This ebook licensed to billy corum. Unauthorized reproduction or distribution of this ebook is illegal.


100 STRANGEST
MYSTERIES


MATT LAMY


MetroBooks


MetroBooks


This edition published by MetroBooks
by arrangement with
Arcturus Publishing Limited


2004 Metrobooks
M10987654321
Metrobooks
122 Fifth Avenue
New York, NY 10011
ISBN 0-7607-6175-2
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise, without written permission in accordance with
the provisions of the Copyright Act 1956 (as amended). Any person or persons who
do any unauthorized act in relation to this publication may be liable to criminal
prosecution and civil claims for damages.


Typeset by Mike Harrington


Printed in China


CONTENTS


The Beast of Bodmin

Bigfoot l
The Grey man of Ben Macpbui
The Loch Ness monster


The Lusca & st Augustine phenomena


The mongolian peathworm
Motbman

The ogopogo

The skunk Ape
The utab Lakes monsters
The white River Monster
yeti


Abductions

Ancient Astronauts

Area 51

civilian aircraft Encounters.
Government Knowledge
Life On Mars

Men in Black

Nazca Lines

The piri Reis Map
Rendfesham Forest
RosWwelf


24
25
28
30

31
33
35
37
39

Al
43


The Tunguska explosion
uFo crasbes i 5
UFOS & Military Interceptions


eartb energy

crop circles

crystals

earth Ligbts

Ley Lines

MuYstical places

The Bermuda triangle
The pragon's Pene
easter Island

The pyramids of Giza
stonebenge
stone circles at castlerigg -


Atfantis

ef Dorado
Lyonesse

MU & Lemuria
Teotihaucan


Arnityuiffe
The noríeuy Rectory
Hampton court paface
Longendale Ghostpfanes


45
46
48


52
53
55
56
58
60
60

ol
62
65
70
73


76
78
79

81
82


80
87
89

9]


The mary celeste
waterworks valfeu


Angels

The nibfe code

The Big Bang

The children of Fatima
rbe pead sea scrolls

Gef rbe tafking Mongoose
The Great rlood


Hindu statues DEDE milk


Lourdes
Modern miracles”
Noah's Ark
saipt-Médard
stigmata

The Turin sbroud
The veif of veronica
weeping statues


Auras & RHirfian cae ae


DOUJSIDG

ESp & psychokinesis
Levitation

Near peotb experiences
ouija Boards
poltergeists
premonitions
Reincarnation

Remote viewing


93
95


98


. 1OO


101


. 103
. 106
. 108
. 109


111
113
115
118


. 120


121
123
125


s 127


. 130


131
133
135
137
138


. 140


142
144
145


seances
spontaneous Human | Combustion


Anastasia /Anna Anderson
The comte de saint-Germain
pracula

Jack the Ripper

Kaspar Hauser

Hing Artbur

Maitreya ATR k ii Ss Edd
Tbe man in tbe rrop Mask
Nostradamus i

The Queen of sheba

uri Geffer


The Knights Tempfar
Rennes-fe-chateau

The ark of tbe Covenant
The Holy Grail

Alcbemyv

The Rosicrucians

oak island

The curse of Tutenkbanun


pemonic possession
perpetual Motion
ROdS

voodoo

zombies


147
149


152
155
156
158
162
163
164
166


. 168
. 170
xa et


. 176
. 179


181
183
185


. 187
. 188
. 190


194


. 196
. 198
. 199
. 201


BEASTS &
MONSTERS


Ine BEAST OF
BODMIN


Tracks of the Beast? The ten pence coin shows the scale of this paw-print.


HE BEAST OF BODMIN: whether it is a

native cat, previously thought extinct,

or an escaped exotic pet, the Beast of
Bodmin is a creature that refuses to disappear.
Indeed, sightings of the panther-like creature
continue apace and, unlike other mysterious
beasts, modern technology is actually helping
to prove its existence. Bodmin Moor is an area
of National Park land in Cornwall, southwest
England. Since 1983 there have been over
sixty sightings of big cats in the area, and
some experts suggest there may be a whole
breeding population on the moors. In fact, one
recent sighting was of a mother cat and her
cub together. Despite wide-ranging testi-
monials from reliable witnesses, a British


government report in 1995
concluded that there was no
evidence of big cats on the


moors.
However, since 1995
some quite startling,


tangible evidence has been
produced. A  20-second
video released in July 1998
clearly shows a large black
animal roaming the moor.
Experts believe the footage
is the best evidence yet to
support the idea that big
cats are living in the area.
suggest the
beasts may be a native
species of cat which was


Many also


thought to have become
extinct over a hundred years ago. Around the
time of the video release, Maurice Jenkins, a
quarry weighbridge worker was driving near
Exmoor, near Bodmin, when he spotted an
odd beast at the side of the road. He trained
his car headlights on the creature. Jenkins
said afterwards:


‘Tt was a big black pussycat. His eyes
reflected in my headlights and I slowed
down so I could get a better look and it
sat watching me. It was the size of a
collie dog with jet-black head and tail.
He leapt away and made off into the
fields.'


E- 0ESB-413A-AC19-4DOCOD69FAAD


Real biological evidence has also been found
in recent years. A large skull with huge fangs
was found near the River Fowey on Bodmin
Moor. The bones were sent to mammal
specialists at the British Natural History
Museum who, when they examined it,
quickly realised that the skull did not belong
to a creature normally found in the English
countryside. Because of the size and position
of the teeth, they also deduced that it was the
head of a large cat.

In November 1999 a spate of farm animal
mutilations on Bodmin Moor caused a high-
tech option to be introduced in finding the
beast. When a calf and two sheep were
attacked and torn apart by an unknown
creature, a motion-activated infrared video
camera was installed on the moor. Similarly,
in January 2001, reserve volunteers from a
nearby Royal Air Force base used state-of-
the-art night-vision military equipment to
hunt for the creature. Rather than practise
exercises against an imaginary foe, RAF
commanders thought that it would be more
interesting for the troops to look for the
fabled Beast of Bodmin. Whether the RAF
found any trace of the Beast is not known.
The Beast strikes
again; or is it in
fact a fox with a
rabbit?


Certainly, the idea of strange big cats
roaming Britain is not totally bizarre. In May
2001, a peculiar, vicious-looking wild animal
was found in the garden of a house in Barnet,
north London. A huge team of armed police,
RSPCA inspectors and vets were needed to
capture what turned out to be a lynx. A
similar event happened in September 1998
when people living close by, in Potters Bar
and South Mimms, were told to stay indoors
whilst police looked for a large cat sighted
there. Generally, however, such animals pose
little threat to the human population.

Farmers in southwest England do not agree
that these creatures are so benign, and many
sceptics believe the Beast of Bodmin is, if
anything, an escaped foreign cat. A number
go missing from zoos and wildlife parks each
year, and Britain’s 1976 Dangerous Wild
Animals Act made ownership of exotic big
cats illegal. Some people believe that if such
a pet were to escape from a private
collection, its owner would be hesitant to
report it missing. Whatever the truth about
its origin, there is growing, indisputable
evidence that a large, black, feral cat is


stalking the land of Bodmin Moor.


BIGFOOT


N THE WILDS OF NoRTH AMERICA a mystical
[oct creature hides in the shadows.

Standing over seven feet tall and having
an immense, muscled body, it should be hard
to stay concealed. Many that see him say he
just disappears into the background. Like a
man, he walks upright, but the short black
hair covering his entire body indicates he is
no homo-sapien. No bodies, bones or
remains have ever been found despite more
than two centuries of searching. The only
evidence we have of this mythical beast is its
huge tracks. That is why the creature is
named ‘Bigfoot’.

Like many legendary Native American
monsters, Bigfoot is a central part of
indigenous traditional tales. They call him
‘Sasquatch’, the ‘hairy giant of the woods’.
But it was his early personal introduction to
European settlers that sparked off real
interest. In 1811, David Thompson, a white
trader, was in the north Rocky Mountains
when he spotted a set of massive 14 by 8-inch
footprints. Over many years, the tales of
Sasquatch spread and on 4th July 1884, the
in British
Columbia was proud to announce that a train
crew had caught a strange beast. In reality, the
black-haired primate that they
trapped was probably just a chimpanzee.


Daily Colonist newspaper


stocky,


The American and Canadian mountains
gradually grew awash with stories of
Sasquatch appearances; there were even
reports of gangs of strange creatures
The


Sasquatch phenomenon was never solely


attacking people in the forests.
focused on the idea of a single creature, and
people have always considered there might
be a breeding colony. At that time, the


mystical beasts were primarily of interest to
lumberjacks, miners and those who lived or
worked in areas where it had been sighted.

That changed in 1958 when Jerry Crew, a
bulldozer operator working in Humboldt
County, California, made casts of the bizarre
footprints he had found. A local newspaper
photographed Crew, and his picture was
syndicated across the United States. The
sight of a man holding a plaster cast record of
the tracks of a mysterious beast started the
modern Bigfoot legend. But if Crew's
discovery helped to launch the myth, it was
an episode nine years later that sealed
Bigfoots place in the American con-
sciousness.

In October 1967, Roger Patterson and Bob
Gimlin were riding on horseback through
Bluff Creek, north California. They were in
the area specifically looking for Bigfoot.
Suddenly one appeared in their path, and
Patterson was thrown from his horse. Whilst
Gimlin kept a rifle trained on the beast,
Patterson quickly regained his footing and ran
towards the creature, filming all the time with
a cine camera they had taken with them. The
result is perhaps the most enigmatic evidence
yet. The footage shows a large hairy biped
slowly strolling into the undergrowth. Experts
who have closely studied the film suggest it is
a female Bigfoot, as two mammary glands are
just discernible on its front.

Although the evidence is startling, many
have questioned its authenticity. Some
experts believe, if the film is played at a
slightly faster speed, it could easily be a
human in a costume. However, aspects of the
footage are quite amazing. For example,
biotechnology scientists have said that for a


A larger-than-life — we hope! — model of Bigfoot on display outside a US museum.


creature like Bigfoot to walk upright it would
need an extended heel. The creature on the
film has an extended heel.

Experts in the industry initially expected
the film merely to be special effects, but they
have been unable to find any tell-tale signs


that itis a hoax. Similarly, a group of Russian
scientists who attempted to determine the
correct speed of the film came to the
conclusion that the creature really did have
a long, lumbering gait. However, Gimlin
himself has entertained the possibility that


Still taken from Roger Patterson's film of Bigfoot.


he might have been an unwitting participant
in a hoax orchestrated by his friend. This we


shall never know as Patterson died of cancer
in 1972.

More recent sightings of the ape-man have
taken on a new and bizarre twist. People have
reported seeing UFOs in the regions of Bigfoot
appearances. Also, the creatures are now said
to have bright red eyes and be carrying
glowing orbs. This may seem a strange
development, but Sasquatches were always
reported as having a quality beyond the
physical, and it has always been suggested
that when they die, Bigfoot bodies vanish into
the ether. This is a shame, because to really
accept Bigfoot's presence, the world needs to
see some hard, physical evidence.


THe GREY MAN OF
Ben MaAcDHuI


N THE SCOTTISH HIGHLANDS lies a mountain

where many have felt a dread quite unlike

anything else they have ever experienced.
As the fogs and mists roll across the cairns,
they say there lurks a creature huge and
terrifying. They call it ‘Am Fear Liath Mor’,
or the ‘Big Grey Man’. Some see him as an old
figure in robes, a giant, or even a devil. The
creature does not just threaten with a force of
physical power, this beast also causes an
almost suicidal sense of depression and
panic in all who come near it.

Ben MacDhui is the second highest
mountain in Scotland, standing at over 4,000
feet. It is an imposing sight and a substantial
test for experienced climbers. Many of the
witnesses who see, or feel the presence of,
the hardened
mountaineers, not prone to flights of fancy.


Grey Man are serious,


The first person to reveal he had met the
mountain's strange tenant was Professor
Norman Collie. Collie was a respected and
well known climber, but when he gave his
speech to the Cairngorm Club in 1925, the
audience was truly stunned.

Collie explained that he had been coming
down from the peak of Ben MacDhui in 1891
when he heard footsteps behind him. At
first, shrouded in mist, he rationalised that it
must just have been an echo of his own
footfalls. But eventually he realised the
noises he heard were not corresponding to
the movements he was making. It sounded
like a giant was following him. He said it was


'as if someone was walking after me, but
taking steps three or four times the
length of my own.'


IDA TCE-OE58-413A-ACIS-ADOCODGGEAXO.


Terrified, Collie blindly ran for four or five
miles down the mountainside until he could
no longer hear the noise. Collie never
returned to the mountain, and to his dying
day resolutely believed there was,
‘something very queer about Ben MacDhui.'

During the Second World War, Peter
Densham was a mountain rescue worker,
locating and saving pilots who had crashed
in the Cairngorms. One day he was at the top
of Ben MacDhui when a heavy mist started to
fall. He sat and waited for conditions to
improve. After a while he began to hear
strange crunching noises and suddenly felt a
presence close by. He stood up to investigate,
but was immediately seized by a feeling of
panic. Before he realised what was happen-
ing, he was running down the mountain,
dangerously close to the sheer cliff edge. He
said afterwards 'I tried to stop myself and
found this extremely difficult to do. It was as
if someone was pushing me. I managed to
deflect my course, but with a great deal of
difficulty.’

Since then, many people have spotted a
strange being, or felt an overpowering sense of


impending doom in the area. One of the most
recent encounters occurred in the early 1990s.
Three men were walking in a forest just
outside Aberdeen. One of the party spotted a
human-shaped figure running across the track
a little way ahead of them. He told his friends,
and when they all looked in the same
direction they saw a strange, not-quite-human
face. A few weeks later, the same group were
driving in the area when they realised they
were being followed by the same tall, dark
being. The creature kept pace, even at speeds
of 45 miles an hour, but eventually tired and
stopped. Again, these men felt a distinct sense
of terror and foreboding.

Monster enthusiasts have plenty of ideas
about the beast’s origin. Some say he could
be an alien, or the ghost of an old Highland
race, or even a mystical, wise religious
figure. One interesting theory is that atop
Ben MacDhui there is a gateway to another
dimension, and this creature is the
gatekeeper. If this really is his role, then he is
doing a good job. After an experience with
the Big Grey Man, very few people have
dared to venture up Ben MacDhui again.


Tarn in the foothills of the mountain of Ben MacDhui.


IDA TCE OESB-413A-AC19-4DOCOOG9FAAD


THe LocH Ness
MONSTER


F ALL THE MYTHICAL BEASTS in the

world, the most famous, most

hunted for, and most talked about
must be ‘Nessie’ the Loch Ness Monster. She,
for the Scottish monster is always seen as a
not-so-wee lassie, is often the first
phenomenon thought about when the subject
of unexplained mysteries is raised. She is an
internationally-known celebrity, who has
probably done more for her native tourist
industry than any other famous Scot. There
have been Nessie documentaries, pro-
grammes, films and even cartoons. But
although she appears each year to a select
few, she has been too shy to debut in a major
scientific investigation. So is Nessie really a
strange creature, lost in time, and lurking at
the bottom of Loch Ness?

Loch Ness is a 24-mile-long freshwater
lake found in the Great Glenn, a massive
crevice that cuts the Scottish Highlands in
two. The loch is up to a thousand feet deep
and, at some points, a mile-and-a-half wide.
The first tale of a monster living in the water
originates in AD 565 and features Saint
Columba, who rescued a swimmer from the
beast’s advances. Experts now generally feel
that Saint Columba actually encountered a
known, normal, marine animal that had
ended up outside its natural environment.
Although the loch continued to be the focus
of strange sightings, it was not until the 20th
century that the phenomenon really
flourished.


Loch Ness, Scotland. Could this be the home of a
plesiosaur?


In 1933 the Loch Ness Lakeshore road was
built. This initiated a flood of sightings and
created the Nessie legend. In April that year,
a local couple spotted an enormous animal
rolling and playing in the water. They
reported what they had seen to the man in
charge of salmon stocks in the loch who then
saw the monster himself, describing it as
having a six-feet-long neck, a serpentine
head and a huge hump. He suggested the
creature was a total of 30 feet in length. In
the July a family from London were driving
along when they almost crashed into a
massive dark, long-necked animal that
strolled across their path and then
disappeared into the water. Similarly, early
the next year a young veterinary student was
riding his motorcycle along the road when
he almost struck a creature. He said what he


saw had a large bulky body, with flippers, a
long neck and a small head.

Over the years, many people have tried to
capture the creature on film. One Nessie
witness managed to take a rather incon-
clusive photograph of something appearing
from the water in 1933. In 1934 a London
doctor released a most mysterious
photograph of the monster to the public. It
showed a strange head and neck appearing
from the water; 60 years later it was revealed
to be a fake. In April 1960 an aeronautical
engineer used a 16mm movie camera to film
something moving through the loch's waves.
Although it has never been established
exactly what is captured on the film, experts
at the Royal Air Force's photographic
department have verified that the footage is
not a fake and has not been tampered with.
Dinsdale himself devoted the rest of his life
to finding Nessie.

Recent years have also provided new
sightings. In June 1993, a couple were on the
bank of the loch when they saw a huge,
strange creature lolling about in the water.
They said it must have been about 40-feet-
long, with a giraffe-like neck and very light
brown flesh. Later that same evening, a
father and son were on their way home when
they spotted something odd in the water.
They later told reporters they saw an animal
with a neck like a giraffe swimming swiftly
away from the shore. Because of the
evidence accrued during these two episodes,
bookmakers William Hill slashed the odds of
there really being a Loch Ness Monster from
500-1 to 100-1.

Despite over 3,000 similar sightings by
private individuals, Nessie has always been
coy about exposing herself to dedicated,
scientific research teams. The Academy of
Applied Science from Boston, Massachusetts
operated the first extensive expedition in the
early 1970s. Using underwater cameras and


The first photo of the Loch Ness Monster, which
sparked the current ‘Nessiemania’.


sonar equipment, the project captured
images of what looked like an eight-foot-long
flipper, an unusual 20-foot-long aquatic
body, and even a hazy photo of a creature's
face. However, an organised, structured
sonar sweep of the loch in 1987, named
‘Operation Deepscan’, revealed the earlier
portrait picture of Nessie was actually a tree
stump. That said, Deepscan did report
various, unaccounted-for, large sonar echoes
moving about in the extreme depths of the
loch.

Although these hunts have proved incon-
clusive, other recent scientific evidence has
been more hopeful. In March 2000, a team of
Norwegian scientists, the Global Underwater
Search Team, picked up bizarre noises in the
loch’s water. At one point whatever was
making the sounds even crashed into the
team’s underwater microphone. This group
had already recorded unusual sounds from
another mythically monster-infested lake in
Norway. The strange noises found in Loch
Ness are described as a cross between a
snorting horse and a pig eating, closely
matching the experiences in Norway. Not
only does this suggest there are unknown
creatures in both lakes, but they might
actually be related. In recent years, sonar
has also
underwater caverns opening onto the bottom


equipment discovered huge


Monster hunters: the search for Nessie goes on.


of the loch. These structures have been
termed 'Nessie's Lair', and may well be large
enough to house and hide a whole family of
monsters.

It is agreed that a breeding colony of beasts
would be needed to continue its existence,
and some witness accounts have reported
more than one Nessie appearing on the
water's surface. Nessie's actual species is still
unknown although experts have suggested it
may be a manatee or type of primitive whale.
It my also be a large otter, a long-necked seal,
a huge eel, or even a giant walrus. However,
Nessie seems to bear a much stronger
resemblance to a creature now thought to be
extinct. This is called the plesiosaur, a marine
dinosaur that has not been found on Earth for
over 60 million years. It had large flippers, a
small head and a large body, and some experts


believe a few of these animals were stranded
in the loch after the last Ice Age.

None of these suggestions are completely
plausible. Even if the plesiosaur did survive
the disaster that wiped out the rest of its
fellow prehistoric creatures, it is generally
believed to be a cold-blooded animal, and
would find the chilly environment of a
Scottish lake too cold to survive. If Nessie is
really a modern day aquatic mammal like a
whale or a seal, then it would constantly
have to come to the surface for air, resulting
in many more sightings. One cannot help but
feel there might actually be something in the
murky depths of Loch Ness. With a
continued interest that actually grows with
each unsuccessful scientific study, this loch
remains the home of the world's most
mysterious, unexplainable monster.


THe LuscA &
ST AUGUSTINE
[HENOMENA


6 E the
surface of the moon than we do
about the bottom of our deepest


KNOW MORE ABOUT


oceans,’ so the old saying goes. It is an adage
that, over time, is proving more and more
relevant. What creatures actually do lurk at
the bottom of the sea? Around the Bahamas
and the southeast American coast there are
tales of a giant octopus that captures unwary
swimmers and small boats. The people of the
islands call it the ‘Lusca’ and believe it lives
in deep underwater caves. However, no one
has ever seen the creature in it natural
environment and lived to tell the tale.

One evening in November 1896 two men
were cycling along the coast just outside
their hometown of St Augustine, Florida. As
they looked over the beach, they noticed a
huge carcass. It was 23 feet long, 18 feet
wide, four feet high, and it seemed to have
multiple legs. The two men decided to tell Dr
Dewitt Webb, the founder of the St
Augustine Historical Society and Institute of
Science, who came to examine the corpse.

Webb photographed the body, noting it
was a silvery pink colour, and took samples.
Webb recorded that the skin was axe-proof,
being three and a half inches thick. He also
estimated that the body weighed around six
or seven tonnes. It needed four horses and a
whole team of people from the local


community to drag it the painstaking 40 feet
up the beach in order to keep it away from
the rolling waves.

Webb was convinced it was not part of a
whale, and must have been some kind of
unknown giant octopus, so he sent letters
describing the carcass to many eminent
scientists. One such expert was Professor
Verrill at the National Museum (now called


The immense body of an octopus, washed up on the
Florida shore. Is this the real Kraken?


the Smithsonian) in Washington DC. Verrill
stated that the creature was actually a squid.
When Webb sent him more information, he
changed his mind and said it was an
octopus. Verrill suggested it probably had
tentacles around 100 feet long.

Verrill refused to see the dead creature in
person, or indeed to provide any funds or
resources to help preserve the sea monster.


Even so, the professor decided this new
species should be named after himself,
calling it ‘Octopus Giganteous Verrill’.
Finally, he changed his mind again after
receiving tissue samples, and said the body
was probably just the head of a sperm
Webb was disappointed and
preserved as many samples of the creature


whale.


as he could. Eventually the corpse was
retaken by the sea.

Over fifty years later, two marine
biologists, Dr F.G. Wood and Dr J.F. Gennaro
Jr., discovered stories of the St Augustine sea
monster in old newspaper clippings. They
applied to the Smithsonian and took samples
from the original specimens Webb had sent
Verrill. Wood had worked in the Bahamas
and knew of the famous ‘Lusca’. The legend
said that it was a giant octopus, with arms
seventy-five feet long, that lived in great
deep blue holes in the sea floor. By looking at
the samples, Wood and Gennaro were able to
deduce that the body was indeed that of an


enormous octopus. At long last, Webb had
been proved right.

In recent years other examples of huge,
previously unknown, sea creatures have
been discovered. Tales of giant squid have
been told through the ages, but it is only in
the last century that accurate and scientific
details have been truly kept. Even in this day
and age, some bizarre stories still have crop
up. French fishermen have recently been
attacked by one multi-legged sea creature,
and marine biologists are constantly finding
remains of squid which out-size the
previously known largest.

At the moment, the biggest giant squid find
happened in April 2003 when a colossal
squid was found in Antarctic waters. The
example found was still immature, but had
an overall length of around 50 feet. Octopi by
comparison, are small fry, and the biggest,
caught in March 2002, only measured 13
feet. So the beast at St. Augustine is still a
truly unexplained phenomenon.


‘THe MONGOLIAN
IDEATHWORM


NDER THE BURNING sand dunes of the
| | Gobi desert there lurks a creature

that is so feared by the Mongolian
people they are scared even to speak its
name. When they do, they call it the ‘Allghoi
khorkhoi', ‘the
worm’, because this fat, red, deadly snake-


which means intestine


like monster looks similar to a cow’s innards.


12


This giant worm, measuring up to four feet
long, can kill people instantly. How it does
it, no one knows. Some believe it spits a
lethal toxin, others say it emits a massive
electrical charge. However it kills, it does so
quickly and can do it from a distance. We in
the West have come to call this monster the
‘Mongolian Deathworm’.


Artist's impression of a Mongol Deathworm, based on
eyewitness reports.


Mongolian Nomads believe the giant worm
covers its prey with an acidic substance that
turns everything a corroded yellow colour.
Legend says that as the creature begins to
attack it raises half its body out of the sand
and starts to inflate until it explodes,
releasing the lethal poison all over the
unfortunate victim. The poison
venomous that the prey dies instantly.

Because Mongolia had been under Soviet


is so


control until 1990, very little was known
about the Deathworm in the West. In recent
years, investigators have been able to look for
evidence of the creature's existence. Ivan
Mackerle, one of the leading Loch Ness
Monster detectives, studied the region and
interviewed many Mongolian people about
the worm. Due to the sheer volume of
sightings and strange deaths, he came to the
conclusion that the Deathworm was more
than just legend. Nobody is entirely sure
what the worm actually is. Experts are
certain it is not a real worm because the Gobi
desert is too hot an area for annelids to
survive. Some have suggested it might be a
skink, but they have little legs and scaly skin
whereas witness accounts specify the worm
is limb-less and smooth bodied. The most
probable explanation is that it is a type of
Although the native
Mongolian people are convinced of the
Deathworm's nature, it will take more years


venomous snake.


of research to satisfy the rest of the world's
scientific community.


MOTHMAN


HIS STORY SOUNDS like the creation of

an overworked comic book writer. A

seven-foot-tall, well built, humanoid
monster with giant red, glowing eyes and
huge brown wings, a creature who can
ascend to the skies from a standing position,
and fly at astonishing speeds, and who
mutilates pets and instils instant fear in the
hearts of all those who see him. Yet, for over
a year in the mid 1960s more than 100
otherwise reliable residents of a small West
Virginian town distinctly saw the horrifying


figure that terrorised their community. They
saw 'Mothman'.

In early November 1966 various sightings
of a huge, strange ‘bird’ were reported
around Point Pleasant, West Virginia, USA.
On 12th November, five gravediggers pre-
paring a plot reported seeing a 'brown
human being' take to the air from some
nearby trees and pass over their heads. It was
not until three days later that the creature
really terrified the community with a close
encounter.


On 15th November, two young couples
were driving together near the McClintic
Wildlife
Pleasant. The area was known to locals as


Preserve, just outside Point
"TNT', because it had been used as an
explosives depot during the Second World
War and there were many abandoned
chemical and industrial plants in the
vicinity. Late in the evening, the two couples
approached an old generator plant and saw
that its door appeared to have been ripped
off. It was then that they noticed two huge
red eyes shining out of the gloom at them.
These hypnotic, staring discs were attached
to what they said was 'shaped like a man, but
bigger, maybe six or seven feet tall. And it
had big wings folded against its back’.

As the creature approached, the young
group sped off, but as they looked back they
saw it take to the air, rising straight up
without flapping its wings. It had a giant 10-
foot wingspan, and kept pace with the car
despite the vehicle reaching speeds of 100
miles an hour. Eventually the group reached
the Point Pleasant city limits, where their
aerial pursuer turned away and disappeared.
The couples drove straight to the local police
station and reported what they had seen.
Although local police found nothing at TNT,
they accepted the young people had seen
something.

Over the next few days reports of a giant
‘bird’ terrorising locals came into police


headquarters with increasing frequency. Car


passengers had experienced the creature
swooping down on them, and the reception
on television and radio sets were being
disrupted across the region. One man whose
television failed lived in Salom, 90 miles
from Point Pleasant. At the exact moment
his television stopped working, his dog
whined from the porch. The man went
outside to investigate and spotted two red,
glowing lights in his hay barn, at which
point his dog ran off. The man, stricken with
fear, returned to his house, locked all the
doors and windows. That night, he slept
with his gun next to him. His dog was never
seen again.

Perhaps the most chilling story concerning
Mothman happened on 16th November
1966. A young mother was driving to see
some friends, who had one of the few houses
close to the TNT compound. She said she
had seen a ‘funny red light’ in the sky, and,
as she arrived at her friends' house, heard
something rustling near her car.


‘Tt seemed as though it had been lying
down. It rose up slowly from the ground.
A big grey thing. Bigger than a man, with
terrible glowing eyes,’


she said. Horrified, she grabbed her small
daughter and ran into the house, locking the
doors behind her. The creature followed,


creeping onto the porch and staring in the
windows. The police were called, but by the
time they arrived, Mothman had dis-
appeared.

Over the next year, Mothman was seen by
many witnesses including firemen and
pilots. Gradually the reports altered into
cases of UFOs, strange lights and ‘Men in
Black'. At 17.00 on 15th December 1967 the


Silver Bridge linking Point Pleasant to Ohio
suddenly collapsed, 46 people died as a
result, and the residents of Point Pleasant
were forced to deal with real horror rather
than mythical beasts. Their creature's reign
of terror paled into insignificance and he was
forgotten. still
believe the bridge disaster may have been


However, many people


Mothman’s terrible final act.


THE Ocopoco


ANTED CRIMINALS OFTEN have a
reward attached to their heads.
Now it seems mythical beasts are


also the object of bounty hunters' affections.
Between August 2000 and September 2001
three around Lake
Okanegan promised $2 million to anyone


companies from
who could find definitive, living proof that
the fabled Ogopogo monster did exist. The
crime the creature committed is hard to say,
although there are stories of it seizing and
murdering helpless native people out on the
lake. It cannot be denied that the Ogopogo is
a serial offender at causing civil unrest.
Lake Okanegan is in British Columbia,
Canada. It is around 100 miles long and has
areas almost 1000 feet deep. The native
Salish tribe believed in a terrible serpent,
which they called 'N'ha-a-tik', the 'Lake
Demon’. They said the beast had a cave
dwelling near the middle of the lake, and
they would often make sacrifices to please
the monster. European settlers initially


15


scoffed at the legends, but over the years the
Ogopogo has established itself in the minds
of many who live nearby.

From the mid 1800s white immigrants
started seeing strange phenomena in the
lake. One of the first stories told of a man
crossing the lake with his two tethered
horses swimming behind. Some strange
force pulled the animals under, and the man
only saved himself by cutting the horses
loose.

Witnesses say the creature is anything up
to 50 feet long, with green skin, several
humps and a huge horse-like head. Some
people have managed to closely view it as it
ate water vegetation; they said the Ogopogo
also had small feet or fins. It could be the
North American cousin of the Loch Ness
Monster. Most sightings have come from
around the city of Kelowna, near the centre
of the lake, and many monster watchers now
agree that it seems to live in the area
originally indicated in native legend.


THE SKUNK Ape


N THE MID 1970s, a few years after the

public release of Bigfoot footage, Florida

police received a torrent of reports
claiming a similar creature was living in the
state’s swamplands. Many witnesses
described the beast as like an ape standing
upright, seven feet tall and covered in light
brown hair. In all it sounded like a Bigfoot
clone, but there was one unique aspect to the
Florida monster — it smelled like a strong
mixture of rotten eggs, manure and an
elephant's cage. One witness said it had the
scent of a skunk that had just been rolling
around inside a dustbin lorry. It was given
the name the ‘Skunk Ape’.

After the initial flurry of sightings, the
Skunk Ape phenomenon waned. Some
pictures, footprint casts and hair samples
were collected, but appearances of the Skunk
Ape came to an abrupt halt. There were
suggestions it had been caught by the US
Army and imprisoned at the Everglades
National Park. This urban myth said that the
creature escaped by smashing through a
concrete wall and returned to his swampland
home. Some Skunk Ape watchers believe he
has taken up residence at the Big Cypress
National Preserve, but none of the 70 rangers
who patrol the area have ever seen him.

In the last few years however, new
sightings have appeared in Ochapee, Florida.
A group of tourists who were being shown
round the Everglades saw a large ape-like
creature moving around the edge of a nearby
swamp. Later it was seen crossing the road
outside the house of a local fire chief. The


man found his camera and photographed the
beast as it retreated into the swampland.


Skunk ape, or nocturnal monkey? Only the creature in
the photograph knows for sure!


The photo does show a large brown,
hirsute monster, but even the man who took
the photograph says he thinks the creature
could well be a man in an ape-suit. With
like that
witnesses, what hope is there that the Skunk
Ape really exists?


confidence from first-hand


Ine UTAH LAKES
MONSTERS


TAH FOLKLORE SAYS the state’s Great

Lakes house not one, not two, but

five fearsome water monsters. Early
Native Americans believed some lakes were
cursed by ‘Water Babies’ who would coax
travellers into the water to their deaths. By
the time pilgrim settlers started to arrive,
local tribes told tales of a giant water lizard,
thirty feet long, with large ears and a mouth
that would swallow men whole. Local
natives said the great serpents had dis-
appeared in the 1820s, but by the 1860s
white settlers were reporting incidents
involving huge, terrifying, scaly creatures.

The Utah and Bear Lakes in the north have
had most sightings of these monsters; indeed,
the description witnesses provide suggest
these lakes each have one of a pair of twin
water-dragons. One of the first appearances of
these creatures was in 1864 when a local man,
Henry Walker, was in the Utah Lake. He
reported seeing something that looked like a
giant snake, but with the head of a greyhound,
which frightened him so much he fled the
water. Over the years, there were frequent
accounts of reputable people, including local
priests, meeting the beasts. All witnesses
provided the same description — that of a giant
snake’s body with short, trunk-like legs rising
out of the water with an enormous mouth and
fearsome black eyes.

In the late 1860s the idea of hunting down
the monsters gained favour. Young local men
tried shooting at them. Some successfully hit
their targets, although no one was ever able


to sufficiently wound the beasts in order to
capture them. One farmer heard rustling in
his garden one night. Using only his old rifle,
he confronted and shot the creature, only to
discover it was his neighbour’s heifer. In
1870 real physical evidence was recovered,
when fishermen from Springsville, a nearby
town, found a large unidentified skull with a
five-inch tusk on the jaw. The next year the
Salt Lake Herald even revealed that the
monster had been caught, but what hap-
pened to the body of the captured creature is
unknown.

In 1871 two local men were out fishing on
Bear Lake when they saw the monster rise
from the water. They said they managed to
hit the beast with shots from their rifles, but
the beast just swam away. A wagon train
captain called William Bridge said in 1874
that he had also seen the Bear Lake beast.
Bridge reported that the creature had been
about 20 yards from shore when it surfaced
from the water. ‘Its face and part of its head
was covered with fur or short hair of a light
snuff colour,’ he said. Bridge also described
it as having a flat face with large eyes,
prominent ears and a four or five-feet-long
neck.

Bear Lake residents were so affected by
Bridge’s testimony that they decided to make
a trap to capture the beast. Two prominent
local citizens, Brigham Young and Phineas
Cook, hatched a plan which involved little
more than a giant fishing line. They linked a
300-feet-long, one-inch-thick rope to a large


hook with a huge slab of mutton attached as
bait. The position of the rope was marked by
a buoy floating on the lake surface. Although
the trap was often robbed of meat, no
monster was ever caught.

Lake monster sightings had fallen away
drastically by the end of the nineteenth
century. There was one sighting of the Utah
Lake creature in 1921, which marked a
limited resurgence in interest, but then the
whole area once again quietened down. Since
then, one of the few reliable reports was in


1946 by a local Scout master who said he had
seen the bizarre creature appear on the
surface of the lake. The account was widely
regarded to be so detailed and accurate that
only the most ardent sceptic could doubt it.
Local wags have also pointed out that Scouts
don't lie. But some still do question the truth
of the Utah Lakes monsters. In his lecture on
the subject to the Utah State Historical
Society, local historian D. Robert Carter said
he actually believed the monster was a
species of giant bug — humbug.


THe WHITE
RIVER MONSTER


F ALL THE awesome and hideous

mystery beasts in the world, nothing

is loved by its neighbours quite as
much as ‘Whitey’, the White River Monster.
In fact, Arkansas State Legislators have
declared the area where it has been most
often seen — around the town of Newport — a
‘White River Monster Refuge’. It is now
illegal to *molest, kill, trample or harm' the
legendary beast. But this has not always been
the case — originally locals wanted to
dynamite the monster.

Whitey's first appearance was in the 1890s.
He then reappeared in 1915, but it was only
in the first week of July 1937 that he really
made a splash. Men fishing in the White
River, a tributary of the great Mississippi,
noticed that they were finding it hard to land
many fish. One day they spotted a strange
creature in an eddy, and reported it to the
local plantation owner, Bramlett Bateman.
Bateman was sceptical, but agreed to have a


look at whatever they had found. He was
shocked at what he saw. A monster with the
skin of an elephant, four or five feet wide by
twelve feet long, with the face of a catfish,
was lolling on the surface of the water.

Bateman felt this beast was a threat to his
crops, and applied to local officials to blow
up the eddy with TNT. The authorities
refused permission, and by then hundreds of
people had heard of the phenomenon. They
came from as far away as California, some
with cameras, some with explosives; one
man reportedly brought a machine gun. A
plan to capture the monster with a giant net
fell by the wayside, and Bateman's use of a
deep-sea diver to find the creature came to
nought. As people lost interest in the beast,
Bateman felt he was being accused of
creating a hoax although there had been over
100 confirmed sightings recorded during the
short period of excitement.

Whitey was forgotten, but he made a


dramatic return in June 1971. A man was
fishing with two friends when suddenly a
great fountain of water spurted in front of
them and a creature with a 20-feet-long
spikey back was seen to surface and then
disappear beneath the water. The man
managed to take a photograph of the beast,
which he sold to the Newport Daily
Independent newspaper. People who saw the
picture were unimpressed by its clarity and
the newspaper has since lost the original
copy.

However, numerous other witnesses saw a
long, grey creature surfacing in the water of
the White River. Some said it was the length
of a boxcar, that its smooth flesh looked as if
it was peeling. Others said it made a bizarre
noise, like a cow’s moo or horse’s neigh.
Those who managed to see the beast’s face in
detail told of a strange tusk protruding from
its forehead. A trail of peculiar 14 inch tracks
were found on the nearby Towhead Island,
and a CBS news team was duly despatched
to report on the area. The last reported


sighting came in late July when two people
out fishing claimed their boat was rocked by
what they believed was the monster. Media
coverage killed off sightings of Whitey, and
in February 1973 the Arkansas Senate passed
its resolution to protect the beast.

From the accounts witnesses have
provided, some experts believe Whitey may
be a lost elephant seal. They can be immense
creatures, up to twenty feet long, and the
descriptions of noise, skin and forehead horn
would all fit correctly. It is also known that
the elephant seal migrates seven thousand
miles each year so it may just be off-course.
However, the nearest seal colony lies on the
west coast of America, so it would have to
come through the Panama Canal to reach the
White River. Also, elephant seals only live
for around fifteen years, so no single animal
could possibly account for sightings over
almost a century. Whatever Whitey is, he can
be assured of a warm, if not explosive,
welcome the next time he pops up in
Arkansas.


The White River Monster — or possibly an elephant seal — basks on a river beach.


IDA TCE OESB-413A-AC19-4DOCOO69FAAD


N 1921 Lr. CoLoNEL Charles Kenneth

Howard-Bury, a British soldier leading

an expedition up Mount Everest,
recounted a puzzling story. His team had
been scaling the mountain’s north face when
they noticed dark shapes moving about in
the snow above them. By the time the
explorers reached the site, the only signs of
life were large, human-like
footprints. Howard-Bury said his Sherpa
guides called this creature the 'Metoh-
Kangmi'. Translated, this became the


unusual,


‘Abominable Snowman’.

In fact, ‘Metoh-Kangmi’ was a collective
term for any of three mythical mountain
creatures. Individually, they had their own
names — the ‘Dzu Teh’, a large, hairy beast
which experts believe is actually one of the
rare bear species in the region, “Thelma’,
which is regarded as being a species of
gibbon, and the ‘Meh-Teh’ or ‘Yeh-Teh’, the
‘man-beast’ or ‘rock dweller’. This final
animal is the most enigmatic. It is described
as being between five and six feet tall, with
reddish hair, long hanging arms, a conical,
pointed head and a human face. This ‘Yeh-
Teh’ is what we now know as the Yeti.

In 1925 a Greek photographer called N. A.
Tombazi was on expedition in the Himalayas
when one of his Sherpa guides pointed at a
figure in the distance. Tombazi said the
creature stood upright, just like a human,
and was pulling at some rhododendron
bushes. The beast disappeared before
Tombazi could capture it on film, but the
party headed over to the area where it had
been viewed and found footprints strangely


20


similar to human feet. During the following
years, there were many reports of odd tracks


in the snow.

In 1951 the eminent mountaineers, Eric
Shipton and Michael Ward, were part of the
Everest Reconnaissance Expedition. They
were trying to plot the best route up the
mountain when they came upon a set of
fresh, unusual footprints. Shipton and Ward
took photographs of the 13 by 18-inch prints,
and followed the trail before it eventually
disappeared. Sir Edmund Hillary and Sherpa
Tenzing Norgay, the two most celebrated
visitors to Everest, actually found giant
footprints on their way to the summit in
1953. This was particularly interesting


IDA TCE OESB-413A-AC19-4DOCOOG9FAAD


because Norgay’s father was supposed to
have encountered a Yeti shortly before he
died, whereas Hillary would later lead an
effort to find evidence of the Yeti’s existence.

When Hillary’s 1960 Yeti expedition found
nothing, the great man stated that the beast
was nothing more than a fairy tale. But many
experts felt Hillary had rather rushed to his
conclusions. Even Hillary’s colleague on the
mission, Desmond Doig, said the expedition
had been too bulky and clumsy. Doig agreed
that they had not encountered a Yeti, but
neither had they seen a snow leopard, which
undoubtedly exists.

This failed expedition killed off much
interest in the Yeti, but over the years more
unusual footprints were found. In 1974 one
of the creatures reportedly attacked a Sherpa


girl and her yaks, killing a couple of her
animals. Then, in March 1986, Tony
Woodbridge, a British physicist doing a
sponsored solo run around the Himalayas,
had a remarkable face-to-face meeting with
the monster. Woodbridge had seen tracks
earlier in the day, but thought no more about
it until he heard a crashing sound like an
avalanche.

Further up the trail, snow had indeed
fallen, creating a giant impenetrable frozen
wall. Strangely, it looked as if something had
slid down the snow. Woodbridge followed
prints at the bottom of the mound, and 150
metres away he spotted a large, hairy,
powerfully built creature standing stock-
still. The beast did not move an inch, and
Woodbridge was lucky enough to have his


Skull top and skeletal hand, said to be from the Yeti.


camera on him. Unfortunately, despite
Woodbridge's initial strong convictions,
close examinations of his photographs
instilled some doubt and a return to the area
convinced Woodbridge that he had only
encountered a tree stump.

Even if episodes like this do nothing to
convince sceptics, many experts agree that
the idea of an unknown species of ape is not


22


so far-fetched. Some species of wild cattle
and jungle deer have only been discovered in
the last ten years. It is possible that Yeti-like
creatures, descended from prehistoric apes
could be roaming parts of the world
Whatever the
scientists and experts prove, Sherpas have
already accepted the belief that up in their


completely undiscovered.


mountains they are not alone.


CONSDIRACIES
&
COMMUNICATIONS


ABDUCTIONS


Little green man: a common view of what an alien
‘should’ look like.


ECAUSE ALIENS ARE supposed to blank

the minds of their victims, what
actually happens during an abduction

is often only revealed through regressive
hypnosis or piecing together known facts.
However, the stories which occur all follow
broadly similar lines. Generally, the abductor
feels compelled, or is forced, to go into an
alien space-craft where they encounter the
visitors. These are often described as being
small, grey figures with large black eyes and a
hairless body. They are frequently reported as
having large skulls and they communicate
with their human captive using telepathy. The
message sent to the man or woman tells them
not to be scared, that they will not be harmed.
The candidate is scanned, or examined,
and then placed on an operating table. This
part of the abduction is often a blur, even


24


during the hypnosis, but it seems the aliens
perform a series of tests and a recurring
theme is that they do extensive sexual
experiments on their subject. The abductee’s
body is prodded, probed and manipulated.
Some even report having tracking devices or
other equipment implanted under their skin.

The human is returned to wherever they
were picked up, often remembering abso-
lutely nothing. Consequently they are left in
a state of perplexion as they realise a number
of unaccountable hours have passed. The
physical effects are said to be striking. Many
people are bruised all over their bodies, and
suffer painful headaches the next morning.
Abductees often have terrible nosebleeds
and bizarre but small puncture wounds at
points on their skin. They are also said to
pass strange urine the next morning. Female
abduction victims are particularly prone to
suffering sexual pains. In all cases, an
extreme sense of fatigue is felt.

The psychological results are often even
more extreme. Some people feel as if they
love the aliens and have been enriched by
contact. These abductees believe the visitors
have come to warn us and help Mankind
protect the planet. But these types of
experiences are in the minority. Many feel a
sense of violation and despair, very similar
to rape victims. Often it is mixed with
confusion, disbelief and a sense of possible
insanity. Many abduction victims need
counselling to regain some sense of stability
and, in cases of extreme trauma, have been
known to commit suicide. However, many
researchers wonder if abduction memories
are themselves caused by psychological
problems, rather than the reverse.


The first time alien abductions entered the
public consciousness was in September 1961
when Barney and Betty Hill were reportedly
captured by strange beings. The Hills gave an
account under hypnosis a few years later that
revealed all manner of strange experiments
had been performed on them. Betty had seen
the aliens inserted a probe into her belly
button, and Barney claims he was forced to
provide a sample of his sperm. The one
incongruous detail they did provide was that
the aliens, rather than having large black
eyes, actually had ‘wraparound’ receptors.
Sceptics point out that the Hills' testimonies
were given less than a fortnight after a
television episode about aliens with
wraparound eyes.

This factor is one that repeatedly features
in abduction stories. The descriptions of
aliens and their craft are often identical to
stereotypical, 1930s style cosmic invaders.
No details have been revealed which could
not have been derived from the imagination
of a comic book writer. Similarly, no


souvenirs have been brought back from the


any craft visited by humans. However there
are also a few examples featuring extremely
disturbing physical evidence. One is where a
pregnant woman was abducted by aliens
who removed her foetus. Although she had
previously gone for an ultrasound that had
confirmed her unborn children was present
and doing fine, when she went to the doctors
afterwards, it had simply disappeared. The
second example involves people who have
actually found alien implants in their body.
There is even a rumour that a private clinic
in California has removed a number of
strange implants from abductees' bodies. If
these stories are true, there can be no
denying that alien meetings leave physical
scars on the victim.

The reported evidence on the bodies of
abductees is hard to dismiss, and if an
implant is ever officially removed and
studied, it could act as conclusive proof.
Until then, many scientists are going to be
sceptical that this phenomenon is nothing
more that the product of imaginations easily
prone to fantasy.


ANCIENT
ASTRONAUTS


RICH VON DANIKEN’S book Chariots of
the Gods? has many followers who
believe it is the most convincing text
supporting the idea of alien travellers
instigating Mankind’s traditions. He claims
that the first UFOs ever to visit the Earth
landed in prehistoric times, and the aliens
that alighted were really the beings


responsible for our ancient ancestors’


25


intelligence. Such a theory encompasses
countless tales of ancient, now lost, races.
The legends of Lemuria, Atlantis and Nazca
all that
intergalactic relationships, and Daniken’s


have elements encourage
daring suggestions have spurred countless
similar theories linking our history with
visits from ancient astronauts.


Daniken was born on 14th April 1935 in


Zofingen, Switzerland. At school he was
fascinated by ancient holy writings, but it
was during his time managing a Swiss hotel
that he wrote his first and most famous book,
Chariots of the Gods?. The book looked at
evidence to support a theory that prehistoric
Man did not have the abilities to create his
Daniken stated that
ancient astronauts had arrived on the planet


own civilisations.
and introduced our ancestors’ culture,
traditions and intelligence. By carefully
choosing data from religious, historical,
scientific, biological, mythical and even
some downright fictional sources, Daniken
created a compelling argument. But many
other experts have since had to question his
assertions.

He claimed that the Ark of the Covenant
was made as a large electric capacitor, when
in fact its design is utterly impractical.
Famously, he stated that the fabled Nazca
lines are runways for alien spacecraft, but
did not consider the other options: for
example, that they might have something to
do Nazcan He
introduced impossible equations and even


with native culture.
fictional ‘facts’, One example of Daniken’s
evidence was pottery said to date from
Biblical times. The ancient pots had pictures
of UFOs painted in their sides, but a
television documentary team found the
potter who created the artefacts. When
Daniken was confronted with proof of his
fraud, he replied that it was allowed because
some people will irrationally refuse to
believe an argument unless they see tangible
evidence.
Since then, rival


or complementary


theories about similar subjects have
appeared. Another controversial notion was
written by Robert Bauval and Adrian Gilbert
in their 1994 book The Orion Mystery. The
idea is termed ‘The Orion Theory’, and is
solely connected with the belief that the


Ancient Egyptians are descended from alien


26


visitors. Gilbert and Bauval realised that the
three pyramids at Giza correlate exactly with
the three belt stars of Orion. Subsequent
study using the theory has apparently
discovered other ancient structures in areas
of Egypt that correspond to points of the
Orion constellation.

The Orion Theory suggests that the alien
visitors originated from a planet in the Orion
constellation. The Egyptians worshipped the
god Osiris, who had ‘Sha’ as its cosmic
representation. The Sha constellation is what
we call Orion. Gilbert and Bauval also
studied the strange shafts found in the
pyramids which they said were directed
towards the right area of the heavens for the
dead pharaohs’ souls to ascend back from
whence they came. Modern scholars have
pointed out that the Earth’s position and
view of the heavens would have been
drastically different in ancient history, and
suspicious manipulation of time frames has
been used to make sure some related theories
are seen as plausible. In reality, this has
undermined the integrity of the whole
subject.

The forefather of all these types of ideas,
Daniken himself, has little reason to be bitter
about other people’s doubts. Chariots of the
Gods? became an instant bestseller in the
United States and across the world. Since
then, he has written nearly 30 books and sold
60 million copies of his work. He enjoys a
life of travel, lecturing across the world and
appearing on television programmes talking
abut his theories. He is responsible for
inspiring a major science-fiction television
series entitled Chariots of the Gods, and in
the summer of 2003 he opened his very own
Mysteries of the World theme park. Perhaps
the mystery in this story is nothing to do
with aliens and ancient civilisations, but
with how one man created an enormous
industry and following based on a theory
with dubious foundations?


The Great Pyramid of Giza: sophisticated map of the heavens, or just a load of stones?


IDA TCE-OE58-413A-ACIS-ADOCODGGEAXO.


AREA ^l


EEP IN THE Nevada desert lies a
military base that is surrounded by
so much official secrecy that the US
has even refused to
acknowledge it exists. The base was built by


government


the CIA and all pilots, ground crews and the
staff have to retire from their original
military departments and join the agency
before taking residency on site. As a CIA
installation it operates independently of
other government departments. To this day,
signs at the entrance warn all visitors that
they have no constitutional rights on site,
and armed units guard the perimeter. It is the
UFO world's worst kept secret, and the area
is now a pilgrimage point for alien watchers.
This is Area 51.

Built in the 1950s around the Groom Lake
Air Force base, and next to the Nevada
atomic test range, Area 51 was a perfect site
to carry out classified aircraft tests. It had a
large flat surface perfect for laying runways,
few local residents, and a highly unattractive
reputation to new settlers due to the nearby
nuclear pollution. Initially it was built
purely for testing the U2 spy plane, but the
programme was such a success that all the
United States secret aircraft were experi-
mentally flown there. The base grew in size,
creating its own small community and the
landing strip was increased to three miles
long. The Blackbird and Stealth planes were
developed on site, and countless unknown
technologies are housed in the base's hanger.
Many people believe these technologies are,
quite literally, from a different planet, and
the base is actually a test zone and hiding
site for alien aircraft. At night, strange lights


28


<n


Sars TN


Examining the wreckage of a UFO — or is it a weather
balloon?


are seen in the sky above the base, and many
watchers believe the site hides enormous
underground installations.

More in-depth knowledge of operations
there have come through one man, Bob Lazar.
Lazar is a scientist who was employed by a
company called EG & G in 1989 who said
they were working on a propulsion project at
their testing centre near Area 51, on a base
called S4.
revealed that he and other scientists were
employed to pull an alien aircraft apart and


In later conversations Lazar


see if they could manufacture it using man-
made components. As part of their work, the
scientists were informed about the role of
aliens in the history of the Earth, and on one
occasion Lazar even claims to have briefly
seen at first-hand, a real, live alien at S4.


-


It's out there somewhere: members of a UFO search team pose for the camera.


Over time, Lazar says he decided to rebel
against his employers. In the evening of
22nd March 1989 he and a friend went out to
the Groom Lake road and watched a flying
disc test flight. The following week Lazar, his
friend and three others visited the same area.
They saw a disc flight, which Huff described
as 'the thrill of a lifetime'. The disc they
witnessed glowed extremely brightly, and
flew so close that they felt they had to move
backwards. The following week, on the way
back home from another UFO-spotting trip,
the group were seen and stopped by base
security patrolling the outlying area. The
next day Lazar was sacked from EG & G’s
employment. He has subsequently revealed
that nine discs are said to be held at S4.

Some of the unsettling things that go on at
the base are more real than others. The road
to its entrance is known as ‘The Widow’s
Highway’ because of the high numbers of


29


workers at the base who die through contact
with fatally poisonous materials. Many
experts suggest the area is a secret dumping
ground for toxic substances, rather than a
UFO base. In either case, the workers are
sworn to secrecy, and cannot reveal details
about what they have been handling to their
doctors. This has
launching court proceedings against the US


led to their wives


government, who have traditionally refuted
the allegations on the grounds that Area 51
does not officially exist. However,


statement made in January 2001 by President


a


George Bush did refer to the ‘operating
location near Groom Lake’, which is the first
official recognition of Area 51. But Bush also
said that the site was exempt from environ-
mental disclosure requirements, so the
widows are still fighting their case. But at
least we now know the place is not just a
figment of our imaginations.


CIVILIAN
AIRCRAFT
ENCOUNTERS


NE OF THE FIRST ENCOUNTERS between
O civilian aircraft and a UFO hap-

pened at 2.45am on 24th July 1948.
Captain Clarence S. Chiles and Pilot John B.
Whitted, both former US Air Force pilots,
were flying an Eastern Airlines DC-3 flight
from Atlanta, Georgia to Montgomery,
Alabama. The plane was travelling at an
altitude of 5,000 feet when both men noticed
a strange aerial vehicle approaching their
aircraft. They said it appeared to be cigar-
shaped, 400 feet long, and travelling at
around 600 miles an hour. They managed to
make out two rows of windows along its
side, which glowed bright white, and a blue
light underneath. It had no wings and its trail
rocked the DC-3 as it blasted off. For the rest
of the 1940s and 1950s many aeroplanes
were ‘buzzed’ by UFOs, and the pheno-
menon grew to such an extent that military
officials brought in a code that gagged US
commercial pilots from talking about their


experiences.
On the other side of the border, in Canada,
pilots did not have to follow such


regulations. In 1966 a Canadian Pacific DC-8
was flying at a height of 35,000 feet from
Peru to Mexico City when the crew
witnessed something very odd. The Captain,
Roger Millbank, was so certain of what he
and his staff had seen that he filed an official


30


report with Mexican authorities. He said that
he and the co-pilot had seen two bright white
lights to the left, which gradually separated
and approached the DC-8. The lights seemed
to change in colour and intensity, and they
turned into two distinct beams, pointing in a
V-shape. They came nearer still, and finally
levelled off by the airliner's left wing-tip.
Millbank said that in the light of the full
moon they could 'see a shape between the
two lights, a structure which appeared to
have been thicker in the middle’. It remained
close to the DC-8 for a couple more minutes,
and then disappeared behind.

On one flight in the 1970s the passengers
on a British Airways jet had a very light-
hearted encounter with a UFO. The plane
was flying just south of the Portuguese
capital, Lisbon, when the Captain heard air
traffic control issuing a warning about a
strange object in the skies near their flight-
path. The crew of the BA flight saw a bright
light in the distance, and a cigar-shaped craft
soon appeared close-by. Realising this was
too good an opportunity to miss, the British
pilot issued an announcement over the
passenger address system, 'Ladies and
gentlemen, if you look on the starboard side
of the plane, you will see what we believe to
be a UFO.’
destination safely.


The airliner reached its


In November 1979, rather


unpleasant episode befell the pilot flying a


a more
Spanish charter plane from Ibiza to the
Spanish mainland. At an altitude of 24,000
feet a strange subject almost collided with
the airliner. The pilot saw a bright red object,
seemingly on a collision course with his
vessel, and began an emergency dive to
avoid it. The UFO continued to buzz round
the airliner, and in the end two fighter jets
were sent to intercept the object. The whole
incident was witnessed on radar screens and
by countless people watching from the earth
below. A similar occurrence happened in the
same area exactly one year later. The pilot of
an Iberian Airways jet flying at 31,000 feet
suddenly saw an immense green bubble in
his
witnessed by six other commercial airlines


flight-path. The phenomenon was


in the vicinity, and some reports said it even
swooped down on Barcelona Airport.


In recent years, other similar incidents
have occurred. A British Airways 737 was
arriving at Manchester Airport in 1995
when a UFO buzzed near to the side of the
plane. An even closer event happened on
12th June 1998 when an Oslo-bound jet
took off from London's Heathrow Airport.
The plane's captain reported to air traffic
controllers that they had almost been hit by
a small aircraft. Later the co-pilot said he
had seen a very clear bright light and the
captain filed an official report claiming a
fighter-sized aeroplane had passed within a
50 metre distance of the aircraft. Aviation,
military and police authorities found no
explanation for the incident, however they
say that no matter how safe air travel is,
accidents sometimes do happen. With this
level of unexplained aerial activity,
perhaps it’s surprising they do not occur
more often.


GOVERNMENT
KNOWLEDGE


N DECEMBER 1988 countless witnesses in

Puerto Rico saw apparent encounters

between US warplanes and strange, huge
alien aircraft. On one occasion, bystanders
saw two F-14 jets actually enter another
massive flying triangular craft. Were the war
planes destroyed or were they co-operating
in joint manoeuvres with the unknown
vessel? Certainly some conspiracy theorists
have suggested that the United States
government actually has a close relationship
with alien visitors, and provides them with
ground bases. One of the areas is said to be


31


under the water of the western Atlantic.
Other theories propose that extraterrestrial
beings are allegedly abducting law abiding
US citizens in return for technological
secrets. But what do our governments really
know about UFOs?

The US Department of Defense does not,
officially, have anything to do with UFOs
anymore. That is because they are no longer
called UFOs. In the present age, such
phenomenon are called Uncorrelated
Targets, or UCTs for earthbound unidentified
air-based incidents. The US military rarely


reveals what it knows, and exact figures are
scarce. Officially, there is also no central
department dealing with the issue, although
many investigators consider this to be a
fallacy. In either case, this situation has only
developed since 1974 with the shutting
down of the US military's open, public
examination of UFO cases.

After the Second World War, a spate of
UFO sightings initiated a US project called
‘Operation Blue Book’. It was a scheme
designed to show the public there were no
secrets in the US's official investigation of
alien craft. This ‘openness’ was merely a
front, and it was actually made a crime equal
to spying for military officers to reveal
details of UFOs to unauthorised people. In
reality, Blue Book only reported cases that
were guaranteed to be found as hoaxes or
mistaken identity. One of the experts who
worked as a scientific consultant on the
project Josef Allan Hynek,
astrophysicist and sceptic. He revealed that


was an
any sightings reported by people under 18
years of age were automatically ignored, and
other incidents would only be published if
they could be rationalised. In total, Blue
Book investigated 15,000 reports of UFOs,
many of them still not explained, and Hynek
experienced something of
conversion. He became an informed believer,


himself a
and coined the term ‘close encounter’.
Britain has its own group of people similar
to Hynek. Nick Pope was a civil servant who
worked for the Ministry of Defence. His role
was to respond to questions from the public
about UFOs. During the course of his work,
he uncovered enough fascinating infor-
mation to write his own books about
unexplained phenomenon. Other investi-
gators believe what Pope has been privy too
is merely the tip of the iceberg, and some


32


quite extraordinary files concerning the issue
of UFOs have been uncovered. One
collection entitled ‘UFO Policy’ features a
six-page document from 1960 which states
that any unauthorised information
disclosures would be viewed as breaches of
the Official Secrets Act.

The Ministry of Defence official policy
states that it does not investigate UFO
sightings unless they are of ‘defence signif-
icance’. Despite proof or
terrifying witness accounts, the authorities at


impressive


the Ministry of Defence continually rule that
each incident has no importance to national
security. At least that is the public position,
and what happens behind the scenes is
unknown.

One of the problems British investigators
have when searching for old files like this is
that the various ministries and departments
involved are quite adept at being secretive.
United States officials, on the other hand, are
supposed to be more open. The American
Constitution and Freedom of Information
Act is designed to let the public know what
is actually happening. In 1980, however, a
group called ‘Citizens Against Unidentified
Flying Objects Secrecy’ sued the National
Security Agency. It wanted the NSA to open
its files on 239 UFO incidents but the
authorities argued that to do so would
damage US national safety. In recent years a
ruling changing the classification status of
documents has meant many of these reports
will finally be put in the public domain.

One cannot help but feel that any truly
amazing official papers that may cause
public hysteria will be suppressed. Are
national governments hiding the truth from
their people, or is there really nothing to
report? It is a question to which we may
never have a definite answer.


LIFE ON MARS


HE IDEA THAT the Earth could be

invaded by a marauding army of

creatures from Mars is a scene now
suitable only for vintage science-fiction —
with the advent of modern technology and
better understanding, even our creative
writers have progressed. The suggestion that
intelligent life forms live so close to Earth is
now too implausible for fiction. But as we
learn more about the universe, so our
intelligence contradicts old, established
beliefs.


wisdom is wrong?


Can it be true that conventional


In 1976, Viking Orbiter 1 was sent to scan
the surface of Mars. The craft was designed
to photograph the planet's terrain and find a
suitable landing site for a future Viking
Landing 2 mission. Investigators studying
the photographs found a picture of Mars’
Cydonia region that seemed to show a mile-
wide hill shaped like a human face. NASA
claimed it was just a trick of the light, and
released the image, naming it the ‘Mars
Face’. However, many enthusiasts believed
that close scrutiny of the photographs
proved that some formations were artificial,
rather than naturally created. Some people
stated that the face was the design of an
intelligent life form, and some believed that
triangular-shaped hills near the face were
actually pyramids.

In 1998 and 2001 the Mars Global
Surveyor took more photographs of the
Cydonia region. These pictures showed the
‘Mars Face’ and other geographical objects as
being much more innocent. However, most
‘Mars
claimed these new pictures depicted a whole


astonishingly, Face’ enthusiasts


33


city frozen underneath a giant glacier in the
region. NASA has promised to continue
mapping the area until the question is
answered and former NASA administrator,
Dan Goldin, vowed that the Cydonia region
of Mars will be studied to everybody’s
satisfaction.

Other developments in the quest to find
life on Mars have also thrown up some
fascinating results. A meteorite from Mars
was found in Antarctica in 1984 and the
NASA scientists who studied it found it
contained evidence that bacterial life may
actually exist, or have existed, on the planet.
The space rock contained hydrocarbons,
which are the natural waste products of dead
micro-organisms, mineral structures con-
sistent with bacterial activity and tiny
globules of carbonate, which may be micro-
fossils. In NASA’s opinion, these features
found together strongly point to possible
micro-organism activity.

Another recent discovery was published
when data found by the Pathfinder mission
to Mars suggested there might be chlorophyll
in its soil. Pathfinder touched down in the
Ares Vallis region of the planet in July 1997,
and took many pictures and readings from
the area in which it landed. Some of the
pictures it took revealed that two areas close
to the landing site may have contained
chlorophyll. Chlorophyll is a substance used
by plants and other organisms to extract
energy from sunlight. It is an important
component of life on our planet, a very stark
indicator that there may be life on another
planet too.

The most important ingredient for life is


ratte See N
» D ME BS
Ar oam. SS


^
“f+
£1
PA
a


Carte d'ensemble de la planète Mars
avec oes gres sombres pon doutes
observés pendant lea six oypomtiora de 1877. 1885


` par JN Sehinparelhi


Map of Mars. The most up-to-date reports from the European Mars Express mission confirm the presence of large
quantities of ice-held water at the Red Planet’s South Pole.


B-4134-ACI9-4DOCOO6OFARD


D470


water. It had generally been assumed that
there was little easily available water on the
surface of Mars, and most of that was frozen
solid. However, recent studies have
suggested that the surface is actually just a
covering over a permafrost layer. NASA and
Russian scientists have looked at the
examples of life found in permafrost regions
of Earth, and believe similar organisms may
lurk somewhere on Mars. Other experts who
have studied the surface of the planet have
noted how similar it is to former, now dried-
up, river, lake and ocean areas on Earth. It all
suggests that water was in abundance at
some time on Mars.


34


American President George Bush certainly
seems to share in this opinion, and his
budget announcements have all favoured
putting some money into space research,
particularly on Mars. One statement said that
‘habitable worlds’ may be more prevalent
than scientists once thought. He vowed to
put $3 billion into Project Prometheus, a
plan to find out more about our solar system.
This money should prove to be highly
beneficial for the Mars projects, for, as each
new study seems to throw up more potential
questions, it may well take nothing less than
a manned mission to Mars to finally put the
mystery to rest.


MEN IN BLACK


HE FIRST KNOWN ENCOUNTER with two

| ‘Men in Black’ happened in 1947.
Two US harbour patrolmen, Harold A.

Dahl and Fred L. Crisman, had spotted a
UFO over the water of Puget Sound,
Washington. Dahl said that a man dressed in
black visited him shortly after the sighting
and forcefully advised him not to discuss the
further. A
happened to Carlo Rossi, from the area near
San Pietro a Vico in Italy. In the early hours
of 25th July, 1952, Rossi was fishing in the
River Serchio when he witnessed a strange
circular craft hovering over the river. Rossi


incident similar meeting


hid, watching the craft as it passed over him,
and then sped away. In the following weeks
he told no-one about what he had seen, but
on 15th September he found a stranger
dressed in a dark blue suit waiting for him by
the river. The stranger spoke Italian, but with
an odd Scandinavian accent, and had very
strange facial features. The man forcefully
asked Rossi about what he had seen, but
Rossi denied everything.

A bizarre Men in Black case happened on
18th May 1968, when UFO witnesses started
contacting researchers. George Smyth was
one of those who had seen a strange object in
the skies above Elizabeth, New Jersey, USA.
He began to receive visits from strange men,
and received phone calls warning him not to
attend upcoming UFO conventions or speak
to independent investigators. A bizarre
aspect of this case was that the three visitors
Smyth described were apparently the men
he had been told to avoid — the UFO
enthusiasts John Keel, Gray Barker and
James Moseley. What made this even more
odd was that these three men were actually


35


miles away from Smyth's house at the time of
the visits.

Other UFO investigators in the area, John
Robinson and his wife Mary, also noticed
strange things happening to them. A large
dark car seemed to be parked outside their
house in New Jersey City, with a strange man
inside constantly watching them. One day
Mary went out and noticed their friend
James Moseley making a spectacle of himself
further up the street. She thought this was
very strange, but went inside to make a drink
for him, thinking he was there to visit them.
But then the phone rang. To her surprise it
was Moseley, not on a street corner in New
Jersey City, but at his home in Manhattan.

In recent years, more incidents have been
reported. On 15th January 1997 William
Shearer experienced a UFO encounter in
Essex, southern England. Four days later he
had a knock at the door and outside stood
two strange men, dressed in dark grey suits
and long coats. One man stood on guard by a
large imposing saloon car, the other stood at
Shearer's threshold. This man was said to be
very tall, deathly pale but with bright red
lips, and spoke in a very unusual, almost
automated, way. He repeatedly asked to
come in but Shearer refused and the men
finally said they would come back later.

A month later, Shearer was at work when
two men appeared. One was the visitor who
had stood by the car at the housecall, the
other was a different man. They were both
dressed in suits with hats, and they told him
talk about his UFO
experience. They gave him exact details of
the incident, details that Shearer felt only he
should know, and were forceful in their


they wanted to


y


V.
a


y


i


Men in Black: Will Smith and Tommy Lee Jones prepare to save the Earth in a still from the film of the same name.


Shearer asked to see their ID, but
the men just kept repeating a formulaic set of


requests.


questions. In the end, Shearer refused to let
them into his place of work and the two men
disappeared. However, since then, he has
reported blatant tapping activity when using
his telephone.

Although no one can be absolutely certain,
one theory is that these strange visitors are
UFO investigators who belong to a research
group that has standardised their visiting
uniform. Others say they are actually aliens


36


trying to cover their tracks. Sceptics believe
they are pranksters or simply figments of
witness’s imaginations. In most cases, they
claim to be from the CIA or intelligence
agencies, and there is a theory that these
organisations have been happy to assume
such identities in recent years as a ready-
made method of intimidation. The other
option is, of course, that they are from a
of
intelligence, trying to control UFO and alien-
related sightings.


secret department government


DIM TCE-OESB-IL 3A ACI-ADOCOOGOFAMD


NAZCA LINES


N THE 1930s, when air travel was gaining

popularity as the easiest way to cross the

high altitude peaks of South America,
passengers flying over the lofty plains of
Peru were greeted with quite a sight. Down
on the arid, dry plateau of the Nazca desert,
which is about 250 miles south of Lima and
covers an area of approximately 200 square
miles, was a plethora of massive markings,
many in the shape of people and animals,
although there were also hundreds of criss-
crossing, randomly spaced lines. Locals had


always known of the strange marks found on


the dusty floor, although it was only now,
from the air, that their true designs were
revealed. The discovery sparked an interest
and a study that continues to this day:
people wanted to know why they were there,
and what they meant.

The pictures themselves were created using
the gravel, soil and distinctly coloured
undercrust. Because the area experiences less
than an inch of rainfall each year, and the
effect of the wind on the surface is minimal,
the shapes have been preserved over
centuries. There are over 100 outlines of


animals and plants, including a monkey,
spider, hummingbird and even, it is thought,
a spaceman. Countless straight lines form
squares, triangles, trapezoids and all manner
of strange angles. They seem to run in random
directions and to random lengths — one even
stretches for nine miles along the desert floor.

Over 3,000 years ago the area was
inhabited by a race called the Nazca, who
had developed proficient techniques in
pottery, weaving and architecture. They
created highly effective irrigation systems
and successfully grew crops in a harsh
environment. It is widely believed that these
people were responsible for drawing the
lines, although the actual date of the lines'
creation is impossible to determine. A
nearby city called Cahauchi, just south of the
lines, was recently discovered as being the
probable home of the Nazcan line drawers.
Experts were able to deduce that the majority
of Nazcan people fled the city after a series of
natural disasters, with the few native people
who remained being exiled or killed by
Spanish conquistadors.

But why would a race want to draw
pictures that could only be appreciated from
the sky? Perhaps the most celebrated theory
was the one advanced by Dr Maria Reiche.
She tried to prove that the lines correlated to
important stars rising in the heavens, and the
symbols of animals were actually native
representations of star constellations. But her
views were not universally supported due to
the very fact that the lines cannot be dated.
As the Earth's relationship with the universe
turns, any line in any direction will
correspond to some astronomical feature at


38


some date. After a lifetime of study and
fascination, Reiche died and was buried in
the Nazca valley in 1998.

During the 1960s, writers such as Louis
Pauwels, Jacques Bergier, and Erich von
Daniken famously promoted ideas that the
lines were runways or landing strip for alien
visitors. Other theories suggest they are an
astronomical calendar; that they were used
for religious ceremonies; or that they
indicated underground sources of water. One
expert believes that, before the invention of
weaving tools, the lines had men standing
along them holding thread, in a version of a
giant human loom. But exactly why the
images were designed to be viewed from the
air has never really been addressed. One
quite astonishing theory is that the Nazca
people were the original human aviators,
and had developed the first rudimentary hot
air balloon.

Our understanding of the Nazcan culture
has developed with archaeological dis-
coveries, but today the fate of the lines is in
serious jeopardy. In recent years, political
and advertising agencies have graffitied
slogans on the patterns, whilst a recent surge
in gold and copper mining in the area is
defacing the designs with industrial
activities and heavy traffic movements. The
expanding local population needs a higher
level of basic amenities, which has meant
utility providers are now running cables and
pipes over the site. Combined with the
effects of natural weathering, this means that
the most enigmatic and mysterious visual
display of an ancient race is under threat of
being lost from Man’s history forever.


THe DIRI Reis Map


N 1929 A GROUP of historians at the
Topkapi Palace in Istanbul, Turkey, found
something rather fascinating. Imprinted
on an old Gazelle skin dated 1513 they
uncovered a segment of an amazing map. The
chart seemed to depict part of the Atlantic
Ocean and included the Americas and
Antarctica in perfect detail. The mysterious
thing was it had been drawn up only a few
years after Columbus’ discovery, and three
centuries before Antarctica was even known
about. Over the years since the find, debate
has raged about how the cartographer had
assimilated his knowledge. Did an advanced
ancient race, or aliens, create his source
charts, or have the map’s features been
adapted to fit wishful-thinking theories?
The map came to be named after its creator
— Piri Reis. The word ‘Reis’ actually means
‘Admiral’,
Muhiddin Piri had originally worked as a
privateer for the Turkish Ottoman empire,


and it was discovered that


before accepting a role in the imperial navy.
On his travels, he had collected all manner of
charts, sketches, drawings and diagrams of
coastlines and lands in the known world. In
1513, using an exhaustive list of source charts
and data, he drew his first world map, which
is what we now recognise as the Piri Reis
Map. He is known to have compiled another,
quite different, global study in 1528 and
continued to enjoy a distinguished military
career until 1554, aged almost 90, when he
was beheaded by the Ottoman Sultan.

The segment of the map that still exists is
only a portion of the original, and shows the
Atlantic Ocean from the west coast of Africa,
to the east coast of South America, to the
north coast of Antarctica in the south. Piri


39


also included details about his sources on
the map, claiming some of the reference
charts he used were from the fourth century
or even before. The map is not drawn with
the straight lines of longitude and latitude
found on today's maps. It was designed using
a series of circles with lines radiating out
from them. These types of charts were called
'portolan maps and were used to explain
sailing routes, guiding ships from port to
port, rather than giving sailors a definite
position in the world. Ancient charts of this
type were widespread, and Columbus is said
to have used one when he set off to find the
Americas.

Many Piri Reis Map enthusiasts believe the
level of geographical detail and mathe-
matical knowledge needed to create the map
was far beyond the reach of navigators from
the sixteenth or earlier centuries. Indeed,
experts at the United States Air Force in the
1960s found the map so accurate they used it
to replace false information on their own
charts. Some people believe the map could
only have been achieved with the help of
aerial surveys, and suggest alien creatures
mapped the planet thousands of years ago,
leaving their results behind to be copied by
Mankind.

The map's seemingly accurate depiction of
the geography of Antarctica is its most
fascinating aspect. Antarctica was dis-
covered in 1818, and the actual land of the
continent was only mapped in 1949 by a
combined British and Scandinavian project
that had to use modern equipment to see the
land underneath the mile-deep icecap. The
theory put forward to compensate for this is
that an ancient race using advanced, but now


DIM TCE-OESB-IL 3A ACI-ADOCOOGOFAMD


lost, technology was able to accurately
record details of the continent before it was
covered with ice.

Most experts suggest Antarctica was ice-
free no later than 6,000 years ago, although
others believe ice has covered the continent
for — at least — hundreds of thousands of
years. Similarly, many cartography experts
claim the accuracy of the portolan system of
map drawing is more in the eye of the
beholder, and many maps of this time
included imaginary continents in the south
Atlantic. But there still


are some


unexplainably accurate details on the map.
The Falkland Islands are placed at the
correct latitude, despite not being discovered
until 1592, and the unknown Andes
mountain range was included on the map of
America. Similarly, Greenland was shown as
three separate islands, a fact only discovered
this century.

So the debate continues. Did Piri Reis just
strike lucky with cartographic guesswork? Or
did the Turkish admiral have access to charts
and maps created by an advanced race,
living on the planet thousands of years ago?


The Piri Reis map, showing the coastline of Antarctica under the ice.


40


RENDLESHAM
FOREST


ANY AREAS ON THE east coast of

Britain contain top-secret military

installations. One island called
Orford Ness, just off the coast of Suffolk, was
the site of many still unrevealed chemical,
biological, nuclear and radiological weapons
experiments during the 1940s, 50s and 60s —
and as a matter of interest has an imposing
lighthouse. Some of the other bases near the
coast have been leased to the US Air Force;
the twin installations at RAF Bentwaters and
RAF Woodbridge were two oval complexes
and formed a vital part of NATO’s defence
against Communist threats. It was reported
that at the height of the Cold War these co-
joined airbases housed the most nuclear
weapons outside the Soviet Union. This
important and serious tactical presence
meant the bases were fiercely guarded and
were hidden in a thick ring of woodland
known as Rendlesham Forest. In December
1980, which were
witnessed by some of the forces stationed at


two strange events,


the bases, occurred in this forest and would
go down in history as one of the most
fascinating UFO cases ever recorded.

The unique aspect about the Rendlesham
forest incident is that within three years of it
happening, the public had proof of official,
military documents detailing the events that
were witnessed. The witnesses were not
simple country folk, lunatics or publicity-
seekers, they were trained, professional US
Air Force personnel. Indeed, the most
famous name connected with the incident,
Lieutenant Colonel Charles Halt, was the


Al


Deputy Base Commander in charge of
Bentwaters and Woodbridge’s security. Not
only did Halt write and submit the official
report, he was also a first-hand witness at the
second of the two strange happenings.

His memo, sent to the British Ministry of
Defence, was released by the US authorities
under the American Freedom of Information
Act in 1983, after rumours about a period of
bizarre incidents at the site begun to
circulate among UFO enthusiasts. The
subsequent publication of sensational stories
about Rendlesham appeared in tabloid
newspapers, and the continued silence by
British authorities meant many believed
something odd did occur. So what did
happen around the Rendlesham Forest in
December 1980?

Halt’s memo recorded that the first
incident happened in the early hours of 27th
December 1980. He wrote that two perimeter
security patrolmen saw a strange light
outside the back gate of RAF Woodbridge,
which they thought may have been a crashed
aircraft. They called their commanders for
permission to investigate, and three patrol-
men went to search the nearby land on foot.
These three military guards reported viewing
a bizarre glowing subject in the forest which
appeared to be made of a metallic substance.
It was triangular in shape, two to three
metres wide and about two metres high. It
was said to light the whole forest with a
bright white beam. It had a red light as its
peak, blue lights along its base, and seemed
to hover or stand on legs. As the Air Force


personnel approached it, the object weaved
through the trees and disappeared, causing
the nearby farm animals to go into a frenzy
An hour later, the strange object was briefly
seen again.

The next day, Halt wrote that more
servicemen from the base ventured into the
forest to see if they could see any markings or
tracks. They found three, 1-inch-deep and 7-
inch-wide depressions in the area where the
object was seen. On 29th December, base
personnel tested for radiation levels and
found higher-than-normal readings in the
centre of the formation of depressions, and on
a nearby tree.

During the night of the 29th, and the
morning of the 30th, another ‘red sun-like’
light was viewed moving and pulsing in the
forest. Halt personally saw the oddities and
his memo reported that it ‘appeared to throw
off glowing particles and then broke into five
separate white objects and then disappeared.'
Three strange star-like objects were seen
darting rapidly about the night sky exuding
red, green and blue light. They remained
visible for two to three hours, and ‘beamed
down a stream of light from time to time’.

Over time, many of the Air Force witnesses
have come forward and offered their own
accounts of what happened those nights. Halt
himself took an audio, micro-cassette
recording of his commentary as events
happened on the second occasion. However,
his official report was not written until 13th
January 1981 and there now seems to be
confusion with dates. Local police records
show that they were called by the US Air
Force about the first incident on the morning
of 26th December 1980. On the other hand,
some reports state that a nearby radar station
at RAF Watton recorded an unusual
'uncorrelated target' that disappeared near
Rendlesham Forest at around 2am on 27th
December. Other researchers have revealed
that Halt actually called RAF Watton in


42


relation to the second sighting at 3:25am on
28th December. Seemingly, there
fundamental disagreement between Halt's


is a


dates of occurrences during the mornings of
the 27th and 29th, and other agencies
involved which state they happened early on
the 26th and 28th.

Many investigators believe the events
themselves were nothing more than the
result of  misunderstandings and visual
illusions. The initial cause of the supposed
UFO sighting may have been an excep-
tionally bright meteor that appeared over
southern England just before 3am on 26th
December. It has been suggested that the
subsequent triangular, metallic object was in
fact a tractor, seen from a distance with its
night lights switched on. Many investigators
believe the bizarre beam of white light see
illuminating the forest was actually caused
by the Orford Ness lighthouse. Similarly,
there are benign explanations for the
resulting depressions — they may have been
indentation caused by old rabbit burrows.
The radiation levels recorded, although
higher than naturally expected, are said by
some experts to be negligible.

It is undoubted that many of the US
servicemen viewing these bizarre occur-
rences must have been extremely excited,
and may have become confused and
irrational. Certainly the police who visited
the scene recorded no sighting of UFOs.
However, the personnel were also trained
airmen, and the bases at Bentwaters and
Woodbridge had been occupied by US forces
for many years, so they had grown
accustomed to the area. The fact that these
installations were the base for seriously
powerful weapons meant that the staff there
could not be prone to flights of fancy.
Similarly, Woodbridge was the home of 67th
Aeroplane Rescue and Recovery Squadron —
a unit specialising in the retrieval of
returning satellites and spacecraft. This


highly advanced and technological group
directly the Pentagon
Washington, and one would hope they


answers to in
would have been able to identify the
differences between any known aerial or
space vehicle, and a tractor.

In recent years, the British Government
silence — which led many to believe in a UFO
cover-up at Rendlesham - has receded. In
fact, the complete file of documents relating
to the incidents has been released. The
official explanation that the Ministry of
Defence had nothing to say on the matter
because there *was no reason to consider that
the alleged sightings had any defence signif-
icance', has been proven honest. The newly


publicised documents show the MOD did
investigate the sightings but could find little
cause for concern.

Their analysis does not entirely coincide
with the views of Georgina Bruni who wrote
the seminal book on the Rendlesham UFO
mystery, You Can't Tell the People. Bruni
interviewed all available witnesses and was
even given a personal tour around the US
installations. She also managed to catch a
quick unexpected word with the ultimate
Chief of British forces at the time, the Prime
Minister Margaret Thatcher. Her words to
Bruni were both interesting and mysterious:

‘You must have the facts, and you can't tell
the people.'


ROSWELL


HROUGH THE HAZY black and white
footage, the relaxed shape of a


T


humanoid figure can just be viewed. The


bloated, swollen-headed, six-fingered


grainy scene is a bizarre image of death as the
pathologist cuts into the alien skin. Could
this be the most incredible evidence ever
uncovered to prove that something out of
this world really did land at Roswell over
fifty years ago?

On 7th July 1947 the wreckage of a strange
vehicle and some non-human bodies was
found on the Foster ranch just outside
Roswell. The next day, a press officer from
the Roswell Army Air Fields was happy to
announce to the Roswell Daily Record that
the 509th Bomb Group, an elite section of the
Air Force, had salvaged an alien vessel.
Immediately his words were refuted. The US
8th Air Force’s commanding officer, General
Roger Ramey, said they had actually
recovered an experimental balloon. Ramey’s
explanation was quickly adopted as the


43


official line throughout the following years,
and this technique of outright denial would
continue to be championed by governments
questioned about flying saucer stories.
Although the public initially accepted the
official version of events, this episode
stream of UFO
sightings, particularly around remote US Air
Force bases. Sites such as Area 51 in Nevada,


sparked a consistent


and the government’s denial of its existence,
led to suspicion and conspiracy theories.
The 1947 ‘Roswell Incident itself has also
never quite left the public consciousness. In
1994 a New Mexico congressman instigated
an inquiry into the affair. The investigative
department of the US Congress, known as
the General Accounting Office, discovered
that many relevant US Air Force documents
had gone missing or had been destroyed.
the GAO also came to the
conclusion that it was, indeed, a weather


However,


balloon that had been recovered from the
Foster ranch, and the bodies there were in


IDA TCE-OES8-413A-ACIS-ADOCODGGEAXO.


The Roswell crash scene; why was there no debris left after the crash?


fact anthropomorphic dummies. Case closed.

Little did US officials realise that the
‘Roswell Incident’ was about to dramatically
appear on television screens across the
globe. In 1992, a British media businessman,
Ray Santilli was in Cleveland, Ohio to meet
a retired cameraman. Santilli wanted to buy
some vintage 1955 Elvis footage from the
man, who revealed he also had some
interesting alien autopsy film from his time
in the military. Santilli purchased the film in
November 1994 and agreed to show it at the
British UFO Research Association annual
conference on 19th August 1995. However,
by March 1995 news of the film had been
released to the media, and a serious world
premier of the footage was needed. It took
place in front of invited guests at the
Museum of London on 5th May. By the end
of August 1995, millions of people around
the world had seen moving pictures from a
supposed alien autopsy.

Although this was compelling evidence,
doubters immediately began voicing their
theories about the film. The most obvious
suspicion was that the autopsy had been
created by movie special effects processes.
Many experts believe the film is fake, but
they also believe it is very high quality. The
Hollywood effects industry is a closed shop,


44


with insiders having friends and contacts
across the range of companies, but so far no-
one has an inkling as to who created the
Roswell film. Other experts in the field of
biology are less convinced that the body is
entirely man-made, and some suspect that it
may be a human being adapted to look other-
worldly.

There is a whole host of further questions
about the Roswell autopsy. Whoever
captured the footage has never been
revealed, although a bizarre film was
released where someone purporting to be the
cameraman attempted to explain his
involvement. Santilli has never uncovered
the footage he has of another alien autopsy
and has never really allowed any of his films
to be subjected to proper scrutiny. Most
importantly, the aliens in the footage look
nothing like the bodies witnesses saw
recovered from the New Mexico desert floor.
All experts who view the autopsy film agree
that it is a fake. Santilli has made a great deal
of money from the Roswell autopsy footage,
and he still maintains that it is genuine. The
rest of us will probably never know. The
public’s natural instinct is to question
governmental denials, but the other options
here are also so unreliable that it is very hard
to determine the truth.


THe lIuNcGuUusEkEA
UHDLOSION


T 7:17AM ON 30th June 1908 there was
A massive explosion in the atmo-
sphere five miles above Siberia. It

left the forest underneath burnt and charred,
and pushed trees over in a 20-mile radius. It
threw people to the floor and broke
windowpanes 50 miles away. One hundred
miles away, witnesses reported seeing the
explosion create an enormous black cloud of
ash which was accompanied by a terrific
roar. This deafening noise was even heard
300 miles away, and all across the world
scientific recorded strange
occurrences in northern Russia. To this day,


equipment


bizarre growth patterns in plant and animal
life can be found in the area. But what
exactly happened in Tunguska that day?

The nearest witnesses to the explosion
were reindeer herders 25 miles from the
blast's epicentre. They were sleeping in their
tents when the massive force blew them into
the air. One man was reported to have died,
and the others lost consciousness. When
they came round, they saw the forest around
them devastated and smouldering. Other
witnesses at a trading post in Vanavara 50
miles south of the explosion, reported seeing
the sky split in two, with the northern part
covered in flames. A blast that washed over
them was so hot it felt as if their clothes were
on fire. It threw them 20 feet in the air, and
when they regained their senses, a terrible
crashing bang was followed by a noise which
sounded like a downpour of small stones
hitting the ground.

More distant witnesses had seen the


45


phenomenon's final impressive act
approaching. Residents in remote towns had
seen a great ‘ball of fire’ with an iridescent
tail streaking across the morning sky. Many
thought it was the beginning of the great final
apocalypse. The local newspaper, the Sibir,
reported what was seen from the village of
Nizhne-Karelinsk, 200 miles


explosion:


from the


The peasants saw a body shining brightly
- with a bluish white light. It moved
vertically downwards for about ten
minutes. The body was in the form of a
‘pipe’. The sky was cloudless, except that
low down on the horizon in the direction
in which this glowing body was observed,
a small dark cloud was noticed. It was hot
and dry and when the shining body
approached the ground it seemed to be
pulverised: in its place a huge cloud of
black smoke was formed and a loud
crash, not like thunder, but as if from the
fall of large stones, or from gunfire, was
heard. All the buildings shook and at the
same time, a forked tongue of flame broke
through the cloud. The old women wept,
everyone thought that the end of the world
was approaching.

The Russian authorities were not able to
send anyone to investigate the phenomenon
until March 1927, when Leonid Kulik was
chosen by the Soviet Academy of Sciences to
find out what had happened. Kulik arrived
in the area and noticed the lines of trees all
knocked down radiating from a distant
point. He took photographs and studied the


land, but never found any fragments or
meteorite samples. It seemed that whatever
had caused the huge heavenly event had
vaporised itself. The absence of physical
remains left the Russians perplexed. They
felt that only a massive rock from outer space
could have caused those effects.

Following the dropping of atomic bombs
on Japan during the Second World War,
photographs comparing the devastation of
Hiroshima and Nagasaki and the area near
the epicentre of the Tunguska explosion
displayed many similarities. A revision of
eye-witness accounts also increased the
possibility of the Russian phenomenon being


a nuclear explosion. However, no nuclear
weapons existed in 1908, so some people
speculated the blast was caused by an alien
space craft crashing to Earth.

Such an idea is now largely scoffed at, and
has been replaced with theories of anti-
matter or a black hole imploding above
Siberia. Our improved scientific knowledge
has been able to deduce that the explosion
was the equivalent of a 40-megaton nuclear
weapon. But Man's ideas about what caused
this amazing event, whether it involves
UFOS or other intergalactic oddities, requires
an understanding of a subject that we still
have not quite grasped.


UFO CRASHES


N 1963, A SCIENTIST known as Fritz Werner

was working on specialist nuclear tests in

Arizona. In May of that year, Werner was
asked to go on a specialist assignment — he
was flown to Phoenix, and then taken by bus
with a group of other men to a destination
north-west of the city. The men were told not
to talk to each other, and when unloaded
from the vehicle they were shown a crash
site. Werner claims that he saw a 30-feet-
wide metal disc protruding from the desert
sand. He was asked to calculate the speed of
the impact, and says that during his time on
site he also saw the body of a four-foot-tall
creature wearing a silver suit in the medical
tent. He was taken back to Arizona and made
to sign a non-disclosure agreement.

In 1957, a crashed UFO actually resulted
in physical evidence being put into the
public domain. On 18th September a
journalist named Ibrahim Sued, who worked
at a major Brazilian paper called O Globo,


46


received a very odd letter. It was unsigned,
but was said to be by a man who had been
fishing near the town of Ubatuba in Sao
Paulo, and saw a bizarre flying disc almost
crash into the sea. The anonymous man said
the craft was travelling at incredible speeds,
and although it missed the water, it exploded
in mid-air. The man managed to collect
fragments from the strange vessel, which he
included in the letter. These pieces were sent
for official testing, and the Brazilian
agricultural ministry declared it was a form
of unusually pure magnesium. The results of
experiments carried out by the Brazilian
Army and Navy were kept secret.

Unlike more remote areas, the great
advantage UFO researchers have when
investigating odd incidents in America is
that there are often plenty of witnesses. On
9th December 1965 hundreds of people saw
a bizarre object streaking across the skies
over Ohio and Pennsylvania. Some of the


ACIS-ADOCODGHAYO


GDAMTCE-OESB A23.


witnesses were airline pilots whose planes
were shaken by the turbulence created by the
unusual heavenly body. For six minutes,
people watched what they thought was a
meteorite travel from north-west to south-
east before it seemed to explode. In fact, the
object crashed in a wooded area in the town
of Kecksberg, and started a small fire. Local
police and fire authorities were unable to
reach the site because they were turned away
by a specialist military team who had
immediately descended on the area.
Witnesses said they had later seen the armed
unit load a rounded metallic object onto a
flatbed lorry which was then covered in
tarpaulin to disguise its load.

Undoubtedly the most unsettling UFO
crash and subsequent government reaction is
reported to have occurred in northern


Mexico, in the state of Chihuahua. UFO
investigators have obtained documents
which they claim reveal that an unidentified
object was tracked by two US Air Defense
radars on 25th August 1974. The object
seemed to be entering the atmosphere from
orbit, and was heading towards the United
States, but veered off at the last minute and
disappeared from sight over Mexico. At the
same time, Mexican authorities said a light
aeroplane had been lost over the area. The
next day, Mexican search and rescue teams
hunting for the downed plane started
reporting that they had found the crash site,
and two aircraft seemed to have been
involved. When they transmitted a message
that claimed the second appeared to be
metallic and circular in shape, all broadcasts
were ordered to stop.


UFO, or just poor photography?


4T


UFO enthusiasts believe the US
government heard these messages and
immediately organised a response team. The
US government strongly urged Mexico to
accept their help, and when the local
authorities ignored the offer, they decided to
go in anyway. Mexican salvage squads had
already loaded the two craft onto a truck and
were heading south. By the time the US
forces, travelling in helicopters, had caught
up with them, a terrible tragedy had


occurred. All the people with the convoy


had somehow been mysteriously killed, so
the American team, wearing protective
clothing, took charge of the suspect air
vehicle. They ferried it slung underneath a
cargo helicopter, and took it to a secret instal-
lation in the US.

There is no absolute proof of UFO activity,
but investigators continue to claim that more
and more official evidence is being revealed
that support these stories. The truth may not
be ‘out there’, but it could certainly lie
hidden in the vaults of a government agency.


UFOS &
MILITARY
INTERCEPTIONS


HE UFO PHENOMENON has an almost
inextricable connection to the world’s


T


that a substantial amount of unexplained


military forces. Many sceptics believe


sightings are actually test flights of secret
man-made fighters and bombers. Conspiracy
theorists on the other hand are convinced the
United States government in particular is in
collusion with alien life forms — and that its
military’s high-technology weapons have
been created with the aid of extraterrestrial
intelligence.

One of the first eminent military witnesses
of UFO sightings was Commander Robert B.
McLaughlin of the US Navy. McLaughlin
graduated as an engineer and researched
guided missile systems in the 1940s. It was


48


during his time spent as a rocket expert at
White Sands, the military proving ground,
that he witnessed an unknown flying
structure for himself. In May 1949 he was
watching the test of an upper atmosphere
rocket, when he saw a white object travelling
at a speed of about a mile a second, at an
altitude of about 25 miles. Initially he
thought it was the rocket experiencing a
technical glitch, but the object speeded up to
a velocity far in excess of normal craft. He
noticed that the object left no vapour trails,
and was similar in appearance, placement
and motion to other phenomenon reported
by staff at White Sands.

A year earlier, in January 1948, Captain
Thomas Mantell was flying a F-51 Mustang


IDAM ICE OES8-1 3A ACIS-ADOCODEGEAO.


Watching the skies, but is the truth really out there?


in a group of four aircraft in the skies over
Kentucky when he was asked by airforce
command to investigate a strange object seen
at a high altitude. In broad daylight Mantell
flew after the target, but his
inexplicably plunged to the ground.
Subsequent investigators believe he had
chased after a ‘Skyhook’
balloon, but ran out of oxygen at high
altitude. This does not entirely tally with


plane


experimental


Mantell's own last message, which revealed
he had been approaching a massive metallic
object. Whatever Mantell encountered, the
US military placed increasing numbers of
Air Force fighters at the ready to intersect
any other strange flying craft, and the events
surrounding many US lost planes in
subsequent years were kept highly secret.
The British Royal Air Force has not had
such a long history of events involving UFOs,


49


and the first really mysterious incident
actually involved an American pilot, Captain
William Schaffer, a US Air Force exchange
officer. While Schaffer was flying an F6
Lightning over the North Sea, radar stations
picked up an unknown object, and he was
dispatched to observe. He managed to close
on it, but then lost contact. Radar operators
noticed the two blips of Schaffer's plane and
the other object merged to form one, and then
separated again. Radio controllers managed to
reach Schaffer, who seemed confused. He was
ordered to ditch the Lightning and wait for a
rescue helicopter to retrieve him. Although
other military aircraft witnessed Schaffer's
controlled sea landing, and saw his plane's
cockpit canopy open, he did not manage to
escape. In a cloak of secrecy, the RAF raised
the Lightning later that year, but few details
have ever been released.


The most widespread and fascinating case
of military involvement in a UFO case
happened in Belgium. On 29th November
1989 hundreds of civilians reported seeing a
huge dark grey triangular shape flying across
then night sky. This sparked off massive
interest in the country, and similar odd craft
were seen across Europe. Then, in 1990, two
Belgian Air Force F-16s actually managed to
intercept the UFO, but it displayed amazing
turns of speed and direction and broke the
The
government and its military opened up all
the data it recorded for public inspection,


fighters’ radar lock-on. Belgian


and it even pledged to have fighter planes on
permanent stand-by for UFO watchers. The
sightings gradually fell away, but scientists
have continued to study the information
gleaned during the period.


50


Episodes such as this support the theory
that the world’s military is indeed having
aerial rendezvous with the other-worldly
craft. Despite sceptical explanations, the
sheer range of incidents, and expense and
danger involved during them, suggest that
governments view the subject seriously. It is
claimed that between January and August
1996 the US Department of Defense secretly
scrambled fighters up to 23 times for
The
authorities in the last case may seem candid
and honest, but how much individual


unknown flying objects. Belgian


authorities know about possible alien
invaders is another matter. Whilst various
military organisations try to reveal little, the
well documented reports of world-wide
incidents point to the possibility that Man is,


indeed, encountering UFOs first hand.


EARTHLY
ENERGIES &
MYSTICAL
DLACES


UARTH ENERGY


OME PEOPLE BELIEVE the earth has a

natural source of energy that manifests

itself as a magnetic field or electrical
current. This unseen power is thought to
have the ability to affect human bodily
conditions and create biochemical reactions
when people are near a prime spot of Earth
Energy. Particularly potent areas are known
as vortices, and many enthusiasts are of the
opinion that these points help provide Man
with rejuvenating or beneficial energy. As a
sign of proof, they point to the idea that
ancient races were more in tune with natural
powers, and built important structures on
sites emanating large amounts of energy.
They claim Stonehenge, the Great Pyramid at
Giza and Nazca are all points of strong
natural forces.

As the idea of quantifiable, geophysical
Earth power or natural energy has developed,
the subject of ley-lines has very much caught
the public's imagination. Although leys have
significance based on historical and archaeo-
logical fact, the theory of Earth Energy was
popularised by New Age philosophies. Many


52


enthusiasts have examined the subject with a
scientific approach, despite it originating
alongside many of the ‘hippy’ theories of the
1960s and 70s. Certainly, many people do
connect Earth Energy with ley-lines and
mystical qualities, but there is also some
scientific substance to the idea.

Actual hard evidence is scarce, despite
enthusiasts' opinions. Dowsers suggest they
can pick up strong sources of energy at many
sacred sites, but that is a fact only as
believable as dowsing itself. Earth Energy
researchers often suggest that power centres
are all areas heavily charged with negative
ions, and there is an unusual state of
electrical, magnetic or electromagnetic flux.
They term the phenomenon
'geophysical anomalies', and whilst it seems


whole


superficially impressive, the technological
community is less convinced. Although
many scientists are happy to entertain the
possibility of untapped natural energy
sources, they do not agree that many of these
qualities attributed to Earth Energy have yet
been proven.


DIM TCE-OESB-I1 A ACIO-ADOCOOGOFAMD


CROp CIRCLES


HE PHENOMENON OF crop circles is one
that we regard as being a relatively
recent mystery, but strange patterns
have actually been appearing in fields for over
three hundred years. Sometimes occurring in
sand, ice or even snow, five thousand of these
beautiful geometric shapes have manifested
themselves in over forty countries across the


globe. However, Man is still no closer to
realising their significance. Some are
undoubtedly hoaxes but what do the others
mean? Are they messages from space, Mother
Earth, or perhaps another dimension?

Over the years, those who live in the
countryside, particularly those who live
along ley lines and channels of natural


Crop circle. Although many are perpetrated by hoaxers, the difference between hoax and genuine circles is clear.


energy, have come to regard the circles as
part of rural life and a few witnesses have
actually seen them made. They say an
invisible line snakes its way at high speed
through a field, pushing the stalks of crops
aside. When it reaches a certain point it
begins to spin round, pushing the crop down
radially, as would the hands on a clock.
When it has turned the full 360 degrees the
force just vanishes, leaving the crop perfectly
matted on the field floor. No stalks spring up,
and no stalks are crushed, they are all
carefully and permanently bowed.

The question as to who or what actually
determines that the patterns should be made
is still up for debate. Tales of UFOs and odd
lights above fields the night before new
formations appear are common. Similarly,
there are a substantial proportion of hoax
circles, but these are often easily discernible
as they have trampled, crushed crops rather
than gently bent stalks. Many people are
convinced freak weather conditions such as
mini, localised whirlwinds cause the
patterns. There is also a continuing study
into the scientific qualities of crop circles,
where investigators hope a rational, serious
approach will reveal the truth.

Perhaps the most popular explanation for
the appearance of crop circles is connected
with earth forces. The great majority of good,
reputable patterns in England appear in
Wiltshire, around historic areas of high
natural energy. They also often occur close to
ancient forts, burial mounds, standing stones
and fertility symbols therefore suggesting an
affiliation with Britain's traditional heritage.
Indeed, many people are convinced the
ancient forces of Mother Earth have a hand
in their creation.

One aspect of crop circles' character that is
not questionable is the effect they have on
electronic equipment. Tape recorders are
known to speed up once inside a circle and


54


then slow down again outside. State-of-the-
art video equipment malfunctions without
good cause, and even ordinary photographic
cameras have produced severely distorted
images. A rather ironic reaction circles have
is on farm machinery. Not only are good
crops flattened during a circle's production,
but many farmers have witnessed their
harvesting equipment refusing to work
anywhere near the circles.

The circles have striking effects on
humans. Some experts suggest that stepping
inside certain patterns can cause extreme
emotion change. Some people feel an
improved physical well-being and vitality in
certain circles, whilst in others feelings of
nausea, fatigue and light-
headedness can be brought about. Just by


migraine,


sitting inside stone circles people with a long
standing medical conditions are said to have
been significantly improved or even cured;
the effect of a crop circle's power on animals
is equally impressive. Horses and cats in
particular become agitated near patterns, and
often refuse to enter them. Flocks of birds
have been seen flying straight towards a crop
formation, only to drastically steer around
them at the last minute, whilst some dogs
feel compelled to bound right into the centre
of some circles, only to drop down asleep
when they reach it.

It seems a shame that some people do
create hoax crop circles. Of all unexplained
phenomena, they are one of the most
deserving of scientific study. Unlike the
fleeting images of monsters, aliens and
ghosts, crop circles are their own record of
some unknown power. Whatever causes
these formations undoubtedly leaves a trace
of its inexplicable force. Country folk are
well aware that, for centuries, something
with which they have grown to live has been
going on in their fields, but it is still
something they do not quite understand.


CRYSTAIS


HE NEW AGE movement has placed
great emphasis on one particular type
attractive chemical solidifications are now
regarded as being the wonder substance of


of power instrument - crystals. These


New Age belief, and have permeated into the
world of popular culture. The celebrity
world is awash with high-profile, spiritually-
aware people who attest to the positive
power of crystals. They believe these
substances direct and control energy flows in
the body and promote physical and
emotional well-being. But do crystals really
provide magical support for people or is this
effect merely an unsubstantiated craze?

A crystal is a solid ‘rock’ created by
chemicals solidifying in a solution. Its
chemical construction is particularly special
because it is formed by regularly repeating
patterns of atoms and molecules, and the
crystal particle is pulled together by flat
external forces. Like snowflakes, they are a
naturally occurring phenomenon where each
one created is unique, and crystals occur in
any number of shapes. They are highly
aesthetic and prized for use in clothing and
jewellery.

Throughout history, crystals have also
been regarded as having magic properties
and were often believed to hold bizarre
paranormal powers. Ancient races
considered crystals to contain the power of
Mother Earth as they originated in its crust,
and the energy of the sun because they were
seen to reflect light in bizarre ways. Crystals
were also supposed to show the future and
give people superhuman powers, with the
use of crystal balls by psychics being a
deliberate choice.


55


Crystals like these are claimed by many to have
mysterious healing powers.


Modern New Age enthusiasts believe the
power of the crystals lies in their ability to
regulate, calm and heal the body. They are
believed to channel good energy, ward off
bad energy and are also said to ‘vibrate’ at
frequencies which compliment natural body
declare that
crystals promote self-expression, meditation
and creativity, and that a full complement of


functions. Lifestyle gurus


different crystals is needed to engage with all
a person’s needs.

Different crystals are said to affect the
body in different ways. Amethysts are
believed to help headaches, eye and hair
problems, balance blood sugar levels,
increase psychic abilities and reduce anger,
impatience and nightmares. Emeralds
apparently increase the efficiency of a body’s
respiration, heart and blood systems, lift
depression and insomnia and evoke peace,
harmony, patience and love. Finally,
diamonds increase clarity, confidence and
trust, clarify attitudes and thoughts and
develop prosperity, generosity and love.


What better reason could there be for buying
them for a loved one?

In recent years it has been fashionable to
employ crystals in jewellery, not only for
aesthetic qualities, but so as to have
beneficial power sources near the body. A
chiropractor called Charles
developed the Bioelectric Shield — a piece of


Brown


jewellery that has crystals arranged in such a
way that they protect people from all the
many harmful electromagnetic forces in the
modern world: mobile phones, computer
screens and power lines. These ‘shields’ are
said to be medically proven, and are even
worn by Cherie Blair, the wife of the British
Prime Minister. The different constructions
of these shields
protection for different things.


are said to provide

Unfortunately, these assertions are not
based on any sort of scientific basis. Indeed
they are based on nothing more than blind
faith. Sceptics believe any reaction they do


UARTH


have on human beings is the result of
selective or wishful thinking, more self-
deception and placebo effect. But crystals do
have many vital roles in our modern world.
They
electronic,


are important components in


optical and communication
industries, and feature in many types of
high-tech equipment. These functions are
due to one special function that crystals
really do have. In 1880 Pierre and Jacques
Curie realised that certain crystals produce
change they
compressed. This discovery was termed the


an electrical when are
‘piezoelectric effect’, and now crystals are
used for highly scientific purposes.
However, the piezoelectric effect has no
effect on the human body, and crystals
provide no protection from illness, calamity
or misfortune. That does not detract from
their beauty, but as far as science is
concerned the magical power of crystals is


completely unfounded.


LIGHTS


HROUGHOUT HISTORY, PEOPLE have noted

strange lighting phenomena emanat-

ing from remote areas of natural land.
‘Will-o’-the-wisps’ are well known occur-
rences featuring small flames that spark from
marsh and woodland. Ball lightning is a
curious form of meteorological phenomenon
where air pressure causes an electrical
charge in the form of a ball. But the most
fascinating natural lights are even more
bizarre. People across the world have
reported seeing strange orbs of light that
seem to ignore the standard laws of physics
— explanations for their appearance are
anything but definite. Present theories range


56


from alien spacecraft to pan-dimensional
energy. All we do know is that they seem to
appear from the ground, and so they have
been termed Earth Lights.

These odd glowing visions have been
witnessed radiating all manner of colours,
from bright white, to blue, red or even black.
They can be as small as a tennis ball, or as
large as a car, and although they are normally
spherical, witnesses have seen Earth Lights
of many designs. Accounts of glowing
tadpole shapes are particularly common.
People who have managed to view them
close-up report odd internal reactions, and
bizarre crackling noises. The lights move in


IDA TCE-OES8-413A-ACIS-ADOCODGGEAXO.


erratic directions, and can split into
formations of multiple floating orbs. They
seem to have a strong connection to
geological and geographical features, and
linger around lakes, mountains and rocky
ridges.

One of the most impressive series of
sightings happened in Hessdalen, Norway, in
the early 1980s. People living in the area
began to see strange lights emerging from the
valley in November 1981. The glowing
designs ranged from bullet shapes to
triangles, and were commonly white and
yellow in colour. The level of reports
reached such a pitch that two airforce
officers were sent by the Norwegian


government to examine the occurrences. By
the start of 1984, Swedish and Norwegian


E i aa


LL Ti oe


UFO enthusiasts had begun Project
Hessdalen, a month long scientific study of
the valley. This yielded some readings of
Earth Light properties and also managed to
capture examples of the Earth Light
phenomenon on film.

Although the 1960s saw the creation of
theories that connected these unexplained
light displays with earthquakes and fault
lines, in-depth study of the subject had
always been overshadowed by alien and
UFO interest. However, unlike UFOs, the
verifiable scientific relationship between
these lights and the earth has allowed the
phenomenon to be quietly, but seriously,
studied. The leading name in this field is
Paul Devereux, the man who actually coined
the term ‘Earth Lights’. Devereux has


u^ = oL — ca — — m


Earth lights dance above a Norwegian fjord. These are probably similar to the Northern Lights in origin.


travelled the world studying versions of the
phenomenon, separating fake or mistaken
incidents from genuine Earth Lights. His
conclusion is that they are an honest and real
phenomenon.

Devereux, along with much of the
interested scientific community, believes the
lights may be connected with the strains and
conflicting energy found in the Earth's crust.
Just as heavy pressure in the atmosphere
causes storms and lightning, so too pressure
under the surface causes equally impressive
reactions. As the tectonic plates rise and fall,
it is suggested that energy is released through
particular areas of weakness such as fault
lines, or areas of high mineral or rock
density. It has been discovered that many
historical accounts of strange lights appeared
on recently discovered fault lines, or just
before earthquakes developed.

Different theories suggest the lights could
be alien landing craft; some alien abduction
victims have reported seeing similar glowing
features. Other people believe they have


amazing paranormal qualities, and link our


world with another dimension. Some
witnesses claim to have heard ghostly voices
and seen apparitions after an Earth Light
display. In both these cases the effect of
magnetic variation on brain patterns has
been cited as having an influence. Many
the
upheaval caused by conflicting tectonic


forces needed in Earth Light creation may


experts believe extreme magnetic


cause the brain to suffer hallucinations.

The effect on witnesses, although not
dangerous, can be striking. One of the most
common areas for Earth Light incidents in
Britain is the Longendale Valley in the Peak
District. Sean Wood is a local resident who
has seen the lights over thirty times in sixteen
years. As a catalogue of his sightings he now
produces paintings of the local landscapes. In
all his pictures, in the corner of a field or the
side of a valley, there lurks the image of a
small glowing orb. For him, the phenomenon
of Earth Lights is an unexplainable, but
acceptable, natural occurrence.


Lev LINES


HE TERM ‘LEY-LINE’, was invented by

Alfred Watkins, a British business-

man. In 1921 he was looking for
interesting features in a regional map when
he noticed that many ancient and sacred
sites could be placed on a straight line
running through the countryside. As he
researched the subject more, Watkins
discovered that these mysterious lines could
be identified, not just by marker points, but
that some were physically visible from the
ground. The lines were anything from two to


58


several miles long and their reference points
were objects like ancient churches, standing
stones, stone circles and prehistoric burial
sites. In 1922 Watkins published his first
book, Early British Trackways, which
explained his initial thoughts on the subject.
He published his seminal work, The Old
Straight Track, which fully demonstrated his
new-found phenomenon, in 1952.

Watkins used the term ‘ley-lines’ or ‘leys’
as it came from an old Saxon word for
cleared glade. He believed they were trading


routes for Neolithic Man who used ancient
surveying techniques to create long, straight
lines. His theory followed the thinking that
many areas on these routes became sacred
sites, and over time the pathways fell into
disuse, leaving only the special points
discernible. He also believed that many of
the ancient, pagan holy sites were later
commandeered and Christianised, leaving a
fascinating mixture of both prehistorical and
relatively recent points of interest along the
lines.

Despite the fact that these paths followed a
perfectly straight line, which often meant
cutting through forests, climbing up valleys
Or across hilltops, Watkins
maintained his belief that they were trading


running


routes. By 1929 he had stopped referring to
the old leys, simply calling them ‘old straight
tracks’. Watkins died in 1935 but his idea
had instigated the formation of the Straight
Track Club, a collection of interested
enthusiasts based across Britain who enjoyed
investigating their own regional versions of
ley lines.

Many people felt that the difficult routes
taken by leys running through steep or
testing countryside meant they were unlikely
to be pathways for traders — other theories
about their nature was put forward. In 1936 a
British writer called Dion Fortune first
suggested the idea that ancient sites could be
linked by lines of mysterious cosmic forces.
A member of the Straight Line Club, Arthur
Lawton, continued with this notion in 1938.
Lawton was a dowser, and had been
fascinated by German and French dowsing
theories that were connected with standing
stones, so he formulated the idea that leys
were lines of natural energy that could be
proven by dowsing.

During the Second World War the Straight
Line Club and its activities dwindled, but in
the 1950s new ideas about leys burst into the
public’s consciousness. Various UFO books


59


from France and America linked the flying
saucer phenomenon with lines of cosmic
force. In 1961, Tony Wedd, a British ley
hunter and ex-pilot, published his theory
that leys were magnetic flight paths for alien
visitors, and any sites of interest found along
From Wedd’s
work, the modern movement in ley research
truly began when in 1969 another enthusiast,
John Michell, wrote The View Over Atlantis,
a book that combined ley lines, earth energy,
UFOs and ancient mathematics. The 1960s
and 70s saw all manner of New Age theories,


them acted as landmarks.


and leys began to be automatically associ-
ated with lines of energy, flying saucers and
strange psychic experiences.

The phenomenon spread across the world,
and New Age enthusiasts were eager to seize
the idea of cosmic forces and aliens
wholeheartedly. The city of Seattle in the
USA even readily gave a $5,000 grant for a
group of dowsers to create a ley line map of
the area. To some extent they missed the
original point of ley lines, which was they
were straight routes connecting sites of
sacred interest. In fact, the United States has
its own version of Watkins-style leys. Native
American 'Spirit-Lines' found across the
country are believed to have been ancient
sacred pathways. Similar features are found
in Mexico, and it has been suggested the
Nazca lines may be a variation on the same


theme.
So the real significance of leys is still
unknown. Although the theories and


background ideas have bred and multiplied,
few people have discovered more ley line
facts than Alfred Watkins. His vision is still
the most fact based and, despite its short-
comings, still the most plausible. It would be
a shame to see the phenomenon of ley lines
become synonymous with extreme New Age
ideas because it has a fascinating historical
and geographical background that has not
yet been fully studied


THE BERMUDA
TRIANGLE


HE BERMUDA, Or Devil’s, Triangle is an
area of ocean found off the south-
eastern tip of the United States. It is a
region of water indelibly connected with
disappearances; the
popular perception is that countless boats


mysterious vessel
and planes have been inexplicably lost there.
The triangle extends from Bermuda to Miami
and then to the Puerto Rico, and is said to
contain a supernatural secret. Some high
profile disappearances have occurred there,
and the notion of its existence has been
turned into a modern myth in the media.
Even the term ‘Bermuda Triangle’ was
coined in a fictional publication. But does
the sea here really house some unknown
power that pulls sea and airmen to their
doom, or is this mystery based mainly on
imagination?

The most famous loss in the triangle is
known as the mystery of Flight 19, and
happened on 5th December 1945. A
squadron of five US Navy Avenger torpedo
bombers set off from their base in Fort
Lauderdale, Florida to conduct a practice
mission over the island of Bimini. The flight
contained 14 men, all of them students apart
from the commander, Lt Charles Taylor.
About an hour and a half after the mission
began, radio operators received a signal from
Taylor saying his compasses were not
working, but he believed he was over the
Florida Keys. He was advised to fly north
which would bring him back to the
mainland. In fact, he was over the Bahamas,
and his attempts to head north and north-


60


east merely took him further away from solid
ground. A terrible storm that day hampered
communications and it seems Taylor rejected
a suggestion to pass control of the squadron
to one of the other pilots.

Radio contact was entirely lost and search
craft were dispatched to try and find the
flight to guide them back in. Of the three
planes used to rescue Flight 19, one lost
communications itself because of an iced
over aerial, one was just unsuccessful whilst
another seemed to explode shortly after take-
off. Flight 19 itself has never been found, but
it is assumed that they ditched into the
raging sea when their fuel ran out, with the
heavy planes rapidly sinking to the ocean
floor. The US Navy recorded that the disaster
was caused by Taylor's confusion, but an
appeal by his family had this overturned,
and a verdict of ‘causes or reasons unknown’
was given. However, Flight 19 is not the only
high profile official loss in the area, and the
USS Cyclops and Marine Sulphur Queen
have also disappeared without trace.

The legend of Flight 19 was cemented by its
inclusion in Steven Spielberg’s Close
Encounters of the Third Kind movie. Indeed,
some theories state that visiting UFO craft
enter an underwater base in the Bermuda
area, and they have been the cause of the
disappearances. Other fantastical ideas such
as technologies from Atlantis or evil marine
creatures have also been considered. Some
people even suggest the triangle is the site of
a gateway into another dimension. Strange
oceanographic features such as huge clouds of


methane gas escaping from the seabed have
also been blamed for the disappearances.

In reality, the triangle does have one
natural quality which may contribute to the
losses. Unlike everywhere else in the world —
apart from the Dragon's Triangle near Japan —
compasses point to true north rather than
magnetic north. This may be a contributing
factor to the triangle's legend, but the US
Coastguard officially believes the losses are
caused by a mixture of environmental and
man-made mistakes. This region is used by a
large amount of ocean and air traffic, much
of which is navigated by inexperienced
pleasure-seekers. A strong Gulf Stream and
unpredictable weather conditions not only
cause vessels to run into trouble, but also


remove many traces of them once they have
been wrecked.

It is interesting also to note that the
coastguard does not view the area as having
a particularly high incidence of accidents.
One researcher examined many historic
losses in the triangle. He came to the
conclusion that rumours and elaboration had
clouded the real, understandable, causes
behind the events. Similarly, the interna-
tional insurers, Lloyd's of London, have
records that demonstrate that this region
near Bermuda is no more treacherous than
any other waterway. However, the myth of
the Bermuda Triangle is so strong it will live
on as long as fictional writers use it as a site
of mysterious happenings.


THe DRAGONS
TRIANGLE


HE BERMUDA TRIANGLE'S infamous
association with disappearing boats
and aircraft is known across the globe.

Less well known is an area off the west coast

of Japan which has an equally deadly history.

It is an area where Japanese sailors fear to

voyage; they call it ‘Ma-no Uni’ - the ‘Sea of

the Devil’. Legend has it that huge restless
dragons surface from their deep shelters to
seize any unfortunate passing mariners.

Japanese sailors have often recorded freakish

occurrences in the area and talk of hearing

terrible noises and seeing awful red lights.

They believe one particularly potent creature

lives in an immense palace beneath the


61


waves. They call this monster 'Li-Lung', the
"Dragon King of the Western Sea', and say his
lair is decorated with the ships he has
captured.

This mysterious zone stretches from
western Japan to Yap island in the south and
Taiwan to the west. Like the Bermuda
Triangle, it is seen as having an above-
average number of navigation and communi-
cation failures. In truth, this area of ocean
bears a remarkable resemblance to its
Western cousin. Both areas are known for
extreme changes in weather conditions,
unexpected fogs, tidal waves, seaquakes and
hurricanes, and both have examples of


agonic lines, lines upon which a compass
needle will point true north and south. Their
most unwelcome similarities are the truly
horrifying levels of unexplained sinkings
and disappearances.

By the late 1940s, the amount of ships
being lost without trace in the region lead to
the Japanese government declaring the area
a danger zone. In the early 1950s they
decided to dispatch a research vessel to
study the area. Despite enjoying good
visibility and calm seas, the Kiao Maru No.5


disappeared without trace 24th


September 1952. The lives of all twenty-two


on


crew and nine scientists were lost. The
vessel has never been found. It has only
been in relatively recent years that these
incidents of strange disappearances have
been reported in the West. To the Japanese,
they are regular occurrences which stretch
back for centuries and continue to this day.
Whether it is dragons or not, the real
evidence behind this ocean's terrible secret
remains on the seabed.


EASTER


ISLAND


ASTER ISLAND, or Rapa Nui, is in the

south Pacific Ocean and lies about

2,300 miles from the west coast of
Peru. Formed by a volcanic eruption on the
ocean floor, it is separated from the other
Polynesian islands by huge expanses of sea.
The island itself only occupies 45 square
miles, and has three volcanic craters. Now
lakes, they are some of the few areas of fertile
nature, for the rest of the island is rather
desolate and barren. However, it has not
always been like this, and there remains
evidence that the land was once rich in flora
and fauna.

The first time the outside world knew
about Easter Island was when a Dutch
admiral called Jakob Roggeveen stumbled
across it on Easter Sunday, 1722. When he
landed, he found a backward race which
lived in caves and rudimentary huts, and
practised cannibalism. What truly amazed
him were the huge stone carved figures, or
‘moai’, that stood on guard around the


62


island. Modern investigations have revealed
there are something like a thousand of these
great statues, standing between 12 and 25
feet high, and weighing up to 20 tonnes. The
largest one is 65 feet tall and weighs 90
tonnes. However, when Roggeveen stepped
ashore, many of these figures had been torn
down by the fierce natives.

The origin of the Easter Island race is an
issue of contention. One early visitor to the
island after Roggeveen was Captain James
Cook. Cook had a Hawaiian sailor aboard his
ship who could understand the Easter Island
native tongue. This suggested that they
spoke Polynesian, and indeed the general
consensus is that they were descended from
a distant Polynesian tribe. There is also a
celebrated theory that they actually came
from South America which is supported by
the fact that bulrushes and sweet potatoes
found on the island were said to be imports
from that continent. There were also consid-


erable similarities between pre-Inca


= ^ X qiti


Measuring statues on Easter Island. The origins of the people who created the statues remain shrouded in mystery.


American cultures and the examples of
Easter Island culture, although it is believed
there may have been an early trading
industry between Easter Island, South
America and the Polynesian Islands.

The Easter Island race probably settled on
the island sometime around the middle of
the first millennium AD, and began building
their statues quite soon afterwards. The early
Easter Islanders developed a_ precise
technique for creating the stone men out of
the walls of the volcanic craters. Using a
system of logs and ropes, they would sit the
moai on a funerary platform, called an ‘ahv’,
under which the remains of dead elders were
buried. It is believed the stone figure acted as
a talisman, guarding and protecting the clan
of the dead islander, although some experts


suggest the islanders ended up erecting the


63


statues purely for the joy of making them.
Archaeologists have also discovered wooden
tablets called ‘talking boards’, which
describe ancient religious rites of the old
culture.

The Easter Island story is the archetypal
island version of paradise lost. When the
first Polynesian immigrants landed on the
island it was a land of bountiful natural
produce. There were great forests, sugar beet
crops, exotic fruit and native meat sources.
In these conditions the people flourished.
They built fine houses and enjoyed life, but
in around AD 1500 a new cult called
‘Makemake’ or ‘the cult of the birdman’
sprang up. This may have signalled the
arrival of a new tribe from across the sea, and
soon afterwards overpopulation and
wasteful island management caused the


E


4
EE
Li
i
L4
A
!
?


Are the stone heads on Easter Island memorials to ancestors, or guardians of the island?


64


crops to fail and the natural resources to be
depleted. The different clans and tribes
began warring, even overturning each other's
statues, and legend on the island recounts a
terrible battle between tribes of 'long ears'
and a tribe of ‘short ears’.

Within a couple of centuries, Easter Island
was the barren waste populated by savages
discovered by Roggeveen. The life of
islanders only grew worse. The inter-tribal
conflicts continued until 1862, when ships


arrived and enslaved a thousand of the
island's fit men to work in the Peruvian
mining industry. These islanders quickly
grew ill in the strange continent, and the few
that returned home brought back diseases.
Smallpox and leprosy reduced the native
population to 111 by 1877. European
missionary workers helped the people of
Easter Island survive, but many of the secrets
of the island's strange stone faces were lost
forever.


THe ['YRAMIDS
OF GIZA


HE ANCIENT EGYPTIANS believed that
after mortal death the soul or spirit
life
dimension. They buried their Pharaoh kings,


would continue in another
whom they regarded as living Gods, with all
the treasures and objects needed to survive
in comfort in the afterlife. They also
embalmed their bodies to ensure that their
mortal remains would be mummified and
preserved for whatever fate awaited them.
Crucially, they built impressive burial
structures to demonstrate the dead person's
importance and to aid their ascendancy to
the next dimension in the heavens. The most
famous and enigmatic of these buildings are
Egypt’s pyramids, and the most mystical of
all these is the Great Pyramid of Cheops at
Giza.


However, many people question


whether the structure really is just a simple,


65


albeit awesome, tomb or whether the design
holds one of the great secrets of civilisation.

The pyramids were erected between 2800
BC and 2200 sc; the first was built by King
Zoser in Saqqara near Memphis. Although
the structure was created with six stepped
tiers, and is not a strict pyramid as such, it
was the first building designed exclusively to
house the property and remains of the king.
In the following centuries King Seneferu
built his own trio of pyramids. One at
Maidum was called the ‘False Pyramid’
because it was abandoned mid-project due to
a structural weakness. One at Dahshur was
known as the ‘Bent Pyramid’ because of
another design problem which meant the
gradient of its sides had to be reduced as it
was constructed. The final one, called the
‘Northern Pyramid of Seneferu’, was built


—— 9
—'


" - r * "A So a ‘oe
2c HO a aS a2 x gee eae. ae


The pyramids of Egypt possess a haunting quality that stays with whoever sees them.


close to the ‘Bent Pyramid’, and is recog- built for King Chephren and King Mycerinus
nised as the first true pyramid. alongside, neither is of the same quality.
The most impressive structure, however, Certainly, there are many fascinating
was completed around 2500 BC for King aspects of the Great Pyramid’s design. Its
Cheops at a site in Giza, ten miles south of sides run perfectly north to south and east to
the city we now know as Cairo. Using an west to within a tenth of a degree. The base
estimated 4000 builders, and tens of is an almost exact square, with an error
thousands more manual labourers, the ‘Great margin of just seven inches, whilst the
Pyramid’ stands 481 feet high. It is believed pavement around the structure is level to
it may have taken up to 30 years to quarry within an inch. Unlike other pyramids, this
and assemble the two and a half million one houses a great number of chambers and
blocks of limestone, which weigh a total of corridors, with the lengthy 345 feet long
six million tonnes. The base of the pyramid Ascending Passageway running directly
covers an area just over 30 acres. It appears north. It had been widely assumed that the
that great care was lavished on Cheops’ pyramid stood as a great monument to hold
structure, and although later pyramids were the body and treasures of King Cheops,


66


`


EN SS ——


Does the layout of the pyramids really reflect the position of the stars 5,000 years ago?


67


Guardian of the Pyramids: the Sphinx remains as enigmatic today as it was to our ancestors.


68


although when the structure was first opened
by Caliph Abdullah al Mamun in AD 820
nothing was found inside. Al Mamun
discovered the King's Chamber blocked by
three huge granite plugs, which he and his
men circumvented. But when they arrived in
the great room, there simply stood an empty
stone sarcophagus.

The mystery of what had happened to the
pyramid after its completion, if its assumed
use is correct, has continued to this day. In
the absence of real evidence of burial
ceremonies in the structure, many fantastic
other theories have grown. Some people
believe it was built by God either as a stone
version of the Bible, or as a record containing
references to all events past, present and
future. They believe that the various
passageways represent historical time-lines,
and intersections between them mark great
happenings. The birth of Christ and the two
World Wars are supposed to be signified
along these routes. Some experts who
advocate this theory said it also showed a
Second Coming in 1881 and the end of the
world in 1953. Other mathematical studies
of the Great Pyramid claims it demonstrates
knowledge of the true value of pi, and was
built using the ‘sacred inch’.

A popular theory originating in the latter
part of the last century is at the Great
Pyramid was constructed by alien visitors. It
has been proposed that these aliens did
everything from creating Mankind to
erecting the pyramid as a landing beacon for
their next visit to Earth. Another well-known
idea is called the Orion Theory and was
created by Robert Bauval and Adrian Gilbert.
They believe the pyramids at Giza are an
earthly representation of the three stars in
the Orion Nebula. The shafts found in the
Great Pyramid are supposed to correlate with
important astronomical features visible at
the time of the building's construction. The
Orion Theory states that the Ancient


69


Egyptians were direct descendants of alien
visitors, and retained of their
knowledge. The purpose of these important


some


design features in their tombs was to help
point the spirits of the dead back towards the
stars from whence they came.

Many of these 'ancient astronaut' theories
suggest the pyramids were built around
10,000 years ago, rather than the 5,000
supported by historians. Other theories state
that the instigating race may not have been
aliens, but a now-lost civilisation. One writer,
Edgar Cayce, was convinced the pyramids
were built around 10,000 BC by travellers
from Atlantis. However, his assertion that the
Atlanteans also recorded the Second Coming
of Christ in 1998 in the design of the
pyramid, is somewhat flawed. Some theories
even suggest that our conception of the
chronology of the pyramids is wrong. Some
people believe the build quality of the
pyramids actually deteriorated, rather than
improving, as the initial knowledge brought
by the instigating race was lost over time.

Although the Great Pyramid has been
explored and studied more than any other
ancient structure in Egypt, new discoveries
are constantly being made. In 1954 a
previously unknown sealed pit was found on
the south side, containing a 140 ft long cedar
boat, which may have been buried to help
the king travel to the after-life. In recent
space and remote
controlled probes have been used to examine


years, equipment
the building in ways never before possible.
However, NASA's refusal to publish
underground readings taken by the space
shuttle, and the Egyptian government's
unhelpful attitudes towards deeper
exploration, has only increased conspiracy
theories and myths of hidden secrets. For the
world’s interested public, the mystery of the
Great Pyramid at Giza is as unknown today
as when Caliph Abdullah al Mamun first
reopened it over a millennium ago.


DIM TCE-OESB-I1 A ACI-ADOCOOGOFAMD


STONEHENGE


TONEHENGE LIES ON Salisbury Plain in

the county of Wiltshire, England. The

whole area is regarded as mystical,
with an abundance of ley lines, and is widely
accepted as the centre of the crop circle
phenomenon. Stonehenge itself was
constructed in three stages. The first began in
about 3,000 BC, when a circular ditch was
dug around the site and a raised bank two
yards high and 106 yards in diameter was
formed. Just inside the bank, 56 shallow


holes were dug and then refilled and the first
rock, the ‘Heel Stone’, was introduced. This
was positioned to mark the axis of sunrise at
the summer solstice. Two smaller entrance
stones were put in place, then 40 wooden
posts, marking positions of the sun, were
erected.

In around 2,000 Bc, a two-mile avenue to
the River Avon was created. From southwest
Wales, the builders imported 82 ‘bluestones’,
weighing over four tonnes each. To reach the


Sacred circle: Stonehenge predates the Druids by over 1,000 years, however.


Were the standing stones witness to blood sacrifice by their Stone Age builders?


site they would have had to travel 240 miles
over land and water. These bluestones were
used to construct a double circle inside the
site. It is believed the builders never finished
this design because they already had the idea
to erect the third, and most impressive,
phase.

This started in around 1900 BC, with the
selection of 75 loose blocks of sandstone,
known as sarsens, from Avebury, 20 miles
away. Using rollers and ropes, these 25-
tonne, 17-feet-long rocks were pulled to the


[4


site where they were then shaped and lifted
into upright positions. The architectural
detail of this stage is phenomenal, and the
lintel stones that cap the pillars are actually
curved to fit in the large circle. The Welsh
bluestones were repositioned, and the
structure was complete.

In each stage, the stones were placed at
specific points demonstrating the position of
the sun and moon at important times. The
site was in continual use until about 1,000
BC, but we still do not know exactly what it


was used for. Very little human or cultural
debris has been found on the site, so there
can be no definitive answers.

Some experts say that this absence of
historic litter leads to the suggestion that the
structure was a temple or sacred site. Many
of the other 900 stone circles in Britain
served many uses and were often meeting
places, so they often have remnants of
ancient day-to-day life. Similarly, the
amount of trouble endured, and the sheer
of the project, that
Stonehenge was something of immense
importance. The bluestones brought from


scale indicates


Wales were exceedingly valuable to the
Ancient Britons, and were ideal for a temple.
The possibility that it was partly used as a
burial site has also been considered — during
limited excavations it was discovered that the
56 shallow holes dug during the first phase
contained cremated bones. There are also
barrows, or burial tombs, of later Bronze Age
warriors dotted around the outlying area.
Because of Stonehenge's obvious correla-
tion to important astronomical events, a
whole host of other theories have arisen. It
may have been used as an observatory, or
even a gigantic lunar calendar. In 1965,
Gerald S. Hawkins, an astronomer at Boston
University, published a book entitled
Stonehenge Uncoded. In it, he claimed a


72


computer had proven that Stonehenge
marked many astronomical alignments. He
even went so far as to say that Stonehenge
was a computer itself, designed by the
Ancient Britons to read the stars and
calculate upcoming eclipses, but many
experts feel he has not discovered the true
significance of the structure.

In the seventeenth century historians
believed the structure had been built by
ancient Celtic priests, and many modern
druids feel it is their right to perform rituals
and ceremonies at the site. They are now no
longer allowed to, and for good reason. Not
only was damage occurring to the area, but
modern druids have no connection to their
Celtic namesakes. Anyway, Stonehenge was
built over 1000 years before the Celtic druids
existed.

Unfortunately, in the last few hundred
years many of the stones have been stolen,
lost or collapsed, and poor restoration work
has been performed on some of the stones
that remain. But the magic of the site and the
design never dissipates. One legend says the
most famous of all Britain's magicians,
Merlin, summoned the stones and set them
in place. It is a story in keeping with the
mystical tradition of the area. Maybe the
simple fact is that modern minds have just
not imagined the true use of the site yet.


IDA TCE OESB-413A-AC19-4DOCOOG9FAAD


STONE CIRCLES
AT CASTLERIGG


F STONEHENGE IS THE most famous stone
circle in Britain, the Castlerigg Stone
Circle, near Keswick in the Lake District,
must be the most atmospheric. Situated in an
open bowl between rolling hills, this
Megalithic construction appears as a perfect
picture postcard. This is the land of
Wordsworth, Coleridge and Romantic
poetry; but many millennia before, it was


home to an equally creative race.
The Castlerigg Stone Circle, also known as


Keswick Carle or Druid’s Circle, is one of the
oldest in Britain. It was built in around 3,000
BC and comprises 38 stones of various
heights placed in a slightly oval shape. The
largest stone is over 8 feet tall, but the
majority of them are less than 5 feet high.
Although five of the stones have collapsed, it
is a site in remarkably good condition.

It has a feature unique among stone circles
in Britain. Inside the ring of rocks, ten
smaller stones are placed in a rectangle in an


4


Amidst the rugged splendour of the Lake District, the Castlerigg circle is particularly imposing.


arrangement called ‘The Cave’. There is also
a slight mound in the centre, which, it has
been suggested, is a burial chamber.
However, the site has never been properly
excavated, and perfunctory archaeological
studies have only ever uncovered charcoal
deposits.

Like Stonehenge, the site has qualities
which make it suitable for use as an
astronomical observatory, although an un-
polished stone blade found near the circle


suggests it may have been used as a centre of


74


trade for the area's Neolithic axe industry.
There is also a local legend that says the
stones were never built to any design, but
were actually men turned to rock by fear of a
local monster.

In all likelihood, it probably formed a focal
point for the local community, and may have
been used for a combination of commercial,
religious and tribal purposes. For now, we
can only admire the stunning sight of this
early man-made structure placed in an area
of unique natural beauty.


HIDDEN CITIES
& LOST
CIVILISATIONS


ATLANTIS


UR KNOWLEDGE OF THE world’s most

famous lost continent comes from

the work of one man - Plato. The
great Greek philosopher was the singular
source of all information about the ill-fated
island race and whilst experts write long-
winded theses about the age and position of
Atlantis, nobody is entirely sure that Plato
did not just invent the Atlantean people as
an allegory for what happens when a civili-
sation over-reaches itself. Despite this, the
hunt for Atlantis is as fierce as ever.

Plato lived in Greece between 428 and 348
BC, and revealed the story of Atlantis in his
dialogues ‘Timaeus’ and ‘Critias’. Many of
Plato's fables were fictional creations used to
illustrate a point, but the history of Atlantis
was repeatedly stated as fact. The dialogues
recount the story of Solon, a Greek scholar
who travelled to Egypt in around 600 Bc to
learn more about the ancient world. The
Egyptians were known to have knowledge
and records dating back centuries, and as
Solon tried to impress his hosts with tales of
Greece's achievements, the old
Egyptian priests put him in his place. They


wise


revealed a story about a continent and a
people completely unknown to him.

Around 10,000 BC, a powerful race lived
on an island in the west, beyond the ‘Pillars
of Hercules’, now believed to be the land
masses along the coasts of the Straits of
Gibraltar. The island was the kingdom of
Poseidon, the Sea God. It had a huge central
mountain with a temple dedicated to the
deity, and lush outlying districts, there was
an elaborate system of canals to irrigate its


76


successful farms, and a bustling central city.
The island was rich in vegetables, and was
home to different types of exotic animals.

The Atlanteans were originally a powerful
but fair race. They were an advanced people
with a prosperous trading industry, a strong
and noble army and a highly educated,
cultured society. Their influence reached far
and wide, and they controlled large areas of
Africa, Asia and the Mediterranean.
Although the island left its inhabitants
wanting for nothing, their taste for power
and empire led to them over-extending
themselves. An attempt to conquer Athens
failed, and the Atlanteans retreated home to
face a cataclysmic disaster. Legend says that
the great god Zeus saw the corruption that
had seized the island’s people, and sent
down upon them an immense barrage of
earthquakes, fire and water. Atlantis
disappeared under the waves.

Whilst Plato’s story was well known, the
renewed modern interest in Atlantis began in
1882 with the publication of Atlantis: The
US
congressman, Ignatius Donnelly. Donnelly’s


Antediluvian World by a former


book was a mixture of conjecture, misinter-
preted fact and actual history. But there were
some interesting ideas; he noted similarities
in the science and culture of native races
which apparently could never have met.
Likewise, the great ancient flood, which is
said to have destroyed Atlantis, is logged in
ancient writings and traditions of peoples
around the world.

Exactly who the Atlanteans were is
unknown. Some say they were aliens, some


The lost civilisation of Atlantis, as described by the philosopher Plato. Was he writing about what he believed to be a
real city, or was he simply describing an ideal state?


believe they were descendants of the
Lemurians (see p. 81), and some say they
eventually travelled westward and became
Native American tribes. Similarly, the actual
placing of Atlantis is a subject open to
argument. Many experts suggest the island
was actually in the Mediterranean, and a
constant stream of archaeological investi-
gations in the area has tried to prove this.
There are theories that Sardinia in the
Mediterranean, and the island of Thera in
the Aegean Sea, could be Atlantis. Both had
highly-evolved civilisations: the Nuraghi
people on Sardinia and the Minoan culture
on Thera. Both also suffered terrible natural
disasters. But neither of these islands are
westwards of the Straits of Gibraltar, so to
accept them is to doubt Plato's geography.


TT


Also, the advanced races on these islands
disappeared about 900 years before Plato —
he stated that Atlantis became extinct 9,000
years before him.

Other experts say Atlantis was in the
middle of the Atlantic, and all that is left of
the island are its mountains, the peaks of
which show through above the waves. These
are now believed by many to be the Azore
islands. There is also evidence to suggest a
huge comet or asteroid crashed into the
southwest Atlantic Ocean many thousands
of years ago and two 23,000-feet-deep holes
have been identified on the seabed close to
Puerto Rico. Experts believe the falling rock
that caused them would have created
massive natural movements, enough to
destroy any mid-Atlantic islands.


EL DORADO


HEN THE CONQUISTADORS were
ravaging and looting the ancient
cultures of the Aztecs and Incas,


native tribesmen told them about an amazing
rumour. They said that there was a race, deep
in the jungle, whose king was covered with
gold dust and who swam in a golden lake. It
was the story of ‘El Dorado’, the ‘Golden
Man’. One of the first Spaniards to set off to
find this fantasy land was Jimenez de
Quesada. In 1536, Quesada and 500 soldiers
hacked into the undergrowth from the
northwest of what is now Columbia. After
many hard days trudging through intense and
dangerous jungle, they came upon two tribes
of Chibchas, a race with plentiful riches.
They had gold, silver and huge amounts of
emeralds, but they did not have the fabled ‘El
Dorado’. However, they told Quesada of a
lake in the middle of a huge volcanic crater
on the Bogota plateau not far away.

The natives revealed that the lake was
called Guatavita and each year the bizarre
ceremony of the Golden Man would take
place. Tribal witnesses said the occasion was
used to offer sacrifices and gifts to the god
that they worshipped. The tribal king was
smeared in sticky mud, on which gold dust
was set. He and four other chiefs then sailed
on a raft with their finest jewels and
treasures, whilst the tribe played music at
the shoreline. When the king and his party
reached the centre of the lake they threw the
offerings into the water, and the king then
bathed himself to
covering. Quesada travelled to the lake, but
could find no clue hinting at treasure. Other
heard the


remove his golden


Spaniards rumours about


78


Guatavita, and the first attempt to dredge the
lake began in 1545.

As the years passed, each new expedition
heard other versions of the El Dorado legend.
Each one ploughed into the jungle certain
they would find the wealth. None ever did,
but they did come across other interesting
things. In 1537, one adventurer, Francisco de
Orellana, was trying to find the golden city
by sailing down the Napo River. Orellana
reached the end of the Napo, and realised it
was a tributary to another, massive river. As
he floated along this, a tribe of long-haired,
fierce female archers attacked his boat. The
women reminded Orellano of the Amazons
of Scythia in Greek legend, and he named the
river ‘Amazonas’.

In 1584 another native rumour appeared. It
suggested that Incas fleeing from the Spanish
invaders had created a new city of gold
called Manoa. This became inseparable from
the El Dorado legend, and in 1595 the British
adventurer Sir Walter Raleigh attempted to
find Manoa and its gold for Queen Elizabeth
I. He failed, and a further fruitless expedition
in 1617 helped to seal his execution. Over
the years, yet another myth circulated — that
of a lost mystical lake called Parima. It was
described as being almost identical to
Quesada’s initial discovery, Lake Guatavita.
Despite this, more expeditions floundered in
the jungle, haphazardly slicing their way
through the foliage until they ran out of
supplies, funds, men or patience.

Meanwhile, other Spaniards had decided
to continue attempts at reaching the bottom
of Lake Guatavita. In 1580s, Antonio de
Sepulveda, a merchant living in Bogota, used


8000 native men to drain the lake by cutting
a huge gash in the side. He did manage to
remove a fair deal of water, and found
considerable gold, but the earth walls
collapsed, killing many workmen and
causing the project to be abandoned. Further
attempts to drain the lake continued right
into the twentieth century, and many histor-
ically valuable artefacts were found, but
never the great quantities of treasure
promised by the legends.

There can be little doubt that, despite the


countless and varied attempts hunting
through the jungle, the Conquistadors never
uncovered all the secrets of the Amazon.
Biology, botany and anthropology show us
that there is still plenty of potential for new
discoveries. Did the Spanish adventurers
really find the lake of El Dorado? Almost
certainly Lake Guatavita is that fabled
lagoon. But nobody has found yet Manoa,
and if the El Dorado myth has been proven
real, there is good reason to suspect the
Manoan legend will be too.


LYONESSE


FF THE VERY SOUTHWEST tip of Land’s

End, in Cornwall, England, there lies
nothing but water and a few small
islands called the Scilly Isles. Legend says
that under the fierce Atlantic Ocean waves
rests the remains of a beautiful old kingdom
called Lyonesse. It is a kingdom steeped in
the legends of King Arthur and was once
overcome by a great flood. Locals believe that
if you look in the right direction at low tide
you can even see the submerged towers and
domes. Sometimes, late at night, it is possible
to hear the ghostly tolling of lost church bells.
Lyonesse is said to be a great country that
contained magnificent cities and stretched to
the distant west off Land’s End, from St
Michael’s Mount to beyond the Scilly Isles.
There were supposed to be 140 churches in
the country, and great forests covering the
area. However, on 11th November 1099 a
terrible flood raged over the land, drowning
all but one of the inhabitants. This single
survivor was a man called Trevilian, who
saw the waves coming and rode his horse to
safety on higher ground. The Trevlyan coat of


79


arms still shows a white horse rising from
the sea, but the cities of Lyonesse were lost
forever, and only the highest points of the
kingdom peaked through the waves. At a
distance of 20 miles from Land's End, we
now know these summits as the Scilly Isles.

Another variation of the Lyonesse legend
says that when King Arthur was wounded in
his the
remnants of his foe's army chased the king to
Lyonesse. As Arthur and his men reached the


final battle against Mordred,


highest points in the kingdom, the ghost of
Merlin appeared. He called the terrible flood
and Mordred's forces were drowned. It is
said that Arthur then died on the Scilly Isles,
and the association between King Arthur and
Lyonesse has been extended by imaginative
minds over the years. Alfred Lord Tennyson
even suggested the great king may have had
his fabled, mystical court, Camelot, there.
So what proof is there to accompany these
fanciful myths? To begin with, surrounding
St Michael's Mount at low tide, the fossilised
remains of an ancient forest can be seen. So
there once was definitely woodland under


~
o
a
n
o
g
S,
4
[zu
[s]
"a
=]
[s]
—
+
n
[s]
=
o
-d
+
[ran
[s]
| o
>
5
d
q
d
o
-d
n
Ks]
z
H
=l
-d
—
H
<
[er]
g
em
M


what is now sea. Similarly, at low tide
around the Scilly Isles, it is also possible to
spot walls and ruins running from the
islands' shores. In the 1920s it was believed
that structures found on the beach at Samson
Flats were field boundary markers, although
more recent thought considers that they were
probably fish traps. But definite remains of
hut circles and cysts on other islands
suggests the water really has risen. Indeed,
writings as late as the fourth century AD state
that the Scilly Isles were one singular land
mass.

A group of rocks positioned halfway
between Land's End and the Scilly Isles,
known as the Seven Stones, are believed to
mark the site of a once great city. Sailors and
local fishermen call the area “The Town’.
Some of these mariners have even reported
catching parts of doors and windows in their
nets around the area. In the 1930s, Stanley
Baron, a journalist from the London paper,


News Chronicle was staying in Sennen Cove,
just north of Land's End, when he was
awoken one night by the sound of muffled
bells. His hosts explained that he had heard
the ghostly tolling of Lyonesse's churches.
Another reliable witness, Edith Oliver, was a
former mayor of the town of Wilton in
Salisbury. She claimed to have twice seen
the towers, spires and domes of Lyonesse
emerging from the waves as she looked out
from Land's End.

Science, however, refuses to accept these
legends. Oceanographers are convinced that
in the last 3,000 years there has not been a
big enough change in tidal height to account
for any of these phenomena. But even if they
disprove the fantastical stories, there is still
real evidence at the shore edge on many of
the Scilly Isles. And anyway, oceanographic
proof alone is not enough to dissuade old
Cornish seadogs. Sometimes a story is so
magical it seems silly to let science spoil it.


Mu &
I EMURIA


NCIENT LEGENDS TELL of a great continent
now lost under the sea. Sanskrit
tradition calls the continent 'Rutas'
and says that it sank under the Indian Ocean.
Tamil writings recorded on palm tree bark tell
of a giant land mass that connected southern
India to Australia. All across the islands of the
Pacific Ocean there are legends of a massive
continent that was the birthplace of Man and
which sank under the waves. This lost land
we now refer to as ‘Mu’ or ‘Lemuria’.


81


James Churchward, an Anglo-American
traveller, wrote the first accounts of Mu
legend. He said he was taught Mankind's
original tongue, a dialect called ‘Naacal’, by
an Indian priest. This holy man then showed
him some old stone tablets hidden in a
temple, written in this ancient language.
These tablets explained that Mu was a
continent in the Pacific Ocean. Placed just
below the equator, it was 5,000 miles long
and 3,000 miles wide. The tablets said that


Mankind had appeared on Mu two million
years ago, and a highly advanced society of
64 million people had developed on the
island before they were all but wiped out by
a huge volcanic eruption.

Around the same time as Churchward was
publicising his legend and tradition-based
theory, another more scientific group were
advancing the idea of a lost land. Naturalists
and zoologists who followed and believed
Charles Darwin's theory of evolution were
finding it particularly difficult to explain the
widespread existence of lemurs. If these
animals had all descended from a common
ancestor, as Darwin suggested, then there


must have once been a land link between
these areas. One of Darwin's followers, an
English zoologist called Philip L. Schlater,
proposed the name ‘Lemuria’ for this
invented sunken land bridge.

As science has progressed since Darwin's
time, zoologists can now account for the
wide distribution of the lemur family
without resorting to creating ideas of ancient
missing land masses. But at the same time,
that,
because of a massive natural catastrophe that
almost induced human extinction, all of


genetic discoveries have proven


Mankind originally stems from a small pool
of biological variations.


TREOTIH AUCAN


IGH ON A PLATEAU in central Mexico
lies the remains of a city that
continues to perplex archaeologists
and historians. Of all the ancient cities of the
Americas,  Teotihaucán the
enigmatic. Nobody knows what race of


is most
people built it, what they used it for, or why
it was abandoned. Indeed, the remains are
awe-inspiring, but it is believed that 90 per
cent of the city is still buried under the arid
Mexican soil. And yet, this great city of
culture held 200,000 inhabitants at its peak.
So what happened at Teotihaucán?

When later Aztec races found this amazing
urban development they were so impressed
by its construction that they named it
"Teotihaucán', meaning “The great city where
men become gods’. The focal point of the
city, which spread over 12 square miles, was
an immense building called the Pyramid of
the Sun. This 216-foot-tall structure had a
temple at its summit which indicated the


82


city was ruled by native religion. At the base
of the pyramid ran a north-south avenue,
which stretched for almost three miles. The
Aztecs called this the ‘Avenue of the Dead’,
believing the small platforms that lined the
series of connecting courtyards to be tombs.
In fact, they were probably temples — it has
since been discovered that the Teotihaucáns
actually buried the dead in their own houses.

At the northern end of the avenue, nearest
the Sun Pyramid, there was a slightly smaller
construction, named the Pyramid of the
Moon. About a mile south down the avenue
there was a vast open area called the Citadel.
This was also surrounded by temples and
had the important Temple of the Feathered
Serpent in its centre. Intersecting the Avenue
of the Dead at its halfway point was another
avenue. The city was therefore based on a
grid system of four quarters. The houses in
this format were built in complexes of
adjoining dwellings, linked by terraces and


ACIS-ADOCODGHAYO


GDAMTCE-OESB A23.


The great Sun Pyramid of Teotihaucán rises above a plateau in Mexico.


patios. The building of the city began around
200 BC, with the major structures, like the
pyramids, being erected from the first
century AD. By the beginning of the fifth
century AD, the city covered its maximum
surface area, and housed around 100,000
people. Within two centuries this number
had doubled.

But who


were the inhabitants?


83


Archaeologists and historians really do not
know for certain. They were much too early
to be Aztecs, and the Toltec race, despite
having a similar sense of architecture and
civil engineering, did not appear until 200
years after the initial building of Teotihuacán.
There is a possibility that the Olmecs, a race
of great builders and craftsmen who had
flourished between the fifteenth century BC


IDA TCE OESB-413A-AC19-4DOCOOG9FAAD


and first century AD, may have been their
ancestors. However, there is no proof to
confirm this, and the writings and records
left by the Teotihaucáns, which would
provide us with their own version of their
history, have never been successfully
translated to. Whoever founded the city did
so with intelligent laws and a strict reverence
for religious matters. It has been suggested
that the city was a major destination for
pilgrims and the training centre for priests.
Despite the people enjoying a structured,
dignified and privileged life, the city of
Teotihaucán was largely destroyed by the
eighth century AD. One theory is that the
population may have been too great for the
local resources although this has been
countered by the knowledge that the rulers
of Teotihaucán were good enough social and
civil engineers to provide for this. It is more
likely that invading barbarians from the


north attacked the city. Indeed, what
historians have garnered from Teotihaucán
murals suggests the roles of soldiers took on
more prominence in the city's later years.
Teotihaucán itself was not designed to repel
attacks, and recent excavations have
indicated that large, prepared fires were
started in the city during its last days.

Although the origin of the Teotihaucán
race is unknown, the influence it had across
the Mexican region has been proven to be
immense. Some experts consider the
possibility that a mass exodus of
Teotihaucán citizens founded another town
with structure similar to the earlier pyramids
at a site 700 miles away in Kaminaljuyá. But
nothing is known for certain. Even after
nearly a century of intense historical investi-
gation, the mysterious story of Teotihaucán
is as unknown now as it has been for a
thousand years.


They came, they created, they departed in silence: who were the builders of Teotihaucán?


HORRORS &
HAUNTINGS


AMITYVILLE


HE MOST FAMOUS and horrific ghost
story of the last century must be that
New York. The terrifying tale has been
turned into a best-selling book and


of 112 Ocean Avenue, in Amityville,


successful film, and captured the public’s
attention like no other haunting. Indeed,
such is its place in the American con-
sciousness that most people assume that it is
a real story — and that is certainly how it was
publicised. There is no doubt that some
awful events did take place in the building,
but were they really caused by ghostly
actions?

The now infamous three-storey Dutch
colonial house was built in 1924. The
owners lived happily in the building for
many years, raising a family and leaving the
house to their daughter who had such fond
memories of her childhood home that she
moved her own family into it. In 1960 the
building left the care of the original owners'
descendants and was bought by a couple
who lived in the house until they sold it
following their divorce in 1965.

In June 1965 the DeFeo family bought the
house. They were an unhappy family and the
father, Ronald DeFeo Sr., was known to be
abusive. Over a period of nine years the
family was not said to experience any type of
frightening event other than those inflicted
by paternal forces. However that all changed
on the night of the 18th of November 1974
when one son, Ronald DeFeo Jr., shot and
killed his mother, father, two brothers and
two sisters.

Just over a year later, in December 1975, a
young couple bought the house. George and
Kathy Lutz, and her three children moved in,


86


George and Kathy Lutz: victims of supernatural horror,
or common swindlers?


knowing the building's terrible history.
Almost immediately they began experi-
encing strange phenomena. Doors and
windows would open by themselves, bizarre
noises were heard, and a Catholic priest who
had come to exorcise the house was ordered
to get out by a devilish voice.

Things rapidly grew worse. Blood and
sticky goo oozed from the walls, clouds of
flies appeared on windows, ghostly hooded
apparitions manifested, and one of the
children started communicating with a
demonic pig called Jodie. One night Kathy
Lutz was even thrown from her bed by a
supernatural force, and it was famously


claimed that the face of the devil appeared in
the brickwork of the fireplace.

After 28 days of this horror, the Lutzes
moved out. They soon went to the media
with their story. In February 1976 two of
America's most famous celebrity paranormal
investigators, Ed and Lorraine Warren, were
filmed by a television news team whilst
conducting séances at the house. The
Warrens stated the indeed
haunted with evil spirits, but other investi-


house was


gators were not convinced.

Dr Stephen Kaplan, the executive director
of the Parapsychology Institute of America,
based in New York, initially had great doubts
about the story, and discovered some very
interesting facts about the Lutzes. However,
his studies were ignored, and it transpired
that the couple had already collaborated
with an author, Jay Anson, and had written a
book, The Amityville Horror - A True Story.
An instant best-seller on its release in 1977,
a blockbusting movie version of the tale was
released in 1979.

As Kaplan suspected, there were some
dubious actions and motives behind the
Amityville tale. It was revealed that Ronald


DeFeo Jr’s defence lawyer had met with the
Lutzes before their story was released.
Kaplan found no evidence to support many
of the claims written in their book, but he did
discover that the Lutzes were able to return
to the house to hold a garage sale only a
couple of weeks after apparently fleeing in
terror. Similarly, many investigators noticed
that the Lutzes were holding contracts for
book and film rights as soon as they decided
to publicise their account.

Since the Lutzes left, three different
families have lived in the house with no
reports of ghostly experiences. Dr Stephen
Kaplan’s in-depth report and its subsequent
revelations about the house were never
viewed with as much interest as the dramatic
original story, but his book, The Amityville
Horror Conspiracy, was eventually
published some years after his death. Many
investigators and cynics have been led to
conclude that the whole case really revolved
around money, rather than the popular
perception of paranormal influences. It
seems the evil forces in this story have less to
do with supernatural unknowns, and more
with all too common, base human instincts.


THe BonRrev
RECTORY


ANY PEOPLE BELIEVE Borley’s ghostly
problems began centuries ago. In
1362 Benedictine monks built a
monastery in the little village in Essex, south
east England. Local legend says that a monk
tried to run away with a nun from the nearby
Bures nunnery. Despite having an escape
plan organised and a carriage ready to


87


smuggle them away to safety, the two lovers
were caught. The monk was hanged, and the
nun was bricked up in the walls of the
monastery’s cellars.

The modern legend began in 1862, when
Reverend Henry Bull became rector of Borley
and built the rectory a year later in 1863.
Villagers knew of the mournful nun who


IDAM ICE OES8-1 3A ACIS-ADOCODEGEAO.


oe
sods


Excavations at Borley Rectory, site of a mediaeval monastery.


could be seen, walking sadly round the land
near the old monastery — and it seems
Reverend Bull grew accustomed to her too.
In 1875 he added a new wing to the rectory
overlooking what was known in the village
as the ‘Nun’s Walk’ so that he could watch
the ghost. However, the nun eventually
became an annoyance, particularly as she
had a habit of staring in the windows of the
rectory, scaring many visitors.

Henry Bull died in May 1892 in the Blue
Room of the rectory. His son Harry took over
the building and, if anything, the tales of
haunted happenings increased. Four of
Henry’s sisters saw the nun walking along
her path, and in addition to the nun
apparition, there were new sightings of a
ghostly coach and horses arriving in the
rectory drive. Harry Bull died in June 1927,
also in the Blue Room; before his death he is
claimed to have said he had experienced
‘communications with spirits’, but his
passing marked the end of the Bulls’
physical, earthly tenancy with the rectory.


»-— t.


88


In October 1928 the Reverend Guy Eric
Smith and his wife took over residency of the
rectory. The Smiths knew about the house's
history and soon began experiencing their
own strange phenomena. Objects were
moved around the house, lights were
switched on and off, stones were thrown,
there was even the sound of strange whispers
mentioning Henry Bull’s nickname — Carlos.
The Smiths finally wrote to the Daily Mirror
for help, and the paper dispatched the
paranormal investigator, Harry Price, to the
rectory.

Price recorded incidents of many unusual
activities including inexplicable bell ringing
and the strange appearance of a Catholic
medallion. The Smiths moved out of the
building and then left Borley altogether in
April 1930, but the October of that year saw
the start of a period Harry Price would refer
to as 'the most extraordinary and best
documented case of haunting in the annals
of psychical research'. Reverend Lionel
Foyster, his young wife Marianne and their


adopted daughter Adelaide moved into the
rectory and immediately the phenomena
worsened.

Marianne faced the worst of the poltergeist
attacks — objects were thrown at her, and
addressed her
scribbled across the walls. One message
read, ‘Marianne, please help get. Pleas for


messages to appeared


help and prayers. The Reverend Foyster
decided to have the rectory exorcised and
things settled down for a short time,
although the
Marianne was repeatedly thrown from her
bed by spiritual forces. Reverend Foyster


hauntings returned and


finally decided to move his family away
from the area, and all subsequent rectors
have refused to live in the house.

By June 1937 Harry Price himself decided
to rent the building and installed a team of
observers. On 27th March 1938 a séance was
held in the rectory. A spirit voice said the


rectory would catch fire in the hallway, that
very night and burn down. It did not. Price's
tenancy expired and the house was taken
over by Captain William Gregson and his
On 27th February 1939 Captain
Gregson was in his library when a lamp in


wife.


the hallway fell over. Eleven months later
than the spirits warned, Borley Rectory burnt
to the ground. Witnesses saw strange
apparitions dancing in the flames, and the
nun's face was said to be seen staring from an
upper window.

Before the rectory was razed in 1944, Price
returned to the site and was hunting in the
cellars when he found the jawbone of a
young woman. He believed it belonged to the
infamous nun, and gave it a Christian burial.
However, it has not stopped the strange
occurrences and many locals now believe
the spirits inhabit the Borley church and
churchyard across the road.


HAMPTON COURT
['ALACE


AMPTON COURT PALACE on the banks
H the River Thames, just outside
London, is said to be the most
haunted royal building in Britain. Most
palaces and castles are known to house a few
mythical spectres, but the special quality
about Hampton Court is the sheer range of
apparitions. From wives of King Henry VII,
to Cavalier soldiers, to a ghostly dog, the
palace is plagued by over a dozen
unexplained phenomena.
Hampton Court was originally bought by


Cardinal Wolsey, but Henry VIII liked the


89


building and took it as his own. Henry was
the first person to report seeing the
decapitated head of his second wife, Anne
Boleyn, who was executed for treasonous
adultery in 1536. Subsequent sightings of her
have described her with, without and even
carrying her head. Witnesses say she appears
in blue or black, walking slowly, looking
angry or upset, and is said to pervade a sense
of grief or despair.

Henry’s third wife, Jane Seymour, repor-
tedly the love of his life, was the only wife to
be buried alongside him in his death vault.


IDA TCE-OE58-413A-ACIS-ADOCODGGEAXO.


nS}


G
Ti


Hampton Court Palace, site of many ghostly sightings, usually of one or other of Henry VIII's unfortunate wives.


She died giving birth to his only son,
Edward, in 1537 and was the only one of his
queens to die of natural causes before Henry.
It is said that on the anniversary of Edward's
birth, 12th October, Lady Jane appears from
the Queen's Apartments and walks round to
the Silver Stick Gallery. Witnesses say the
apparition wears a white robe and carries a
lit candle.

With Jane's death, Henry's new-born son
was entrusted to the care of a nursemaid,
Sibell Penn. Penn died of smallpox in 1562
and was buried in St Mary's Church, not far
from the palace in Hampton. Her spirit was
not seen or heard from until the 1820s when
St Mary's Church was stuck by lightning and


90


during the rebuilding, Penn's remains were
removed to another grave.

Since then there have been reports of a tall,
hooded figure known as the 'Grey Lady'
walking the corridors of the palace at the
same time as a strange spinning noise was
heard in the west wing of the building. The
whirring sound seemed to be coming from an
odd wall of a corridor, so during investi-
gations the wall was knocked down. Behind
it they found a previously unknown room,
along with Sibell Penn's old spinning wheel.

Undoubtedly the most celebrated ghost in
Hampton Court can be found in what is
called the Haunted Gallery. The ghost is that
of Henry's fifth wife, Catherine Howard, who


was beheaded in 1542 for infidelity with
younger men. Legend has it that the
moments following the ordering of her
execution can be seen played out by spectres
in the gallery. Witnesses say Catherine's
figure appears screaming for her life, until
guards seize her and drag her away. Some
people have also seen her trying to find
sanctuary in the palace chapel, whilst a
palace warder once reported seeing a ghostly
hand wearing one of Catherine's heavily
jewelled rings knocking on the chapel door.

Not all the restless spirits that wander the
hallways of the palace are of royal lineage.
Palace staff have seen a strange grey mist
floating along the kitchen floor, and a guard
reported seeing a dark, male figure wearing a
top hat who just disappeared into the wine
cellar. (Witnesses said it was strange, as he
looked more like a spirit man!) There are also
tales of a ghostly dog being seen entering the
King's Apartments.

Many people have reported seeing two


noisy figures fighting in the main courtyard.
During renovation work in the yard, the
skeletons of two English Civil War Cavalier
soldiers were found and given a proper
burial. There have been no sightings of the
figures since. A group of seven women and
two men dressed in old-fashioned clothing
are also said to wander Hampton Court. In
1917 a police officer even opened a door for
these apparitions, before they simply
disappeared into thin air.

Nowadays, visitors to the palace should
not be concerned if they see some strange
characters in period dress, for many of the
specialist guides giving tours of the building
now appear in costume. If people do see a
ghost there, it seems that none of them are
harmful. That said, one lady warder at the
palace was standing on duty when she felt
something flick her underwear elastic.
Perhaps the spirit of Henry is lurking
somewhere — and it would seem entirely


possible that he has not changed his ways.


I ONGENDALE
GHOSTDLA NES


HE PEAK DISTRICT is an area of sombre,

| imposing natural beauty between
Manchester and Sheffield in the north

of England. Britain’s first National Park, it is
still the most visited National Park in
Europe. It can be a dark, doleful place; a
place where tradition and legend come alive;
where history blurs with the present and
where things can sometimes happen with no
obvious explanation. In the west of the
Peaks, running towards Manchester, lies the


91


Longendale Valley. It is not only attracts
tourists and leisure-seekers, but is also one of
Britain’s most active sites for UFO
enthusiasts and ghost-hunters. However,
Longendale has one particularly unique type
of supernatural story — Ghostplanes.

The area has a long association with
aircraft. The reservoirs in the area were used
by the ‘Dambusters’ squadron to test their
bouncing bombs during the Second World
War. Although these tests saw no fatal


accidents, there have been over 50 cases
where planes have found themselves lost in
fog and crashed into the moors. In all, over
three hundred airmen have died in these
accidents. There is also a remarkable range of
tales from people witnessing phantom
vintage aircraft seemingly in trouble. It is
such a common occurrence that the local
park rangers and mountain rescue teams
have almost become used to being called out
for plane crashes that they cannot find.

A striking recent example happened on the
night of 24th March 1990. Many people
were in the Peaks away from the city lights to
watch the passing Hale-Bopp comet when
they saw a large, low flying aircraft, like an
old Lancaster bomber, on a collision course
with local hills. Emergency switchboards lit
up with a series of calls reporting the
accident, with a staggering number of
reliable witnesses. Two of them were Marie-
Frances  Tattersfield, police special
constable, and her husband, a former pilot.


a


Mrs Tattersfield said the plane was ‘the
weirdest thing I have ever seen... it was big
and it was well below the legal altitude for
night flying. All its windows were lit up
which made it look even more odd as no
pilot would fly blind at that time of night
over those hills’. The police launched a
search and rescue operation with over a
hundred volunteers, but no trace of any
plane or crash was spotted.

But the remains of many stricken aircraft
do still litter the hills of the area. On one,


92


called Bleaklow, lies the shattered carcass of
a B-29 Superfortress that crashed on 3rd
November 1948, killing all 13 crew. Local
children who play on the hill tell stories of a
man in uniform who revealed himself as
guardian of the site. They say he told them
about the history of the aircraft and its crew,
before vanishing. When shown photos of the
dead aircrew, the children have been
shocked to find the man they met was the
doomed plane's captain, Langdon P. Tanner.

It is not just children that have seen the
captain. Gerald Scarratt witnessed the B-29
crash as a boy, but only visited the site two
decades later. He investigated around the
remains of the wreckage and found a gold
ring engraved with the name ‘Langdon P.
Tanner’. Soon after hearing of his discovery,
a group of aircraft enthusiasts asked if he
could take them to the wreck, ‘I bent down to
show them where I found the ring, and when
I looked up they had scarpered and were ten
or fifteen yards away.

"When I caught up with them they were
ashen-faced. They said they had seen
someone standing behind me, looking down
and dressed in full flying uniform. I told
them I had seen nothing, but they said:
"We've all seen him, thanks for taking us up,
but we are going." And I have never seen or
heard from them again,' Scarratt said.

It would seem that, whether flying through
the skies, or buried in the earth, there are
some things in the Peak District which are
beyond the realm of the explainable.


THe MARY
CELESTE


HE TALE OF THE Mary Celeste is not
technically a ghost story, but thanks
all time the true story of this ship has passed
into legend as one of the most perplexing of


to one of the finest fiction writers of


naval mysteries. It was Sir Arthur Conan
Doyle who, as a young writer, was commis-
sioned to pen a tale about a vessel that had
been found wandering across the Atlantic
Ocean in perfect condition but completely
crewless. He changed the name slightly,
calling it the Marie Celeste, and added
fictional embellishments. But the facts
themselves are strange enough and, to this
day, nobody quite knows what happened to
those aboard the Mary Celeste.

Originally called the Amazon, the ship
was built in Nova Scotia in 1860. She was a
100-foot long, 282-tonne brigantine or half-
brig. Right from the start she was an unlucky
ship: she suffered numerous accidents and
ended up in a dire state of repair at a New
York salvage auction in 1868. The three new
owners, James H. Winchester, Silvester
Godwin and Benjamin Spooner Briggs,
repaired and refitted the Amazon. They
registered her in New York under the name
Mary Celeste.

Having been the master on three previous
ships, Briggs took on the role as captain.
Viewed as an honest, upright, God-fearing
man, he was a captain who would only
abandon his ship in the most appalling
conditions. On 7th November 1872 the Mary
Celeste left New York with Briggs, his wife
Sarah, their daughter Sophie Matilda, and a


93


crew of seven. Their cargo was 1700 barrels
of American alcohol bound for Genoa in
Italy.

A week later the British frigate the Dei
Gratia left America to follow a similar route
across the Atlantic. Captain David Reed
Morehouse, who had dined with Briggs only
a few days before the Mary Celeste left port,
ran the Dei Gratia. On 4th December the Dei
Gratia was 400 miles east of the Azores when
its crew spotted a ship sailing haphazardly
ahead of them. Through his spyglass,
Morehouse could see it was the Mary Celeste
As there was no sign of activity on deck, and
no reply came to any attempt at hailing her,
Morehouse decided to send off a boarding
party.

Chief Mate of the Dei Gratia, Oliver
Deveau, was dispatched as leader of the
group who set off in a small boat. He found
the ship in a perfectly seaworthy condition
with good supplies of food and water, but
with a certain amount of interior damage.
There was a great deal of water over the
ship’s decks, and one of the pumps was
broken. The galley stove had moved from its
correct position, and the ship’s clock and
compass were also damaged.

The crew appeared to have left quickly, as
their waterproof boots and pipes were still
on board, but it looked as though Captain
Briggs had taken the chronometer and
sextant. Deveau noticed that there were no
lifeboats left on the ship. The most
interesting find was the ship’s log. The last
entry was dated 24th November, when the


DIM TCE-OESB-IL 3A ACI-ADOCOOGOFAMD


r1 A ee
T Ae — S 137112 eee EN


a


A ie


Clipper ship similar to the Mary Celeste.


Mary Celeste was only just passing the
Azores. That meant the ship had sailed itself
for over 400 miles on a perfectly-plotted
course for the Mediterranean.

The crew of the Dei Gratia now split into
two groups. One stayed on their own ship,
whilst the other sailed the Mary Celeste onto
Gibraltar. The cargo of alcohol reached
Genoa with only nine barrels damaged.
Following a naval inquiry, the Mary Celeste
was sold on and then continued to change
hands frequently. After hearing her history,
many mariners decided that she was not the
sort of ship they were too keen on. In 1884
she was wrecked off the coast of Haiti in an
alleged insurance scam. But what happened
to her crew in 1872?

The official version of events, arrived at by
the British and American authorities, was
that the crew had mutinied and then


94


abandoned ship. This seems very unlikely as
it was only a short journey and there were no
signs of a struggle on board. Also, Briggs was
generally viewed as a decent and respected
captain.

A second theory is almost completely
implausible. It came from a man called
Fosdyk who left papers after his death saying
he was a secret passenger on the Mary
Celeste. that had
constructed a special deck in the bow for his
daughter. During the voyage, two of the crew


He claimed Briggs


were having a swimming race around the
boat when one man was attacked by sharks.
As the rest of the ship’s passengers crowded
onto the little girl’s deck to see what was
happening, the temporary structure gave
way, sending all those on board into the sea
and to the sharks. Fosdyk claimed to have
survived by clinging to a piece of driftwood.


The most probable explanation, given the
facts, was that the Mary Celeste hit a terrible
patch of bad weather. As the ship bucked on
the waves, some alcohol spilled from the
cargo barrels, covering the hold floor.
Coupled with this, the ship's movement
caused the galley stove to become unstable.
Fearing the ship was about to explode, Briggs
ordered everybody into the lifeboat, and
planned to follow behind the Mary Celeste
attached to the ship's main halyard, a strong,
thick rope.

As the storm worsened, somehow the
halyard snapped and the Mary Celeste sailed
off. Briggs, his family and crew were left
stranded in a small boat in the middle of the
Atlantic Ocean. There is some evidence for
this scenario. Morehouse testified that the
Dei Gratia had been battered in severe storms
during the days leading up to finding the


Mary Celeste. As mentioned earlier, Deveau
noticed alcohol and water spilled over the
boards of the ship, whilst the galley and its
stove were found in a very disorderly
condition. Crucially, Deveau also noted that
all small boats were missing, and the halyard
was found dangling, frayed and split, over
the side of the ship.

Ghost ships were not particularly rare
during the nineteenth century. The Dutch
schooner Hermania and the ship Marathon
were both found abandoned but floating in
perfect order around the same time as the
Mary Celeste. However, with the help of
Conan Doyle, it was the Mary Celeste that
really caught the public's interest. Whilst his,
and our, imagination can come up with
possibilities, the true fate of the souls aboard
the Mary Celeste is something we will
probably never know.


WATERWORKS
VALLEY


ATERWORKS VALLEY, in the parish of
St Lawrence in the Channel Island
of Jersey, is named after the great


number of reservoirs and pumping stations
found along it. Even in the daytime, it is a
brooding, haunting place, overcast as it is by
a thick layer of trees and foliage. It is damp
and dark, and people are often forgiven for
seeing or hearing things. Sometimes there is
no mistaking the ghostly sights and sounds
that occur. Countless people have seen it


95


pass by, and even more have run away after
hearing it approach. This, they say, is the
‘Phantom Carriage’.

The stories often follow a similar pattern.
Usually the events occur in the evening and
begin with the muffled ringing of bells — the
unearthly music is said to sound more like
wedding bells than anything sombre.
Gradually, mixed with ringing, another noise
becomes discernible. It is the sound of horses
trotting along the valley, accompanied by the


spinning, bumping rattles of a carriage.
Emerging from the gloom, witnesses spot the
procession which is clothed in eighteenth
century costume. They see that the coach's
passenger is a bride in her wedding dress, but
as it rolls past witnesses see the face behind
the veil. It is the haggard skull of a corpse.
One tale of explanation claims that in the
early eighteenth century a girl who was due
to be married at St Lawrence parish church
was disappointed at the altar. It is said she
committed suicide that evening, and the


96


apparition is a representation of her timeless
sorrow. Another variation of the story is that
she committed suicide on the eve of the
wedding, but her ghostly figure appeared at
the church the next day anyway. It was only
as the groom lifted the veil that he noticed
the pale lifeless face of a corpse underneath.
Many people believe the phenomenon
happens only once a year at a specific time.
But there are so many sightings, and such
vivid recollections, that perhaps this poor
girl's misery is constant and never-ending.


MARVUIS &
MIRACLES


IDA TCE OESB-413A-AC19-4DOCOO69FAAD


HE IDEA THAT angels exist is not solely

the intellectual belief of the Roman

Catholic Church. Many people of all
religions have experienced feelings or events
that instilled a belief that something is
watching over them, protecting them.
Whether that is a divine being depends on
the person’s own belief in God. There is also
a case for saying that many people feel
guided by a guardian angel, which does not
have to be a religious entity, but can be a
deceased relative or friend. In both cases, the
angel’s role is to give warning of impending
danger, and comfort in times of difficulty.
Their effect on an individual’s life can be
immense.

One fascinating story concerns Sergei
Kourdakov who, as a Russian KGB agent,
was instructed not to believe deity-based
faiths. Indeed, Kourdakov was in a squad
purposely set up to persecute and intimidate
Christian groups. On one occasion, he claims
his team raided a secret Bible meeting with
the task of punishing those present.
Kourdakov noticed an old woman standing
in the corner holding her Bible. He went over
to beat her, but as he pulled his arm back to
punch her, some strange presence held it
behind him. He turned round but there was
nobody there. Eventually, Kourdakov ended
up defecting to the United States.

The religious view of angels is that they
are solely God's messengers. They appear to
give news of great events — for example,
telling the shepherds of Christ's birth. Their
role is to perform God's commands and
reveal the most important truths to Man.


98


Lucifer falls from Heaven in this nineteenth-century
engraving.


Often they instil awe in those that see them,
but they are said to exude a calm confidence.
Although they feature regularly throughout
both the Old and New Testament, it is not
just bible-based religions that experience the
phenomenon. Diverse races and cultures
have all recorded startlingly similar accounts
of meetings with mystical creatures, and they
are often associated with miracles and
inexplicable healing powers.


Angels in chariots descend to earth. Theologians have struggled for centuries to order the different classes of angel.


THe BIBLE Cope


d IDEA OF Bible Codes began in the
twelfth century when Jewish students
discovered interesting and relevant
hidden words in the Hebrew version of the
Torah, the first five books of the Bible.
that details of


everything that will ever happen on Earth are
recorded here; the great Rabbis have always


Devout Jews believe


stressed that as these writings were dictated
by Moses straight from God, no alterations
should be made to the text.

The modern era of Bible Codes was begun
by Michael Ber Weissmandl — a Slovakian
rabbi who narrowly escaped the Nazi death
chambers. His interest in ancient books about
Bible Codes led him to develop his own
theories. Although the Second World War
had helped to ruin Weissmandl’s old life, it
did promote the idea of code-breakers, with
the famous stories of the German Enigma
programme. It also marked the beginning of
micro-computers, and many Torah scholars,
fascinated by Weissmandl's ideas, were able
to harness complex technology to further the
research into Bible Codes.

In 1994 a group of intellectuals, Doron
Witztum, Eliyahu Rips and Yoav Rosenberg,
published a study in the Statistical Science
journal of an experiment they had conducted
using methods developed by Weissmandl.
They said they had found references to 34
Great Rabbi Sages, together with their
respective birth and death dates, hidden in


the book of Genesis. This study ignited the
scientific and popular interest in Bible
Codes, which is still active today, and has
led to many more books being produced,
although not all of these have had such
groundings in scientific procedures.

So how are the messages in the Bible
decoded? In its simplest form, the research
uses a system called Equidistant Letter
Sequencing. This works by placing all the
letters in the text next to each other, with no
spaces or punctuation. Then, by performing
uniform jumps along the letter chain, other
words are discernible. For example:

GENERALIZATION

In the above passage, by skipping to every
third letter from the starting point, we get the
word ‘NAZI’. The method can be used
forwards or backwards, with any number of
letter jumping or spacing. There are even
more complicated ways of decoding, called
arrays or matrices; they are a two
dimensional presentation of the text — rather
like a word search puzzle — which contain
hidden words in different directions.

Weissmandl’s initial discovery was that by
taking the first T in the first verse of the book
of Genesis, and then skipping 50 letters three
times you end up with the word TVRH, the
Hebrew spelling of Torah. This finding
applies with the same 50 letter skips in the
first verses in the book of Exodus and
Numbers. More recent research has shown


G H T E[R]s T H[o]u H A[s]r N o[w]p o N[EJF OO[L]r s [pv INS


“Roswell” hidden in KJV Genesis 31:28


100


references to Hitler, Mein Kampf, and other
historical events. However, sensationalist
authors have rather corrupted the system to
produce fanciful assertions, and the Bible
Code has become a phenomenon rather akin
the of
Subsequently some researchers have tried to
use it as a method of foretelling the future.


to prophecies Nostradamus.


Many Code enthusiasts believe it is not
supposed to be seen as a way of deducing our
fate, but should be seen as proof that the
Torah was actually written by God, who had
knowledge of all that would come to pass.
They say that searching the text for
references to future events that might occur
is not valid, because if they fail to happen,
then they would just be random word
formations. Many people believe the valid
details that do seem to appear in the Bible
Code are merely random words which just


happen to correspond to a real event.

Certainly, there is a huge body of sceptical
statistical and computer experts in the
scientific world. Two such intellectuals,
mathematicians Dror Bar-Natan and Brendan
McKay, were the first to refute the findings of
Witztum, Rips and Rosenberg. McKay and
Bar-Natan found similar results when
looking for the details of famous Rabbis
within the text of Tolstoy's War and Peace.
Other experiments have also revealed a
foretelling of famous assassinations, Princess
Diana’s death and the ‘War on Terrorism’ all
hidden in the text of Melville's Moby Dick.

The Bible Code breakers say they are
pursuing this subject to prove God actually
did write the Bible although one is tempted
to think that an overly elaborate code system
will have little effect on the faith of either a
believer or an atheist.


THe BiG BANG


HE GREATEST, fundamental


mystery in the history of the world


MOST


and the universe is; how did this all
begin? Man now knows a lot about the
different stages of Earth's development, but
he still has no definite answers for how our
world came to be here or even how the
universe came to be formed. Religion
provides us with one theory — the idea that
God created the planets by hand, but that
does not tally with the few pieces of
scientific evidence that we do possess. For,
although we are still largely ignorant, science
has begun to reveal some of the secrets of the
cosmos. We do not know much, but we do
know it all started with a bang. A Big Bang.
About 15 billion years ago there was an


101


enormous explosion. Incredible, trillion-
degree heat, matter and anti-matter were
created in a dense expanding cloud. In less
than 1000th of a second, the universe had
doubled in size over 100 times. More matter
than anti-matter was produced, and basic
particles began to form. The universe
remained a thick, plasmatic substance, made
up mainly of radiation at an extreme, but
cooling, heat. After a second, the universe
had a temperature of ten billion degrees
Kelvin. The process continued, with simple
speed,
allowing for more complex reactions to take
place.


particles gradually slowing in


About three minutes after the initial


explosion, the temperature was down to a


billion degrees. Nucleosynthesis
beginning to take place, and deuterium, an


was


isotope known as heavy hydrogen, was being
created. Deuterium then formed into tritium,
which then became a helium nucleus. With
slightly more cooling, hydrogen atoms were
created. Over the next 300,000 years, helium
atoms were formed, and the universe
dropped to a temperature of 10,000 degrees
Celsius as it expanded. Radiation gradually
became less dense and it, light and matter
were able to separate. Eventually, after 15
billion years, the universe became what we
know today.

Although the Big Bang theory is based on
the guesswork of many eminent cosmologists
and astronomers, it is supported by a
scientific basis. Recent discoveries have also
helped to provide proof. NASA’s COBE
satellite has detected cosmic microwaves
produced at the distant edges of the
universe. The fact that these microwaves
followed a similar rigid structure suggested
the universe developed in a verifiable
pattern. Slight temperature differences at
three far-off points have also helped to prove
scientists’ earlier theories about what
happened as the cosmos cooled. The
different stages in development between
areas of different heat give a good indication
of what happened following the Big Bang.

In June 1995, scientists working on
NASA’s Astro-2 observatory were able to
detect deuterium in the distant corners of the
cosmos. This suggests such elements really
did exist soon after the Big Bang. Similarly,
the Hubble telescope has allowed astro-
nomers to look deep into the universe and
discover what substances are predominant in
older features. These new discoveries often
lead to new questions, and reworkings of old
theories. What we can be certain of is that the
universe continues to expand, so the Big
Bang phenomenon is still in progress. The


102


Research into the origins of the universe currently
supports the Big Bang theory.


fact that these procedures are still in effect at
the far reaches of the universe provides hope
that, techniques
improve, we will definitely be able to learn


as our observational
how the universe initially expanded

As an intelligent life form, we may feel
confident enough to scientifically state the
conditions at the very dawn of time and
space. However, no scientist would dare to
suggest exactly what existed before the Big
Bang. Religious philosophers have stated
that everything has a cause, and have used
our ignorance of the subject as proof of God.
Others that not all
necessarily have a catalyst, and as we are
entering a completely new realm of the


state happenings


unknown, the normal rules of the universe
may not apply.

In either case, it is a subject for philosophy,
rather than physics or chemistry. What
science can say is that everything around us
is made up of particles that burst from an
origin smaller than an atom, 15 billion years
ago. Anything else remains a mystery.


ACIS-ADOCODGFAYO


GDAMTCE-OESB A23.


HE CHILDREN OF
FATIMA


N 13TH May 2001, a frail, tired Pope
John Paul II finished the final leg of
his own personal pilgrimage. He had
travelled to the little town of Adjustrel, near
Fatima in Portugal. His aim was to beatify
the life of two children who had died over 80
years previously. They were two of the three
‘Children of Fatima’, who had been


repeatedly visited by the spirit of the Virgin
Mary in 1917. The holy vision had told them
three prophecies, which the children kept
secret, only ever revealing them to
subsequent Popes. Over the years, the
Roman Catholic Church explained that all
but the final prediction had come to pass.
But, as the Pope paid homage to the children,


Roman Catholic pilgrims at Fatima in Portugal, where it is said Our Lady appeared to three peasant children in 1917.


he finally revealed the details of the third
secret — it was a warning that saved his life.

On 13th May 1917, three children were
tending their sheep at the Cova da Iria, near
the town of Fatima. The two youngest
children, nine-year-old Francisco and seven-
year-old Jacinto Marto were brother and
sister. They were helping their cousin, ten-
year-old Lucia de Jesus, with her flock. All
were good children, coming from strong
Catholic families. They would recite the
Rosary each midday without fail, and then
continue with their work or play. On this
occasion, a flash interrupted their afternoon
activities. They though it was lightning, so
they turned to leave for home, but were
stopped by a beautiful lady dressed in a
white robe that shone brighter than the sun.
The lady had a Rosary hanging from her
palm, and she instructed the children to
come back and visit the site on the 13th day
of each of the next five months.

The children returned as they were told.
Over the following months the lady told
them three secrets about future events, and
promised them a miracle by their last
meeting. The story of the vision spread, and
a crowd of 70,000 spectators came to the site
to the see the final vision on 13th October,
although the lady only appeared to the
children. She told them she was 'Our Lady of
the Rosary’ and asked them to build a chapel
on the site of the visions. She then performed
her miracle, which was experienced by the
entire crowd. They called it the ‘Miracle of
the Sun' because the huge glowing orb
seemed to burst into a magnificent array of
colours, dancing around the skies, and the
heavens rained flowers.

The children had also received visions of
their own deaths. For Francisco and Jacinta,


104


they did not have to wait long. They both
died of pneumonia, Francisco in April 1919
and his sister in February 1920. Although
they were both initially buried at the Fatima
parish cemetery, their remains were removed
and placed in the Chapel of the Apparitions,
built on the Cova de Iria site. Lucia de Jesus
took holy orders after seeing the visions and
became a nun. In the 1940s she sent a letter
to Pope Pius XII, written in Portuguese,
describing the visions.

The first secret was a vision of Hell and
salvation, which the Vatican understood to
be a prediction of the Second World War.
The second prophecy was the rise and fall of
Communism. The third secret was kept from
the public. Many theories suggested it
revealed the end of the world, but during the
Pope's visit to Fatima in 2001, his officials
revealed it was actually a vision of a white-
robed priest falling to the ground. The Pope
interpreted this as a forewarning of the
assassination attempt on him in St Peter's
Square, Rome on, amazingly, 13th May 1981.

The Pontiff believes the Virgin Mary
steered the bullets away from causing mortal
death, and helped him survive. He is so
convinced of the role of the Fatima visions in
his recovery that one of the bullets fired
during the attack has been placed in the
crown of the statue of the Virgin Mary at the
Chapel of the Apparitions. This episode
brought to end one of this century's most
mysterious tales of the Roman Catholic
Church. It seems strange that the mystery
was really caused by the Vatican's secrecy,
whereas the supernatural miracles involved
are openly known and accepted. As so often
happens in religion, the actions of men in
response are often more confusing than the
original inexplicable event.


105


THE DEAD SEA
SCROLIS


HE NORTHERN SHORE of the Dead Sea is

a particularly dry, arid place. It is 13

miles from Jerusalem, and even
though the area is often shrouded in haze,
the humidity levels are extremely low: it is
the perfect place to preserve ancient
artefacts. In the spring of 1947 two young
Bedouin shepherds were looking for a lost
goat among the cliffs in the area known as
Qumran. As they hunted from cave to cave,
they came upon a store of jars containing
many papyrus and parchment manuscripts.
These scrolls only came to prominence later
that year when the Bedouin sold seven of the
texts to a local antiquities dealer. As the
academic world grew to hear about the
discoveries, intense excitement burst
through the global community of historians.
Little did they know that this would be the
most important discovery of ancient scrolls
in the entire century.

In 1949 the exact location of the initial
find was discovered, and the cave was given
a thorough archaeological survey. More
fragments of scrolls were uncovered, along
with pieces of cloth, pottery and wood. Over
the next seven years ten more caves
containing ancient texts were found in the
Qumran area, and the remains of around 850
different scrolls were discovered in total.
The caves were named in the order that they
were searched, and cave four, uncovered in
1952, proved the single biggest haul of
artefacts with 15,000 fragments of 500


106


Part of a manuscript from the Dead Sea Scrolls.


different manuscripts. A complex of ancient
structures close to the caves, referred to as
the Qumran ruin, was also excavated.

What the scientists discovered was that the
scrolls and the ruin both dated from between
the third century Bc and 68 AD, placing them
around the time of Christ. It seems the texts
formed the library of a Jewish sect, similar to
the Essenes. The Essenes were a strict Torah-
observing society, who disliked the
established priesthood and may have


IDA TCE OESB-413A-AC19-4DOCOOG9FAAD


actually been wiped out by the Jerusalem
based church. It is thought the ruins at
Qumran formed part of their society, and the
scrolls were hidden from the advancing
Roman army around AD 70. The truly
fascinating thing about the scrolls is not so
much their history, but what they actually
say.

The scrolls have been deciphered and
reconstructed by expert modern scholars.
They tend to fall into two groups: texts
concerned with religion and others revealing
details of daily lives and history. There are
copies of many biblical writings, and all but
one book of the Old Testament. More
interestingly, there are previously unseen
psalms authored by King David and Joshua,
and also some prophecies attributed to
Ezekiel, Jeremiah and Daniel that do not
appear in the Bible. The scrolls contain


previously unknown stories about Enoch,
Abraham and Noah. Similarly the lost words


of Amram, Joseph, Judah, Levi and Naphtali
are also revealed in the texts.

Surprisingly, given their date and
proximity to New Testament events, the life
of Jesus Christ is not mentioned. The scrolls
are mainly written in Hebrew, but also
feature passages in Aramaic and Greek.
Some scrolls explain laws and codes of
battle, whereas others recount poems and the
philosophies of wise men. The most
enigmatic information contained in the
scrolls lists 64 places around Israel where
ancient treasures are buried. It is suggested
that not only gold and silver is hidden there,
but many of the holy objects from the temple
of Jerusalem were also deposited in distant,
unknown places for safekeeping.

Although the scrolls were all discovered
within eight years, the collection was
scattered among universities, museums and
scholarly institutions across the world. In
1954, some of the scrolls were even


—


Painstaking detective work on the Scrolls has allowed most of their contents to be read.


advertised for sale in the Wall Street Journal.
Many of the scrolls were in terrible
condition, so it became difficult to assemble
a complete idea of what the texts revealed.
During the 1960s and 70s much of the work
that was done remained unpublished, so
public interest in the scrolls waned. In the
last decade however, there has been a


renewed commitment to provide complete
collections of photographs, translations and
explanations to the wider world. This seems
vitally important. Not only do the scrolls
represent an amazing historical discovery,
they also chronicle a time essentially
interwoven with our understanding of the
Biblical World.


GEF THE


ÍIALHING


MONGOOSE


HEN IS A GHOST not a ghost? When it
is a talking mongoose! In 1931 the
Irving family started hearing strange


sounds coming from the attic and walls of
their farm in Dalby on the Isle of Man. James
Irving, his wife Margaret and their daughter
Voirrey were sure a large animal was
scampering around the house out of sight. The
noises it made were so loud, plates fall and
hanging pictures moved. Over time, it began
making bizarre hissing and crying sounds.
James Irving decided to make animal noises at
it, and, to his astonishment, the creature
started doing these impressions back at him.
He decided to teach the beast a few words,
and within weeks the creature could speak
perfectly. It said its name was Gef, and it was
a mongoose born on 7th June 1852 in Delhi,
India. Gef refused to appear in front of the
Irvings, and was known to be quite rude.
When the Irvings threatened to leave him, he
calmed down. The family and the mongoose


108


grew Close, and he even let them stroke him
through a hole in the wall.

Eventually, the story of Gef spread,
although when reporters came from the
mainland, many were unimpressed with the
phenomenon. They believed it was actually
Voirrey who was creating the voice. In 1937
the Irvings sold the farm and were believed
to have taken Gef with them. However, in
1947, the new owner claimed to have shot a
strange, mongoose-like animal outside the
house.

The idea of a mongoose in the Isle of Man
is not quite as bizarre as it first appears. In
1912 a local farmer did import a group of the
animals to kill rabbits on his land. However,
most present-day researchers believe if Gef
was anything, then he was probably a
poltergeist. But there is one last interesting
fact; in India they have a strange old legend.
They say that over time, and with the right
teacher, the mongoose can learn to speak.


IHE GREAT
FLOOD


ESUS CHRIST HIMSELF referred to ‘The
Flood’ but it is not only Christians who
believe in the story. Jews believe in
accounts of the disaster described in the
Holy Torah whilst Muslims have references
in the Koran. The first historical record of the
disaster appeared in eighteenth century BC
Babylonian writings, whilst the ancient Epic
of Gilgamesh is also concerned with a great
flood. ‘Flood’ traditions and references exist
in 300 different cultures around the world;


"et ia — -=a


Ancient Greeks, Romans and Native
Americans all have fables of a terrible flood
that left only a few survivors. There are
suggestions that the Noah flood may have
been the same event that destroyed Atlantis.
Although tradition and mythology has often
represented strong circumstantial evidence,
recent provable scientific knowledge has


been crucial in helping to support the ‘Great
Flood’ theory.
The scientific approach began in the 1990s


A ET pus
=— ay 2 ae


e


Noah's Ark: many cultures around the world tell stories of cataclysmic floods which swept away their predecessors.


109


IDA TCE OESB-413A-AC19-4DOCOOG9FAAD


Evidence from the bottom of the Black Sea suggests it was once dry land. Was it drowned in Noah's flood?


when two geologists from Columbia
University, William Ryan and Walter Pitman,
pieced together clues that they believed
suggested a great ancient flood actually did
occur. Ryan and Pitman formulated a theory
which proposed that the European ice sheets
melted about 7,500 years ago as the world
rapidly grew warmer following the last Ice
Age. The excess water caused the Medi-
terranean to overflow into the Black Sea
which Ryan and Pitman believe was initially
a shallow, land-locked fresh water lake with
river-fed fertile plains surrounding it. They
suggest that it was a heavily populated area
which was completely drowned by the rising
sea levels.

Ryan and Pitman suggest that as the ice
melted, the Black Sea rose by as much as six
inches per day, with water rushing in at 200
times the rate of Niagara Falls. Within a year,


110


60,000 square miles of land was lost under
water, and the fresh water basin became a
salt-water extension of the ocean. The
farmers and settlers who had relied on the
natural environment of the area were forced
away, not only by rising water levels, but
also by the loss of their fresh water resources.
Ryan and Pitman believe the ancient lake
shoreline now lies around 5,000 feet below
the present water level. Sediment core
samples take from the centre of the Black Sea
have provided fascinating evidence. Plant
roots and mud cracks in these samples
suggest a dry riverbed covered in a layer of
mud, which indicates a great flood.

As a continuation of Ryan and Pitman’s
work, the underwater explorer Robert Ballard
decided to study the area in 1999. Ballard
was the man who discovered remains of the
Titanic and, using highly technological


equipment, he and his team found a previous
coastline 550 feet deep and 20 miles out into
the Black Sea. They took samples which
included freshwater and saltwater molluscs
from the ancient seabed. Apart from the well-
preserved geographical and oceanographic
features of the underwater area which
pointed to a coastline flooding gradually, the
freshwater molluscs species were carbon
dated at an age older than the saltwater
molluscs. Scientists also discovered that the
fresh water molluscs all seemed to die at the
same time, suggesting an immediate change
in environment for them. The youngest
freshwater shells were found to be 7,460
years old, whereas the oldest saltwater
creatures dated from 6,820 years ago. This
suggests the flood happened somewhere
between those two dates, confirming Ryan
and Pitman's original theory.

Ballard returned to the area in September
2000, and discovered some even more
fascinating revelations. They found ancient
tools and rubbish sites, and crucially, what
may be a prehistoric dwelling. The wooden-


beamed man-made structure contained


ceramic vessels and stone tools and was
found 300 feet down. The team referred to it
as 'Noah's House', although radiocarbon
dating has proved it was too young to be
from Noah's time. However, it did provide
real evidence that the area was inhabited
before the 'Great Flood' and would have
produced witnesses to the catastrophic
event. The condition of the house also
showed that the flood had happened at such
a speed that surface waves had not had time
to batter the building before consuming it.

These theories and discoveries offer many
fascinating avenues for further study.
Anthropologists are interested to see how
population movements are caused by terrible
disasters and how ancient races have passed
on their great tales using only word of
mouth. Geologists and oceanographers are
fascinated by immense sea-level changes and
flood lands, particularly with the looming
threat of global warming. For scholars,
historians and the religious alike, the confir-
mation of an amazing Biblical story is a
welcome change in an age of legend-
destroying scientific discovery.


HINDU STATUES
DRINKING MILK


N 21ST SEPTEMBER 1995, reports started
to come out of New Delhi of Hindu
statues drinking milk. Worshippers
were offering spoonfuls of the substance as a
sacred gift, and the symbolic carvings of Lord
Shiva and Ganesha were actually consuming


mi


it. Queues built up around temples, and the
local authorities had to increase the city’s milk
supply by 100,000 litres because of a shortage.
Sceptics immediately suggested it was a case
of mass hallucination, or that the porous
quality of the statues that created the


Statue of a Hindu goddess, not drinking milk.


Right: Saint Bernadette of Lourdes. The town has become the
destination for hundreds of thousands of Catholic pilgrims a year.


112


phenomenon. Others said the milk was just
being spilt, but the ground around the statues
did not hold anywhere near the amount of
milk that was being offered.

Certainly, those who came had no doubts
that it was a true miracle, and as Indian
communities heard about the phenomenon,
other reports about similar events appeared
across the world. By the next day, Hindu
worshipers were standing in long lines
outside London temples, eager to offer the
statues milk. Anila Premji was one lady who
waited during the night to attend the Vishwa
temple in Southall, west London, to offer a
spoonful to a marble figure of Nandi, a bull
ridden by Shiva. ‘I held the spoon out level,
and the milk just disappeared,' she said. At
the main Swaminarayan temple in London,
the situation was so busy that authorities


were refusing entry to people bringing their
own milk cartons.

In Canada, Germany and the United States
the miracles were continued. Hindu
worshipers at Chatsworth Hindu Temple in
California also reported milk being accepted
by their idols. Stories were run by Reuters,
CNN, the BBC and most of the world's major
Despite sceptics
explanations, the


newspapers.
scientific


giving
devoutly
religious said it was a sign of God. Even
those Hindu worshippers who did not
regularly attend the temples witnessed the
events and said they felt a reassured sense of
an almighty power protecting them. Perhaps
that is the point. No matter what practical
explanations are advanced, sometimes a
resurgent faith in a divine presence is a great
comfort for those who want to believe.


LOURDES


N 7TH JANUARY 1844 Marie Bernarde

Soubirous was born. She was the

first child of Francois Soubirous, a
poor miller from Lourdes in Southern
France, and his wife Louise. She was a
fragile child, and such was her small stature
she acquired the name Bernadette. Her
father’s lack of money meant she was often
sent away to be cared for by relatives and
friends, and in the summer of 1857 she went
to stay with Marie Aravant in the nearby
town of Batres. Aravant enjoyed having the
girl at her home, but was concerned about
her religious development. She tried to teach
Bernadette about the Bible, but repeatedly
grew impatient as the teenager failed to show
any aptitude for the subject. Finally, Marie
Aravant asked a local priest for his advice.


113


He said Bernadette should be sent back to
Lourdes for Catechism classes.

And so, shortly after her 14th birthday, the
girl arrived back in her hometown. On 11th
February 1858, Bernadette was with two
friends collecting wood from the shore of the
river Gave, to the west of Lourdes. She
decided to walk to a great stone promontory
known as the ‘Big Rock’ or Massabieille,
which was a deserted spot next to the river.
At the base of the cliff there was a 25-foot
deep and 40-foot wide natural hollow.
Bernadette heard a noise and looked up. The
that followed would change
Bernadette and this area of France forever.


events


As Bernadette raised her head, she saw a
vision of a beautiful lady dressed in white
and praying the Rosary. The apparition
disappeared but Bernadette returned to the
grotto and saw her again. On her third
appearance, on 18th February, the lady
spoke and asked the girl to come to their area


281. LOURDES


each day for two weeks. Bernadette did as she
was told. One day, the lady told Bernadette to
wash herself in the grotto's spring water.
There was no spring in the area, so the girl
dug into the mud and bathed in its damp
earthiness. By the next day, a strong spring of
fresh water had manifested. On the 13th
encounter with the vision, the lady asked for
a chapel to be built in her honour, and on the
16th appearance the woman revealed her
identity as the ‘Immaculate Conception’. In
total, Bernadette had seen the Holy Virgin
Mother 18 times, with the last vision
occurring on 16th July 1858.

Very quickly, many of those who drank or
bathed in the grotto’s spring were reporting
miraculous cures. By 28th July 1858 the
Bishop of ‘Tarbes had instigated an
investigative commission. For over three and
a half years this group of eminent clergymen,
doctors and scientist studied the claims
made by Bernadette and worshippers at the


- Intérieur des Piscines


Inside the spring at Lourdes.


grotto. On 18th January 1862 they ruled that
Bernadette herself was an entirely normal
girl who really had seen the Virgin Mary. The
cures attributed to the spring at Massabieille
were declared real, but inexplicable, and the
authorities agreed to build a chapel in
homage to the Holy Mother there, thus
providing the focal point for pilgrims.

The main Basilica at Lourdes now
comprises three chapels and there are other
churches nearby. The largest one in the area,
the Basilica of St Pius X, can hold 30,000
people, which is particularly useful as the
site is visited by about a million pilgrims
each year. Many travel there simply to show
their respect, or to receive religious solace.
Others who go are critically unwell and hope
the healing waters will restore their mortal
spirit. In total, there have been nearly 4,000
recoveries from illnesses, which have ranged


from tuberculosis, sores and blindness to
deafness and cancers. There have also been
65 miracles certified by the Catholic Church
attributed to Our Lady of Lourdes.

Bernadette herself was not so lucky. In
1866 she joined the sisters of Nevers at the
convent of Saint Gildard. Always frail, she
continued to suffer from various illnesses
and died on 16th April 1879 at the age of 35.
In 1925, Bernadette's perfectly preserved
remains were transferred from the convent
chapel to a glass casket in the Nevers chapel.
It appeared that her body had survived better
in death than it had in life and a Doctor
Talon, who helped exhume her, later wrote
an article for a medical journal saying the
state of preservation was not a 'natural
phenomenon’. Bernadette was canonised in
1935, and is now the subject of pilgrimage in
her own right.


MODERN
MIRACLES


LL OF THE RELIGIOUS mysteries in this
section have some relationship, in
one way or another, to miracles.

They God-inspired
phenomena. Sceptics argue that the human
condition is such that we naturally want to


are inexplicable,


believe in miracles, and the phenomenon
has such an attraction that even atheists and
pragmatists are sometimes overcome by
these bizarre events. For as long as Man can
remember, different religions and races have
understood that some occurrences are
instigated by a deity and beyond our compre-


115


hension. In recent years the abundance of
phenomena has increased dramatically.
Some say it is due to a resurgence in
spirituality teamed with a truly worldwide,
24-hour media. Others believe it has had
more to do with an encroaching millennium
fever which induced expectations of a great
happening as we crossed into the 21st
century. For whatever reason, some of the
modern reports of miracles have been truly
amazing.

One of first miracles to be captured by the
world's media occurred in April 1968. In the


town of Zeitun in Egypt apparitions of the
Virgin Mary started to mysteriously appear.
These bizarre sights lasted for over three
years and were viewed by over a million
people firsthand. Countless more across the
globe saw them after they were filmed by the
Egyptian television and photographed by the
world's press. Even Egypt's Marxist dictator,
President Nasser, who was an atheist by
visited the
apparitions


site and saw the
To check the
phenomenon was not a hoax or a prank,


nature,
in person.


Egyptian police scoured a 95 mile radius
around Zeitun. They searched for any
suspicious equipment that may have been
the source of the display, but found nothing.

This type of phenomenon, the spon-
taneous apparition, has become one of the
most widespread modern miracles. In
December 1995 an image of Christ's face was
imprinted in a granite rock in Australia.
Julian Webb, the wheat farmer on whose
land the rock is found, said that one night he
saw a beam of light focus on the solid stone
slab. As he watched the illuminated granite,
the face of Jesus slowly formed on the rock
and remained there. Webb does not consider
himself a religious man, nor is he a regular
church-goer, but is convinced he witnessed a
miracle. On Christmas Day that same year,
people all around the city of Tehran in Iran
reported seeing the image of Christ appear on
fences and building walls. Despite the fact
the overwhelming majority of the population
are Muslim, all the witnesses believed they
had seen visions of Jesus.

These apparitions at the end of 1995 were
merely an opening chapter to a huge range of
visions reported around the globe the


116


following year. An image of the Virgin Mary
appeared on a roof of a San Francisco
church, and visitors reported smelling an
unsourced scent of rose petals. Another
church in South Australia had a picture of
the Holy Mother manifest itself on an inside
wall and a spring of water with healing
properties found underneath the
building. The most impressive example


Was


occurred for three weeks around Christmas
1996, when almost half a million people saw
the Virgin Mary on a black glass building in
Florida. The image measured 50 feet wide
and 35 feet tall, and remained inexplicable
despite the fact that local scientists and
academics studied the apparition at length.
It is not only established church-based
religions that have been caught up in this
recent tide of miracles — Native Americans
have also been experiencing their own
unusual holy events. To these people, the
birth of white buffalo is a truly miraculous
occurrence akin to some of the greatest
Christian miracles. Three different years in
the last decade, 1993, 1994 and 1996, all saw
the arrival of pale buffalo calves. Add to this
the
respected tribal leaders across the United
States, and indigenous Americans were


bizarre visions appearing before


convinced of an end-of-millennium religious
spectacle.

To a great extent, the importance of a
miracle is dependent on a person’s reaction to
it. Scientists and sceptics feel that truth and
practical explanation is the only important
factor. However, can there be any real crime in
an event not instigated by human means
which offers confirmation of beliefs and helps
people to live peaceful lives?


DIM TCE-OESB-I1 A ACIO-ADOCOOGOFAMD


A mother carrying her sick child to a picture of the Madonna which had begun weeping to pray at the site of the
miracle.


117


NOAHS ARH


HE BIBLE SAYS that God warned Noah

that he was planning to wipe out

Mankind because his sins had grown
too much. He told Noah that he wanted to
save two of each kind of animal, and Noah
and his family, so that Creation could
continue after the Great Flood. Noah was
instructed to build a large wooden Ark 45
feet long, 75 feet wide and 45 feet high,
which could house and protect them as the
waters raged. For 40 days and 40 nights the
rain poured and the sea rose until the Earth
was completely covered. Both the Bible and
the Koran say that the Ark came to rest on
Mount Ararat as the water subsided, and that
is where the focus of most Ark-hunters
attempts has been.

The mountain lies in the far east corner of
Turkey close to borders with Russia, Iran and
Iraq. The highest peak is just under 17,000 ft
high, but the Ark itself is believed to lie a
little further down, in a chasm called the
Ahora Gorge. In the gorge there is an ice-
covered mountain called Al Judi, which is
where the Koran places the beached vessel.
However, this area is not easy to explore, and
is only accessible for a couple of months each
year. Melting ice and rock falls make the
Ahora Gorge particularly treacherous, and
roling mists, hidden glaciers and altitude
difficulties have ended the research of many
adventurers. Historically it has always been a
politically unstable region, close to many of
the world's violent hotspots and the Turkish
government has frequently discouraged any
organised The
themselves are also less than helpful, and one


investigations. locals


possible resting-place of the ark is said to be
guarded by fierce indigenous tribesmen.


118


this, countless researchers
searching for the Ark have ventured into the


area, and may have discovered proof of a


Despite


wooden construction locked in the ice caps.
The most common find has been machined
and treated timbers, uncovered in areas
completely devoid of natural woodland. In
1876 a British ambassador to Turkey found
such remains when climbing Mount Ararat.
The timber he discovered had been hand-
hewn and fixed with an extremely hard
black covering. Almost 80 years later, in
1955, an explorer called Fernand Navarra
and his son Rafael discovered some wooden
beams in a crevice on the mountain. They
took samples of the wood and these have
been carbon dated as being around 4000
years old.

Sightings of the Ark itself have also been
documented. The first modern encounter is
said to have happened in 1856 what a group
of young English atheist scientists climbed
the mountain with two local guides. Despite
everyone swearing to keep the discovery
secret, two members of the search team
independently revealed details on their
deathbeds. Around 1910, an official Russian
military expedition commissioned by the
Czar, claimed to have found Noah's Ark and
took measurements and photographs of the
vessel. The results and reports sent back to
the Czar were all lost or destroyed during the
but
independent witnesses account for the
events that occurred. Crucially, everybody


Communist Revolution, many


who claims to have found the remains has

done so in the same area of Mount Ararat.
In more recent years, aerial technology has

provided an overall picture of the mountain,


IDA TCE OESB-413A-AC19-4DOCOO69FAAD


a
JE j
‘is AM f


The animals go in two by two. Has the final resting place of Noah's Ark finally been uncovered?


but has suggested the Ark may lie
somewhere different. In 1949 a US Air Force
mission photographed an unusual feature
15,500 feet up on the northwestern plateau
of Mount Ararat on the other side from the
Ahora Gorge. The images appear to show the
bow of a ship poking out of a glacier. The
phenomenon was given the name the 'Ararat
Anomaly' and resurfaced in the 1970s when
secret military satellites were able to focus
on the area from space. Since then, more
high-powered, clearer and commercial
satellites have allowed researchers a better
chance of examining the strange structure. It


seems to be 600 feet long and some experts


19


believe it may be the wooden ribbed
structure of an ancient boat.

Other Ark investigators believe it could be
simply an old rock formation, an old fortress,
or even a crashed aeroplane. Of course, the
only way researchers can gather definite
evidence is to be near the site on the ground.
But increased tension between Turkey and
the area's Kurdish population has hampered
exploration attempts, and the recent
instability in nearby Iraq has also added to
the region's pressures. Until a team of
archaeological experts can examine the
photographed remains firsthand, the mystery
of Noah's Ark will never be solved.


SAINT-MÉDARD


HEN THE DEACON of Paris, François
de Paris, died in May 1727, great
swathes of mourners attended his


funeral. The congregation was sorrowful, for
Frangois was only 37, and was said to have
holy healing powers. The emotional crowd
followed his coffin as it was placed behind
the high altar in the small church of Saint-
Médard. One by one, the congregation
slowly trundled past the body, paying their
respects and laying tokens of affection. One
crippled boy shuffled up to the coffin with
the help of his father. As they looked onto
the clergyman's peaceful face, the boy was
suddenly hit by a powerful physical
reaction. Members of the crowd struggled to
control his squirming body as it was hit by a
series of savage convulsions. They pulled
him away from the altar and the convulsions
stopped. The boy opened his eyes, stood up,
and with a look of complete joyous
realisation, began dancing and singing
around the church, his malformed right leg
now taking the weight as easily as his left.
This event was the beginning of an
extensive range of miracles that happened
over a five-year period and originated at the
churchyard of Saint-Médard. What is most
remarkable about this series of unexplained
incidents is the complete integrity and
intelligence of those that witnessed the
events. Although many of the Deacon's
followers were poor, unhealthy and perhaps
easily fooled, others who observed these
bizarre happenings were lawyers, scientists
and respected public figures. The most
detailed and believable witness accounts
came from a magistrate, Louis-Basile Carré
de Montgéron. Montgéron had a lawyer


120


friend by the name of Louis Adrien de Paige
who had long described the Saint-Médard
events, but Montgéron was convinced his
friend was being fooled. Despite not partic-
ularly wishing to go to the churchyard,
Montgéron relented and agreed to visit.

The two men arrived at Saint-Médard on
the morning of 7th September 1731. What
Montgéron saw immediately shocked him;
women writhing on the floor; men beating
other women with wooden and metal bars;
there was even one woman whose nipples
were being twisted in a metal clamp. All the
time, the women did not seem to feel pain, in
fact they pleaded for more punishment.
Paige explained that this treatment cured the
women of their deformities and diseases.
Things quickly became more disturbing for
Montgéron when he saw a teenage girl sitting
at a table eating from a plate. As Montgéron
approached, he could see that the girl was
eating human faeces and drinking human
urine. The girl had previously suffered from
a psychological problem that caused her to
constantly wash her hands. Not only was she
cured of this neurosis, but the most amazing
part of the episode occurred as she appeared
to begin vomiting. Out of her mouth poured
pure cow's milk.

As
churchyard, he came upon a group of women


Montgéron stumbled around the
who were cleaning infected cuts and boils by
licking the poisons from them. Montgéron
watched as a young child, suffering form the
most appallingly diseased leg had her
bandages removed. Even the woman who
was to perform the cleansing needed to pray
for strength. But after a moment she began,
removing and swallowing the festering


tissue, leaving a perfectly clean leg. During
this first visit Montgéron saw enough
miracles to leave him emotionally
exhausted. He continued to revisit the
churchyard many times, collecting enough
evidence for an incredible book. That year,
he was thrown into prison for handing a
copy of the tome to a disgusted King Louis
XV. But Montgéron would not be silenced,
and published three further books demon-
strating an honest, serious examination of
the miracles in the churchyard of Saint-
Médard.


The French authorities grew concerned


that these miracles would undermine their
power and the king tried to close the
churchyard. At the time, the writer Voltaire
quipped: 'God is forbidden by order of the
King to perform any more miracles in the
cemetery of Saint-Médard'. When soldiers
were sent to seize the church land they failed
totally. The stories of Saint-Médard spread
and persisted for years, and the Scottish
philosopher, David Hume wrote that there
was never ‘so great a number of miracles
ascribed to one person', as those attributed to
Frangois de Paris. It is a truly enduring
mystery.


SIIGMATA


TIGMATA HAVE BEEN such well-
documented, historical phenomena
that many sceptics have been forced to
accept their legitimacy. The affliction creates
marks on the hands, feet, side and brow
which reflect the wounds Christ suffered on
the cross. The marks often bleed or secrete a
liquid, and can appear and disappear in a
matter of hours. It is usually only saints and
the most devoutly religious who experience
stigmata. It not only leaves a physical
representation of Christs wounds, but
stigmatics often feel pain near the marks, and
many report a lifelong sense of despair and
suffering. Some even feel the lashing of
whips across their backs. Religious followers
believe that the pain is an integral part of
stigmata.
The first celebrated stigmatic was Saint
Francis of Assisi. His holy marks appeared
in 1222 and were of an extent never


121


subsequently equalled. The skin on his
hands and feet actually grew out of the
wounds to form calluses in the shape of
nails. Since his time, there have been over
three hundred reported stigmatics, sixty-two
of which were saints. Georgio Bongiavani is
one of the most well known recent sufferers
of stigmata. In his case, wounds on his
hands and forehead seem to appear and
disappear almost at will. The explanation
for stigmata is still a mystery. Doctors have
recorded that blood secreted by the wounds
is a different type to the stigmatic's blood
group or is an unknown liquid, or even
exudes a perfume.

A popular theory is that stigmata are


psychosomatic afflictions brought on by
extreme levels of worship. Some believe
stigmatics unconsciously bring about these
wounds by their devotion to Christ. Many
stigmatics have reported their wounds
appearing in their greatest intensity around
the holy days of Easter, when sufferers are
most engrossed by religious events.
Similarly, each stigmatic’s wounds generally
correspond to the marks on the statue of the
person they most often worship. If the statue
is nailed through the wrist and ankles, their
wounds appear in the wrist and ankles. But
of course, there is another theory: that
stigmata are sent by God as a gift to only the


most holy.


è


Mystic and Stigmatic, Capuchin friar Padre Pio (Francesco Forgione) (1887—1968) celebrating mass. The stigmata on
his hands can be seen. He bears on his body the five marks of the crucifixion of Christ, on hands, feet and side.


122


THe IURIN SHROUD


HE TURIN SHROUD is probably the most
famous religious relic in the world.
half feet long by four-and-a-half feet wide,
and clearly depicts the body of a bearded


The cloth measures thirteen-and-a-


man, said to be Jesus Christ. Its legend states
that it was used by Joseph of Arimathea to
wrap the body of Christ after his crucifixion.
Its first appearance in recorded history came
in 1357, in the little village of Lirey in
France. It was then taken to Chambéry, in the
Savoy region of the country in 1457, and it
was there in 1532 that the shroud was almost
destroyed in a fierce fire. This experience left
charred marks on the corner of the folds in
the fabric, and in 1578 it was taken to Turin
where it has remained ever since. The
Catholic Church
shroud genuinely possesses an amazing


is convinced that the


physical record of Christs body, and the
cloth is now only shown to the public on rare
occasions.
However, organised religion has not
always been so accepting. Research has
uncovered documents from 1389 written by
the Bishop of Troyes and Pope Clement VII.
Lirey was in the Bishop's diocese, and he
asked the Pontiff to publicly rule that the
shroud was merely a painting. He stated that
the image had actually been painted by an
artist, originally as decoration, but the priests
in Lirey had started duping the local public
into believing it was Christ's authentic death
shroud. The Pope's conclusion bowed to the
Bishop's wishes, but was hardly resolute. He
declared that the shroud could keep being
exhibited, but each time it was shown, the
local priest had to announce to the
assembled public that the relic only depicted


123


a painted copy of Christ's real cloth.

Over the years such practices fell away,
and authenticity of the shroud was assumed.
The early days of the enlightened age of
science seemed to corroborate this belief. In
1898 photographic experts revealed the
image was actually a negative picture, and
seen in reverse tones, the outline showed a
much more detailed view of the body. By
1901, Dr Paul Vignon produced a theory that
such a phenomenon was caused by ammonia
emanating from Christ's dead body after his
terrible death. Vignon believed the resulting
image was therefore beyond the ability of
any forger, and must have been authentic.

But that is not the view of more modern
appraisals, and in 1979 Dr Walter McCrone
conducted a series of advanced scientific
tests on samples of the shroud. Using
microscopic and microchemical forensic
techniques, McCrone and his associates
discovered particles of red ochre and
vermilion pigment mixed with a tempera
medium. No blood was found on the cloth.
Tempera was a substance widely used by
medieval painters, and recent theories
suggest that the original light yellow paint
has turned dark brown over the centuries.
Similarly, the background cloth has actually
faded to a paler hue, thus causing the strange
negative image effect, misunderstood by
earlier researchers.

The most famous and conclusive recent
tests involved radiocarbon dating of the
shroud. In 1988, laboratories in America,
Switzerland and England performed
examinations on sections of the cloth. All
three concluded the material was produced
between AD 1260 and 1390, thereby fitting in


The Turin Shroud: the face of Jesus, or 14th century fake?


with the historical recorded period of the
picture's production. There is also common
sense evidence against the shroud's authen-
ticity. Firstly, the Greek New Testament itself
claims Christ was actually wrapped in strips
of linen, not a whole sheet. We also have no
idea of the provenance of the shroud before
the fourteenth century. Finally, the image on
the shroud has quite obviously faded and
damaged over the last few centuries, whilst it
has been in the care of the Catholic Church,
although when it was first viewed, witnesses
stated that the picture was bright and
vibrant.

Despite these questions surrounding the
shroud, some investigators continue to


124


search for proof of its authenticity. One
recent theory states the samples taken for
carbon dating were contaminated by fungi
and bacteria that had grown in the cloth over
the centuries. This idea is also used as an
explanation for some dressings on Egyptian
mummies that have been carbon dated at an
age many hundreds of years later than the
remains they cover. But most of the scientific
community is convinced that by combining
and corroborating the evidence, the Turin
Shroud is simply a medieval painting that
subsequently assumed mystical beliefs. Even
so, it can be confidently claimed that the
shroud is the world's greatest explained
mystery.


THe VEIL OF
VERONICA


HE TURIN SHROUD is not the only
ancient artefact purporting to show a
Christ’s


features. Christian legend tells of a fabled,
linen veil which also inexplicably shows the


mysterious imprint of


face of Jesus. It is a cloth said to have
miraculous healing powers and supernatural
qualities. Just like the Turin Shroud, it is also
the source of controversy. However, the veil
has more intriguing mysteries surrounding it
than just what caused the image. The Vatican
claims it has been holding the cloth in its
archive continuously since the twelfth
century, but in 1999 an expert in Christian
art history, who works for Vatican organi-
sations, said he had found the real veil
hidden in a remote Italian abbey. So what
exactly is the world supposed to believe?

When Christ was carrying his cross
through Jerusalem on the way to being
crucified at Cavalry, a woman stepped
forward and used her veil to wipe the sweat
and blood from His face. As a sign if
gratitude, He left an image of his likeness
stained on the cloth. Although this episode
is not mentioned in the scriptures, legend
says the woman’s name was Veronica. She is
said to have kept the cloth and realised that
it had holy healing powers. She took the veil
to Rome where she used it to cure Emperor
Tiberius of a malady, and then left it in the
care of Pope Clement and the Catholic
Church.

Historical records show that the veil was
in Rome from at least the fourth century. In
1297 it was placed in the Vatican Basilica


125


and was the subject of worship from pilgrims
who believed the picture was indeed the
genuine likeness of Christ. The image itself
was almost identical to the face seen on the
Turin Shroud. In 1608 the area of the Basilica
displaying the veil was demolished in order
to be redesigned, and the cloth was placed in
the Vatican’s archives. Under tight security,
it was brought out once a year for public
viewing. Or so Catholics believed.

On 3rd June 1999, a professor of Christian
art history at the Vatican’s Gregorian
University, and official advisor to the Papal
Commission for the Cultural History of the
Church, had
completed a 13-year investigation to find the


revealed he successfully
real Veil of Veronica. A German Jesuit,
Heinrich Pfeiffer explained that the artefact
annually displayed was merely a copy that
the Vatican had created so as not to
disappoint pilgrims.

He claimed to have actually found the true
relic in an abbey in the tiny village of
Monopello, high in the Italian Apennine
mountains. Records in the village’s
monastery revealed that the wife of a jailed
soldier stole the veil in 1608, and sold it toa
Monopellan nobleman to release her
husband from prison. The nobleman gave it
to the abbey’s Capuchin monks, who have
kept it in the monastery and revered it as a
sacred icon ever since.

The veil Pfeiffer found is an almost
transparent cloth 6.7 inches wide and 9.4
inches long. The dark red image on it depicts


a bearded man with long hair and open eyes.


The Veil of Veronica on display in the Vatican.


126


There are also red drop marks, which are
believed to be blood. The picture itself seems
to appear and disappear in different light — a
quality that Pfeiffer says would have been
viewed as supernatural in less advanced
times. Pfeiffer also revealed that ultraviolet
testing confirmed that veil the image was not
created by paint, and the image has been
infused identically on both sides.

Sceptics are not convinced. They believe
the extremely thin nature of the cloth
allowed the image to seep through to be the
same on each side. Many believe the
similarities between the veil and the Turin
Shroud occur because the veil was a
deliberate copy of the larger cloth. They also


WEEPING


point out the fact that Veronica’s meeting
with Christ has never been historically
documented, and her name itself is a work of
fiction — being an amalgamation of the Latin
words for ‘true image’, or 'vera-icon'.

The only scientific way of determining the
age of the cloth is by carbon dating, but its
brittle, delicate state means it could be
irreparably damaged during any such tests.
For Pfeiffer there is no doubt about the
religious authenticity of the veil, and he is
entirely convinced that his find is the true
artefact. But for other Catholics, it is not so
easy. Even if they accept the legend, which
veil do they chose as the genuine relic?


STATUES


HE PHENOMENON OF weeping or crying
religious statues is one of the oldest
and most stereotypical images of holy

in Catholicism. Ireland, South


America and southern Europe all have well


powers
documented accounts of Virgin Mary
figurines seeping strange liquids. And,
whilst sceptics believe there are good
reasons to doubt the validity of such
occurrences, to the local populations they
are often only explainable under the term
‘miracle’.

In November 1992, a six-inch-high, blue
and white porcelain statue of the Virgin
Mary began weeping blood in Santiago,
Chile. The figurine, which belonged to a
local housewife, became an attraction for
local people in the La Cisterna district and


127


was even tested by Chilean police. Doctors at
the Santiago coroner’s office discovered that
the liquid produced at the statue’s eyes was
type O-4 human blood.

A similar event happened in the small
village of Mura, 35 miles north of Barcelona
in Spain. Outside the village church a two-
foot-high marble statue of the Virgin Mary
had been set on a seven-foot-high pedestal.
In March 1998, the local priest, Luis Costa,
discovered it was crying tears of blood. Mura
residents were convinced the phenomenon
was genuine. The statue had not been
tampered with, and further investigation
revealed the blood was emanating from the
figure in a particularly human way.

Sceptics are quick to dismiss such stories.
Some promote fanciful theories that water is


soaked up by the base of the statues, mixes
with red clay inside them, and then appears
through the head as blood. Others are
convinced these instances have been
created through the use of a simple magic
trick. Certainly, it is true that the actual
point when blood appears on such statues is
rarely witnessed. By diverting people's


A pious believer attempts to be healed by a statue.


attention, it is easy to interfere with the
figurines unnoticed. But these explanations
fail to alter the effect on a credulous public.
Although it is important to discover the
truth, this type of religious mysticism is a
pleasant way to remind us that there are
still some things in life that we just can't
explain.


PSYCHIC POWERS
& PHENOMENA


AURAS &
KIRLIAN
| DHOTOGRAPHY


UST AS EVERY living creation gives out
heat, gases and energy, so it is believed
they emit an aura of vitality, that is to say,

a glow of colour around the body which
reveals its health, mood and thoughts. The
idea of auras is a concept that has been
around from the beginning of time. Even
though most of us cannot detect them, there
are psychic people who claim they can see
these indications of life force. The challenge
in recent years has been to find a way of
recording auras so ordinary people can view
them. Aura enthusiasts believe we will be
able to use them to help solve health,
psychological and emotional problems, and
perhaps even understand other mystical
remedies.

Our knowledge of auras comes solely from
the psychics who can see them. They say
that the colour of an individual’s aura, and
the distance it radiates from a body, often
provides vital information about the general
wellbeing of the person. The hue and
intensity of the aura are said to fluctuate
constantly as individuals change moods,
thoughts and levels of fatigue. As study in
the area has increased, so too has a widely
agreed catalogue of aura qualities and an
understanding of what they mean. For
example, a green aura reflects intellectual
factors, whilst any brown or grey shades
reflect disease. However, science has not


130


gathered any definitive results, and different
techniques in photography are constantly
being evolved to try to capture auras on a
solid substance.

The first person to use auras for medical
purposes was Walter Kilner, the head of the
electro-therapy department at St Thomas’
Hospital in 1911.
discovered that just by looking through


in London Kilner
coloured glass he could see an outline of light
shrouding the patient’s body. He noticed that
the light changed shape, intensity and colour
as the patient’s health altered. Kilner was the
only one who could see the light, and it was
not until 1939 that his discoveries were taken
any further. Semyon Kirlian, a Russian
hospital electrician, stumbled by chance
upon a completely unique method of
photography. He realised that by placing a
living object on a photographic plate and
running a high voltage through it, the most
amazing image of strange colours appeared as
a halo around the subject.

Kirlian and his wife, Valentina, perfected
the technique. The first photograph they took
showed a leaf with millions of orange and
turquoise light dots seemingly emanating from
the leaf’s veins, and a bizarre aura around the
leaf edges. Over time they conducted many
experiments and even developed an
instrument that would show auras in motion.
They noted that whilst healthy, vital subjects


created pictures with the most distinct,
radiant outlines — withered and dying subjects
would result in very weak auras.

Kirlian also proposed and demonstrated
the theory that different colours emanated
with different moods, feelings and thoughts.
A most fascinating experiment took place
when a visiting scientist gave them two
apparently identical leaves to study. The
Kirlians were puzzled because one seemed
to have a very strange aura, and yet it
appeared normal.

In the 1970s and 80s Thelma Moss, a para-
psychologist at the University of California,
became convinced in the power of auras for
medical purposes. She promoted the view
that Kirlian's discovery was a way of
showing 'bioenergy' as a tangible, provable
subject, and even visited the Soviet Union to


discuss techniques with paranormal
researchers there. She wanted to use Kirlian
auras as a diagnostic tool, and believed the
subject represented the next major step
forward for the medical establishment.
Unfortunately, Moss died in 1997 without
fully realising her aim.

In fact, Kirlian photography is seen by the
established scientific community as being a
very unreliable way of determining illnesses.
It has been pointed out that moisture, air
pressure and voltage all have a marked effect
on the resulting picture. However, aura
enthusiasts are convinced we all have a
demonstrable life atmosphere


surrounding us. They say that it is only a


force


matter of time before some unquestionable
technique is devised, and a whole new world
of personal care is unveiled.


JIDOWSING


HE OLD GAG where a man with a forked
stick is searching for water is very
finds


nothing, but as he approaches a tree, some


well known. Initially he
strong power starts pulling the end of the
stick downwards. The looks


his talent and techniques


man
triumphant,
vindicated. He then spots a rather self-
satisfied dog standing next to the tree with a
leg cocked in the air! The process the man
used is called dowsing, and it can be used to
find oil, gold, water, and even golf balls. It is
known as one of the oldest of psychic
powers, and connects man directly with the
earth, but does dowsing really work?

Over the centuries, dowsers have made
many appearances in mankind's traditions. It
is said that cave drawings in Spain and Iraq


131


show dowsers working in prehistoric times,
and woodcuts from ancient China and
Britain support the long heritage of dowsing.
During the Middle Ages, dowsers were
vilified as witches or devil worshippers;
Martin Luther even claimed that dowsing
was 'the work of the devil'. However, history
also shows that many official groups have
placed their trust in dowsers. German
dowsers were apparently invited to assist
British miners during the reign of Queen
Elizabeth I, and it is claimed that modern
military organisations actively employ them.
General Patton was said to have used
dowsers to find water to replace the wells
destroyed by German forces during the
Second World War, Similarly, the US Marine
Corps apparently used dowsers to find mines


Dowsing for water: are water dowsers on to something real, or just wasting their time?


laid during the Vietnam War, and the British
Army followed suit in the Falklands War.
The most common method dowsers
employ is to walk around the area in which
they are searching whilst holding their
dowsing tools. These can be forked branches
which point down when the dowser is above
the thing searched for, or, more commonly,


132


are two L-shaped rods made of copper, wood
or wire held in each hand. The rods sit in the
palms of the dowser with the longest side of
the ‘L’ pointing forwards. When the dowser
approaches the hunted substance, the rods
swivel in the palm to touch each other,
forming a cross. Another way of dowsing is
to use a piece of string with a crystal on the


end. The pendulum gently swings and the
dowser is subtly guided to what they are
looking for. The most impressive display is
when dowsers are not even in the area to be
searched, and simply use their dowsing
technique over a map to locate an object or
substance.

There are a number of theories as to why
the rods move. Some believe it is electro-
magnetic power or other earth forces.
However, the most likely explanation is
involuntary nerve signals sent to the
dowser's palms. It is generally accepted that
dowsing is not controlled by physical or
chemical influences, but more by the
psychic ability of the dowser. It is suggested
that, over time and with practise, the dowser
can improve their talents and success rate.
There have been some quite striking results
from experienced dowsers. In a 1995 report
by Hans-Dieter Betz, a physicist at the
University of Munich, it was claimed that
some dowsers achieved a 9696 success rate
in 691 drilling attempts to find water in Sri


Lanka. The German government has since
sponsored 100 dowsers to find water in arid
areas of southern India.

The conventional scientific view is,
however, that dowsing achieves no better
results than pure guesswork. Indeed, there
are a handful of high-profile competitions
involving big money prizes for dowsers. One
such challenge promises a million dollars if
an 8096 success rate in finding water flowing
through pipes during
controlled conditions can be achieved. The


underground


money has never been won.

Some dowsers do still use their skills to
earn a healthy living — a select few act as
advisors to mining and drilling companies
searching for minerals. However, the fact is
that scientists are always sceptical about
phenomena that they cannot explain. But the
great thing about dowsing is, unlike other
psychic powers, it is an activity anybody can
at least try. Who knows, if you practise hard
enough, there is a million-dollar cheque just
waiting to be cashed!


ESP AND
SYCHOHINESIS


XTRA-SENSORY PERCEPTION (ESP) and

Psychokinesis (PK) are the two powers

that govern all self-controlled human
mysteries. ESP is the ability to feel or
understand events which are not apparent to
the standard five senses, whereas psycho-
kinesis is a natural force which can be used
to physically affect the world, without there
being any physical contact. Together, these
two talents are known as psychic powers or


133


psi, and many researchers believe they are
inherent in us all. Other scientists think they
are nothing but bunkum, hoaxes or magic
tricks which have never been proven in
controlled laboratory conditions.

The subject of ESP has been around for
centuries under the guise of telepathy and
clairvoyance, and there is some substance
behind the possibility of its existence.
Animals are known to have instincts and


senses that are inexplicable if we rely purely
on the five established receptors. For
example, trained dogs can feel when an
epileptic person will have a fit, and can give
the sufferer enough of a warning for
medication and safety precautions to be
taken. Advocates of human ESP suggest we
have similar powers ingrained with natural
instincts, but our modern, comfortable
lifestyles have allowed them to become
dormant and unused.

The first scientifically tested experiments
to investigate the subject of ESP were
conducted by Joseph Banks Rhine in the
1930s. Rhine
University in Durham, USA, and developed
the now archetypal ESP-testing, card
guessing game. Rhine would ask the subjects
in his experiments which one of five cards


was a scientist at Duke


he was holding - it would either show a
circle, a square, a plus sign, a star or three
wavy lines. The pack would contain 25
cards, and the success rate of the subject
compared to the pure statistics of probability
gave a reading of whether some external,
unknown sense was at play.

Rhine concluded that ESP was a genuine
phenomenon that could be effected by the
human involved in the experiment. He
discovered that if people were relaxed and
comfortable, their rate would
improve but if those being tested were bored,


Success


scared or simply disliked the notion of ESP,
their results would actually be worse than
probability. Character and situation are said
to have great bearing on individual ESP
sensitivity. Particularly stressful or traumatic
scenarios are believed to encourage much
more receptivity to instinctive senses. Those
who call themselves psychics are said to be
naturally in tune with their inherent powers,
and can feel unexplained sensations as easily
as normal people receive the known five.
These psychics are often the brunt of
scientists' most fierce scepticism. Many


134


researchers, who utterly disbelieve the
notion of psi, point to the long history of so-
called psychics being revealed as charlatans,
con men or illusionists. Similarly they
question every aspect of the controlled
experiments used to prove the existence of
ESP and point to the fact that successful tests
are often unrepeatable. Some scientists are
eager to state that there is no known force or
sense that can be received or manipulated by
the brain. If there are such things as
brainwaves, then why can we not build a
machine to receive them? It must also be
highlighted that ESP tests can be proven
successful just by pure luck playing a part,
whereas psychokinesis experiments are far
less susceptible to chance. Either people
involved in psychokinesis experiments can
make things move psychically or not, and
any positive result would be a sensation.

Needless to say, the lack of public
understanding of psychokinetic energy is
due to the very fact there have not been any
substantially successful tests, and that the
proof we do have of its existence comes
purely from anecdotal evidence. That said,
the phenomenon of poltergeists is well
documented — if not laboratory tested — and
is believed to contain a great deal of
psychokinetic influence.

Certainly, many traditional biologists and
physicists would refute the existence of any
forces that are not explained by known
science and when
reinforced by dubious


such powers are
evidence, their
credibility is questioned further. However,
the public perception of psi ability is quite
different, and recent surveys have shown
that two-thirds of American adults believe
they have experienced some occurrence of
ESP. In many ways, the subject is akin to the
question of God, or the human soul. Are
there actually forces we can feel and control,
but which our intelligence cannot yet
understand?


IDA TCE-OES8-413A-ACIS-ADOCODGGEAXO.


I EVITATION


ANY OF THOSE who have been

known to levitate have had fervent

and passionate states of mind. The
early Christian Church believed levitation
was a sign of demonic possession, and
certainly it has been known to afflict the
possessed. However, throughout the
centuries, many holy people have also been
able to lift themselves off the ground. The
most famous was probably St Joseph of
Copertino, born in 1603 in Apulia, Italy, who
reached a state of religious ecstasy that
allowed him to defy gravity. He is said to
have levitated over a hundred times in his
life, and it was the demonstration of his


jg o9 52 2^1


A visual illusion, but does levitation actually work?


135


rapture-induced ability in front of Pope
Urbain VIII that led to his canonisation.
Eastern philosophies and religions teach
that levitation can be achieved through a
devoted study to fully harness the body's life
force. This natural energy is called 'Ch'i' or
‘Ki’, and is said to be controlled by extensive
yogic training. The phenomenon of ‘yogic
hops', where a person can make short levita-
tional movements using transcendental
meditation is also advanced by Eastern
teachings. The focus is placed less on
extreme emotion, but more on visualisation
and breath control to summon up all latent


energy within the body.


19-4bocootorjva.


GDAMTCE-OESB-AL3A AC


Wz


Some psychics also believe the power
needed to levitate ourselves is a naturally
The
nineteenth century medium Daniel Douglas
Home was known as a practised proponent


inherent psychokinetic power.


of the levitating craft. In 1868 he was seen
levitating out of a window on the third storey
of a building. It was reported that he re-
entered the building through another


136


Pickles


Teu.


window on the same floor. Unlike the
religious examples, Douglas Home did not
enter a trance, and believed it just required a
good deal of concentration. However, many
people in the modern age believe the
theories of levitation are best left to the
engineers, designers and magicians in
glamorous cabaret shows.


NEAR DEATH
UHDERIENCES


OST RELIGIONS AGREE that when we
die, we are going to face some kind
of
However, so much of our lives are spent
dealing with trivial day-to-day distractions


reckoning or judgement.


that we often forget this. For some people, a
truly amazing phenomenon reasserts their
priorities. It is a phenomenon that takes
them beyond the shroud of life, to the very
edges of the next dimension where they
leave their mortal bodies and are shown the
error of their ways. It is a phenomenon
characterised by a dark tunnel, a shining
light at the end, and extreme feelings of
serendipity or fear. These are Near Death
Experiences.

Near death experiences are reported by
people who have been, at some stage,
physically and medically dead - that is to
say, they show no vital signs of life. It is
normally experienced by heart attack
sufferers, overdosed drug users, and people
who have attempted suicide. Some estimates
suggest that over ten million people in the
United States have had personal experiences
of near death experiences, so it is hardly a
select phenomenon.

Although no two near death experiences
are the same, they do share some common
qualities. Many people report that they feel
as if they have risen out of their body. Often
they look down upon the medical teams
trying to bring them back to life. Indeed,
many people who have had near death
experiences can even state exactly what
happened, who said what, and which


137


instruments were used to resuscitate them.
Other
hovering above members of their family at
the time of death.

Sometimes seeing their close relations is
enough to force them to return to their mortal


experiences involve the person


frames. But if they continue their near death
experience, it is often reported that a feeling
of sublime peace and joy sweeps over them.
They find themselves in a dark tunnel with a
beautiful white or golden light at the end of
it. Sometimes they hear the voices of
deceased loved ones, or even God, telling
them to return to Earth. Some near death
experiences involve an overview of the
person's life, showing where things have
gone wrong or need completing, and
sometimes the person feels as though they
have gained knowledge about the meaning of
life. Whether by voluntary or involuntary
means, they return to their bodies.

Not all near death experiences are so
enjoyable, for there are some people who
suffer horrific fear during their near death
experience and see monsters or devils. What
is largely universal is the effect of the
experience on the person; they often
instigate massive, life-changing decisions as
a result. People review what is important in
their life, and find new happiness from
simple things. Many do voluntary work, or
become teachers or lecturers. Those who do
not chose to show their commitment to
serving people publicly frequently reveal a
new approach to life, and often become more
pleasant, sympathetic and understanding.


In 2001, The Lancet medical journal
published a report of a 13-year study into
near death experiences that occurred in
Dutch hospitals. The investigation was
conducted by cardiologist Pim van Lommel,
and was unique in that it questioned 344
patients immediately after they had been
resuscitated. It was established that the
patients’ brains had no flow of blood, and so
would have ceased to operate, yet 18% of
those questioned had some memory of
events during the time they were technically
dead.

The researchers also found that 12% had a
deep experience — that is, an out-of-body,
bright light, or meeting of dead relatives type
of phenomenon. The most impressive part
was that the details of their experiences
stayed precisely exact, even when they were
re-interviewed two and eight years later. It
was also seen that those who had near death


experiences reprioritised, and became
noticeably more appreciative of life, when
compared to non- near death experience flat-
liners. Near death experience sufferers also
had a radically declined fear of death.

Some in the medical profession consider
the accounts to be products of fantasy, false
memory or confused consciousness. This
view does a disservice to the huge numbers
of people who genuinely feel they have had
these moments; their reported near death
experiences are just a sample — it has to be
pointed out that many who had near death
experiences in the past failed to come
forward for fear of ridicule.

Do these experiences mean there really is
an after-life? There is no scientific proof,
although many near
sufferers will slip into death without fear


death experience


when the time comes again. For them, it is
not a step into the unknown.


OugA BOARDS


UNA BOARDS ARE known to teenagers

across the world as the easiest way

to create spooky, hair-raising
experiences. Most people see them as a toy,
something to play with. The fact that they
were even mass-produced by games
companies only adds to the ‘harmless fun’
factor. However, many expert mediums
believe they should not be approached with
such a nonchalant attitude. They say that
countless people end up in dire straits
simply from fooling around with Ouija
boards; some experience mental breakdowns
or relationships disintegrating, some end up


138


possessed by spirits and some are even
driven to suicide.

Nobody is precisely sure when the first
Ouija board was made, but it seems that
similar types of apparatus have been around
for well over a century. The board itself
consists of the letters of the alphabet, the
numbers zero to nine, and the words ‘yes’
and ‘no’. In fact, the name Ouija comes from
the words for ‘Yes’ in French and German.
The people using the board all gently touch a
pointer which slides around the board,
forming words that answer the questions
asked by the sitters.


Contact with the spirits, or a cheap party game?


Officially, manufacturers of the boards say
they works by tapping into the collective
sub-conscious, but the item is generally
regarded as a way to talk to spirits. Indeed,
during the Second World War sales of the
board peaked as people tried to contact loved
ones lost in battle. The Ouija board then had
a resurgence in the 1960s during the days of
heightened spiritual interest. It was overtly
marketed as a game, but media stories
questioning the effect of the board on
people's emotional, spiritual and psycho-
logical equilibrium led to the items being
removed from high-street shops.


139


The dangers people face when using the
board are obvious. If the sitters are trying to
contact the spirit world, then they are
probably dealing with something about
which they know nothing. Just from a
common sense point of view, there are
dangers involved similar to modern forms of
communication; you never know exactly
who you are talking with, no matter what
they tell you. It is claimed that especially
mischievous or evil spirits try to contact
people who are using Ouija boards without
any clear idea of what they are doing. But,
like viewed and


modern technology,


operated in the correct, careful way, people
can have a lot of enjoyment.

Experts are particularly keen to warn
people of nervous dispositions, who may be
susceptible to unhealthy suggestion, to stay
away from Ouija boards. There have been
reports of extreme activity during sessions,
with inanimate objects moving indepen-
dently and lights flicking on and off. There is
also no scientific proof to say exactly what is
causing the words to be spelt out. If people
really want to try contacting the spirit world
it is probably advisable to visit a reputable
medium who can guide and control sessions.

However, there are some Ouija board
experiences that actually prove to be life-
changing successes. Many of the established
mediums began their careers using Ouija
boards, and there is a strong argument that
the boards help you become more sensitive
and appreciative of the spirit world. One


such case happened in 1913 to Pearl Curran,
a housewife from St Louis. Curran was
dabbling with a friend's board when a spirit
supposedly called Patience Worth contacted
her. Curran and this entity progressed and
she started to practise automatic writing,
resulting in the production of over a million
words of poetry, drama and fiction.

Of course there was always the possibility
that Curran was a naturally gifted writer and
just pretended a spirit had initiated the
writing. She may even have been the
unwitting reincarnation of Patience Worth.
In either case, the prose was of a good
enough quality to be published and receive
substantial acclaim from readers.

However, not all experiences have this
result. Whatever intellect is being harnessed,
the fact is that with Ouija boards, like life in
general, it is best to be careful with things
you know little about.


[OLTERGEISTS


N GERMAN, THE WORD ‘poltergeist’ means
‘noisy ghost’. It is an apt title, because of
all paranormal activity, poltergeists are
the most physical, forceful and frightening.
They can make objects fly across the room,
items shake, and strange and loud noises be
heard. Often they are dangerous, and can
leave people in a state of trauma. The most
intriguing aspect of poltergeists is that they
are actually caused by human predicaments
and mental powers. In fact, they are such a
well-studied and established phenomenon
that science actually takes an active and
interested role in researching them.
A haunting, and our traditional concept of
a ghost, usually involves the lost soul of a


140


deceased person who is spiritually still in
the same place where they lived or died. It is
as if they have not realised their time has
passed, and they are indiscriminate to whom
they appear. Indeed, it is generally perceived
that ghosts do not even realise the modern
world is happening around them.
Poltergeists, on the other hand, do react,
disruptively, with their environment. Their
disturbances can begin and end abruptly,
and they have a very real, intrusive
relationship with the people close by. Also,
unlike traditional hauntings, it is believed
they actually need a human to be the
catalyst, or agent, for their activity.

This agent is crucial for poltergeist


IDA TCE OESB-413A-AC19-4DOCOO69FAAD


Poltergeists — the word is from the German for ‘noisy
spirit’ — are often thought to be the ghosts of children.


occurrences. Indeed, experts believe the
agent is actually the root cause. It is
understood that any type of person can be an
agent, but there seems to be a particular
susceptibility to poltergeist activity with
young women. Although many agents are
stable, balanced individuals with no control
over the poltergeist, it is widely recognised
that some agents have some deep-seated
mental difficulties. It has been discovered
that extreme states of anxiety, depression,
hysteria, anger, schizophrenia and emotional
fatigue are all powerful catalysts for
poltergeist activity. Similarly, highly stressed
individuals, or those with epilepsy, are
regularly found to be poltergeist agents. The
resultant events only serve to heighten any
problems the agent has.

The symptoms of poltergeist disturbances
are initially banging or knocking noises,
awful smells, inexplicable lights, flying or
moving objects and electrical equipment
failures. As time passes by, if the cause is not
sorted, the activity becomes more and more
extreme. Experts are sincere when they
believe poltergeists are dangerous both


141


physically and mentally. They say that a
person cannot run or move to escape from
the poltergeist, that because the agent is
responsible for its disturbances, it follows
them. More advanced poltergeist activity
involves unexplained dripping water,
random fires igniting and vague apparitions
appearing. Poltergeist activity is noticed and
experienced by everyone in the room, and
the disturbance is genuine physical activity,
not imagined events.

As poltergeists have been studied for
decades, scientists and experts have reached
some conclusions. Many believe these
strange events are caused by the agent
releasing psychokinetic energy in an attempt
to relieve stress. Psychokenisis is the idea of
‘mind over matter’ energy, and people are
understood to expel huge amounts of it when
under pressure. The actual activity that
occurs is also symbolic of the problem. For
example, some agents who feel intense guilt
inspire a poltergeist to beat them and end up
physically bruised all over. If an agent is
incredibly angry with someone, then it will
be their property that is thrown across the
room and smashed by psychokinetic power.
In almost all cases, the agent is as scared as
everyone else, and does not realise that they
are causing these events.

Experts agree that poltergeist activity is
possible to solve, and many strongly suggest
that those who experience it should seek
help immediately. Whether the help comes
from a priest or a psychologist, it is clear that
poltergeist agents have an incredible power
running loose that needs to be tamed. Once
the cause is addressed, or even simply when
the agent realises that they are the root of the
disturbances, activity often stops. As with
many paranormal experiences, the horror of
poltergeists is not created by some unseen
beast or phantom, but by the inexplicable
power of the human mind.


[/REMON ITIONS


ESEARCHERS HAVE REVEALED that most

premonitions predict events likely to

happen within a very short space of
time. They believe that women are more
susceptible, or at least most ready to admit
having them, but premonitions can be
experienced by almost anyone. People who
regularly experience premonitions can often
determine how long the time delay between
the dream and the ensuing reality is. For
example, on 15th September 1981, Barbara
Garwell had a dream involving the shooting
of important Middle Eastern men at a
stadium. She knew her premonition would
take 21 days to show effect, and on the 6th of
October, President Sadat
murdered at a mass commemoration.


Anwar was

Other versions of the phenomenon have
arisen in equally strange ways. There is a
theory that mortally important events can
trigger mass premonitions where many
people in the affected community foresee an
impending tragedy or disaster. Perhaps the
most striking of these happened at the Marfa
colliery in Port Talbot, Wales. One day in
1890 over half of the miners in the town
failed to turn up for work because of a
general disquiet and feeling of foreboding.
Some people even reported the 'smell of
death' drifting up from the mine. In total, 87
miners went down to work that day, but a
massive accident in the heart of the colliery
meant none survived. A similar
phenomenon was said to have been
experienced by many passengers shortly


before boarding the Titanic.


142


Without doubt, the largest modern source
of premonition stories has been the World
Trade Center attack on 11th September 2001.
Indeed, this event alone has initiated a
massive resurgence in the belief of psychic
forewarnings. There have been remarkable
stories of artists and creative people
including the disaster in works composed
before the fateful day.

Charles Burwell II, a painter and self-
confessed non-psychic, composed an unusual
image between spring and September 2000.
The picture showed a calamity in a city of
large pillars, but it caused Burwell so much
distress that he did not finish it. In a similar
case, intelligence agents investigated an
Egyptian calendar printed in May 2001. On
the page for September, the decorative picture
seemed to depict a passenger plane crashing
into tall buildings with Manhattan and the
Statue of Liberty in the distance behind. If, as
it seems, some of the hijackers were not aware
of what was to unfold, it seems highly
unlikely that the information was passed on
to calendar manufacturers.

The case of the World Trade Center has
caused many premonition investigators to
ask for individual experiences in the run-up
to the disaster. The British Society for
Psychical Research has started a confidential
website for people to log any experiences
about the World Trade Center attack, or any
other premonition, whether it has come to
pass or not. This idea of a predictions
catalogue is not new; a British Premonitions
Bureau was originally set up in 1957. In the


Foretelling the future with the aid of a chicken. Why poultry is ascribed such powers is perhaps more of a mystery
than clairvoyancy itself.


first year, over a thousand premonitions
were filed, and although they had some
proven forewarnings, the bureau was shut
down within a few years. The concept does
throw up some interesting logical questions.
Those who promote it say that if people
logged their ideas, and the public took
notice, it could help avoid terrible disasters.
If all warnings were heeded, and we all
stayed at home, all of the time, there would
certainly be no terrible accidents. But we
would also never know how accurate any
premonitions actually were.

Many doubts about the integrity of
premonitions are based on explanations of
logic. Numerous experts believe a fair
proportion of premonitions are created by
environment, custom, people's nature and
probable possibilities. Instinct, intuition and


143


common sense can be just as effective as
mystical messages. Other theories state that
sheer chance suggests many realistic dreams
will come true, at least in part at some point
in time. Dr Richard Wiseman advanced a
theory which stated that, if somebody
dreams about a plane crash and they then
look hard enough, within a reasonably short
space of time a suitably similar event will
appear in the media. Air crash experts,
however, dispute this and point to the
overall low number of fatal passenger airline
incidents.

Like many mysteries, people can interpret
events in whatever way suits them, but there
are still some cases of
premonitions. If only we could be warned


impressive


before the event, then many sceptics would
be truly silenced.


REINCARNATION


OW DO SOME children have the ability

to speak in dialects and remember

details of events that happened
years before their birth? Reincarnation is the
belief that the soul of a person returns to
Earth after death and takes residency in a
new body. It is a belief borne in the
philosophies of Eastern religions and the
Karmic laws of nature. Such is the level of
complete conviction that some Buddhist
holy men even believe it is a crime to kill any
living creature for fear that it is a loved one
returned. These ways of the mystical East are
increasingly finding favour in our normally
sceptical societies, and many people now
purposely search for details of their past
lives through hypnotic regression.

Christianity, and particularly the Roman
Catholic Church, see reincarnation as heresy,
although many branches of religion are open
to the possibility. The central theme of the
Buddhist religion, for example, relies on
reincarnation. Buddha himself taught that
the point of reincarnation depends on the
quality of the preceding life. This is the idea
of Karma, and the belief that one's actions are
repaid in equal kind. Buddhists believe that
reincarnation is needed to understand the
world and achieve enlightenment. Once this
is achieved, the soul will break the chain of
reincarnation, attaining a state of nirvana or
spiritual heaven.

The current trends for therapy and
counselling in the Western world have also
increased interest in the phenomenon of
reincarnation. Problems such as irrational
fears, recurring nightmares and inexplicable
health problems are said to be caused by
shadow memories of former lives. To solve


144


these difficulties, people often undergo
hypnosis to experience regression to find
details of past lives. Experts believe that, in
the wrong therapist's hands, these processes
can be unhelpful, and a combination of
latent imagination and leading questions can
produce quite fanciful results.

Details of past lives can appear completely
unsolicited. Experiences such as spon-
taneous recall, where the person suddenly
see an ultra real ‘daydream’, or triggered
recall, where an external factor in the
physical world acts as a catalyst for the
memory, are both common examples of this.
It is suggested that anybody interested in
discovering their own past memories
actually undertake a long course of
meditation or yoga. Although the process
does not yield immediate results, and may
take years to develop, the individual retains
self-control and also achieves a higher state
of mystical and spiritual wellbeing.

As the subject of reincarnation gains more
and more acceptance, an increasing amount
of verified cases are being reported. One of
the most famous was that of the movie star
Glenn Ford. Under hypnosis, Ford claimed
to remember five previous lives, the most
impressive of which was as a French
cavalryman during the reign of Louis XIV.
Despite the fact that Ford only knew a few
rudimentary phrases in French, under
hypnosis he was able to speak fluently in a
language that was later discovered to be a
particular Parisian dialect from the
This is
astounding evidence, but many sceptics still
claim that these sort of ‘memories’ can be


seventeenth century. quite


created by sub-conscious dreaming.


Children's recounts of past lives often
provide the most amazing and most reliable
proof of reincarnation, as they are not
corrupted with the notion of reincarnation or
false histories. Dr Ian Stevenson, a leading
researcher in this field, has written about
many fascinating cases. One such incident
involved an Indiana girl called Swarnlata
Mishra.

In 1951, when Swarnlata was three, she
started giving details about a woman called
Biya Pathak who had lived in the Katni, over
a hundred miles away from Swarnlata's
family home in Pradesh. The young girl
revealed that Pathak had two sons and had
died in 1939 of a 'pain in her throat'. She


described and positioned Biya's home and
seemed to remember more and more as time
passed by. Eventually, Biya's family were
tracked down and came to visit Swarnlata to
her She
recognised all the correct relations of Biya,
calling them by their nicknames and treating


test knowledge. immediately


them just as Biya would have. Over the years
she developed a close relationship with the
Pathak's, and both families now accept that
Swarnlata is Biya returned. When
Swarnlata’s father, Sri Mishra decided to
chose a husband for her, he even consulted
the Pathak family. Stories like this that affect
people so personally suggest reincarnation
really is a reality.


REMOTE


VIEWING


EMOTE VIEWING IS one of the most
verifiable of all human paranormal
abilities. It allows ‘viewers’ the power
to see and experience situations and places
separated from them by distance and time.
Using naturally inherent psychic talents,
known as psi, the viewer then records details
of what he or she has seen. Many enthusiasts
say it is an acquirable craft rather than some
divine gift and that, whereas many so-called
psychic powers now have unfortunate
connotations of con-men and tricksters,
remote viewing, or RV, began as a scientific
experiment and is used by police, military
and large corporate organisations.
Many now offer


companies remote


viewing tutorials and promise that anyone


145


can understand and control this ability with
practise and a good teacher. Unlike other psi
powers such as clairvoyance, remote viewing
is conducted under strict controls. Viewers
are not allowed to know anything of their
target other than the detail that instigates the
search. It might be a photograph or a co-
ordinate on which the viewer then trains
their thoughts following a scripted format.
The viewer operates in a quiet room, often
going into a trance-like state, and sometimes
has a companion who helps direct them.
Unlike an out-of-body phenomenon, the
viewer always knows where they really are.
They still feel and experience all aspects of
their target.

The creator of remote viewing was an


American artist and paranormal student
called Ingo Swann. Swann had taken aspects
of previous psychic experiments and formed
a new technique, which was tested by
scientists at the American Society for
Psychological Research. In these tests, he
was able to accurately describe in detail the
weather in different US cities. In 1972
Swann was introduced to Dr Hal Puthoff, a
physicist at the Stanford Research Institute
in California. The two conducted further
experiments and were subsequently
approached by the CIA. The department
approached Puthoff with some tasks it
wanted his team to look at, and were
impressed with the results.

At the time, American intelligence experts
were becoming increasingly worried about
reports coming from Russia that Soviet
authorities were spending vast sums on
paranormal activities. The CIA had become
aware that Communist scientists were
developing psychic warfare capabilities
including ‘psychic spies’. Initially, Puthoff's
programme was used to test the feasibility of
this. But as remote viewing produced more
accurate and detailed results, the use of
viewers in intelligence gathering roles was
explored, and various military and
intelligence agencies developed their own
branches of the remote viewing programme.

The potential of Swann’s work grew
immensely, and rather than just using people
who already had a demonstrable psychic
ability, he recruited normal, non-psychic
civilians. In 1991 the entire US programme
was renamed the ‘Star Gate’ project. With the
end of the Cold War, viewers were used to
collect intelligence against a broad range of
targets, including drug dealers, tyrants and
terrorists. Swann had also developed an
effective new technique called Co-ordinate


146


which
actually directed viewers to their targets. In
1995 the US Congress decided that the
remote viewing programme be given back to


or Controlled Remote Viewing,


the CIA, who then commissioned an
report. The
disbanded and many of the military viewers


unfavourable team was
have gone on to offer their services privately
with a few even receiving contracts from the
US intelligence agencies to work in a
freelance capacity.

Other nations have not been so quick to
end their official psychic warfare divisions.
The intelligence agencies of Russia, France
and especially China continue to fund and
study in-depth experiments. Many intelli-
gence experts believe China has a select
group of military ‘Superpsychics’. Their
programme is said to be highly advanced,
even to the point of recruiting and training
particularly talented psychic children.

More peaceful uses of remote viewing have
been adopted by large corporations, and
controlled, scientific research in civilian
universities has come to some staggering
conclusions — particularly talented viewers
are said to achieve results with odds of over
100 billion to one. As the subject has become
more widely available in the public domain,
former members of the US military involved
in the project have spoken out; even former
president Jimmy Carter has recounted tales
of remote viewing. He reports having once
met a female viewer who was looking for a
lost aircraft: ‘She went into a trance. And
while she was in the trance, she gave us
some latitude and longitude figures. We
focused our satellite cameras on that point,
there.’ With
testimonies like this there can be little doubt
that remote
phenomenon.


and the lost plane was


viewing is a genuine


SÉANCES


ÉANCES ARE AN age-old way for the

living to communicate with the dead.

The popular image of a group sitting
round a table, holding hands, with the room
lights flickering, is a little over-dramatic, but
not so far from the truth. Many people
believe the collective energy of a number of
participants or 'sitters' helps attract spirits.
Generally, there should also be an
experienced medium, who channels the
messages and helps control the sitting.


Is there anybody there? A séance in progress.


Although séances had a reputation for
trickery and fraudulent practices in the past,
a talented and honest medium can make
them an explore
contacting spirits.

Before a séance can begin, it is necessary to
have a particular spirit, which the sitters


interesting way to


want to reach in mind. It also helps if a
relative, or someone who had known the
spirit in their lifetime, is part of the group —
this is a reason why attempts by people to


A medium chats with the spirits.


contact ghosts of Elvis and the like are
unsuccessful. The contact spirit will often
know that the séance is going to happen, and
will want to talk. The room must be a
peaceful environment, and the sitters must
be comfortable and undisturbed. They
should then sit in a circle, or around a table,


148


and may hold hands if they wish although
that is not essential. Together, they mentally
call the spirit they are searching for.

Often the medium enters a trance-like state
and will begin channelling messages from
the spirit world. Sometimes this coincides
with odd physical experiences, such as a


cool breeze wafting through, strange per-
fumes, or a tickling sensation. Often sitters
also feel a slight pain corresponding to how
the spirit died — for example, a chest pain is
felt with a spirit who died of a heart attack.
Hopefully, the medium finds the spirit the
sitters have asked for, but other spirits are
sometimes also eager to chat. The medium


leads the
continue for as long as the sitters want.


discussion, and allows it to

With a professional psychic, the chances
of having a bad experience are very slim, and
many people feel that it acts as a significant
healing process for both the bereaved and the


deceased.


PONTANEOUS
HUMAN
COMBUSTION


HE MERE NOTION that a human being

has the potential to burst into flames

without the help of an external
ignition source seems too ridiculous for
study. Surely there is nothing inside the
body that could create such a reaction? And
yet, for over three hundred years, reliable
records have testified to a phenomenon
where people, with no prior warning or
exposure to naked flames, simply combust in
a fit of intense heat. All that is left is a pile of
ash and perhaps a random charred limb. The
fact that no damage ever seems to be done to
nearby textiles leaves experts perplexed.
This inexplicable phenomenon is called
spontaneous human combustion.

Many of those who are attacked by
spontaneous human combustion, or SHC, are
often simply sitting in a chair when the event
affects them. At one time, it was thought
many subjects were alcoholics, and one old
behind human


theory spontaneous


149


combustion was that it was caused by a
chemical reaction brought on by alcohol in
the blood and a fit of geriatric pique. This is
now largely discredited, but there are some
common qualities in occurrences of
spontaneous human combustion. Generally,
it is the trunk of the body that is most
severely burnt, and frequently a couple of
smouldering, blackened feet are found where
the person should have been. Similarly,
arms, skulls and even spinal cords are often
the only distinguishable remains.

The actual damage to the bodies affected
by spontaneous human combustion appears
to be created by a heat more intense than
even that of a crematorium. A universal
theme of spontaneous human combustion
occurrences is that despite this extreme
temperature — which experts believe is
probably around 600°C — objects or material
around the person are not destroyed,
although obviously their clothing is burnt,


and sometimes there is a patch of scorched
carpet where their feet would have been. In
one case, a woman died following an
incidence of human


combustion in bed and the sheets were not


spontaneous


even marked. However, occasionally a
greasy, sooty dust is found on ceilings and
walls nearby.

Spontaneous human combustion was
recorded in 1673 by a Frenchman, James
Dupont, who studied a selection of cases of
the phenomenon in his book, De Incendiis
Corporis Humani Spontaneis. Dupont’s
interest in the subject was initially aroused
by the Nicolle Millet court case. In this
instance, a man was found not guilty of
murdering his wife because the jury ruled
that she had actually suffered an attack of
spontaneous human combustion. From the
late seventeenth century the idea of
spontaneous human combustion gained
credence and acceptance in popular life.
Indeed, Charles used the
phenomenon as the reason of death for a
character called Krook in his 1852 novel,
Bleak House.

The most celebrated case of spontaneous
human combustion happened on 2nd July


Dickens


1951 to a 67-year-old pensioner from Florida,
USA called Mary Reeser. The only parts of
Reesers body to be found were her skull,
which had shrunk to the size of a baseball,
her spinal column, her left foot, and a pile of


150


ash still in her armchair. The authorities
declared she had died in a normal household
fire, but no part of her apartment, including
cotton sheets and a pile of newspapers left
nearby, was damaged.

A similar event occurred recently in
France. On 17th November 1998, the few
remains of a 67-year-old woman called
Gisele were found in her farmhouse near
Honfleur. Only a pile of ashes and her
slippered left foot were discovered. In this
case, even the wheelchair in which she was
sitting had disintegrated, although the rest of
her farmhouse stood untouched by fire.

In such cases, police investigators can only
take a guess or choose the most plausible
option given the seemingly inconsistent
facts. Spontaneous human combustion
investigators themselves have no satisfactory
explanations. The alcoholism and anger
mixture has no scientific grounding and the
suggestion that it is caused by excessive fat
deposits that catch alight is also dismissed,
whilst the idea that spontaneous human
combustion is caused by some error in the
body's electrical system is unverifiable.

Perhaps the most acceptable explanation
for the time being is that spontaneous human
combustion is caused by an Act of God.
Although that can have no easily studied
scientific basis, for now it is the most
reassuring answer to a mystery that truly is
inexplicable.


PUZZLING
PEOPLE &
ENIGMATIC
ENTITIES


ANASTASIA /
ANNA ANDERSON


N FEBRUARY 1920, two years after the
[: of the Russian Czar and his

family, a young woman attempted suicide
by jumping off a bridge in Berlin. She was
rescued, but when she arrived at hospital she
had no proof of identity on her and would
not reveal her name. The hospital sent her to
an insane asylum where she was recognised
as the Czar's daughter, Grand Duchess
Tatiana. The woman denied that she was
Tatiana, but over time revealed that she was
actually his other daughter, the Duchess
Anastasia. She explained that the bayonets of
the Communist death squad soldiers had
been blunt and she had survived the assassi-
nation attempt. One of the soldiers who
came to remove the bodies noticed that she
was still alive and spirited her away to
Romania. She had come to Berlin to find her
aunt, Princess Irene, but fear of not being
recognised led to her taking such desperate
measures. The woman adopted the name
Anna Anderson, and spent much of her life
trying to prove she was Anastasia.

When news of her appearance first spread,
one of Alexandra's ladies-in-waiting visited
the hospital, but Anderson kept her head
covered with blankets so the woman
declared her a fake. Similarly, Princess Irene
met Anderson and refuted her claims,
although in private it is said she was not so
sure, and her son Sigismund actually
declared that he thought Anderson was


152


Princess Anastasia before the assassination.


Anastasia. The community of European
monarchies were generally undecided. The
Mathilde Kschessinka,
believed Anderson was the young princess,


Czar’s mistress,


Happy families: the Tsar's people, however, were less happy with his rule of the country.


and Pierre Guillard, Anastasia's former tutor,
also initially declared his support before
changing his mind. The family of another
court employee — the monarch's doctor
Eugene Botkin — were utterly convinced of
Anderson's true royal lineage, particularly as
she could talk in detail about personal
correspondences between the
princesses and Botkin's children.


young


In attitude, Anderson certainly behaved
like a princess. She was said to be
demanding and arrogant, and could be


153


consumed by fits of rage. She spoke excellent
English, French and German, and could fully
understand Russian although she refused to
speak it. She also had scars on her body that
matched her execution claims, and facial
experts argued that she looked very similar
to Anastasia. She had similar physical
deformities to the young princess, and
calligraphic experts said their handwriting
was identical. Anderson was also said to
have an amazing knowledge of royal affairs.
She revealed that Anastasia's uncle, Grand


IDA TCE-OESB-413A-AC19-4DOCODGOFARD


Duke Ernst of Hesse, had secretly visited the
Russian monarchy in 1916 when the two
families had actually been at war. This fact
was only categorically proven in 1966, but
Ernst always denied the claims.

It has been suggested that Ernst started
circulating another theory which was that
Anderson was actually a Polish factory
worker named Franziska Schanzkowski.
People started to claim that Schanzkowski
disappeared only a day before Anderson's
appearance in Berlin. It was said that
Anderson's scars had arisen from a time
when Schanzkowski had dropped a live
grenade whilst working at an armaments
factory. However, Anderson was small and
frail, whereas Schanzkowski was raised on a
farm and supposedly had a very stocky
build. Anderson continually tried to prove
her heritage, but she never succeeded
conclusively in a court of law. In late 1968
she married a wealthy American called John
Manahan, and she died of pneumonia in
1984. Her body was cremated, but advances
in DNA testing meant her death was not the
end of the saga.

In 1991, the remains of eight people were
found in Siberia. Forensic testing suggests
the corpses of Nicholas, Alexandra and three
of their children were among the bodies.
British scientists compared their DNA with
samples of Anderson's hair, and found no
match. However, Anderson did seem to have
extremely similar DNA results to blood
samples taken from the grand-nephew of
Franziska Schanzkowski. So it appears the


154


The survivor of the massacre of the Russian royal family,
or a Polish factory worker named Franziska?


mystery of Anna Anderson has been put to
rest. Except for one thing. When Russian
authorities uncovered the royal bodies in
1991, two corpses were missing. One was the
Czar's son Alexei. The other was his
youngest daughter, Anastasia.


THE COMTE DC
SAINT-GERMAIN


HE MYSTERIOUS FIGURE we now know as

the Comte de Saint-Germain was first

witnessed in 1710 under the name the
Marquis de Montferrat. Seen in Venice by a
musician named Rameau and a Parisian
socialite called Madam de Gergy, he had the
appearance of a man between 40 and 50
years of age. It was an appearance he would
hold all his life, and he would only officially
die in 1784. However, many people believe
he never actually passed away. To them, this
enigmatic character has become known as
‘Saint-Germain the Deathless’.

Saint-Germain’s provenance was never
revealed, not even by those he had taken into
his confidence. For his entire life he looked
like a middle-aged, strongly built man of
average height. He was an amazing raconteur
with incredible stories, and had some
impressive talents. He could create fantastic
jewels, had a complete understanding of
music and art, and was able to provide
people with potions which he claimed were
the elixir of youth. He was never seen to eat
or drink, but he enjoyed the company of
women and mixed with the aristocracy. He
never seemed to age.

His great period of celebrity was in Paris
between 1750 and 1760. His main role was
that of spy for King Louis XV. However, his
friendship with the king created many
enemies within the French government and
he was forced to flee to England. He
resurfaced in Russia under the name General
Soltikov and played a major role in the 1762
revolution. At the start of Louis XVI’s reign


155


One of the few portraits to show the mysterious Comte


de Saint-Germain.


he reappeared in Paris and, through an old
friend, the Countesse d'Adhemar, he issued a
warning to Queen Marie Antoinette of the
dangers that were building for the French
monarchy. Saint-Germain tried to see the
king personally, but the police were ordered
to capture the Comte by the king's minister.
Again, Saint-Germain simply disappeared.


He apparently sought refuge at the castle of
Count Charles of Hesse Cassel in the Duchy
of Schlesing, Austria. It was said that he
revealed many of his secrets to the count, but
by 1784 Saint-Germain had simply grown
bored of life and died. However, there is no
official record of his death, and no tombstone
bearing his name. He left all his papers, many
of which concerned freemasonry, to the
count, but like Louis XV, Charles never
revealed anything about Saint-Germain's real
history. Indeed, even though he claimed to be
sad that Saint-Germain had died, many
commentators have suggested he did not
appear so upset, and there is a theory that he
may have been privy to a staged death.

Certainly, further reports of Saint-Germain
have been recorded. In 1786 he met the
Empress of Russia, and in 1788 he was
apparently the official French representative
at the World Convention of Freemasons. The
Countess of d'Adhemar said she had met her
old friend in 1789, 1815 and 1821, and that
each time he looked no older than her
memory of him. It is said that he continued
to have an influence on secret societies and
may even have been a guiding light of the
Rosicrucians.


So who was the strange character?
Parisians who disliked him said he was the
son of a Portuguese Jew named Aymar, or an
Alsatian Jew called Wolff. However, the
general feeling at the time was that he was
the natural son of Spain's Charles II’s widow,
Marie de Neubourg. A more recent study has
suggested that he may actually have been
one of the sons of Prince Francis Racoczi II of
Transylvania. The prince gave his children to
the Emperor of Austria to bring up, but one
of them was said to have died at a young age.
It is now considered that this child may
have, in fact, been raised by a family in the
little village of San Germano in Italy. This
would account for how he assumed the name
the Comte de Saint-Germain.

However, some people, particularly those
involved with the Theosophy movement,
believe Saint-Germain may have been one of
the ‘great masters’, sent to show developed
men the errors of their ways. They believe he
may be still wandering the Earth, waiting for
the right time to reappear and counsel Man
through Until then,
however, the enigmatic figure known as the
Comte de Saint-Germain will remain a


troubled waters.


mystery.


DRACULA


ASTERN EUROPE OF THE Middle Ages
was a turbulent place. The great
Hungarian nation was its first line of
defence against Ottoman forces, and the
individual states that happened to be placed
in ‘No-man’s land’ between the two suffered
terrible unrest. It was enough to inspire Bram
Stoker to write his most famous novel,
although people now question which figure


156


during this unstable period was the greatest
influence on the writer. Only one name truly
stands out — the real, terrible man known as
Dracula.

Walachia, now part of Romania, was a
Hungarian province ruled by Prince Mircea
the Old until 1418. In around 1390, Mircea
had an illegitimate son named Vlad who was
given away to be brought up in the court of


Hungary's King Sigismund. When Mircea
died, Vlad was not given control of
Walachia, but he was made a Knight of the
Order of the Dragon, a group set up to defend
the Christian world from Turkish rule. Vlad
was soon given the name 'Dracul', meaning
‘dragon’, and was
Transylvania.


made governor of


Dracul had three sons. The first, named
after his father Mircea, was born in 1443,
with the next two called Vlad and Radu.
Dracul gathered an army and took back his
family’s traditional seat of power in
Walachia, although only with the help of old
enemy Turkey. As a sign of his loyalty,
Dracul sent Vlad and Radu to live in
Adrianople, the seat of the Ottoman Empire.


In 1447 Dracul and Mircea were killed, and a
Hungarian ruled
Walachia. This situation made Turkey


uncomfortable, so in 1448 they decided to


government again


arm the seventeen-year-old Vlad who was
known as the ‘Son of Dragon’, or Dracula.
Over the years and battles the protagonists
continued to swap sides, but by 1456
Dracula had reclaimed his throne in
Walachia. He built a capital city at Tirgoviste
and was pronounced Prince Vlad III. From
the beginning, he realised that to survive he
would have to be shown as utterly ruthless.
Shortly after he was crowned prince, he
invited destitute souls from the streets of his
kingdom to a great feast at his castle. After
the meal, he asked the assembled poor, frail


Ae
4


Jg
B


m


Woodcut of a vampire feeding on the blood of another victim.


157


and aged if they would ‘like to be without
cares, lacking nothing in the world?’ When
they all cried *yes' he promptly boarded up
the castle and set fire to it. He said there was
little place in his society for people who
would be a burden, and anybody who did
not contribute to the community received
scant sympathy.

If killing the infirm was a sign to the
public, Dracula committed a similar action
with Walachia's dignitaries. He had the older
ones impaled, and sent the others to build a
castle at Poenari, a mountainous area 50
miles away. In their place, Dracula organised
his own set of nobles to confirm his power.
His evil knew no bounds, and he particularly
enjoyed watching people die after being
hoisted on a sharpened pole. His people
called him Vlad Tepes meaning 'Vlad the
Impaler’ and the Turkish knew him as
Kaziglu Bey or the ‘Impaler Prince’. He
murdered cheating wives, fraudulent
merchants, anybody who committed any
crime. Often he would have many victims
impaled at the same time, but he also
enjoyed skinning and boiling people alive.
He killed children and the old, and put their
bodies on public display to warn would-be


miscreants. It is said that 20,000 dead bodies
hung from the walls of Tirgoviste, and by the
end of his reign he had killed around 50,000
people.

In 1462 when Walachia was attacked by
the Turks, led by Dracula's younger brother
Radu, Dracula went into exile in Hungary. In
1476, with Radu dead of syphilis and
another prince on Walachia's throne, Dracula
attempted to regain his rightful home. He
succeeded, but in December 1476 was killed
during another Turkish attack. The Ottoman
sultan impaled Dracula's head and had it
displayed in Constantinople as evidence of
his death. His body was said to have been
buried as an island monastery called Snagov,
although investigative digs in 1931 were
unable to find the coffin. It is one final
mystery to the Dracula story.

Some proof of his reign does remain
though. His fortress in the hills of Poenari
stands today as a popular tourist destination,
and there are also ruins of his palace at
Tirgoviste. More important than any physical
heritage is his memory in the mind of the
Romanian people. But whether his life is the
sole inspiration behind Bram Stoker's story
or not, we shall never know.


JACK THE HippeR


N 1888, THE WORLD's most famous serial
IE stalked the dark, grimy streets of

London's East End. ‘Jack the Ripper’ was
the original celebrity mass-murderer, and set
a trend for homicidal maniacs which seems
to grow with each year. The fear surrounding
the recent Washington sniper incidents, for
example, has many similarities with the
terror created by this forefather of death-
dealing criminals. In these types of cases, the


impact of the crime is heightened by the


158


mystery surrounding the actual killer’s
identity. Unlike many of his modern age
copyists, Jack the Ripper was not caught or
even named, and to this day it has never
been conclusively proven who he really was.

London’s Whitechapel district was known
as one of the poorest areas of the city, and at
the time, was home to over a thousand
prostitutes. It was also the area which would
become the focus of the Ripper’s attacks. His
reign of terror officially began in the opening


It

1)
A A VUAN TA
:\~ NM v Q


Bay us EN HE 7
aT” NANECHKR?


ASL aa Riy
VANS RDr RSR


rd


>
L^
^"


sa
“ewig aa
VA


z ze


ry


Jack the Ripper strikes again in this contemporary illustration. Was he the royal physician, or even royal himself?


hours of 31st August 1888, when a market
porter spotted a woman lying in a doorway
on Buck’s Row in Whitechapel. Rather than
approach the woman, the porter went to find
the beat policeman. When he arrived, he
found the woman’s throat had been deeply
cut and a medical examination later revealed
her body had been mutilated. Her identity
was also discovered: she was Mary Ann


159


Nichols, known as Polly, a 42-year-old
prostitute.

Barely a week later, at 6am on 8th
September, the body of another woman was
found in Hanbury Street, near Buck’s Row.
She was Annie Chapman, a 45-year-old
prostitute whose head had been almost
entirely severed from her neck; she had also
been disembowelled.


wwe LT Ln
7


v WurrecHAPEL Fier?


Annie Chapman, victim of the Ripper.


Fear was beginning to spread throughout
the community. For the first time in history,
the people had a literate public and a scruti-
nising press, who were putting the police
under a new sort of pressure. Not only were
the police there to protect the people of
London, they also had to cope with the novel
stress of proving their own competence. Just as
in modern mass murder cases, the effect of
supposition, myths and rumours in news-
paper coverage led to a great deal of anxiety.

By the time the Ripper struck again, the
Whitechapel area was interested in only one
thing. The Ripper did not disappoint. In the
dark early hours of 30th September a
costume jewellery salesman arrived home in
Berners Street, where he discovered the body
of Elizabeth Stride, a prostitute who had had
her throat slit. As police rushed to the scene
and searched the nearby streets, the Ripper


160


made off to Mitre Square, in the City of
London, and killed Catharine Eddowes.
Although the earlier victim had not been
mutilated, many believe the Ripper had been
interrupted during this procedure. Eddowes’
remains were not so well preserved and she
was found disembowelled.

This night become known as the 'double
event’, and was the focus of many letters sent
into the police. Although most came from
members of the public offering advice, some
purported to come from the Ripper himself
and were given more credence than others.
One dated 28th September goaded and teased
the police, and was the origin of the name
Jack the Ripper, which was how the sender
signed off. The second was a postcard dated
1st October and referred to the ‘double event’
of the night before. The third letter was
posted a fortnight later and even included a
section of a kidney allegedly removed from
Catharine Eddowes. Although the police, as
in modern times, had to suspect that these
correspondences came from a crank or a
hoaxer, the kidney included in the third letter
was shrivelled and diseased. An interesting
fact is that not only was Eddowes an
alcoholic, she also suffered from Bright's
disease, and this organ displayed all the signs
of being from such an afflicted body.

The police believed they had discovered a
pattern to the killings the first occurred on
31st August, the second on 8th September,
the third and fourth on 30th September.
They believed the next would happen on the
8th of October, but in fact the Ripper did not
strike for the whole of that month. His final
official murder actually occurred on 9th
November in Miller's Court, a building close
to where the other killings had taken place.
Another prostitute, 24-year-old Mary Jane
Kelly was found by her landlord with her
body utterly mutilated. This time, the
murder had taken place inside, and the killer
had had all night to dissect the corpse.


Although these five murders are all
assigned to the Ripper, there the
possibility he may have killed two or three


is


more woman in London around that time.
However, the police were at a loss to find the
real name of the man behind the crimes and
employed policy of
suppression to try to reassure the public.


a information
Despite this, Londoners were fully aware
that police work was proving fruitless at
obtaining a clear picture of the Ripper's
identity. But some of those in the force did
have their own theories, and many police
doctors who examined the victims' bodies
suggested the Ripper was likely to be
someone with medical training. In 1894 the
Chief Constable of the Metropolitan Police
Force, Sir Melville Macnaghten, wrote a
report which named Montague John Druitt, a
barrister who committed suicide shortly after
the Kelly murder, as the most likely suspect.
However, at the time Macnaghten believed
Druitt to be a trained doctor, which subse-
quent research proved to be false.
Macnaghten also named two more possible
Rippers. One was Aaron Kosminski, a Polish
Jew who lived in the Whitechapel area and
was placed in an insane asylum in March
1889. Although one of the chief investigating
officers, Robert Anderson, had a great belief
in Kosminski's guilt, the Pole's behavioural
records from his time in the asylum contain
nothing to suggest he was homicidal.
Macnaghten's final suspect, Michael Ostrog,
was a Russian lunatic. Despite being a
convicted criminal and possibly having
some medical training, his behaviour under
studied conditions also did not point to an


161


ability for multiple murders. In recent years,
Ripper investigators have considered Dr
Francis Tumblety, an American doctor who
fled London shortly after the murders.
Despite thinking him a possible suspect, the
Metropolitan Police at the time decided to
rule him out of its enquires.

As with many mysteries, the identity of the
Ripper has become the domain of conspiracy
theorists. This has led to people from all walks
of life — members of the monarchy, royal
servants, high-ranking police officers, Russian
spies and even crazed evangelists — being
accused of holding the Ripper's identity.
However, in the last few of years a study has
been conducted by the crime writer Patricia
Cornwell. She used $4million of her own
money to investigate if there is a link between
the Ripper and Walter Sickert, an impres-
sionist painter who may have had connections
with Whitechapel around the dates of the
murders. Twenty years after the killings, he
created a series of paintings that depicted dead
and gruesomely mauled prostitutes. Cornwell
has used modern technologies and intense
examinations of his work, and is so convinced
of Sickerts guilt that she is staking her
reputation on him being the Ripper.

Modern Ripper investigators, just like the
Victorian London police forces, fail to agree
with each other. There
unsavoury characters roaming London at the


were so many


time that almost any suspect could have
been linked to the murders in some way. As
the years blur the truth, so the plausibility of
many different suspects increases, whilst the
definitive proof needed to decide on one
disappears in the fog of time.


HASDAR


HAUSER


N 26TH May 1828, a strange, teenage
Qe stumbled up to the gates of
Nuremberg. He had a strong build.
light curly hair, a pale complexion, and


moved as drunk. A local
shoemaker, Georg Weickmann, approached


if he was


the boy to see who he was, but the lad only
said, ‘I would like to be a rider the way my
father was. He handed Weickmann an
envelope addressed to the Captain of the
fourth squadron of the sixth regiment of the
Light Cavalry. The shoemaker took him to
the captain, who opened the letter. It
explained that the boy had been left with a
poor labourer who had kept him locked
inside all his life. But the boy was now ready
to serve in the king's army.

The cavalry captain questioned the boy, but
the only words he said were, ‘don’t know’,
‘take me home’, and ‘horse’. He could also
write the name ‘Kaspar Hauser’. In the end,
the captain put the boy in the local prison but
the jailer took pity on him. The jailer’s
children began to teach him to speak, write
and draw. He seemed to have no concept of
behaviour; had no facial expressions; could
not understand the difference between men
and women; was happy to sleep sitting up;
acted like a baby or infant child and was
particularly happy in the dark.

In July 1828 a local magistrate suggested to
Nuremberg’s authorities that it would be best
for Hauser to be taken out of the jail and
placed in the custody of George Friedrich
Daumer, a university professor and
psychologist. Daumer helped Hauser change
into a normal young man, but also kept a
record of the strange boy’s behaviour. Daumer
realised the extent of Hauser’s amazing


162


He could read in the
dark, hear whispers from extreme distances
and discern who was in a pitch black room


heightened senses.


simply by their smell. Unfortunately, as his
awareness and education about the world
around him increased, these extraordinary
abilities waned.

By early 1829, Hauser had learnt enough to
be able to write his autobiography. In it he
revealed that he had been kept in a cell 7ft
long, 4ft wide and 5ft high by a man whose
face he never saw. He slept on a straw bed,
and when he woke there would be water and
bread for him to eat. Sometimes the water
would taste odd, and he would pass out only
to find himself cleaned and groomed,
wearing with a fresh set of clothes when he
awoke. One day the man came to Hauser's
cell door with books and taught him to read
a little, write his name, and repeat the
rudimentary phrases he pronounced on his
public arrival. The next day, Hauser and his
captor began a three day journey which
culminated in his appearance at Nuremberg.

Hauser's autobiography opened the door to
a new terror. In October 1829 a stranger
dressed in black came to Daumer's house and
tried to kill Hauser with a knife. Lord
Stanhope, an English aristocrat and friend of
the ruling Baden family, then struck up a
friendship with Hauser, and gained
guardianship of the boy from the city of
Nuremberg. Stanhope quickly lost interest
and placed the boy in the town of Ansbach
under the care of a Dr Meyer. Meyer disliked
the boy and became a hard and mean-spirited
tutor. On 14th December 1831, Hauser went
to a local park to meet a man who had
promised to reveal details about his mother's


identity. They met, and the stranger motioned
as if to give Hauser a wallet, but as the young
man leant forward, he was stabbed in his
side. He died three days later aged just 21.
The suspicion developed that Hauser was
actually a Baden prince and son of Stephanie,
Grand Duchess of Bavaria. Certainly many of
the Bavarian aristocracy had such suspicions,
and King Ludwig of Bavaria even wrote in his
diary that Hauser was the 'rightful Grand
Duke of Baden'. The theory is that Stephanie
and Karl of Baden had Hauser in 1812, but
Karl's stepmother, the Duchess of Hochberg,
switched him at birth with a sickly peasant


child. The ill baby soon passed away and
subsequent boys sired by Karl with Stephanie
also died young. Karl himself died in strange
circumstances, and on his deathbed said he
believed that he and his boys had been
poisoned. Karl's throne then went to his
stepbrother, the Duchess of Hochberg's son
Leopold. It is an unprovable theory.

All we definitely know is that in a peaceful
countryside churchyard there is a gravestone
that reads:

'Here lies Kaspar Hauser, riddle of his
time. His birth was unknown, his death
mysterious.’


KING ARTHUR


HE LEGEND OF King Arthur states that he
was born sometime in the fifth century
AD. It is said that the great magician
Merlin disguised Uther Pendragon, one of
Britain’s great warriors, to look like the Duke
of Tintagel, the husband of Ingraine of
Cornwall. Uther seduced Ingraine at Tintagel
cottage, but the child they conceived was
given away at birth. He was named Arthur and
was raised completely unaware of his special
lineage. When Uther died, the throne was
empty. Merlin set a sword called Excalibur in
rock and stated that only someone of a truly
royal bloodline would be able to remove
Excalibur from its fixed position. When the
young Arthur was the only one able to do this,
he was pronounced king. Eleven other British
rulers rebelled against the young leader, but
Arthur quashed their uprising and began a
noble and glorious reign.
Arthur married Guinevere and assembled
a group of courageous and honest knights at
a kingdom seat in Camelot, in the Vale of
Avalon. To avoid any sense of preference


163


among the knights, Guinevere’s father
provided Arthur with the fabled Round
Table. Together they had great victories over
Saxon invaders and the Roman Empire.
Arthur is even said to have become Emperor
himself and set about on a search for the
Holy Grail. However, during this time one of
Arthur’s most trusted knights, Lancelot, had
an affair with Guinevere.

This marked the beginning of the end for
Arthur. The two lovers fled to Lancelot’s
land in Brittany, France. Arthur decided to
follow and wage war on his former friend,
leaving his nephew Mordred as custodian of
England. Whilst he was battling across the
English Channel, Mordred rebelled, so
Arthur was forced to return home. A fierce
battle ensued on Salisbury Plain. Arthur
managed to kill Mordred, but the king
himself was also mortally wounded. On the
brink of death, he returned to Avalon. He is
said to have thrown Excalibur into that
kingdom’s lake and then he himself
disappeared into a cave, pledging he would


return if ever danger threatened England.

The first historical proof we have of a
Arthurian-type figure is in Gildas' sixth
century De Excidio Britanniae which refers
to British soldiers being led by a man called
Ambrosius Aurelianus. The name 'Arthur
appears in Nennius' ninth century Historia
Brittonum. However it was not until the
twelfth century that the phenomenon of
Arthur as an historical icon really had an
impact. William of Malmesbury and Geoffrey
of Monmouth produced works which sowed
the seeds of our modern understanding of
Athurian legend. Unfortunately their works
also included many fictional details, which
have subsequently obscured the true reality
of Arthur's reign.

There is other evidence for his place in
historical fact. Many people believe that
Glastonbury in Somerset is the true site of
Camelot, and in the 12th century it was
claimed that Arthur's grave had been found
there. Similarly, the Isles of Scilly are said to
host the remains of the great king. Certainly
there are plenty of candidates for places
featured in Arthurian mythology and
historians have discovered many possible
historical figures who could be the king
himself. The historians believe that the sheer


number of possibilities as to Arthur's true
identity is probably the reason that our
knowledge has become so blurred, and that
many individual personal histories have
been actually confused and amalgamated.

What we do know is that in the sixth
century many Celtic realms had leaders born
who were called Arthur; this could have
been in homage to the original king.
Although the use of the name has clouded
the original Arthur's legend, it also points to
the fact that a truly great and inspirational
leader was present a generation before.

Perhaps that most amazing evidence has
only surfaced in recent years. In July 1998,
archaeologists found a slab marked in Latin
with the name 'Artagnov' or 'Arthnou' on a
rocky hilltop in Tintagel, Cornwall. The slab
dates to the sixth century, and proves that
the name was present in the legendary
Arthurian lands at the correct time, and
belonged to a man of some standing. Like
many historical mysteries, the damage to
truth caused by passing years, is slowly
being fixed by science and the application of
modern interest. We may never know exactly
who the legend of King Arthur represents,
but with more finds like this, we can only
move closer to the tantalising truth.


MAITREYA


LL THE WORLD’S major religions expect
ne visit by a supremely holy
man. Hindus await the arrival of
Krishna; Jews expect the appearance of a
Messiah; Muslims believe in an Imam
Mahdi; Christians expect the Second Coming
of Christ and Buddhists imagine Him as a
Buddha. There is a large organisation


operating across the world which believes


164


these various figures all refer to the same,
single being, that He is a teacher sent to
direct Mankind towards a future of peace
and love, and that this being already walks
amongst us — in fact, he lives in a suburb of
London.

The Share International Magazine com-
pany operates as the mouthpiece for this
great leader whom they call Maitreya. The


organisation's leading light is Benjamin
Creme, a former artist from Glasgow born in
1922. Creme is a follower of Theosophy, the
movement created by Madame Helena
Blavatsky, whose members believe that Earth
and Humanity is controlled by a select
council of inter-dimensional super-beings.

Creme believes these super-beings or
'Masters' told him in 1975 of Maitreya's
impending appearance, and gave him the
task of preparing for his arrival. Many people
think that Creme sees himself as a modern
day John the Baptist, and uses Share
International to promote the Maitreya cause.
He writes books and articles and appears on
television shows and in lecture halls
discussing the upcoming Maitreya unveiling.

Creme says Maitreya emerged from a
spiritual centre in the Himalayas on 19th
July 1977, and flew to Europe by aeroplane.
He then disappeared into an ethnic
community in a suburb of London, and has
lived quite anonymously ever since.
However, the Tara Centre, another organi-
sation close to Creme, has run a series of full-
page adverts in major newspapers across the
world announcing the presence of the ‘Lord
Maitreya'. It is even said that a major
American television network has asked to
interview Maitreya at any time of his
choosing.

Maitreya has also made some personal
appearances. One of the most celebrated
happened on 11th June 1988 in Nairobi,
when 6000 worshippers in the village of
Kawangware saw him appear in the form of
Jesus Christ. The white-robed, bearded figure
walked among them and declared that the
world was 'nearing the time for the reign of
heaven'. Maitreya then left in a car. Share
International also claims that Maitreya has
performed many miracles. The phenomenon
is spreading throughout Africa, and many
villages are being visited by the man in
white.


165


In 1996 there was the biggest outbreak of
strange 'crosses of light' reports in recent
years. CBS television news broadcast a story
about 40-feet-high glowing crosses which
had appeared in the windows of a Baptist
Church in Knoxville, Tennessee. The local
priest said 30,000 people came to view the
bizarre sight and miraculous happenings
have since occurred there. Similar crosses of
light have appeared throughout the world,
and Share International claims this is a sign
of Maitreya being in our world.

Share International claims that before his
public appearances, Maitreya likes to
energise local water sources. Magic water in
the little town of Tlacote in Mexico is said to
heal everything from AIDS and cancer to
and high cholesterol. Other
miraculous water is said to have sprung up at
a disused slate mine at Nordenau, 100km


obesity


east of Dusseldorf in Germany. In August
1994 a strange image of the Madonna and
Child appeared on a church wall in the small
South Australia town of Yankalilla. A
dowser came to the site and said there was
water running underneath the church.
Benjamin Creme informed them that this
was the work of Maitreya and said the water
would have healing powers. Creme told the
Yankalilla people where to dig, and sure
enough, a miraculous spring was discovered.

Share International has performed some
miracles of its own. It is now an official non-
governmental organisation recognised by the
United Nations, and has published articles
written by some very respected figures —
Boutros Boutros-Ghali, Kofi Annan, Mary
Robinson, the Dalai Lama and Prince Charles
amongst others. The future of Maitreya is
uncertain depending on your belief. If you
are a follower, his appearances will only
increase until he becomes a global voice. If
not, he will quietly disappear just as the
dozens of self-proclaiming Messiahs over the
centuries always have.


THe MAN IN THE
IRON MASH


F ALL THE MYSTERIOUS figures in

history, no one has sparked more

interest, and provided such little
detail, as the Man in the Iron Mask. Despite
more than 300 years of puzzle, conjecture
and uncertainty, there are precious few clues
to his identity. The man is a enigmatic
character who has been the subject of a
classic novel by Alexandre Dumas and
countless feature films. His place in the
public's mind is assured, but despite arousing
such popular interest, no crucial revelations
have been discovered. All we know is that he
was a distinguished prisoner, and from the
moment he was imprisoned, he had to hide
his identity behind a strange mask.

The Man in the Iron Mask was first
imprisoned sometime in the 1660s, probably
towards the end of the decade. He was
initially jailed at the fortress of Pignerol in
the French Alps, where he was guarded by
Benigne d'Auvergne de Saint-Mars, who
would continue to be his personal jailer until
the mysterious man's death. He was trans-
ferred to the nearby prison in Exiles in 1681,
and then to the island castle of Sainte
Marguerite in 1687. It was during this second
change of jail that the first witness account
reported seeing a prisoner in an iron mask. In
1698 Saint-Mars was made the governor of
the Bastille, the famous Parisian prison.
Consequently, the masked man moved to the
French capital and more reports, this time of
a man in a black velvet mask, were recorded.
He is said to have died in the Bastille in 1703.

The actual details we have of his life are


166


extremely scant. A death certificate states the
prisoner's name was Marchioly, and he was
about 45 years old when he died. This seems
unlikely, particularly as he had been held in
captivity for almost 40 years. One man who
initiated many theories about the Bastille's
mysterious inmate was another, later,
resident of the jail — the philosopher and
writer Voltaire who had spoken to the man's
captors. He revealed that the man had been
in jail since 1661, and was young, tall and
handsome when first captured. He was said
to dress in exquisite clothing, had refined
hobbies and tastes and, crucially, he looked
very much like a member of the French
Royal Family.

Although Voltaire was a known adversary
of French Royalty, this suggestion that the
prisoner was possibly a twin brother of King
Louis XIV lingered, and was adopted by
Dumas for his novel. Despite the fact that an
identical physical resemblance to the king
would account for the man being
permanently masked, it seems unlikely that
such a monumental fact could have stayed a
secret. However, the king's birth did have
some unusual qualities, and there is a strong
possibility that the prisoner may have been
an illegitimate brother of Louis XIV.

Other theories for the masked man's
identity include that he was actually the
had been


imprisoned for fear of corrupting the king.


playwright Moliére, who
This can be discounted because Moliére
would have been too old to fit the dates


recorded. There are also suggestions that he


The Man in the Iron Mask. Reputedly the King's unfortunate twin brother, there is little or no evidence as to whether
he ever existed or not.


may have been Nicolas Fouquet, a envied
wealthy French nobleman, or even an
illegitimate lovechild of Charles II of
England.

What cannot be in doubt is the reverence
with which he was treated. Saint-Mars was
known to call him, ‘my prince’, and his
guarding soldiers referred to him as ‘Tower’.
It has even been revealed that the soldiers
would often remove their hats when entering
his chamber, and would stand silently until
the man motioned them to sit. In 1711,
Princess Palatine, the king's sister-in-law,
wrote a letter about how the man was
flanked at all times by two musketeers who
had orders to immediately kill him if he


167


removed his mask. Similarly, letters between
the king and Saint-Mars have revealed that
the prisoner should be executed straight
away if he tried to talk or communicate with
anybody.

Certainly, the prisoner warranted special
attention, whoever he was. Many experts
have wondered why, if he was such a threat
to the French Royal Family, he was not just
executed anyway. However, the fact that was
allowed to live, but only behind a mask,
perhaps does indicate he had an interesting
relationship with the monarchy. The identity
of the Man in the Iron Mask is now a fact lost
in time, and the true story of his life is
probably a tale we will never fully know.


NOSTRADAMUS


AGE, Michel de
is associated with one


N THE MODERN

Nostradamus

simple notion — prophecies of doom.
This has been derived from his great work
The Centuries, a collection of around 1,000
four-line verses or quatrains. Nostradamus
believed that through his study of astrology,
combined with divine guidance, he was able
to see the future. He used meditation, mild
hallucinogens and extreme focus to heighten
his images. The first part of The Centuries
in 1555 -
contained a strange and vague language,
which Nostradamus claimed he had used


was published the verses


purposefully to refute charges of witchcraft.
Written
occasional inclusions of Latin, Greek and


in a mixture of French with


Italian, many people now believe they can
decipher these verses, and Nostradamus has
been hailed as an accurate foreteller of things
to come. However, these enthusiasts have
had the privilege of hindsight and the luxury
of fitting real events to suit his text. Few of
predictions made at the end of the 20th
century about the start of the new millen-
nium, which cited his work as reference,
have come to pass. So how good a seer was
Nostradamus?

Probably the most famous example of
Nostradamus’ work is that which many
enthusiasts say predicted the Second World
War. The text itself, taken from Century 2,
Quatrain 24, in translation reads:


Beasts ferocious from hunger will swim
across rivers:


The greater part of the region will be
against the Hister,


168


Michel de Nostradamus, perhaps the world’s most
famous seer.


The great one will cause it to be dragged
in an iron cage,


When the Germany child will observe
nothing.


Nostradamus believers suggest 'Hister' is
Hitler; the ‘ferocious beasts’ are invading
Nazis ‘hungry’ for power; but the German
nation, who blindly follow, without fully
will be
imprisoned. There is a ring of truth about
that interpretation. But sceptics point out


realising or grasping events,


that there are no dates involved; terms like
‘ferocious beasts’, and ‘the great one’ are
particularly ambiguous and imprecise, and
the Hister is actually a region near the River
Danube, not Hitler. However, other quatrains
nearby in the text do seem to mention other
important details about the war, and Hitler’s
personal history shows that he was born near


DM TCE-OESB-I1 A ACI-ADOCOOGOFAMD


the Danube. So perhaps, taken as a whole,
there is something there.

In recent years, the new millennium and
World Trade Center attack have caused a
major re-examination and interest in
Nostradamus' work. Perhaps the most
memorable figure mentioned in verses said to
relate to our own time is that of ‘Mabus’ or
‘Maddas’. This person is said to be — if I can
be similarly non-committal — the next 'great
evil’. In the 1990s, many Nostradamus
readers claimed he was definitely called
‘Maddas’, which just happens to be ‘Saddam’
spelt backwards, so it was clear where the
finger was pointing. However, after 11th
September 2001, the spelling became
something closer to Mabus which is an
anagram of Usam B. As I write this,
enthusiasts interpreting his works are in
something of a state of flux, and are not quite
sure which Middle Eastern villain is the one
predicted.

After the World Trade Center attack, a great
flood of false Nostradamus verses appeared
throughout the information networks. This
confused many people, and increased
scepticism about his work among the not-
so—credulous. That is something of a shame,
particularly as there are good arguments to
suggest he predicted the death of John F.
Kennedy, the fall of Communism, the French
Revolution and the Challenger Space Shuttle
disaster. But the unconvinced will always
refer to the vague language, absence of
definite dates, and benefit of back
cataloguing events as areas of doubt. If
anybody is interested, he predicts the end of
the world in 3797.

Certainly, people of his own period
believed in his powers, medical and
otherwise. The Queen of France, Catherine
de Medici asked him to plot the horoscope of


169


At work in his study, Nostradamus stops to ponder the
meaning of it all.


her husband King Henry II, and in 1564 he
was appointed court physician to King
Charles IX of France. His final prediction
came true on 2nd July 1556. The day before,
as he left a meeting with his priest, the
clergyman is believed to have said 'Until
tomorrow, to which Nostradamus replied,
‘You will not find me alive at sunrise.’ Sure
enough, by the morning he was dead. It is
said that his body is buried with a script
which translates his prophecies into more
defined predictions. Perhaps this could
finally put to rest the debate about just how
good a seer Nostradamus really was.


THE QUEEN


OF SHEBA


HE MYSTICAL FIGURE known as the
| Queen of Sheba is recorded in the
First Book of Kings in the Old
Testament. It states that around the tenth
century BC a queen of the rich trading nation
known as Sheba decided to meet the great
King Solomon in person. She did not believe
the stories she had been told of Solomon's
wisdom, and brought many hard questions
to test him. When his replies met with her
approval she gave him plentiful gifts of gold,
spices and precious stones. In return,
Solomon gave the queen 'all her desire', and
after their meeting she returned to her own
country. The story is repeated in the second
Book of Chronicles, and even Christ himself
spoke of a queen of the south who came to
hear the wisdom of Solomon. Other than
this, precious few pieces of historical
evidence have survived, but that has not
stopped the growth of countless myths and
stories. So who was the real Queen of Sheba?
Perhaps the most famous and important
extension of her story is that connected with
Ethiopia. In 1320 an Ethiopian monk named
Yetshak wrote a compendium of legends
called Kebra Negast or ‘Glory of the Kings’.
In it, he said that when the Queen of
Sheba, referred to in Ethiopian as Makeda,
visited Solomon, she was seduced by the
great king. Solomon had said that the queen
was welcome to his hospitality, but must not
take anything without asking. During the
night, the Queen suffered a terrible thirst
caused by a spicy meal Solomon fed her and
she drank the water placed by her bed. The
king said she had broken the rules, and must
sleep with him as repayment. Nine months
later she gave birth to a boy called Menelik.


170


The Queen of Sheba.


Ethiopians believe that the Queen and her
son both accepted the Jewish faith, and that
Menelik founded the Solomon Jewish, and
then Christian, dynasty in Aksum, Ethiopia.

At around the same time as Yetshak was
compiling his tome, other legends were
forming in Europe. A thirteenth century
story told in the Legenda Aurea stated that


ACIS-ADOCODGOHAYO


GDAMTCE-OESB A23.


Ma
B
:


Who was the real Queen of Sheba?


the queen was a prophetess connected to the
crucifixion of Christ. Over time, she also
part
decorations and art. She was often seen as a


became an integral of religious
sorceress, and then a seductress. Strangely,
she is also featured as having a secret
deformity — French Gothic sculpture often
shows her having a webbed foot. In the same
way, the Temptation of Saint Anthony by
French novelist Gustave Flaubert depicts the
queen as a lustful temptress with a withered
limb.


This imperfection perhaps arises from


171


earlier Jewish and Islamic references to her.
In both the Koran and the Jewish Book called
the Targum Sheni, the queen meets Solomon
and reveals that she has hairy feet. The
Jewish tradition later features her as a demon
or seductress, whereas Islamic legend states
that Solomon used his magicians’ power to
remove her excess hair and married her.
Muslims call the Queen of Sheba Balkis, and
believe her great nation was based in the
Yemen. The Koran describes Sheba as being
two gardens, irrigated by a great dam. An
advanced level of farming, and good access


to Red Sea shipping channels and Arabian
camel trains, meant the nation prospered.
Archaeological proof of this occurring in
Southern Arabia has been uncovered. The
remains of a great dam can be viewed in the
Mareb region of the Yemen, now considered
to be the capital of the ancient Sheba nation.
This dam collapsed in AD 543, but scientists
have been able to deduce that it would have
been used to irrigate over 500 acres of farm
land. In recent years, archaeologists have
finished restoring an ancient temple known
as the "Throne of Balkis' in the Mareb region.
The structure dates from the tenth century


BC, so is from the right era to link with what
we do know about the queen. Two miles to
the east of the Marab region, another ancient
building, known as the ‘Temple of the Moon
God', is also being studied. Scientists using
radar equipment believe this is an extremely
large and elaborate structure, and could yield
the answers to many Sheba mysteries.
Unfortunately such investigations have been
plagued the by political
indifference and, until these areas become


Over years
more secure for researchers to study, the true
history of Sheba may continue to be
obscured by myth and legend.


URI GELLER


RI GELLER IS, without doubt, the most
famous proponent of psychic
powers in the world today. Unlike
past figures who have claimed mysterious
talents, Geller has had to prove his abilities
in front of an ever-developing media and an
increasingly intelligent public. Many
sceptics, however, are dubious of his claims
and believe he is nothing more than a simple
illusionist. Having said that, popular culture
across the world continues to view Geller
with a degree of respect and awe and even
scientists are beginning to question if he has
tapped into an unexplained natural power.
So is Uri Geller a phenomenon or a faker?
The world at large first encountered Uri
Geller in the 1970s, when the young Israeli
arrived in Europe. Born on 20th December


1946 to Hungarian and Austrian parents,


172


Geller had already became something of a
celebrity in his homeland for displaying
unusual abilities. He had performed
amazing feats of telepathy and psychokinesis
to small audiences across the country, which
had fascinated the Israeli population. Geller
claims he had only developed these powers
after an encounter with a ball of light at the
age of four and that during his childhood he
discovered the ability to bend cutlery with
minimal contact. However, it was not until
he had completed a term of service in the
Israeli army, and then worked as a model
that he decided to exhibit his powers.

In 1972 Geller left Israel and an appear-
ance on the Talk-In television show in
Britain turned him into an instant celebrity.
He performed other demonstrations across
Europe and, using only mind power,


pyschic skills he claims for himself, his ability with metal seems beyond doubt.


173


managed to stop a cable car and an escalator
from working in Germany. His celebrity grew
quickly and widely, and he was asked to visit
the United States to exhibit his abilities
there. Many of the American scientific
community were eager to view the human
phenomenon, and Geller was subjected to all
manner of tests at many of the country's
leading institutions. One of the eminent men
he met was Dr Wernher von Braun, the
leading mind behind NASA's rocket
programme, and the man widely dubbed the
‘Father of the Space Age’. Von Braun was one
of the first to experience Geller effects up
close when the young visitor managed to
bend the older scientists wedding ring
without any physical contact.

Under laboratory conditions at the
Stanford Research Institute, Geller was able
to prove high levels of predictive talents and
managed to alter weight measurements using
only mind control. At London's Birkbeck
College he evoked extreme Geiger counter
readings and manipulated crystal formations
psychically. One of his most impressive
performances was at the high security US
Navy Weapons base at Silver Springs in
Maryland. Here, Geller used his mind
control talents to fundamentally alter the
structure of a newly-created metal called
Nitinol. Despite this, he is most well known
for spoon bending and clock stopping, and
Geller claims he was the cause of Big Ben's
three breakdowns in the 1990s.


174


Indeed, Geller’s relevance to the scientific
community has been superseded by his
celebrity status. He has featured on the front
cover of most major international magazines
and papers. He has appeared on television
and radio shows across the world, and there
has even been a film called ‘Mindbender’
produced which depicts his life. Over 15
books have been written about him, and he
has featured in countless more. In all, he is
now something of a world-wide celebrity.

Geller himself seems to have embraced his
famous status, and considers people like
Michael Jackson and David Blaine among his
close friends. He has had cameo roles in
numerous movies and programmes and was
one of the original contestants in the British
version of the reality TV programme I’m A
Celebrity — Get Me Out Of Here. He has also
branched out to produce art and pottery, and
has even recorded a selection of songs. In
recent years his business interests have
developed in the technological inventions
market and he has created equipment which
can differentiate between real and fake
banknotes and diamonds.

All this enhance the
popularity and celebrity of Uri Geller, but it


may image,
does nothing to promote serious study of his
powers. That is a shame because many
eminent experts seem to believe he has
abilities far beyond the realm of most
modern-day men.


SECRET
SOCIETIES &
HIDDEN
TREASURES


THe KNIGHTS
I@MpPLAR


GROUP OF NINE French knights founded
A order in Jerusalem in 1118 under
the title ‘The Poor Fellow-Soldiers

of Christ. The warriors all took monastic
views and pledged their lives to protecting
Christian travellers and the Holy Land. They
were housed at the palace of King Baldwin II,
the French King of Jerusalem, on the site of
Solomon's Temple which is how they gained
their title ‘Knights Templar’. In 1128 they
were Officially sanctioned by Pope Honorius
II, and they were provided with a ‘Rule’ from
Saint Bernard of Clairvaux. The knights
gained a fearsome reputation for being
battle,
honourable. They fought in the Crusades
alongside Richard the Lionheart and quickly


ferocious in courageous and


accumulated vast amounts of treasure,
wealth and land from grateful European
monarchs.

Within 200 years the Templars had left the
Holy Land and taken residence in Paris, but
such was their influence that they were only
required to answer to the Pope. Their riches
were so immense that they began the earliest
form of organised banking, and became
known as moneylenders to European
monarchies. But this, combined with a
history of holding meetings in secret, led to
their downfall. King Philip the Fair of France
was known to be hugely indebted with
staggering sums owed to the order. On 13th
October 1307, he declared that the Templars
engaged in heretical activities at their
meetings, arrested all members of the order
in France, and seized their assets. The


176


Templars accepted his decisions quietly, but
many were then tortured into giving false
confessions of unholy practices. However,
only the Pope could condemn the order, and
a newly installed Pope Clement V was happy
to bow to Philip’s coercions.

The order was disbanded, and it was
suggested that all European monarchies take
steps to suppress the movement. On 19th
March 1314, the last Grand Master of the
Knights Templar, Jacques de Molay, was
burned at the stake on an island in the
middle of the River Seine in Paris. As the
flames rose, it is claimed de Molay cursed
King Philip and Pope threatening that they
would both follow him within a year. They
both did — Clement died a month later and
Philip seven months after that. However, the
Knights Templar themselves are said to have
continued in secret, and before his death, de
Molay had passed on his powers to a
successor. Some of the Templars are believed
to have taken refuge in Scotland during the
intervening years, but the movement did not
reveal itself again until 1705.

Since then the order has had associations
with Freemasonry and other secret societies,
but the movement has flourished and they
have had many high profile and influential
members. In more recent years, following the
Second World War, the cohesion of the entire
international order has become somewhat
fractured. The meetings are still held in
secret.

Apart from fiercely guarded rituals ands
traditions, it would seem that there are few


The Knights Templar. Did they hide a huge treasure away from the grasping King Philip of France?


177


(ovvs690000%-613¥-¥eTh-asa0391 ios


Jacques de Molay, last leader of the Templars.


mysteries surrounding the order. But one
question remains — why did the Parisian
Templars not fight when arrested by Philip's
men? In the days leading to their capture, a
heavily-laden cart was supposedly removed


178


from their buildings. Philip never found all
the riches in their offices that he wished to
acquire, and it seems the knights submitted
to his thuggery meekly, in order to let their
great treasure escape. So what was this
treasure? The obvious theory is that it was
gold and jewels taken from holy temples of
Jerusalem and the biblical world during the
Crusades. However, many have speculated
that the reaction of the Templars suggested
that it was something beyond material value,
and may have been something of enormous
spiritual importance, such as the Ark of the
Covenant or the Holy Grail. Others have
considered that it may be secret Christian
knowledge, such as the 'bloodline of Jesus
Christ’.

The treasure, whatever nature it takes, has
never been found, and where it is hidden
remains a mystery. Many Templar experts
have considered it may have been the root of
Bérenger Sauniére's mysterious wealth, and
believe it was buried at the church of
Rennes-le-Cháteau. However, one of the most
widely-held theories is that the surviving
Templars hid it at Rosslyn Chapel in
Scotland. If the order did manage to continue
throughout its banished years, there is good
reason to believe the secrets of the treasure
are known to only a select few. To the rest of
us, the Knights Templar are only modern day
descendants of an historical mystery.


RENNES-LE-
CHATEAU


HE LEGEND OF Rennes-le-Chateau is one

of the most complicated treasure-
hunting stories of all time. It is
steeped in the movements of pre-medieval
European dynasties and encompasses a
whole host of historical unsolved mysteries.
Enthusiasts believe the secret of Rennes-le-
Chateau could reveal the whereabouts of the
Holy Grail, or the Ark of the Covenant, or
indeed almost any other lost treasure. The
story involves mysterious societies like the
Knights Templar, the Freemasons and the
Priory of Sion. Researchers say that many of
those who have been told any of the real
details have died in suspicious circum-
Their fate, and the village’s
enigmatic story, all revolved around the


stances.


arrival of one man.

On ist June 1885, a recently ordained
priest entered the hot, dusty, hilltop village
of Rennes-le-Cháteau in the French


Pyrenees. Bérenger Saunière was an
ambitious young cleric, and was very
unimpressed by the dilapidated ninth
church and the uninhabitable


presbytery, although he stayed. In October of


century


that year Sauniére was banished from the
region for a short time for committing a
public order offence when he campaigned
against the ruling Republican Party. During
this exile from his parish he formed a
friendship with the wealthy and respected
Countess of Chambord, who loaned him a
large sum to rebuild the village church. He
began the restoration work five years later,
starting with the altar. As he removed the


179


heavy stone lintel, the ancient pillar on


which it stood cracked, and inside it
Saunière found three wooden tubes
containing  parchments. After finding


another scrap of paper in a pillar supporting
the pulpit, Sauniére immediately began
digging up parts of the church and its yard.

Helped in this by his housekeeper, Marie
Denarnaud, Saunière recorded in his
personal diary on 21st September 1891,
‘Excavated a grave. Found a tomb.’ What was
found in the tomb is unknown, but over the
following years Saunière led a very odd life.
He built an elaborate estate, which had
gardens full of exotic flora and fauna. The
whole structure was said to be a recreation of
Mary Magdalene's walk from Magdala to
Bethania. Sauniére lived in splendour and
was said to hold accounts in various major
banks. He was known to visit Paris and mix
with famous people, but regional church
authorities grew tired of his strange
behaviour and tried to discipline him.
Sauniére said he needed to answer to nobody
but the Pontiff and resigned his seat. The
villagers of Rennes-le-Cháteau chose to
attend Mass at Sauniére's private chapel
rather than attend the one provided by the
officially installed new priest.

On 17th January 1917 Sauniére had a
serious seizure, and shortly before his death
explained how he had come to find his
wealth. The priest who heard the details was
so disgusted he denied Sauniére absolution
and last rites. But Denarnaud also knew the


secret and promised to reveal it on her


IDA TCE-OE58-413A-ACIS-ADOCODGGEAXO.


deathbed. Unfortunately she suffered a
debilitating stroke and could not talk when
she died in 1953. Others who may have
understood some aspects of the mysteries
suffered horrific fates. Many people believe
Denarnaud's carer, Noel Corbu, may have
learnt something from her before her death,
but he was killed in a car accident in the
same year. Another local priest, Jean-
Antoine-Maurice Gelis, was said to know
details during Sauniére's time, but he grew
so paranoid that he would let only his niece
into his presbytery. On All Saints’ Eve 1897,
he was found killed by four blows from an
axe. During an investigation in 1956 the
corpses of three men who had been shot
were found in Sauniére's garden, and in 1967
Fakhur el Islam, a courier carrying
Sauniére's secret documents, was found
dead on train tracks near Melun in Germany.

It is believed that a secretive society called
the Priory of Sion is behind much of the
strange history of Rennes-le-Cháteau. The
group is said to have strong connections with
Freemasons and legends of the Holy Grail. It
has been a registered organisation in France
since 1956 and has over a thousand members,
some of whom are extremely high profile.
The Grand Master until 1963 was Jean
Cocteau, and past leaders have included
Claude Debussy, Leonardo de Vinci and Isaac
Newton. Yet, despite this air of respectability,
the organisation is still said to be untraceable.
Sauniére himself was not so secretive about
the treasure though, and it is believed he left
many clues in the buildings he erected and
the monuments he left. The design of the
church in Rennes-le-Cháteau itself is
supposed to be a clue about the treasure. One
theory is that Sauniére’s wealth came about
by his discovery of details relating to an old
Christian secret, which he then used to
blackmail the Roman Catholic Church.

One of the stained glass windows he had
commissioned after rebuilding the church


180


Statue of a demon, most likely of Lucifer.


depicts both Mary and Joseph holding
babies, which has lead some to suspect
Sauniére had proof that Christ had a twin.
Similarly, it has been considered that
perhaps the priest found evidence that Jesus
did not die on the cross, but moved to
Europe and had a family with Mary
Magdalene. Many of the blackmail ideas
seem to revolve around elaborate conspiracy
theories, but there are also legends of real,
sparkling, mystical treasure. Rennes-le-
Cháteau is believed to have been the third
largest town in the Visigoth kingdom, when


it was known as Rheddae. Visgoths were said
to have looted Rome of all its riches in 410
AD and were also believed to have stolen
great wealth from Greece and Jerusalem. It
was never disclosed exactly where the
Visigoths finally buried their treasure,
although the fortress of Rheddae was always
considered a strong possibility.

Another theory combines aspects of both
treasure and religious secrecy. It is suggested
that the Cathars, a Christian group who were
considered a threat by the Roman Catholic
Church, buried something of immense
religious importance near Rennes-le-Cháteau
before they were destroyed. Some have
suggested that this great spiritual treasure
may have been the Holy Grail or Ark of the


Covenant. The great French classical artist,
Nicolas Poussin, is also said to have known
of the secrets of Rennes-le-Cháteau. He
apparently included clues in a number of his
paintings; particularly one called Les Bergers
d'Arcadie which features a tomb that closely
resembles one found near to Rennes-le-
Cháteau.

Many factors pointing to the truth behind
Sauniére’s wealth are still available for study.
But despite the best efforts of countless
experts, these mysteries remain hidden. Did
Sauniére find a legendary religious artefact, a
horde of ancient treasure, or some terrible
Christian secret? The answers may, one day,
be revealed, but for now, Sauniére and his
money continue to be a curious puzzle.


THe ARE OF THE
COVENANT


T5 BIBLE sAYs that God inscribed the
Ten Commandments on two stone
tablets that he gave to Moses. To
protect the tablets, and to let them be carried,
a wooden chest decorated with exquisite
gold ornaments was built. It was about three-
and-a-half feet long, just over two feet wide,
and had two poles attached through gold
rings on its sides. There were two carved
cherubim on top, and the chest's lid was
called the atonement cover or the ‘mercy
seat'. The box accompanied Moses and the
Israelites on their quest for the Promised
Land, and brought them victory wherever
they went. When they finally founded
Jerusalem, King Solomon built the ‘Holy of
Holies', or First Temple, and housed the box


181


there. This supremely holy chest is called
the Ark of the Covenant.

No single item is involved in more legends
of treasure, unexplained wealth and interna-
tional intrigue than this great chest. Some
legends say that the Ark was destroyed or
captured by invading Egyptian forces around
925 BC, others say that the Babylonians stole
it in 586 Bc. The Jewish sect who wrote the
Dead Sea Scrolls may have buried the Ark in
the Jordanian desert before they were over-
run. Likewise, it has been suggested that an
early Christian group called the Cathars may
have hidden it in an ancient church at
Rennes-le-Cháteau in France before they
were destroyed by the Catholic Church.

King Arthur has also been linked to the


Fanciful impression of the Ark of the Covenant, reputed to contain the original Ten Commandments.


Ark's history, whilst many researchers claim
it was taken from the Holy Land by the
Knights Templar. It is said that they may
have hidden it at the pit on Oak Island, or
even at a Scottish chapel in Rosslyn.
Conspiracy theorists believe the descendants
of the Knights Templar are the Freemasons,
who now have the Ark under their control.
In fact, many mysterious tales have
incorporated aspects of involving the Ark of
the Covenant. Here, we will look at two of
the most plausible theories.

Leen Ritmeyer is an archaeologist who has
conducted tests on Temple Mount in
Jerusalem, and believes he has established
the true position of the First Temple. He
claims he has discovered a section cut out of
the underlying rock that exactly matches the
dimensions of the Ark. From this, Ritmeyer


182


believes the Ark may be buried deep inside
Temple Mount, but it seems impossible that
excavations will be carried out in the area,
particularly whilst it continues to be the site
of violent political turmoil. Many other
experts also believe the Ark remains in the
Holy Land, and one, an American called Ron
Wyatt, even claimed to have found the


sacred chest in the Garden Tomb, in the
north of the old city of Jerusalem.
Perhaps the most celebrated theory


connecting the Ark with a real object
revolves around western Africa. Ethiopia has
a legend that claims the Queen of Sheba was
impregnated by King Solomon. The child,
known as Menelik, meaning 'the son of the
wiseman', travelled to Jerusalem when he
was 20 to study in his father's court. Within


a year, Solomon's priests had become jealous


of the king's son and said he must return to
Sheba. Solomon accepted this but said that
all first-born sons of other elders should
accompany Menelik. One of these, Azarius,
was the son of Zadok, the High Priest. It was
Azarius who stole the Ark and took it to
Africa. Menelik decided that their success
and founded the
'Second Jerusalem' at Aksum in Ethiopia.


must be divine will,


Today, the ancient church of St Mary of Zion
is said to house the Ark, which was
traditionally brought out every January for
the celebration known as Timkat.

In recent years, due to the instability in the
country, the Ark has been hidden away and


cared for by a devoted guardian, who is the
only man allowed to see the true nature of
the box. Certainly, there
recommend this theory — for instance,


is a lot to


Ethiopians are one of the few races that
practise Christianity in Africa, and the
that the
Ethiopian emperor is a direct descendant of


national constitution ruled
Solomon. Ethiopians are confident of their
role in the Ark’s heritage, but with so many
legends vying to reveal the final resting place
of the Ark of the Covenant, it is impossible to
decide on one. Perhaps, as many religious
groups believe, its presence will become


known when the time is right.


THe HOLY GRAIL


LMOST ALL OF our understanding of the
A Grail is derived from romantic
Arthurian tales of the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries. However, there are
some generally accepted details. The Grail is
believed to be the chalice of the Eucharist or
dish of the Pascal lamb used by Christ at the
Last Supper. This vessel was taken by
Joseph of Arimathea, who used it to collect
blood from the crucified body of Christ. An
alternative theory is that it was a chalice
given to Joseph by Christ in a vision This
vessel’s holy powers sustained Joseph for 42
years during his incarceration by the Jews.
In either case, Joseph brought the holy
chalice to Britain, thus beginning the true
legend.
Some people believe the Holy Grail was
secretly passed down through generations of
Joseph’s descendants. Others believe it is


183


buried in the Chalice Well at Britain’s oldest
holy city, Glastonbury, which indicates a
connection to Arthurian legend. Romantic
tales say that Arthur and his Knights of the
Round Table set off on a holy quest to find
the Grail. More reliable legend says the
Cathars had possession of the Grail and hid
it in the Pyrenees before they were over-run.

It has been suggested that they may have
kept it at their stronghold of Montségur,
which was actually searched by Nazi forces
looking for the Grail during the Second
World War. Others believe the Cathars hid it
at Rennes-le-Chateau, or gave the chalice to
the Knights Templar for safe-keeping. Some
researchers believe a field in Shropshire
hides the Grail under its surface, and another
tradition states that a wooden cup in a Welsh
country house is the true artefact. The
organised church does not credit any legend


DIM TCE-OESB-I1 A ACIO-ADOCOOGOFAMD


Our understanding of the Holy Grail is derived from romantic Arthurian tales of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries


of its existence, although that should not be — chalice's existence is ever found or not, the
seen as any indication that it is purely a story of the Holy Grail will continue to
myth. Whether any evidence of the fabled puzzle Man for many years to come.


184


ALCHEMY


in the
eighteenth century is largely believed
to have led to the birth of chemistry as


HE DISCOVERY OF OXYGEN


T


we know it. Before then, many races had
examined the properties of different
materials without ever forming a coherent
theory to link their qualities; these ancient
studies were known as alchemy or transmu-
tation. Scientists had believed that as metals
oxidised, so they gained an important


addition. They thought the ultimate
transmutation process would turn
substances into gold or silver. Today,


alchemy is largely considered to be this idea
of creating gold. Modern chemistry has
proven such theory is completely
impossible, but for thousands of years it was


a


not always thought to be so.

Certainly, many of the greatest minds the
world has ever seen believed in the
possibility of making gold from base
ingredients. In fact, it was such a widely held
belief that King Henry IV of England actually
encouraged all intelligent men in the country
to study the subject so that the nation’s great
debts could be paid. Similarly, in later years,
many rulers supported alchemists and their
experiments. Other feared the
repercussions of transmutation success, and


races


in the second century BC China actually
made the production of gold by alchemy an
offence punishable by death. The Roman
Emperor Diocletian even ordered the
destruction of all Egyptian texts that
advocated alchemical procedures.
Diocletian and the Chinese authorities
were wise to be wary, for the Ancient


185


Egyptian and Oriental peoples were known
to be the masters of alchemy. Mystical
Eastern practices are still revered by some to
this day, and the Egyptians are said to have
spread their knowledge onto other races. The
Arabic world was one of the recipients, and
the seventh century King Khalid was said to
be a master of the subject. Indeed, the word
‘alchemy’ is thought to have been derived
from the Arabic for Egyptian art, 'al-khem'.
In the following centuries it is said that the
Sufi Islamic movement used alchemy as part
of their religious beliefs.

Certainly, alchemy has always had strong
religious connections. Albertus Magnus and
St. Thomas Aquinas were both experts on
the subject. Aquinas even wrote a text asking
if it was ethically correct to pass off gold
created by alchemy as real gold. Another
holy man, the fourteenth century Pope John
XXII, is credited with writing a major work
on the subject, and also wrote a great text
damning fraudulent alchemists. When he
died in 1334, he left the Church 18 million
florins of gold bullion, which no one had
even realised he had acquired. Even Martin
Luther is believed to have said alchemy was
beneficial for affirming church doctrines,
whilst the grandees of modern science, Boyle
and Newton, were also sympathetic to
alchemy.

Although modern chemistry has revealed
that what the alchemists were aiming for is
impossible, even today our knowledge grows
in strange ways. The realm of unstable
radioactive materials and the notion that the
physical construction of subjects can be


altered has opened new avenues of thought.
Similarly, another goal of alchemy was to
find the elixir of life that would cure all ills
and make men young for eternity. Again,
although modern science has dismissed
alchemists methods, experiments in the
fields of DNA and cloning have suggested
that it is a notion not too far removed from
reality. It was even an alchemist, Paracelsus
who, in the sixteenth century, determined
that illnesses were caused by foreign agents
attacking the body.

Other off-shoots of this medical branch of
alchemy are also held as valid by some
people in our modern age: homeopathy and


186


are direct


example,
descendants of old alchemy studies, and


aromatherapy, for


acupuncture and hypnosis are also
connected. Some modern alchemists still
believe, however, that illness is caused by an
imbalance in the body, so much of the
medical profession regard them as ‘quacks’.
Similarly, the subject has been linked with
many New Age ideas and theories which has
not helped the public accept it as a genuine
and serious area of interest. Many people
continue to practise alchemy and maintain
that it is a valid subject. Science tends to
disagree, but our development and view of
the world still owes a lot to this ancient art.


THe
ROSICRUCIANS


N 1614, A PAMPHLET called Fama
Fraternitatis Rosae Crucis, was pub-
lished. It described a secret brotherly
order of non-Catholic Christians who were
striving for knowledge of alchemy and
This group,
‘Rosicrucian Brotherhood’, was said to be
founded in 1408 by a former monk and


magic. known as the


nobleman Christian Rosenkreuz. Rosenkreuz
was thought to have travelled through
Damascus, Jerusalem and Fez, and had
acquired knowledge of magical Arabian
learnings and Egyptian spiritualism. The
Rosicrucian movement he inspired was
believed capable of making gold, and was
devoted to the secret study of nature's
mystical properties. They were said to be
concerned with encouraging the enlight-
enment of Mankind, and waiting for the day
when it would be free of the shackles of the
organised Church.

Entry into the order was said to be a secret
process, and only special, chosen individ-
uals would be admitted. The brotherhood's
background and direction were confirmed in
1615 with the publication of the Confessio
Fraternitatis, or 'Confession of the Brother-
hood', and the 'Third Chemical Wedding of
These
created much interest in the movement, and
divisions of the order were instigated


Christian Rosenkreuz’. writings


throughout Europe. It is generally felt that
the Rosicrucians may have been one of the
precursors to the Freemason fraternity, but
how much reality is behind their mythical
heritage?


187


Some sources suggest there may have been
some groups similar to the Rosicrucians
dating from around the twelfth century AD in
Europe and Asia. However, the brotherhood
detailed in the texts of the 1610s was purely
the fictional work of John Valentin Andrea, a
Lutherian philosopher and theologian.
Andrea admitted writing the pamphlets as a
satire of the prevalent deep interest in
mysticism and occultism. By combining
contemporary muses of knighthood, far-off
lands and romantic notions, it is claimed
Andrea was trying to promote anti-Papal,
Protestant ideas. Certainly, he denounced the
whole issue of Rosicrucians as mere folly for
the rest of his life, even though the order’s
sacred symbol of a rose in the centre of a
cross was actually taken from Andrea’s own
family shield.

But Andrea’s work began something he
never intended, and the original satirical
works ended up being viewed seriously. In
the late seventeenth century, new Rosi-
crucian groups claiming direct descent from
those mentioned in Andrea’s writings sprang
up across Europe. In the mid eighteenth
century Rosicrucianism apparently helped to
establish the Freemasonry movement. It is
said that Saint-Germain the Deathless was
instrumental in both organisations and
certainly his claimed abilities in alchemy,
medicine and transmutation would have
been of immense interest to the early
followers. The Scottish Masonic movement
have


is believed to retained many


Rosicrucian influences, and in 1866 centres


of Masonic Rosicrucianism were created
throughout Britain and America.

These
continued to this day largely as a select
branch of the Freemason community, and


Rosicrucian movements have


around 1910 Harvey Spencer Lewis founded
the ‘Ancient Mystical Order Rosae Crucis’, or
AMORC, in California. Now generally
accepted as being the main world-wide
division of the movement, it has followers
and lodgers across the world. The AMORC
headquarters in San José is believed to be a
massive complex that houses a museum,
temple, auditorium, planetarium, art gallery
and library. Most of their practices are held
in the utmost secrecy, and entry into the
Order is said to be limited to select, high-
achieving freemasons. Many conspiracy
theorists claim that other Rosicrucian orders
try to entice people into their groups through


suggestive advertising and false claims.

The stated aim of AMORC is to encourage
the spiritual liberation of people so that
individuals can find their own free versions
of God. The original idea of reducing the
need for organised, church-based religion
still persists. Rosicrucian followers are also
believed to strive for knowledge in the
secrets of nature; in the symbolic properties
of art, literature and ancient history and in
developing the psychic abilities of Mankind.
Critics of the movement claim they promote
anti-Christian doctrines. As with many
secret organisations, the imaginations of the
curious can create theories far more
outlandish than the truth. And in this area
Rosicrucians are unique, as it seems it was
the fiction-driven creative mind of John
Andrea that instigated the
movement in the first place.


actually


OAK ISLAND


N THE SUMMER of 1795 a young Nova
[sere boy called Daniel McGinnis

landed on one of the many small islands
in Mahone Bay. He found signs of human
inhabitation and an aged ship’s tackle block
dangling from an old oak tree. Under this
tree a slight dip in the ground suggested a
hole had been dug and refilled. McGinnis
excitedly believed he had stumbled across
the site of a buried treasure hoard. He raced
home to request the help of his two best
friends, John Smith and Anthony Vaughan,
and the next day they began digging in the
hollow. They discovered a shaft 13 feet wide,


188


and four feet down they found a platform of
foreign flagstones. Ten feet down they found
a layer of supporting log beams, and at 20
and 30 feet they found further platforms
made of oak. The three friends realised they
would need more manpower and better
equipment, and returned home, eager to
raise the funds needed for a more ambitious
attempt.

Initially they failed, but in 1803 a local
doctor called Simeon Lynds heard of Smith's
discoveries on Oak Island and was suitably
interested to raise funds from among his
friends. The new team dug in earnest and


found platforms of logs and clay at ten-foot
intervals. By the time they reached the 90-
feet mark, the team was removing one bucket
of water with every two buckets of mud. Late
one evening they found what they thought
was the last layer before the treasure. They
had the next day off, and spent the time
planning how to split their expected wealth.
The next Monday morning, however, all but
the top thirty feet of the shaft was filled with
murky, muddy water. The group tried to bail
the water out, but the level remained
constant. They tried pumping the water out,
but to no avail and abandoned that attempt.
In 1805, the group decided to dig another,
parallel shaft 110 feet deep, and then tunnel
towards the expected treasure chests. But
they dug too close to the original shaft, and
the wall between the two cracked, filling the
new tunnel with hundreds of gallons of
water. Out of funds, the work ceased.

No subsequent attempt has been quite so
close to rescuing the treasure, but more has
become known about the shaft. It was
discovered that a carefully constructed
underground canal had been built. It ran
from the beach, 500 feet away, and entered
the shaft's core. This meant that the logs and
clay acted as an effective cork, which, once
removed, allowed the water to rush into the
chamber. Later efforts to drill into the shaft
discovered wood from chest casings, loose
metal such as coins, decorative metal chains,
a layer of concrete, soft metal such as
bullion, and even a piece of parchment with
writing on it. This real, tangible evidence of
treasure, and the obvious efforts of whoever
hid it, has helped to promote and encourage
continual efforts to raise the bounty.


189


The question of who owned the treasure
has also baffled interested minds. The
suggestion that it is Inca gold, hidden as the
natives fled from Spanish settlers, has been
mooted. There is the idea that it is a cache of
British Army war chests, hidden as their
forces retreated during the American War of
Independence. However, in 1937, a New
England businessman, Gilbert D. Heddon,
researched the possibility that the wealth
belonged to the well-known  privateer,
Captain William Kidd. Heddon hoped that
by reading Kidd's history he would find
clues leading to details of a shaft's contents.
Like all others, his efforts proved fruitless.

By 1965 Oak Island had turned into a
honeycomb of shafts and tunnels, so the
American geologist, Bob Dunfield tried a
method of brute force to find the treasure. He
imported a 70-tonne crane and dug a hole
140 deep and 100 feet wide, but found
nothing other than the remnants of earlier
searches. In 1970, a new investment group
called the Triton Alliance commissioned a
complete geological study of the island. The
report's findings have never been released to
the public, but it enthused the Triton group
enough to excavate the site. They began a
project called Borehole 10-X, which found
pieces of brass, china and wood cribbing 200
feet down, but the project has suffered
numerous problems.

Many locals claim that centuries of
haphazard searching have left the island in
such a mess that the hidden loot will never
be found. Others still believe it might be
possible to recover the hoard. But, for now at
least, it looks as if the secret treasures of Oak
Island are safely buried.


THE CURSE OF
IUTENKHAMUN


N THE LATE nineteenth century a young
[es archaeologist by the name of

Howard Carter was convinced that the
remains of the ‘Boy King’, the pharaoh
Tutenkhamun, lay undisturbed somewhere
in Egypt. Carter first arrived in Egypt in
1891, and eventually secured funding for his
archaeological digs from the wealthy Lord
Carnarvon in 1917. After five years of little
success, Carnarvon gave Carter one last
support. On 4th
November 1922, Carter’s team found a step
cut into the rock floor of the Valley of the
Kings. As they dug and removed the


season of financial


covering material, they discovered a set of
steps that ended at a door inscribed with the
name 'Tutenkhamun'. Carter ruled that they
would do no more digging until Lord
Carnarvon reached the site, and immediately
sent a telegram back to Britain.

Carnarvon travelled to Egypt and together
he and Carter entered the tomb. They
discovered a fake room, a storage room and
then the burial chamber. Unlike other
pharaohs, Tutenkhamun had lain un-
disturbed since death, and when Carter had
peered in by candlelight he discovered an
untold array of treasures. The team cata-
logued and recorded all the items they
found, the most impressive of which was the
king’s sarcophagus — three interlocking
coffins, the last of which depicted the earthly
form of Tutenkhamun in beautiful gold
metalwork. Inside this lay the mummified
body of the Boy King. Everyone celebrated at


190


Death mask of Tutenkhamun, the ‘Boy King’ of Egypt.


finding an unplundered tomb, and Carter’s


team felt vindicated in their search.
However, there were rumours that Carter had
removed a sign above the tomb door that
read ‘Death shall come on swift wings to him
that toucheth the tomb of the Pharaoh’.

In the spring of 1923, Lord Carnarvon was
bitten on the neck by a mosquito. He
accidentally cut the bite whilst shaving, and
the wound became infected. He started


suffering fevers and chills and died shortly


Life-size statue of Tutenkhamun, on display in the British Museum in London. Could the Curse of the Pharoahs have
been a virus or poisonous fungus left in the tombs in order to infect the unwary?


191


after in Cairo hospital. It is believed all the
lights in the hospital went out when he
passed away, and his favourite dog back in
England is said to have howled and dropped
dead the same instant. The press had a field
day, claiming it was the curse of the pharaoh
— strangely, when the
unwrapped, it had a bite on the cheek in


mummy was


exactly the same place as Carnarvon’s had
been. Over the next few years, two of
Carnarvon’s relatives, Carter’s personal
secretary and several others connected with
the discovery were said to have died in
strange circumstances. Each time one died,
the British media linked the death to the
curse.

Some historians believe that the Ancient
Egyptians placed poison inside the tombs to
gain vengeance on grave robbers. Scientists
have also advanced many theories in recent
years that suggest food placed inside the
tomb to help the dead body’s spiritual
journey may actually have helped the
breeding of microscopic spores which
entered the explorer’s lungs when they
opened the tomb. This highly volatile
fungus, which would have developed
uninhibited over 3000 years, then caused
terrible fever and fatigue in the bodies it
infected. Certainly, Lord Carnarvon, who
was not in the best of health, would already


192


have been tired from the long journey out to
Egypt
susceptible to infection..

But this theory does not totally explain the


and would therefore be more


supposed curse, because very few of the
people who were actually on hand died
early. Of the 26 people present at the opening
of the burial chamber, only six died in the
following ten years. At the sarcophagus
opening, 22 were present, of whom six died
within a decade, while nobody who helped
unwrap the mummified body suffered an
early death. Carter himself, at the forefront of
all the discoveries, died of natural causes at
the age of 66.

However, Carnarvon was the one who
funded the search, was and the first on site
for the opening so it may be possible that
Tutenkhamun focused his ire directly on
him. It is certainly true that Cairo’s hospital’s
lights failed at the time of his death, and the
story about his dog has never been
disproved. One final fascinating rumour was
that Carnarvon had given Carter a pet canary
as a token of good luck to find the tomb. On
the day of its discovery, it is said that a cobra
— an animal symbolic of pharaohs — ate the
bird. In fact, Carter had it kept alive and well,
although it did pass into the possession what
could be thought of as another kind of snake
— he gave it to a bank manager!


MISCELLANEOUS


DEMONIC


[POSSESSION


HEOLOGIANS BELIEVE THE idea of posses-
sion began with the Zoroastrian
religion in Persia, but the continual
references to the phenomenon in the
teachings of Christ sealed the concept as a
major spiritual occurrence. A
conducted in 2002 revealed that 54 per cent


of Americans believe in the genuine power


survey


of unwelcome spiritual forces to control a
person. Many people believe the religious


aspect of possession refers just to our natural
instinct, desires and temptations. Surely
other-worldly forces cannot really inhabit
the human mind?

Something bizarre does seem happen to
people who become fixated with the occult.
Possession is believed to happen over a
gradual period, and begins with spiritually
sensitive people dabbling with strange


forces. It can be inflicted by a bad Ouija


Medieval engraving of holy men casting out demons.


194


Belief in possession by demons persists in many parts of the world, even today. These tribesmen are casting out their
own particular demons.


board experience, an uncontrolled séance, or
by an encounter with a particularly potent
ghost or poltergeist. As time passes, so the
possessed person gradually loses control
over their actions. To begin with, their
'mind-invader' can be pleasant and helpful,
but as soon as the host body tells it to leave,
it can become hateful and spiteful.

The original partial possession becomes
more total. It results in the possessed person
being isolated and Their
behaviour increases in its unpredictability,


aggressive.


and they suffer from terrible nightmares,
sleeplessness and headaches. Finally, the
fear that the spirit’s power is uncontrollable
can drive the possessed person to attempt
suicide, or to be locked in a mental hospital.
If caught in time, the possessed person can


be exorcised by a priest, but the exertions
needed for this have also been known to kill
the victim.

In 2002,
Andrea Yates claimed demonic possession
had caused her to kill her five children. Yates
drowned the infants aged between six


an American woman called


months and seven years in June 2001 and
pleaded not guilty by reason of insanity.
Many experts believe possession is
nothing more mysterious than being an
outlet for severe mental difficulties. Just as
Biblical possession may represent impure
desires, so real-life possession may
represents psychosis. In whichever case,
possession is a dangerous state of mind that
needs immediate professional help to restore


the mental balance of its unfortunate victim.


ERDETUAL
MOTION


VER SINCE THE invention of the wheel,

Man has been searching for unlimited

energy — the idea of perpetual motion,
the notion that once the machine starts
turning, it would never stop. The laws of
physics tell modern scientists that perpetual
motion is an impossibility, but engineers
from previous times were not governed by
such inhibitive rules. Between 1607 and 1903
the British Patent Office received over 600
applications for perpetual motion inventions.
However, only one man has dared to suggest
he really did conquer the problem.


196


Johann Ernst Elias Bessler was born in
1680 in Zittau in Saxony. In 1712 he
appeared in the town of Gera with a wheel
which he claimed was self-moving. With a
little push to start, the three-feet-wide, four-
inch-thick wheel worked itself up to a
regular speed. It could lift a weighted bag
and, it was claimed, would continue turning
forever. But Bessler seemed to attract many
enemies, and very little notice was taken of
his invention.

In 1716, the Landgrave of Hesse-Cassel
became his patron, and it was at his home in


Sm m 2c


T LEON m )


um "i ! i


odd
Wu A I i
* s, PLU.


M i : = À
WE


en
; WE


The theory of perpetual motion has engaged the attentions of scientists for centuries.


1717 that Bessler created his greatest wheel. ^ weeks later the room was reopened and the
Twelve feet wide and fourteen inches thick, ^ wheel was still turning at a constant 25 rpm.
it constantly revolved at 25 or 26 turns a They sealed it away for a further six weeks,
minute. On 12th November 1717 the wheel and once more, when viewed, it was
was locked and sealed in its room. Two revolving at 25 rpm.


197


Bessler asked for £20,000 to reveal the
secrets of his wheel, but nobody seemed
ready to provide such a huge amount of
money. At the same time, his enemies were
casting doubts on his invention, but many
learned and official figures who studied the
wheels confirmed there was no trickery
involved. Bessler grew impatient and vexed


and simply disappeared, taking his secret to
his grave.

It is said that he left certain clues which,
when deciphered, will demonstrate how his
amazing machine worked. But until then
perpetual motion will have to remain, at
least in scientific eyes, a practical impossi-
bility.


Rops


T RODS PHENOMENON started in March
1994 when Jose Escamilla, a film
editor from New Mexico, captured
some interesting footage of a UFO sighting.
As he studied the tapes in frame-by-frame
detail, Escamilla noticed long, thin, bizarre
objects darting about the screen. Initially he
thought they were birds or insects that were
very close to the camera lens, but as he
sharpened the clarity of the picture, an
elongated cylindrical body could be viewed.
Their rod-like shape gave them their name,
and in subsequent years, a wealth of similar
footage has been recorded from all corners of
the globe.

Rods
unnoticeable to the human eye because of


seem to be living organisms,


their rapid movement. They have an
extended, ultra-thin frame, and sets of wings
or fins protruding from their body. The
quick, haphazard motion suggests they are
organic life, but detailed analysis is difficult,
as they are only discernible in pictures taken
with high-shutter-speed cameras. To some
extent they look like stick insects with no


198


real limbs, but the possibility that they are
known organisms has been proven wrong.
Footage of rods moving alongside existing
animals highlights the fact that their design
and attributes are quite unlike any creature
that we recognise.

There has been a huge amount of private
footage captured by enthusiasts, but very few
examples of truly high-grade, broadcast
quality photography. One of the best
examples of rods on film came from Mark
Lichtle, who was recording parachutists
leaping into a cavern in Mexico called the
Cave of the Swallows. During the 45 minutes
of footage, countless rods can be seen
alongside insects, birds and people, and it is
now widely accepted that the Cave of the
Swallows is one of the best places to capture
rods on camera. However, rods are sighted
across the world, and even the US Navy is
reported to have knowledge and footage of
the phenomenon. With an abundance of
growing proof, it seems the idea of flying
rods has to be taken seriously. But still,
nobody has any idea what they truly are.


VOODOO


OTIONS SUCH AS CURSES, black magic,

pin dolls and skeleton-painted

priests are inextricably linked with
the popular perception of Voodoo. A
combination of Hollywood movies, fictional
novels and comic book story lines have
helped instil the idea that Voodoo is a
mysterious, evil religion, stemming from
darkest Africa. Many people believe it has
been used to bring about the early deaths of
unwelcome researchers and to resurrect the
of dead believers.
However, those who practise Voodoo say
these rumours and myths have been borne


zombified bodies


out of ignorance and misplaced fear. Voodoo,
they say, is actually a peaceful religion very
similar in emphasis to the Catholic faith.
They say it should cause no feeling of
trepidation in anybody.

Voodoo, also known as Vodun, Vodoun,
Voudou or Sevi Lua, originated in the west
African countries of Nigeria, Benin and Togo.
‘Voodoo’
‘Great Spirit’, and the religion itself is
believed to stretch back many millennia. The
first the developed world knew of it was
when slave traders started capturing African
workers in the sixteenth century, and
deporting them to the West Indies. On
arriving in the islands, the slaves were
forcibly invested in the Catholic faith, but as
there were few facilities for them to actually


is an ancient African word for


practise this new religion, many slipped
back into their native traditions.

Their religion was founded on the idea of
one supreme God - an unknowable but
almighty force. Under Him there lies a
network of ‘Loa’ or spirits, which are broadly
equivalent to the Christian idea of patron


199


A spider model commonly used in voodoo ceremonies.


saints. Each Loa represents a different area of
life and has certain qualities. For example, if
a farmer was worried about his crops he
would focus his worship on the Loa known
as 'Zaka', the spirit of agriculture. Despite
the similarity between these African faiths,
and their own, the French and Spanish
conquerors refused to accept that these
enslaved savages could have their own
indigenous religion. Fearing that they were
actually worshipping the devil, Voodoo was
banned, and slave leaders and priests were
beaten into confessing that their rituals were
evil.


IDA TCE OESB-413A-AC19-4DOCOOG9FAAD


Doll used in the African/West Indian practice of voodoo.


However, the Voodoo faith was continued
in secret, particularly in Haiti. Over time it
even adopted some aspects of the Catholic
religion, as descendants of the original slaves
spread throughout across the Caribbean. The
belief of West Indian workers mixed with
Voodoo practices of slaves taken to the
American southlands and a centre for the
faith was soon created in New Orleans with
its fertile blend of French, Spanish and
African cultures. Today, 15% of New Orleans
citizens, and 60 million people worldwide,
practise Voodoo. In 1996 it was also made
the official faith of Benin. Despite this
official recognition, there is still a great deal


200


of mystery and fear attached to Voodoo
rituals.

The Voodoo temple is called a Hounfour,
and the leader of the ceremony is a male
priest called a Houngan, or a female priest
called a Mambo. At the centre of the temple
there is a post used to contact spirits, and a
highly decorated altar. There is a feast before
the ceremony, and a particular pattern
relating to the Loa being worshipped is
outlined on the temple floor. Dancing and
chanting accompanied by beats from rattles
and religious drums called Tamboulas
begins. One of the dancers is said to be
possessed by the Loa, enters a trance and


behaves just as the Loa would. An animal,
normally a chicken, goat, sheep or dog, is
sacrificed and their blood is collected. This
is used to sate the hunger of the Loa.
Although these rites and rituals are used
for good purposes — asking for guidance and
help — there are some less wholesome
practices. Voodoo black magic is performed
by Caplatas or Bokors who place curses, and
stick pins in Voodoo dolls to cause people
pain and suffering. However, this use of


Voodoo is very rare, and the faith is
promoted by its followers as being a
wonderful way to understand the human
condition and the world around us. Even
though some of the practices seem a little
strange, are they really much different from
evangelist rituals or even archaic Catholic
rites? As with many of Humanity's
mysteries, a little
understanding goes a long way to revealing
the truth.


tolerance and


ZOMBIES


HE CENTRE OF THE zombie world is the
island of Hispaniola, in the West
Indies. Many peasant workers there
believe that evil sorcerers called bokors have
the power to bring their dead loved-ones
back to life as unthinking puppets. The
bokors are then said to these
unfortunates as their slaves. It is true that


use


this Caribbean idea of zombies does exist,
and that zombies can be found regularly
walking the streets of the islands. Some
people know members of their family or
friends who have been turned into zombies,
and as a precaution many poor peasant
workers place heavy stone tablets on top of
their loved-ones' coffins to stop bokors
snatching the bodies.

The reality is truly frightening, although it
does not involve otherworldly powers.
Psychiatric experts agree that the people
identified as zombies by Haitian folk do have
problems and suffer from a variety of serious
mental health disorders. Some commen-
tators have suggested that the idea of


201


zombies was the way in which Haitian
culture could explain these naturally unwell
people. Others think it is something much
more sinister. It is believed that by using
natural, native resources, Haitian bokors can
actually induce these mental illnesses.

Using a chemical called tetrodotoxin, a
nerve agent found in puffer fish, the bokor's
victim can be afflicted with a deep paralysis.
The victim's family thinks he or she is dead,
and so they are buried. The lack of oxygen in
the coffin contributes to brain damage, and
when the bokor comes to steal the body, the
victim is revived using a substance called
datura stramonium, or ‘zombie cucumber’,
which is also a mind-control drug. Other
poisons, like that found in a local cane toad,
can be extracted and will act as
hallucinogens and anaesthetics on the
unfortunate victims. It keeps them in a
permanent state of trance, appearing
impervious to physical pain, and acts as a
warning to other islanders to be wary of the
power of bokors.


rvassooooat-6Tov-ve ti 0630-30. 106


100
STRANGEST


MYSTERIES


100 Strangest Mysteries is an amazing compendium of


the weird and the wonderful. The range of entries is
extraordinary, from the bizarre to the horrific, and from
the spooky to the just plain confounding.


The book includes some of history’s most astounding
tales of the strange and supernatural, and tells in vivid
detail the story of both events and the people involved,

the impact of particular myths and beliefs, and the latest
investigations being undertaken in an attempt to
find answers to the world’s most bewildering
phenomena. The text is complemented by 100
photographs and illustrations.


100 Strangest Mysteries is a gripping and compelling
account of some of the most baffling and
astonishing events and is sure to shock and


amaze in equal measure.
