9Mi?Pooks Re(Iuire Faith 
By Robert Hunter j 
A Washington free - lance miter, 
Hunter has been teaching at the Lon- 
don School of Economics.

The follow- 
ing is excerpted by permission from 
the British Broadcasting Corp.

maga- 
zine The Listener.

IN THE Ashenden stories, Somer- 
set Maugham put a human face on 
the British Secret Service.

No matter 
that the Hairless Mexican killed the 
wrong man; this bumbling helped 
soften the image of a ruthless and ever- 
competent machine dedicated to doing 
His Majesty’s dirty business, and made 
everything right.

Not so with the Central Intelligence 
Agency.

No humor here; just the sense 
of a sinister and heartless manipula- 
tion of the democrats of a hundred 
countries, designed to support the new 
imperialism of those sons-of-Britain, 
the Americans.

*• /i- 
What is myth and what reality?

Since it was organized from the post- 
war remnants of the old Office of 
Strategic Services, the CIA has cer- 
tainly had its fingers in many political 
pies, and has been accused of myriads 
more.

Mossadegh fell in Iran; a Guate- 
malan coup replaced a left-wing re- 
gime; America was humiliated at the 
Bay of Pigs; a private American air 
force has fought the Laotian war, and 
Che Guevara was killed in Bolivia.

These events, which have all, rightly 
or wrongly, been attributed to the 
CIA, are the glamorous side of the 
business.

But most of what the agency 
does is far more prosaic.

It is basically 
an organization of fact-gatherers: aca- 
demics who never teach a class; pe- 
dants who rarely parade their nuances 
in learned Journals—and never with 
the CIA’s imprimatur.

It has many of the world’s most 
skilled linguists, the most patient ar- 
chivists, the cleverest analysts of iso- 
Ilated data and, surprisingly, some of 
the most liberal people, politically, in 
Washington.It is basically 
an organization of fact-gatherers: aca- 
demics who never teach a class; pe- 
dants who rarely parade their nuances 
in learned Journals—and never with 
the CIA’s imprimatur.

It has many of the world’s most 
skilled linguists, the most patient ar- 
chivists, the cleverest analysts of iso- 
Ilated data and, surprisingly, some of 
the most liberal people, politically, in 
Washington.

Indeed, if the American 
government ever does come to accept 
that the Soviet Union is not preparing 
to launch a nuclear attack and that 
China is not populated with madmen, 
it will probably be because the CIA 
has succeeded in putting across its es- 
timate of the situation.

The Iceberg’s Tip 
THIS, OF COURSE, is a rosy view 
Like any great, sprawling institu- 
tion, the CIA does suffer from a great 
deal of intellectual myopia, the com- 
promises of bureaucracy and the po- 
litical philosophy dominating the coun- 
try at any moment.

Abd If anything, its 
reporting is usually dull, tedious, banal 
f and sometimes dead wrong, as anyone 
will testify who has been privileged— 
1 or compelled—to read the Daily Digest 
I and other classified reports that circu- 
I late about the government.

This part of the CIA—the part that is 
styled “overt”—is quartered in adarge 
building across the Potomac - from 
Washington, unmarked and unob- 
served.

But the 8,000 or so particularly 
gray-faced men and women who work 
there are only the tip of the intelli- 
gence iceberg.This part of the CIA—the part that is 
styled “overt”—is quartered in adarge 
building across the Potomac - from 
Washington, unmarked and unob- 
served.

But the 8,000 or so particularly 
gray-faced men and women who work 
there are only the tip of the intelli- 
gence iceberg.

It has been estimated, 
receptions; the agency has a listed 
phone number, and the day has long 
passed when junior employees went 
• through the absurd ritual of telling 
people whom they met at Washington 
cocktail" parties simply ’ that they 
worked for "the government.’’ 
Another Department 
A LL THIS is straightforward enough, 
an<* I *s ^ard to fault in any 
government It is true that Francis 
Gary Powers did help disrupt the sum- 
mit conference in 1960 by having the 
ill-luck to be shot down over Russia in 
his U-2 aircraft.

But those reconnais- 
sance flights, and the reconnaissance 
satellites later sent aloft by both 
Russia and America, .

have helped 
to slow down the arms race and to in- 
spire mutual confidence that the other 
side is not building some new 'super- 
weapon in secret 
- , - ,i u: r \ • 
See CIA, Page B3, Column 1 
Bar Bob Burchett*—TheWMfcHnafcon Poet 
Richard Helms, the ebulient di- 
rector of the gray-faced CIA, 
for example, thatr more than 100,000 
people are actively engaged in the one 
function of.

gathering and interpreting 
information about Sovie^ military 
capabilities.

The CIA budget, too, is immense, al- 
though not one iteip appears anywhere 
in the compendia of federal expendi- 
tures, there is no congressional debate 
and few people know its true magni- 
tude.

By conservative estimates, more 
than $1 billion of CIA money is hidden 
under other categories and another $2 
billion is spent on similar activities by 
other agencies—such as the National 
Security Agency—whose existence is 
never formally acknowledged.

Yet despite the secretive nature of 
the “intelligence community,” many 
CIA officials lead surprisingly public 
lives.By conservative estimates, more 
than $1 billion of CIA money is hidden 
under other categories and another $2 
billion is spent on similar activities by 
other agencies—such as the National 
Security Agency—whose existence is 
never formally acknowledged. Yet despite the secretive nature of 
the “intelligence community,” many 
CIA officials lead surprisingly public 
lives. Unlike the heads of MI5 and 
MI6, the director of Central Intelli- 
gence is a familiar figure at diplomatic

--- PAGE BREAK ---CIA, From Page B1 
Few people who take seriously the 
problems of running a government and 
a reasonably enlightened foreign pol- 
icy would question the role that the 
CIA shares with other agencies in 
gathering and interpreting informa- 
tion; but they do argue against the op- 
erational responsibilities that shelter 
—under the same roof—what is popu- 
larly called the “department of dirty 
tricks.” 
There is considerable justice in the 
I view that the same bureaucrats who 
I carry through policy should not have 
f the right to gather the information 
• needed to judge their actions.

And 
since the ill-starred adventure at the 
Bay of Pigs, there has been a much 
greater effort throughout the Ameri- 
can government to end this overlap of 
authority.

President Kennedy reacti- 
vated his Foreign Intelligence Advi- 
sory Board and all the bureaucratic 
strings were pulled much tighter.

Ironically, however, the test of intel- 
lectual purity has not been applied as 
rigorously to the CIA’s competitors.

The Defense Department and its many 
military offshoots also devote large re- 
sources to knowing the enemy, and 
there is far less concern to see that re- 
sponsibility for information and action 
are kept separate.

The Vietnam war is 
an excellent example of this.

The blun- 
ders that have occurred in that war 
from bad espionage involve the mill- 
tary more than they do their civilian 
counterparts at the CIA.

Tool and Scapegoat 
BUT IN ALL, it is fair to say that 
very little if anything that is done f 
Again, after the Bay of Pigs fiasco, it 
suited President Kennedy and his hag- 
iographers to emphasize the bad ad- 
vice given by the CIA.

Here was a rec- 
ognized scapegoat whose involvement 
softened criticism of executive deci- 
sions.

Surely, the argument ran, even 
the President could not be expected to 
be proof against the agency’s machina- 
tions?Here was a rec- 
ognized scapegoat whose involvement 
softened criticism of executive deci- 
sions.

Surely, the argument ran, even 
the President could not be expected to 
be proof against the agency’s machina- 
tions?

- 
This incident illustrates what may » 
be the most important fact to bear in 
rwnd about the CIA: What it actually 
does or does not do is far less impor- 
tant than what it is believed to do.

Uke a belief in religion or witchcraft 
in other times, belief in the potency of 
the CIA provides a point of stability in 
a disorganized world.

It is far easier to accept that evil is 
being done consciously than to under- 
stand it as the simple product of 
human failings.

Good intentions gone 
awry are far harder to tolerate than 
the knowledge that a conspiracy is 
truly afoot.

One doesn’t have to be par- 
anoid to gain a certain comfort from 
suspicions of conspiracy; and the few 
times that the CIA actually does gain 
direct publicity—almost always when a 
job has been bungled—merely confirm 
them.

The political impact of this desire to 
believe in the CIA’s skulduggeries is 
considerable—however many thou- 
sands or millions of conscious agents 
one must assume to exist for the 
agency to be involved in all the actions 
attributed to it This was made quite 
clear recently on BBC Television’s 
Line-Up,” when Michael Dean inter- 
viewed Andreas Papandreou, the most 
publicized leader of the Greek resist- 
ance-in-exile.

Papandreou recounted in 
ht, fK.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The political impact of this desire to 
believe in the CIA’s skulduggeries is 
considerable—however many thou- 
sands or millions of conscious agents 
one must assume to exist for the 
agency to be involved in all the actions 
attributed to it This was made quite 
clear recently on BBC Television’s 
Line-Up,” when Michael Dean inter- 
viewed Andreas Papandreou, the most 
publicized leader of the Greek resist- 
ance-in-exile. Papandreou recounted in 
ht, fK. nr *  —■ *-^I«UJCOU recounted in some 
totay ?°ea C0I“rary to the / detail the nature of the 
JCIA plot 
HUf163 016 President and his inline- I to overthrow the democratic govem- 
?Mieh*rfViSerS ..RJjnype0plethinkthat I ment ln Athens and install the colo- 
it is bad enough that the President can I nels, and completed his narrative with 
sometimes set in secret and with con- I quotations from a top se^f meeTina 
3epara?iethTPaCt’bUUt!S neCMSary t0 I °f the American National SecurHy 
separate this concern about American I Council. ly 
kAkatrlAw I    ^ 
behavior in general from perennial 
worries that the CIA. as the estab- 
lished villain, will run amok. Perhaps this Is all true. But even if 
it is, what does it say for the strength 
of Greek political life and institutions?

--- PAGE BREAK ---at the CIA. as the estab- 
lished villain, will run amok. Perhaps this Is all true. But even if 
it is, what does it say for the strength 
of Greek political life and institutions?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Must we believe that every Greek of 
political influence is employed by the 
Americans? Or were the Greeks so lax 
in developing their political Institu- 
tions that an order from the CIA—or 
whatever—could indeed produce what 
we see in Athens today? 
Deliciously Sinister 
THE EFFORT by many Greeks 
today to pin most if not all of 
their troubles on the Americans is only 
one example of the force exerted by 
the conspiracy theory of history. In- 
deed, there is a certain appeal in the 
truly sinister and secret operation that 
is lacking in the more obvious one. 
Everyone knows that Air America, 
which forms the backbone of the anti- 
communist air war in Laos, is directly 
financed by the CIA. Yet this knowl- 
edge has never produced an outcry, or 
even much interest, largely because 
the whole affair is conducted with min- 
imum secrecy and maximum routine 
and boredom. 
Compared to the killing of Che Gue- 
vara—widely believed to be tfte work 
of the CIA—the fighting in Laos is far 
more important in terms of current 
politics and lives lost, but it is totally 
lacking in those elements that make 
for a basic confrontation between good 
and evil. For the purposes of theater 
and the politics that depend on it, Gue-‘ 
vara’s death symbolizes this kind of 
confrontation perfectly. Indeed, his 
life and work would be incomplete un- 
less he had been killed in this or some 
similar way. 
This sense of the conflict between 
good and evil was also present in the 
most celebrated instance of CIA in- 
volvement in Great Britain: the tunnel- 
ing of money through the Congress for 
Cultural Freedom to the magazine Jij- 
qdunBF^T^iue and cry from that af- 
fair nave subsided, but the moral is- 
sues that were raised have still not 
been adequately settled. j 
i A number of authors, and some indi- 
viduals who had helped with the edit- 
ing in entire innocence of the secret 
source of funds, were horrified to dis- 
Wrisbt In the Dayton Dally Neva 
44There he is again."f authors, and some indi- 
viduals who had helped with the edit- 
ing in entire innocence of the secret 
source of funds, were horrified to dis- 
Wrisbt In the Dayton Dally Neva 
44There he is again."

--- PAGE BREAK ---indi- 
viduals who had helped with the edit- 
ing in entire innocence of the secret 
source of funds, were horrified to dis- 
Wrisbt In the Dayton Dally Neva 
44There he is again."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

cover who had actually been making * . 
possible the publication of their views. 
These men and women had written ^ 
what they believed, and were in no 
way influenced by the character of ^ 
their ultimate benefactor. Can it be J1 
said that they were suborned? 
Likewise, do articles written for a 
magazine that has been compromised 
by the CIA have no value? Do they 
lose the significance which the authors ‘ 
thought they were imparting to their i 
work when they produced it? 
This is not really a question about *>,7 
the nature of the sponsoring institu- 
tion—whether one that serves the ends ,rj 
of a government, or one like the great u 
foundations that give out money 
amassed by devious means in the past 
—but of the secrecy with which it is i . 
done. At heart, it is a question of i 
man's striving to secure the right to 
know what forces are shaping his life, ». 
to know how far he is a free agent. * O 
A Guidepost Warped 
THE ANGER directed at the CIA 7 
was not eased by the irony of the q 
CIA’s choice of what is considered at 
least by Americans to be a left-of-cen- . 
ter publication. If anything, it intensi- 
fied this anger, particularly on the n 
part of those who needed to measure 
their own radical progress against 
their image 6f CIA activities. * 
There was also a sense that the bar- 
gain with the devil had been unfairly 
struck. It is one thing to sell one’s soul ' 
willingly; it is quite another to do so, v, 
even if the temporal payment is made, 
without being able to share in the 
awareness of complicity with evil. To be 
used by a capricious god may be toler- 
able if everyone is in on the secret, but 
what could be worse than to be denied 7 
the sweetness that comes from the , 
knowledge of sin? 
Perhaps this is the way an agency 7 
like the CIA must operate, and cer- » 
tainly this fresh evidence of duplicity 
only reinforced the comforting belief f 
that conspiracy does, indeed, abotuui. 
As such, the piA has a value in ihm 
realm of drama, in the realm of th« 
morality play, whatever its impact on 
the world’s policies.