

News / True Crime


A


Feldman ‘My Truth’:
Everything on the allegations
sexual misconduct

Several women have recently come forward accusing former child actor
Corey Feldman, who starred in films such as Goonies, License To Drive,
and Lost Boys, of alleged rape & abuse, including physical & sexual
assault.


The former 80’s child star is a known activist against sexual assault &
pedophilia in Hollywood. Corey Feldman, who claims to have insider
information, has threatened to expose those who are taking advantage of
vulnerable people within the entertainment industry.

Corey Feldman made a documentary that attempts to expose predators
within the Hollywood community. His documentary film My Truth: A Rape
of 2 Coreys presents allegations that Corey Feldman and fellow child
actor Corey Haim were both sexually abused by Hollywood moguls.


Feldman has received criticism over the documentary, though. Critics
claim the project is just a “greatly exaggerated money-grab” profiting from
child abuse by simply repeating claims published in this article by National
Enquirer on November 8th, 2017.

Despite his participation in the fight against sexual abuse in Hollywood,
multiple claims that Feldman is allegedly perpetrating acts of abuse
himself have now surfaced. Here is what we know.


The Mindy Robinson editorial

Multiple women have come forward allegedly accusing Corey Feldman of
instances of rape, sexual abuse, sexual harassment & physical assault.
Although some of these allegations have already circulated on social
media over the past decade, they were recently publicized by Mindy
Robinson, a conservative activist, political commentator, actress & former
associate of Feldman.


On June 16 of 2020, Mindy Robinson published an open editorial titled
“Corey Feldman is a Sexual Predator: Former Angels Speak Out” to lend
weight to some of these accusations. She published it here.


“He demanded I had to wear white if we hung out or did an
event which was ... weird, but whatever. Then he started
demanding that I couldn't eat meat in front of him. He had
actually invited me to dinner, but then refused to “allow” me to
order anything with meat because he was vegan and found it
“offensive” which was the last time I agreed to ever take him up
on dinner. “


“According to her, Corey Feldman, not only destroyed the lives
of women who were around him, he wanted to control
everything; the way they dress, the things they eat, and the way
they live their lives. As stated by Robinson, the icing on the
cake is the drugs he lures women to do with him so that he can
take advantage of their vulnerable condition and have sex with
them. ”


The editorial mentions an incident where Robinson was invited to
Feldman’s birthday party. Requirements for entering the party included a
choice: pay an entry fee, or strip down to her bra & thong.

Robinson also alleges that she later found out that Feldman was having
unprotected sex with women. Robinson claims to have cared for one
woman who was sick from all the drugs & alcohol Feldman had given her.
Robinson stated:


“I held her hair while she cried and threw up, while Corey stomped around
angry because she wouldn't have sex with him”. She says Feldman had
also given the girl a bladder infection. ”


“Corey liked using his “celebrity” status to reel in young, usually
out of town, naive girls, but it turns out he also convinced them
that a make-up sponge dipped In a questionable spermicide he
bought from China would protect them from every disease in
the world... including AIDS.” Robinson wrote.


Robinson further adds, “Corey Feldman is a manipulative, emotional bully
and takes advantage of everyone he knows. I very well believe that he
himself was a victim of sexual abuse.. .but that does not give him the right
to sexually violate women all the while pretending to fight Hollywood
predators. Make no mistake, Corey Feldman is a sexual predator of the
worst kind."


The accusers

Eight women have spoken out as victims & witnesses of Corey Feldman’s
alleged sexual, emotional, mental, and physical abuse. Some of them
have worked in very close proximity with Feldman, or have been a part of
Corey Feldman’s former band, Corey’s Angels. Here is what we know
about them.

Mara Moon, a singer & songwriter who was a part of Feldman’s 2017 tour,
alleges she was subjected to emotional abuse because she refused to
acquiesce to Feldman’s sexual advances. She was forced to watch his
orgies, drug use, and abusive behavior.

Jacqueline Von Rueden, one of Corey Feldman’s former band members
from the spring & summer tours of 2017, allegedly claims that Feldman
and his wife Courtney Anne Mitchell, (Now Courtney Feldman) were both
fond of group sex parties, often luring newcomers to participate in group
sex with them. Von Rueden also filed a police report on Feldman for
sexual battery.


“There were several times at his home or on tour where he
grabbed at my butt or breasts" says Von Rueden.


Allegedly, Von Rueden also claims that she witnessed Feldman sodomize
an unnamed girl while his wife watched on, encouraging him.


“This happened while on tour in New York City. I tried to go
back to the tour bus with the other girls after our show but he
yelled at me and said I had to go with him because it was his
birthday We had a party at his hotel suite. Some of the girls left
and then Corey had sex with the ones who stayed besides
myseif and one girl who was there with her boyfriend who only
had sex with him while we watched.


“Eventually that couple left too. One of the other girls had told Corey
earlier in the day that she was going to have anal sex with him as a gift for
his birthday. She had never done It before and when he told her he
wanted to do It, she said no because she was scared and she had
changed her mind.


His wife Courtney started screaming at the girl, saying that she
had to do it because she already said she would. Corey yelled
at her too. The girl started crying and kept saying no, but Corey
didn't care and he forced himself on her. His wife was touching
me and kept saying “Isn't that so hot?” while he raped her. I had
done so much MDMA and ketamine that I was physically ill, I
felt freezing cold and I couldn 't move or speak.''


Poeina Suddarth, a costume designer, and musician who worked with
Corey Feldman in 2016 & 2017, allegedly revealed that Feldman not only
used women for sex but also robbed them of their hard work. She
accused Feldman of using the costumes she made for him without ever
paying her.


“As long as you're listening to him and dancing on his signals
you're acceptable but the moment you start making your own
decisions he kicks you out of his group and he uses your
belongings without your permission. “


Suddarth also allegedly claimed that all the donations, which Corey
collected to help him fight sexual abuse, were allegedly redirected to his
own personal purse.


Margot Lane, music director & band mate who worked on the spring &
summer tours with Corey Feldman allegedly spoke of the artist’s habit of
slipping women unsuspecting drugs. Lane also filed a complaint with the
California Labor Commissioner’s Office for unpaid wages and penalties.
The court sided with Lane, stating she was owed over $7000. Details can
be found here.


Chantal Knippenburg allegedly calls Feldman a sexual predator, claiming
allegations of Feldman behaving inappropriately with underage girls. In
June 2020, Knippenberg claimed to have proof that Feldman, in
collaboration with another former child actor, Jamison Newlander, were
conducting inappropriate business relations with young girls in the form of
a talent agency.

Allegedly, in order to be considered for an audition, young girls were
required to take pictures of themselves and send them to Feldman for
approval. The pictures were allegedly received by a woman named Nicole
Howe, who was responsible for deciding which should be forwarded to
Feldman.

Knippenberg alleged in an interview that many of the pictures that came
through were disturbing to see.


“There were many pictures of young girls dressed in lingerie
leaving very little to the imagination. ”


Like Margot Lane, Knippenberg also made further allegations against
Corey Feldman, claiming he fed drugs to some of these underage girls


then would proceed to abuse them. Knippenberg alleges that Jamison


Newlander not only knew of this happening but witnessed these events
himself. Newlander remains silent on the issue.


A TOWN HALL CONVBtSATION WITH THE

SAG-AFTRA LA COMMOIS ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT

THURSDAY. JUNE »TH @ 8PM PST


I V


tSTlNinllLIER PtMEU BDEST CORE! FELOMRN LIU BERNIRO JESSI^RRT


/


011 II ClHTIIA lu CUlf


HEAR THE STORIES BEHIND THE HEADLINES FIND OUT WHAT S
BEEN HAPPENING AND TELL US YOUR IDEAS FOR CHANGE


V W e b; LI Z o 6


,} S


/ * ■'


SRS*'


r


Amy Clark, another fellow Corey’s Angels musician, tweeted a picture of
herself with a scratch on her arm and wrote “Thanks @Corey_Feldman
for his nasty scratch u gave me while pushing me into a wall after
screaming at me.” The tweet was later deleted.

In 2016, Corey Feldman also allegedly left an angry voice message for
former “Corey’s Angel” band member, Krystal Khali, when he found out
that she was preparing to leave the band.


The fallout

Only days following the publication of Mindi Robinson’s open editorial,
Corey Feldman was scheduled to be one of the panelists on the town hall
meeting organized by the LA committee on Sexual Violence. This panel
consisted of several SAG-AFTRA survivors of sexual violence.

Although the panel didn’t mention Corey Feldman’s name directly, the
panel was abruptly cancelled due to allegations of sexual misconduct
against one of their panelists.


Corey Feldman has taken to Twitter, as well as a variety of other
publications to categorically deny every allegation made against him.
There have been allegations that during these denials, Feldman has
participated in victim shaming of some of the accusers as well. Feldman
allegedly leaked naked images of Jacqueline Von Reuden, one of his
accusers.


Furthermore, Corey Feldman claims a group called “The Wolfpack”
cooked up these accusations against him, with the sole intention of
tarnishing his reputation and stifling his voice. Feldman claims The
Wolfpack are interested in suppressing the allegations of sexual
misconduct Feldman made against Hollywood in his documentary.

Those interested in watching My Truth: A Rape of 2 Coreys can do so
here.

All claims made against Corey Feldman here still remain allegations.
Corey Feldman has not currently been charged with any crimes.


Share With:


□


Tags


Amy Clark Chantal Knippenburg Corey Feldman Jacqueline Von Rueden Mara Moon
Mindy Robinson My Truth: A Rape Of 2 Coreys Poeina Suddarth Sexual Allegations


Jim Cue is a Miami-based documentary filmmaker and
occasional writer. Jim's passion? Digging up true crime
rabbit holes. His obsession? Fact-checking them. Jim's
favorite leisure activity is fact-checking crazy stories
somewhere on the beach.


Jim Cue


jcue@filmdaily.co
