This  transcript  has  not  yet  been  checked  against 
videotape  and  cannot,  for  that  reason,  be 
guaranteed  as  to  accuracy  of  speakers  and  spelling.

(LW) 
LARRY  KING  LIVE  Transcript  #972 
Air  Date:  November  22,  1993 
The  Kennedy  Assassination:  Thirty 
Years  Later 
ANNOUNCER:  Welcome  to  Larry  King  Live.

Tonight:  A 
computer  says  Oswald  acted  alone  —   Thirty  years  after  the 
shots  in  Dealey  Plaza,  a   new  high-tech  analysis  points 
away  from  a   conspiracy.

Hear  the  latest  chapter  in  the 
debate  that  will  not  end.

Then,  memories  of  the  slain 
president  from  his  personal  photographer;  and  biographer 
Richard  Reeves  offers  a   new  take  on  the  Kennedy  years.

Now,  here’s  Larry  King.

LARRY  KING:  Good  evening  from  Washington.

Thirty  years  ago,  America  mourned  the  death  of  a   presi- 
dent —   a   criminal  act  that  many  say  is  still  an  unsolved 
mystery.

Polls  show  a   vast  majority  of  Americans  — 
maybe  90  percent  —   believe  that  John  F.

Kennedy  was 
killed  by  unknown  conspirators.

But  a   new  high-tech  com- 
puter study  backs  up  the  Warren  Commission  —   un- 
popular though  that  may  be.

We  welcome  Kal  Korff,  president  of  Total  Research  of 
Palo  Alto,  California.

His  computers  have  analyzed  16 
years’  worth  of  assassination  books  and  have  ruled  that 
Oswald  acted  alone.

Joining  us  tonight  from  Dallas  is  an 
assassination  investigator  of  long  standing  with  a   very  dif- 
ferent point  of  view  —   Gaeton  Fonzi.

In  his  new  book,  The 
Last  Investigation  —   there  you  see  its  cover  —   from 
Thunders  Mouth  Press  [sp?],  Mr.

Fonzi  claims  to  reveal  the 
only  verifiable  link  between  Oswald  and  the  CIA.

Kal,  what  started  you  doing  a   16-year  computer  analy- 
sis of  this?

KAL  KORFF,  JFK  Researcher:  Well,  it  actually  started 
in  high  school,  Larry.Kal,  what  started  you  doing  a   16-year  computer  analy- 
sis of  this?

KAL  KORFF,  JFK  Researcher:  Well,  it  actually  started 
in  high  school,  Larry.

I  had  asked  my  teacher,  “Who  shot 
President  Kennedy?”  I  was  trying  to  do  an  extra-credit 
report.

And  no  one  could  give  me  an  answer.

So,  we 
looked  into  the  issue,  came  up  with  a   report  that  was  some 
218  pages,  and  then  we  ended  up  doing  a   computer  analy- 
sis at  NASA  of  a   photograph  taken  during  the  assassina- 
tion.

KING:  “We”  being— ?

Mr.

KORFF:  A   friend  of  mine  and  I  at  the  time.

We  were 
freshmen  in  high  school  —   coincidentally,  going  to  John  F.

Kennedy  High  School,  just  a   coincidence.

So,  we  did  this 
analysis,  and  the  computer  comes  back  and  tells  us  there  is 
a   person  standing  on  the  grassy  knoll,  most  likely  holding 
a   rifle.

A   person  wasn’t  supposed  to  be  there.

So,  the  San 
Jose  Mercury  ran  the  article  in  1978,  and  then  I  was 
hauled  out  of  school  the  following  Monday.

I  got  a   phone 
call  from  what  was  then  the  House  Assassinations  Com- 
mittee, demanding  that  I  send  in  the  photo.

I  did  that,  and 
didn’t  hear  anything  back  from  them.

Then,  about  three  or  four  months  went  by —   made  a 
bunch  of  phone  calls.

They  sent  the  photo  back;  said,  “It’ 
not  a   gunman.

It’s  a   scratch  on  the  photo.”  I  thei 
countered  with  the  argument  that,  “That’s  not  possible.

And  then,  later  on,  the  committee  concludes  there  was 
conspiracy  and  that  there  was  a   guy  on  the  knoll.

KING:  And  you  feel  that —   You  agree  with  them?

Mr.

KORFF:  No,  I  don’t,  because  what  bothered  me  is  th 
committee  said  that  there  was  no  gunman  in  the  photo,  bu 
yet  they  concluded  there  was  a   gunman  on  the  knoll.Mr.

KORFF:  No,  I  don’t,  because  what  bothered  me  is  th 
committee  said  that  there  was  no  gunman  in  the  photo,  bu 
yet  they  concluded  there  was  a   gunman  on  the  knoll.

Am 
since  the  photo  was  taken  within  one-fifth  of  a   second  o 
the  fatal  head  shot,  if  a   gunman  had  been  there  he  had  t 
be  in  the  photo.

KING:  So,  can  you  briefly  tell  us  what  you  did  over  thes 
years?

Mr.

KORFF:  Yes,  what  we  did  is,  that  started  me  lookin; 
into  the  case.

I  took  every  book  ever  published  that  sob 
any  significant  quantity  in  this  country  —   there  were  6 
books  that  have  been  bestsellers  to  this  day  —   put  them  i; 
the  computer;  scanned  the  Warren  Commission  report,  th 
House  committee  documents;  expanded  the  search  int 
data  on  J.

Edgar  Hoover,  anti-Castro  groups  such  as  Alph.

66;  put  it  Ml  in  the  computer;  did  the  photographs,  tht 
films,  the  forensic  material.

We  analyzed  it  all  and,  1< 
years  later,  coincidentally,  we  are  done  with  our  stud) 
And  our  conclusion  is  that  there’s  no  conspiracy.

KING:  Who  financed  this?

Mr.

KORFF:  I  did.

KING:  Just—?

Mr.

KORFF:  Just  myself.

KING:  Your  company  does — ?

Mr.

KORFF:  My  company  is  a   research  company  which  i.

dedicated  to  humanitarian  causes.

We  have  identified  ; 
bunch  of  issues  which  we  feel  are  problems  in  this  society 
one  of  which  is  this  belief  in  the  wrong  thing  —   that  then 
was  a   conspiracy.

KING:  Your  conclusion,  then,  backs  up  the  Posner  [sp 
book?

Mr.

KORFF:  I  would  say  it’s  probably  the  other  wa\ 
around,  because  our  study’s  a   lot  more  comprehensive  thar.

Posner’s.

KING:  You’ve  come  to  the  same  conclusion?

Mr.

KORFF:  Yes,  but  so  did  the  Warren  report.Mr. KORFF:  Yes,  but  so  did  the  Warren  report. KING:  OK  Now,  Gaeton  Fonzi  —   former  investigator  foi 
the  House  Select  Committee,  author  of  The  Last  Investiga  • 
tion  —   what’s  wrong  with  Kal’s  concepts  based  on  com- 
puter analysis? GAETON  FONZI,  Author,  “The  Last  Investigation”: 
Well,  if  investigations  could  be  done  while  sitting  in  an  of- 
fice, I   think  we’d  find  them  a   lot  easier  to  do  and  get  them 
over  with  a   lot  quicker. I  believe,  unfortunately,  that  you 
have  to  go  out  and  hit  the  streets  and  talk  to  people  and 
get  your  results  that  way. I  think — 
KING:  Yes,  but,  I  mean,  you  use  ballistics,  you  use  finger- 
prints. That’s  all  technical. That’s  in  the  office. That’s  not 
going  out. Mr. FONZI:  That’s  true,  but — 
KING:  Computers  are  a   big  part  —   DNA  research  now. Mr. FONZI:  What  happened  with  the  House  Select  Com- 
mittee on  Assassinations  was  its  heavy  reliance  on  scientif-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ic  evidence.

And  what  happened,  also,  as  a   result  of  that 
is,  you  had  a   lot  of  conflict  between  so-called  experts,  and 
you  never  really  got  to  a   final  answer.

Again,  you’re  talk- 
ing about  areas  of  the  investigation  that  weren’t  in  my 
bailiwick.

You  know,  one  of  the  points  I  make  is  that  so  many 
theories  over  the  years,  so  many  speculations,  have  devel- 
oped, really,  from  the  basis  of  the  government  not  telling 
us  the  truth  about  its  investigations.

And  the  truth  about 
the  investigations  —   both  the  Warren  Commission  and  the 
House  Select  Committee  on  Assassinations  —   was  that 
neither  one  conducted  a   full  and  complete  investigation.

KING:  Do  you  agree  with  that,  Kal?

Mr.

KORFF:  Yes  and  no.

Mr.

Fonzi’s  book  was — 
KING:  One  of  the  books?

Mr.

KORFF:  One  of  the  books  we  studied.

And  basically, 
I  think  the  difference  between  our  conclusion  and  others  is 
that  ours  is  the  only  conclusion  that  any  one  can  independ- 
ently verify.

From  what  I  can  tell  in  our  analysis  of  his 
book  and  the  committee  documents,  you  cannot  verify  con- 
clusively that  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  was  a   member  of  the  in- 
telligence community.

And  a   lot  of  the  sources  which  claim 
he  was  have  done  so  many  years  after  the  fact.

KING:  Can  you  prove  it,  Gaeton?

Mr.

FONZI:  We  developed  evidence  that  Lee  Harvey  Os- 
wald was  seen  with  a   man  who  later  became  a   high- 
ranking  intelligence  officer  in  the  agency,  in  late  August, 
early  September  of  1963.

KING:  Seen  with  him  in  what  circumstances?

Mr.

FONZI:  In  Dallas,  in  the  lobby  of  an  office  building.

This  man,  who  went  by  the  name  of  Maurice  Bishop  [sp?], 
worked  with  the  leader  of  Alpha  66,  the  largest  and  most 
militant  of  the  anti-Castro  Cuban  groups.FONZI:  In  Dallas,  in  the  lobby  of  an  office  building.

This  man,  who  went  by  the  name  of  Maurice  Bishop  [sp?], 
worked  with  the  leader  of  Alpha  66,  the  largest  and  most 
militant  of  the  anti-Castro  Cuban  groups.

KING:  Well,  how  do  you  know  he  didn’t  just  run  into  him 
in  the  hall?

Mr.

FONZI:  They  met  regularly — 
KING:  I  don’t  know  who  I  bumped  into  today.

Mr.

FONZI:  The  leader  of  the  group  —   His  name  was 
Antonio  Visciana  [sp?]  —   worked  with  this  Maurice  Bishop 
from  1960  to  1972,  and  he  was  the  strategic  director  of  Al- 
pha 66.

And  they  would  meet  on  a   regular  basis  over  the 
course  of  a   year,  wherever  Bishop  called.

KING:  So,  this  leads  you  to  think  —   in  the  interests  of 
time  —   and  of  course,  I’m  looking  forward  to  reading  your 
book  —   that  Oswald  was  doing  this  on  behalf  of  the  CIA, 
working  with  the  CIA?

Are  you  saying  he  was  one  of  the 
people  shooting?

What’s  your  conclusion?

„ 
Mr.

FONZI:  Well,  I  don’t  draw  any  conclusions,  because  I 
think  there’s  so  much  speculation  out  there.

But  the  point 
is  that  the  CIA  had  denied  any  association  with  Oswald 
from  day-one.

KING:  And  you  say  that  denial  makes  them  now  suspect?

Mr.

FONZI:  No,  what  I  say  is  this  is  an  area  of  the  inves- 
tigation that  the  committee  failed  to  pursue.

KING:  All  right,  now,  I’d  like  to  ask  Kal  to  show  us,  if  he 
would,  what  your  computers  did  to  show  that  Oswald  fired 
all  three  shots.

Right?

Mr.

KORFF:  Yes.

Well,  first  of  all— 
KING:  Put  that  up  to  the  camera.

Mr.

KORFF:  Yes.

[Holds  up  enlarged  photographs]  First 
of  all,  what  we  have  in  the  computer  analysis  here  is,  this 
view  here  shows  us — 
KING:  On  the  left?

Mr.

KORFF:  On  the  left  here.

It  shows  us  the  view  that 
the  assassin  had  when  he  fired  the  first  shot.KORFF:  On  the  left  here.

It  shows  us  the  view  that 
the  assassin  had  when  he  fired  the  first  shot.

Now,  the 
computer  enhancement,  on  what  would  be  the  right,  shows 
all  of  the  leaves  that  are  in  the  way.

And  because  Oswald’s 
rifle  was  sited  four  inches  up  to  the  right,  the  odds  of  him 
hitting  the  President  at  the  time  he  pulled  the  trigger  were 
very  small.

And  if  you  look  at  the  witnesses  and  take  their 
testimony  at  the  time,  you  see  that  the  first  shot  did  miss.

KING:  OK,  now  the  second  thing.

Mr.

KORFF:  [Holds  up  enlarged  photograph  of  limousine 
carrying  President  Kennedy]  OK,  the  next  issue  here  is, 
this  is  a   frame  of  the  Zapruder  film  from  one  of  our  enhan- 
cements.

This  has  gotten  a   lot  of  publicity  later  in  Gerald 
Posner’s  book  because  he’s  quoting  some  computer- 
enhancement  work.

This  is  frame  223  of  the  Zapruder 
film,  and  if  you’ll  look  very  carefully  here,  you’ll  see  Gov- 
ernor Connally  with  his  suit  right  here.

And  then,  in  the 
next  enhancement,  you  will  see,  of  course,  that  the  lapel, 
which  has  been  talked  about  now,  pops  up.

And  more  im- 
portantly, you  see  back  here  that  President  Kennedy  is  al- 
ready reacting  to  the  shot.

And  when  we  look  at  it  this 
way  here,  you  can  see  how,  when  you  zoom  in  close  on  it — 
You  see  that  the  President  is  reacting  and  the  lapel  has 
flipped  up.

KING:  So,  you’re  saying  the  one-bullet  theory  works?

Mr.

KORFF:  Yes.

In  other  words,  it’s  important  to  know 
that  if  it  was  three  shots  total,  Larry —   that  President  Ken- 
nedy and  Governor  Connally  should  show  reactions  of 
being  hit  at  the  same  time.

KING:  What  do  you  think,  Gaeton?

Mr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

KING:  What  do  you  think,  Gaeton? Mr. FONZI:  Well,  I’ll  tell  you  about  my  own  experience  in 
terms  of  coming  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was  a   conspiracy, 
right  from  the  beginning,  when  I  studied  the  Warren  Com- 
mission report  and  its  volumes  of  evidence  and  I  went  to 
talk  to  Arlen  Specter. This  was  back  in  early  ’65,  shortly 
after  the  Warren  report  came  out. And  what  bothered  me 
most  was  the  fact  that  the  Warren  Commission  concluded 
that  a   bullet  hole  went  into  the  lower  part  of  Kennedy’s 
neck,  the  back  of  the  neck,  and  came  out  his  throat;  and 
yet,  the  holes  in  the  jacket  and  his  shirt  were  almost  6  in- 
ches down  from  the  collar. Well,  I  had  known  Arlen  Specter,  and  I  thought,  “Well, 
Arlen  will  clear  this  up  for  me.”  When  I  went  to  talk  with 
Arlen  Specter,  he  couldn’t  resolve  that  issue. He  admitted, 
in  fact,  that  was  a   troublesome  point,  as  he  put  it. Unless  you  can  explain  why  the  bullet  holes  are  in  the 
shirt  and  the  jacket  6  inches  down  from  the  collar —   And 
the  explanation  of  it  being  bunched-up  or  doubled-over  — 
the  jacket  —   would  have  resulted  in  two  bullet  holes,  if 
that  were  the  case,  but  the  photos  show  that  the  Presi- 
dent’s jacket  wasn’t  doubled-over. KING:  All  right,  I’ve  got  to  get  a   break. But  Kal— 
Mr. KORFF:  Yes. KING:  — how  do  you  respond  to  that? —   
2   —

--- PAGE BREAK ---Mr.

KORFF:  Well,  I  disagree.

I  think  it  is  not  possible, 
Larry,  to  pinpoint  the  exact  trajectory  of  a   bullet  hole 
based  on  the  clothing.

Clothing  does  move  around,  and  the 
assumption  that  the  clothing  would  be  folded  over  is  just 
an  assumption.

KING:  OK,  let  me  get  a   break  and  come  back  with  more.

We’ll  be  including  your  phone  calls.

And  later  —   a   major 
discussion  of  John  F.

Kennedy,  politically  and  otherwise.

This  is  Larry  King  Live.

Tomorrow  night,  Anjelica 
Huston  will  be  one  of  our  guests.

Don’t  go  away.

[Commercial  break] 
KING:  We’re  back  on  Larry  King  Live  with  Kal  Korff, 
president,  Total  Research  of  Palo  Alto,  California  —   they 
did  that  16-year  computer  analysis  of  the  assassination; 
and  in  Dallas,  Gaeton  Fonzi,  the  former  federal  investiga- 
tor for  the  House  Select  Committee  on  Assassinations  — 
His  new  book  is  The  Last  Investigation.

We’ll  be  going  to  calls  in  a   couple  of  moments.

Kal 
wanted  to  add  something.

Your  thoughts  on  the  commission?

Mr.

KORFF:  Yes,  I’d  like  to  mention  to  Mr.

Fonzi,  Larry, 
that  when  we  did  our  analysis — 
We  do  agree  with  you,  sir,  that  the  committee  was 
flawed.

However,  we  don’t  agree  that  because  the  CIA  de- 
cided to  withhold  evidence  from  you,  because  you  didn’t 
have  a   need  to  know,  that  that  means  Oswald  was  on  their 
payroll  and  that  they  paid  him  to  kill  President  Kennedy.

Also,  some  of  your  main  sources,  like  Sylvia  Odio  [sp?] 
and  Vanciana  (sp?) —   Other  than  their  word  that  these 
events  actually  happened,  we  have  no  proof  that  Maurice 
Bishop  even  existed.

It’s  just,  in  a   way,  kind  of  like  a   UFO 
report,  where  you  have  someone’s  story  that  they  saw 
something.

KING:  Yes,  how  do  you  know  that  Bishop  met  with  Os- 
wald?

Mr.KING:  Yes,  how  do  you  know  that  Bishop  met  with  Os- 
wald?

Mr.

FONZI:  Well,  let  me,  first  of  all,  go  back  to  that  Syl- 
via Odio  incident  that  was  just  mentioned,  because  I  be- 
lieve this  is  one  of  the  crucial  areas  in  terms  of  conspiracy.

Sylvia  Odio  said  that  Oswald —   two  Cubans  came  to  her 
door  in  Dallas  in  late  September  of  1963,  and  linked  Os- 
wald to  the  assassination.

One  of  the  men  called  later  and 
said,  “Oswald  thinks  we  Cubans  should  have  killed  the 
President  after  the  Bay  of  Pigs.” 
She  told  that  story —   The  Warren  Commission  tried  to 
discredit  her,  and  they  did  in  their  report.

But  the  House 
Select  Committee  proved  that  she  had  told  that  story  prior 
to  the  assassination.

And  this  is  one  of  the — 
KING:  Told  it  to  whom?

Mr.

FONZI:  — most  important  events,  I  believe,  in  the 
conspiracy.

KING:  Obviously.

Now,  she  used  the  name  “Lee  Harvey 
Oswald”?

She  told  who  —   city  officials,  FBI,  who?

Mr.

FONZI:  She  never  came  forward,  herself.

As  a   result 
of  telling  her  sister  and  her  sister  telling  a   friend,  they 
found  her.

But  she  told  a   priest  and  she  told  a   doctor  prior 
to  that — 
KING:  And  both  confirmed  that  she  did?

Mr.

FONZI:  — and  her  sister  was  present  at  the  visit — 
Pardon  me?

KING:  Both  said  that  before  November  22nd  they  knev 
the  name  “Lee  Harvey  Oswald”?

Mr.

FONZI:  He  was  introduced  to  her  as  “Leon  Oswald, 
and  they  immediately  recognized —   Both  her  and  her  siste 
immediately  recognized  him  as  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  whei 
they  saw  him  on  television.

Mr.

KORFF:  OK,  yes,  a   lot  of  people  when  they  saw  Le< 
Harvey  Oswald,  Larry,  on  TV,  after  the  assassination,  du 
come  forward  and  say,  “Oh,  I  saw  this  guy  with  Jack  Rub} 
or  with  Meyer  Lansky.”  We  have  all  kinds  of  reports  lik< 
that.Mr.

KORFF:  OK,  yes,  a   lot  of  people  when  they  saw  Le< 
Harvey  Oswald,  Larry,  on  TV,  after  the  assassination,  du 
come  forward  and  say,  “Oh,  I  saw  this  guy  with  Jack  Rub} 
or  with  Meyer  Lansky.”  We  have  all  kinds  of  reports  lik< 
that.

The  truth  is,  if  you  look  at  the  committee’s  owi 
records  and  the  FBI  reports,  you  will  find  out  that  her  doc- 
tor has  testified  that  he  heard  it  the  day  after  the  assas 
sination,  because  the  day  of  the  assassination,  Larry,  Odi< 
had  a   nervous  breakdown.

She’d  come  to  this  country 
she’d  been  here  a   couple  of  years  earlier  than  that;  she  ha( 
had  her  kids  taken  away  from  her  because  she  was  deemec 
an  unfit  mother.

She  was  psychologically  unstable,  an< 
that  is  what  her  doctor  has  testified  to.

Her  sister  could  not  recall  the  phrase  “Leon  Oswald.

Also,  finally,  when  she  claims  that  she  saw  Lee  Harvey  Os 
wald,  that  entire  last  week  of  September,  he  was  in  Mexio 
at  the  time.

KING:  Does  that  change  your  mind,  Gaeton?

Mr.

FONZI:  No,  not  at  all.

The  information  that  he’.' 
drawing  from  is  from  the  original  FBI  reports,  which  wen 
discredited  by  the  House  Select  Committee.

She  did  tel 
the  priest  and  she  did  tell  the  doctor  prior  to  the  assassina 
tion.

Mr.

KORFF:  How  were  they  discredited?

Mr.

FONZI:  Because  the  Warren  Commission  didn’t  havt 
their  testimony  at  the  time.

They  used  only  FBI  report.' 
that  went  to  other  doctors  to  claim  that  she  was  unstable.

KING:  So,  a   Catholic  priest  said  that  he  knew  the  name 
“Oswald”  before  November  22nd?

Mr.

FONZI:  That’s  right.

KING:  We’ll  be  right  back  with  Kal  Korff  and  Gaeton 
Fonzi.

We’ll  include  your  phone  calls.

And  then  — 
Richard  Reeves  and  others.

Don’t  go  away.

[Commercial  break] 
KING:  We’re  back,  and  we’ll  go  to  some  calls.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Don’t  go  away. [Commercial  break] 
KING:  We’re  back,  and  we’ll  go  to  some  calls. Houston,  Texas,  for  Kal  Korff  and  Gaeton  Fonzi  — 
Hello. 1st  CALLER:  [Houston,  Texas]  Yes,  Larry. I’d  like  to  ask 
Kal— 
About  30  years  ago,  I  was  standing  on  the  curb  in 
Dallas  when  the  shots  hit  the  President. And  in  all  of  your 
research  that  you’ve  done,  I’d  like  to  know  what  you  found 
that  allowed  you  to  either  discredit  or  not  go  along  with  a 
lot  of  the  information  in  David  Lifton’s  [sp?]  book? Mr. KORFF:  Well,  David  Lifton  started  his  study  by  look- 
ing at  an  FBI  report  which  incorrectly  stated  that  surgery 
had  been  performed  on  the  head  of  the  President. KING:  During  the  flight,  right? And  the  body  switched,  or 
something? Mr. KORFF:  Yes,  that  was  later  his  scenario  that  he 
came  up  with. What  we  came  up  with  was,  basically,  this. When  you  look  at  the  Zapruder  film,  we  were  the  first 
ones,  in  1988,  to  identify  the  moment  of  the  first  shot. We 
—   
3  —

--- PAGE BREAK ---then  found  the  second  shot,  where  you  can  see  the  bullet  go 
through  both  President  Kennedy  and  Governor  Connally.

That's  the  lapel  flipping  up  that  everyone  is  talking  about 
now.

And  then,  the  third  shot,  of  course,  is  the  fatal  head 
shot.

KING:  Are  you  going  to  publish  these  findings?

Mr.

KORFF:  Yes,  we're  going  to —   We  don't  have  a   pub- 
lisher yet.

We’re  looking  for  a   publisher  that's  going  to 
treat  the  data  respectfully.

But  next  year,  our  goal  is  to 
get  out  software  and  a   book  so  that — 
KING:  Software?

In  other  words,  I  can  go  home  and  play 
assassination  buff?

Mr.

FONZI:  Yes.

If  you  own  an  IBM  computer  or  a 
Macintosh  computer,  you  can,  with  our  software,  replicate 
the  assassination,  yourself.

You  can  actually  participate  in 
it  and  verify  the  results  on  our  own.

KING:  Vincennes,  Indiana,  hello.

2nd  CALLER:  [ Vincennes ,  Indiana]  Hello,  Larry.

KING:  Hi.

2nd  CALLER:  My  question  is,  in  the  Magruder  [sic] 
film — 
Mr.

KORFF:  Zapruder  film,  sir.

KING:  Zapruder.

2nd  CALLER:  Yes,  sorry.

The  presidential  car  goes  be- 
hind that  big  sign  and  then  comes  out.

Mr.

KORFF:  Yes.

2nd  CALLER:  Do  researchers  think  that  those  missing 
frames  are  very  important?

Mr.

KORFF:  Well,  there  aren't  any  missing  frames.

The 
three  frames  you're  talking  about  were  accounted  for,  once 
the  technician  was  found  who  accidentally  tweaked  [sic] 
the  three  frames  when  they  were  making  a   copy  print.

I 
have  the  three  frames  at  home  on  our  computer  archives.

They  have  been  published.

KING:  Gaeton,  let  me  understand.

Are  you  saying  that — 
Can  you  both  be  right?

Can  Kal  be  right,  and  can  you  be 
right  by  saying  Oswald  was  shooting  for  the  CIA?

Mr.Can  Kal  be  right,  and  can  you  be 
right  by  saying  Oswald  was  shooting  for  the  CIA?

Mr.

FONZI:  Well,  you  know  what  still  bothers  me,  as  I 
said  before,  are  those  holes  in  the  jacket  and  the  shirt.

And  this  is  not  an  assumption  I’m  making.

There  are  pho- 
tographs of  the  jacket  and  shirt  indicating  where  it  is.

KING:  Yes,  doesn't  clothing  move  when  a   bullet  hits 
someone?

Mr.

FONZI:  Well,  a   jacket  may  move,  but  Kennedy  was 
probably  the  best-dressed  president  we  had,  and  he  was 
wearing  a   back  brace  and  he  had  a   form-fitting  shirt.

And 
in  addition  to  which,  every  Secret  Service  man  behind  the 
motorcade  described  the  shot  as  hitting  him  in  the  back, 
below  the  shoulder.

Two  FBI  agents  who  were  present  at 
the  autopsy  said  that  they  observed  Dr.

Humes  [sp?]  prob- 
ing this  bullet  wound  in  his  back,  and  it  was  only  a   finger- 
length  long.

Mr.

KORFF:  Well,  if  you  look  at  the  reports  that  are 
going  on  at  the  time,  you  have  all  kinds  of  things.

You 
have  people  who  claim  they  heard  everything  from  two 
shots  to  six  shots.

Again,  clothing —   The  one  thing  miss- 
ing, I   think,  in  what  you're  saying  is  that  you  don't  account 
for  the  fact  that  Kennedy  wore  an  Ace  bandage,  as  well.

And,  yes,  chat  did  afreet  the  way  his  shirt  wras  bunched  up.

And  because  of  the  way  he's  waving —   Again,  look  at  the 
film.

You  see  it  yourself.

I'm  simply  saying  that  holes, 
bullet  holes —   One  bullet  hole  in  a   shirt  is  not  proof  that 
there  was  a   conspiracy  or  that  the  person  who  pulled  the 
trigger  was  from  the  CIA.

KING:  Columbia,  Maryland,  hello.

3rd  CALLER:  [ Columbia ,  Maryland]  Hello.KING:  Columbia,  Maryland,  hello.

3rd  CALLER:  [ Columbia ,  Maryland]  Hello.

I'd  like  these 
gentlemen  to  please  quote  on  what  I  heard  last  night  for 
the  first  time  —   it  may  have  been  reported  before  —   that 
one  of  the  Secret  Service  men  shooting  towards  where  he 
heard  a   shot  coming  from —   his  gun  may  have  bolted  or  the 
car  may  have  jolted,  and  the  Secret  Service  man,  himself, 
may  have  shot  the  President.

This  was  reported  last 
night — 
KING:  Where?

3rd  CALLER:  — by  a   ballistics —   on  the  news —   a   bal- 
listics expert  from  Maryland.

I  believe  it  was  “Mr.

Howard”  was  the  one  who  has  done  the  study.

KING:  Kal?

Mr.

KORFF:  Yes,  there's  a   book  out  called  Mortal  Error.

The  author  of  that  book,  whom  you’re  talking  about  last 
night,  is  the  guy  who  claims  that  Mr.

Hickey  [sp?],  one  of 
the  Secret  Service  agents,  accidentally  discharged  his  AR- 
17  rifle,  wounding  Kennedy  in  the  back  of  the  head.

That 
is  not  true.

Look  at  any  photo  taken  during  the  assassina- 
tion.

You  see  that  Hickey  did  not  bring  his  rifle  up  until 
after  the  third  shot  was  over.

Hickey  doesn't —   will  not 
even  respond  to  such  an  accusation,  because  it  is 
ridiculous.

KING:  Groningen,  The  Netherlands,  hello.

4th  CALLER:  [ Groningen ,  The  Netherlands]  Hello.

I 
have  a   question  for  Mr.

Kal  [sic].

KING:  Yes.

4th  CALLER:  Why  do  you  think  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  has 
been  shot?

Clearly,  there  was  a   great  interest  to  prevent 
Oswald  from  talking.

KING:  Is  that  too  circumstantial?

Mr.

KORFF:  Well,  I  can't  tell  you  why  Jack  Ruby  decided 
to  kill  Lee  Harvey  Oswald,  other  than  what  Jack  Ruby 
ended  up  saying  before  he  died.

He  said  he  just  thought  he 
was  going  to  be  a   hero,  he  wouldn't  get  a   big  sentence.

KING:  What  do  you  think,  Gaeton?

Mr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

KING:  What  do  you  think,  Gaeton? Mr. FONZI:  Well,  I  think,  again,  it's  not  an  area  of  my  in- 
vestigation. But  I  think  the  committee  concluded  that 
Ruby  was  actually  stalking  Oswald  prior  to  the  day  he  shot 
him,  and  that  he  had  help  getting  into  the  police  depart- 
ment. KING:  Montgomery,  Alabama,  hello. 5th  CALLER:  [ Montgomery ,  Alabama]  Yes,  when  Presi- 
dent Kennedy  was  shot,  John  Connally  was  shot,  too. And 
all  these  years,  he  carried  fragments  of  those  bullets  in  his 
body  —   even  to  his  grave. I   want  to  know,  if  you  all  got 
those  fragments  now  and  analyzed  them,  would  it  shed  any 
light  on  the  case? Mr. KORFF:  Well,  it  would  shed  light  on  the  case  if  a 
neutron-activation  analysis  were  to  be  done. The  problem 
is,  there's  only  one  fragment  in  Governor  Connall/s  body. It  is  buried  with  him. In  fact,  it  was  deemed  so  in- 
significant —  left  over  from  the  bottom  of  the  bullet  that 
—   4   —

--- PAGE BREAK ---hit  him  —   that  the  doctors  didn’t  even  remove  it.

KING:  Gaeton,  do  you  think  we’ll  ever  resolve  this?

Mr.

FONZI:  You  know,  I  don’t  think  that’s  the  question.

I 
think  the  question  is:  Can  we  afford  not  to  continue  to 
pursue  the  truth?

Unfortunately,  because  of  the  in- 
adequate investigations  conducted  by  the  government,  we 
still  have  a   lot  of  open  questions.

And  I  think,  as  I   say,  we 
can't  leave  them  open  in  this  democratic  society  of  ours.

Mr.

KORFF:  I  would  disagree  with  that,  sir.

I  would 
simply  say  that,  if  you  look  at  our  conclusions,  as  well  as 
some  of  those  advocated  by  Posner’s  —   but  ours  go  a   lot 
deeper  because  our  study  was  a   lot  more  comprehensive  — 
I   don’t  think  there’s  any  part  of  our  analysis  that  cannot  be 
replicated.

A   fact  is  a   fact.

Anybody  should  be  able  to  in- 
dependently check  it  and  verify  it.

The  problem  I  have  with  some  of  the  theories  advocated 
■  with  Lee  Harvey  Oswald  being  a   CIA  operative  is  that  the 
evidence  for  this  comes  from  individuals  who  have  no  proof 
to  back  up  what  they’ve  claimed,  other  than  just  their 
word.

KING:  All  right,  we’re  going  to  stop  it  there,  but  we’ll,  ob- 
viously have —   One  thing  you  can  be  sure  of:  Death,  taxes, 
and  you  have  not  heard  the  last  of  this.

Thank  you  very 
much,  Kal  Korff  and  Gaeton  Fonzi.

Gaeton’s  book  is  The 
Last  Investigation ,  and  we  look  forward  to  Kal’s  published 
materials  as  well  as  the  software  next  year.

When  we  come  back,  we’ll  be  joined  by  Richard  Reeves 
and  others  to  look  at  the  Kennedy  legacy,  right  after  this.

ANNOUNCER:  Coming  up:  A   fresh  look  at  “Camelot” 
from  author  Richard  Reeves,  and  JFK’s  personal  photo- 
grapher shows  off  his  favorite  pictures.When  we  come  back,  we’ll  be  joined  by  Richard  Reeves 
and  others  to  look  at  the  Kennedy  legacy,  right  after  this.

ANNOUNCER:  Coming  up:  A   fresh  look  at  “Camelot” 
from  author  Richard  Reeves,  and  JFK’s  personal  photo- 
grapher shows  off  his  favorite  pictures.

[Commercial  break] 
Images  of  JFK 
KING:  Grieving  for  JFK  went  on  all  over  the  country 
today.

Thirty  years  after  we  first  absorbed  the  terrible 
news,  polls  still  name  Kennedy  our  greatest  president.

No 
wonder  many  say  his  leadership  and  charisma  remain  un- 
matched to  this  day.

We  reflect  on  this  somber  anniver- 
sary with  Jacques  Lowe.

He  was  JFK’s  personal  photo- 
grapher through  the  1960  campaign  and  in  the  first 
months  of  his  presidency.

His  collection  of  intimate  photos 
is  JFK  Remembered,  published  by  Random  House  —   and  it 
is  spectacular.

Also  here  is  the  veteran  political  reporter, 
Richard  Reeves.

KBs  new  biography  is  entitled,  simply, 
President  Kennedy  —   There  you  see  its  cover.

It’s  from 
Simon  and  Schuster,  and  has  been  praised  in  every  circle 
we’ve  read.

And  we  welcome  documentary  filmmaker 
Robert  Drew,  who  was  there  with  a   camera  through  Ken- 
nedy’s brightest  and  darkest  hours.

First,  individually  —   How  did  you  get  to  be  JFK’s  pho- 
tographer?

JACQUES  LOWE,  JFK  Photographer:  Actually, 
through  Bobby.

I  was  a   young  magazine  photographer, 
and  Bobby  was  appointed  the  majority  counsel  of  the 
McClellan  committee,  and  I   had  three  assignments  in  one 
week  to  go  photograph  him— 
KING:  And  he  liked  you?

Mr.

LOWE:  The  third  time,  it  got  funny.

He  took  m 
home,  we  had  dinner,  I   stayed  overnight,  he  invited  me   
KING:  And  he  recommended  you  to  his  brother?

Mr.He  took  m 
home,  we  had  dinner,  I   stayed  overnight,  he  invited  me   
KING:  And  he  recommended  you  to  his  brother?

Mr.

LOWE:  No,  what  happened  is  that  after  a   year  r 
going  up  to  Hyannisport  and  McLean,  I   made  a   whole  sc- 
of  pictures  —   128  prints,  in  fact  —   of  dogs  and  cats  an 
goldfish  and  hundreds  of  kids  and  goats,  and  you  name  it 
And  I   sent  it  down,  and  he  was  on  the  phone  in  a   fiasi 
asking  for  another  set.

And  I  said,  “Well,  you’re  craz\ 
What  are  you  doing  with  all  these  pictures?”  And  he  said 
“I  want  to  give  it  to  my  dad  as  a   birthday  present.” 
Forgot  all  about  it.

Four  months  later,  I  get  a   call  oi 
the  telephone  at  midnight.

The  voice  says,  ‘This  is  Jo 
Kennedy,  Mr.

Lowe,”  and  I  said,  “This  is  Santa  Claus.

And  he  said,  “No,  no,  this  is  Joe  Kennedy,  and  it’s  m 
birthday,  and  I  got  this  wonderful  set  of  pictures,  and  it’ 
the  greatest  birthday  present  I  ever  got.

And  would  yoi 
come  and  photograph  my  other  son?”  And  that’s  how  i 
started.

KING:  Did  you  know  Kennedy,  Rich?

RICHARD  REEVES,  Author,  “President  Kennedy”: 
didn’t —   I  was  in  college  when —   I  knew  Bobby.

KING:  You  did?

Mr.

REEVES:  I  traveled  with  Bobby,  yes,  for  The  Neu 
York  Times.

But  John  Kennedy —   I  was  in  college  when  hi 
was  elected.

KING:  What  led  to  a   biography  now?

Mr.

REEVES:  I  wanted  to  do  a   book  about  what  it  wa 
like  to  be  president.

I  thought  that  there  was  enough  in 
formation,  enough  new  information,  coming  from  all  ove: 
the  world  that  I  could  literally  sit  with  John  Kennedy  a 
the  center  of  power  and  write  what  he  saw,  what  he  said 
what  he  did  each  day.

KING:  And  this  is  the  political  Kennedy,  this  book,  right?

Mr.

REEVES:  This  is  the  President  Kennedy.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mr. REEVES:  This  is  the  President  Kennedy. Well,  some 
of  the  personal  things  happened  in  the  Oval  Office,  too,  but 
this  is  President  Kennedy. This  is  the  man  at  the  center  of 
power  when  the  world  was  holding  its  breath. KING:  It  takes  us  from  what  —   his  election,  or  his  in- 
augural? Mr. REEVES:  It  takes  us  from  his  first  meeting —   his  last 
meeting  with  President  Eisenhower,  to  Dallas. And  it  is. to  the  extent  I  could,  a   kind  of  minute-by-minute  construc- 
tion of  how  he  used  power  and  what  kind  of  man  we  had 
there. KING:  And  Bob,  how  did  you  get  to  doing  documentary 
films? You  did  three  close-range  documentaries  —   Pri- 
mary,  Crisis,  and  Faces  of  November. How  did  that  come 
about? ROBERT  DREW,  JFK  Documentary  Filmmaker: 
Well,  I  was  a   Life  magazine  correspondent,  and  I  worked 
with  people  like  Alfred  Eisenstadt  [sp?]. And  the  candid 
still-picture  essay  was  what  interested  me. And  I 
wondered  why  we  couldn’t  do  that  in  motion  pictures,  why 
television  couldn’t  shoot  candid  pictures  of  real  people  in 
real  situations  and  bring  back  some  of  the  emotional  power 
that’s  in  character  and  in  story. It  took  me  five  years  to  develop  the  equipment  and  the 
organization  to  make  the  first  really  candid  film,  and  then 
—   
5  —

--- PAGE BREAK ---I   had  to  look  around  for  a   subject.

And  there  was  this 
young  fellow  running  for  president,  and  I   was  afraid  for 
him.

He  was  beautiful  and  thin  and  very  young,  and  I 
wondered,  “How  can  a   man  think  that  he  can  control  this 
country  and  deal  with  this  world — ”   By  the  way,  I'd  been 
set  off  by  a   book  called  The  Education  of  Henry  Adams ,  in 
which  Henry  Adams  said,  “On  the  day  I  die  —   maybe  1910 
—   a   child  will  be  born  who  will  grow  up  to  think  he  can  see 
it  all.”  When  I   first  saw  Kennedy  walk  out  on  a   stage,  I 
thought,  “That's  the  child.

He  thinks  he  can  see  it  all.” 
KING:  Obviously,  enormous  attraction  and,  obviously,  a 
lot  of  charisma.

Does  the  photographer  have  to  like  the  subject?

Mr.

LOWE:  Oh,  yes.

Oh,  yes.

KING:  If  you  don't,  the  picture  won't  be  as  good?

Mr.

LOWE:  It  will  be  a   different  picture.

I  mean,  the  pho- 
tographer brings  something  to  the  subject.

You  bring  your 
own  emotion  to  your  photograph.

KING:  Photographically,  he  was —   How  would  you  des- 
cribe him?

Mr.

LOWE:  He  was —   People  say  he  was  photogenic,  but  I 
don't  believe  in  that  word.

I  think  that's  a   bad  word.

I 
think  his  eyes,  his  body  movement,  his  intelligence  —   All 
that  came  through  in  this  remarkable  man.

And  you 
know,  when  you  photographed  him,  all  that  becomes  part 
of  it.

KING:  Scale  of  10  —   What  kind  of  president?

Mr.

REEVES:  I   would  think  between  eight  and  nine.

KING:  Really?

Mr.

REEVES:  I  would  definitely —   This  is  the  president 
who  put  the  government  on  the  side  of  the  minority  in  civil 
rights —   was  a   great  decision.

This  is  the  president  who — 
the  first  American  president  to  come  to  power  since  1812 
with  the  possibility  that  the  U.S.REEVES:  I  would  definitely —   This  is  the  president 
who  put  the  government  on  the  side  of  the  minority  in  civil 
rights —   was  a   great  decision.

This  is  the  president  who — 
the  first  American  president  to  come  to  power  since  1812 
with  the  possibility  that  the  U.S.

could  be  invaded  —   in 
this  case  by  guided  missiles  —   and  that  danger  was  much 
less  when  he  left  the  office.

And  in  the  end,  you  have  to 
judge  a   democratic  leader  —   with  a   small  “D”  —   by  wheth- 
er he  brings  out  the  best  or  the  worst  in  his  people,  and  he 
brought  out  the  best.

KING:  Do  you  think  he  began  the  civil  rights  movement?

Mr.

REEVES:  No,  I  think  he  resisted  it  like  crazy.

When 
he  found  out  about  the  freedom  riders  by  reading  about  it 
in  the  newspapers  and  calling  in  his  civil-rights  aide  — 
who  was  Harris  Wofford,  who  was  a   young  man  then  — 
and  told  him,  ‘This  is  making  us  look  bad  all  over  the 
world,  pictures  of  burning  buses  and  Negroes  being  beaten.

We're  looking  bad  all  over  the  world.

Get  your  god-damned 
friends  off  those  buses — '' 
KING:  His  death,  though,  really  brought  about  the  Civil 
Rights  Act,  didn't  it?

Mr.

REEVES:  Well,  I  think  he  would  have  gotten  the 
Civil  Rights  Act.

I  mean,  he  had  the  guts,  when  he  finally 
realized  he  couldn't  be  on  both  sides.

He  thought  the  coun- 
try was  not  ready  for  it,  as  Lincoln  thought  they  were  not 
ready —   we  were  not  ready  for  the  Emancipation  Proclama- 
tion.

But  two  years  in,  he  decided  he  couldn't  sweep  this 
away  any  more.

He  had  to  deal  with  it,  and  he  had  to  take 
sides,  and  he  took  the  right  side.

And  also,  when  he  left  office,  there  was  less  chance  of 
war  than  when  he  entered.

That's  not  bad  stuff— 
KING:  Did  he  enjoy  being  filmed,  Robert?

Mr.That's  not  bad  stuff— 
KING:  Did  he  enjoy  being  filmed,  Robert?

Mr.

DREW:  The  great  thing  about  Kennedy  is  that,  when 
I  told  him  that  the  camera  was  going  to  be  with  him  from 
morning  till  night  for  five  days  —   that  was  the  primary  — 
and  that  we  were  going  to  have  a   new  kind  of  record  out  of 
this,  a   new  kind  of  history,  he  didn’t  object,  and  he  was 
not —   And  I  told  him  he  would  not  be  conscious  of  the 
camera,  and  he  wasn't.

I  traveled  with  him  with  one  pho- 
tographer.

We  were  in  and  out  of  cars,  in  and  out  of  hotel 
rooms;  went  everywhere  with  him.

And  after  the  first  15 
minutes,  he  forgot  us.

KING:  Let  me  get  a   break  and  come  back  with  Richard 
Reeves  and  Jacques  Lowe  and  Robert  Drew,  and  your 
phone  calls,  as  well.

All  have  intertwined  in  Kennedy's  life 
through  this  brilliant  biography  by  Richard  Reeves,  this 
brilliant  collection  of  photographs,  JFK  Remembered ,  by 
Jacques  Lowe,  and  three  terrific  documentaries  from 
Robert  Drew.

We'll  be  right  back.

[Clip  from  “ Primary  ”   by  Robert  Drew:] 
JOHN  F.

KENNEDY:  [campaigning]  I  have  strong 
ideas  about  the  United  States  playing  a   great  role  in  a 
historic  moment  —   when  the  cause  of  freedom  is 
endangered  all  over  the  world,  when  the  United  States 
stands  as  the  only  sentry  at  the  gate,  when  we  can  see 
the  campfires  of  the  enemy  burning  on  distant  hills.[Clip  from  “ Primary  ”   by  Robert  Drew:] 
JOHN  F.

KENNEDY:  [campaigning]  I  have  strong 
ideas  about  the  United  States  playing  a   great  role  in  a 
historic  moment  —   when  the  cause  of  freedom  is 
endangered  all  over  the  world,  when  the  United  States 
stands  as  the  only  sentry  at  the  gate,  when  we  can  see 
the  campfires  of  the  enemy  burning  on  distant  hills.

[Commercial  break] 
KING:  We're  back  with  Jacques  Lowe,  personal  photo- 
grapher to  JFK  and  author  of  JFK  Remembered ;   Richard 
Reeves,  the  nationally-syndicated  columnist  —   he  teaches 
political  science  at  UCLA,  and  he's  written  a   biography, 
President  Kennedy ,  from  Simon  and  Schuster;  and  Robert 
Drew,  the  award-winning  documentary  filmmaker  whose 
films  on  JFK  include  Primary ,  Crisist  and  Faces  of  Novem- 
ber.

Saint  Paul,  Minnesota,  hello.

6th  CALLER:  [Saint  Paul,  Minnesota]  Hi,  Mr.

King.

How  are  you?

KING:  Hi.

6th  CALLER:  Two  questions  real  quick.

I'm  a   profes- 
sional shooter,  myself.

For  Mr.

Lowe,  I  just  wanted  to  know,  in  your  opinion, 
how  did  you —   What  did  you  think  about  JFK  as  far  as  did 
he  like  getting,  you  know,  shots  taken  of  him?

And  the  other  was  that  I  don't  know  if  you  all  know  of 
George  Taimes  [sp?].

He's  my  teacher.

And  I   think  that  if 
America  wants  to  know  a   lot  more  about  JFK,  they  should 
read  his  book,  Eye  on  Washington .

KING:  Do  you  know  that  book?

Mr.

LOWE:  No,  I  don't  know  that  book.

KING:  No,  that  might  be  George  calling,  trying  to  sell  a 
book.

Mr.

LOWE:  I  see.

KING:  OK.

Did  he  like  being  photographed?

Mr.

LOWE:  But  answering  that  first  question,  I  don't 
think  it  was  a   question  of  liking  to  be  photographed.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mr. LOWE:  But  answering  that  first  question,  I  don't 
think  it  was  a   question  of  liking  to  be  photographed. I 
think  that  —   and  I  only  realized  this  all  these  many  years 
later  —   that  he  had  found  in  me,  for  some  reason,  for  some 
chemical  reason,  a   person  that  he  could  trust  and  rely  on 
—   
6  —

--- PAGE BREAK ---and  feel  good  about.

He  didn’t —   I  mean,  he  literally  did 
not  know  that  I  was  photographing,  and  I  photographed 
him  in  all  situations.

KING:  The  book  is  brilliant.

He  liked  the  press,  didn’t  he,  Richard?

I  mean,  he  liked 
journalism.

Mr.

REEVES:  He  was  the  first  president  not  to  call  us 
“the  boys”  —   “Bring  in  the  boys”  kind  of  thing.

And  the 
only  non-government  check  he  ever  got  was  as  a   reporter 
for  Hearst.

But,  as  he  would  say,  himself,  that,  you  know, 
“We  come  together  for  a   while,  and  then  we  go  our  sepa- 
rate ways”;  even  to  the  point  he  would  write  Khrushchev 
notes  advising  him,  “Now,  don’t  talk  to  the  American 
press.

There  are  too  many.

You’ve  got  to  understand, 
they’re  competing  and  they’ll  use  you.” 
KING:  How,  politically,  do  you  measure  what  is  now 
termed  “character  flaws”?

Mr.

REEVES:  Character —   I  don’t  know  about  Napoleon’s 
character  flaws  or  Caesar’s  character  flaws.

I  don’t  think 
that  character  is  at  the  root  of  leadership.

I  think  that 
leadership  is — 
KING:  Really?

You  differ  from  Garry  Wills — 
Mr.

REEVES:  I  do.

I  do.

KING:  — who  would  say  it’s  at  the  root.

Mr.

REEVES:  Yes,  I  don’t  think  so.

I  think  that  bad  men 
can  do  wonderful  things,  and  wonderful  men  can  do  ter- 
rible things.

And  I  think  that,  whatever  personal  charac- 
ter flaws  John  Kennedy  had,  that  as  a   public  man  he  was  a 
figure  of  great  significance,  and  as  a   cultural  figure  I  think.

This  was  a   man  who  wouldn’t  wait  his  turn,  and  now  no 
one  does,  and  part  of  the  reason  is  that  he  was  so  much  the 
model  for  Americans.

It  was  self-improvement,  watching 
Kennedy.

KING:  Do  you  agree,  Robert?

Mr.

DREW:  Kennedy  was  self-improvement —   And  I  want 
to  say  that  I  agree  with  Richard  in  one  basic  thing.Mr.

DREW:  Kennedy  was  self-improvement —   And  I  want 
to  say  that  I  agree  with  Richard  in  one  basic  thing.

Ken- 
nedy had  a   view  of  the  world,  and  that  view  was  internal- 
ized, and  then  we  felt  it  from  him  and  he  held  a   mirror  up 
to  us  and  we  saw  ourselves  in  the  mirror  and  we  saw  the 
best  part  of  ourselves.

I’ve  just  recited  a   litany  of  about 
four  points  that  Richard  makes  in  other  words.

But  I  ob- 
served all  those  things  myself.

And  I  think  that  the  man 
had  this  internal  balance  wheel,  this  confidence  —   insane 
confidence,  maybe  —   that  he  could  see  it  all  and  handle  it, 
and  that  helped  all  of  us  to  feel  we  could  see  our  lives  and 
handle  them.

KING:  Alexandria,  Virginia,  hello.

7th  CALLER:  [ Alexandria ,  Virginia]  Hi.

Right  before 
JFK  was  elected,  he  came  to  a   small  town  I  lived  in  — 
Sugar  Notch  [sp?],  Pennsylvania  —   and  I  was  just  a   baby.

And  he  came  to  the  street  corner  that  we  lived  on,  and  he 
picked  me  up  and  he  held  me  and  I  touched  his  face.

And 
I’ve  always  wondered  if  there  was  a   picture  of  that  some- 
where.

Is  there  somewhere  where  there’s  groups  of  pic- 
tures or  something  that  you  could  look  through?

Mr.

LOWE:  I’m  afraid  I   can’t  help  you.

I   have  thousands 
of  letters  from  all  over  the  country  —   people  saying  that 
they  were  at  such-and-such  place  at  such-and-such  hour 
and  they  knew  I   was  there,  and  didn’t  I  have  a   picture.

I’m 
terribly  sorry.

I   wish  I  could  help  you.

KING:  We’ll  be  back  with  more  on  Larry  King  Live.

Tomorrow  night  —   Anjelica  Huston,  and  the  famed  lav 
yer,  Jerry  Spence  [sp?].

Don’t  go  away.

[ Clip  from  “Primary  ”   by  Robert  Drew:] 
TV  ANNOUNCER:  “Kennedy,  of  course,  is 
Roman  Catholic;  Humphrey,  a   Congregationalis 
and  Nixon,  a   Quaker.Don’t  go  away.

[ Clip  from  “Primary  ”   by  Robert  Drew:] 
TV  ANNOUNCER:  “Kennedy,  of  course,  is 
Roman  Catholic;  Humphrey,  a   Congregationalis 
and  Nixon,  a   Quaker.

And  some  observers  thin 
that  the  election  has  resolved  into  a   religious  strut 
gle...” 
JOHN  KENNEDY:  [watching  broadcast]  It’s  not  a   rr 
ligious  thing.

It’s  just — 
See,  it  makes  religion  to  be  of  disproportionate  im 
portance,  being —   put  a   front-page  story,  when  unde 
ordinary  conditions  it  wouldn’t  have  been  even —   be  pu 
in  the  paper — 
1st  STAFTER:  Well,  it  turns  up — 
2nd  STAFFER:  I  see  it  every  week — 
[Commercial  break] 
KING:  Stockton,  California  —   as  we  get  back  to  calls  - 
Hello.

8th  CALLER:  [Stockton,  California]  Hello.

Hi,  Larry.

KING:  Hi.

8th  CALLER:  I   really  enjoy  your  show.

KING:  Thank  you.

8th  CALLER:  Mr.

Lowe,  did  you  ever  take  any  picture, 
that  reflected  what  they're  saying  about  President  Ken 
ned/s  life —   health,  not  life,  about  his  health?

Mr.

LOWE:  Yes.

KING:  Were  there  pictures  of  him — 
Mr.

LOWE:  Yes,  if  you  look  through  the  book  you  will  fine 
many  photographs  of  him  leaning  on  a   table —   even  whei 
he  was  standing  up,  leaning  on  a   table,  either  with  on.

arm  or  with  both  arms.

And  that  always  means  that  he  i: 
in  pain  and  that  it  is  a   support  movement.

I  always  knev 
when  he — 
KING:  You  knew?

Mr.

LOWE:  — the  pain  came  on —   Oh,  absolutely.

KING:  Did  you  know,  Robert?

Mr.

DREW:  In  Crisis ,  when  he  came  back  from  a   very  dis 
tressful  trip  and  had  to  face  this  very  distressful  decision, 
and  we  shot  closeups  of  him  trying  to  decide,  you  could  see 
that  his  eyes  were  puffy,  that  his  face  was  puffy,  that  he 
didn’t  really  look  the  way  he  used  to  look — 
Mr.

LOWE:  Lines  around  his — 
Mr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

DREW:  In  Crisis ,  when  he  came  back  from  a   very  dis 
tressful  trip  and  had  to  face  this  very  distressful  decision, 
and  we  shot  closeups  of  him  trying  to  decide,  you  could  see 
that  his  eyes  were  puffy,  that  his  face  was  puffy,  that  he 
didn’t  really  look  the  way  he  used  to  look — 
Mr. LOWE:  Lines  around  his — 
Mr. DREW:  And  I  think  it  was —   We  kind  of  knew  it  was 
the  medication. KING:  Addison’s  disease  is  a   killer,  isn’t  it? Mr. REEVES:  Well,  it’s  a   fatal  disease. The  adrenal 
glands  wither  away — 
KING:  Would  he  have  lived  a   shorter  life  than — 
Mr. REEVES:  Not  necessarily. I  mean,  he  was 
maintained  by  taking  cortico-steroids  each  day,  which  sub- 
stituted for  the  adrenalin,  so  life  was  maintained,  but  he 
also  was  taking  a   range  of  drugs. I  mean,  he  was  much 
more  promiscuous  about  medication  than  he  ever  was 
about  women,  including  using  amphetamines  and  massive 
shots  of— 
KING:  All  associated  with  health,  though,  right? -7  —

--- PAGE BREAK ---Mr.

REEVES:  Yes,  he  had  been — 
KING:  Yes.

Mr.

REEVES:  He  had  taken  medication  his  whole  life 
and  he  was  in  pain,  I   think,  most  every  day — 
KING:  Would  you  say  he  was  a   pill-popper  from  a   lifetime 
of  pills?

Mr.

REEVES:  I   wouldn’t  use  that  phrase,  but  he  took 
enormous  amounts  of  medication.

ICING:  Was  he  in  constant  pain?

Mr.

REEVES:  I   think  he  was  often  in  pain.

KING:  Marietta,  Ohio,  hello.

9th  CALLER:  [ Marietta ,  Ohio]  Hi,  Mr.

King  and  panel.

What  I   was  calling  about,  you  know,  I  grew  up  in  the — 
You  know,  I  was  born  in  1960.

I  grew  up  during  the —   you 
know,  the  Kennedy  years  and  stuff.

And  I  was  wondering, 
what  kind  of  person  was  Mr.

Kennedy?

I  heard  that,  you 
•know,  he  was  a   person  who,  you  know,  liked  to,  you  know, 
have  his  privacy.

And,  also,  was  he  a — 
KING:  OK,  briefly  —   because  I’ve  got  to  take  a   break  — 
what  kind  of  guy?

A   guy’s  guy?

Mr.

LOWE:  I  think  he  was  a   man  of —   very  ceurapro  [sp?].

He  had  a   wonderful  sense  of  humor.

He  was  very  itchy —   I 
mean,  he  had  to  move  all  the  time.

He  couldn’t  sit  still  for 
a   moment.

He  was  very  curious,  terribly  curious  about  ev- 
erything that  he  saw.

He  couldn’t  go  through  a   room  and 
see  a   newspaper  and  not  bend  down  and  read  it.

Mr.

REEVES:  Averell  Harriman  said  you  had  seven  sec- 
onds with  John  Kennedy — 
KING:  To  get  his — 
Mr.

REEVES:  If  you  lost  him —   If  you  couldn’t  get  it  to 
him  them,  you  lost  him.

He  was  the  most  impatient  of 
men.

It  was  also,  I  think,  though,  the  little  rich  boy  side  of 
him  which  could,  I  found — 
Mr.

LOWE:  No,  I  think  he —   I  really  do  think  it  was  his 
curiosity — 
KING:  Robert?

Mr.

DREW:  I  would  add  just  one  thing;  that  Kennedy  is, 
according  to  Reeves,  not  a   great  intellectual.Mr.

DREW:  I  would  add  just  one  thing;  that  Kennedy  is, 
according  to  Reeves,  not  a   great  intellectual.

And  I  don’t 
know  what  a   great  intellectual  is,  but  I  do  know  this.

He 
had  a   sense  of  history.

He*d  written  several  history  books.

And  part  of  the  reason  I  was  able  to  make  candid  films  on 
him  in  the  White  House  is  that  he  felt  that  this  would  be  a 
new  form  of  history.

And  tonight  we  just  screened  the 
three  films  at  the  American  Film  Institute  here  in  Wash- 
ington, and  it  is  history.

It  became  history.

KING:  We’ll  be  back  with  our  remaining  moments,  on  this 
November  22nd,  after  this.

[Commercial  break] 
KING:  With  Jacques  Lowe,  Richard  Reeves,  and  Robert 
Drew  —   last  call  —   Fleming,  Georgia,  hello.

10th  CALLER:  [Fleming,  Georgia]  Yes,  hello,  Larry.

Good  evening.

KING:  Hi.

10th  CALLER:  I  find  it  very  difficult  to  understand  why 
the  American  public  and  that  generation  of  people  who 
lived  during  that  tragedy  has  [sic]  to  see  photos  such  as 
I’ve  been  seeing  recently  of  the  autopsy  of  the  President 
that  my  generation  and  millions  of  Americans  love  very 
deeply.

And  I  find  it  very,  very  disrespectful.

KING:  All  right,  we’ve  got  less  than  a   minute.

What  do 
you  think?

Mr.

LOWE:  Well,  I  tried  to  make  my  book  not  about  the 
tragedy,  but  about  his  life.

KING:  What  do  you  think  about  photos  of  the  autopsy?

Mr.

LOWE:  Oh,  I  detest  it.

I’m  furious  about  it.

Mr.

REEVES:  Well,  obviously,  I  was  taken;  spent  six 
years  with  the  man  alive.

It's  what  Kennedy  did  as  a 
president  that  should  live  on  and  not — 
KING:  This  macabre  interest.

Bob,  what  do  you  think?

Mr.

DREW:  Well,  it’s  how  Kennedy  was  able  to  put  things 
into  words,  while  looking  great.

KING:  That’s  what  counts.

Mr.

DREW:  Well,  that’s  what  counted.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mr. DREW:  Well,  that’s  what  counted. KING:  Thank  you  all  very  much. Jacques  Lowe’s  book  is  JFK  Remembered ,  an  intimate 
portrait  by  his  personal  photographer;  Robert  Drew’s 
documentary  films  —   they  showed  all  three  tonight  here  in 
Washington  —   Primary ,  Crisis ,  and  Faces  of  November ; 
and  Richard  Reeves’  terrific  book,  from  Simon  and 
Schuster,  titled  simply  President  Kennedy. Anjelica  Huston  —   tomorrow  night. Thanks  for  joining 
us. Linden  Soles  goes  it  alone  in  Atlanta  with  the  world 
news. Linden,  what’s  up? LINDEN  SOLES,  “WorldNews”:  Larry,  we  will  pick  up 
where  you  leave  off,  as  the  memories  of  that  one  brief  shin- 
ing moment  leave  an  indelible  mark  on  this  day  30  year 
later. Another  one  of  Hollywood’s  true  gentle  men  is  gone  — 
Bill  Bixby  has  lost  his  battle  with  cancer. And,  a   reprieve  for  Thanksgiving  travelers  —   The 
American  Airlines  strike  is  over,  as  both  sides  agree  to 
binding  arbitration. Please  join  us  next  on  WorldNews. Copyright  ©   1993  Cable  News  Network,  Inc . FURTHER  INFORMATION: 
The  Last  Investigation  by  Gaeton  Fonzi 
(Thunders  Mouth  Press),  available  in  book 
stores. JFK  Remembered  by  Jacques  Lowe  (Random 
House),  available  in  book  stores. President  Kennedy:  Profile  of  Power  by  Richard 
Reeves  (Simon  and  Schuster),  available  in  book 
stores. The  preceding  text  has  been  professionally  tran- 
scribed. However ,  although  the  text  has  been 
checked  against  an  audio  track ,  in  order  to  meet 
rigid  distribution  and  transmission  deadlines ,  it 
has  not  yet  been  proofread  against  videotape. —   
8  —