The Dies Committee was formed for an anti-labor purpose
2
The Dies Committee has gone in for union busting
3.
The committee has whitewashed fascist and anti-semetic
organizations
vitaland
The Dies Committee has suppressed/material evidence
5.
The Dies Committee has been anti-semitic
6.
The Dies Committee has uncovered no facts not public
knowledge previous to its investigation
7。
The Dies Committee has been a tool of reaction
(consumer report)
8.
The Dies Committee has used illegal methods
9.
The main attention of the committee has been to newspapers
10.
The DiesCommittee has attempted tocreate a hysterical
stateofmindbyfollowingthedevelopmentsinthe
European war and playing upon prejudices

--- PAGE BREAK ---f the committee has been to newspapers
10.
The DiesCommittee has attempted tocreate a hysterical
stateofmindbyfollowingthedevelopmentsinthe
European war and playing upon prejudices

--- PAGE BREAK ---

On
，1938,a prominent Washington liberal
was privately informed by a conservative Congressman fr@fessing
friendship for labor that Martin Dies, John Nanee Garner and
John P. Frey, bitterly disappointed at the ir failure to ease
through the Honee of Representatives an investigation of sit-
in an attempt
down strikes which they intended to use to break the CIo, had
whichtheyhopedtoaehievethesameend.
The Congressman's information came straight from
Martin Dies.He warned his liberal friend to persuade John L.
Lewis to attempt to defeat the resolution creating the cormittee.
John Lewis was not persuaded.Within
months
Legran tomake
Martin Dies e good his boast to his colleague.
The Dies committee formally commenced hearings
John C.Metcalfe,
ing to a Chicago newspaperman,who had become a member of the Ger-
man-American Bund and exposed its vorkings in a long series of
articdes. Metcalfe's testimony, substantially his published
articles touched up,got the committee headlines and a liberal
name.
But Mr. Dies was impatient to get down to his
real business, so on the following morning John P. Frey, reactionary
leader of the Metal Trades division of the AF of L,took the
falsehood, distortion and libel Washington correspondents had ever
heard. His "testimony" resulted in tremenduous headlines typified

--- PAGE BREAK ---e Metal Trades division of the AF of L,took the
falsehood, distortion and libel Washington correspondents had ever
heard. His "testimony" resulted in tremenduous headlines typified

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2
by the New York Times for August l4 :"Communists Rule the C.I.0.,
atlnton
Phe press paid little hed and the Dies committee
Dies committee does not show that ikmediately denials and disproofs
were issued from all over the country.
However, there was critieism of the committee, so
the chairman felt constrained to inform the press shortly thereafter
that he was the innocent vietim of a sampaign "caleulated campaign"
of abuse and " Fabrieated reports":
Thus was the Dies investigation launched.
For the nextfour monthsthecommitteekeptitself
in the Nation's headlines through the uninhibited outpourings o重
an enaless succession of discredited and disreputable witness,
numerous
ineluding/labor spies, crooks, anti-New Deal Republican politicgins
and at least one insane man. All told the same lurid story-the
C.I.o.was created and directed from Moscow; the New Deals was
pue sddous uanoA isiayeno au4 oste aram se nruorgr4sruamoyu
Communists to the Dies Committee.
Nothing could stop the comnittee. One of its in
Av
vestigators was shown to be an outstanding enti-Semite, a highly-
paid.labor spy, one of the authors of the campaign of sl&nder
aimed at President Roosevelt in 1936 （ while on the payroll of

--- PAGE BREAK ---s was shown to be an outstanding enti-Semite, a highly-
paid.labor spy, one of the authors of the campaign of sl&nder
aimed at President Roosevelt in 1936 （ while on the payroll of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3
the Republiean National Committee) , an employe of a Ukranian
Faseist group, and a convieted larcenist. But Dies said it
because
wasn't true,aua the investigator, Edward Franeis Sullivan, had
deniedit.
In February 1939 the eommittee's life was extended
work would be over; As soon as Congress adjourned and there was
eomparatively little eompetition for headlines the committee
again began it hearings, this time with a big smear on the Jews,
8 group of whom,it was alleged,plotted the overthrow of the
May
government.For & month beginning in kngnsk l939 the committee
shadoweboxed with several native faseist groups, always careful
not tohit hard even at the cost of suppression of important
information.Liberals throughout the land, unaware of the inside
stories of either the committee or its subjeets of investigation,
doing a conseientious job.
Butwhatwasaetuallyhappening?
Prominent faseists appeared before the eommittee,
pravately and publiely, and testified Zo that the C.I.o. was
un-American, Zormmunistie, or revolutionary. Jews in the Federal
government were trying to wreck it. Jews were Communists; communists
were Jews.Soon the cormittee ehairman adopted the praetise of
examination of Henry D. Allen,Silvershirt,Bundsser and zktson
repated liason between Nazis in Los Angeles and Gold Shirss in

--- PAGE BREAK ---ews.Soon the cormittee ehairman adopted the praetise of
examination of Henry D. Allen,Silvershirt,Bundsser and zktson
repated liason between Nazis in Los Angeles and Gold Shirss in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4
Communists"and on one oecasion Congressman Dies refered
toJewry
as another "international".When Congressman Noah Mason, self-
styled"old stogie"and acommittee member，attempted to establish
that Jews were not sabotaging the government Dies abruptlycon-
cluded the hearings by eszabtzshtug placing in the offieial record
referenees to the seurrilous "Proetocols of the Elders of Zion",
That is a questionthat neither this committee not anyother
Meanwhile, of course, Allen was being whitewashed.
Even his eriminal reeord, a matter of public record, was distorted
admitted that he had been arrestedoh "some check charge",Rhea
Whitley, former committee counsel whose seeret resignation is
eurrently one of the big questions in Washington, asked, "Boguf
s
was brought out that Allen's zkezkingzazzawns was a ehronie
sufferen from "insuffieient funds" Congressman Dies said,"Do
you think this is material?* and Congressman J. Parnell Thomas
replied"Idonotthinkso."
Thetruthisthateachofthemembersofthe
comnittee had a copy of Allen's eriminal record, showing that he
used at least three aliases, that he was arrested on numerous
ocearions beginning on May l7, l9l0, in Los Angeles, zmdx that
he was a forger（ not"insuffieient funds"） and had swzreax been

--- PAGE BREAK ---least three aliases, that he was arrested on numerous
ocearions beginning on May l7, l9l0, in Los Angeles, zmdx that
he was a forger（ not"insuffieient funds"） and had swzreax been

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5
committe@ to Folsom and San Quentin prisons.
Thisis only oneof the most zxzwr unimportant faets
about the witness suppressed by the Dies Committee. The others are
those for which the committee, thus far able to get away with
almost anything, may yet have to answer if reeurrent rumors
heard inWashington of a fascistcoalition to be consummated
earlythissummerareaswellfoundedastheyseemtobe.
An even more brazen whitewash was that of George
Deatherage, nasty, pugnacious fuhrer of. the Knights of the White
Camelia,.who appeared before the committeeon May 23 and 24.
Well -bomewtw..
his friendship for the European fascist leaders.He refused without
evenanobjectionfrom anymemberofthe committeetonameany
in any way。
Yet Deatherage had-and the kuw committee knew about
it- drawn an elaborate plan for fascism in America. In faet, the
committee has a copy of a chart he prepared in 1937, with great
emphasis on military matters, bat not one question was asked about
1t。
Uf all the native faseists who have bathed in the
Dies committee's imunity，however,not owes it a bigger debt than
the notorious William Dudley Pelley. part of unbelieveably filthy
the whole zxzw thing will be exposed in court proceedings already
begun against David D. Mayne, who has been and is stiil believed
+ohearaocntofboth PellevandDiesS

--- PAGE BREAK ---lieveably filthy
the whole zxzw thing will be exposed in court proceedings already
begun against David D. Mayne, who has been and is stiil believed
+ohearaocntofboth PellevandDiesS

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6
Briefly, this is what is pubxz known about the Pelley-
Dies relationship.
Until the middle of 1939 Dies kept Pelley pretty well
out of the record saying "we'll egt around to that later"
AfterrDies called General George Van Horn Moseley as a
uncomplementary things about Dies in both his magazine, Liberation,
-usthqease duraunad aaaet sru Aa pansst saetudmed Auem aua ur pue
ment, Pelley Publishers. In July 1939 Dies dispatched one of
his agents, Robert B. Barker, to conduct an investigation of
spent 9o days on this investigation, but the only result was
a very minute addition to what was known. Until four days
before the committee planned to call Pelley as a witness no
effort was made to apprehend him. Then, on zhex August 19,
Rhea Whitley telegraphed Pelley and asked him to please come
to Washington and accept Service of a subpenartkagznokwxtxsx
nohseems that he was in Washington a few days later, at the
House of Representatives Office Building. When Pelley failed
to accept the inviaation, Wpitley began dispatching special
delivery letters, none of which reached Pelley.
?
.So a few days later Agent Barker took the stand and
testified about Pelley. Most of Barkers testimony was
already a matter of public record in court records, books,
magazine articles, Who's Who and Pelley's own writings.
Barker did have, however, a 40-page list of Pelley's

--- PAGE BREAK ---estimony was
already a matter of public record in court records, books,
magazine articles, Who's Who and Pelley's own writings.
Barker did have, however, a 40-page list of Pelley's

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7
correspkndenty,
including Members of Congress and their
Secretariesandofficial armsoftheNazigovernment.
On four differentoccasionstheinvestigatorbegan toplace
this damaging list ( prepared by the Post Office Depart-
ment,not the Dies committee) in the record and on each of the
four occasions it did not get in. What that list shows is
still not known, except to the Dies committee, and it's not
saying.
No place in Barker's testimony is there even a reference
to the kindof an organization that the Silvershirt Legion
as is- a military and violent one.No place in the record is
there even a Suggestion of the Silvershirt boast that Rresident
Roosevelt was to be assinated-even though sworntegtimony on
this was available The whole farce was ended, until it.began
all over again with Pelley's recent, mysterious appearance,
when Rhea Whitley attempted to show that Pelley printed material
obtained from Nazi sources. This neat trigx
wasaccomplished
at the very end of the hearing of August 29, when Whitley
changes
July 8, l933, dealing with the axetarekez in merchandizing
methods and practises through the years. This, he concluded
7.
triumphantly, was a duplication.of an"article which appeared
in the Hammer Press, Leipzig, Germany, 1n 1927." MKXXX
He didn't pointout that l927 was six full yearsbefore
the accession of the Nazi's to power in Germany·
had been handled with kid gloves, for on 0ctober 28, 1939,

--- PAGE BREAK ---y, 1n 1927." MKXXX
He didn't pointout that l927 was six full yearsbefore
the accession of the Nazi's to power in Germany·
had been handled with kid gloves, for on 0ctober 28, 1939,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8
he made a Nationwide radio attaek on President Roosevelt,in
which he said, in part, that ." a mailing list of William
Dudley Pelley's Silvershirts was spread upon the record"
by his committee. When Congressman Frank Hook of Michigan
ontheflooroftheHouse
on January 23, 1940, demanded/thah the Dies committee
show where in its record this list appears not a member of the
eommitteesaida word.
But the American people never learned these facts and
Dies and his assoeiates found themselves getting stronger and
stronger. As the press built the committee up more and more
it got bolder and bolder.Throughout its hearings it had
sniped at all the large liberal groups in the country. It
hadcalledoccasionalwitnesses whowere anxious to voice
their opinions that the C.I.O. was dominated by foeeign
agents even if they could produce no proof. It had never,
however, made any effort to obtain information from these
organizations until suddenly, on Spetember , 1939,
agentsofthecommittee swoopeddown ontheofficesofthe
American League for Peace and Demoneracy in Chicago and,
over the objections of tkex league officials，saized the
records illegally. This procedure was almost duplicated in
Washington on Spetember 28 when Agent Barker conducted a
similar raid on the leagues offices there. After repeated
public attacke on the league, and without affording the
league a chance to answer its critics， the committee
dramaticly published a list it describes as membership
and mailing list. on 0ctober 25,:

--- PAGE BREAK ---the league, and without affording the
league a chance to answer its critics， the committee
dramaticly published a list it describes as membership
and mailing list. on 0ctober 25,:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9
Immeadiaely, from many Sourees, from government clerks
and President Roosevelt, came severe criticims of this aetion.
The committee's defense was that the league was a Communist
front organization- a charge the league had repeatedly denied-
ofthose
and had not the committee demanded xkax xkx members of the
The league demanded that Dies waive his Congressional
immunity so they could Sue him, but Dies declined.
The committee has not yet explained how several prominent
officials of the National Labor Relations Board, men who had
and
never had any connection with the league who were never on
any of its lists, happened to be included in the list released-
also priveleged-to the newspapers. Not has any explanation
been given of the information that was added to the list
by the committee, information about the salary and employment
of those listed..This doeument immediately assumed the pro-
portions of a blacklist. Many government employeees feared
and some efforts were made in this direction.
that they would lose their jobs, Some oter-zealous persons
mailed copies to government officials outside of washington.
Typical of the suffering cause by this action was the case
of a school teacher whohad never had anyconnection with the
league. Parents. of some of her students, after reading her..:
name in the paper with Dies "communist" charges, threatened
to withdraw their childrennfrom the School unless the distressed
teacher resigned.fhis was only one of the many mistakes on the
list. Newspaper letter columns frtvolume l0 of the committee's

--- PAGE BREAK ---w their childrennfrom the School unless the distressed
teacher resigned.fhis was only one of the many mistakes on the
list. Newspaper letter columns frtvolume l0 of the committee's

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
grom persons whose first knowledge of any relationship with
the league came from the publication of this list.
While all this kept the headline writers busy Dies
was quietly preparing another sensation.
From the beginning of his investigation, Dies pet
hate has been the National Maritime union.With almost every
series of hearings came new charges against the union, but
it wasnever convenient for the committee to allow its
leaders to testify or to accept their pbotests and denials
for the record.In the summer of 1939 the NMM went out on
strike against the Standard OilCo.andothertanker
X
operators.xxxkxpxxxxxxxxoxxxxtxoxxxxaxxxxxxaxx&nngxuax道an
Dzxzzuaaxtexozxexexazamazte zpoxt zxz
ERaxmRnxzana Portxaxzknr
Almost immediately there were repeated attacks on members of
the union and its picket lines in Congressman Dies district
( perhaps is is only a foiqcidence that Dies district includes
Arthur ). Leaded of the goon
geng, as the unions call them,
was an ex-Communist and a dgunkard william C. McCuistion.
MeCuistion and his gang, which included one known dope fiend,
1y
repeated beat union members into unconsciousness with blackjacks,
chains and pipes. On more than one oc casion the strikers were
and terrorism
ubs/l1/ 4gmgtry uo
shot. All this violence came to a head
the murder of philip Carey, union leader, in New Orleans. The

--- PAGE BREAK ---. On more than one oc casion the strikers were
and terrorism
ubs/l1/ 4gmgtry uo
shot. All this violence came to a head
the murder of philip Carey, union leader, in New Orleans. The

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11
August 3, a special investigatory was detailed to mxk these
Gulf ports. On September 27, 1939, J. Edgar Hoover informed
the union there were no grounds for Federal intervention.
Meanwhile, with the breaking out of the war in Europe
the seamen attempted to get war-risk insurance and labor strife
wasimminent.
to be heard. He was finally called as a witness on Saturday
October 28 ( Congressional committees do not ordinarily sit
on Saturdays). Curran was not allowed to proceed to answer
aceusations made by previous witnesses, and every time he
attempted to 'do more than answer leading questions Dies
Q
banged the gavel. When Curran persisted, Dies dwwne drowned
out his voice by banging the gavel, and when that failed to
stop the union leader he was finally threatened with
contempt proceedings. To make certain that the press paid
little heed to Curran Dies made his Spectactlar attack on
President Roosevelt that night.
On the following Monday morning McCuistion took the stand.
-dozeaotp uetsshy l ro Auo4s prant e 4no paunod ou sfep anog dog
ship in the maritime unions, identified most'Vf the union
leaders as Communists, and climaxed his amazing performance
by saying that "communist Party gunmen" were going to kill
hum, or at least so he had heard. The committee, of course,
took this all seriously. Ever since that day MeCuistion has
been in Washington, Spending his time between the committee'S
office and a motorious dive.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rd. The committee, of course,
took this all seriously. Ever since that day MeCuistion has
been in Washington, Spending his time between the committee'S
office and a motorious dive.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12
However,when zkzwaxzxearxeazxhazxMx the Department of
Justice learned that McCuistion wasin Washington it informed
the DistrictofColumbia Police that he was wanted bythe
New Orleans police for murder.Immediately this became the
signal for &n a typical Dies blast. He informed the press
that this was "intimidation", &xax"persecution" and a
"frame up". Ail this got banner headline play in the press.
Dies kept it that way by repeated spectacular charges and
statements.On November l hgzanxoxnzed the Washington Star
carried the following 8-column headline on the front page:
"Dies to probe M'Cuistion Case in Person".
A few days later Dies &xz&d said he was going to ask the
Housefor an additional$ioo,0o0.
On November 9th.the committee，or at leastDies
sitting as a committee of one,took testimony in secret session
in New Orleans. Robert Stripling, committee secretary Φ he ba
had been an elevator operator before Dies made him administrative
head of the committee ） informed the Washington Times-Hearld
that Mc Cuistion was a Department of Dustice "spy" and the
murdered Carey had been his assistant! The story seems to have
appeared in only one edition of the paper, and no other paper,
apparently， carriea it.
Then Dies let the whole thing drop, except for sending
Orleans police attempted to extradite him. to stand trial for
the murder of Carey. Exactly why Dies xxkxkkx dropped his
personal" investigation is not clear, but it didn't take him

--- PAGE BREAK ---Orleans police attempted to extradite him. to stand trial for
the murder of Carey. Exactly why Dies xxkxkkx dropped his
personal" investigation is not clear, but it didn't take him

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13
long to find other unions to"investigate,"
and he didn't
take any of the other six.committee members with him.
the press,"There will be hundreds of Z indietments-and
convictions- of persons who have violated the laws of this
Suttpueustm, auu  ,epuesedoud aatsiaaqns Surpeatds ut Auqunoo
of union funds" was another charge on which he said there
would be indictments.
Outside of Chicago this made only the usual headlines
into which "Dies" fits so easily. But in Chicago it was even
bigger news, for on November 2l the Bzhx packinghouse workers'
Dxagnx were to vote in a National Labor Relations election.f
and Several times a Nationwide strike in thas industry seemed
imminent on more than one occasion.
On the same day Dies "personal aide", John C. Metcalfe,
told the Chicago D.A.R. that the investigation was to expose
"red" actiyities in the union.
. The next day secret hearings were held, but the news
leakedout to the strike-bound Hearst Herald-American that
thousands of dollars of union money had been diverted to
other uses; that the union's constitution had been " drawn
up at a Communist meeting";that two Communists could "tie
Sutpues fa Atauam Atzsnput Suryoed-aeam s,uoraeu aut dn
telegrams"; that the union's mail "was delivered first to
Communist headquarters and only Such as was deemed proper
for Pwoc consumption was allowed to pass on to Pwoc members

--- PAGE BREAK ---t dn
telegrams"; that the union's mail "was delivered first to
Communist headquarters and only Such as was deemed proper
for Pwoc consumption was allowed to pass on to Pwoc members

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Insert on page 14
Without waiting for the NLRB election Dies made a flying
was negotiating contracts with some of the major steel corpor-
ations. A strike was a posibility at the time Dies arrived.
For the Special benefit of Pittsburghers Dies varied
his wording slightly. He aaid that he was convinced that
"foreign agents" would resort to " sabotage, espionage, and
labor strike" in thet area in an effort to block shipments
of arms and supplies tonthe Allied armies.
Dt
"This is one of the worst spots in the 哆ountry," he
positions in labor unions here. Both Communists and Nazis
have installed agents in jobs in key industries."
Yet the committee's report fails to mention the Swoc,
and, although it does include one of the largest unions in
the Pittsburgh area, the United Radio, Electrieal and Machine
Workers of America, two members of the committee took the
well of the House of Representatives of January 23, l940,
and publicly apologized for the accusations against this union,
which they said were false.
The next day Dies was in Detroit. Here he told the press

--- PAGE BREAK ---sentatives of January 23, l940,
and publicly apologized for the accusations against this union,
which they said were false.
The next day Dies was in Detroit. Here he told the press

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14
or officers not holding red cards".
The testimony about the misuse of funds seems to have cme
xf from a former union official who had been expelled from
the union for mishandling its funds. Not testimony was taken
about or from menker&xof any union save the Packinghouse
Workers Organizing Committee.
Nonetheless, the Pwoc two days later won the election.
Herbert March, head of the union, on October 20, was
March and his assistant, Henry Johnson, by " a group of
pbominent citizens". These"prominent citizens", tkexewzpoxak
March Says, were the Chicago Association of Commerce. Three
officers of this association, Mareh points out, are officers
of meat packing corporations.
Mr. Dies indictments have not been handed down since his
visit to Chicago, and the rest of the charges against the union
can best be judged by the fact that none of xk them appear
in the committee's report.Neither does the committee list the
PwOc as one of the unions it found "communistddominated".
Withoutwa ItIng-for-tlhre NLRB-eleetionDioGoamadoaamfhyding
trip-to.Detroitwwhoregon-bhemtwentiednlrewtrolembhemppoaaaam
that Communist and Nazi agents in Detroit had stolen condidehtial
military information and fled the country. In Detroit, Dies
$aid, he was going to interview l0 secret informants, "four
or five of them are also members of labor unions".

--- PAGE BREAK ---didehtial
military information and fled the country. In Detroit, Dies
$aid, he was going to interview l0 secret informants, "four
or five of them are also members of labor unions".

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15
While Dies was interviewed by the press the United Auto-
Workers Union was on strike against the Chrysler Corporation,
and immediately before Dies arrival in
Detroit it looked as though the union was going to win.
The committee's report does not mention the UAw,zxax
nz nor is there any reference to the thefts of military
Before leaving Detroit Dies
announced that 3,500 persons in that wwx city were members
He would, he said, return about December l for a two-weeks
hearing by the full committee. To date such hearings have
not been held, and the sechedule of committee activity just
announced does not include them.
These are only a few of the cases where Dies or his
colleagues intervened in legitimate union affairs through
the exercise of powers and immunities they posses through
are constantly quoted against unions. The case of the
national Harvester Co. illustratea this.
ANationalLaborRelationsBoardzzoxzexzxexbazgzankugz
election was held iat the Richnond works of the International
Harvester Co. on December 20, 1939, a month after Dies visit
to Chicago. The day before the election there appeared in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---tion was held iat the Richnond works of the International
Harvester Co. on December 20, 1939, a month after Dies visit
to Chicago. The day before the election there appeared in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the
accounts of the anti-cIo testimony taken by Dies in
Chicago and then proceeds to say tkaxzkbz ， in effeet,
that a vote for the FEwoc is a vote for gommunism. The
"palladium-Item", accomodatingly enough, ran & news story
on the ad under the headline "Communism Issue Raised in
I.H.C.Vote". The story then refers to the statements in the
ad, based on Dies "Testimony", that the chairman of the
FEwoc and other leaders are Communists. For Some unaccountable
reason both the ad and the story failed to quote the earlier
statement of Metcalfe to the ladies of the D.A.R.,that the
Chicago investigation would be devoted, in part, to "red
activity in the farm equipment industry.