MEMPHIS rut,ICC DEPARTMENT 
INSPECTIONAL Illllii:AU 
MEMPHIS, TENNESSEE 
\ 
July 17, 19G8 • . 
RE: Security and surveillanco of Dr. 
Martin Luther King from time he 
arrived in Memphis on April 3, 1008. 
until he was assassinated on the 
evening ot April 9, LMiiH. 
W. E. Routt, Asst. Chief # t 
pectionul Bureau 
Lding •' - / 
r Sir: 
This report is being submitted as per request of Mr. Frank C. Holloman, 
octor ol Fire and Police, lor his information concerning the above captioned 
ject. • . . . . • 
In the early morning of April 3, 1968, we received information that Dr. 
tin Luther King, Jr., would arrive in Memphis from Atlanta, Georgia, on 
ght No. 38L, Eastern Airlines, arriving in Memphis at 10:15 A.M., Gate 17, 
phis Municipal Airport. ; ' \ 
On receipt of this information I instructed Det. E. E. Redditt and Ptlm. 
B. Richmond to go to the Municipal Airport to observe and report when Dr. 
g arrived and try to ascertain the location where he would be staying 
Le in Memphis. They were also advised to keep a continuing surveillance 
Dr. King, so as to know who all he came in contact with. 
The reason for surveillance being ordered was because Dr. King was a 
troversial figure plus the fact he had, according to our information, been 
ting with local black militants while in Memphis on prior visits. 
A short time after instructing Det. Redditt and Ptlm. Richmond to go to 
airport, I was advised by Chief J. C. Macdonald that Chief W. P. Huston 
sendinga detail of men to be with Dr. King for security measures. 
On April 5, 1968, I received a copy of report written to Chief W. P. 
ton by Inspector Don H. Smith, who was in charge of the security detail 
Dr. King, along with Lts. William Schultz, George Kelly Davis and Det. 
aid B. Howell. These men were also assisted by Inspector J. S. Gagliano 
l Lts. Hamby and Tucker. Inspector Smith’s report reads as follows: 
April 3, 1968, 8:30 A.M., I was instructed by Chief W. P. Huston to go ‘to 
• Metropolitan Airport along with a detail of men who will be Ustec1 below 
, security purposes for Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., who was to arrive 
is city aboard Flight 381, Eastern Airlines at 10:15 A.M. 
..... „„ rtie HnfTi1 were Lt William Schultz of the Homicide Bureau, 
GeorK KQlly Oavis a‘nd Dot. Ronald D. How 11, of the Vice and Narcotics 
rcau arrived at the Metropolitan Airport at approximateLy . • 
ril 3, 1908, and proceeded immediately to Gate 17, where F ig> 
stern Airlines was to deplane. 
On our arrival at Gate 17 at the Metropolitan Airport there was no one 
this Rate and only two passengers crossed the hallway at Gate 18 awart 
outRn i,.R fliRlit. At approximately '1:15 A.M. on April l, 1X.H, a whiteGate 17 at the Metropolitan Airport there was no one 
this Rate and only two passengers crossed the hallway at Gate 18 awart 
outRn i,.R fliRlit. At approximately '1:15 A.M. on April l, 1X.H, a white

--- PAGE BREAK ---Page 2 - Security and surveillance of Dr.

Martin Luther King.

female reporter and white cameraman arrived at Gate 17.

A very few minutes 
later Mrs.

Thomas Matthews, colored female, arrived at Cate 17 and during the 
conversation with Lt.

George Kelly Davis she stated that she had come to the ai 
port to Pick up Dr.

King.

Mrs.

Matthews stated that they had not asked for 
police to be assigned to Dr.

King.

Between 9:15 A.M.

and 10:33 A.M., which is the time Flight 381 arrived 
(Eastern Airline) in Memphis, a crowd of approximately 60 to 70 people had 
congregated at Gate 17 anil in the hallway between Gate 17 and Gate 18.

Some 
of the peopLe who had congregated at this location were outbound passengers.

Eastern Airline flights, and d id not come to that ‘location to greet Dr.

King.

The majority of the people congregated there were from the news media.

There 
were approximately 15 to 20 colored males and females who were not with the 
news media.

After Dr.

King deplaned at 10:33 A.M.

(his plane being late) he held a 
short press conference in the hallway near Gate L7 at the Metropolitan Airport.

Our dispatcher was kept advised of the approximate number of people who were 
congregating at Gate 17 and he was also advised the exact time Dr.

King de- 
planed, and that the crowd assembled was orderly.

Shortly after Dr.

King's press conference, he started toward the 
nain lobby of the airport terminal and while walking down the hallway, the 
writer approached Reverend James Lawson and after identifying himself, asked 
Reverend Lawson if he would tell me where they were going on leaving the 
airport.

Reverend Lawson stated, "We have not fully made up our minds." 
» 
Dr.

King got into a grey with a black vinyl top Buick Electra bearing 
Lennessee License JP-973S, which was parked on the upper driveway at the 
•letropolitan Airport.

This car was driven by Mrs.

Thomas Matthews and Dr.

King 
vas in the front seat with her.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Thomas Matthews and Dr. King 
vas in the front seat with her. There were three colored males in the rear 
;eat of this automobile. There was also a yellow Lincoln Continental with a 
'lack vinyl top bearing Tennessee License BT-0039, which was occupied by 
everal male coloreds who left the airport along with the Buick carrying 
>r. Martin Luther King. The dispatcher was advised of the description of the 
ars and the license numbers, and the above mentioned officers followed, 
eeping the dispatcher advised of our location and our final destination, 
/hich was the Lorraine Hotel located at 406 M:ulborry, arriving there at 
ipproximateIy 11:20 A.M. After arriving at the Lorraine Hotel, another 
ruiser occupied by Inspector J. S. Gagliano, Lts. Hamby and Tucker, arrived 
t this location at my request to assist in securing the area where Dr. King 
•as staying. At approximately 12:05 P.M., April 3, 1968, Dr. King left the Lorraine 
lotel in the same black over gray Buick bearing Tennessee License JP-973S, „ 
iriven by Mrs. Thomas Matthews, and the above mentioned officers followed 
his car carrying Dr. King to 584 E. MeLemorc, the Centenary Methodist Church, 
/here the officers in Cruiser John 1 secured the front entrance to the church 
»ff of McLcniore and David 1 secured the rear entrance off Edith. Dr. King, in the same automobile driven by the same person, left 58CJ E. IcLemorrj at approximately 2:15 P.M. and was followed by a white Cadillac with 
i black vinyl top bearing Tennessee License KO-0708 driven by Soloman Jones 
ind an unknown colored male sitting in Uic. front seat with the driver. The 
ibove mentioned officers followed these two cars back to the Lorraine Hotel 
/here the entrances were secured by the olficers who remained on duty at that 
ocation approximately until 5: (J5 P.M. Dr.* King arrived at the Lorraine, 
lotel on the last occasion at approximately 2:25 P.M. * -Vf »" '• • • JJ -iJRfM* 
r- 
W i

--- PAGE BREAK ---During the time?

wo were on duty at the?

entrances of this hotel between 
2;«.5 P.M.

and 5:05 P.M., the Federal Marshal and some of his deputies arrived 
at this location and Dr.

King along with some of his aides were served with an 
injunction.

Approximately 30 minutes after this injunction was served on Ur.

King and his aides a meeting, was held in Room 307 of the Lorraine Hotel between 
Dr.

King, his aides and several attorneys.

It is not known by the writer if there were detectives.assigned to this 
detail after 5:05 P.M.

when we were pulled off, but it should be°noted that at 
no time did Dr.

King or anyone else ask for police protection while I was on 
this detail.

.

t 
This concluded Inspector Don H.

Smith’s report.

It was not until April 10, 19G8, that I received a report concerning 
Inspector Joe Gaglianq's participation in this detail, as well as those 
assigned with him, Lts.

J.

C.

Hamby and Joe Tucker.

This report was written 
to Chief W.

P.

Huston and reads as follows: 
April 3, 1%8, at approximately 11:15 A.M., the writer received 
instructions from you that I was to meet Inspector Don Smitli at Dutler and 
Mulberry and assist him on the above captioned detail.

I arrived at this 
location with Lts.

J.

C.

Hamby and Joe Tucker around 11:25 A.M.

and was 
briefed by Inspector Don Smith.

He advised me that Dr.

King had been driven to the Lorraine Motel in a 
black Elcetra (black vinyl top and gray colored bottom) bearing Tennessee 
License JP-9735.

lie instructed me to take Lts.

Hambv and Tucker and secure the 
Butler Street exit and to stay with Dr.

King whenever he left this location.

In the meantime we were to keep him under observation as best we could.

He 
also told me that although he had requested Dr.

King’s schedule, he "had been 
refused same.

The three (3) of us secured the Butler Street exit and at approximately 
12:05 P.M.

Dr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The three (3) of us secured the Butler Street exit and at approximately 
12:05 P.M. Dr. King and party left in the black and grey Electra bearing 
Tennessee License JP-973S, being driven by a colored female whom I later 
learned to be Mrs. Thomas Matthews. They caine out the Butler Street exit and 
proceeded cast on Butler, south on Second to Calhoun, east on Calhoun to Third, 
south on Third to McLemorc, and then east on McLcmore to 584 E. McLemore, which 
is Reverend Lawson's church. During this entire time this car was secured by 
Inspector Smith and his men, who followed immediately behind their Buick and we 
followed Inspector Smith's car. At this location I told Inspector Smith that I 
believed that there was an exit at the rear of this church and he instructed me 
to check and if so, to secure same. After having secured the rear exit for about fifteen or twenty minutes-* I 
noticed Herald Tanion, male colored, enter the rear wing off Edith 'where he 
remained for approximately twenty or thirty minutes. When he came out, I 
motioned him over to our cruiser, at which time I requested that lie try and 
determine for us what Dr. King's party's schedule was so that we could protect 
him. At this time Lt. Hamby told him, "We don't want anything to happen to 
him,” and he answered, "I know what you mean," and he stated he would find out 
where*.they were going from here and would let us know, lie went west on Edith 
on foot£vand returned a short time later, again entered the building, but never 
came back to inform us of Dr. King's party's intentions. Around 2:15 P.M. Street olf McLemorc, 
inst north of Walker 
wo again fill owed Dr. King and his party west to Third 
then north on Third to the Hogue & Knott Super Market 
on Third where Dr. King and party parked briefly while

--- PAGE BREAK ---Page 4 - Security ancl surveillance oi.-Dr.

Martin Luther King.

one of the male coloreds entered HORMP & Knott and returned to theirear At 
this time Inspector Smith was able to get immediately behind Dr.

King « ^ • .

Previously; there was a white 67 or 68 Cadillac bearing Tennessee K0-D708, 
being driven by a male coLured Solomon Jones, immediately behind Dr.

King s eai 
We allowed this car to proceed between Inspector Smith s cruiser an ouis.

c 
went north on Third to Butler and west on Butler to the Lorraine lictel.

where 
we took up our same security stations.

We remained at this location until we were instructed by Inspector Don 
Smith that Chief C.

Macdonald had ordered us to Headquarters at approximate!

5:05 P.M., April 3, llJG8.

This was my only detail on Dr.

Martin Luther King, J r.

This concluded Inspector J.

S.

Gagliano’s report.

The observations of Dot.

Rcdditt and Ptlm.

Richmond on April 3, 1968, 
coincide with reports written by Inspector Smith and Inspector Gagliano, 
except go into more detail as to persons going to and from the Lorraine 
Hotel-Motel complex while Dr.

King was there.

Cor they had an observation po 
in the rear of Engine House No.

4, located at Main and Butler overlooking the 
Lorraine Hotel-Motel.

It should be noted at this point a remark made by Mrs.

Thomas Matthews, as 
her name has been mentioned in the reports made by Inspectors Smith and Gugli no 
anS she stated.

pointing her f inger at Det Redditt "I am going to 
Pet vou " or "I am going to shoot you." This is listed to show the attitude 
toward the police that some of Dr.

King's associates had.

It was also mentione 
by Lt.

Davis that Mrs.

Thomas Matthews was the first colored person to arrive 
at Gate 17 at thp airport and upon talking with her, trying to in .

, 
arrangements that had been made for Dr.

King, she stated they had not invited 
any police and later she was overheard telling Dr.

King that, "tie are ju 
rece^vl^ any police protection," and Dr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

King, she stated they had not invited 
any police and later she was overheard telling Dr. King that, "tie are ju 
rece^vl^ any police protection," and Dr. King stated to Hro..Mrtl 
ennn as I n-et time, I will see what I can do about it. It , 
ILIZs Matthews and Dr. King did not know these remarks had been overheard 
by Lt. G. K- Davis. . ., . • * 
Det Redditt and Ptlm. Richmond left their observation post at 6:36 P.M., 
April 3 1968, and went to the Mason Temple where Dr. King was to make an 
iS«.;*ti a mass mooting. On arrival at this location they were met by 
Reverend Halcomb Douglass- Blackburn, MW, 40, residence 857 Woodlawn, who 
Associate Minister at Clayborn Temple, and was quite active, during the 
sanitation strike. . . • 
Reverend Blackburn called Det. Redditt aside and “ked what he 
to do‘to himself and when Redditt “Station pear the Lorraine Motel 
the word is out that you were over in the tire station 
spying with binoculars. • • „ • ♦ 
After Reverend Blackburn had toOct^Rcd^itt^he then^proadhod> 
as'this^was°tho wron^placc Tor him" because tension was alroady high enough. The meeting at Clayborn ^otj approximately 8:'I0 P.H. because 
Aprtl 3, 1868, but Redditt and Richmond to make their presence known' 
they felt that Reverend James Lawson was goins to make thcii P ui it 
af?er remarks had been made concerning the shooting ot Larry laync, cat 
cold blooded murder. „ • fv

--- PAGE BREAK ---.

5 - Security and surveillance of Dr.

Martin Luther King.

I would like to make mention at this point that I have no idea as to" 
why the security detail was removed from Dr.

King after 5:05 P.M., April 3, 
1968, as mentioned in Inspector J.

S.

CagLiano’s report, as I was not conferred 
with concerning it.

The surveillance detail, however, was again resumed at 
10:30 A.M., April 4, 1908.

April 4, 1008, 10:30 A.M., Dot.

Redditt and Ptlm.

Richmond resumed their 
surveillance of the Lorraine Hotel-Motel complex, noting everything that went 
an concerning persons going to and from this location.

4 
While at the observation post at Firehoude No.

4, Det.

Redditt received 
i phone call from a woman who did not identify herself, stating, "You arc 
ioing your own black people wrong and we are going to do you wrong also." 
During the time this surveillance was in progress Mr.

Philip R.

Manuel, 
vho is with the U.S.

Senate Investigating Committee for Senator McClellan, 
was in our nil ice and lie received a call to return a call to his office in 
VasilingLun and in doing so, he was advised that a reliable informer of theirs 
in Mississippi had called advising them of a plan the Mississippi Freedom 
democratic Party had made to kill the Negro Lieutenant here in Memphis and it 
was believed they eouLd have been referring to Det.

Redditt, for he had been 
in the thick of things since the beginning of the sanitation strike.

Mr.

Manuel 
vas advised by his oil ice that the plan had already been set in motion, but 
le could get no spoeilie details because Mr.

Jack Dross, his associate in 
Washington, had left the office without dictating a memo regarding this.

Mr.

Manuel advised that his plane was to leave Memphis for Washington at 
>:50 P.M.

and that on arrival in his office the next morning, the particulars 
would be forwarded our office.

NOTE: Information was received later from Mr!--- PAGE BREAK ---

and that on arrival in his office the next morning, the particulars 
would be forwarded our office. NOTE: Information was received later from Mr! ■lanuel indicating that the Negro Lieutenant referred to was in Knoxville, 
Tennessee instead of Memphis. ' » 
/• o 4 
Upon learning of this possible threat to Det. Redditt, he was pulled from 
the surveillance assignment and relieved of duty and sent home to be with his 
amily and a police guard was set up at his home. Ptlm. Richmond, however, 
’emained on his post, continuing surveillance of the Lorraine Hotel-Motel. Ptlm. Richmond, while observin 
it the time lie was shot. He states 
it that time he heard a loud sound 
juther King fall back From the hand 
ibserving this, he run to the phone 
rnr tac units in front of the fire 
ieeii shot, and at this time the dis 
ill police units in the ai*ea began 
g the motel, saw Dr. Martin Luther King 
that this was approximately 6:U0 P.M. and 
as if it were a shot and saw Dr. Martin 
rail and put his hand up to hishead. Upon 
to report it, at which time he saw one of 
station, advising them that Dr. King had 
patcher was made aware of what happened and 
to converge on the scene. At the time Dr. King was shot, there.were two tac units and five cars in 
’lose proximity, which would give a minimum of 44 men in the area and a 
naximum of 52, as the tac units had anywhere from 12 to 16 men per unit and 
the cars had 4 men each assigned. % 
^iierc was quite a lot of conversation at the Lorraine Hotel-Motel after 
polic*c«?irrival as to how they got on the scene so Last, and it was even 
indicated that a policeman was responsible for the shooting. As a result of 
these remarks, I had Mr. Waiter Lane Hailey, male. 1 Negro, who is the owner of 
the Lorraine Hotel-Motel, come to the Police Station on April 6, 1968, and 
TTI 
. * T

--- PAGE BREAK ---.give a statement concerning our presence in the area, as we were keeping in 
ose touch with lum as to what was going on among Dr.

King ami his associates.

hl.

Mr.

BaUoy's statement he states that he.knew that we were observin'" 
i P, r-?.

JUPinpSS Lrom t,1L
‘ iirt-
1 station located at Main and Butler and the 
en/i-h11 1C1Sm dc.

had heard of the police was they were wondering how the police 
got there- so quick and he told the parties making the remarks thSt the police 
were watching from the lire house and that they were always over there.

Tn ^th° rt’ports artcr Dr.

King's death that were written by 
Inspector Smith Inspector Gagliano, Det.

Redditt and Ptlm.

Richmond there 
were certain things that I felt needed clarifying/ such as Reverend Blackburn's 
statement to Dot.

Redditt, that he knew that we were spying on the activities 
they^had'^o^asl !.Jtt' aLs“.L'rom Mrs- Thomas Matthews, her statement that 
tney hail not asked lor any poLice in connection with Dr.

King's visit Also 
memo that was written to Mr.

Frank Holloman by Captain Sidncv Cole and Lt B 
Jesse1EnnsetTd 5’ Jwl;ich stated they escorted Reverend Lawson, 
WLSP ^ P !

Jot?

Paisley, Gerald Fanion and another male colored 
that tl^'y !!“?

tain°d’ t0 Mt'- Hoiluinai1's office on his request and 
that this was at 1:10 A.M.

and while in Mr.

Holloman's office, Gerald Fanion 
made the statement that the Strategy Committee had considered asking for 
againstPrttOCtl°n ^ ^ Revercnd Martin Luther King; however, had'decided 
On 
business 
the same 
remark a 
before, 
saw Lt.

Ptlm.

Ri 
statemen 
April 1.1, 1068, I talked to Mrs.

Thomas Matthews at her place of 
the Eureka Barber Shop on Park Avenue, ph.

324-0247, and she stated 
as Lt.

Davis had mentioned in their report.

She said she made the 
bout the police being at the airport, for they weren't there the time 
and that on this occasion, however, referring to April 3 1068 she 
Davis Inspector Smith, Det.

Redditt and his partner, referring to 
ehmond.

Mrs.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Redditt and his partner, referring to 
ehmond. Mrs. Matthews was asked to coine to my office and give a 
t, which she agreed to do, but never appeared. • 
n i°n n?ri,\ 22, a statement was obtained from Reverend Malcomb 
Douglas Blackburn to the effect that he had spoken with Det. Redditt at Mason 
Temple, but didn t remember the? exact context of their conversation, but did 
ten hun that lie had heard a remark or rumor that he had been observing the 
Lorraine Hotel with binoculars from in or nedr the fire house. Reverend 
Blackburn also stated that he had no knowledge of whether anyone had asked for 
police protection Jor Dr. King while in Memphis on April 3 and 4, 1968. With reference to the memo concerning Gerald Fanionrs remarks to Mr. Holloman, a statement was obtained from Gerald Fanion on April 24*, 1968, 
whereiti he stated that on April 3, 1968, while at the Centenary Methodist 
Church on MoLcmorc he saw Inspector Gagliano amt another gentleman he did not 
know and that he spoke to Inspector Gagliano, but cannot remember all the 
contents ol the conversation, but ho does remember being asked about Dr. King’s 
schedule. lie went on to state that he did notMrosumefT the responsibility of 
getting the information of Dr. King’s schedule as requested by Inspector 
Gagliano. When asked the question if he had been present on any occasion during 
strategy meetings pertaining to Dr. King’s visits to Memphis and particularly 
his^v^sit ol April 3, 1968, was there any discussion with reference to asking 
P>

--- PAGE BREAK ---ny occasion during 
strategy meetings pertaining to Dr. King’s visits to Memphis and particularly 
his^v^sit ol April 3, 1968, was there any discussion with reference to asking 
P>

--- PAGE BREAK ---

f6r police protection for Dr. Kin*;. Mr. Fanion answered by stating he had 
heard this mentioned prior to his first visit March 28, 1008, and went on to 
state that Dr. King's itinerary on both visits to Memphis were not discussed 
in strategy sessions where there would be general knowledge to a lot of people, 
but he has heard it mentioned that poLice protection is not a request of Dr. 
King's staff. In other words, it is not a policy to ask for police protection. 
Mr. Fonion also makes mention that he had heard Dct. Rcdditt had been 
watching the Lorraine* Hotel-Mo tel [ roin the fire station and remembered hearing 
that he had been removed from the fire station prior to Dr. KingTs assassination. 
As to the remarks Mr. Fan ion is supposed to hdve made in the presence of 
Mr. Holloman, he stated he cannot truthfully remember these remarks; however, 
he might have said this, that it had been mentioned. 
All data mentioned in this report, such as copies of reports, statements, 
etc., will be made a part of the Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., surveillance 
file’of April 3 and 4, 1968, maintained in the Inspectional Bureau office. 
Respectfully submitted. 
G. P. Tines, Inspector 
Inspectional Bureau 
GPT/mk 
i • . .. 
V u 
*[ '!• •- 
y %■ 
K: iv 
&. 
r 
- 
v 
r ., 
1*S: 
% 
■fa—