PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND
Toward a Psychocivilized Society


httpVwww.propheticexplorer.i


WORLD PERSPECTIVES


Volumes already published


I

II

III

IV

V
VI

VII

VIII

IX

X

XI

XII

XIII

XIV
XV


XVI

XVII

XVIII

XIX

XX

XXI

xxn

XXIii


Approaches to God Jacques Maritain

Accent on Form Lancelot Law Whyte

Scope of Total Architecture Walter Gropius
Recovery of Faith Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan
World Indivisible Konrad Adenauer

Society and Knowledge V. Gordon Childe

The Transformations of Man Lewis Mumford
Man and Materialism Fred Hoyle

The Art of Loving Erich Fromm

Dynamics of Faith Paul Tillich

Matter, Mind and Man Edmund W. Sinnott
Mysticism: Christian and Buddhist

Daisetz Teitaro Suzuki
Man's Western Quest Denis de Rougemont
American Humanism Howard Mumford Jones
The Meeting of Love and Knowledge

Martin C. D’Arcy, SJ.
Rich Lands and Poor Gunnar Myrdal

Hinduism: Its Meaning for the Liberation
OF THE Spirit -Swami Nikhilananda

Can People Learn to Learn? Brock Chisholm


Physics and Philosophy
Art and Reality
Sigmund Freud's Mission
Mirage of Health
Issues of Freedom


Werner Heisenberg
Joyce Cary
Erich Fromm
Ren^ Dubos
Herbert J. Muller


httpVwww.propheticexplorer.com


XXIV

XXV

XXVI

XXVII

XXVIII

XXIX

XXX

XXXI

XXXII

XXXIII

XXXIV

XXXV

XXXVI

XXXVII

XXXVIII

XXXIX

XL

XLI


Humanism Moses Hadas

Life; Its Dimensions and Its Bounds

Robert M. Maciver
Challenge of Psychical Research

Gardner Murphy

Alfred North Whitehead: His Reflections
ON Man and Nature Ruth Nanda Anshen
The Age of Nationalism Hans Kohn

Voices of Man Mario Pei

New Paths in Biology Adolf Portmann

Myth and Reality Mircea Eliade

History as Art and as Science H. Stuart Hughes
Realism in Our Time Georg Lukacs

The Meaning of the Twentieth Century

Kenneth E. Boulding
On Economic Knowledge Adolph Lowe

Caliban Reborn Wilfrid Mellers

Through the Vanishing Point

Marshall McLuhan and Harley Parker
The Revolution of Hope Erich Fromm

Emergency Exit Ignazio Silone

Marxism and the Existentialists Raymond Aron
Physical Control of the Mind

Jos6 M. R. Delgado, M.D.


http :/www. propheticexplorer.com


BOARD OF EDITORS


of

WORLD PERSPECTIVES


Sir Kenneth Clark
Richard Courant
Werner Heisenberg
Ivan Illich
Konrad Lorenz
Robert M, MacIver
Joseph Needham
1. 1. Rabi

Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan
Karl Rahner, S.J.
Alexander Sachs
C. N. Yang


httpVwww.propheticexplorer.com


WORLD PERSPECTIVES • Volume Forty-one


Planned and Edited by RUTH NANDA ANSHEN


PHYSICAL CONTROL
OF THE MIND

Toward a P^chocivilized Society


JOS^: M. R. DELGADO, M.D.


3837


■£


HARPER & ROW, PUBLISHERS

NEW YORK, EVANSTON, AND LONDON


httpVwww.propheticexplorer.com


PHYSICAL control OF THE MIND; TOWARD A PSYCHOCIVILIZED SOCIETY. Copyright ©

1969 by Jose M. R. Delgado. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States
of America. No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner
whatsoever without written permission except in the case of brief quotations
embodied in critical articles and reviews. For information address Harper & Row,
Publishers, Incorporated, 49 East 33rd Street, New York, N.Y. 10016. Published
simultaneously in Canada by Fitzhenry & Whiteside Limited, Toronto.

FIRST EDITION

LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOG CARD NUMBER: 7 1 -8987 1


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


Contents


World Perspectives— What This Series Means

—Ruth Nanda Anshen xi

Acknowledgments xix

PART I MENTAL EVOLUTION

1. Natural Fate Versus Human Control: The Process

of Ecological Liberation and Domination 3

Freedom of Choice
Awareness
Responsibility
Accumulation of Power

2. The Imbalance Between Material and Mental

Evolution 13

3. Mental Liberation and Domination 17

PART II THE BRAIN AND MIND AS
FUNCTIONAL ENTITIES

4. What is the Mind? 23

Mind and Soul

The Brain Defined

The Mind as a Functional Entity

Heterogeneous Qualities of the Mind

5. Extracerebral Elements of the Mind: When and

How the Mind Is Formed 36

vii


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


Vlll


CONTENTS


6. The Mindless, Newborn Brain 47

7. Sensory Dependence o£ the Adult Mind 59

8. Working Hypothesis for the Experimental Study of

the Mind 67

g. Historical Evolution of Physical Control of the

Brain 70


PART III EXPERIMENTAL CONTROL OF BRAIN
FUNCTIONS IN BEHAVING SUBJECTS

10. Physicochemical Bases of Behavioral Activity 76

11. Methodology for Direct Communication with the

Brain 81

Implantation of Electrodes in Animals
Electrodes in the Human Brain
Two Way Radio Communication with the Brain

12. Electrical Stimulation of the Brain (ESB) 97

13. Motor Responses 100

^ Motor Activation in Animals
Motor EjBEects in Man

14. Hell and Heaven Within the Brain: The Systems for

Punishment and Reward 117

Perception of Suffering
Violence Within the Brain
Anxiety, Fear, and Violence Evoked by ESB in
Man

Pleasurable Excitation of the Animal Brain
Human Pleasure Evoked by ESB
Friendliness and Increased Conversation under
Electrical Control

15. Hallucinations, Recollections, and Illusions in Man 150

16. Inhibitory Effects in Animals and Man 155


http :/www. propheticexplorer.com


CONTENTS


IX


PART IV EVALUATION OF ELECTRICAL
CONTROL OF THE BRAIN

17. Brain Stimulation Triggers Physiological

Mechanisms 180

18. Electrical Activation of the “Will” 184

19. Characteristics and Limitations of Brain Control 190

Predictability
Functional Monotony
Skillful Performance
Individual Stability
Technical Complexity
Functions Beyond ESB Control

20. Medical Applications 196

Diagnosis

Therapy

Circumvention of Damaged Sensory Inputs
Brain Viability

21. Ethical Considerations 207

Clinical Use of New Procedures
Human Experimentation
Electrical Manipulation of the Psyche

22. Social Implications 219

23. Neurophysiology and Mental Activity 224

PART V TOWARD A PSYCHOCIVILIZED SOCIETY


24. Social Dependence and Individual Freedom 231

25. Natural Causality and Intelligent Planning 245

26. A Tentative Plan 257

Bibliography 263


http :/www. propheticexplorer.com


World Perspectives

What This Series Means


It is the thesis of World Perspectives that man is in the process
of developing a new consciousness which, in spite of his ap¬
parent spiritual and moral captivity, can eventually lift the hu¬
man race above and beyond the fear, ignorance, and isolation
which beset it today. It is to this nascent consciousness, to this
concept of man bom out of a universe perceived through a
fresh vision of reality, that World Perspectives is dedicated.

Man has entered a new era of evolutionary history, one in
which rapid change is a dominant consequence. He is contend¬
ing with a fundamental change, since he has intervened in the
evolutionary process. He must now better appreciate this fact
and then develop the wisdom to direct the process toward his
fulfillment rather than toward his destruction. As he leams
to apply his understanding of the physical world for practical
purposes, he is, in reality, extending his innate capacity and
augmenting his ability and his need to communicate as well as
his ability to think and to create. And as a result, he is sub¬
stituting a goal-directed evolutionary process in his stru^le
against environmental hardship for the slow, but effective, bio¬
logical evolution which produced modern man through muta¬
tion and natural selection. By intelligent intervention in the
evolutionary process man has greatly accelerated and greatly
expanded the range of his possibilities. But he has not changed

xi


httpVwww.propheticexplorer.com


XU


WORLD PERSPECTIVES


the basic fact that it remains a trial and error process, with the
danger of taking paths that lead to sterility of mind and heart,
moral apathy and intellectual inertia; and even producing so¬
cial dinosaurs unfit to live in an evolving world.

Only those spiritual and intellectual leaders of our epoch
who have a paternity in this extension of man’s horizons are
invited to participate in this Series: those who are aware of the
truth that beyond the divisiveness among men there exists a
primordial unitive power since we are all bound together by a
common humanity more fundamental than any unity of
dogma; those who recognize that the centrifugal force which
has scattered and atomized mankind must be replaced by an
integrating structure and process capable of bestowing mean¬
ing and purpose on existence; those who realize that science
itself, when not inhibited by the limitations of its own meth¬
odology, when chastened and humbled, commits man to an
indeterminate range of yet undreamed consequences that may
flow from it.

Virtually all of our disciplines have relied on conceptions
which are now incompatible with the Cartesian axiom, and with
the static world view we once derived from it. For underlying
the new ideas, including those of modern physics, is a unifying
order, but it is not causality; it is purpose, and not the purpose
of the universe and of man but the purpose in the universe and
in man. In other words, we seem to inhabit a world of dynamic
process and structure. Therefore we need a calculus of potential¬
ity rather than one of probability, a dialectic of polarity, one in
which unity and diversity are defined as simultaneous and nec¬
essary poles of the same essence.

Our situation is new. No civilization has previously had to
face the challenge of scientific specialization; and our response
must be new. Thus this Series is committed to ensure that the
spiritual and moral needs of man as a human being and the
scientific and intellectual resources at his command for life
may be brought into a productive, meaningful, and creative
harmony.


http :/www. propheticexplorer.com


WORLD PERSPECTIVES


Xlll


This Series endeavors to point to a reality of which scientific
theory has revealed only one aspect. It is the commitment to
this reality that lends universal intent to a scientist’s most origi¬
nal and solitary thought. By acknowledging this frankly we
shall restore science to the great family of human aspirations by
which men hope to fulfill themselves in the world community
as thinking and sentient beings. For our problem is to discover
a principle of differentiation and yet relationship lucid enough
to justify and to purify scientific, philosophic and all other
knowledge, both cognitive and intuitive, by accepting their
interdependence. This is the crisis in consciousness made artic¬
ulate through the crisis in science. This is the new awakening.

Each volume presents the thought and belief of its author
and points to the way in which religion, philosophy, art, sci¬
ence, economics, politics and history may constitute that form
of human activity which takes the fullest and most precise
account of variousness, possibility, complexity and difficulty.
Thus World Perspectives endeavors to define that ecumenical
power of the mind and heart which enables man through his
mysterious greatness to re-create his life.

This Series is committed to a re-examination of all those sides
of human endeavor which the specialist was taught to believe
he could safely leave aside. It attempts to show the structural
kinship between subject and object; the indwelling of the one
in the other. It interprets present and past events impinging
on human life in our growing World Age and envisages what
man may yet attain when summoned by an unbending inner
necessity to the quest of what is most exalted in him. Its pur¬
pose is to offer new vistas in terms of world and human de¬
velopment while refusing to betray the intimate correlation
between universality and individuality, dynamics and form,
freedom and destiny. Each author deals with the increasing
realization that spirit and nature are not separate and apart;
that intuition and reason must regain their importance as the
means of perceiving and fusing inner being with outer reality.

World Perspectives endeavors to show that the conception of


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


Xiv WORLD PERSPECTIVES

wholeness, unity, organism is a higher and more concrete con¬
ception than that of matter and energy. Thus an enlarged
meaning of life, of biology, not as it is revealed in the test tube
of the laboratory but as it is experienced within the organism
of life itself, is attempted in this Series. For the principle of
life consists in the tension which connects spirit with the realm
of matter, symbiotically joined. The element of life is dominant
in the very texture of nature, thus rendering life, biology, a
transempirical science. The laws of life have their origin
beyond their mere physical manifestations and compel us to con¬
sider their spiritual source. In fact, the widening of the concep¬
tual framework has not only served to restore order within the
respective branches of knowledge, but has also disclosed anal¬
ogies in man's position regarding the analysis and synthesis of
experience in apparently separated domains of knowledge, sug¬
gesting the possibility of an ever more embracing objective
description of the meaning of life.

Knowledge, it is shown in these books, no longer consists in
a manipulation of man and nature as opposite forces, nor in the
reduction of data to mere statistical order, but is a means of
liberating mankind from the destructive power of fear, point¬
ing the way toward the goal of the rehabilitation of the human
will and the rebirth of faith and confidence in the human per¬
son. The works published also endeavor to reveal that the cry
for patterns, systems and authorities is growing less insistent as
the desire grows stronger in both East and West for the re¬
covery of a dignity, integrity and self-realization which are the
inalienable rights of man who may now guide change by means
of conscious purpose in the light of rational experience.

The volumes in this Series endeavor to demonstrate that only
in a society in which awareness of the problems of science ex¬
ists can its discoveries start great waves of change in human
culture, and in such a manner that these discoveries may
deepen and not erode the sense of universal human commu¬
nity. The differences in the disciplines, their epistemological
exclusiveness, the variety of historical experiences, the differ-


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


WORLD PERSPECTIVES


XV


ences of traditions, of cultures, of languages, of the arts, should
be protected and preserved. But the interrelationship and unity
of the whole should at the same time be accepted.

The authors of World Perspectives are of course aware that
the ultimate answers to the hopes and fears which pervade
modern society rest on the moral fiber of man, and on the wis¬
dom and responsibility of those who promote the course of its
development. But moral decisions cannot dispense with an in¬
sight into the interplay of the objective elements which oflfer
and limit the choices made. Therefore an understanding of what
the issues are, though not a sufficient condition, is a necessary
prerequisite for directing action toward constructive solutions.

Other vital questions explored relate to problems of interna¬
tional understanding as well as to problems dealing with preju¬
dice and the resultant tensions and antagonisms. The growing
perception and responsibility of our World Age point to the
new reality that the individual person and the collective person
supplement and integrate each other; that the thrall of totali¬
tarianism of both left and right has been shaken in the universal
desire to recapture the authority of truth and human totality.
Mankind can finally place its trust not in a proletarian authori¬
tarianism, not in a secularized humanism, both of which have
betrayed the spiritual property right of history, but in a sacra¬
mental brotherhood and in the unity of knowledge. This new
consciousness has created a widening of human horizons be¬
yond every parochialism, and a revolution in human thought
comparable to the basic assumption, among the ancient Greeks,
of the sovereignty of reason; corresponding to the great efful¬
gence of the moral conscience articulated by the Hebrew
prophets; analogous to the fundamental assertions of Chris¬
tianity; or to the beginning of the new scientific era, the era of
the science of dynamics, the experimental foundations of which
were laid by Galileo in the Renaissance.

An important effort of this Series is to re-examine the con¬
tradictory meanings and applications which are given today to
such terms as democracy, freedom, justice, love, peace, brother-


http :/www. propheticexpiorer.com


XVI


WORLD PERSPECTIVES


hood and God. The purpose of such inquiries is to clear the
way for the foundation of a genuine world history not in terms
of nation or race or culture but in terms of man in relation to
God, to himself, his fellow man and the universe, that reach
beyond immediate self-interest. For the meaning of the World
Age consists in respecting man’s hopes and dreams which lead
to a deeper understanding of the basic values of all peoples.

World Perspectives is planned to gain insight into the mean¬
ing of man, who not only is determined by history but who also
determines history. History is to be understood as concerned
not only with the life of man on this planet but as including
also such cosmic influences as interpenetrate our human world.
This generation is discovering that history does not conform to
the social optimism of modem civilization and that the organi¬
zation of human communities and the establishment of freedom
and peace are not only intellectual achievements but spiritual
and moral achievements as well, demanding a cherishing of the
wholeness of human personality, the “unmediated wholeness
of feeling and thought,” and constituting a never-ending chal¬
lenge to man, emerging from the abyss of meaninglessness and
suffering, to be renewed and replenished in the totality of his
life.

Justice itself, which has been “in a state of pilgrimage and
crucifixion” and now is being slowly liberated from the grip of
social and political demonologies in the East as well as in the
West, begins to question its own premises. The modem revolu¬
tionary movements which have challenged the sacred institu¬
tions of society by protecting social injustice in the name of
social justice are here examined and re-evaluated.

In the light of this, we have no choice but to admit that the
unfreedom against which freedom is measured must be retained
with it, namely, that the aspect of truth out of which the night
view appears to emerge, the darkness of our time, is as little
abandonable as is man’s subjective advance. Thus the two
sources of man’s consciousness are inseparable, not as dead but
as living and complementary, an aspect of that “principle of


http :/www. propheticexplorer.com


WORLD PERSPECTIVES


XVll


complementarity” through which Niels Bohr has sought to
unite the quantum and the wave, both of which constitute the
very fabric of life’s radiant energy.

There is in mankind today a counterforce to the sterility and
danger of a quantitative, anonymous mass culture; a new, if
sometimes imperceptible, spiritual sense of convergence toward
human and world unity on the basis of the sacredness of each
human person and respect for the plurality of cultures. There
is a growing awareness that equality may not be evaluated in
mere numerical terms but is proportionate and analogical in
its reality. For when equality is equated with interchangeabil¬
ity, individuality is negated and the human person extinguished.

We stand at the brink of an age of a world in which human
life presses forward to actualize new forms. The false separa¬
tion of man and nature, of time and space, of freedom and
security, is acknowledged, and we are faced with a new vision
of man in his organic unity and of history offering a richness
and diversity of quality and majesty of scope hitherto unprece¬
dented. In relating the accumulated wisdom of man’s spirit to
the new reality of the World Age, in articulating its thought
and belief, World Perspectives seeks to encourage a renaissance
of hope in society and of pride in man’s decision as to what his
destiny will be.

World Perspectives is committed to the recognition that all
great changes are preceded by a vigorous intellectual re-evalua¬
tion and reorganization. Our authors are aware that the sin of
hubris may be avoided by showing that the creative process
itself is not a free activity if by free we mean arbitrary, or un¬
related to cosmic law. For the creative process in the human
mind, the developmental process in organic nature and the
basic laws of the inorganic realm may be but varied expressions
of a universal formative process. Thus World Perspectives
hopes to show that although the present apocalyptic period is
one of exceptional tensions, there is also at work an exceptional
movement toward a compensating unity which refuses to vio¬
late the ultimate moral power at work in the universe, that


http :/www. propheticexplorer.com


XVllI


WORLD PERSPECTIVES


very power upon which all human eflFort must at last depend.
In this way we may come to understand that there exists an
inherent independence of spiritual and mental growth which,
though conditioned by circumstances, is never determined by
circumstances. In this way the great plethora of human knowl¬
edge may be correlated with an insight into the nature of human
nature by being attuned to the wide and deep range of human
thought and human experience.

Incoherence is the result of the present disintegrative proc¬
esses in education. Thus the need for World Perspectives ex¬
presses itself in the recognition that natural and man-made
ecological systems require as much study as isolated particles
and elementary reactions. For there is a basic correlation of
elements in nature as in man which cannot be separated, which
compose each other and alter each other mutually. Thus we
hope to widen appropriately our conceptual framework of
reference. For our epistemological problem consists in our find¬
ing the proper balance between our lack of an all-embracing
principle relevant to our way of evaluating life and in our
power to express ourselves in a logically consistent manner.

In spite of the infinite obligation of men and in spite of their
finite power, in spite of the intransigence of nationalisms, and
in spite of the homelessness of moral passions rendered inef¬
fectual by the technological outlook, beneath the apparent tur¬
moil and upheaval of the present, and out of the transformations
of this dynamic period with the unfolding of a world-conscious¬
ness, the purpose of World Perspectives is to help quicken the
“unshaken heart of well-rounded truth” and interpret the
significant elements of the World Age now taking shape out of
the core of that undimmed continuity of the creative process
which restores man to mankind while deepening and enhanc¬
ing his communion with the universe.

Ruth Nanda Anshen


http :/www. propheticexplorer.com


Acknowledgments


Since the beginning of my studies at the Madrid School of
Medicine, I have been inspired by the memory of the Spanish
histologist Santiago Ramon y Cajal and by his conception of the
central nervous system, his penetrating advice about how to
conduct scientific research, and his philosophical ideas about
life and death. Sixty-five years ago, Cajal said that knowledge
of the physicochemical basis of memory, feelings, and reason
would make man the true master of creation, that his most
transcendental accomplishment would be the conquering of his
own brain.

My personal background is the usual rather specialized one
of a biologist, but I have been compelled to venture beyond the
limits of my science by the need to evaluate the experimental
reality of motor behavior and mental phenomena directed
by electrical and chemical stimulation of functioning brains.
I have also felt the anxiety of our age, which requires a better
understanding of the cosmological situation of man in order to
give a rational and emotional purpose to human life; and I
have been concerned by the urgent need to resolve archaic
human antagonisms and to find a new conviviality based on bio¬
logical reality rather than on wishful thinking. As T. M. Hes-
burg, president of Notre Dame University, has said, “Scientists
cannot be neutral.” We must understand the social responsi¬
bility attached to our research and the moral impact it has on
the world of men, including ourselves. At least there is novelty

xix


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


XX


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


in looking at behavioral manifestations not from outside the
organism but from inside the spiking neurons where informa¬
tion is interpreted and responses are organized.

This book was begun during a sabbatical leave of absence
from Yale University under a Guggenheim Fellowship. Part of
its content was presented at the New York Academy of Sciences
in December 1968 as Salmon Lectures. Dr. Paul Weiss’ Rocke¬
feller University evaluation of the preliminary manuscript was
very helpful. Economic support for my research has been
provided by grants from Foundations’ Fund for Research in
Psychiatry, United States Public Health Service, Office of Naval
Research, United States Air Force 6571st Aeromedical Research
Laboratory, NeuroResearch Foundation, and Spanish Council
for Scientific Education. The experimental material originating
in my laboratory has been the work of a group of investigators
from different countries to whom I express my warm apprecia¬
tion. Their names are mentioned in our published work. Our
most recent collaborators included Dr. Lembit Allikmets (Esto¬
nia, USSR), Dr. Humberto Bracchitta (Chile), Dr. Ronald Brad¬
ley (United Kingdom), Dr. Francis DeFeudis (USA), Dr. Taiji
Hanai (Japan), Dr. Victor Johnson (United Kingdom), Dr.
Diego Mir (Spain), Dr. Rodney Plotnik (USA), Dr. Maria
Luisa Rivera (Spain), Dr. Chico Vas (India) and Dr. Jan Wal¬
lace (USA).

Ideas and reciprocal influences exchanged with my brothers,
Rafael and Alberto, through the years have been important
to the structuring of my own mind; the many enjoyable hours
of discussion with my wife, Caroline, who has been a close,
sensitive, and intelligent collaborator, have been decisive in the
creation of this book.

The Salmon Lectures of the New York Academy of Medicine
were established in iggi as a memorial to Thomas William
Salmon, M.D., and for the advancement of the objectives to
which his professional career had been wholly devoted.

Dr. Salmon died in 1927, at the age of fifty-one, after a career
of extraordinary service in psychiatric practice and education,


http :/www. propheticexplorer.com


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS XXi

and in the development of a world wide movement for the
better treatment and prevention of mental disorders, and for
the promotion of mental health.

This volume in World Perspectives had its original source
in the invitation extended to me in 1963 by Dr, Ruth Nanda
Anshen to write a volume for World Perspectives Series which
she plans and edits. The Salmon Lectures I gave in 1968 were
based on the text of a part of this volume.

Jose M. R. Delgado, M.D.


http :/www. propheticexplorer.com


PART I


MENTAL EVOLUTION


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


1


Natural Fate Versus Human Control:
The Process of Ecological
Liberation and Domination


Manifestations of life depend on a continuous interplay of nat¬
ural forces. Worms and elephants, mosquitoes and eagles, plank¬
ton and whales display a variety of activities on the land, in
the air, and in the sea with a purpose—^or lack of it-—which
escapes human understanding, obeying sets of laws which ante¬
date the appearance of human intelligence.

In the animal kingdom, existence of the genetic code repre¬
sents a biological determination of anatomical and functional
characteristics in the newborn. The growth and development
of organisms after birth proceed according to a natural fate im¬
posed by the correlations between individual structure and
environmental circumstances. The fact that about 300 million
years ago all the world’s creatures lived in the sea did not de¬
pend on their own volition but on biological evolution and
ecological factors. The appearance of dinosaurs 180 million
years ago in the Triassic period, their supremacy on earth, and
their peak in power 30 million years later were determined not
by the will of these animals, which had disproportionately small
brains and were probably rather stupid, but by a propitious
warm and sticky climate which provided a soft slosh of water
everywhere and land covered with a tangle of greenery, juicy

3


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


4 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

palms, and huge fernlike trees extending almost to the North
Pole.

The catastrophic end of the age of gigantic reptiles was simply
the result of their inability to adapt themselves to a change in
weather and lack of food. At the beginning of the Cenozoic era
70 million years ago, the air was drier and cooler than before.
High plains emerged from shallow seas and ponds, and hard¬
wood forests towered in place of ferns and palms. This changing
ecology was unsuitable for dinosaurs and because they lacked
the intelligence to understand their situation, to improve their
food supply, or to modify their diet, natural fate forced these
giants into extinction, and in their place small, warm-blooded,
furry mammals slowly grew in size and number.

The appearance of man approximately one million years ago
meant only the flourishing of one more kind of animal which
shared with the others most biological laws and a complete
dependence on natural forces. Men, like elephants and frogs,
possessed lungs, bones, and brains; pumping of blood by the
heart and other physiological phenomena were—^and still are—
very similar in all mammals, and proceeded according to pre-
established mechanisms beyond awareness or voluntary control.
Personal destiny was determined by a series of biological and
environmental circumstances which could not be foreseen,
understood, or modified. Natural fate meant that man, along
with all animals, suffered the inclemencies of the weather, being
decimated by cold temperatures, starvation, and all kinds of
parasites and illnesses. He did not know how to make a fire or
a wheel, and he was not yet able to influence the functions of
his own body or to modify his environment.

A decisive step in the evolution of man and in the establish¬
ment of his superiority over other living creatures was his
gradual achievement of ecological liberation. Why should man
accept unnecessary hardships? Why should he be wet because
the rain was falling, or cold because the sun was hidden, or be
killed because predators were hungry? Why should he not cover
his body with the soft skins of animals, construct tools and


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


NATURAL FATE VERSUS HUMAN CONTROL 5

shelter, collect food and water? Slowly the first sparks of in¬
telligence began to challenge natural fate. Herds of cattle were
a more reliable source of food than hunting in the forest. Some
fields were stripped of the vegetation which was growing accord¬
ing to capricious ecological destiny, and were placed under
cultivation by man.

Attention was gradually directed toward the human body,
and skills were learned for the treatment of injuries. Broken
limbs no longer meant permanent disfunction but could be
repaired by transitory application of branches tied with vege¬
table fibers. Personal experience was not lost, but could be
transmitted from generation to generation; the accumulating
culture preserved through a gradually elaborated spoken and
written language represented a continuous advance of civili¬
zation. Men learned to work together, to exchange skills and
knowledge, and to join their efforts to improve their circum¬
stances. Curiosity grew continuously, and endless questions were
formulated about the observed reality. Ecological liberation
could progress not by hiding inside caves but by facing danger,
and man challenged the immense power of natural forces, using
a lever to lift weights heavier than muscular power could man¬
age, tricking the wind to push sailing ships through the ocean,
and taming the rivers to turn the grinding stones of the mills.
Thus Began the process of man’s ecological domination, xht
victory of human intelligence over the fate of a mindless nature
—a victory without precedent in the history of other animal
species. Biological adaptation enabled man to survive under
extreme climatic conditions including arctic areas, dry deserts,
high altitudes, and hot tropics, but it was the intellectual and
material development of civilization that really brought about
the present degree of ecological liberation and domination. The
winning of a considerable degree of independence from natural
elements permitted human beings to direct their intelligence
and energy toward endeavors more interesting than mere sur¬
vival, The signs of man’s power slowly extended throughout the
world, transforming the earth’s surface with cultivated fields.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


6


PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

with cities, and with roads; joining oceans; tunneling through
mountains; harnessing atomic power; and reaching for the
stars. In spite of the problems associated with the development
of civilization, the fact is that today the charting of our lives
depends more on intelligent decisions than on ecological cir¬
cumstances. The surrounding medium of modern societies
is not nature, as in the past, but buildings, machines, and cul¬
ture, which are man-made products. Modern medicine has
created a healthier environment by reducing infant mortality,
diminishing the number and gravity of illnesses, and consider¬
ably increasing the span of life. According to the biological
law of only a few centuries ago, pestilence desolated mankind
from time to time, insects spread infections, more than half of
the newborn died before the age of three, old age began at
thirty or forty, and only a minority survived to the age of fifty.
Scientific knowledge has modified our own biology, providing
better diet, hygienic practices, and pharmacological and sur¬
gical treatment.

Viewing evolution in terms of the opposition of human in¬
telligence to natural fate has a dramatic appeal which empha¬
sizes the relative importance of each factor in the determination
of events. In reality, however, we should accept the fact that the
existence of man, together with all of his attributes and crea¬
tions, including his own ecological liberation and domination, is
actually and inescapably the result of natural fate. Man did not
invent man. No conscious efforts were ever made to design—
or modify—the anatomical structure of his brain. Because the
development of wings was a result of biological evolution, we
cannot claim that birds have liberated themselves from the pull
of gravity by flying in the air in defiance of natural laws. The
fact that birds fly means that they hUve achieved one step of
ecological liberation, escape from gravity by using the lifting
support of the wind. Birds can live and play in the air above all
other earthbound creatures. Their wings were a gracious gift
of evolution which did not require knowledge of physics, mathe¬
matical calculations, or even the desire to own wings. Nature


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


NATURAL FATE VERSUS HUMAN CONTROL 7

seems to be highly imaginative but excessively slow; many mil¬
lions of years passed from the beginning of life on earth to the
appearance of flying animals. The period from the emergence
of the human mind to the invention of the airplane was much
shorter. The tremendous acceleration in accomplishments was
determined by the development of the unique powers of imagi¬
nation and reason;‘"and it may be expected that human inven¬
tions will have an increasing role in the control of activities
on earth. Birds fly, and man thinks. Liberation from and domi¬
nation of many natural elements have changed ecology, and are
also influencing the needs, purpose, and general organization
of human life, especially in the following aspects.

Freedom of Choice

In contrast with the limitations felt by our ancestors and by
members of still primitive societies, we enjoy nearly endless
possibilities to pursue interests and activities of our own choice.
Modern life is not bound by the physical restrictions of geog¬
raphy; our voices can be transmitted with the speed of light
to anyone around the world; on television we can see events
in any country as they actually occur; and we can travel to dis¬
tant lands at supersonic speeds. We are not limited in food in¬
take by our hunting skills. Instead, we may have available a
variety of supermarkets which display the culinary products of
many countries. In the acquisition of knowledge we are no
longer limited to verbal contact, but have access to many centers
of learning equipped with increasingly effective teaching aids,
where the different aspects of man’s recorded history are col¬
lected and preserved. We can select from a wide variety of en¬
tertainment, careers, ideas, and religions. Even parenthood can
be planned, and the birth of children controlled, by the use of
medical knowledge and contraceptive devices.

Today our activities are less determined by adaptation to
nature than by the ingenuity and foresight of the human mind
which recently has added another dimension to its spectrum of


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


8 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

choices—the possibility of investigating its own physical and
chemical substratum. Limitation and regimentation of our ac¬
tivities are imposed mainly by education, legislation, social
pressure, and finances—which are creations of civilization—
rather than by environmental determination, as was formerly
the case. Civilized man has surrounded himself with a multi¬
tude of instruments which magnify his senses, skills, strengths,
and the speed with which he can travel, without realizing, per¬
haps, that in his drive to be free from natural elements, he was
creating a new kind of servitude dominated by levers, engines,
currency, and computers. The concerns of earlier times for
crops and predators were supplanted by economic worries, in¬
dustrial problems, and the threat of atomic overkill. Despite
the tremendous increase in possible courses of action, the free¬
dom an individual enjoys is becoming more tied to mechaniza¬
tion which is replacing the natural environment as a determi¬
nant of behavior. Liberation from ecology is paralleled by a
mechanized dependence which absorbs considerable manpower
for the invention, construction, and maintenance of machines.
The possibility of independent behavior is certainly contingent
on the availability of different paths of conduct. But the element
most essential to its achievement is awareness of the many fac¬
tors influencing our actions in order to assure us that our re¬
sponses will not be automatic, but deliberate and personal. As
Ren^ Dubos has said, “The need to chcwse is perhaps the most
constant aspect of conscious human life; it constitutes both its
greatest asset and its heaviest burden” (69)-*

Awareness

The qualities which most distinctly separate man from other
animals are the awareness of his own existence and the capacity
to resist and even change what appears to be his natural fate.
The degree of individual awareness differs according to per-

• Numbers in parentheses refer to sources listed in the Bibliography at the
back of this book.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


NATURAL FATE VERSUS HUMAN CONTROL


9

sonal circumstances. Consciousness is a rather expensive luxury
in terms of time and efEort, and we use it sparingly while per¬
forming many daily tasks based on complex series of automatic
responses. Walking, for example, requires a tedious process
of motor learning in early life, but once the necessary cerebral
formulas for controlling movements have been established, we
p^y no attention to the onset, strength, speed, timing, and se¬
quences of muscular performance; we simply stand up and walk
while our minds are occupied with other thoughts. All these
processes are automatic and, to a considerable extent, are char¬
acteristic of each individual. We can, however, refocus our at¬
tention on any motor aspect of walking and re-educate and
modify the motor formulas to improve the eleg^ce and grace¬
fulness of movement, or to mimick the gait of sailors, tramps,
or cowboys, as actors do.

Stopping at a red light does not require a decision because
we are highly trained and conditioned to perform this action.
If we pause to analyze our behavior, we may be aware of the
motor activity involved in stepping on the brakes and of the
reasons that we are stopping and obeying the traffic rules which
only then may be questioned or even ignored. Choice is not
involved in automatic responses, but if we appraise the reasons
and circumstances surrounding our actions, new avenues of
response are created. This applies to emotional reactions and
social behavior as well as to motor activity.

Awareness is increased by knowledge of the mechanisms of
the considered phenomenon. For instance, an expert is likely
to notice any peculiar car engine noises, perceiving auditory
signals which may not be detected by untrained drivers. Knowl¬
edge of the structure and mechanisms of the motor improves the
probability of foreseeing and preventing possible breakdowns
and also of correcting malfunctioning parts.

To a considerable degree, our behavior is composed of auto¬
matic responses to sensory inputs, but if we knew the genetic de¬
terminants, cultural elements, and intracerebral mechanisms
involved in various kinds of behavioral performance, we could


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


10 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

come closer to understanding the motivations underlying our
actions. If we were cognizant of the factors influencing our be¬
havior, we could accept or reject many of them and minimize
their effects upon us. The result would be a decrease in autom¬
atism and an increase in the deliberate quality of our responses
to the environment. Awareness introduces greater individual
responsibility in behavioral activities.

Responsibility

Primitive man did not have the choice of going to the movies,
reading a book, or watching television. He was fully occupied
searching for food and fighting for survival. Today’s many be¬
havioral alternatives require that we make a conscious effort
to understand and evaluate the different possibilities, perhaps
to modify or repress emotional reactions to them, and finally,
to select a course of action. In many cases, these processes are
performed at the subconscious level, and responses flow effort¬
lessly; at other times we are aware of an impending act and its
possible alternatives, and arriving at a decision may be difficult
and tiring. The conscious selection of one path among many
places greater responsibility on the individual because his ac¬
tivities are not determined by automatic mechanisms or ex¬
ternal factors beyond his control. Intelligent judgment is based
on an individual’s personal qualities and especially on his ability
to evaluate possible solutions. Individual choice entails assum¬
ing accountability for the direction of personal destiny, and the
greater one’s awareness and freedom, the greater the responsi¬
bility. In a small social group such as a tribe, the consequences
of the leader’s choice are rather limited, while in highly or¬
ganized contemporary societies, the decisions of governmental
elites will affect large numbers of people. The political actions
of these powerful officials concerning foreign aid, cultural ex¬
change, and peace and war will affect life in most parts of the
world. We should remember that decision-making always in¬


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


NATURAL FATE VERSUS HUMAN CONTROL


11

volves the activity of intracerebral mechanisms which, as yet, are
little known.


Accumulation of Power

Industrial and technological developments have created un¬
paralleled resources with immense constructive and destructive
potentials. Already we have conquered the natural obstacles of
rivers, seas, and mountains, and they are no longer insurmount¬
able barriers to the activities of man. At the same time, we have
accumulated megatons of atomic energy capable of obliterating
all forms of life in the world.

Instruments have been invented to increase a millionfold
the perceptivity of our senses, the power of our muscles, and
our ability to process information. In addition to increasing our
material power, we have greatly improved our capacity to or¬
ganize and use available resources. Plans for the development
of cities, industries, research, education, and the economy in
general are carefully formulated by experts, and these plans
are essential for the organization and evolution of our society.
These developments again introduce the question of responsi¬
bility in the choice of objectives to be reached. Because of the
magnitude of our material and intellectual powers, the directive
resolutions made by elite groups may be decisive for the de¬
velopment of scientific and economic fields of endeavor, for the
evolution of civilization in general, and for the very existence
of man.

Major nations are constantly faced with the choice of how to
use power, and conscious efforts are made to reach intelligent
decisions which are expressed as national goals such as over¬
coming poverty, landing a man on the moon, or meeting time¬
tables for industrial, agricultural, and scientific development.
Because our resources are not unlimited, a major effort in one
field, such as armaments or outer space exploration, restricts the
development of other less-favored areas. The application of


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


12


PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND


human energy to the control o£ natural forces is continually in¬
creasing, and perhaps it is time to ask if the present orientation
of our civilization is desirable and sound, or whether we should
re-examine the universal goals of mankind and pay more atten¬
tion to the primary objective, which should not be the develop¬
ment of machines, but of man himself.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


2


The Imbalance Between
Material and Mental Evolution


Originally, philosophy and science were unified in purpose,
which was, in the words of Plato, “the vision of truth.” They
were also unified in their methodological exploration of reality,
which consisted of observation and rational interpretation of
what was observed. This happy marriage persisted for many
centuries until ideological and technological revolutions intro¬
duced new methodologies and the need for greater specialization.
Unable to resolve the developing differences in outlook and
method, philosophy and science separated from one another,
tearing apart what had been their common subject of inquiry.
Philosophers and theologians carried with them the mind and
soul; scientists kept matter and the body, and psychologists as
newcomers lived for some time a schizokinetic existence between
spirit and substance, without enough scientific recognition or
philosophical support.

Mathematics, physics, and chemistry became increasingly
important fields of study, and the application of experimental
methods to biology was so fruitful that the interest of scholars
was diverted from philosophy to science. Why should time be
spent in semantic fencing and speculations when important
questions could be asked directly of living organisms, rocks, and
celestial bodies? Telescopes and microscopes explored opposite
aspects of the natural world, and organic compounds were syn-

13


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


14 physical CONTROL OF THE MIND

thesizedi The engaged most of the avail¬

able inteUeetual and economic resourorai, directing them toward
industry, biology, electronics, atomic ehe^, outer space ex-
plotafkm^ and similar fitids of endeavor, hii contrast, only a
minor effort was devoted to inquiry into the nator mental
faculties. This unbalanced sitimtion was determined in part by
methodolc^cai reasons. The mind was considered a metaphys¬
ical entity beyond experimental reach, and in spite of the
obvious importance of uiklerstanding the psychological essence
of man, it appeared more practical to invent combusdon engines
or to investigate the structure of cells than to speculate about
emodons and thoi^ts. While it is true that the disciplines of
psycholc^ and j®ychiatry have greatly expanded in our century,
a survey of the literature shows that a decade or two ago the
brain was Still created as a “black box” which could be reached
only through the senses. Psychological investigations analyzed
correl^dons between sensory inputs and behavioral outputs but
could not explore the intermediary proc^^ses which were hidden
in the^nknowns of brain physiology: Some authors doubted that
the study of neurcms could throw amy light on understanding
propeides of the mind. Surprisingly enough; most investigators
of the brain also contribuied to this unbalanced situation be¬
cause they studied heavQy anesthetized subjects, and dealing
with deepy neurons, they baled to take into account the mental
complexity of wtdcing biuin.

The contrast between the fast pace Of technological evolution
and our limited advances in the undeistanding and control of
human behavior is creating a growing danger. We are f^ng
a situation in which vast amounts of acxumulated destructive
power are at the disposal of brains whidi have not yet learned
to be wise enough to solve economic conflicts and ideological
antagonisms intelligently. The “balance Of terror” existing in
the present world reflects the discrepancy between the awesome
technology and the underdeveloped wMom of man.

We may reciall that many millenniums ago, during the
Jurassic f^ricKi, die gigantic brontosauri, weighing thirty tons


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


IMBALANCE BETWEEN MATERIAL AND MENTAL EVOLUTION 15

and extending over seventy feet in length, reached their peak
of power. With their long necks aand tails they probably moved
gracefully in the water, but on land they were clumsy and
consumed large amounts of energy just in moving their weight
^Qund, Judged by fossil bones discovered in Colorado and
Wyoming, their brute force was overwhelming, but this extraor¬
dinary physical power was directed by tiny brains weighing
less than 0.5 kilc^;rams. The organimtion of incoming signals
and outgoing messages to keep these huge Barnes in working
order must have occupied most of their Toains, leaving little
opportunity for more intelligent and adaptive behavior. The
brontosauri b^ame extinct because of their extremely limited
mentid powers; &ced with an increasingly imfavorable climate
and dimmishing food supply, these animals were incapable of
adaptation and could not survive in the changing environment.

The fate of these giants may have symbolic value for twentieth
century civilization, which is ala> attempting to direct tremen¬
dous potential with dispixiportionately small brains. While our
mental faculties are incomparably superior to those of the early
land animals, we still lack adequate ^If-knowledge and control,
and natural history teaches that when underdeveloped brains
are in charge of great power, the result is extinction. Methods
for the re-education and ccrntrol of social anfagonisms and un¬
desirable emotional manif^tations in man are urgently needed.
While these processes are obviously related to e^nvironmental
circumstances, they also depend on the activity of intracerebral
mechanisms, which should be better known. When primitive
man faced natural catastrophes like floods or pestilence, he was
helpless and reacted with resignation, despair, or an appeal to
supernatural powers. In contrast, modem man, being more
perceptive, may decide to study his circumstances and apply his
power and intelligence to the immediate problem; by constmct-
ihg dikes or vaccinating the population, he may prevent or
modify the forces of natural causality. It is reaimnable to assume
that just as more knowledge of natural mechanisms allows us
to use and control natural forces, a clearor undenlanding of the


http:/www. prop.heticexplorer.com


l6 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

central nervous system should enable us to educate and direct
mental activity more intelligently. In a recent symposium con¬
cerning the “Education of Biologists for the Modem World,” the
distinguished investigator Beach (ii) lucidly expressed the
thoughts of many scientists by saying: . . man’s greatest prob¬
lem today is not to understand and exploit his physical environ¬
ment, but to understand and govern his conduct. ... If he is to
survive he must proceed to explore himself and to control his
own activities. ,.. Science can and must provide the understand¬
ing necessary for prediction, ... If science provides knowledge
society will display wisdom.”


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


3

Mental Liberation and Domination


In Ae near futiure we can expect a rapid expansion in applica¬
tions of atomic power, program^ education, and production
of machinery, along with higher standards of living and length¬
ening of human life. Even with this optimistic outlook, we may
wopder where prc^ess and tedinology are leading us.

The United States enjoys an economic level, educational
system, and a technolc>gical development far , superior to those
of countries like Spain, Poland, or India, yet it is questionable
whether its citizens experience greater happiness, family love,
closer frienddiips, and less fear, anxiety, and psychological pres¬
sure than the people in less advanced countries. Neither East
nor West has succeeded in resolving hiunan conflicts, and the
latest technology is being used to kill thousands of people around
the lyorld. If modern civilimtion with its many comforts does
not provide greater individual and social happiness than less
advanced societies do, the value of this type of civilization may
well be challenged.

We-should realize dbat in spite of our progress in other areas,
psychic life and emotional rea^iohs are little known. The
solutions to present social conflicts proposed by sociologists,
religions organizations, experimental institutes, and the United
Nations have had only limited success. This is partly because
the usual f rame s of reference for these solutions have been
politics, economics, history, metaphysics, sociology, and psychol¬
ogy, while the basic cerebral mechanisms related to man’s ideas,

17

http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


l8 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

emoticms, ^ai^ressions, desifes, and pleasures have been ignored.

Individual reactions are determined by environmental factors
acting through senso^ inputs upon neurophysiological proc¬
esses and m'e manifested through appropriate motor outputs
as behavior. ^1 Of these intervening elements must be taken
into consideration to understand the responses of individuals.
To examine the problem only from outside of the organism, as
is usually done, is as insufficient as if we were to ignore the
environment and try to explain behavior solely in terms of
neuronal activity. ^

At present, not only is there for greater emphasis on material
environment than on the understanding of the mind, but what
is even more dangerous, diis lack of balance is self-perpetuating
through education, economic incentives, and general orienta¬
tion of civilized life (69). “The danger that the entire culture
may become technological is obvious” (15), and the divorce of
mind from life which is mking place catastrophically every¬
where in the modorn world (10) has evoked strong intellectual
reactions and is one of the central themes of existential phi¬
losophy. Present civiUzation is geared to produce more and better
machines and to increase physical power rather than to facilitate
individual happiness. Most of our time is spent in performing
technical skdisv being transported by motorized vehicles, being
entertain^ electronically, and in other occupations which
reflect our increasingly mechanized environnient.

The puipose of education is to further man’s knowledge of
himself and his surroundings through instruction in the arts and
sciences. During the last few decades, technical fields of study
have multiplied rapidly, overshadowing the humanities which
until this century formed the basis of education. Although such
informadon is iricreasihgly available, scant effort is devoted
specifically to providing an adequate foundation for self-knowl-
^ge or for the intelligent construction of individual personality.
A curriculum may teach a student something about evolution
and general physiology and may introduce him to various


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


MENTAL LIBERATION AND DOMINATION IQ

aspects o£ his cultural inheritance, but it usually explains very
little about the most important organ, the brain, which alone
is responsible for man’s emergence as a unique anthropoid and
on which every person must rely for immediate survival and
future development. Study in the realms of philosophy and
introspection is generally considered a nonessential diversion
not directly related to the preparation of future members of
the industrial society, and the inference that “man can succeed
better in this world if he doesn’t invest much time learning
about his relation to it” further promotes the divergence be¬
tween the technical world and the world of ideas. This pedagogic
deficiency was understandable in the past, when psychophysiolog-
ical knowledge was limited, but today scfi^nce is providing the
means to coordinate the diverse fields of philosophy and biology
to form a new basis of inquiry into the nature of man. This is no
longer a purely speculative endeavor but an iexploration in a
new direction already blazed with scientific landmarks. When
present knowledge about the physical substratum of the human
mind is dmeminated in centers of learning, man will be better
equipped to utilize his mental powers and to relate effectively
to his environment, and the heeded balaime in orientation may
be achieved.

This is our alternative: to accept, enjoy, and promote the
increasing material progress without inves hope or

effort in an attempt to understand otn pO'Wer center, the brain,
or to modify the present direction of civiUmtion by shifting part
of our available intellectual and econooiic resources toward an
investigation of the mechanisms of mental activity. This re¬
direction of goals could produce an evolution of the mental
quest similar in significance to the procesies of ecological libera¬
tion and domination which have already Occurred,

The thesis of this bocdt is diat we how ppsess the necessary
technology for the experimental investigation of mental ac¬
tivities, and that we have reached a cridGal hirning point in the
evolution of man at which the mind can be used to influence


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


20


PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

its own Structure, functions, and purpose, thereby ensuring
both the preservation and advance of civilization. The following
pages contain a discussion of what the mind is, the technical
problems involved in its possible control by physical means,
and the outlook for development of a future psychocivilized
society.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


PART II


THE BRAIN AND MIND
AS FUNCTIONAL ENTITIES


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


4


What Is the Mind?


Throughout the centuries, the most powerful intellects iiave
attempted to comprehend the mysteries of their own function¬
ing. Long ago Socrates, leading his disdples through the colon¬
nades of Athens, propounded eternal questions which have been
repeated throughout history in endless variety: What is life?
What is soul? What is mind? The essence of man evolves from
the existence of mental functions which permit him to think £Uid
remember, to love and hate, to believe in myths and in science,
to create and destroy civilimtions. It is remarkable that after
hundreds of years of philosophical inquiry, and despite the
impressive intellectual advances of our present era, the concept
of the mind remains elusive, controversial, and impossible to
coniine within linguistic limits. It is also surprising that in spite
of the importance of the mind for individual survival and for
the preservation of civilimtion, our generation is mainly inter¬
ested in atoms, cells, and stars, and directs so little effort toward
the exploration of the inner space of the psyche.

Before entering into a discussion of men^ activities, it is
important to clarify the m^^tning of certain words. Invesrigalors
often choose to avoid a definition of terms, utilizing op^tmnal
descriptions instead. This procedure inay be reasonable in some
experimental work, but at other times it is inadequate because
a particular function^—^for example, emotion—-may be explored
by different methods which lead to a diversity of operational
definitions of the same term. The same holds true for meta¬
ls


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


24


PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND


physical concepts, and the scientist cannot completely ignore
them.

In spite of the difficulty involved, it is convenient to dis-
tingfuish among the brain, mind, psyche, spirit, and soul, if only
to avoid ambiguities. Unless each term is defined, the reader’s
conception may differ from the writer’s. Classifications and
definitions are only human agreements which try to capture the
essence of a person, place, or event by describing several of its
elements. They are like sketches, which may omit or distort
details. Naturally, if there is no agreement on the subject under
discussion, the meaning of related words and sketches will be
useless. Definitions should be considered as working tools to
guide us on confusing ideological battlefields. For example, the
conventional distinction between static and dynamic processes
used in this book may be understood as an artifact reflecting
both our mental inability to capture the continuous flow of
multiple events and our need to concentrate our attention on a
selected moment. This procedure should not introduce excessive
intellectual distortion provided we realize its existence and
limitations. Theories, experimental tools, and descriptive lan¬
guage are all very different, depending on whether we are dealing
with chemistry, action potentials, social relations, or ghosts.
When the entity under consideration is very complex, as the
mind is, it is necessary to employ different methods to analyze the
various properties, and it may be difficult to integrate results
obtained in a variety of ways which reveal diverse aspects of
truth.

Few definitions are satisfactory; the multiplicity and variety
of those describing the mind are evidence of the complexity of
this subject as well as the lack of agreement among acknowledged
experts. Dictionaries list words as they are popularly conceived,
but current usage sometimes lacks scientific accuracy. Specialists
employ terminology which often has a doctrinal bias. Conser¬
vative authors agree that the mind is indefinable at present and
offer “raw material,” “essays,” “views,” and “thoughts” leading
toward a possible definition. This confusion has a venerable


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


WHAT IS THE MIND?


25

history. The concept of mind in the Western world was intro¬
duced into philosophy by Anaxagoras in the fifth century b.c.
He called it notis, a substance which was infinite, self-ruled,
mixed with nothing, forming part of all living things, being
the source of motion, and having similar properties in animals
and humans. The nous was considered an impersonal intellect
jegulating the movements of the cosmos. Aristotle and Plato
noted that Anaxagoras himself found little use for this concept
which was later elaborated by other philosophers. In De anima,
Aristotle considered the mind different from and superior to the
soul, saying, “We have no evidence as yet about the mind or the
power to think; it seems to be a widely different kind of soul,
differentiating what is eternal from what is perishable; it alone
is capable of existence in isolation from all other psychical
powers.” Aristotle proposed that the fetus was endowed first
with a vegetative soul which was exchanged later for a sensitive
soul and finally replaced before birth, by God’s donation, by
a rational soul, which implied to Aristotle that he must once
have possessed the other elemental functions, namely, the
sensitive and the vegetative, which were both shared by
animals.

Aristotelian thought has permeated most Occidental philo¬
sophical systems untU modem times, and the classification of
man’s functions as vegetative, sensitive, and rational is still useful.
In present popular usage, soul and mind are not clearly differen¬
tiated and some people, more or less consciously, still feel that
the soul, and perhaps the mind, may enter or leave the body as
independent entities.

Several attempts to define the mind follow:

1. "... an organized group of events in neural tissue occurring
immediately in response to antecedent intrapsychic or extrapsychic
events which it perceives, classifies, transforms, and coordinates prior
to initiating action whose consequences are foreseeable to the extent
of available infomarion. The aspect of a biological organism that is
not organic in nature . . . (in man it is experienced as emotions,
imagination, or will)” (283).


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


st6


PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND


St. The mind has been identified with “the faculty of memory,”
“thought,” “purpose or intention,” “the seat of consciousness,
thoughts, volitions and feelings,” “desire or wish,” “the incorporeal
subject of the psychical faculties,” “the soul as distinct from the will
and emotions” (169).

3. “The oiganized totality of psychical structures and processes,
conscious, unconscious, and endopsychic” (67).

4. “The sum total of those activities of an organism, by means of
which it responds as an int^ated, dynamic system to external forces
(usually) in some relation to its own past and future. The organized
totality of a>nscious experience” (235).

5. . . restricted to 'conscious mind' in all its general operation

field of perceiving, feeling, thinking, remembering, and willing. As
such, mental phenomena are facts of experience . . (71).

6. “A highly developed neurological apparatus with which an
animal interprets his inner and outer environmental stimuli. At¬
taining consciousness, mind initiates and carries through action or
the delayed type of action called thought” (i8i).

7. “The group of events connected with the given event by mem¬
ory-chains, backwards and forwards.” “A min d and a piece of matter
are, each of them, a group of events.” “Some events may be neither
mental nor material, and other events may be both” (193).

8. "Mind is thus synonymous with consciousness.” “Consciousness
can thus be defined as an orderly manifold of sensations and per¬
cepts. In an abbreviated enumeration, we may distinguish optic,
tactile (in the wider sense), acoustic, olfactory, and gustatory per¬
cepts. In addition there are internal memory images, abstractions
and thoughts, emotions and vague feelings” (134).

Despite variations in wording and in meaning, most concepts
of the mind share several qualities which may be summarized
and interpreted as follows:

1. The definitions express what the mind does, but not what it
is, or when or how it is formed.

2. Mental functions are described as active processes, not as passive
objects.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


WHAT IS THE MIND?


37

3. The principal functions of the mind are interpretation, storage,
and retrieval of both inner and outer stimuli through processes of
thinking, remembering, feeling, willing, and other phenomena
which are not well identified.

In order to be more precise in our consideration of these phe¬
nomena, we may ask (1) if there is any mental function unrelated
to inner or outer stimuli, (2) if there is any way the mind can
manifest itself other than in behavior, and (3) if the mind could
exist without a functioning brain. If these three questions have
negative answers, then we may conclude that the mind is neces¬
sarily linked to stimuli, to behavior, and to the brain. In my
opinion, without stimuli (or without the brain), the mind can¬
not exist; without behavior, the mind cannot be recognized.
Because of its essential dependence on sensory inputs, both at
birth and throughout adult life, the mind may be defined as
the intracerebral elaboration of extracerebral information. The
problem is then focused on the origins, reception, dynamics,
storage, retrieval, and consequences of this information. The
basis of the mind is cultural, not individual.

The term “psyche’* constitutes the etymological root for the
disciplines of psycholt^, psychiatry, and psychosomatic med¬
icine. The words “mind” and “psyche” are usually considered
interchangeable, and will be used here as such. But before we
proceed with an analysis of the concept of the mind or psyche,
we should clarify the metaphysical meanings that are often
ascribed to these terms.


Mind and Soul

The personal beliefs of scientists concerning the ultimate
destiny of man are not usually related to their investigations.
The study of carbohydrate metabolism, microwaves, or celestial
bodies may not influence personal conceptions of immortality,
free will, or God. Scientists are generally reluctant to combine
experimental work with philosophy and usually reject con¬
sideration of possible theological implications of their studies


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


28


PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND


even more vigorously. The domains of philosophy and science
were clearly delimited by Bertrand Russell (192) who wrote:
“Philosophy, as I shall understand the word, is something inter¬
mediate between theology and science. Like theology, it consists
of speculations on matters as to which de fin ite knowledge has,
so far, been unascertainable; but like science, it appeals to
human reason rather than to authority, whether that of tradition
or that of revelation. All definite knowledge belongs to science;
all dogma as to what surpasses definite knowledge, belongs to
theology.”

The possibility of a relationship between man and super¬
natural life is traditionally implied in the ordinary use of the
words “soul,” “anima,” and “spirit,” The Oxford Dictionary
defines “soul” as “the principle of life; the principle of thought;
the seat of emotions, feelings and sentiments”; and “the spiritual
part of man considered in its moral aspect in relation to God”
^69).

The first three descriptions, especially the third, could easily
be attributed to the mind—^which shows how confusing termi¬
nology is. In my opinion, it is preferable to consider the mind as
a functional entity devoid of metaphysical or religious implica¬
tions per se and related only to the existence of a brain and to
the reception of sensory inputs. The words “soul” or “anima”
will be used when reference is made to man’s relationship with
supernatural forces, life after death, or the existence of God.

The term “spirit” is sometimes equated with “soul,” and it
is disconcerting to realize that it is commonly applied to a
wide range of disparate objects from an alcoholic beverage to
a disembodied soul, as well as including the third person of the
Christian Trinity. Another complication is that “Holy Ghost”
is Saint Spirit in French and Espiritu Santo in Spanish, render¬
ing the words “ghost” and “spirit” synonymous. Because the
meanings of "spirit” are so varied, it seems wiser to use this term
infrequently.

The soul is a metaphysical concept; it is incorporeal, im¬
mortal, and has possibilities for salvation or damnation. Ac-


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


WHAT IS THE MIND?


29

ceptance or rejection of the existence of the soul depends on
religious conviction, on faith, and on theological considerations
which cannot be proved or disproved by present experimental
methods. Science has conquered the mind as a subject of experi¬
mental investigation, but the soul remains outside the realm of
scientific inquiry. The scientist may regard the soul as a myth
created by psychological needs; he may consider the soul as a
religious interpretation of the mind, carrying responsibility for
a future life; or he may accept its existence as a religious truth.
In any case, the soul exists in the human mind as a concept
which should not be ignored. While the intellectual polemic
over its existence and the definition of its qualities and manifes¬
tations belong to theologians and philosophers, the emotional
and rational elements leading to acceptance or rejection of the
concept of the soul are manifestations of the mind. As such they
are dependent on cerebral physiology and thus become part of
the scientist’s domain subject to experimental research. Here we
find a good example of philosophical and religious questions
which may face neurophysiologists in the future.

Thoughts and beliefs are necessarily dependent on neuro¬
physiological activity of the brain. We cannot believe in eternal
life or in any of the religious concepts if we do not have a func¬
tioning brain, if all cerebral excitability has been blocked by
anesthesia, or if the thinking process has been inhibited by
electrical stimulation of the septal area of the brain. Under
these conditions, beliefe and desires disappear, but this fact
cannot be interpreted operationally by saying that religious
faith is a function of the septum or of any other part of the brain.
A natural question would be whether or not the soul could be
modified by experimentation, because thoughts, remorse, re¬
sponsibility, vices, and virtues are revealed precisely through
behavior, and behavior is determined by cerebral activity. Per¬
haps it is too soon to pursue these questions, but it is necessary
for scientists to clarify the terms in which such problems are
stated. Theologians, also, certainly need to redefine what they
have settled upon as the characteristics or manifestations of the


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


30 PHYSIC14L control OF THE MIND

soul because, for example, the properties of the anima as stated
by Catholic doctrine, namely memory, understanding, and will,
are now known to be activities subject to experimental investi¬
gation and related to the chemistry of ribonucleic acids, electrical
activity of the hippocampus, and anatomical integrity of the
frontal lobes.

The dilemma of the soul is this: If we accept mental activities
as manifestations of the soul, then the modifications of these
functions by physical means, such as electrical stimulation of the
brain, would signify the manipulation of the soul by electricity
—which is illogical because the soul is incorporeal by definition.
If, on the other hand, we deprive the soul of all mental functions
which can be demonstrated to be dependent on brain physiology,
then the soul is reduced to an abstraction, not only incorporeal,
but also with a minor symbolic relation to reality.

The alternative would be to consider the mind and the soul
as different aspects of the same reality, in much the same way as
corpuscular and undulatory theories of light are complementary
interpretations of reality with relatively independent sets of
properties. This is a solution based neither on logic nor on ex¬
perimental theory; it is a speculation which may serve as a work¬
ing hypothesis to be proved or disproved.

In this book the soul, or anima, will be considered a theolog¬
ical concept beyond the limits of our discussions, while the mind
will be understood as an entity, devoid of theological implica¬
tions, which can be investigated experimentally regardless of
positive or negative religious bias.

The Brain Defined

In contrast with the difficulties and controversial issues
encountered in the attempt to characterize soul and mind,
definition of the brain is relatively easy. The brain, or cerebrum,
is a material entity located inside the skull which may be in¬
spected, touched, weighed, and measured. It is composed of
chemicals, enzymes, and humors which may be analyzed. Its


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


WHAT IS THE MIND?


31

Structure is characterized by neurons, pathways, and synapses
which may be examined directly when they are properly mag¬
nified.

To function, the brain must be alive, meanmg that the
neurons are consuming oxygen, exchanging chemicals through
their limiting surfaces, and maintaining states of electrical polar¬
ization interrupted by brief periods of depolarization; but even
when it is dead—^meaning that chemical and electrical phenom¬
ena are absent—the brain can still be recognized, preserved in
formaline, and dissected for examination of its anatomical
structures. The brain is essentially a chemical and physical
entity with many complex functions related to genetic and
environmental influences. It functions as a part of the body, but
it can survive independently for a limited period when appro¬
priate circulation is provided.

Some of the brain’s functions are recognized as mental
activities, but other of its chemical, thermal, and electrical
phenomena subserve physiological needs unrelated to the mind.
One quality of the brain is that it may be ccHosidered in static
and material terms, at least with respect to morphological,
cytological, and chemical characteristics which sue self-contained.
In contrast, the mind is a /unchonn/ entity which cannot be
preserved in formaline or analyzed under the microscope. It is
not autonomous but depends on the cerebral reception of a
temporal sequence of phenomena and a con^uous exchange of
information with the environment in order to ftmction properly,
as will be discussed later. The term “mind” is an abbreviation
for the ill-defined group erf mental acdvides. The existence of
mind depends on the ^dstence of a hincdonihg brain, and with¬
out brain there is no mind. The contrary, however, is not true,
and in the absence of mental manifestations, fc^ example dur¬
ing deep anesthesia, several brain functions^ such as maintain-
ance of respiration, may still continue at physiological levels.
The common usage of the terms “brain” and “mind” as equiva¬
lent may be acceptable provided we are aware of the points of
contact and diveigence of their respective meanings.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


32


PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND


The Mind as a Functional Entity

The dynamic concept of the mind as a group of functions
rather than as an object introduces a linguistic and grammatical
dilemma which has been recognized by several authors (195).
In languages with European roots, nouns are generally used to
designate things which have a passive character (book, chair,
table). Actions, movements, and dynamic processes are usually
expressed by verbs (reading, running, eating). The fact that mind
is considered as a noun and that its functions are expressed by
verbs (thinking, willing, feeling), indicates a conceptual dichot¬
omy which distorts general understanding. The m ind should not
be identified with other nouns like brain or heart: functions
depend on, but should not be clarified as, organs.

The mind or psyche, however, has been regarded as an organ
comparable to other organs or systems such as the liver or
kidney. A psychiatric dictionary (110) states that "there is the
organ called the psyche, which, like other organs, possesses its
own form and function, its embryology, growth, and micro¬
scopic anatomy, physiology, and pathology. . , . The mind, like
all other organs of the body, has its own local functions, and
also those functions that are intimately associated with adjacent
and distant organs. It is like the cardiovascular system in that it
reaches all parts of the body.” While most laymen as well as
psychologists and philosophers would reject the concept that
the mind is an organ, it is convenient to analyze the controversy
briefly in order to clarify the ideas involved.

Organs such as the heart, the stomach, or the brain are tangi¬
ble objects with a shape, structure, and chemical composition
which can be identified even after the death of the host organism,
when all normal functions have ceased. Mental functions do not
form part of brain anatomy; they are related to cerebral physi¬
ology. The mind cannot be inspected visually; only its dynamic
expression as behavioral performance is observable.

The functions of organs such as the heart are genetically


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


WHAT IS THE MIND?


33

determined. They are ready to start at the moment of birth, do
not depend on environmental stimuli, and do not require
learning. Mental activities have exactly contrary characteristics,
and the development of their functional substratum within the
brain depends essentially on extragenetic factors. This will be
discussed later.

In biology, the physiology of structures cannot be completely
ascertained from examination of the anatomy. For example, the
circulation of the blood should be difiEerentiated from the sup¬
porting organs such as the heart, arteries, and other parts of the
cardiovascular system because blood pressure, flow, and circula¬
tion are dynamic concepts related to spatial and temporal
changes in the blood as it moves through the vessels. The blood
itself can be analyzed in order to discover its chemical and
morphological properties, and this information will facilitate
the understanding of its possible functions. It will not, however,
explain the dynamics of circulation, which depends on the
summation of systolic volume, heart rate, arterial elasticity,
vasomotility, blood volume, blood viscosity, and many other
factors, none of which are synonymous with circulation. In like
manner, the mind should not be considered identical with its
supporting organ, the brain. Information about the anatomy,
physiology, and biochemistry of neurons will facilitate the
understanding of mental manifestations because these activities
depend upon cerebral functions. This information, however,
will not fully explain mental dynamics because the mind is
related not only to the structure of neurons but also to their
spatial-temporal relations and to important extracerebral factors.


Heterogeneous Qualities of the Mind

On previous pages, the mind has been referred to as a single
entity, and it is very common in layman's language as well as
in philosophical and scientific discussions to find that the mind
is considered as a unit. In reality, however, mental activities such
as talking, understanding, or problem solving not only have


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


34 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

different sensory inputs and behavioral manifestations but
depend on different cerebral structures and mechanisms. Even
within a particular mental function there may be considerable
anatomical and physiological specificity, as demonstrated by
disturbances in speech recognition which may affect the written
or the spoken word exclusively.

One of the main difficulties in attempts to define the mind is
that we try to supply a common denominator for all mental
manifestations, insisting upon similarities among entities which
are basically unlike. Gats, monkeys, and men are homogeneous as
mammals but heterogeneous as species, and many of the morpho¬
logical and functional characteristics present in one group
cannot be attributed to the others. Man, for example, does not
enjoy catching and eating mice, nor are monkeys able to play
chess. Unfortunately, some discussions about the mind concern
elements as dissimilar as cats, monkeys, and men. It is only
natural that agreement will be difficult if authors think diat they
are referring to the same subject—the mind—when one is con¬
sidering free will, another consciousness, and still another crea¬
tive writing. When consulting the literature we should not
assume that different phenomena are equivalent merely because
authors use the same words to identify them. We should remem¬
ber that mental functions include a variety of heterogeneous
phenomena.

One additional problem involves the dynamic quality of the
mind. The heart can be taken out of an organism and stopped
in order to study its valves, the thickness of its walls, or the
shape of its cells, but we cannot remove the brain to study the
mind because it vanishes; we cannot preserve intelligence in
formalin. The dynamic and temporal elements of mental
activity are crucial and reflect the elusive and everchanging
qualities of the phenomenon.

The mind is so complex and heterogeneous that it is difficult
to answer the classical questions, “What is the mind?” and
“Where is the mind?” In my opinion, these questions are incor¬
rectly stated. Present knowledge requires us to approach the


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


WHAT IS THE MIND?


35

problems in a new way and to rephrase them if we wish to
progress in understanding. We should seek neither general nor
total answers, but information about specific problems or frac¬
tions of problems. Today we are in an intellectual and technical
position to ask, for example, which parts of the brain do—or do
not—play a role in memory, problem solving, or visual recogni¬
tion. Experiments may be designed and performed to investigate
these subjects.

In my discussion of the physical exploration of the mind, I
propose to examine the problem not in general, but in some
detail, asking questions and presenting experimental data about
modifications of pleasure, sensations, behavioral responses, and
other manifestations of mental activities obtained by direct
manipulation of the brain.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


5


Extracerebral Elements of the Mind;
When and How the Mind Is Formed


In Plato’s works, Socrates is presented as a kind of intellectual
midwife who extracted knowledge already existent in the person
he questioned. According to the doctrine of recollection,
learning is only the remembering of knowledge possessed in a
former life. In Phaedo, the second argument for the survival of
the soul is that knowledge is recollection, and therefore the soul
must have existed before birth.

Aristotle rejected the theory of inborn ideas and proposed the
metaphorical tabula rasa, which was subsequently accepted in
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries by empirical physiol¬
ogists, including Locke and Helv^tius, The newborn mind was
considered a blank tablet on which experience would write
messages, and the dissmilarities between individuals were
attributed solely to differences in education.

The Aristotelian principle, “Nihil est in intellectu quod no
prius suent in sensu” (Sl Thomas, De Veritatis, II, 3), repeated
among others by Leonardo da Vinci (“Ogni nostra cognizioni
qHipcipia dai sentimenti”), expressed the idea still prevalent in
presmt^imes that “nothing is in the intellect which was not first
in the senses/’ Some authors, including Epicurus and the sen¬
sualists, stresseds^e importance of sensory inputs to its limit,
proposing that thVintellect is only what is in our senses.

Between the extremes of considering the mind either sophis-

36


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


EXTRACEREBRAL ELEMENTS OF THE MIND 37

ticated or naive at birth, contemporary opinion holds that both
genetic and experiential components are essential, although
their functions and relative importance remain controversial.
According to several child psychiatrists, heredity and experience
are equipotent (156, 225). Piaget (178) has emphasized that
while the human brain is an almost entirely hereditary regula¬
tory-organ, it has practically “no hereditary programming of
these regulations, quite unlike the case of so many instincts in
birds or fishes. . . Intelligence combines two cognitive
systems; experience and endogenous regulations. The last
system is a source of intellectual operations; by prolonging the
feedbacks and correcting the mistakes, it transforms them into
instruments of precognition.

The genetic determination of mental functions has been sup¬
ported by Rainer (181), who believes that the fertilized ovum
contains “the primordia of what we later call mind,” and that
“the newborn infant is already as much of an individual ‘men¬
tally’ as he is ph)^iognomically.” According to the evolutionary
theories of William James (119), “the new forms of being that
make their appearance are really nothing more than results of
the redistribution of the original and unchanging materials . . .
the evolution of the brains, if understood, would be simply the
account of how the atoms came to be so caught and jammed.
In this story no new natures [James’s emphasis], no factors not
present at the beginning are introduced at any later stage.”

In agreement with these ideas, Sherrington (206) writes:
“Mind as attaching to any unicellular life would seem to me
unrecognizable to observation; but I would not feel that permits
me to affirm it is not there. Indeed, I would think that since
mind appears in the developing soma, that amounts to showing
that it is potential in the ovum (and sperm) from which the
soma sprang. The appearance of recognizable mind in the soma
would then be not a creation de novo but a development of
mind from unrecognizable into recognizable.”

The importance of the prenatal period as a determinant of
future behavior crystallized in the concept of “ontogenetic zero”


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


38 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

(88) has been accepted by most child psychologists (30). At the
moment of fertilization, the life of a unique individual is
initiated (at birth, a child is already nine months old); and some
experts have suggested that its beginning should be traced back
through evolution of the parental reproductive cells or even
through previous generations.

These theories have the merit of stressing the role of genetics
in the formation of the mind, but they give the false impression
that genetic factors alone are able to create a inind, or that in
some mysterious way, a minute, undeveloped mind already
exists in the cells. At the core of this discussion is the meaning
of "potentiality,” which is a convenient concept provided that
we understand its limitations. If we say “a block of marble is
potentially a piece of sculpture,” we mean that marble is an
element which can be shaped into a symbolic pattern by using
chisels and hammers with appropriate skills. We may say that
all shapes and artistic creations potentially exist in the marble,
but the reality is that in the absence of a sculptor, the piece of
stone lacks, per se, the essential elements to become a work of
art- It would be incorrect to think that tools or skills are hidden
within the block of marble, or that if we waited long enough,
a statue would emerge spontaneously from the block. This
type of incorrect reasoning has been called the "error of poten¬
tiality” (137). It has infiltrated the field of embryology and has
influenced analyses of the origin and evolution of mental func¬
tions by assuming, at a certain stage of development, the exist¬
ence of properties which are present only at a later stage and
which depend on a series of essential conditions neither present
in nor determined by the stage under consideration.

If we say that the mind is in the sperm, we can also say that
each man has one million children, that a newborn baby will
be the inventor of spaceships, or that a worm may evolve into
a monkey. These statements may be potentially valid, but their
fulfillment is contingent upon a constellation of factors which
are not present in the original material. In spite of his genes
and his potentials, a man cannot create a single child without


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


EXTRAGEREBRAL ELEMENTS OF THE MIND 39

the collaboration of a woman; and a baby will not invent
rockets unless he is exposed to a highly sophisticated level of
physics. We believe that worms have evolved into more complex
forms of life, and that potentially they may produce dinosaurs,
supermen, or inhabitants of the moon, but before we allow our
imagination to wander among the limitless possibilities of
nature, it is preferable to identify the factors responsible for the
observed reality among an infinite number of theoretical
potentials.

According to early theories of preformism, the germinal cell—
the ovum—held a miniature organism with microscopic eyes,
arms, legs, and other parts of the body which eventually would
grow. The ovaries of Eve had potentially the bodies—and minds
—of all mankind. As soon as scientific embryology began, it was
evident that the germinal cell did not contain a compressed
homunculus, but only a plan which required the interaction of
other elements in order to develop into a human being,

A relatively small group of organization centers (the genes),
with the collaboration of molecules supplied from the outside
(the mother), produce another series of organizers (enzymes,
hormones, and other active substances) which will arrange
patterns of molecules for the construction of cells, tissues, and
organs and will also produce a new series of organizers to direct
the interaction of these new elements. The organizers are not
completely stereotyped in performance but are influenced by
their medium. A particular gene may have different phenotypic
effects in different environments, and “genes control the ‘reac¬
tion norm’ of the organism to environmental conditions” (31).
Blood vessels, muscles, and the various organs are differentiated;
neurons appear, their interconnections are established, and the
brain evolves. Chromosomes have neither heart nor brain—only
a set of architectonic plans which under suitable conditions will
evolve into a complete organism. These plans are unfulfilled
for millions of sexual cells and for countless embryos that are
casualties in spontaneous abortions. The possibilities of evolu¬
tion are far from accomplished realities.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


40 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

If we accept these ideas, we may also state that the fecundated
germinal cell does not talk, understand, or think, and that the
resulting embryo has no mental functions before the medullary
plate rolls up to form the neural tube. When can we detect the
first signs of a functioning mind? How are they correlated with
the anatomical development of the central nervous system?
The study of these questions may be simplified if we first ex¬
amine the initial signs of a functioning brain as revealed by
behavioral expression in lower animals. Before the development
of muscles, motor neurons are already growing out to establish
neural contacts with them. The order of growth is a “progres¬
sive individualism within a totally integrated matrix, and not a
progressive integration of primarily individuated units” (34).
Motions, therefore, are basically a part of a total pattern, and
their relative individualization is only a secondary acquisition.
Some efferent motor pathways appear before any afferent fiber
enters the cerebrum. Initially, the cerebral association system
develops toward the motor system and the peripheral sensory
fibers grow toward the receptor field. Significant conclusions
from these facts are that “the individual acts on its environment
before it reacts to its environment” (35), that efferent nerves
must be stimulated by products of the organism’s metabolism,
and that "behavior in response to such stimulation is sponta¬
neous in the sense that it is the expression of the intrinsic
dynamics of the organism as a whole” (37). Total behavior is not
made up of reflexes; rather, “the mechanism of the total pattern
is an essential component of the performance of the part, i.e.,
the reflex,” and behavior therefore “cannot be fully expressed
in terms of S-R (Stimulus-Response)” (37). It is significant that
in man vestibular connections develop before vestibular sense
organs, because this reveals that “the cerebral growth determines
the attitude of the individual to its environment before that
individual is able to receive any sensory impression of its en¬
vironment. Hence, the initiative is within the organism” (36).

Some of these findings have been confirmed in the toadfish
and the cunner (228). On the first day that the cunner larva


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


EXTRACEREBRAL ELEMENTS OF THE MIND 41

swim around freely, they do not respond to external stimuli.
Thus under natural conditions, this species moves about without
an effective exteroceptive mechanism, evidently propelled by a
“mechanism of motility activated from within.” The afferent
sensory system grows gradually until it finally “captures” the
primitive motor system. The conclusion is that behavior has
'two components; “endogenous activity, the fundamental mo¬
tility conditioned by the inner physiological adjustments of the
organism; and exogenous activity, the oriented activity by which
endogenous activity is so modified as to render response to
external stimuli possible” (70).

This information emphasizes the importance of genetic deter¬
mination and indicates that some mechanisms for behavorial
performance are organized in the absence of environmental
inputs. It is generally accepted that development of the nervous
system is basic for the onset and elaboration of mammalian
behavior, but it is not clear whether any factor can be singled
out as decisive. Without synaptic conduction, impulses obviously
cannot be transmitted: thus the functional maturity of synapsis
must be essential (104, 144, 205, 241). Objections have been
raised about the acceptance of synaptic permeability as the main
reason for onset of behavior (140), and other factors may be
equally important. Activity of peripheral nerve fibers is consid¬
ered essential for the differentiation and specificity of behavioral
performance (72, 78), and the anatomical development of
neurofibrillae may be specifically related to the onset of
behavior (136). These and other studies have provided impor¬
tant information, but its interpretation has often been biased
by methodological distortions.

It is a common error in behavioral embryology, and in science
generally, to try to simplify the observed phenomena and to
reduce causality to a single factor, excluding all other variables.
This is the fallacy of the single cause (i2i), or failure to under¬
stand that a biological phenomena is always the product of a
complex situation, not of a single determinant. With this pitfall
in mind, we must face the task of identifying the several


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


42 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

elements essential for the development of any given phenom¬
enon, and both conduction and synaptic mechanisms are cer¬
tainly basic for the onset of behavior.

Myelin is a substance with insulating properties covering the
nerves, and its appearance in neuronal sheaths has often been as¬
sociated with the onset and differentiation of behavior by neuro¬
anatomists. A correlation perhaps exists for some specific
behavior patterns in the cat and the opossum (138, 226), but
most authors today agree that the myelogenetic law cannot be
generalized. In the newborn rat, myelination does not take place
for several days although the fetus starts moving many days
before birth, and some discrete reflexes and inhibitory activity
in higher centers can be observed in a rat fetus nineteen days
after conception (5). Myelination, therefore, cannot be inter¬
preted as necessary for the conduction of impulses or for func¬
tional insulation.

Differences in anatomical and behavioral evolution certainly
exist between mammals and lower life forms. In the guinea
pig, for example, limbs are well formed in the embryo before
appearance of the first behavioral response, while in the sala¬
mander motor behavior is initiated before morphological
differentiation of the limbs. Evidently embryologic studies of
man cannot be as extensive and as well controlled as those of
amphibia, but valuable information on this subject already
exists (30). Inside the uterus, the human embryo has a comfort¬
able and sheltered life without facing responsibilities or making
choices. Cells multiply automatically and oi^ans take shape
while the growing fetus floats weightless in the silent night of
amniotic fluid. Food and oxygen are provided and wastes are
removed continuously and effortlessly by the maternal placenta.
As the fetus grows, many organs perform something like a dress
rehearsal before their functions are really required. This is
usually referred to as the principle of anticipatory morpholog¬
ical maturation. The heart starts to beat when there is no blood
to pump; the gastrointestinal tract shows peristaltic movements
and begins to secrete juices in the absence of food; the eyelids


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


EXTRACEREBRAL ELEMENTS OF THE MIND


43

open and close in the eternal darkness of the uterus; the arms
and legs move, giving the mother the indesorihable joy of feel¬
ing a new life inside herself; even breathing movements appear
several weeks before birth when there is no air to breathe (i).

Some extensive information about human fetal behavior has
been obtained by indirect methods in pregnant women, while
other findings were obtained directly from fetuses surgically
removed for medical reasons (112, 155, 176). The first move¬
ment observed in a four-millimeter-long, three-week-old fetus
is the heart beat, which has intrinsic determinants because it
starts before the organ has received any nervous connections.
The neural elements needed for a reflex act can be demonstrated
in the spinal cord at the second month of embryonic life, and
at that time, cutaneous stimulation may induce motor responses.
A fourteen-week fetus shows most of the responses which can be
observed in the neonate with the exception of voGalization, the
tonic grasping reflex, and respiration. With fetal growth, spon¬
taneous motility increases inside the mother’s womb and it is
well known that responses from the fetus may be elicited by
tapping the mother’s abdominal wall.

Sensory perception of the fetus has been investigated in detail
by several scientists (27, 30, 240). Cutaneous reception is well
developed long before birth, and mechanical or thmnal stimu¬
lation of the skin elicits appropriate motor activity related to
the stimulated area. The existence of pain perception is doubtful.
Proprioceptors of the muscles (the spindles) develop at the
fourth month of fetal life, and the labyrinth is evident even
earlier. Both organs are active during fetal life; they are capable
of postural adjustments and may be partially responsible for
fetal motility in the uterus.

The possibility of fetal perception of gastrointestinal move¬
ments, hunger, thirst, suffocation, and other types of organic
experience has been debated, and it is generally accepted that
internal stimuli may activate skeletal musculature. Distinction
of sweet from other tastes and of unpleasant odors such as
asafetida has been demonstrated in preinature babies, showing


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


44 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

that these receptor mechanisms are already developed. It is
doubtful, however, that with the nose and mouth immersed in
amniotic fluid, the fetus could have gustatory or olfactory experi¬
ences before birth,

The auditory apparatus is well developed at birth, but the
general consensus (180) is that the infant is deaf until the liquid
of the fetal middle ear is drained through the Eustachian tube
by breathing, crying, and perhaps yawning. Loud noises, how¬
ever, might be perceived, and some cases of presumed fetal
hearing have been reported (79).

The optic apparatus is sufl&ciently developed in the newborn
infant to permit perception of light and darkness, but the optic
nerve is not yet fully developed, and its evolution continues after
birth and is probably influenced by sensory perception (180). It
is highly improbable that the fetus has any visual experience
during its uterine life.

In summary, it is imlikely that before the moment of birth
the baby has had any significant visual, auditory, olfactory, or
gustatory experience, and it is probable that it has received only
a very limited amount of tactile, organic, and proprioceptive
information. The newborn has an elaborated system of reflexes;
and coughing, sneezing, sucking, swallowing, grasping, and other
actions may be evoked by the appropriate sensory stimulation. In
an experimental study of seventeen behavioral responses, their
intercorrelations proved to be zero, indicating that “there is
no mental integration in the newborn child” (82). This integra¬
tion usually takes place during the first postnatal month.

Whether or not the fetus was capable of conscious experience
was a classical philosophical and psychological problem debated
at length with a flourish of words and speculations but with
little factual support (39, 86, 135, 147, 175)- It is difficult to
understand the basis of this controversy since there is no evi¬
dence that the fetus has visual, auditory, olfactory, or gustatory
stimulation. The possibility of fetal awareness is therefore re¬
duced to a limited input of organic sensations of proprioception
and touch in the absence of the main sensory faculties. Whether


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


EXTRACEREBRAL ELEMENTS OF THE MIND 45

or not these phenomena can by themselves create consciousness
is mainly a question of definition and arbitrary agreement, but
it may be stated that they cannot produce manifestations com¬
parable to those of consciousness in children or adults, which
are mainly based on visual and auditory perception and ex¬
perience. The mystery is perhaps insoluable due to the impossi¬
bility of establishing verbal communication with the newborn.

Anticipatory morphological maturation is present in various
mechanisms which remain quiescent in the fetus, ready to per¬
form with physiological efficiency as soon as they are needed.
Their necessary links are established before birth and are trig¬
gered by appropriate stimulation. These functions, which
include oral suction, respiration, kidney secretion, and gastro¬
intestinal activity, are able to act several weeks before an ex¬
pected delivery, in case the baby is bom prematurely.

No comparable provisions exist for mental functions. The
newborn brain is not capable of speech, symbolic understanding,
or of directing skillful motility. It has no ideas, words, or con¬
cepts, no tools for communication, no significant sensory ex¬
perience, no culture. The newborn baby never smiles. He is
unable to comprehend the loving phrases of his mother or to
be aware of the environment. We must conclude that there
are no detectable signs of mental activity at birth and that
human beings are born without minds. This statement may seem
startling, but it should not be rejected by saying, “Well, you
don’t see mental functions during the first few days, but every¬
thing is ready for action; wait a few weeks, or perhaps a few
months; it is just a slight lack of maturity, but the baby’s mind
is there.’’ Potentiality should not be confused with reality. A
project is not an accomplished fact, especially when essential
elements are lacking in the original design. Naturally a baby
lacks experience, but by recognizing this fact, we are accepting
the essentiality of extracerebral elements which originate in
the outside world and are independent of both the organism
and its genetic endowment. As Cantril and Livingston (29)
have said, organisms are in a constant “transaction,” in a “proc-


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


46 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

ess of becoming,” constantly changing into something different
from what they were before. Early in life, an infant is attracted
to sources of comfort and repelled by sources of distress. These
experiences lead to the “intelligent” recognition of objects and
persons associated with positive or negative reinforcement, and
they will determine selective patterns of behavioral response.
“It is at this point, we think, that ‘mind’ is bom” (29).

The concept of the mindless newborn brain is a useful hy¬
pothesis because it clarifies our search for the origin of the mind.
If this origin depended on genetic endowment, then mental
functions should appear in the absence of other external ele¬
ments (as respiratory functions do). If genetic determination
alone is not sufficient, then we must investigate the source and
characteristics of the extracerebral elements responsible for
the appearance of the mind as the baby matures.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


6


The Mindless, Newborn Brain


Psychoanalytical interpretations of fetal life are not in accord
with the concept of a mindless, newborn brain which I propose,
and some authors (183, 193) present a different viewpoint in
approximately the following terms. In the intimate cloister
of the mother, a growing being lives a peaceful, sheltered exist¬
ence. In this uterine paradise, without fears or anxieties, the
embryo must have a mother libido, and it experiences pleasure
and pain, as demonstrated by impulsive movements and by the
sucking responses which are expressions of pleasurable sexual
sensations related to mental states of the fetus. Thinking and
willing are perhaps present to only a limited extent, but feeling
exists in the embryo with hypertrophic sensitivity.

One day, something terrible happens. The carefree, parasitic
existence is terminated, and there is a brutal separation of the
child from the libido object—the mother—causing a psychic
trauma, the primal or original anxiety state. Later on, the
child will try to return symbolically to its mothers womb, and
subconsciously he may remember forever the states of embryonic
life and the anxiety of birth. The child’s neurosis is a natural
result of his traumatic arrival. He is usually able to overcome
it, although occasionally it persists during adult life. Sadger (193)
reported that when he could not relate some patients’ neuroses
to their embryonic periods, he induced them to recall what
happened to their original spermatozoa and ova, or even to
remember possible parental attitudes which could have pro¬

47


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND


48

duced a trauma in the delicate germinal cells before conception.
Sadger maintained that these cells have a psychic life of their
own with the capacity to learn and to remember.

It is difficult to accept the introspective statement of a neurotic
patient who claims to possess a spermatozoic memory, since
experimental studies show that the reactions of newborn babies
are so elemental that they can hardly be considered signs of a
functioning mind. It is doubtful, if not indeed illogical, to
attribute a higher degree of mental activity to a fetus at an
even earlier stage of embryonic development.

The possible existence of psychic functions in the newborn
has been repeatedly debated. Some authorities accept the pres¬
ence in the infant of three primary emotions, fear, rage, and
love, and believe that all other emotions result from the con¬
ditioning of these innate patterns by environmental stimuli
(237). The theory of differential emotional patterns in the
neonate suffered a serious blow when it was demonstrated that
competent observers of infant behavior could not agree on their
interpretations of emotional patterns recorded by moving pic¬
tures unless they knew the type of stimuli applied (204). The term
“emotion” should not be ascribed to infant behavior because
it lacks differentiated responses, and the existence of a “mind”
in the neonate is really a matter of definition (116, 222).

The mind is characterized by many heterogeneous functions,
some of which exist at birth, if only in elemental form. Symbolic
processes as determined by correlation procedures (82) do not
exist in the neonate, but temporary learning of simple con¬
ditioned responses has been demonstrated (213). Four conditions
have been proposed as prerequisite to acceptance of the existence
of intelligent behavior in any organism: (1) a functional cere¬
bral cortex; (2) functional distance receptors; (3) an upright
posture; and (4) the achievement of substitutive or symbolic
behavior. According to these criteria, the neonate does not
qualify for intelligent behavior, and its activities should not
be considered signs of mental life (117).

Careful studies of infants demonstrate that their eyes will


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


THE MINDLESS, NEWBORN BRAIN 49

follow small moving spots of light as early as two weeks after
birth (32). Auditory sensitivity is controversial, and pitch dis¬
crimination and differential responses related to the patterning
of sound seem to be absent (219). Auditory conditioning has
been unsuccessful until the second month of life (125). The
existence of olfactory perception and even gustatory discrimina¬
tion is rather doubtful, but sour and bitter solutions influence
sucking and may evoke facial responses. The newborn baby’s
ability to orient toward the nipple of the mother’s breast is
the most important response in his repertoire (172).

Human beings are bom with such cerebral immaturity that
their very survival depends completely on exterior help, and
their behavior is similar to that of a purely spinal being, or at
most, of a brain stem or midbrain preparation (44, 45, 139,
173). Most neurologists agree that the neonate is a noncortical
being. After birth, there is a transitional period during which
the cerebral cortex starts to function, and then its activities
progressively increase until a reciprocal functional correlation
is established with the rest of the brain.

It had been generally assumed that mammals were born with
most of their cerebral neurons present and that further de¬
velopment was limited to some synaptic elaboration of the al¬
ready existing neuronal network. Recent studies performed
with radio tracers have revealed, however, that at least in the
hippocampus, olfactory bulb, and cerebellar cortex of mam¬
mals, as many as 80 to 90 per cent of the neurons form only after
the animal is born (3). Experience provided by sensory inputs
from the environment influences the number as well as the
structual connections of these postnatal cells. Moreover, as
Cajal (25) suggested long ago, the microneurons of the cerebel¬
lum, which serve as association elements, develop after birth
under the influence of the infant’s behavioral activities. There¬
fore it can be said that the environment is absorbed as a struc¬
tural part of the neurons in the developing brain.

The conclusive proof that performance of neonate behavior
does not require a mind—or even a brain—derives from the


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


50 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

Study of several anenceplialic beings in whom reflexes and be¬
havioral manifestations were similar to those of normal babies.
Some of these infants, bom without cerebrums, lived for only
one or two days, but others survived for two or more months
and could be studied in great detail. One of the most famous
cases was the mesencephalic child which had only midbrain,
pons, and cerebellum, lacked pallidum, striatum, and cortex,
and had only a few traces of diencephalon (84). This abnormal
being had reduced motor performance, but the startle reaction
and grasping reflexes were well preserved. He was able to as¬
sume a sitting position spontaneously when both lower legs
were pressed, and occasionally he yawned and stretched his
arms. He had periodic alternating states of quietude and ac¬
tivity resembling sleep and wakefulness. His feeding behavior
was nearly normal and he could follow a moving finger with
his eyes and head. He cried and was observed to suck his thumb
spontaneously. The main difference between anencephalic and
normal infants is that in a child lacking cortex and other parts
of the brain, responses and activities remain stationary while a
normal infant quickly develops new behavior patterns.

Having seen that mental functions in man cannot be demon¬
strated at birth, we may ask which elements are essential for
their appearance and development, and we may wonder why
the newborn baby is mindless. Why isn’t the mind detectable
at birth? Because it is hidden or dormant inside the neurons,
or because it doesn’t yet exist within the brain? These questions
correspond to the following differing hypotheses: (1) Human
beings, in comparison with other animals, are less developed
at birth, being anatomically and physiologically immature and
requiring a postnatal growing period in order to reach their
expected potential. In this case, the essential elements for the
appearance of the mind, which are determined genetically, are
already present at birth, and only need time to develop and
demonstrate their existence. The mind is there even if it can¬
not be detected, (g) A different point of view is that the brain
is not sufficient to produce mental phenomena. The brain is


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


THE MINDLESS, NEWBORN BRAIN 51

only a reactive organizer o£ transactions o£ elements located in
the environment and transmitted to the individual by sensory
receptors and pathways. According to this hypothesis, the re¬
ception o£ extracerebral factors —the experience o£ living—is
essential £or the appearance o£ the mind and is the basic element
upon which mental development is conditional. While in¬
stinctive behavior may appear even in the absence o£ experience,
mental activity cannot.

Con£ronting these two theories, we £ace again the basic ques¬
tions o£ the origin o£ mind and whether mental £unctions could
appear simply by process o£ anatomical maturation. To find
answers, we must be acquainted with some experimental £acts.
It is known that cerebral maturity in animals is o£ only relative
value £or behavioral performance. With merely 20 per cent o£
their neurons myelinated, 24-day-old white rats are trainable
and can learn associations as well as adult rats (236). Early
visual experience is important for the normal development of
higher animals but is not essential in lower species. Rats raised
in darkness since birth have no visual deficits when exposed to
light for the first time (101). Birds also manage quite well,
although ringdoves which have worn translucent goggles to
block visual patterns but not light show a moderate decrease
in the speed of learning pattern discrimination when their
goggles are removed (207).

Studies of early visual deprivation in higher animals tell a
different story. In one investigation, four baby chimpanzees
were separated from their mothers shortly after birth and each
was kept in a darkened room and given only ninety minutes’
daily exposure to a limited, diffuse light (184). Seven months
later, testing of the animals showed normal pupillary reactions
to light, but lack of eye blink, visual fixation, and pursuit of
moving objects. Unlike the control animals, these chimpanzees
did not appear upset if they were fed by strangers, nor did they
recognize their feeding bottles. In visual discrimination and
conditioning tests, the animals reared in darkness required
more than twice as many trials as did the control animals and


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


58 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

committed over twice as many errors. After living for
months outside the darkened room, only one of the chimpan¬
zees began to converge his eyes on an object brought into con¬
tact with his lips. In this animal, discrimination of vertical
versus horizontal strips was soon acquired, while recognition
of faces took much longer.

Biochemical studies have confirmed the importance of sen¬
sory stimulation for normal cerebral development. In animals
deprived of sight or hearing, the corresponding neurons of the
system do not develop biochemically. Their structure appears
normal, but inside they are like “empty bags, impoverished in
both RNA and proteins” (115). The importance of adequate
sensory stimulation for postnatal neurochemical maturation
has also been demonstrated by Brattgard in his studies of retinal
ganglion cells (88). During the early postnatal period, animals
receiving normal light stimulation showed 100 per cent increase
in cellular mass, as measured by the total amount of organic
substance, while animals deprived of light did not show this
change. Moderate sensory stimulation of the vestibular system
caused by rotation of the body resulted in a 40 per cent increase
in the RNA concentration in the vestibular ganglion cells and
also an increase in amino acid absorption (91).

During the last fifteen years, researchers at Berkeley (13, 132,
190) have performed chemical-behavioral studies demonstrating
that individual experience can lead to measurable alterations
of the chemistry and anatomy of the brain. They started with
the search for relations between naturally occurring differences
in brain chemistry and differences in learning ability and then
analyzed the effects of experience on brain chemistry. It was
known that enriched early sensory inputs benefit subsequent
learning, and the investigations were oriented to find the bio¬
chemical link between early environment and later effects.
Experimental studies in rats proved that exposing litter mates
to either enriched or impoverished environments for eight
days produced in the enriched group significant increases in
(1) the weight of cerebral cortex, (2) total activity of the enzyme


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


THE MINDLESS, NEWBORN BRAIN 53

acetylcholine esterase throughout the brain, (3) total activity of
cholinesterase in the cortex, (4) thickness and vascularization
of the cerebral cortex. Because acetylcholine is a possible trans¬
mitter substance, changes in the enzymes which regulate its
appearance and breakdown have important functional signifi¬
cance. Increase in the number and connections of neurons
should also have obvious consequences. Many years ago, the
great Spanish histologist Cajal (25) suggested that cerebral ac¬
tivity could be correlated with the ramifications of cerebral
neurons, and he drew attention to the small cells rich in synaptic
connections. The total brain mass should be less important
than its internal organization and wealth of connections for the
exchange of information. Cajal knew that a talented person or
even a genius did not necessarily have a large brain. Quality
rather than total volume is crucial.

It is generally accepted that the brain of a newborn human
baby is incomplete to a remarkable degree (41, 76, 118). In the
primary sensory areas and the motor cortex, many character¬
istics including myelination, cortical width, and the number and
size of cells are in an embryonic state. While anatomical matura¬
tion must influence brain functions, it is doubtful whether it
is the decisive factor in mental activity. The limited role of
maturation is illustrated by the behavior of premature babies,
born after seven months of intrauterine life. Two months after
birth, their reactions are more similar to those of a normal,
full-term two-month-old baby than to a newborn. It is also true
that although the pyramidal tract does not mature for two
years, children are able to coordinate, walk, and perform volun¬
tary movements many months before.

If a human being could grow physically for several years
under complete sensory deprivation, it could be ascertained
whether the appearance of mental activity is dependent upon
extragenetic, extracerebral elements. My prediction is that
such a being would not have mental functions. His brain would
be empty and void of ideas; he would be without memory and
incapable of understanding his surroundings. Such a person,


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


54 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

although maturing physically, would remain as mentally naive
as on the day of his birth. This exjjeriment is, of course, un¬
feasible. It would be unacceptable ethically, and it is techni¬
cally impossible because even if sight, sound, taste, and olfaction
could be blocked, touch and visceral proprioception extend
throughout most of the body and could not be completely sup¬
pressed. Although the final proof of this extreme experiment
will never be forthcoming, we have partial medical proof of
the adverse effects of sensory deprivation on physiological de¬
velopment of children.

It is known that people who have lived for several years with¬
out a sensory receptor lack the mental functions related to the
receptor that must transduce, bias, and pass on the incoming
information. Some babies have been bom with congenital
cataracts in both eyes but have not suffered atrophy of the optic
nerve. They grow up without any visual experience of shapes,
objects, or patterns, being able to perceive only diffused light.
During childhood, they leam to recognize surroundings by
touch and by ear. They can identify a book, glass, or chair,
and know people by their footsteps or voices. When some of
these blind children were twelve to fourteen years old, their
cataracts were removed, and for the first time they could see
the physical world. During the first days, this visible world had
no significance, and familim: objects such as a walking stick
or favorite chair were recognized only when explored manually.
A tedious learning process was necessary before these children
could leam to evaluate lights and shades and interpret the
barrage of optic sensations which were initially so confusing.
After a long training period their visual recognition improved
considerably, but it remained permanently impaired. For ex¬
ample, the distinction between a square and a hexagon required
laborious and often erroneous manual counting of the corners,
and a rooster was confused with a horse because both have
tails (202). A very intelligent blind boy, whose sight was re¬
stored when he was eleven, identified a fish as a camel because
he confused its dorsal fin with a camel’s hump (239). Although


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


THE MINDLESS, NEWBORN BRAIN 55

this clinical data is based on a small number of patients some of
whom may have had brain lesions as well as cataracts (243), the
results indicate that the ability to perceive patterns does not
pre-exist in cerebral organization, but is learned through ex¬
perience, and that in man the early postnatal period is of de¬
cisive importance in the acquisition of cerebral mechanisms for
the perception and symbolization of sensory stimuli.

In agreement with the results of visual deprivation in patients
is the very poor performance of native African children in the
form board intelligence test (162). The natives were far su¬
perior to white men in detecting hunting tracks in the forest
but were completely unfamiliar with and unable to discrimi¬
nate between the geometrical patterns used in the test. These
findings illustrate that visual discrimination is one mental
activity which must be learned, and that in the human brain,
cerebral development and organization are not sufficient for the
performance of mental functions. Genetic factors are not
enough; experience is essential. “At conception individuals are
quite alike in intellectual endowment. ... It is the life experi¬
ence and the sociocultural milieu influencing biological and
psychological function which . . . makes human beings sig¬
nificantly different from each other” (170).

The decisive role of infantile experiences in the development
of individual personality and its disorders was the main theme
of Freud’s historic investigations (80), which have shaped the
thinking of psychologists, psychiatrists, psychoanalysts, and lay¬
men to the present time. The central experience of the period of
childhood is the infant relation to his mother, and the events
of the first years leave a much greater mark on physiological
and behavioral characteristics than those which occur later in
life. Piaget also has stressed that the first eighteen months of
life are crucial for the establishment of sensory motor intelli¬
gence and for the formation of the ego (177).

Perhaps the most dramatic evidence that the capacity to love
is not inherited but may appear “at first sight” is the process
of imprinting. As Lorenz (149) has shown, the young of some


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


56 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

bird species become attached to the first moving object they
perceive. Normally this object is their mother, but in his work
with ducks, Lorenz presented himself at the moment of hatch¬
ing as the mother substitute. The little ducklings were im¬
printed with the image of Dr. Lorenz and followed him
obediently with apparent filial affection. The strength of bonds
established in the young depend on the qualities of the stimulus
(shape, sounds, odors) and on the timing of the reception. In the
duck, the most effective imprinting takes place soon after
hatching, while beyond a certain age it cannot take place at
all.

The studies of the Harlows (92, 94) in rhesus monkeys con¬
firmed the decisive importance of early sensory inputs as de¬
terminants of behavior and also the existence of a critical
period early after birth for establishment of the capacity for
affection. Deprivation incurred by isolating baby monkeys from
their mothers or peers irreversibly blighted the animals’ capacity
for social adjustments. The period between the third and sixth
months was found to be most critical for their development.
Animals deprived of contact during this phase exhibited aber¬
rant behavior which persisted throughout their adulthood even
when they were placed within control groups. The behavioral
abnormalities included staring fixedly into space, stereotyped
motility, clasping their heads in their hands, rocking for long
periods of time, development of compulsive habits, self-aggres¬
sive tendencies with self-inflicted body damage, and abnormal
sexuality with unsuccessful mating. In monkeys the ability to
love is not inherited and if it is not learned during early life,
the deprived individual forever loses the capacity to establish
bonds of affection and remains socially and sexually aberrant.

In another series of experiments, it was demonstrated that
“the ability to solve problems without fumbling is not inborn
but is acquired gradually” (93). When monkeys faced a simple
discrimination test such as selection of an object according to
its color or shape for the reward of raisins or peanuts, learning
was initially haphazard. After the animals had learned to solve


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


THE MINDLESS, NEWBORN BRAIN 57

several similar problems, their behavior changed dramatically
and they showed increasing insight until eventually, when faced
with a new problem, they could solve it in a single trial. Parallel
studies have been performed with children showing that in
man, as in monkeys, there is no evidence of any innate endow¬
ment that enables them to solve instrumental problems. The
conclusions of these findings are that “animals, human and sub¬
human, must learn to think. Thinking does not develop spon¬
taneously as an expression of innate abilities; it is the end
result of a long learning process,” and that “the brain is essential
to thought, but the untutored brain is not enough, no matter
how good a brain it may be” (93).

The classical controversy about the nature-nurture dichotomy
has lost its original simplicity. The problem is not to separate
innate from learned behavioral patterns, because in most cases
there is a reciprocal influence between pre-existing and acquired
factors. The problem is to identify the specific roles and mecha¬
nisms in the collaborative effort between heredity and environ¬
ment (io2, 227). To be specific, let us consider language as the
most outstanding manifestation of human mental qualities.
The potentiality to talk depends on genetic factors which exist
in man at the moment of birth, while they are lacking in the
rest of the zoological scale, including the big apes. It is known
that after the most patient training, some chimpanzees living
with human foster parents have been able to pronounce a few
simple words such as “papa” and “mama” and “cup,” but
they have never learned to converse or to say complex phrases.
Language potentiality in the human baby signifies the exist¬
ence of a functioning brain that can be trained to store informa¬
tion and also to combine, modify, and use it for performance
of the specific function of talking. Potentiality is like a beautiful
highway, able to accommodate traffic and facilitate the exchange
of visitors among many cities. The highway, however, cannot
create cars, trucks, merchandise, businessmen, workers, and all
the life which circulates along it. The road makes functions
possible, but by itself it is a useless stretch of pavement. The


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


58 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

potential of verbal communication is not enough to learn to
talk, and it is necessary to be repeatedly exjx)sed to sensory in¬
puts from an environment which includes family and friends.
The baby brain does not invent language nor can it choose to
learn either English or Chinese: It is entirely dependent on
information which must come from the outside. The genetic
structure of the individual establishes the mechanisms for re¬
ceiving and handling the inputs, and in the case of language
it may also be responsible for the modulation of accessory ele¬
ments of speech, such as tone and inflexion of voice, and for the
facilitation of some tendencies related to learning of words
and formation of concepts, but if a baby is not exposed to lan¬
guage, then there are no materials to be received, modulated
or facilitated, and his potentialities will remain dormant.

This is true for many other mental functions which will not
appear in the absence of appropriate sensory inputs. An im¬
portant point is that the choice of the necessary information
cannot be made by the baby himself because at the beginning
he is completely helpless and dependent. The decisive responsi¬
bilities of providing information to structure the initial organi¬
zation of the baby’s mind is assumed by those in charge of the
infant. As stated by Geertz (85), “there is no such thing as a
human nature independent of culture. Men without culture
would not be the clever savages of Golding’s Lord qf the Flies.
They would not be, . . . as classical anthropological theory
would imply, intrinsically talented apes who had somehow failed
to find themselves. Instead, they would be monstrosities with
few useful instincts, fewer recognizable sentiments, and no
intellect.”


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


7


Sensory Dependence of the Adult Mind


Even i£ reception of sensory information is accepted as totally
essential for the onset and development of mental functions,
it is more or less explicitly assumed that an adult has a well-
established mental capacity which functions with relative in¬
dependence of the environment. Individuality, initiative, and
free will are expressed in the ability to accept or reject ideas
and select behavioral responses. A man can isolate himself,
meditate, and explore the depths of his own thoughts. To a
great extent education, especially in Occidental cultures, is
based on the belief that individual personality is a self-con¬
tained and relatively independent entity with its own destiny,
well difEerentiated from the surroundings, and able to function
by itself even when isolated from earth and traveling in an
orbiting capsule.

A more detailed analysis of reality, however, shows that
cerebral activity is essentially dependent on sensory inputs from
the environment not only at birth but also throughout life.
Normal mental functions cannot be preserved in the absence
of a stream of information coming from the outside world. The
mature brain, with all its wealth of past experience and acquired
skills, is not capable of maintaining the thinking process or
even normal awareness and reactivity in a vacuum of sensory
deprivation: The individual mind is not self-sufficient.

Support for this statement derives from neurophysiological
and psychological experimentation. In mammals, the central

59


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


6o PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

organization of motor activity is localized in special regions of
the cerebral cortex where muscles and ideokinetic formulas
are represented. The motor pathways descend through the
spinal cord and emerge through the ventral roots to form plexus
and motor nerves. As should be expected, experimental destruc¬
tion in animals or pathological damage in man of the ventral
roots produces complete motor paralysis because the cerebral
impulses cannot reach the muscle target. Considering the input
side, we know that all sensory information from the periphery,
including proprioceptive impulses from the muscles, is carried
by the dorsal roots of the spinal cord. As anticipated, destruction
of all dorsal roots produces a loss of sensation, but in addition,
there is also a paralysis of the musculature as pronounced as
when the motor roots are interrupted. These experiments show
that in the absence of sensory information, motor activity is
totally disrupted. The brain and motor pathways are not suffi¬
cient in themselves, and for proper motor behavior, sensory in¬
puts are absolutely necessary.

The studies of Sprague et al. (217) in the cat confirmed the
importance of incoming information for normal functioning
of the brain. These authors destroyed the lateral portion of the
upper midbrain, including the main sensory pathways, and
they observed that, in addition to the expected marked sen¬
sory deficit, the cats exhibited a lack of affect, aggression, and
pleasurable responses, and did not solicit petting. The animals
remained mute, expressionless, and showed minimal auto¬
nomic responses but in spite of this passivity, they showed
hyperexploratory activity with incessant stereotyped wandering,
sniffing, and searching as if hallucinating. “Without a patterned
afferent input to the forebrain via the lemnisci, the remaining
portions of the central nervous system . . . seem incapable of
elaborating a large part of the animal’s repertoire of adaptive
behavior” (217).

Psychological data also confirm the essential importance of
continuous reception of inputs. Experiments on sensory depri¬
vation in animals and man have shown that maintenance of


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


SENSORY DEPENDENCE OF THE ADULT MIND 6l

normal mental activity is difl&cult or impossible when sensory
information is reduced and, moreover, that monotonous sen¬
sation is aversive. Animals and humans require novelty and
continual and varied stimulation from their surroundings.

Perception of the environment has positive reinforcing proper¬
ties, and when monkeys were confined in a cage, they would
press levers and perform other instrumental responses for the
reward of opening a little window and looking at the outside
world. Curiosity derives from expectancy of novel sensory
stimulation and motivates exploratory behavior in both animals
and man, while boredom has negative reinforcing properties
and is related to the absence of novel sensory inputs (i6, 95). To
be entertained means to be provided with new and changing
sensations, mainly visual and auditory. Primitive man probably
derived pleasure from looking at the changing beauty of nature,
which retains its fascination to the present day. Civilization
has provided the technical means for a far greater choice of
inputs, and a major portion of our time, effort, mental activity,
and economic resources are now devoted to entertainment
through books, theaters, radio, television, museums, and other
cultural media.

Symbolically we may speak about “psychic energy" as the
level of intracerebral activity which could perhaps be identified
in neurophysiological terms by electrical and chemical processes
located at specific neuronal fields. This psychic energy may be
considered a main determinant of the quantity of intellectual and
behavioral manifestations. While this energy obviously depends
on cerebral physiology (and indirectly on the health of the
whole body), its actual source is extracerebral because mental
activity is not a property of neurons, but is contingent on the
received information which activates stored information and
past experiences, creating emotions and ideas.

To be alone with our own mind is not enough. Even if all
past experiences are included, the exclusion of new perceptions
creates serious functional difficulties. This has been shown for
instance in the studies of Hebb and his group (18, 103) in which


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND


62

college students were asked to lie comfortably on beds in sound¬
proof, lighted cubicles, wearing translucent goggles to minimize
optic sensation and gloves with cardboard cuffs to limit tactual
perception. The purpose of this isolation experiment was not
to cut out all sensory stimulation, but only to remove patterns
and symbolic information. Most of the subjects expected to
spend their idle time alone reviewing their studies, planning
term papers, or organizing ideas for lectures. The surprising
result—for the investigators as well as for the participants—
was that the students "were unable to think clearly about any¬
thing for any length of time, and their thought process seemed
to be affected in other ways.” After several hours of isolation,
many of them began to see images, such as “a rock shaded by a
tree,” “a procession of squirrels,” or “prehistoric animals walk¬
ing about in a jungle.” Initially the subjects were surprised and
amused but after a while their hallucinations became disturb¬
ing and vivid enough to interfere with sleep. The students
had little control over these phenomena which, in some cases,
included acoustic as well as optic perceptions such as people
talking, a music box playing, or a choir singing in full stereo¬
phonic sound. Some subjects reported sensations of movement
or touch, or feelings of “otherness,” or that another body was
lying beside them on the bed. Isolation also tended to increase
the belief in supernatural phenomena and several of the stu¬
dents reported that for a few days after their isolation experi¬
ment, they were afraid that they were going to see ghosts. The
conclusion was that “a changing sensory environment seems
essential for human beings. Without it, the brain ceases to func¬
tion in an adequate way and abnormalities of behavior develop”

(103)-

In patients with long-term hospital confinement in bed or
in an iron lung or body cast, psychotic-like symptoms have ap¬
peared including anxiety, delusions, and hallucinations which
did not respond to standard medical or psychiatric treatment
but were easily alleviated by social contact or by sensory stimu¬
lation from a radio or television set (141).


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


SENSORY DEPENDENCE OF THE ADULT MIND 63

In our century the classic punishment of solitary confine¬
ment has been combined with sleep deprivation and used in
psychological warfare. Exhaustion and decreased sensory inputs
are known to cause mental disturbances and reduce defense
mechanisms, and they have been effectively manipulated during
“brainwashing” or “thought reform” procedures to indoctri¬
nate prisoners (143, 244).

The literature on sensory deprivation is voluminous (197) and
shows conclusively that the cerebral cortex requires a stream of
stimulation for the preservation of behavioral and mental nor¬
mality. We should realize, therefore, that our cerebral and
mental functions rely on the umbilical cord of sensory inputs
and become disrupted if isolated from the environment. This
fact has been recognized by philosophers and is reflected in the
words of Ortega y Gasset (167) who wrote: “Man has no nature;
what he has is a history,” and “I am I and my circumstance.”
The recognition of environmental inputs as a part of personal
identity is one of the important contributions of Ortega, and
this idea is presented in Meditations on Quixote (166), when
one of the characters states that “circumstantial reality forms
the other half of my person,” and “reabsorption of circumstances
is the specific destiny of man.” A similar thought is expressed
in Tennyson’s j>oem “Ulysses” when Ulysses says, “I am a part
of all that I have met.”

Ortega’s position is important to philosophical thinking, but
we should probably go further and question the existence of
that half of personal identity thought not to originate in the
environment. If we could erase all individual history, all circum¬
stances and experiences, would there be anything left of our
personality? The brain would remain and neuronal nets would
perhaps continue their spiking activity, but devoid of history—
of past experiences and knowledge—-there could be no mental
activity and the mind would, in fact, be an Aristotelian tabula
rasa. Let us remember with Dobzhansky (64) that “genes de¬
termine not ‘characters’ or ‘traits’ but reactions or response.”
The frame of reference and the building blocks of our per-


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


64 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

sonality are the materials received from the outside. The role
of cerebral mechanisms, which to a great extent are also de¬
termined by previous experience, is to receive, bias, combine,
and store the received information, but not to create it. Orig¬
inality is the discovery of novel associations between previously
received information. We must realize that the anatomical struc¬
ture of the brain has not evolved perceptibly in the past several
millenniums of man’s history; what has changed is the amount
of information received by the brain and the training to deal
with it. The major diflEerences between a cave man and a modem
scientist are not genetic but environmental and cultural.

For centuries philosophical tradition has accepted the exist¬
ence of the “I,” “soul,” or “ego” as an entity, more or less
metaphysical, relatively independent of the environment (and
perhaps even of the genes), which is the “essence” that endows
individual man with his unique personal identity and character¬
istics, and may later be threatened or disallowed by the social
medium.

The concept of this mythical “I” is so strong that it has
permeated the thinking of authors as original and revolutionary
as Marcuse. In One-dimensional Man (151), he distinguishes
between true and false needs, declaring:

False are those which are superimposed upon the individual by
particular social interest in his repression... . Most of the prevailing
needs to relax, to have fun, to behave and consume in accordance
with the advertisements, to love and hate what others love and hate,
belong to the category of false needs . . . which are determined by
external forces over which the individual has no control. . . . The
only needs that have an unqualified claim for satisfaction are the
vital ones—-nourishment, clothing, lodging.

According to Marcuse, inner freedom “designates the private
space in which man may become and remain ‘himself.’... Today
the private space has been invaded and whittled down by tech¬
nological reality.”


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


SENSORY DEPENDENCE OF THE ADULT MIND 65

The basic questions are obviously. Who is this “himself,” and
what is the origin of its structural elements? Is there any way to
provide the experience which will form a baby’s mind except
by means of the “external powers” of parents, teachers, and cul¬
ture over which the baby has no control? Are we then going to
classify a child’s needs as false because they were inculcated?
Where is the inner man?

Marcuse’s pleas for “intellectual freedom” and his criticism
of “material and intellectual needs that perpetuate obsolete
forms of the struggle for existence” are certainly valid, but the
state of unqualified liberty cannot be supposed to exist for the
infant who is totally dependent physically and psychologically
on his surroundings. Freedom must be taught and created.

The mutual dependence of the individual and the “psychic
environment” or “noosphere” has been elaborated by Teilhard
de Chardin (223), who wrote that the Universal and Personal
“grow in the same direction and culminate simultaneously in
each other, . . the “Hyper-Personal” consciousness at the
“Omega point.” While it is true that each of us personally re¬
ceives, interprets, and feels the world around us, why should our
individual half be opposed to the noospheric half? Teilhard de
Chardin, like Ortega y Gasset and most other philosophers,
accepts the existence of the quasi-mystical, inviolable self, an
entity somehow identified with the individual mind, ego, or
personality, which is related to the environment but has a rela¬
tively independent existence.

Recent neurophysiological and psychological studies discussed
here reveal that this is not the case. The origin of memories,
emotional reactivity, motor skills, words, ideas, and behavioral
patterns which constitute our personal self can be traced to out¬
side of the individual. Each person is a transitory composite of
materials borrowed from the environment, and his mind is the
intracerebral elaboration of extracerebral information. The
“personal half” is a regrouping of elements of the environment.
For the final result, which is manifested as individual reactivity


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


66 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

and behavioral responses, the building blocks from culture are
more decisive than the individual substratum within which the
regrouping is performed.

It is impressive that this is actually the philosophy, as de¬
scribed by Levi-Strauss (142), of the Bororo Indians, a very prim¬
itive tribe living by the Vermelho River in the Amazon jungles
of Brazil. For the Bororo, a man is not an individual but a part
of a sociological universe. Their villages exist "for all eternity,”
forming part of the physical universe along with other animate
beings, celestial bodies, and meteorological phenomena. Human
shape is transitory, midway between that of the fish and the arara.
Human life is merely a department of culture. Death is both
natural and anticultural, and whenever a native dies, damage
is inflicted not only on his relatives but on society as a whole.
Nature is blamed and Nature must pay the debt; therefore, a
collective hunt is organized to kill some sizable animal, if pos¬
sible a jaguar, in order to bring home its skin, teeth, and nails
which will constitute the dead man’s mori, his everlasting per¬
sonal value.

The conclusion that human beings are part of culture does
not deny the fact that "individuals” have "individual” reactions
and that their brains are unique combinations of elements, but
simply points to the source and quality of the factors of personal
identity. The cerebral mechanisms which allow us to receive,
interpret, feel, and react, as well as the extracerebral sources of
stimuli, can and should be investigated experimentally. Then
we shall gain a new awareness of the structure of the individual
and its relations with the surrounding noosphere.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


8


Working Hypothesis for the Experimental
Study of the Mind


One of the most important consequences of recent scientific
discoveries is the new attitude toward the course of human life.
This attitude has modified our traditional acceptance of fatal¬
istic determination by unknown factors related to heredity, body
functions, and environment, and has intensified the search for
knowledge and technology to direct our lives more intelligently.
The genetic code is being unraveled, introducing the possibility
that some time in the future, we may be able to influence
heredity in order to avoid illnesses like Mongolism or in order
to promote transmission of specific anatomical and functional
characteristics. Neurophysiological investigation has established
correlations between mental phenomena and physicochemical
changes in the central nervous system, and specific electrical
responses of different areas of the brain can be identified follow¬
ing sensory stimulation of the eye with patterns, shapes, or move¬
ments. Advances in other scientific areas have proved that mental
functions and human behavior can be modified by surgery
(frontal lobotomy), by electronics (brain stimulation), and by
chemistry (drug administration), thus placing the mind within
experimental reach.

The ability to influence mental activity by direct manipula¬
tion of cerebral structures is certainly novel in the history of
man, and present objectives are not only to increase our under¬

67


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


68


PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND


Standing of the neurophysiological basis of mind but also to
influence cerebral mechanisms by means of instrumental manip¬
ulation.

The working hypotheses may be summarized as follows: (i)
There are basic mechanisms in the brain responsible for all
mental activities, including perceptions, emotions, abstract
thought, social relations, and the most refined artistic creations.
(2) These mechanisms may be detected, analyzed, influenced,
and sometimes substituted for by means of physical and chemical
technology. This approach does not claim that love or thoughts
are exclusively neurophysiological phenomena, but accepts the
obvious fact that the central nervous system is absolutely neces¬
sary for any behavioral manifestation. It plans to study the
mechanisms involved. (3) Predictable behavioral and mental
responses may be induced by direct manipulation of the brain.
(4) We can substitute intelligent and purposeful determination
of neuronal functions for blind, automatic responses.

In any evaluation of experimental results, we should remem¬
ber that there is always a congruence between the methodological
approach and findings obtained, in the sense that if we study
the brain with an oscilloscope, we can expect information about
spike potentials and other electrical data but not about the
chemical composition of the neurons. Psychological reactions
and behavioral performance often escape neurophysiological
methodology, and a coordinated interdisciplinary approach is
needed. Music does not exist in a single note but is the product
of a spatiotemporal sequence of many sounds. Mental activity
does not emanate from the activity of single neurons but from
the interaction of many neuronal fields. Rage, for example, is
characterized by changes in electrochemical, autonomic, sensory,
and motor functions which are overtly expressed in social rela¬
tions. Some electrical manifestations of rage have been recorded
as discharges at the single neuronal level, but the phenomenon
involves multilevel responses, and for its proper investigation
the whole organism should be observed in a social setting.

The development of new methodology to explore and com-


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


HYPOTHESIS FOR EXPERIMENTAL STUDY OF THE MIND 69

municate with the depth of the brain while the experimental
subject engages in spontaneous or evoked activities now enables
the scientist to analyze and control basic neurological mecha¬
nisms of the mind and represents a unique means of understand¬
ing the material and functional bases of individual structure.
The future should see collaboration between those investigators
who formerly studied neuronal physiology while disregarding
behavior and other scientists who have been interested in be¬
havior while ignoring the brain.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


9


Historical Evolution of Physical Control
of the Brain


Experimental Facts

Frog muscle contracted when
stimuated by electricity. Volta,
1800; Galvani, 1791; DuBois-
Reymond, 1848.

Electrical stimulation oC the
brain in anesthetized dog
evoked localized body and
limb movements. Fritsch and
Hitzig, 1870.

Stimulation of the diencephalon
in unanesthetized cats evoked
well-organized motor effects
and emotional reactions. Hess,
* 932 -

In single animals, learning, con¬
ditioning, instrumental re¬
sponses, pain, and pleasure
have been evoked or inhibited
by electrical stimulation of the
brain in rats, cats, and mon¬
keys. Delgado et al. 1954; Olds


Implications

"Vital spirits” are not essential
for biological activities. Elec¬
trical stimuli under man’s
control can initiate and mod¬
ify vital processes.

The brain is excitable. Electrical
stimulation of the cerebral
cortex can produce move¬
ments.

Motor and emotional manifesta¬
tions may be evoked by elec¬
trical stimulation of the brain
in awake animals.

Psycholt^ical phenomena may
be controlled by electrical
stimulation of specific areas of
the brain.


70


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


EVOLUTION OF PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE BRAIN 7 1

and Milner, 1954; see bibliog¬
raphy in Sheer, 1961.

In colonies of cats and monkeys. Social behavior may be con-
aggression, dominance, mount- trolled by radio stimulation

ing, and other social inter- of specific areas of the brain,

actions have been evoked,
modified, or inhibited by radio
stimulation of specific cerebral
areas. Delgado, 1955, 1964*

In patients, brain stimulation Human mental functions may
during surgical interventions be influenced by electrical
or with electrodes implanted stimulation of specific areas of
for days or months has blocked the brain,
the thinking process, inhibited
speech and movement, or
in other cases has evoked pleas¬
ure, laughter, friendliness, ver¬
bal output, hostility, fear,
hallucinations, and memories.

Delgado et al. 1952, 1968;

Penfield and Jasper, 1954; see
bibliography in Ramey and
O’Doherty, i960.

Summary

Autonomic and somatic functions, individual and social be¬
havior, emotional and mental reactions may be evoked, main¬
tained, modified, or inhibited, both in animals and in man, by
electrical stimulation of specific cerebral structures. Physical
control of many brain functions is a demonstrated fact, but the
possibilities and limits of this control are still little known.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


Part III


EXPERIMENTAL
CONTROL OF BRAIN
FUNCTIONS IN
BEHAVING SUBJECTS


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


In our present technological environment, we are used to the
idea that machines can be controlled from a distance by means
of radio signals. The doors of a garage can be opened or closed
by pushing a button in our car; the channels and volume of a
television set can be adjusted by pressing the corresponding
knobs of a small telecommand instrument without moving from
a comfortable armchair; and even orbiting capsules can now
be directed from tracking stations on earth. These accomplish¬
ments should familiarize us with the idea that we may also con¬
trol the biological functions of living organisms from a distance.
Cats, monkeys, or human beings can be induced to flex a limb,
to reject food, or to feel emotional excitement under the in¬
fluence of electrical impulses reaching the depths of their brains
through radio waves purposefully sent by an investigator.

This reality has introduced a variety of scientific and philo¬
sophical questions, and to understand the significance, potentials,
and limitations of brain control, it is convenient to review
briefly the basis for normal behavioral activity and the method¬
ology for its possible artificial modification, and then to consider
some representative examples of electrical control of behavior
in both animals and man.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


lO


Physicochemical Bases of Behavioral
Activity


In the vegetable as well as in the animal kingdom, the dynamics
of biological processes are related to ionic movements and elec¬
trical changes across the membranes which separate cells from
the surrounding medium. For example, during the process of
photosynthesis, the leaf of a tree captures energy from the sun
and a negative potential is created on its receptive surface. In
a similar manner, activation of a squid axon, a frog muscle,
or the human brain is accompanied by a negative wave which
invades cellular membranes and then disappears. This trans¬
membrane change of potential induces a flow of electrical cur¬
rents into the cellular cytoplasm and surrounding conducting
fluids. Cellular activity may therefore be investigated by record¬
ing the electrical potentials appearing across the membranes
or by detecting differences in potential which appear in the
extracellular fluid, even if the recording electrodes are placed
at a considerable distance from the electromotive source. This
is the basic principle of recording electrical activity of the heart
(electrocardiogram = EKG) through electrodes placed on the
extremities, or of studying electrical potentials of the brain
(electroencephalogram — EEG) by means of leads attached to
the scalp. If electrodes are placed closer to the source of nega¬
tivity, for example in the depth of the brain, recordings will be
more accurate and may reveal the location of generators of

76


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


PHYSICOCHEMICAL BASES OF BEHAVIORAL ACTIVITY 77

electrical activity. Conversely, by using an external potential,
an electrical field may be established through the extracellular
fluid, and some of this current flows through the cellular mem¬
branes, modifying their charge and permeability and producing
the self-propagating process called “stimulation.”

In order to stimulate, it is necessary to reduce quickly the
positive charge which normally exists on the surface of a resting
cell until it reaches a critical point of local depolarization. Then
the ionic permeability of the membrane is modified, triggering
a pre-established sequence of electrical and chemical phenom¬
ena. Excitation takes place in the vicinity of the negative elec¬
trode (cathode) because the application of negative charges will
neutralize the normally existing positivity at the external part
of the cellular membrane. When stimulation is over, the posi¬
tive polarity is re-established on the membrane surface with the
aid of energy provided by specific chemical reactions, and the
cell is ready for a new stimulation. The relatively simple proc¬
esses of depolarization and repolarization of cell membranes are
the essential elements of neuronal excitation, and they are
responsible for the extraordinary complexity of all behavioral
performance.

Our knowledge gap between understanding electrical events
at the cellular level and deciphering the chain of phenomena
taking place during the response of a whole organism is cer¬
tainly formidable. How can we explain activities such as walk¬
ing, problem solving, or ideation in terms of polarization and
repolarization of membranes? Behavior certainly cannot occur
without concomitant spike potentials and ionic exchanges,
but the same statement holds true for oxygen and sugar con¬
sumption, and we must diflEerentiate the mechanisms supporting
basic nonspecific cellular activities, such as metabolic require¬
ments, from the mechanisms more specifically related to be¬
havioral responses. Electrical activity of the neurons seems to
have the dual role of indicating nonspecific activity and trans¬
mitting coded infonnation. This ability to transmit coded in¬
formation is the most important and least understood property


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


78 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

of the nerve cell, and it represents the functional unit for nervous
communication. In architecture, given a number of brick units
an infinite number of different houses can be constructed. We
need to know both the properties of the individual bricks and
the pattern of their organization in order to ascertain the
properties and qualities of the final building. The characteristics
of behavioral responses are determined by the combination of
many depolarization phenomena, organized in space and re¬
peated sequentially in time. Their arrangement is often so com¬
plex that it defies experimental analysis, and we must begin by
examining very simple phenomena. The squid axon was for
years a popular object of investigation in neurophysiology.
Great caution should be observed, however, when applying
experimental results with that preparation to the understanding
of motor responses or mental activity. We should remember
that knowledge of the letters of the alphabet will not explain
the meaning of a phrase or reveal the beauty of a poem.

In addition to investigating the spontaneous changes in
membrane potentials, we can artificially depolarize membranes
by electrical stimulation of cerebral neuronal pools in order to
investigate their functional organization and behavioral conse¬
quences for the whole organism. Both of these experimental
approaches should be used simultaneously in order to correlate
cellular functions with behavioral results. Our present knowl¬
edge of the physicochemical bases of biological activity, which
has an extensive bibliography (23, 182, 203), permits statement
of the following principles; (1) All behavioral manifestations
including their mental aspects require the existence of waves
of negativity accompanied by electrical and chemical changes
at the cellular level. (2) Membrane depolarization, artificially
induced by electrical or chemical means, may be followed by
observable behavioral manifestations. (3) While the complexity
of these responses is extraordinary and many of their aspects are
unknown, explanations of motor behavior and psychic activity
do not require “vital spirits” or any other metaphysical principle


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


PHYSICOCHEMICAL BASES OF BEHAVIORAL ACTIVITY 79

because they are related to physical and chemical laws which
can be investigated experimentally.

The classical experiments of Galvani, showing that the legs
of a decapitated frog contract in response to electrical stimula¬
tion, are repeated many times every year in high school and
college laboratories. These simple experiments demonstrate
that a process of life, muscle contraction, can be elicited at the
will of the investigator as many times as electricity is applied
to the tissue. In the absence of stimulation, the legs do not con¬
tract. If the cells of the muscle are dead, excitability and con-
tractability are lost and the preparation does not respond. The
contraction of the frog’s legs is similar regardless of whether
the muscle is stimulated directly through its motor nerve or
through the brain, and this muscle action is also comparable
to its activation during voluntary movements of the intact frog.
The applied electricity does not create the limb movement but
acts only as a depolarizing agent, starting a chain of events which
depends on the properties of the stimulated organ.

The reliability and apparent simplicity of the muscle con¬
traction may be misleading because in reality the contraction
depends on tremendously complex processes which include:
depolarization of the resting membrane, changes in its permea¬
bility, precipitous exchange of potassium, sodium, and other
ions, creation of electrical fields, reorientation of proteic mole¬
cules within the muscle fiber with a shortening in the length
of its chain, decomposition and synthesis of adenosin triphos¬
phate, exchange of phosphoric acids, degradation of hexosaphos-
phate into lactic acid, and many other enzymatic and biochemical
reactions which follow each other according to a genetically
determined plan within the muscle fiber and independent from
the agent which initiates them. The mechanisms for contraction
and relaxation of the muscle fiber are pre-established in the
biological structure of the cells. Electricity^ like the nervous
system itself, acts as a trigger for these processes. This principle
is fundamental for an understanding of the electrical control of


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


8 o PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

biological functions. Organisms are composed of a large number
of biological sequences, some of them inherited and others
learned through experience. When a chain reaction has started,
it proceeds according to an intrinsic plan which can be modified
by feedback or by the arrival of new stimulations. In some cases
the trigger may be nonspecific and, for example, muscular
contraction can be initiated by mechanical, thermal, osmotic,
chemical, electrical, or neuronal stimulation. In investigations
of the brain as well as the muscle, electrical activation is prefer¬
able because it is not harmful for the cells and permits repeated
studies of the same biological processes. By applying electricity
we can activate pre-established functional mechanisms of a
structure and discover its possible role in spontaneous behavior.
By means of ESB (electrical stimulation of the brain) it is
possible to control a variety of functions—a movement, a glan¬
dular secretion, or a specific mental manifestation, depending
on the chosen target. Necessary methodology and examples of
selected results are discussed in the following chapters.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


Methodology for Direct Communication
with the Brain


The depth o£ the central nervous system can be reached very
easily through the natural windows of sensory receptors. Stimuli
such as patterns of light travel fast from the eye’s retina through
optic pathways to the visual cortex located in the occipital lobe.
Would it be possible to explore the local activity of cortical
neurons during the process of symbolic perception? Could we
evoke similar sensations by direct stimulation of specific neurons?
Can we reach the mind of an individual without using the nor¬
mal ports of sensory entry? Can we direct the functions of the
brain artificially? These and similar problems have attracted
the interest of many investigators, but the brain is well protected
by layers of membranes, spinal fluid, bone, and teguments, a
formidable shield which for a long time has kept the secrets of
mental functions away from scientific curiosity.


Implantation of Electrodes in Animals

Starting in the last century, many investigators have explored
the brain, first in animals and recently in human patients as
part of diagnosis and therapy. In these studies it was necessary
to open both skin and skull, and because the procedure was
painful it was mandatory to use anesthesia. It blocked pain
perception, but it also inhibited some of the most important

8i


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


82 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

functions of the nervous system. Emotions, consciousness, and
free behavior were certainly absent under heavy sedation, and
for many years scientists directed their attention to sleeping,
subjects and overlooked the complexity of awake brains. Text¬
books of cerebral physiology were concerned with pathways,
connections, reflexes, posture, and movement; mental functions
and behavior were considered to belong to a different discipline.

The methodological breakthrough which made it possible
to study the brain of behaving animals came in the 1930s when
W. R. Hess (106) devised a procedure to implant very fine wires
within the brain of anesthetized cats. After the effects of anes¬
thesia had disappeared, the relatively free and normal animal
could be electrically stimulated by connecting long leads to the
terminals of the implanted electrodes. This procedure was
refined in the early 1950s (47, 49) by reducing the size of the
electrodes while increasing the number of intracerebral contacts
and using aseptic precautions during implantation. Surgical
accuracy in reaching chosen cerebral targets was also improved
by means of micromanipulators and a precise system of ana¬
tomical coordinates which made it possible to reach similar
structures in different subjects. Using biologically inert mate¬
rials such as gold, platinum, or stainless steel wires insulated
with teflon allows the electrodes to be left inside of the brain
indefinitely. A diagram of the cerebral implantation of one
assembly of seven contacts is shown in Figure 1 and the X ray
of the head of a monkey after implantation is seen in Figure 2.
Through a small opening in the skull, the shaft is introduced
down to a predetermined depth and is secured with dental
cement at the point where it passes through the skull. Then the
upper portion of the shaft is bent over the bone surface and
secured again a short distance away, and the terminal socket is
exteriorized on the head. Each contact of the socket corresponds
to a determined point in the depth of the brain which is acces¬
sible merely by plugging in a connector, a procedure as simple
as connecting any electrical appliance to a wall outlet. This
technique has been used for FSB in thousands of animals in


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


Figure /

Diagramatic representation of an electrode assembly implanted within the
brain and anchored to the skull. The depth of the brain is thus accessible
simply by plugging in a connector {52).


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


84 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND


Figure 2

X rays of a monkey’s head showing two assemblies of electrodes implanted
in the frontal lobes and in the thalamus (49).

many laboratories around the world, and there is ample experi¬
ence of its efficiency, accuracy, and safety, resolving the initial
skepticism that introduction of wires into the brain would be
technically difficult, dangerous for the subject, and grossly dis¬
ruptive of normal functions. It is true that implantation of
electrodes destroys neurons along the path of penetration, break¬
ing capillary vessels and later producing a local reaction involv¬
ing the formation of a thin fibrotic capsule along the implanta¬
tion tract. It has been proven, however, that local hemorrhage
is neglible and that because of the well-known functional re¬
dundancy of neural tissue with abundance of duplication in its
circuits, the destruction of a relatively small group of neurons


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


METHODOLOGY FOR DIRECT COMMUNICATION WITH BRAIN 85


Figure

Chimpanzees Paddy (left) and Carlos, each with 100 intracerebral electrodes
and boxes for instrumentation. In spite of this massive implantation, no
detectable behavioral deficits have been found, and the animak are still
alive and in excellent health two years after surgery.


does not produce any detectable deficit. The thin reactive en¬
capsulation is electrically conductive and is not an obstacle
to stimulation or recording. Beyond this o. 1-0.2 millimeter
capsule, the brain appears histologically normal. Judged by the
absence of abnormal electrical activity, the reliability of effects
evoked by ESB, and the consistency of thresholds of excitability
through months of experimentation, the electrodes seem to be
well tolerated. Some of our monkeys have had electrodes in
their heads for more than four years. The anchorage is very


httpVwww.propheticexplorer.com


86


PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND


solid, and after some initial pulling and scratching of the ter¬
minal sockets, the monkeys seem to ignore their presence.

As shown in Figure 3, as many as 100 contacts have been
implanted in the brain of some chimpanzees without any notice¬
able neurophysiological or behavioral disturbance, and in sev¬
eral monkeys, contacts have been placed in areas as critical and
delicate as the respiratory centers of the medulla without any
surgical problems. Electrodes have been used in laboratory ani¬
mals such as rats, cats, and monkeys, and also in less frequently
studied species including crickets, roosters, dolphins, and brave
bulls.


Electrodes in the Human Brain

Our present knowledge of the central nervous system is based
principally on investigations in animals. Experience has shown
that many questions about implantation in humans, such as
biological tolerance of electrodes by the neural tissue, can be
successfully answered in cats or in lower species. Some of the
electrochemical events of neural conduction can be analyzed
just as adequately in squids as in manunals, and for certain
studies of memory, the octopus has proven an excellent subject.
The rat has been—and still is—the animal preferred by experi¬
mental psychologists because it is a small and inexpensive mam¬
mal which can be used in large quantities to provide behavioral
results suitable for statistical evaluation. The limited behavioral
repertory of lower animals, however, cannot be compared with
the complex activities of monkeys and apes. These species, being
closer relatives of man, are more appropriate subjects for the
neurophysiological study of intelligent behavior, and when
we want to investigate the highest psychological functions of
the brain which involve verbal communication, there is no
possible substitute for man himself.

The human brain, like any other part of the body, may suffer
traumatic accidents, tumors, or illnesses, and it has often been
necessary to explore the affected areas in order to identify struc¬
tures, assess abnormality of the tissues, test excitability, and


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


METHODOLOGY FOR DIRECT COMMUNICATION WITH BRAIN 87

leam the location of important functions which should not be
disrupted during surgical procedures. Conscious participation
of the patient was required in some of these explorations, for
example, to ascertain whether the aura of epileptic attacks could
be triggered by electrical stimulation of a specific cortical point;
thus providing information about the possible source of epileptic
discharges which could be removed by surgery. For this kind
of investigation the brain was exposed under local anesthesia,
presenting an exceptional opportunity to study behavioral and
psychological responses evoked by ESB in fully awake subjects.
The most extensive work in this area has been carried out by
Penfield and his associates in Montreal (174), and a considerable
number of similar studies have been performed by other neuro¬
surgeons as well (g, 8, 97, 124, 163, 215).

Exploration of the exposed brain has, however, some obvious
limitations. It has to be brief to avoid prolongation of surgery;
electrodes are usually held in place by hand, causing variability
in the applied mechanical pressure; the exposed brain is subject
to possible thermal, mechanical, and chemical trauma; the
cortical areas are identified only by visual inspection; and the
physical and psychological stress of the patient undergoing
operation introduces factors difficult to control. Most of these
handicaps can be avoided with the use of implanted electrodes,
and given the experience of animal experimentation it was
natural that some investigators should contemplate the applica¬
tion of this methodology to patients for diagnostic and thera¬
peutic purposes (19, 59, 98). Neurosurgeons had already proved
that the central nervous system is not as delicate as most people
believe, and during therapeutic surgery parts of the cerebral
tissue have been cut, frozen, cauterized, or ablated with negli¬
gible adverse effects on the patients. Exploratory introduction of
needles into the cerebral ventricles is a well-known and relatively
safe clinical procedure, and since electrodes are smaller in diam¬
eter than these needles, their introduction into the brain should
be even less traumatic. Experience has confirmed the safety and
usefulness of long-term implantation of electrodes in man, and
the procedure has been used in specialized medical centers around


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


88 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

the world to help thousands of patients suffering from epilepsy,
involuntary movements, intractable pain, anxiety neurosis, and
other cerebral disturbances. In general several assemblies of fine
electrodes with a total of twenty to forty contacts are placed on
the surface and/or in the depth of the brain, with the terminal
connectors exteriorized through the scalp and protected by a
small head bandage (see Figure 4). In some cases the electrodes
have remained for nearly two years with excellent tolerance.

Leaving wires inside of a thinking brain may appear unpleasant
or dangerous, but actually the many patients who have under¬
gone this experience have not been concerned about the fact of
being wired, nor have they felt any discomfort due to the pres¬
ence of conductors in their heads. Some women have shown their
feminine adaptability to circumstances by wearing attractive
hats or wigs to conceal their electrical headgear, and many
people have been able to enjoy a normal life as outpatients,
returning to the clinic periodically for examination and stimula¬
tion. In a few cases in which contacts were located in pleasurable
areas, patients have had the opportunity to stimulate their own
brains by pressing the button of a portable instrument, and
this procedure is reported to have therapeutic benefits.

Chronically implanted electrodes enable careful diagnostic
explorations to be performed without time limit, and repeated
electrical excitations or well-controlled coagulations can be
graded according to the reactions of the patient. As a bonus,
important information about psychophysiological correlations,
providing direct knowledge about the cerebral basis of human
behavior, is being acquired. In our studies (60, 109, 150), an
interview situation was selected as the method most likely to
offer a continuous supply of verbal and behavioral data. While
the electrical activity of eight pairs of cerebral points was being
recorded, we taped about one hour of conversation between
therapist and patient. Notes of the observable behavior were
also taken. During the interview, electrical stimulations of the
brain were applied for 5 seconds with intervals of three or more
minutes, and each significant point was explored several times.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


METHODOLOGY FOR DIRECT COMMUNICATION WITH BRAIN 89


Figure 4

Two girk who were suffering from epileptic seizures and behavioral dis¬
turbances requiring implantation of electrodes in the brain for diagnostic
and thera|>eutic purposes. Under the cap, each patient wears a “stimo-
ceiver," used to stimulate the brain by radio and to send electrical signak
of brain activity by telemetry while the patients are completely free within
the hospital ward (60). One example of electrical recordings is shown in
Figfure 17.


Two-way Radio Communication with the Brain

Electronic technology has reached a high level of sophistica¬
tion, and two-way radio communication with automobiles, air¬
planes, and outer space vehicles is commonplace today. The
notable lag in development of similar instrumentation for


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


90


PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND


Figure 5

A monkey instrumented with 28 implanted electrodes, a two-channel tele¬
metric unit on top of the head, and a three-channel radio stimulator
around the neck. The animal has learned to press a lever to obtain food.
With this methodology, brain functions can be explored by remote control
without disturbing the behavior under observation.


commundadon with the depth of the brain reflects the already
mentioned unbalanced evolution of our technological civiliza¬
tion, which seems more interested in accumulating power than
in understanding and influencing the basic mechanisms of the
human mind.

This gap is now being filled, and as Figures 4 and 5 show, it
is already possible to equip animals or human beings with
minute instruments called “stimoceivers" for radio transmission
and reception of electrical messages to and from the brain in
completely unrestrained subjects. Microminiaturization of the
instrument's electronic components permits control of all param-


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


METHODOLOGY FOR DIRECT COMMUNICATION WITH BRAIN Q1

eters of excitation for radio stimulation of three different points
within the brain and also telemetric recording of three channels
of intracerebral electrical activity. In animals, the stimoceiver
may be anchored to the skull, and different members of a colony
can be studied without disturbing their spontaneous relations
within a group. Behavior such as aggression can be evoked or
inhibited. In patients, the stimoceiver may be strapped to the
head bandage, permitting electrical stimulation and monitoring
of intracerebral activity without disturbing spontaneous activi¬
ties.

Stimoceivers offer great promise in the investigation, diagnosis,
and therapy of cerebral disturbances in man. Preliminary infor¬
mation about use in patients with temporal lobe seizurees (see
Figure 4) has demonstrated the following advantages over other
methods of intracerebral exploration (60): (1) The patient is
instrumented simply by plugging the stimoceiver to the head
sockets- ( 2 ) There is no disturbance of the spontaneous in¬
dividual or social behavior of the patient. (3) The subject is
under continuous medical supervision, and stimulations and
recordings may be made day and night. (4) Studies are carried
out during spontaneous social interactions in the hospital en¬
vironment without introducing factors of anxiety or stress. (5)
The brain in severely disturbed patients may be explored with¬
out confinement to a recording room. (6) As connecting wires
are not necessary there is no risk of dislodgment of electrodes
during abnormal behavior. (7) Therapeutic programed stimula¬
tion of the brain can be prolonged for any necessary amount of
time.

It is reasonable to speculate that in the near future the stimo¬
ceiver may provide the essential link from man to computer to
man, with a reciprocal feedback between neurons and instru¬
ments which represents a new orientation for the medical
control of neurophysiological functions. For example, it is con¬
ceivable that the localized abnormal electrical activity which
announces the imminence of an epileptic attack could be picked
up by implanted electrodes, telemetered to a distant instrument


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND


92

room, tape-recorded, and analyzed by a computer capable of
recognizing abnormal electrical patterns. Identification of the
specific electrical disturbance could trigger the emission of
radio signals to activate the patient’s stimoceiver and apply an
electrical stimulation to a determined inhibitory area of the
brain, thus blocking the onset of the convulsive episode.

This speculation is supported by the following experiments
completed in June, 1969, in collaboration with Drs. Johnston,
Wallace, and Bradley. Chimpanzee Paddy (Figure 3), while free
in her cage, was equipped with a stimoceiver to telemeter the
brain activity of her right and left amygdaloid nuclei to an
adjacent room, where these waves were received, tape-recorded,
and automatically analyzed by an on-line analog computer.
This instrument was instructed to recognize a specific pattern
of waves, a burst of spindles, which was normally present in
both amygdaloid nuclei for about one second several times
per minute. The computer was also instructed to activate a
stimulator, and each time the spindles appeared, radio signals
were sent back to Paddy’s brain to stimulate a point in her
reticular formation known to have negative reinforcing prop¬
erties. In this way electrical stimulation of one cerebral struc¬
ture was contingent on the production of a specific EEG pattern
by another area of the brain, and the whole process of identifica¬
tion of information and command of action was decided by the
on-line computer.

Results showed that about two hours after the brain-to-com-
puter-to brain feedback was established, spindling activity of the
amygdaloid nucleus was reduced to 50 per cent; and six days
later, with daily two-hour periods of feedback, spindles were
drastically reduced to only 1 per cent of normal occurrence,
and the chimpanzee was quieter, less attentive, and less moti¬
vated during behavioral testing, although able to perform
olfactory and visual tasks without errors.

The computer was then disconnected, and two weeks later
the EEG and Paddy’s behavior returned to normal. The ex¬
periment was repeated several times with similar results, sup-


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


METHODOLOGY FOR DIRECT COMMUNICATION WITH BRAIN Qg

porting the conclusions that direct communication can be
established between brain and computer, circumvening normal
sensory organs, and also that automatic learning is possible by
feeding signals directly into specific neuronal structures without
conscious participation.

One of the limiting factors in these studies was the existence
of wires leading from the brain to the stimoceiver outside of
the scalp. The wires represented a possible portal of entry for
infection and could be a hindrance to hair grooming in spite of
their small size. It would obviously be far more desirable to
employ minute instruments which could be implanted com¬
pletely beneath the skin. For this purpose we have developed
in our laboratory a small three-channel stimulator which can
be placed subcutaneously and which has terminal leads to be
implanted within the brain (Figure 6). The instrument is solid
state, has no batteries, and can work indefinitely. Necessary elec¬
trical energy, remote control of parameters of stimulation, and
choice of channels are provided by transdermal coupling, using
a small coil which is activated by frequency-modulated radio
signals. In February, 1969, an experiment was begun in monkey
Nona and in chimpanzee Suzi who were equipped with sub¬
cutaneous stimulators to activate their brains from time to time
for the rest of their lives. Terminal contacts were located in
motor pathways in order to evoke flexion of the contralateral
leg, an effect simple enough to be observed and quantified with¬
out difficulty. Study of Nona and Suzi and preliminary investiga¬
tions in other animals have demonstrated that subcutaneous
instrumentation is efficient, reliable, and well tolerated. Be¬
havioral responses were consistent, and local motor excitability
was not modified by repeated experimentation. Thus the techni¬
cal problems of stimulating any desired area of the brain for
as long as necessary in the absence of conductors passing through
the skin have been solved, therapeutic and scientific possibilities
have been multiplied, and the comfort of subjects has been con¬
siderably increased.

The next technical step will be to combine transdermal


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


stimulator. This instrument
can be used for life, so that
Chimpanzee Siui (ri^t) has
back underneath the skin.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


METHODOLOGY FOR DIRECT COMMUNICATION WITH BRAIN 95


Stimulation of the brain with transdermal telemetry of EEC.
In this case the stimoceiver will not be outside the skin as it
was in Paddy (Figure 3), nor will it be limited to only trans¬
dermal stimulation (Figure 6) as in Nona and Suzi: the whole
instrument will be totally subcutaneous. The technology for
nonsensory communication between brains and computers
through the intact skin is already at our fingertips, and its con¬
sequences are difficult to predict. In the past the progress of
civilization has tremendously m£^ified the power of our senses,
muscles, and skills. Now we are adding a new dimension: the
direct interface between brains and machines. Although true,
this statement is perhaps too spectacular and it requires cautious
clarification. Our present knowledge regarding the coding of
information, mechanisms of perception, and neuronal bases of
behavior is so elemental that it is highly improbable that
electrical correlates of thoughts or emotions could be picked


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


96 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

up, transmitted, and electrically applied to the suitable struc¬
ture of a different subject in order to be recognized and to
trigger related thoughts or emotions. It is, however, already pos¬
sible to induce a large variety of responses, from motor effects
to emotional reactions and intellectual manifestations, by direct
electrical stimulation of the brain. Also, several investigators
have learned to identify patterns of electrical activity (which a
computer could also reco^ize) localized in specific areas of the
brain and related to determined phenomena such as perception
of smells or visual perception of edges and movements. We are
advancing rapidly in the pattern recognition of electrical cor¬
relates of behavior and in the methodology for two-way radio
communication between brain and computers.

Fears have been expressed that this new technology brings
with it the threat of possible unwanted and unethical remote
control of the cerebral activities of man by other men, but as
will be discussed later, this danger is quite improbable and is
outweighed by the expected clinical and scientific benefits.
Electronic knowledge and microminiaturization have progressed
so much that the limits appear biological rather than technologi¬
cal. Our greatest need is for more experimental information
about the neuronal mechanisms related to behavioral and
mental processes, and research in unrestricted subjects promises
to reveal new understanding of normal minds and more efficient
therapy of disturbed brains.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


12


Electrical Stimulation of the Brain (ESB)


The master control for the whole body resides in the brain, and
the new methodology of implanted electrodes has provided
direct access to the centers which regulate most of the body’s
activities. The brain also constitutes the material substratum of
mental functions, and by exploring its working neurons we have
the possibility of investigating experimentally some of the
classical problems of mind-brain correlations. In addition to
new answers, implantation of electrodes has introduced new
problems: Is it feasible to induce a robotlike performance in
animals and men by pushing the buttons of a cerebral radio
stimulator? Could drives, desires, and thoughts be placed under
the artificial command of electronics? Can personality be influ¬
enced by ESB? Can the mind be physically controlled?

In scientific literature there is already a substantial amount
of information demonstrating the remarkable effects induced
by ESB. The heart, for instance, can be stopped for a few
beats, slowed down, or accelerated by suitable stimulation
of determined cortical and subcortical structures, illustrat¬
ing the physiological reality that it is the brain which controls
the heart, and not vice versa. Respiratory rate and amplitude
have been driven by ESB; gastric secretion and motility have also
been modified by brain stimulation; the diameter of the pupil
can be adjusted at will (Figure 7) from maximum constriction
to maximum dilatation, as if it were a photographic camera,
simply by changing the intensity knob of an electric stimulator

97


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


Figure 7

The diameter of the pupil can be electrically controlled as if it were the
diaphragm of a photographic camera. Above, the normal eyes, and below,
constriction of the right pupil evoked by stimulation of the hypothalamus.
Some effects of £SB such as this are indefatigable and can be maintained
for days as long as stimulation is applied (61).


ELECTRICAL STIMUI^TION OF THE BRAIN QQ

connected with the hypothalamic region of the brain (61). Most
visceral functions have been influehced by as have sensory
perceptions, motor activities, ^d naental funct^^
than examine each type of finding in detail, we have selected a
few typical examples to illustrate the niain aspects of electri
control of the brain and its behavioral consequences.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


Motor Responses


Behavior is the result of motor activities which range from a
simple muscular twitch to the creation of a work of art. If we
consider the skill involved in nest building, the strategies of
fighting animals, or the precision of piano playing, it is obvious
that these activities are not solely the result of physical and
chemical processes of muscular contraction but depend on con¬
scious direction—on the refined complexity of their cerebral
command.

Very little is known about the automatic aspects of voluntary
acts, how purpose is related to performance, or how contractions
are organized in time and space. Present methodology, however,
has placed some of these questions within experimental reach.
The fact that ESB can induce simple movements was discovered
in the nineteenth century, and today we know that the cerebral
organization of motility is located mainly in the cortex of the
parietal lobe. Stimulation of this area induces movements on the
opposite side of the body, while its destruction results in paral¬
ysis. These findings have been expressed in attractive diagrams
showing the motor areas of the brain as an “homunculus” lying
upside down in the parietal cortex, with a big face and a big
thumb, like a caricature of a little man in charge of motility.
This image was partly responsible for consideration of the
cortex as the supreme and intelligent organizer of behavior.

However, further research demonstrated that motor responses
obtained from this cortex are rather crude and that other areas

lOO


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


MOTOR RESPONSES


lOl


in the depth of the brain have a decisive role in the organization
of skilled motility. Modern concepts suggest that the cortex
should not be considered the highest hierarchical structure of
the motor system or even the starting point of motor impulses,
but rather a way station, one more link in the loops of sensory-
motor correlations. The multiplicity and complexity of motor
representation is logical when we consider the tremendous
variety of behavioral manifestations which constitute the only
means of communication between the individual and his sur¬
roundings. This relation requires a motor performance with
precise temporal and spatial coordination among many func¬
tional units and the processing of a great deal of information
for the adjustment and guidance of movements and for instan¬
taneous adaptation to changes in circumstances. Because of the
complexity of these mechanisms, it has been assumed that the
artificial ESB could never induce refined and purposeful motor
performance. The surprising fact is that, depending on its loca¬
tion, electrical stimulation of the brain is able to evoke not only
simple responses but also complex and well-organized behavior
which may be indistinguishable from spontaneous activity.

Motor Activation in Animals

A classical experiment for medical students is to anesthetize
a rabbit or other small mammal and to expose its brain in order
to stimulate the motor cortex. In this way simple responses, such
as contraction or extension of the limbs, may be demonstrated.
These responses usually involve a small group of muscles, are
stereotyped, and lack adaptability, but in spite of these limita¬
tions students are generally impressed by seeing the movements
of an animal placed under the command of a human being. The
demonstration is far more elegant if the experimental animal
is completely awake and equipped with electrodes implanted in
the brain. Then the responses appear more physiological, and
we can investigate the mutual influence of spontaneous and
evoked motility.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


Figure 8

Electrical stimulation of the right-side motor cortex produced flexion of the
left hind limb proportional in amplitude to the electrical intensity used.
Observe the animal’s harmonious postural adaptation to the evoked move¬
ment and lack of emotional disturbance. During these experiments cats
were alert and friendly as usual, purring and seeking to be petted.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


MOTOR RESPONSES


103


Electrical stimulation of the right-side motor cortex o£ a cat
may produce flexion of the left hind leg with an amplitude of
movement proportional to the applied intensity. For example,
in one experiment when the animal was standing on all fours,
the intensity of 1.2 milliamperes evoked flexion of the leg barely
off the ground. At 1.5 milliamperes, the hind leg rose about 4
centimeters, and when 1.8 milliamperes were applied, leg flexion
was complete (Figure 8). The evoked movement began slowly,
developed smoothly, reached its peak in about two seconds, and
lasted until the end of the stimulation. This motor performance
could be repeated as many times as desired, and it was accom¬
panied by a postural adjustment of the whole body which in¬
cluded lowering of the head, raising of the pelvis, and a slight
weight shift to the left in order to maintain equilibrium on only
three legs. The electrical stimulation did not produce any
emotional disturbance, and the cat was as alert and friendly as
usual, rubbing its head against the experimenter, seeking to be
petted, and purring.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


104 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

If, however, we tried to prevent the evoked effect by holding
the left hind leg with our hands, the cat stopped purring,
struggled to get free, and shook its leg. Apparently the evoked
motility was not unpleasant, but attempts to prevent it were
disturbing for the animal, suggesting that stimulation produced
not a blind motor movement but also a desire to move, and the
cat cooperated spontaneously with the electrical command,
adjusting its posture before performing the leg flexion. It was
evident that the animal was not in a hurry and took its time in
preparing for the induced movement. Preliminary adjustments
were not seen if the cat’s posture was already adequate for the
leg flexion. In cases of conflict between the spontaneous move¬
ments of the animal and those elicited by the experimenter, the
final result depended on the relative strength of the opposing
signals. For example, if the cat was walking, threshold stimula¬
tions of 1.2 milliamperes for slight leg flexion were ineffective.
If the eat was stimulated while jumping off a table to reach
food, stronger intensities of up to 1,5 milliamperes, which
usually evoked a clear motor response, were also ineffective;
physiological activity seemed to override the artificial excitation
and the cat landed with perfectly coordinated movements. If
the intensity was increased to 2 milliamperes, stimulation effects
were prepotent over voluntary activities; leg flexion started
during the jump, coordination was disrupted, and the cat landed
badly. A similar experiment is described on page 186.

In monkeys, electrical stimulation of motor areas has evoked
contralateral movements similar to those described for the cat.
The stimulated animal showed no signs of fear or hostility
(Figure 9), nor did he interrupt his spontaneous behavior,
such as walking, climbing, or eating. Evoked and spontaneous
movements influenced each other, and the final response was a
combination of both.

Simultaneous stimulation of two cerebral points with opposite
effects could establish a dynamic balance without any visible
effect. For example, if excitation of one point produced turning
of the head to the right‘and another one produced turning to the


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


MOTOR RESPONSES


Figure 9

Stimulation o£ the temporal lobe (rhinal fissure) induced opening of the
mouth and movement of the arm without signs of fear or hostility (49).

left, the monkey did not move his head at all when both points
were stimulated. This equilibrium could be maintained at dif¬
ferent intensity levels of simultaneous stimulation.

Brain stimulation of different areas has elicited most of the
simple movements observed in spontaneous behavior, including
frowning, opening and closing the eyes, op>ening, closing, and
deviation of the mouth, movements of the tongue, chewing,
contraction of the face, movements of the ears, turns, twists,
flexions, and extensions of the head and body, and movements
of the arms, legs, and fingers. We must conclude that most if
not all of the possible simple movements can be evoked by elec¬
trical stimulation of the brain. Abnormal responses, disorganized


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


106 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

movements, loss of equilibrium (as shown in Figure lo), and
epileptiform convulsions have also been produced, depending
on the cerebral area and parameters of stimulation investigated.

Turning now to more complex responses, we must realize
that normal activities in animals and man involve a succession
of different acts well coordinated in space and in time. Walking,
for example, is a displacement of the body with alternate flexion
and extension of the extremities requiring refined control of
strength, amplitude, and speed for the contraction of different
groups of muscles with precise timing and mutual correlation
aimed toward a common goal. In addition, postural adaptation
and corrective movements of the head and body are necessary.
To induce walking in an animal by programed electrical stimula¬
tion of individual muscles would be a formidable task requiring
the wiring of perhaps loo muscles, the use of a complex com¬
puter, sophisticated timing mechanisms, large numbers of stim¬
ulators with instantaneously adjustable intensities, many sensors,
and the help of a team of scientists and technicians, in addition
to a cooperative animal and a measure of good luck. The sur¬
prising fact is that electrical pulses applied directly to the brain
activate cerebral structures which possess the necessary func¬
tional complexity to induce walking with apparently normal
characteristics.

In one of our experiments, monkey Kuru was sitting in the
colony cage picking some food when radio stimulation of his
thalamus, located in the center of the brain, began. The animal
slowly got up and started walking around the cage on all fours
at a speed of about i meter per second, without bumping against
the walls or against other animals, in a normal manner without
any signs of anxiety, fear, or discomfort. At the end of 5 to 10
seconds of stimulation, the monkey calmly sat down and resumed-
picking food. As soon as stimulation was reapplied, Kuru re¬
sumed walking around the cage. In some studies this effect was
repeated as often as sixty times in one hour.

The speed and pattern of a motor response vary according to
the cerebral structure stimulated. The effect most often observed


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


108 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

in cats and monkeys, obtained by stimulation of limbic struc¬
tures and extrapyramidal pathways, is walking in circles. Usually
the response begins with slow head turning, followed by body
turning, getting up, and walking around the cage. In other
studies, during stimulation of the fimbria of the fornix, a
monkey ran around the cage at a speed of 2.4 meters per second,
showing excellent coordination and orientation, avoiding ob¬
stacles or other animals in its path. In this experiment, as shown
in Figure 11, one monkey in the colony learned to press a lever
in the cage which triggered radio stimulation of the test animal.
Repetition of these excitations produced conditioning in the
stimulated monkey.

Another type of complex motor response induced by ESB has
been described as sequential behavior (54) in which different
patterns of behavior follow each other in a precise order, as
indicated in the following typical example. Monkey Ludy had
one contact implanted in the red nucleus, and when it was
stimulated for 5 seconds, the following effects appeared (see
Figure 12): (1) immediate interruption of spontaneous activity;
(2) change in facial expression; (3) turning of the head to the
right; (4) standing on two feet; (5) circling to the right; (6)
walking on two feet with perfect balance, using both arms to
maintain equilibrium during bipedestation; (7) climbing a
pole; (8) descending to the floor; (9) uttering a growl; (10)
threatening and often attacking and biting a subordinate
monkey; (11) changing aggressive attitude and approaching the
rest of the group in a friendly manner; (12) resuming peaceful
spontaneous behavior. This complex sequence of events took
place during ten to fourteen seconds always in the same order
but with considerable flexibility in the details of performance.
Ludy avoided obstacles in her path, walked with excellent co¬
ordination, and used normal strategies in her fights. The sequen¬
tial response was so reliable that it persisted after 20,000 stimula¬
tions repeated once every minute. Demonstrating the specificity
of evoked effects. Figure 13 shows Ludy’s very different re¬
sponse evoked by radio stimulation of another red nucleus point
located three millimeters away.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


Figure ii

The monkey at left has learned to press the lever inside the cage which
triggers radio stimulation of another monkey in the fimbria of the fornix,
inducing fast running with excellent coordination. After repetition of
these excitations, conditioning is established in the stimulated animal who
shows restlessness and stands in a cage comer ready to start the running
response as soon as another monkey approaches the lever.


ittp:/www. pr6pneticexplorer.com


Figure 12

Stimulation of the red nucleus in monkey Ludy produced a response
which included tiuning of the head, walking on two feet, turning around,
and other sequential effects. The experiment was repeated more than
xo.ooo times with reliable performance (54).


httpVwww.propheticexplorer.com


T.com


Figure

Radio stimulation of Ludy in another red nucleus point 3 millimeters
away produces only the simple response of yawning. If the monkey was
sleeping, brain stimulation was less effective.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


MOTOR RESPONSES


113

Many questions were aroused by these experiments. Why was
Ludy walking on two feet? Why the chain of behavioral events?
Why was she aggressive a few seconds after the end of stimula¬
tion? More studies are needed in order to understand these
problems, but the fact that similar sequences have been evoked
in other monkeys indicates that we are dealing with rather
specific mechanisms of intracerebral organization.

When reviewing the motor responses that can be induced by
electrical stimulation several important limitations should be
considered: (1) Lack of predictability: When a point of the brain
is stimulated for the first time, we cannot predict the effects
which may be evoked. When the upper part of the motor cortex
is stimulated, it is highly probable that the contralateral hind-
limb will contract, but we cannot foresee the quality of this
movement or the participation of other body muscles, or know
whether this response will affect the whole leg or only the foot.
Once the evoked effect is known, repeated stimulations give
predictable results provided that the experimental situation is
constant. (2) Lack of purpose: In some cases the evoked response
is directed by the animal in a purposeful way, but the movements
and sequential responses are usually out of context, and there is
no reason or purpose for yawning, flexing a hand, or walking
around, apart from ESB. It is important to differentiate these
aimless motor responses from other types of behavior described
later in which the aim is of primary importance and the motor
performance secondary. (3) No robot performance: Brain stim¬
ulation activates cerebral mechanisms which are organized for
motor performance, but it cannot replace them. With the
present state of the art, it is very unlikely that we could electri¬
cally direct an animal to carry out predetermined activities such
as opening a gate or performing an instrumental response. We
can induce pleasure or punishment and therefore the motiva¬
tion to press a lever, but we cannot control the sequence of
movements necessary for this act in the absence of the animal’s
own desire to do so. As will be discussed later, we can evoke emo¬
tional states which may motivate an animal to attack another


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


1 14 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

or to escape, but we cannot electrically synthetize the complex
motor performance of these acts.

Motor Effects in Man

The most common effect obtained by electrical stimulation
of the human brain is a simple motor response such as the
contraction of an extremity. This effect is often accompanied by
lack of voluntary control of the muscles involved, and occasionally
it is limited to a local paralysis without any other observable
symptoms. In general, the evoked contractions are simple in per¬
formance, artificial in character, lacking purpose, and without
the elegance of spontaneous motility. For example, in one of our
patients, stimulation of the left parietal cortex through implanted
electrodes evoked a flexion of the right hand starting with con¬
traction of the first two fingers and continuing with flexion of
the other fingers. The closed fist was then maintained for the
rest of the 5-second stimulation. This effect was not unpleasant
or disturbing, and it developed without interrupting ongoing
behavior or spontaneous conversation. The patient was aware
that his hand had moved involuntarily but he was not afraid and
only under questioning did he comment that his arm felt "weak
and dizzy.” When the patient was warned of the oncoming
stimulation and was asked to try to keep his fingers extended, he
could not prevent the evoked movement and commented, "I
guess. Doctor, that your electricity is stronger than my will.” If
this stimulation was applied while the subject was voluntarily
using his hand, for instance to turn the pages of a magazine, this
action was not blocked but the induced hand flexion distorted
voluntary performance and resulted in crumpling and tearing
of pages. In our experience and in reports by other investigators,
electrical stimulation of the motor cortex has not induced
precise or skillful movements, and in all cases the evoked re¬
sponses have been clumsy and abnormal.

Excitation of the supplementary motor area, located near the
main motor cortex, may induce three types of effects (174): (1)


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


MOTOR RESPONSES


115

There can be postural changes, in which the movement starts
slowly and attains a determined end point with more or less
general involvement of the body. (2) The movements can have
a phasic character such as pawing with the hand, stepping with
the foot, or flexing and extending the fingers or wrist. (3) The
response can consist of uncoordinated movements. Of special in¬
terest is the possibility of activating paralyzed limbs by means of
ESB. For example, one patient was suffering from sudden paraly¬
sis of the left arm and leg probably caused by an embolus, and
after four years he had begun to experience burning pain in the
left side of his body which was exacerbated by touching his left
thorax or arm. After other treatments failed, two surgical inter¬
ventions were performed to ablate parts of the sensorimotor
cortex, and it was observed that electrical stimulation in the
supplementary motor area produced vocalization, raising of
the paralyzed arm, and other motor responses. These effects
were similar to those evoked in other patients without paralysis.
Thus it is clear that the supplementary cortex has pathways in¬
dependent from the classical motor pathways and that evoked
movements may be independent from the integrity of the main
motor representation in the cortex.

ESB apparently produces similar results whether applied to
the motor area of a child or an adult, of a manual laborer or of
an accomplished artist. Skills and refined movements do not
seem to be represented in the cortex, or at least they have not
been aroused by its electrical stimulation. The motor cortex
is probably like a large keyboard located on the efferent side,
dealing with the output of activity, able to play the strings of
muscular contraction and to produce movements, but requiring
the direction of other cerebral structures which as yet are little
known.

In contrast to these effects, ESB may evoke more elaborate
responses. For example, in one of our patients, electrical stimu¬
lation of the rostral part of the internal capsule produced head
turning and slow displacement of the body to either side with
a well-oriented and apparently normal sequence, as if the patient


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


1 l6 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

were looking for something. This stimulation was repeated six
times on two different days with comparable results. The inter¬
esting fact was that the patient considered the evoked activity
spontaneous and always offered a reasonable explanation for it.
When asked “What are you doing?” the answers were, “I am
looking for my slippers,” “I heard a noise,” “I am restless,” and
“I was looking under the bed.” In this case it was difficult to
ascertain whether the stimulation had evoked a movement
which the patient tried to justify, or if an hallucination had been
elicited which subsequently induced the patient to move and to
explore the surroundings.

There are very few clinical reports of complex movements
evoked by ESB which are comparable to the sequential responses
observed in monkeys, and this may indicate that cerebral organ¬
ization is less stereotyped in man than in animals. Temporal
lobe stimulation in man has induced automatisms, including
fumbling with surgical drapes or with the patient’s own hands,
and well-organized movements aimed at getting off the operating
table. Usually these evoked automatisms have not been remem¬
bered. Vocalizations and more or less intelligible speech may
also be included among complex motor responses, although they
represent the activation of motor and ideational mechanisms.
Vocalizations have been obtained by stimulation of the motor
area in the precentral gyrus and also of the supplementary
motor area in both hemispheres. The response usually consists
of a sustained or interrupted cry with a vowel sound which
occasionally has a consonant component (174).


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


14


Hell and Heaven Within the Brain:
The Systems for Punishment and Reward


When man evolved above other powerful animals, the size and
complexity of his brain increased, giving him superior intelli¬
gence along with more anguish, deeper sorrow, and greater
sensitivity than any other living creature. Man also learned to
enjoy beauty, to dream and to create, to love and to hate. In
the education of children as well as in the training of animals,
punishment and reward constitute the most powerful motiva¬
tions for learning. In our hedonistic orientation of life to
minimize pain and seek pleasure, we often attribute these
qualities to the environment without realizing that sensations
depend on a chain of events which culminates in the activation
of determined intracerebral mechanisms. Physical damage, the
loss of a beloved child, or apocalyptic disaster cannot make us
suffer if some of our cerebral structures have been blocked by
anesthesia. Pleasure is not in the skin being caressed or in a
full stomach, but somewhere inside the cranial vault.

At the same time pain and pleasure have important psychic
and cultural components related to individual history. Men
inhibited by some extraordinary tribal or religious training to
endure discomfort have been tortured to death without show¬
ing signs of suffering. It is also known that in the absence of
physical injury, mental elaboration of information may produce
the worst kind of suffering. Social rejection, guilt feelings, and

117


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


11 8 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND


Other pCTSonal tragedies may produce greater autonomic,
somatic, and psychblogiGal manifestations than actual physical
pain.


There is strong reluctance to accept that such personal and
refined interpretations of realty as being afraid and being in
love are contingent on the ihiembrane depolarization of deter¬
mined clusters of neurons, blit this is dhe aspect of emotional
phenomena which shprUd riot be %nor^ After frontal lobot-
omy, cancer patients have reported that the pain persisted
undiminished, but that their subjective suffering was radically
reduced, and they did not complain or request as much medica¬
tion as before surgery. Lobotomized patients reacted to noxious
stimuli as ririich, if not more, than before their operations,
jumping at pinpricks and respondirig q^uickly to objective tests
of excessive heat, but they showed decreased concern. It seems
that in the frontal lobes there is a poteritiating mechanism for
the evaluation of personal suffering, arid after lobotomy the
initial sensation of pain is unmodified, while the reactive compo¬
nent to that feeling is greatly dimiriished. This mechanism is
rather specific of the frontal lobes; bilateraf destruction of the


temporal lObeS fails to modify personal suffering.

Importaftt qriestions to resolve are: Do some cerebral struc¬
tures have the specific role of analyzing determined types of
sensations? Is the coding of mformatiori at the receptor level
essential for the activation Of these structures? Not too long ago,
many scientists would have dismissed as naive the already
demonstrated fact that punishment and reward can be induced
at will by mariipulating the controls of an electrical instrument


connected to the brain.


Perception of Suffering

In textbooks and scientific papers, terms such as “pain recep¬
tors,” "pain fibers,” and ‘‘{»^in pathways” are frequently used,
but it should be clarified that peripheral nerves do not carry
sensations. Neuronal pathways transmit only patterns of elec-


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


HELL AND HEAVEN WITHIN THE BRAIN 1 19

trical activity with a message that must be deciphered by the
central nervous system, and in the absence of brain there is no
pain, even if some reflex motor reactions may still be present.
A decapitated frog cannot feel but will jump away with fairly
good motor coordination when pinched in the hind legs. During
competitive sports or on the battlefield, emotion and stress may
temporarily block the feeling of pain in man, and often injuries
are not immediately noticed. The cerebral interpretation of
sensory signals is so decisive that the same stimulus may be con¬
sidered pleasant or unpleasant depending on circumstances. A
strong electrical shock on the feet scares a dog and inhibits its
secretion of saliva. If, however, the same “painful” excitation
is followed for several days by administration of food, the
animal accepts the shock, wagging its tail happily and salivating
in anticipation of the food reward. Some of these dogs have been
trained to press a lever to trigger the electric shock which pre¬
ceded food. During sexual relations in man, bites, scratches,
and other potentially painful sensations are often interpreted
as enjoyable, and some sexual deviates seek physical punishment
as a source of pleasure.

The paradox is that while skin and viscera have plentiful
nerve endings for sensory reception, the brain does not possess
this type of innervation. In patients under local anesthesia, the
cerebral tissue may be cut, burned, pulled apart, or frozen
without causing any discomfort. This organ so insensitive to
its own destruction is, however, the exquisite sensor of informa¬
tion received from the periphery. In higher animal species
there is sensory differentiation involving specialized peripheral
receptors which code external information into electrical
impulses and internal analyzers which decode the circulating
inputs in order to give rise to the perception of sensations.

Most sensory messages travel through peripheral nerves, dorsal
roots, spinal cord, and medulla to the thalamic nuclei in the
brain, but from there we lose their trail and do not know where
the information is interpreted as painful or pleasurable, or how
affective components are attributed to a sensation (212, 220).


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


120 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

Although anatomical investigations indicate that thalamic
fibers project to the parietal “sensory” cortex, stimulation o£
this area does not produce pain in animals or man. No discom¬
fort has been reported following electrical excitation of the sur¬
face or depth of the motor areas, frontal lobes, occipital lobes,
cingulate gyrus, and many other structures, while pain, rage,
and fear have been evoked by excitation of the central gray
tegmentum, and a few other regions.

Animals share with man the expressive aspect of emotional
manifestations. When a dog wags its tail, we suppose it is happy,
and when a cat hisses and spits we assume that it is enraged, but
these interpretations are anthropomorphic and in reality we do
not know the feelings of any animal. Several authors have tried
to correlate objective manifestations with sensations; for ex¬
ample, stimulation of the cornea of the eye provokes struggling,
pupillary dilatation, and rise of blood pressure (87), but these re¬
sponses are not necessarily related to awareness of feelings, as is
clearly demonstrated by the defensive agility of the decapitated
frog. Experimental investigation of the mechanisms of pain and
pleasure is handicapped in animals by their lack of verbal com¬
munication, but fortunately we can investigate whether an
animal likes or dislikes the perceived sensations by analyzing
its instrumental responses. Rats, monkeys, and other species can
learn to press a lever in order to receive a reward such as a food
pellet or to avoid something unpleasant such as an electric
shock to the skin. By the voluntary act of instrumental manipula¬
tion, an animal expresses whether or not the food, shock, or
brain stimulation is desirable, allowing for the objective quali¬
fication of the sensation. In this way, many cerebral structures
have been explored to identify their positive or negative rein¬
forcing properties.

At present it is generally accepted that specific areas of the
brain participate in the integration of pain sensations, but the
mechanism is far from clear, and in our animal experiments
we do not know if we are stimulating pathways or higher centers
of integration. The concept of a straight conduction of pain


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


HELL AND HEAVEN WITHIN THE BRAIN


121


messages from the periphery up to the central nervous system
was too elemental. Incoming messages are probably processed
at many levels with feedbacks which modify the sensitivity and
the filtering of information at many stages including the periph¬
eral receptor level. Brain excitation, therefore, may affect trans¬
mission as well as the elaboration of inputs and feedback mod¬
ulation. Electrical stimuli do not carry any specific message
because they are a monotonous repetition of similar pulses, and
the fact that they constitute a suitable trigger for central per¬
ception of pain means that the reception of a patterned code is
not required, but only the nonspecific activation of neuronal
pools which are accessible to investigation. In addition to the
importance of these studies for finding better therapies for
the alleviation of pain, there is another aspect which has great
social interest: the possible relations between pain perception
and violence.


Violence Within the Brain

The chronicle of human civilization is the story of a coopera¬
tive venture consistently marred by self-destruction, and every
advance has been accompanied by increased efficiency of violent
behavior. Early man needed considerable physical strength and
skill to defend himself or attack other men or beasts with stones,
arrows, or swords, but the invention of explosives and subse¬
quent development of firearms have made unskilled individuals
more powerful than mythical warriors of the past. The technol¬
ogy for destruction has now placed at the disposal of man a vast
arsenal of ingenious weapons which facilitate all forms of vio¬
lence including crimes against property, assassinations, riots,
and wars, threatening not only individual life and national
stability but the very existence of civilization.

Ours is a tragically imbalanced industrial society which
devotes most of its resources to the acquisition of destructive
power and invests insignificant effort in the search which could
provide the true weapons of self-defense: knowledge of the


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


122 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

mechanisms responsible for violent behavior. They are neces¬
sarily related with intracerebral processes of neuronal activity,
even if the triggering causality may reside in environmental
circumstances. Violence is a product of cultural environment
and is an extreme form of aggression, distinct from modes of
self-expression required for survival and development under
normal conditions. Man may react to unpleasant or painful
stimuli with violence—^he may retaliate even more vigorously
than he is attacked—but only if he has been taught by his
culture to react in this manner. A major role of education is
to “build internal controls in human beings so that they can
withstand external pressures and maintain internal equilib¬
rium” (157). We should remember that it is normal for an
animal to urinate when the bladder is full and to mount any
available female during the mating season, but that these be¬
haviors may be controlled in man through training. The dis¬
tinctly human quality of cerebralization of behavior is possible
through education.

Human aggression may be considered a behavioral response
characterized by the exercise of force with the intent to inflict
damage on persons or objects. The phenomenon may be
analyzed in three components: inputs, determined by environ¬
mental circumstances perceived through sensory receptors and
acting upon the individual; throughputs, which are the personal
processing of these circumstances through the intracerebral
mechanisms established by genetic endowment and previous
experiences; and outputs, represented by the expressions of
individual and social behavior which constitute the observable
manifestations of aggression. Increasing awareness of the need
to investigate these subjects has already resulted in the creation
of specialized institutes, but surprisingly enough the most
essential element in the whole process of violence is usually
neglected. Attention is directed to economic, ideological, social,
and political factors and to their consequences, which are ex¬
pressed as individual and mass behavior, while the essential link
in the central nervous system is often forgotten. It is, however.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


HELL AND HEAVEN WITHIN THE BRAIN 123

an incontrovertible fact that the environment is only the pro¬
vider of sensory inputs ivhich must be interpreted by the brain,
and that any kind of behavior is the result of intracerebral
activity.

It would be naive to investigate the reasons for a riot by
recording the intracerebral electrical activity of the participants,
but it would be equally wrong to ignore the fact that each par¬
ticipant has a brain and that determined neuronal groups are
reacting to sensory inputs and are subsequently producing the
behavioral expression of violence- Both neurophysiological and
environmental factors must be evaluated, and today method¬
ology is available for their combined study. Humanity behaves
in general no more intelligently than animals would under the
same circumstances, and this alarming reality is due largely to
“that spiritual pride which prevents men from regarding them¬
selves and their behavior as parts of nature and as subject to its
universal laws” (148). Experimental investi^tion of the cerebral
structures responsible for aggressive behavior is an essential
counterpart of social studies, and this should be recognized by
sociologists as well as biologists.

In animals, the first demonstmtion that ofEensive activity
could be evoked by ESB was provided by Hess (105), and it has
subsequently been confirmed by numerous investigators. Cats
under electrical stimulation of the perivenlrieular gray matter
acted “as if threatened by a dog,” responding with unsheathed
claws and well-aimed blows, ‘^he animal spits, snorts or growls.
At the same time the hair on its back stands on end, and its tail
becomes bushy. Its pupils widen sometimes to their maximum,
and its ears lie back or move back and forth to frighten the non¬
existing enemy” (106). In these experiments it is important to
know how the cat really feels. Is it aware of its own responses?
Is the hostility purposefully oriented to do harm? Or is the entire
phenomenon a pseudoaffective reaction, a false or sham rage
containing the motor components of offensive display without
actual emotional participation? These issues have l)een debated
over the years, but today it is clear that both sham and true rage


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


HELL AND HEAVEN WITHIN THE BRAIN


125


Figure 14

At upper left, the control, two friendly cats. At lower left, electrical stimu¬
lation of the anterior hypothalamus evoked an aggressive expression not
directed against the other cat which, however, reacts with a defensive
attitude. Above, the normal cat attacks the stimulated animal which lowers
its head, flattens its ears, and does not retaliate. This experiment is an
example of false rage (53).


can be elicited by ESB depending on the location of stimulation.
Excitation of the anterior hypothalamus may induce a threaten¬
ing display with hissing and growling which should be inter¬
preted as false rage because, as shown in Figure 14, the display
was not directed against other animals. When other cats reacted
by hissing and attacking the stimulated animal, it did not
retaliate or escape and simply lowered its head and flattened its
ears, and these brain stimulations could not be conditioned to
sensory cues.

In contrast, true rage has been demonstrated in other experi¬
ments. As shown in Figure 15, stimulation of the lateral hypothal¬
amus produced an aggressive display dearly directed toward


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


attack against investigators with whom relations had previously been
friendly (above); learning of instrumental responses, such as rotating
a paddle wheel, in order to stop the brain stimulation (below). In this
way the cat expresses its dislike of being stimulated in a particular area (53).


128 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

a control animal which reacted properly in facing the threat.
The stimulated animal started prowling around looking for
fights with other subordinate animals, but avoided the most
powerful cat in the ^oup. It was evident that brain stimulation
had created a state of increased aggressiveness, but it was also
clear that the cat directed its hostility intelligently, choosing
the enemy and the moment of attack, changing tactics, and
adapting its movements to the motor reaction of its opponent.
Brain stimulation determined the affective state of hostility,
but behavioral performance depended on the individual char¬
acteristics of the stimulated animal, including learned skills
and previous experiences. Stimulations were usually tested for
5 to lo seconds, but since it was important to know the fatig¬
ability of the effect, a longer experiment was performed, reduc¬
ing the applied intensity to a level which did not evoke overt
rage. The experimental subject was an affectionate cat which
usually sought petting and purred while it was held in the
experimenter’s arms. Then it was introduced into the colony
with five other cats and was radio stimulated continuously for
two hours. During this period the animal sat motionless in a
comer of the cage, uttering barely audible growls from time to
time. If any other cat approached, the stimulated animal started
hissing and threatening, and if the experimenter tried to pet
it, the growls increased in intensity and the animal often spat
and hissed. This hostile attitude disappeared as soon as the
stimulation was over, and the cat became as friendly as before.
These experiments demonstrated that brain excitation could
modify reactions toward normal sensory stimuli and could
modulate the quality of the responses in a way similar to mod¬
ulation during spontaneous emotional states.

Monkeys are more interesting subjects than cats for the study
of social interactions because of their more numerous and skill¬
ful spontaneous activities. It is well known that monkey colonies
constitute autocratic societies in which one animal establishes
itself as boss of the group, claiming a large portion of the
territory, feeding first, and being avoided by the others, who


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


HELL AND HEAVEN WITHIN THE BRAIN 120

usually express their submissiveness by grimacing, crouching,
and offering sexual play. In several colonies we have observed
that radio stimulation of specific points in the thalamus or
central gray in the boss monkey increased his aggressiveness
and induced well-directed attacks against other members of the
group, whom he chased around and occasionally bit, as shown in
Figure i6 (56). It was evident that his hostility was oriented
purposefully and according to his previous experience because
he usually attacked the other male who represented a challenge
to his authority, and he always spared the little female who was
his favorite partner.

A high-ranking monkey expresses rage by attacking submissive
members of the colony, but what would be the consequences of
stimulating the brain of lower-ranking animals? Could they
be induced to challenge the authority of other monkeys, includ¬
ing perhaps even the boss, or would their social inhibitions block
the electrically induced hostility? These questions were inves¬
tigated in one colony by changing its composition to increase
progressively the social rank of one member, a female named
Lina, who in the first grouping of four animals ranked lowest,
progressing to third rank in the second group and to second
rank in the third group. Social dominance was evaluated during
extended control periods using the criteria of number of spon¬
taneous agonistic and sexual interactions, priority in food
getting, and territoriality. On two successive mornings in each
colony Lina was radio stimulated for 5 seconds once a minute for
one hour in the nucleus posterolateralis of the thalamus. In all
three colonies, these stimulations induced Lina to run across the
cage, climb to the ceiling, lick. Vocalize, and according to her
social status, to attack other animals. In group 1, where Lina was
submissive, she tried to attack another ihonkey only once, and
she was threatened or attacked 24 times. In group 2 she became
more aggressive (24 occurrences) and was attacked only 3 times,
while in group 3 Lina attacked other monkeys 79 times and was
not threatened at all. No changes in the number of agonistic
acts were observed in any group before or after the stimulation


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


one as a specific target, and this animal usually expresses submissiveness
by grimacing, crouching, or escaping. A toy tiger is also a suitable target
for aggressive display.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


132 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

hour, showing that alterations in Lina’s aggressive behavior
were determined by ESB.

In summary, intraspecies aggression has been evoked in cats
and monkeys by electrical stimulation of several cerebral struc¬
tures, and its expression is dependent on the social setting.
Unlike purely motor effects including complex sequences which
have no social significance, an artificially evoked aggressive act
may be directed against a specific group member or may be
entirely suppressed, according to the stimulated subject’s social
rank.

Many questions remain to be answered. Which cerebral areas
are responsible for spontaneous aggressive behavior? By what
mechanisms are environmental inputs interpreted as undesirable?
How does cultural training influence the reactivity of specific
cerebral areas? Can neurophysiological mechanisms of violence
be re-educated, or are individual responses set for life after early
imprinting? It is interesting that application of ESB modified
the interpretation of the environment, changing the peaceful
relations of a group of animals into sudden overt hostility.
The same sensory inputs provided by the presence of other
animals, which were neutral during control periods, were under
ESB the cue for a ferocious and well-directed attack. Apparently
brain stimulation introduced an emotional bias which altered
interpretation of the surroundings.

While neurophysiological activity may be influenced or per¬
haps even set by genetic factors and past experience, the brain
is the direct interpreter of environmental inputs and the deter¬
minant of behavioral responses. To understand the causes and
plan remedies for intraspecific aggression in animals and man
require knowledge of both sociology and neurophysiology.
Electricity cannot determine the target for hostility or direct
the sequences of aggressive behavior, which are both related to
the past history of the stimulated subject and to his immediate
adaptation to changing circumstances. Artificially triggered and
spontaneously provoked aggression have many elements in com¬
mon, suggesting that in both cases similar areas of the brain
have been activated.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


HELL AND HEAVEN WITHIN THE BRAIN 133

While individual and collective acts of violence may seem
rather distant from the electrical discharges of neurons, we
should remember that personality is not in the environment
but in the nervous tissue. Possible solutions to undesirable
aggression obviously will not be found in the use of ESB. This
is only a methodology for investigation of the problem and
acquisition of necessary information about the brain mecha¬
nisms involved. It is well known that medical treatment of cardiac
patients is based on anatomical and physiological studies of
the heart, and that without this information it would not have
been possible to discover new drugs or to give effective medical
advice. Similarly, without knowledge of the brain it will be
difficult to correlate social causality with individual reactivity.

Anxiety, Fear, and Violence Evoked by ESB in Man

Anxiety has been considered the alpha and omega of psychi¬
atry. It is one of the central themes of existential philosophy, and
it shades the normal—-and abnormal—-life of most human
beings. Several emotional states may be classified under the
heading of anxiety, including fear, fright, panic, and terror,
which are variations of the same basic experience. One of the
most complex mental disturbances, unreasonable or excessive
anxiety, including phobias and compulsive obsessions, often
does not respond to standard therapies, and in some instances it
has been improved by electrocoagulation of discrete areas of
the frontal pole. Grey Walter (234) has claimed an 85 per cent
total social recovery in a group of sixty patients with anxiety and
obsessions treated with carefully dosified coagulations made
through electrodes implanted in the frontal lobes.

Without entering into semantic discussions, we may consider
anxiety an emotional state of conscious or subcmiscious tension
related to real or imaginary threats to psychological or physical
individual integrity. A mild degree of anxiety may mobilize,
while excessive degrees may paralyze somatic and mental activity.
Beyond a certain limit, anxiety has unpleasant characteristics.
In normal circumstances, it is produced, as is any other emotion.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


134 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

by sensory inputs from the environment and by recollections,
both of which require mental elaboration of messages which
may be influenced by humoral and neuronal factors. In addition,
there is abundant evidence that anxiety and fear may be induced
as either a primary or a secondary category of response by direct
electrical stimulation of the brain. The perception or expect¬
ancy of pain can be frightening, and in some cases when ESB pro¬
duced localized or generalized discomfort, patients have ex¬
pressed concern about continuation of the exploratory pro¬
cedures. In addition to the natural fear of possible further dis¬
comfort, there may have been a component of primary anxiety
which would be difficult to evaluate.

Destruction of discrete parts of the thalamus produces relief
from anxiety neurosis and obsessive-compulsive neurosis which
is probably related to the interruption of tonic pathways to the
frontal lobes. Stimulation of the thalamic nucleus, however,
very seldom produces anxiety, and the reports of patients are
limited to feelings of weakness, being difiEerent, dizziness, float¬
ing, and something like alcoholic intoxication (214).

Clearer demonstrations of direct induction of fear without any
other accompanying sensations have been reported by several
investigators. Lesions in the medial thalamus give effective pain
relief with a minimal amount of sensory loss, and for this reason
this area has often been explored electrically in cancer patients.
In some cases it has produced acute anxiety attacks, which one
patient vividly described as: “It’s rather like the feeling of having
just been missed by a car and leaped back to the curb and went
B-r-r-r.” Something in his guts felt very unpleasant, very unusual,
and he certainly did not want to feel like that again (73). The
surprising fact is that the unpleasant sensation of fear was felt
in one side of the body, contralateral to the brain stimulation.
Sweet (221) has reported the case of a very intelligent patient,
the dean of a graduate school, who after a unilateral sympa¬
thectomy to treat his upper limb hyperhydrosis, found that his
previous and customary sensation of shivering while listening to
a stirring passage of music occurred in only one side and he could


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


HELL AND HEAVEN WITHIN THE BRAIN 1 35

not be thrilled in the sympathectomized half of his body. These
cases were interesting because emotions are usually experienced
in a rather diffuse and bilateral fashion unless innervation has
been specifically interrupted.

The role of the thalamus in the integration of fear is also sug¬
gested by the study of a female patient whose spontaneous crip¬
pling attacks of anxiety of overwhelming intensity had led to
several suicide attempts and a chronic state of depression and
agitation quite refractory to drugs and psychotherapy. Stimula¬
tion of the dorsolateral nucleus of the thalamus evoked precisely
the same type of attack at a level of symptomatology directly
proportional to the applied intensity. It was possible to find the
electrical threshold for a mild anxiety or to increase it to higher
levels simply by turning the dial of the stimulator. “One could
sit with one’s hand on the knob and control the level of her
anxiety” (73).

In one of our female patients, stimulation of a similar area
in the thalamus induced a typical fearful expression and she
turned to either side, visually exploring the room behind her.
When asked what she was doing, she replied that she felt a
threat and thought that something horrible was going to happen.
This fearful sensation was perceived as real, and she had a pre¬
monition of imminent disaster of unknown cause. The effect
was reliable on different days and was not altered by the use of
lights and a movie camera to document the finding. Her motor
activity and choice of words varied according to the environ¬
mental setting, but her facial expression and acute sensation of
nonspecific, unexplainable, but real fear were similar following
different stimulations. The response started with a delay of less
than one second, lasted for as long as the stimulation, and did
not leave observable aftereffects. The patient remembered her
fear but was not upset by the memory.

Some patients have displayed anxiety and restlessness when
the pallidum was stimulated at frequencies above 8 cycles per
second, and they also perceived a constriction or warmth in the
chest (123). A few reported a “vital anxiety in the left chest,”


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


136 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

and screamed anxiously if the stimulation was repeated. Intense
emotional reactions have been evoked by stimulation of the
amygdaloid nucleus, but responses varied in the same patient
even with the same parameters of stimulation. The efiEect was
sometimes rage, sometimes fear. One patient explained, “I don’t
know what came over me. I felt like an animal” (100).

The sensation of fear without any concomitant pain has also
been observed as a result of ESB of the temporal lobe (230).
This effect may be classified as “illusion of fear” (174) because
there was obviously no real reason to be afraid apart from the
artificial electrical activation of some cerebral structures. In
every case, however, fear is a cerebral interpretation of reality
which depends on a variety of cultural and experiential factors
with logical or illogical reasons. The fact that it can be aroused
by stimulation of a few areas of the brain allows the exploration
of the neuronal mechanisms of anxiety, and as a working hy¬
pothesis we may suppose that the emotional qualities of fear
depend on the activation of determined structures located
probably in the thalamus, amygdala, and a few other as yet un¬
identified nuclei. This activation usually depends on the sym¬
bolic evaluation of coded sensory inputs, but the threshold for
this activation may be modified—^and also reached—^by direct
application of ESB. Knowledge of intracerebral mechanisms
of anxiety and fear will permit the establishment of a more
rational pharmacological and psychiatric treatment of many
suffering patients, and may also help us to understand and
ameliorate the increasing level of anxiety in our civilization.

It is also known that in some tragic cases, abnormal neuro¬
logical processes may be the causal factor for unreasonable and
uncontrollable violence. Those afflicted may often hurt or even
kill either strangers or close family members usually treated
with affection. A typical example was J. P., a charming and
attractive 20-year-old girl with a history of encephalitis at the
age of eighteen months and many crises of temporal lobe seizures
and grand mal attacks for the last ten years (60). Her main social
problem was the frequent and unpredictable occurrence of rage


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


HELL AND HEAVEN WITHIN THE BRAIN 1 37

which on more than a dozen occasions resulted in an assault
on another person such as inserting a knife into a stranger's
myocardium or a pair of scissors into the pleural cavity of a
nurse. The patient was committed to a ward for the criminally
insane, and electrodes were implanted in her amygdala and
hippocampus for exploration of possible neurological abnormal¬
ities. As she was rather impulsive, confinement in the EEG
recording room was impractical, and she became one of the first
clinical cases instrumented with a stimoceiver, which made it
possible to study intracerebral activity without restraint (see
Figure 4). Depth recordings taken while the patient moved
freely around the ward demonstrated marked electrical abnor¬
malities in both amygdala and hippocampus. Spontaneous
periods of aimless walking coincided with an increase in the
number of high-voltage sharp waves. At other times, the patient’s
speech was spontaneously inhibited for several minutes during
which she could not answer any questions although she retained
partial comprehension and awareness. These periods coincided
with bursts of spike activity localized to the optic radiation
(Figure 17). Transitory emotional excitement was related with
an increase in the number and duration of 16-cycles-per-second
bursts; but the patient read papers, conversed with other people,
and walked around without causing any noticeable alterations
in the telemetered intracerebral electrical activity.

During depth explorations, it was demonstrated that crises
of assaultive behavior similar to the patient's spontaneous bursts
of anger could be elicited by radio stimulation of contact 3 in
the right amygdala. A 1.2 milliampere excitation of this point
was applied while she was playing the guitar and singing with
enthusiasm and skill. At the seventh second of stimulation, she
threw away the guitar and in a fit of rage launched an attack
against the wall and then paced around the floor for several
minutes, after which she gradually quieted down and resumed
her usual cheerful behavior. This effect was repeated on two
different days. The fact that only the contact located in the
amygdala induced rage suggested that the neuronal field around


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


j.p. m-ee

A

■■I j

2


IViJgjilM''

AiAvVi«r(«/<(vAivi>'\^-i


3 l/lV^S/*«AikJH»VYl/V^

ISec —*—'—'—>—*—'—*—•—‘


- > - »


B


V f 0


Telemetric recording of electrical activity of the brain in one of the pa¬
tients shown in Figure 4. The location of the contacts was as follows:
Channel 1: amygdaloid nucleus; Channel 2: anterior optic radiation; Chan¬
nel 3; posterior optic radiation. A: spontaneous bursts appearing in
Channel 1 were more prominent when the patient was psychologically
excited. B: sudden spontaneous arrest of speech coincided with bursts
of spikes in Channel 3. C: control recordings were unmodified by
friendly behavior or by diflferent types of motor activity such as walking
and reading (60).


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


HELL AND HEAVEN WITHIN THE BRAIN I 39

contact 3 was involved in the patient’s behavior problem, and
this finding was of great clinical significance in the orientation
of subsequent treatment by local coagulation.

The demonstration that amygdaloid stimulation may induce
violent behavior has also been provided by other investigators.
King (128) has described the case of a woman with feelings of
depression and alienation, with an extremely flat tone of voice
and a facial expression which was blank and unchanging during
interviews, who upon stimulation of the amygdala with 5
milliamperes had greatly altered vocal inflections and an angry
expression. During this time she said, “I feel like I want to get
up from this chair! Please don’t let me do it! Don’t do this to
me. I don’t want to be mean!” When the interviewer asked if
she would like to hit him, the patient answered, “Yeah, I want
to hit something. I want to get something and just tear it up.
Take it so I won’t!” She then handed her scarf to the interviewer
who gave her a stack of paper, and without any other verbal
exchange, she tore it into shreds saying, “I don't like to feel
like this.” When the level of stimulation was reduced to 4
milliamperes, her attitude changed to a broad smile, and she
explained, “I know it’s silly, what I’m doing. I wanted to get
up from this chair and run. I wanted to hit something, tear up
something—anything. Not you, just anything. I just wanted
to get up and tear. I had no control of myself.” An increase in
intensity up to 5 milliamperes again resulted in similar aggres¬
sive manifestations, and she raised her arm as if to strike.

It is notable that although the patients seemed to be out of
control in these two instances of electrically induced aggression,
they did not attack the interviewer, indicating that they were
aware of their social situation. This finding is reminiscent of
the behavior of stimulated monkeys who directed their aggres¬
siveness according to previous experience and social rank and
did not dare to challenge the authority of well-established bosses.
Apparently ESB can induce a state of increased violent reactivity
which is expressed in accordance with individual structure and
environmental circumstances. We may conclude therefore that


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND


140

artificially evoked emotional change is only one more factor in
the constellation of behavioral determinants.


Pleasurable Excitation of the Animal Brain

It is surprising that in science as well as in literature more
attention has been paid to suffering than to happiness. The
central theme of most novels is tragedy, while happy books are
hard to find; excellent monograplw have been published about
pain, but similar studies of pleasure are nonexistent. Typically,
in the monumental Handbook of the American Physiological
Society (75), a full chapter is devoted to pain, and pleasure is
not even listed in the general subject index. Evidently the pur¬
suit of happiness has not aroused as much scientific interest as
the fear of pain.

In psychological literature the study of reward is well repre¬
sented, but even there it has been considered a second-rate sen¬
sation and perhaps an artifact of a diminution of pain. It has
been postulated that a truly “pleasant” sensation could not exist
because organisms have a continuous tendency to minimize
incoming stimuli. Pleasure was thus considered a subjective
name for the diminution of drive, the withdrawal of a strong
stimulation, or the reduction of pain. This “pain reduction”
theory (154) has been fruitful as a basis for psychological investi¬
gations, but it is gloomy to think that we live in a world of
punishment in which the only reality is suffering and that our
brain can perceive different degrees of pain but no real pleasure.

Interest in the earlier ideas of hedonism has been renewed
by recent experimental studies. According to this theory, pain
and pleasure are relatively independent sensations and can be
evoked by different types of stimuli which are recognized by
separate cerebral mechanisms. Behavior is considered to be
motivated by stimuli which the organism tries to minimize
(pain) or by stimuli which the organism tries to maximize
(pleasure). The brain is thought to have different systems for


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


HELL AND HEAVEN WITHIN THE BRAIN 141

the reception of these two kinds of inputs, and the psychological
state of pleasure or reward can be determined not only by the
termination of pain but also by the onset of primary pleasure.
The discovery of two anatomically distinct mechanisms in the
brain, one for punishment, as mentioned earlier, and one for
reward, provides a physiological basis for the dualistic motiva¬
tion postulated in hedonism (62, 165).

The surprising fact is that animals of different species, includ¬
ing rats, cats, and monkeys, have voluntarily chosen to press a
lever which provides electrical stimulation of specific cerebral
areas. The demonstrations are highly convincing because ani¬
mals which initially pressed a lever to obtain the reward of
sugar pellets later pressed at similar or higher rates when elec¬
trical stimulation was substituted for food. These experiments
showed conclusively that the animals enjoyed the electrical im¬
pulses which were delivered only at their own demand. Watch¬
ing a rat or monkey stimulate its own brain is a fascinating
spectacle. Usually each lever pressing triggers a brief 0.5-to
i.o-second brain stimulation which can be more rewarding
than food. In a choice situation, hungry rats ran faster to reach
the self-stimulation lever than to obtain pellets, and they per¬
sistently pressed this lever, ignoring food within easy reach. Rats
have removed obstacles, run mazes, and even crossed electrified
floors to reach the lever that provided cerebral stimulation.

Not all areas of the brain involved in pleasurable effects
appear equally responsive. The highest lever-pressing rates (of
up to a remarkable 5,000 times per hour) were recorded by
animals self-stimulating in the posterior hypothalamus; excita¬
tion of rhinencephalic structures (of only about 200 times per
hour) was considered moderately rewarding; and in sensory or
motor areas, animals self-stimulated at merely a chance level
(of 10 to 25 times per hour), and these areas were classified as
neutral. As should be expected, when stimulation was shifted
from rewarding areas to nuclei in the punishment system in the
same animals, they pressed the lever once and never went back,


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


142 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

showing that in the brain of the same animal there were two
different groups of structures, one rewarding and the other
aversive.

A systematic analysis of the neuroanatomical distribution
of pleasurable areas in the rat (164) shows that 60 per cent of the
brain is neutral, 35 per cent is rewarding, and only 5 per cent
may elicit punishing efEects. The idea that far more brain is
involved in pleasure than in suffering is rather optimistic and
gives hope that this predominance of the potential for pleasur¬
able sensations can be developed into a more effective behavioral
reality.

Because of the lack of verbal communication with animals,
any ideas about what kind of pleasure, if any, may be experi¬
enced during ESB is a matter of speculation. There are some
indications, however, that the perceived sensations could be
related to anatomical differentiation of primary rewards of food
and sex, because hungry animals self-stimulated at a higher rate
in the middle hypothalamus, while administration of sexual
hormones to castrated rats increased their lever pressing of more
lateral hypothalamic points.

The controversial issue of how these findings in animals may
relate to human behavior and the possible existence of areas in¬
volved in pleasure in the human brain has been resolved by the
information obtained in patients with implanted electrodes.

Human Pleasure Evoked by ESB

On the basis of many studies during cerebral surgery, Pen-
field (174) has said of anger, joy, pleasure, and sexual excitement
in the human brain that “so far as our experience goes, neither
localized epileptic discharge nor electrical stimulation is capable-,
of awakening any such emotion. One is tempted to believe that
there are no specific cortical mechanisms associated with these
emotions.” This statement still holds true for the cerebral cortex,
but studies in human subjects with implanted electrodes have
demonstrated that electrical stimulation of the depth of the


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


HELL AND HEAVEN WITHIN THE BRAIN 143

brain can induce pleasurable manifestations, as evidenced by the
spontaneous verbal reports of patients, their facial expression
and general behavior, and their desire to repeat the experience.
In a group of twenty-three patients suffering from schizophrenia
(g8), electrical stimulation of the septal region, located deep in
the frontal lobes, produced an enhancement of alertness some¬
times accompanied by an increase in verbal output, euphoria,
or pleasure. In a more systematic study in another group of
patients, further evidence was presented of the rewarding effects
of septal stimulation (20, 99). One man suffering from narcolep-
sia was provided with a small stimulator and a built-in counter
which recorded the number of times that he voluntarily stim¬
ulated each of several selected points in his brain during a period
of seventeen weeks. The highest score was recorded from one
point in the septal region, and the patient declared that pushing
this particular button made him feel “good” as if he were build¬
ing up to a sexual orgasm, although he was not able to reach the
end point and often felt impatient and anxious. His narcolepsia
was greatly relieved by pressing this “septal button.” Another
patient with psychomotor epilepsy also enjoyed septal self¬
stimulation, which again had the highest rate of button pressing
and often induced sexual thoughts. Activation of the septal
region by direct injection of acetylcholine produced local elec¬
trical changes in two epileptic patients and a shift in mood from
disphoria to contentment and euphoria, usually with concomi¬
tant sexual motivation and some “orgastic sensations.”

Further information was provided by another group of sixty-
five patients suffering from schizophrenia or Parkinson’s disease,
in whom a total of 643 contacts were implanted, mainly in the
anterior part of the brain (201). Results of ESB were grouped
as follows: 360 points were “Positive I,” and with stimulation
“the patients became relaxed, at ease, had a feeling of well-being,
and/or were a little sleepy.” Another 31 points were “Positive
II,” and “the patients were definitely changed ... in a good
mood, felt good. They were relaxed, at ease, and enjoyed them¬
selves, frequently smiling. There was a slight euphoria, but the


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


144 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

behavior was adequate.” They sometimes wanted more stimula¬
tions, Excitation of another eight points evoked behavior classi¬
fied as “Positive HI,” when “the euphoria was definitely beyond
normal limits. The patients laughed out loud, enjoyed them¬
selves, and positively liked the stimulation, and wanted more.”
ESB of another 38 points gave ambivalent results, and the pa¬
tients expressed occasional pleasure or displeasure following
excitation of the same area. From three other points, responses
were termed “orgasm” because the patients initially expressed
enjoyment and then suddenly were completely satisfied and did
not want any more stimulation for a variable period of time.
Finally, from about two hundred other points, ESB produced
unpleasant reactions including anxiety, sadness, depression,
fear, and emotional outbursts. One of the moving pictures taken
in this study was very demonstrative, showing a patient with
a sad expression and slightly depressed mood who smiled when
a brief stimulation was applied to the rostral part of the brain,
returning quickly to his usual depressed state, to smile again as
soon as stimulation was reapplied. Then a ten-second stimula¬
tion completely changed his behavior and facial expression into
a lasting pleasant and happy mood. Some mental patients have
been provided with portable stimulators which they have used
in self-treatment of depressive states with apparent clinical suc¬
cess.

These results indicate the need for careful functional explora¬
tion during brain surgery in order to avoid excessive euphoria
or depression when positive or negative reinforcing areas are
damaged. Emotional instability, in which the subject bursts sud¬
denly into tears or laughter without any apparent reason, has
been observed following some neurosurgical interventions.
These major behavior problems might have been avoided by..
sparing the region involved in emotional regulation.

In our own experience, pleasurable sensations were observed
in three patients with psychomotor epilepsy (50, 58, 109). The
first case was V.P., a 36-year-old female with a long history of
epileptic attacks which could not be controlled by medication.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


HELL AND HEAVEN WITHIN THE BRAIN 145

Electrodes were implanted in her right temporal lobe and upon
stimulation of a contact located in the superior part about thirty
millimeters below the surface, the patient reported a pleasant
tingling sensation in the left side of her body “from my face
down to the bottom of my legs.” She started giggling and making
funny comments, stating that she enjoyed the sensation “very
much,” Repetition of these stimulations made the patient more
communicative and flirtatious, and she ended by openly express¬
ing her desire to marry the therapist. Stimulation of other cere¬
bral points failed to modify her mood and indicated the
specificity of the evoked effect. During control interviews before
and after ESB, her behavior was quite proper, without familiar¬
ity or excessive friendliness.

The second patient was J.M., an attractive, cooperative, and
intelligent 30-year-old female who had suffered for eleven years
from psychomotor and grand mal attacks which resisted medical
therapy. Electrodes were implanted in her right temporal lobe,
and stimulation of one of the points in the amygdala induced
a pleasant sensation of relaxation and considerably increased
her verbal output, which took on a more intimate character.
This patient openly expressed her fondness for the therapist
(who was new to her), kissed his hands, and talked about her
immense gratitude for what was being done for her. A similar
increase in verbal and emotional expression was repeated when
the same point was stimulated on a different day, but it did not
appear when other areas of the brain were explored. During
control situations the patient was rather reserved and poised.

The third case was A.F., an 11-year-old boy with severe psycho¬
motor epilepsy. Six days after electrode implantation in both
temporal lobes, his fourth tape-recorded interview was carried
out while electrical activity of the brain was continuously re¬
corded and 5-second stimulations were applied in a prearranged
sequence at intervals of about four minutes. The interviewer
maintained an air of friendly interest throughout, usually with¬
out initiating conversation. After six other excitations, point
LP located on the surface of the left temporal lobe was stim-


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


146 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

ulated for the first time, and there was an open and precipitous
declaration of pleasure. The patient had been silent for the
previous five-minute interval, but immediately after this stim¬
ulation he exclaimed, “Hey! You can keep me here longer when
you give me these; I like those.” He went on to insist that the
ongoing brain tests made him feel good. Similar statements with
an emphatic expression of “feeling good” followed eight of a
total sixteen stimulations of this point during the ninety-minute
interview. Several of these manifestations were accompanied
by a statement of fondness for the male interviewer, and the
last one was accompanied by a voluptuous stretch. None of these
manifestations appeared during the control prestimulation pe¬
riod of twenty-six minutes or during the twenty-two minutes
when other points were excited. Statistical analysis of the differ¬
ence between the frequency of pleasurable expressions before
and after onset of stimulations proved that results were highly
significant (P < 0.001).

The open expressions of pleasure in this interview and the
general passivity of behavior could be linked, more or less
intuitively, to feminine strivings. It was therefore remarkable
that in the next interview, performed in a similar manner, the
patient’s expressions of confusion about his own sexual identity
again appeared following stimulation of point LP. He suddenly
began to discuss his desire to get married, but when asked, “To
whom?” he did not immediately reply. Following stimulation
of another point and a one-minute, twenty-second silence, the
patient said, “I was thinking—there's—I was saying this to you.
How to spell ‘yes’—y-e-s. I mean y-o-s. No! ‘You’ ain’t y-e-o. It’s
this. Y-o-u.” The topic was then completely dropped. The mon¬
itor who was listening from the next room interpreted this as
a thinly veiled wish to marry the interviewer, and it was decided
to stimulate the same site again after the prearranged schedule
had been completed. During the following forty minutes, seven
other points were stimulated, and the patient spoke about
several topics of a completely different and unrelated con¬
tent. Then LP was stimulated again, and the patient started


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


HELL AND HEAVEN WITHIN THE BRAIN 147

making references to the facial hair of the interviewer and con¬
tinued by mentioning pubic hair and his having been the object
of genital sex play in the past. He then expressed doubt about
his sexual identity, saying, “I was thinkin’ if I was a boy or a
girl—which one I’d like to be.” Following another excitation
he remarked with evident pleasure: “You’re doin’ it now,”
and then he said, “I’d like to be a girl.”

In the interpretation of these results it is necessary to consider
the psychological context in which electrical stimulation occurs,
because the personality configuration of the subject, including
both current psychodynamic and psychogenetic aspects, may be
an essential determinant of the results of stimulation. Expression
of feminine strivings in our patient probably was not the ex¬
clusive effect of ESB but the expression of already present per¬
sonality factors which were activated by the stimulation. The
balance between drive and defense may be modified by ESB,
as suggested by the fact that after one stimulation the patient
said without apparent anxiety, “I’d like to be a girl,” but when
this idea was presented to him by the therapist in a later inter¬
view without stimulation, the patient became markedly anxious
and defensive. Minute-to-rainute changes in personality func¬
tion, influenced by the environment and by patient-interviewer
relations, may modify the nature of specific responses, and these
variables, which are difficult to assess, must be kept in mind.


Friendliness and Increased Conversation
Under Electrical Control

Human relations evolve between the two opposite poles of
love and hate which are determined by a highly complex and
little understood combination of elements including basic drives,
cultural imprinting, and refined emotional and intellectual
characteristics. This subject has so many semantic and conceptual
problems that few investigators have dared to approach it ex¬
perimentally, and in spite of its essential importance, most


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


148 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

textbooks of psychology evade its discussion. To define friend¬
liness is difficult although its identification in typical cases is
easy, and in our daily life we are continuously evaluating and
classifying personal contacts as friendly or hostile. A smiling
face, attentive eyes, a receptive hand, related body posture, in¬
tellectual interest, ideological agreement, kind words, sympa¬
thetic comments, and expressions of personal acceptance are
among the common indicators of cordial interpersonal relations.
The expression of friendship is a part of social behavior which
obviously requires contact between two or more individuals.
A mutually pleasurable relation creates a history and provides
each individual with a variety of optic, acoustic, tactile, and
other stimuli which are received and interpreted with a “friendly
bias.” The main characteristic of love and friendship is precisely
that stimuli coming from a favored person are interpreted as
more agreeable than similar stimuli originating from other
sources, and this evaluation is necessarily related to neuronal
activity.

Little is known about the cerebral mechanisms of friendliness,
but as is the case for any behavorial manifestation, no emotional
state is possible without a functioning brain, and it may be
postulated that some cerebral structures are dispensable and
others indispensable both for the interpretation of sensory in¬
puts as amicable and for the expression of friendship. Strong
support for this idea derives from the fact, repeatedly proved in
neurosurgery, that destruction of some parts of the brain, such
as the motor and sensory cortices, produces motor deficits with¬
out modifying affective behavior, while ablation of the frontal
lobes may induce considerable alteration of emotional per¬
sonality. Further support has been provided by electrical stim¬
ulation of the frontal lobes, which may induce friendly mani¬
festations.

In patient A. F., mentioned earlier in connection with pleas¬
urable manifestations, the third interview was characterized by
changes in the character and degree of verbal output following
stimulation of one point in the temporal cortex. Fourteen


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


HELL AND HEAVEN WITHIN THE BRAIN 149

stimulations were applied, seven of them through point RP
located in the inferolateral part of the right frontal lobe cortex,
and the other seven through contacts located on the cortex of
the right temporal lobe and depth of the left and right tem¬
poral lobes. The interview started with about five minutes of
lively conversation, and during the next ten minutes the patient
gradually quieted down until he spoke only about five seconds
during every subsequent two-minute period. Throughout the
interview the therapist encouraged spontaneous expression by
reacting compassionately, by joking with, urging, and reassuring
the patient, and by responding to any information offered. The
attitude never produced more than a simple reply and often not
even that.

In contrast to this basic situation, there were six instances of
sharp increase in verbal communication and its friendly content.
Each of these instances followed within forty seconds after stim¬
ulation of point RP. The only exception was the last excitation
of this point when the voltage had been changed. The increases in
verbal activity were rapid but brief and without any consistency
in subject material, which was typical for the patient. Qualifica¬
tion and quantification of the patient's conversation was made
by analyzing the recorded typescript which was divided into two-
minute periods and judged independently by two investigators
who had no knowledge of the timing or location of stimulations.
Comparison of the two-minute periods before and after these
stimulations revealed a verbal increase from seventeen to eighty-
eight words and a greater number of friendly remarks, from six
to fifty-three. These results were highly significant and their
specificity was clear because no changes in verbalization were
produced by stimulation of any of the other cerebral points.
It was also evident that the evoked changes were not related
to the interviewer’s rather constant verbal activity. It was there¬
fore concluded that the impressive increase in verbal expression
and friendly remarks was the result of electrical stimulation of
a specific point on the cortex of the temporal lobe.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


15


Hallucinations, Recollections, and Illusions

in Man


Hallucinations may be defined as false perceptions in the ab¬
sence of peripheral sensory stimulation, and they probably de¬
pend on two processes: (i) the recollection of stored information
and (2) its false interpretation as an extrinsic experience entering
through sensory inputs. Very little is known about the cerebral
mechanisms responsible for these phenomena, but apparently
the frontotemporal region of the brain is somehow involved
because its electrical stimulation may evoke hallucinations.

In some patients electrical stimulation of the exposed temporal
lobe has produced the perception of music. Occasionally it was
a determined tune which could be recognized and hummed by
the subject, and in some cases it was as if a radio or record were
being played in the operating room. The sound did not seem to
be a recollection but resembled an actual experience in which
instruments of an orchestra or words of a song were heard (174).
These artificially induced hallucinations were not static but
unfolded slowly while the electrode was held in place. A song
was heard from beginning to end and not all at once; in a dream,
familiar places were seen and well-known people spwke and
acted.

Like spontaneous memories, the recollections induced by
ESB could bring back the emotions felt at the time of the orig¬
inal experience, suggesting that neuronal mechanisms keep an

150


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


HALLUCINATIONS, RECOLLECTIONS, ILLUSIONS IN MAN I5I

integrated record of the past, including all the sensory inputs
(visual, auditory, proprioceptive, etc.) and also the emotional
significance of events. Electrical stimulation activated only one
memory without reawakening any of the other records which
must be stored in close proximity. This fact suggests the exist¬
ence of cerebral mechanisms of reciprocal inhibition which
allow the orderly recall of specific patterns of memory without
a flood of unmanageable amounts of stored information. In no
case has brain stimulation produced two psychical experiences
at the same time, and the responses have been on an all-or-
nothing basis.

In one of our patients, complex sensory hallucinations were
evoked on different days when the depth of the tip of the left
temporal lobe was electrically stimulated. The patient said,
“You know, I just felt funny, just now, . . . Right then all of
a sudden somethin’ else came to me—these people—the way
this person talked. This married couple—as though the fellow
came into my mind—as though like he was saying somethin’
like oh my mind drifted for a minute—to somethin’ foolish. . . ,
It seemed like he was coming out with some word—sayin’ some
word silly."

The fact that stimulation of the temporal lobe can induce
complex hallucinations may be considered well established, and
this type of research represents a significant interaction between
neurophysiology and psychoanalysis (133)- The mechanism of
the evoked hallucinations, however, is far from clear, and it is
difficult to know whether the experiences are new creations
based on the recombination of items from memory storage and
thus equivalent to psychotic hallucinations, or if the experiences
are simply an exact playback of the past.

In either case, the applied electricity is not “creating” a new
phenomenon but is triggering the orderly appearance at the
conscious level of materials from the past, mixed in some cases
with present perceptions. The order in the stream of perceived
information is perhaps one of the most interesting qualities of
this behavior because it indicates something about the mechan-


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


152 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

isms for storage of information in the brain. Memory does not
seem to be preserved as single items but as interrelated collec¬
tions of events, like the pearls on a string, and by pulling any
pearl we have access to the whole series in perfect order. If
memory were organized in this way, it would be similar to the
strings of amino acids forming molecules of proteins and carry¬
ing genetic messages. Electrical stimulation may increase gen¬
eral neuronal excitability; and the memory traces which at this
moment have a lower threshold may consequently be reactivated,
reaching the perceptual level and forming the content of the
hallucinatory experience while exerting a reciprocal inhibitory
influence upon other traces. The excitability of individual traces
may be modified by environmental fectors and especially by
the ideological content of the patient’s thoughts prior to stimula¬
tion. Thus electrical excitation of the same point may produce
a series of thematically related hallucinatory experiences with
different specific details, as was the case in the patients that we
have investigated.

All sensory inputs suffer distortion during the normal process
of personal interpretation, which is determined to a great extent
by past experience and depends heavily on cultural factors. A
baby looking at the moon may extend his arms in an attempt
to catch it without realizing the remoteness of celestial bodies.
By comparing past and present experiences, we learn to evaluate
distance, size, intensity, and other qualities of inputs. The
mechanisms for these evaluations do not seem to be genetically
determined and are related to neuronal activity which may be
influenced by direct stimulation of the brain. We must remem¬
ber that our only way to be in touch with external reality is by
transducing physical and chemical events of the surroundings
into electrical and chemical sequences at the sensory receptoiu
level. The brain is not in touch with the environmental reality
but with its symbolic code transmitted by neuronal pathways.
Within this frame of personal distortion, our lives evolve within
a range of “normality.” Beyond this range, the distortion of
perceptions qualifies as illusion. Illusions occur in a wide variety


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


HALLUCINATIONS, RECOLLECTIONS, ILLUSIONS IN MAN 153

of regressed mental states, during moments of keen anticipation,
and as a primary manifestation in some epileptic discharges. An
hallucination is a false perception in the absence of sensory
inputs, while an illusion requires an external sensory source
which is misinterpreted by the individual. This distinction is
convenient, and it will be observed in our discussion, although
in practice the terms often overlap.

The following phenomena have been observed in patients:
(1) illusions (visual, auditory, labyrinthine, memory or deja vu,
sensation of remoteness or unreality), (2) emotions (loneliness,
fear, sadness), (3) psychical hallucinations (vivid memory or a
dream as complex as life experience itself), and (4) forced think¬
ing (stereotyped thoughts crowding into the mind). The first
three groups of phenomena have been induced by different in¬
tracerebral stimulations. The most commonly reported effect
has been the illusion of familiarity or deja vu, which is char¬
acterized by surprise, interruption of conversation, and im¬
mediate spontaneous reporting that something unusual had just
happened. For example, after a stimulation in the inferolateral
part of the frontal lobe, one patient began to reply to the inter¬
viewer’s question but suddenly stopped and said, “I was thinkin’
—it felt like someone else was asking me that before.”
Occasionally a previously initiated statement would be com¬
pleted, but there was always an overt desire to express the
perceived experience. The effect was clearly felt as intrusive
although not disturbing. After several of these experiences, the
patient recognized the special quality of the phenomena and
said, for example, “Hey—I had another strike. I have a feel¬
ing that someone once told me that before.” The reliability
of the response was remarkable, as was the consistency of
its reporting, which was spontaneous and in most cases un¬
solicited. Each instance consisted usually of a reference to a
remark made by the patient or the observer just before or during
the moment of stimulation. The ideational content of the deja
vu was therefore dissimilar following each stimulation, but
it always referred to the theme of the ongoing conversation.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


154 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

The common feature was the sensation, expressed by the patient,
that the words, ideas, or situation were similar to a previous
experience. There was no new perception, only the interpreta¬
tion of a novel input as one already known and familiar. There
was no anxiety or fear in the perception of these illusions, and
the apparent effect was one of interested surprise with a rather
pleasant, amusing quality which made the patient more alert
and communicative. He was eager to report that something
similar had happened before, and the word “before” was used
in reporting most of these incidents. No lasting traces could be
detected, and after the sensation of familiarity had been ex¬
pressed, the patient’s behavior continued in the same vein as
before stimulation.

Knowledge of the cerebral mechanisms of psychic activities
is so elemental that it would not be wise to speculate about the
neuronal causality of illusions of familiarity. However, the fact
that they may be elicited with reliability indicates the probable
existence of interpretive functions in a determined area of the
brain and opens the way for further experimental studies of
how sensory inputs are processed by the individual. Penfield
supposes that the cortex of the temporal lobe has a ganglionic
mechanism which is utilized in the personal assessment of
experiential reality regarding distance, sound, sight, intensity,
strangeness, or familiarity of sensory inputs. This mechanism
would be relatively independent from the mechanism utilized
in the recording of contemporary experience and could be
affected by epileptic abnormality or by direct brain stimulation.
If we accept this hypothesis, we may assume that artificial in¬
fluencing of electrical and chemical neuronal physiology could
play a decisive role in the interpretation of reality with some
independence from past experience and personal structure.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


Inhibitory Effects in Animals and Man


The existence of inhibitory functions in the central nervous
system was described in the last century by Sechenov (198),
Pavlov (171), and other founders of Russian psychology. Inhibi¬
tion is a well-known phenomenon, and it has been the main
theme of several recent symposiums (14, 63, 77). In spite of its
importance, information about inhibitory mechanisms has not
yet been integrated into the general body of scientific knowl¬
edge, and no chapter is devoted to this subject in most neuro¬
physiological, psychological, and pharmacological textbooks.
This lack of interest is surprising because as Morgan (158)
wrote eighty years ago, “When physiologists have solved the
problem of inhibition they will be in a position to consider that
of volition,” and modern investigators maintain that inhibition
and choice, rather than expression and learning, are the central
problems of psychology (63). A shift in interest among scientists
seems necessary to give inhibition its deserved importance, and
the layman should also be aware of the decisive role of inhibi¬
tion in the performance of most of our daily activities.

The sound of a theater crowd at intermission is a continuous
roar without intelligible meaning. During the performance,
however, noises and individual conversations must be inhibited
so that the voices of the actors can be heard. The brain is like a
monumental theater with many millions of neurons capable
of sending messages simultaneously and in many directions.
Most of these neurons are firing nearly continuously, and their

155


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND


156

sensitivity is like that of an enormous synaptic powder barrel
which would explode in epileptic convulsions in the absence
of inhibitory elements (122). During the organized performance
of behavioral responses, most neurons and pathways must re¬
main silent to allow meaningful orders to circulate toward
specific goals. Inhibition is as important as excitation for the
normal physiology of the brain, and some structures have spe¬
cialized inhibitory functions. It should therefore be expected
that, in addition to inducing the many types of activities de¬
scribed in previous sections, ESB can also block performance
of such activities by exciting pools of neurons whose role is to
inhibit these specific responses.

To behave is to choose one pattern among many. To think
we must proceed in some orderly fashion repressing unrelated
ideas; to talk we must select a sequence of appropriate words;
and to listen we need to extract certain information from back¬
ground noise. As stated by Ashby, we must “dispose once and
for all of the idea . . . that the more communication there is
within the brain the better” (6). As we know by personal experi¬
ence, one of the problems of modern civilization is the confusion
produced by a barrage of sensory inputs. We are optically and
acoustically assaulted by scientific literature, news media, propa¬
ganda, and advertisements. The defense is to inhibit the process¬
ing of sensory stimuli. Conscious and unconscious behavioral
inhibition should not be considered passive processes but active
restraints, like holding the reins of a powerful horse, which
prevent the disorderly display of existing energies and potential¬
ities.

Within the central nervous system, the reticular formation
seems to be especially differentiated to modulate or inhibit the
reception of sensory impulses, and some other cerebral structures
including the thalamus, septum, and caudate nucleus also possess
important inhibitory properties which can be activated by ESB.
Three types of inhibitory processes may be induced by electrical
stimulation: (1) sleep, which usually starts slowly and can easily
be interrupted by sensory stimuli; (2) general inhibition, which


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


INHIBITORY EFFECTS IN ANIMALS AND MAN 1 57

affects the whole body, starts as soon as ESB is applied, and per¬
sists in spite of sensory stimulation; and (3) specific inhibition,
which appears immediately, affects only a determined pattern
of behavior such as aggression or food intake, and may or may
not be modified by sensory impulses.

One example of sleep induced in a monkey by application of
ESB is shown in Figure 18. After 30 seconds of stimulation in
the septal area, the animal’s eyes started closing, his head low¬
ered, his body relaxed, and he seemed to fall into a natural state
of sleep. In response to noise or to being touched, the animal
would slowly open his eyes and look around with a dull expres¬
sion for a few seconds before falling asleep again. Similar results
have been obtained in free-ranging monkeys stimulated by
radio. In this situation there was a gradual diminution of spon¬
taneous activity, and then the animals began to doze, closing
their eyes and assuming a typical sleeping posture with heads
down and bodies curved over the knees. Theoretically it should
be possible to treat chronic insomnia by brain stimulation, or
to establish an artificial biological clock of rest and activity by
means of programed stimulation of inhibitory and excitatory
areas of the brain, but these challenging possibilities still require
further investigations.

Motor arrest is an impressive effect consisting of sudden im¬
mobilization of the experimental animal in the middle of
ongoing activities, which continue as soon as stimulation is over.
It is as if a motion picture projector had been stopped, freezing
the subjects in the position in which they were caught. A cat
lapping milk has been immobilized with its tongue out, and a
cat climbing stairs has been stopped between two steps.

Other types of inhibitory effects are more specific and re¬
stricted to only one determined behavioral category. Typical
examples are the inhibition of food intake, aggressiveness, ter¬
ritoriality, and maternal behavior. As these specific inhibitions
do not influence general activities, they could pass unnoticed
if the experimental situation was not properly arranged. Obvi¬
ously inhibition of appetite cannot be demonstrated in the


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


Figure i8

Sleep induced by electrical stimulation of the brain is similar to sponta¬
neous sleep. Above, control. Below, the monkey falls asleep under ESB.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


INHIBITORY EFFECTS IN ANIMALS AND MAN 159

absence of food, nor can changes in maternal behavior be in¬
vestigated when no babies are present. One example of how a
hungry monkey loses appetite under the influence of brain
excitation is presented in Figure 19. At the sight of a banana,
the animal usually shows great interest, leaning forward to
take the fruit, which he eats voraciously and with evident
pleasure. However, his appetite is immediately inhibited as
soon as the caudate nucleus is electrically stimulated. Then the
monkey looks with some interest at the banana without reaching
for it, and may even turn his face away, clearly expressing re¬
fusal. During stimulation the animal is well aware of his sur¬
roundings, reacting normally to noises, moving objects, and
threats, but he is just not interested in food. If a monkey is
stimulated when his mouth is full of banana, he immediately
stops chewing, takes the banana out of his mouth, and throws
it away.

Close to the hunger inhibitory area there is a region which
is involved in inhibition of aggressive behavior. When this part
of the caudate nucleus is stimulated (Figure 20), the normally
ferocious macacus rhesus becomes tranquil, and instead of grab¬
bing, scratching, and biting any approaching object, he sits
peacefully and the investigator can safely touch his mouth and
pet him. During this time the animal is aware of the environ¬
ment but has simply lost his usual irritability, showing that
violence can be inhibited without making the animal sleepy or
depressed. Identification of the cerebral areas responsible for
ferocity would make it possible to block their function and
diminish undesirable aggressiveness without disturbing general
behavioral reactivity.

Similar results have been obtained in chimpanzees, and one
example is presented in Figure 21. Chimpanzee Carlos was an
affectionate animal who enjoyed playing with the investigators
and had learned a variety of tricks including throwing and
catching a ball. Enticed by an expected food reward, he sat
voluntarily in the restraining chair where recordings and ex¬
periments were conducted. Like most chimpanzees, Carlos was


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


INHIBITORY EFFECTS IN ANIMALS AND MAN


l6l


Figure jp

The normal reaction of a monkey is to stretch its arms and body to take an
offered banana (above left). Appetite is immediately inhibited by stimula¬
tion of the caudate nucleus (below left). The monkey is not interested in
food (above) and even turns away from the fruit (53). Photo: Eric School.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


Figure 20

Rhesus monkeys are usually ferocious and will often launch attacks, trying
to catch and bite the observers (above). This ferocity is inhibited during
stimulation of the caudate nucleus, and then (below) it is safe to touch the
animal, which extends its arm to meet the observer’s hcind without making
any threatening gestures (53).


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


Figure 21

Chimpanzee Carlos reacts with offensive-defensive manifestations when
touched by a stranger (left). During caudate stimulation, the chimpanzee
is inhibited and can be teased without evoking any response.


httpVwww. propheticexplorer.com


164 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

rather temperamental and was easily provoked into a tantrum
by being punished, frustrated, or merely teased. He liked to be
touched by people he knew but not by strangers. Figure 21 (left)
shows his defensive, anxious reaction when approached by an
unfamiliar investigator. His fear and aggressive manifestations
were, however, completely inhibited during electrical stimula¬
tion of the caudate nucleus, as shown in Figure 21 [right). The
animal displayed no emoticm, appeared peaceful, and could be
teased without any resulting disturbance.

Other experiments in monkeys have also confirmed the
pacifying possibilities of ESB. In the autocratic social structure
of a monkey colony the boss enjoys a variety of privileges such
as choosing female partners, feeding first, displacing other
animals, and occupying most of the cage while the other monkeys
avoid his proximity and crowd together in a far comer (see
Figure 22). This hierarchical position is maintained by subtle
communication of gestures and postures: a boss may look directly
at a submissive member of the group who will glance only
furtively at his superior, and the boss may paw the floor and
threaten by opening his mouth or uttering a warning cry if
any low-ranking animal does not keep a suitable distance. This
social dominance has been abolished by stimulation applied
for 5 seconds once a minute for one hour to the caudate nucleus
in the boss monkey. During this period the animal’s facial ex¬
pression appeared more peaceful both to the investigator and
to the other animals, who started to circulate freely around the
cage without observing their usual respect. They actually ignored
the boss, crowding around him without fear. During the stimula¬
tion hour, the boss's territoriality completely disappeared, his
walking time diminished, and he performed no threatening or
aggressive acts against other monkeys in the colony. It was
evident that this change in behavior had been determined by
brain stimulation because about ten minutes after ESB was dis¬
continued, the boss had reasserted his authority and the other
animals feared him as before. His territoriality was as well
established as during control periods, and he enjoyed his cus¬
tomary privileges.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


Figure aa

Monkey colonies form autocratic societies in which the territoriality of the
boss is clearly shown. He occupies more than half of the cage (above). Radio
stimu^tion of an inhibitory area of the brain (below) modifies the boss’s
facial expression, and the other monkeys crowd fearlessly around the
former boss in his own corner.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


l66 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

The old dream of an individual overpowering the strength
of a dictator by remote control has been fulfilled, at least in our
monkey colonies, by a combination of neurosurgery and elec¬
tronics, demonstrating the possibility of intraspecies instrumen¬
tal manipulation of hierarchical organization. As shown in
Figure 2$, a monkey named Ali, who was the powerful and ill-
tempered chief of a colony, often expressed his hostility sym¬
bolically by biting his hand or by threatening other members of
the group. Radio stimulation in Ali’s caudate nucleus blocked
his usual aggressiveness so effectively that the animal could be
caught inside the cage without danger or difl&culty. During
stimulation he might walk a few steps, but he never attempted to
attack another animal. Then a lever was attached to the cage
wall, and if it was pressed, it automatically triggered a five
seconds’ radio stimulation of Ali. From time to time some of the
submissive monkeys touched the lever, which was located close
to the feeding tray, triggering the stimulation of Ali. A female
monkey named Elsa soon discovered that Ali’s aggressiveness
could be inhibited by pressing the lever, and when Ali threat¬
ened her, it was repeatedly observed that Elsa responded by
lever pressing. Her attitude of looking straight at the boss was
highly significant because a submissive monkey would not dare
to do so, for fear of immediate retaliation. The total number of
Ali’s aggressive acts diminished on the days when the lever was
available, and although Elsa did not become the dominant
animal, she was responsible for blocking many attacks against
herself and for maintaining a peaceful coexistence within the
whole colony.

Appeasement of instinctive aggressiveness has also been dem¬
onstrated in an animal species which for generations has been
bred to increase its ferocious behavior: the brave bull.jSome
races of bulls have been genetically selected for their aggressive
behavior just as others have been bred for farm work or meat
supply. Brave bulls are stronger and more agile than their
tamer relatives, and these differences in appearance and behavior
must be supported at the neurophysiological level by different


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


Figure 25

Above, Ali, the boss of the colony, expresses his ill temper by biting his
own hand. Below, a submissive monkey, Elsa, has learned to press a lever
which triggers radio stimulation of Ali, inhibiting his aggressive behavior

(51)-


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


i68


PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

mechanisms of responses. The sight of a person, which is neutral
for a tame bull, will tri^er a deadly attack in a brave one. If
we could detect functional diflEerences in the brains of these
two breeds we could discover some clues about the neurological
basis of aggression. This was the reason for implanting electrodes
in the brains of several bulls. After surgery, different cerebral
points were explored by radio stimulation while the animal
was free in a small farm ring. Motor effects similar to those
observed in cats and monkeys were evoked, including head
turning, lifting of one leg, and circling. Vocalizations were often
elicited, and in one experiment to test the reliability of results,
a point was stimulated lOO times and lOO consecutive “moo’s”
were evoked.

It was also repeatedly demonstrated that cerebral stimulation
produced inhibition of aggressive behavior, and a bull in full
charge could be abruptly stopped, as shown in Figure 24. The
result seemed to be a combination of motor effect, forcing the
bull to stop and to turn to one side, plus behavioral inhibition of
the aggressive drive. Upon repeated stimulation, these animals
were rendered less dangerous than usual, and for a period of
several minutes would tolerate the presence of investigators in
the ring without launching any attack.

Maternal behavior is one of the instincts most widely shared
by mammals, and a baby rhesus monkey enjoys the first months
of his life resting in the arms of the mother, who spends most
of her time hugging, nursing, grooming, and taking care of him.
If the pair are forcibly separated, the mother becomes very
disturbed and expresses her anxiety by prowling about rest¬
lessly, threatening observers, and calling to her baby with a
special cooing sound. It is promptly reciprocated by the little
one, who is also extremely anxious to return to the protective
maternal embrace. This strong bond can be inhibited by ESB,
as demonstrated in one of our colonies, consisting of Rose and
Olga with their respective babies, Roo and Ole, plus a male
monkey. Maternal affection was expressed as usual without
being handicapped by the presence of electrodes implanted in


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


INHIBITORY EFFECTS IN ANIMALS AND MAN 169

both females (Figure 25). Several simple motor effects evoked
by ESB (such as head turning or flexion of the arm) did not
disrupt mother-infant relations, but when a lo-second radio
stimulation was applied to the mesencephalon of Rose, an aggres¬
sive attitude was evoked with rapid circling around the cage
and self-biting of the hand, leg, or flank. For the next eight to
ten minutes, maternal instinct was disrupted, and Rose com¬
pletely lost interest in her baby, ignoring his tender calls and
rejecting his attempts to approach her. Little Roo looked rather
disoriented and sought refuge and warmth with the other
mother, Olga, who accepted both babies without hesitation.
About ten minutes after ESB, Rose regained her natural ma¬
ternal behavior and accepted Roo in her arms. This experiment
was repeated several times on different days with similar dis¬
ruptive results for the mother-infant relation. It should be
concluded, therefore, that maternal behavior is somehow de¬
pendent on the proper functioning of mesencephalic structures
and that short ESB applied in this area is able to block the
maternal instinct for a period of several minutes.

Information about inhibitory effects induced by electrical
stimulation of the human brain is more limited than our
knowledge about inhibition in animals. The subject has great
importance, however, because one of the primary aims of human
therapy is to inhibit undesirable sensations or excessive neuronal
activities. Some patients experience a type of “intractable pain”
which cannot be alleviated by the usual analgesic drugs, and
their unbearable suffering could be blocked by direct interven¬
tion in brain structures where sensations reach the perceptual
level of consciousness. Illnesses such as Parkinson’s disease and
chorea are characterized by continuous involuntary movements
maintained by neuronal discharges originating in specific
cerebral structures which could be inhibited by suitable therapy.
Assaultive behavior constitutes one of the most disturbing
symptoms of a group of mental illnesses and is probably related
to the abnormal reactivity of limbic and reticular areas of the
brain. Epilepsy is caused by explosive bursts of electrical dis-


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


Figure 24

Brave bulls are dangerous animals which will attack any intruder into
the arena. The animal in full charge can be abrupdy stopped (above) by
radio stimulation of the brain. After several stimulations, there is a lasting
inhibition of aggressive behavior.


httpVwww.propheticexplorer.com


Figure 35

Above, materaal behavior is tenderly expressed by both mother monkeys.
Rose and Olga, who hug, groom, and nurse their babies, Roo and Ole.
Below, radio stimulation of Rose for ten seconds in the mesencephalon


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


INHIBITORY EFFECTS IN ANIMALS AND MAN


»73


evoked a rage response expressed by self-biting and abandoning her baby,
Roo. For the next ten minutes Rose has lost all her maternal interest
(above), igntuing the appealing calls of Roo who seeks refuge with the
other mother. Below, Rose is sucking her foot and still ignoring her baby.


174 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

charges which might be inhibited at their original source.
Anxiety poses very difficult therapeutic problems, and its basic
mechanism might be traced to the increased reactivity of specific
areas of the brain. All these disturbances could be cured, or at
least diminished, if we had a better knowledge of their anatom¬
ical and functional bases and could inhibit the activity of
neurons responsible for the phenomena.

In the near future, important advances may be expected in
this field, and already we have some initial clinical information
demonstrating that ESB can induce inhibitory effects in man.
For example, ESB applied to the supplementary motor cortex
has slowed down or completely arrested voluntary motor activity
without producing pain or any concomitant loss of conscious¬
ness (174). In other cases, stimulation of the frontotemporal
region has caused an “arrest response” characterized by sudden
cessation of voluntary movements which may be followed by
confusion, inappropriate or garbled speech, and overt changes
of mood (128, 186). More interesting from the therapeutic point
of view is the fact that abnormal hyperkinetic movements have
been inhibited for the duration of the applied ESB, allowing
patients to perform skilled acts which were otherwise impossible.
In these cases, a small portable instrument could perhaps be used
by the patient to stimulate his own brain in order to inhibit
abnormal motility temporarily and restore useful skills (160).

Somnolence with inexpressive faces, tendency to lower the
eyelids, and spontaneous complaint of sleepiness, but without
impairment of consciousness, has been produced in some
patients by stimulation of the fornix and thalamus (7, 199). In
some cases, sleep with pleasant dreams has been induced, and
occasionally sleep or awakening could be obtained from the
same cerebral point by using a slow or high frequency of stimula¬
tion (96, 229). Diminished awareness, lack of normal insight,
and impairment of ability to think have been observed by several
investigators during excitation of different points of the limbic
system (74, 120). Often the patients performed automatisms such
as undressing or fumbling, without remembering the incidents


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


INHIBITORY EFFECTS IN ANIMALS AND MAN 175

afterward. Some of our patients said they felt as if their minds
were blank or as if they had been drinking a lot of beer. These
results indicate that consciousness may be related to specific
mechanisms located in determined areas of the brain. They con¬
trast with the full awareness preserved when other areas of the
brain were stimulated.

Arrest of speech has been most common of all inhibitory effects
observed during electrical stimulation of the human brain (8),
and this fact is probably due to the extensive representation of
the speech areas in the temporal lohe, and also to the facility
of exploring verbal expression just by conversing with the
patients. The most typical effect is cessation of counting. For
example, one of our female patients was asked to count numbers,
starting from one. When she had counted to fourteen, ESB was
applied, and speech was immediately interrupted, without
changes in respiration or in facial expression, and without pro¬
ducing fear or anxiety. When stimulation ceased seconds later,
the patient immediately resumed counting. She said that she
did not know why she had stopped; although she had heard the
interviewer encouraging her to continue, she had been unable to
speak. If the same stimulation was applied while the patient was
silent, no effect could be detected by the observer or by the
patient herself. In other cases, patients have been able to read
and comprehend or to write messages that they were temporarily
unable to verbalize (200).

It is known that ESB activation of pleasurable areas of the
brain can inhibit pain perception in animals (42, 146), and
similar results have also been reported in man, with an immedi¬
ate relief of pain following septal stimulation (98). Because of
the multiplicity of pathways in the nervous system which can
transmit disagreeable sensations, it is often not possible to
block all of them, and to alleviate unbearable suffering it may
be easier to inhibit the cerebral structures involved in the
psychological evaluation of pain, blocking the components of
anxiety and diminishing the subjective sensation of unpleasant¬
ness.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


176 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

There are also a few reports indicating that abnormal violence
may be reduced by ESB: Heath has a movie showing a patient
who self-stimulated his own brain in order to suppress an ag¬
gressive mood as it developed, and we have described a case in
whom crises of antisocial conduct during which the patient
attacked members of his own family were considerably dimin¬
ished by repeated stimulations of the amygdaloid nucleus (60).

We are only at the beginning of our experimental understand¬
ing of the inhibitory mechanisms of behavior in animals and
man, but their existence has already been well substantiated.
It is clear that manifestations as important as aggressive responses
depend not only on environmental circumstances but also on
their interpretation by the central nervous system where they
can be enhanced or totally inhibited by manipulating the re¬
activity of specific intracerebral structures.

Violence, including its extreme manifestation of war, is de¬
termined by a variety of economic and ideological factors; but
we must realize that the elite who make the decisions, and even
the individual who obeys orders and holds a rifle, require for
their behavioral performance the existence of a series of intra¬
cerebral electrical signals which could be inhibited by other
conflicting signals generating in areas such as the caudate nu¬
cleus, Inhibitory areas of the central nervous system can be ac¬
tivated by electrical stimulation as well as by the physiological
impact of sensory inputs which carry messages, ideas, and pat¬
terned behavior. Reception of information from the environ¬
ment causes electrical and chemical changes in the brain
substance, and the stimuli shape the functional characteristics
of individual interpretation and integration, determining the
degree and quality of his reactions. Human relations are not
going to be governed by electrodes, but they could be better
understood if we considered not only environmental factors but
also the intracerebral mechanisms responsible for their recep¬
tion and elaboration.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


EVALUATION OF
ELECTRICAL CONTROL
OF THE BRAIN


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


Because the brain controls the whole body and all mental
activities, ESB could possibly become a master control of human
behavior by means of man-made plans and instruments. In
previous sections we have described methodology for brain
stimulation and many efEects evoked by ESB, This section will
discuss the meaning of these results, the mechanisms involved,
the expected limitations, and the problems facing investigators.
How physiological or artificial is the electrical activation of
neurons? How predictable? Who is responsible for acts per¬
formed under ESB—the stimulated subject or the scientist?
Which benefits or risks may be expected in the future? Can we
modulate perception and expression by electrical means? Can
we expect that brain investigation will provide a new conception
of the human mind? These and other questions confront the
investigator while he is sending radio messages to induce a
muscle to contract, a heart to beat faster, or a sensation to be
felt. Evaluation of these experiments requires the formulation
of appropriate theoretical concepts and the design of working
hypotheses.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


Brain Stimulation Triggers Physiological
Mechanisms


Electrical stimulation of the brain is in reality a rather crude
technique based on the delivery of a monotonous train of pulses
without modulation, without code, without specific meaning,
and without feedback to the pool of neurons which by chance is
located within the artificial electrical field created by stimula¬
tion. Temporal and spatial characteristics and the complexity of
multisynaptic relays, delays, and convergent and divergent cor¬
relations are also absent. The intensity of several volts usually
employed in ESB is hundreds of times higher than spontaneous
neuronal potentials, which are measured in millivolts.

It is reasonable, therefore, that doubts have been expressed
about the normality of responses obtained by brain stimulation.
It is difficult to compare normal behavior with electrically
evoked effects, considering the complications of operative
trauma, artificiality of experimental conditions, and lack of
specificity of ESB (4). “Electrical stimulus, unlike physiological
excitation, unselectively affects all elements of a similar thresh¬
old that lie within the radius of action of the electrodes” (107),
and in the majority of cases cortical stimulation “has failed to
elicit anything but fragments of skilled movements” (224).
Cobb (33) considers the greatest oversimplification the belief
“among those not educated in physiology, that the electrical
stimulation of a nerve or brain center closely resembles normal

180


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


BRAIN STIMULATION TRIGGERS MECHANISMS l8l

neuronal stimulation. Electrical stimulation, however, pro¬
duces little that resembles the normal.”

It is certainly true that many responses evoked by ESB are
simple contractions of a small group of muscles without coordi¬
nation, skill, or apparent purpose, and that many effects have
abnormal characteristics far removed from the harmonious
elegance of voluntary activities. It is also true, however, that
with the development of technology to stimulate the brain in
free subjects, many of the responses obtained in both animals
and man are indistinguishable from spontaneous behavior. Se¬
quential behavior, sexual activity, alimentary responses, walk¬
ing, yawning, fighting, and many other eflEects documented in
previous sections demonstrate conclusively that ESB can evoke
purposeful, well-coordinated, skillful activities of great re¬
finement and complexity. Patients have accepted evoked psycho¬
logical changes, such as an increase in friendliness, as natural
manifestations of their own personality and not as artificial
results of the tests. The question to answer is not whether but
how the application of a crude train of messageless electricity
may result in the performance of a highly refined and compli¬
cated response.

To explain this apparent contradiction we must consider the
normal mechanisms of physiological performance. In a simple
act such as the flexion of a limb, the nerve impulse initiates a
very complex process which includes well-organized, sequen¬
tial, metabolic activities and structural changes in the myo-
proteins resulting in the shortening of muscle fibers. These
processes do not depend on neural impulses and have been
established by genetic determination as intrinsic properties
of muscular tissue unfolding in a similar way under nervous
command or direct electrical excitation. Electricity does not
create muscle contraction; it simply activates a pre-established
pattern of response. At the neurological level, flexion of a
limb requires the propagation of many well-organized impulses
from the brain to the different groups of muscles, the processing
of proprioceptive information from many regions, the adjust-


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


i82 physical control of the mind

merits of servomechanisms, visceral adaptations, and many other
electrical, thermal, chemical, mechanical, and physiological
pre-established phenomena and correlations. The applied elec¬
tricity is only the depolarizing trigger of a group of neurons;
it starts processes which once activated are relatively inde¬
pendent of the initial cause. Evoked behavior is like a chain
reaction in which the final result depends more on the struc¬
ture and organization of the components than on the trigger.
To understand the role of electrical stimulation, we may ask
whether the finger of the person pushing a button to launch
a man into orbit is responsible for the performance of the com¬
plicated machinery or for the sequence of events. Obviously the
finger, like a simple electrical stimulus, is only the trigger of
a programed series of interdependent events and cannot be
accepted as the real cause of capsules orbiting around the earth.

A tentative explanation of some of the mechanisms involved
in motor activities has been proposed in the theory of fragmental
representation of behavior (53) which postulates that behavior
is organized as fragments which have anatomical and functional
reality within the brain, where they can be the subject of ex¬
perimental analysis. The different fragments may be combined
in different sequences like the notes of a melody, resulting in a
succession of motor acts which constitute specific behavioral
categories such as licking, climbing, or walking. The theory
may perhaps be clarified with one example. If I wish to take a
cookie from the table, this wish may be considered a force called
“the starter” because it will determine the initiation of a series
of motor acts. The starter includes drives, motivations, emo¬
tional perceptions, memories, and other processes. To take the
cookie it is necessary to organize a motor plan, a mechanical
strategy, and to decide among several motor choices, because the
cookie may be taken with the left or right hand, directly with
the mouth, or even by using the feet if one has simian skills.
Choice, strategies, motor planning, and adjustments depend
on a set of cerebral structures, “the organizer,” which is different
from the set employed by the starter, because the desire for


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


BRAIN STIMULATION TRIGGERS MECHANISMS 183

cookies may exist in hungry people or in completely paralyzed
patients, and the hands can move and reach the table for many
different reasons even if there are no cookies. Finally, the actual
contraction of muscles for the performance of the selected
movement to reach the cookie—for example, using the right
hand—depends on a cerebral set, “the performer,” different
from the previous two, because motor representation of hands,
mouth, and feet is situated in different areas of the brain, and
the choice of muscle group to be activated is under the super¬
vision of a given organizer. Naturally, there is a close correlation
among these three basic mechanisms, and also between them and
other cerebral functions. The concept of a brain center as a
visible anatomical locus is unacceptable in modem physiology,
but the participation of a constellation of neuronal groups
(a functional set) in a specific act is more in agreement with
our present knowledge. The functional set may be formed by
the neurons of nuclei feir from one another, for instance, in
the cerebellum, motor cortex, pallidum, thalamus, and red
nucleus, forming a circuit in close mutual dependence, and re¬
sponsible for a determined act such as picking up a cookie with
the right hand.

If we accept the existence of anatomical representation of
the three functional sets—starter, organizer, and performer—
it is logical that they can be activated by different types of trig¬
gers, and that the evoked results will be related to the previous
experiences linked to the set. The same set, evoking a similar
behavioral response, may be activated by physiological stimuli,
such as sensory perceptions and ideations, or by artificial stimuli,
such as electrical impulses. When we stimulate the brain through
implanted electrodes we can, depending on the location of con¬
tacts, activate the starter, the organizer, or* the performer of
different behavioral reactions, so that natural and artificial
stimuli may interplay with one another, as has been experi¬
mentally demonstrated.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


i8


Electrical Activation of the “Will”


The theoretical considerations of the previous section may
facilitate the understanding of so-called willful, free, or spon¬
taneous behavior which to a great extent depends on pre-estab¬
lished mechanisms, some of them inborn and others acquired
through learning. When a child takes his first steps or when an
adult learns a new skill like tennis or typing, the initial move¬
ments are clumsy and require considerable attention and effort
in every detail. Coordination progressively improves, unneces¬
sary muscular tension diminishes, and the movements proceed
with speed, economy, and elegance without being thought
about. Acquisition of a skill means the automation of patterns of
response with the establishment of spatial and temporal se¬
quences. The voluntary aspects of willful activity are the pur¬
pose for it and the initiation of performance, while most of the
details of complex movements and adaptation to changing cir¬
cumstances are performed automatically. We may consider
that the role of the will is mainly to trigger previously established
mechanisrns. Ohyionsly the will is not responsible for the chem¬
istry of muscular contraction, the electrical processes of neural
transmission, or the intimate organization of responses. These
phenomena depend on spindle discharges, cerebellar activation,
synaptic junctions, reciprocal inhibitions, and many other
mechanisms which are not only beyond consciousness but may
be beyond our present knowledge and comprehension. The
uniqueness of voluntary behavior lies in its initial dependence

184


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


ELECTRICAL ACTIVATION OF THE “WILL” 185

on the integration of a vast number of personal past experiences
and present receptions.

Volition itself must be related to neuronal activities, and it
may be asked whether either appropriate sensory perceptions or
artificial electrical stimulation could induce neuronal pools
involved in decision-making to discharge in a like manner, I
shall not enter into the controversial issues of causality and de¬
termination of free behavior, but on the basis of experimental
findings it is reasonable to assume that voluntary and electrical
triggering can activate existing cerebral mechanisms in a similar
way. If spontaneous and electrically evoked behavior involve
participation of the same set of cerebral areas, then both types
of behavior should be able to interact by modifying each others’
inhibitory and excitatory influences. This possibility has been
proved experimentally.

As described by Hess (107) and as observed also in our ex¬
periments, excitation of some points in the subthalamus of the
cat induces a clockwise rotation of the head, and the effect of
low intensity and low frequency (8 cycles per second) stimula¬
tion can be counteracted by the animal. The head starts rotat¬
ing slowly and then is brought back to normal position by a
quick voluntary jerk, the process repeating several times until
stimulation ceases. If the intensity of stimulation is increased,
the corrective movements disappear and rotation of the head
progresses slowly but continuously, followed by rotation of the
body on its longitudinal axis until the cat lies on its back. Then
with a sudden jerk the animal abruptly completes the turn and
springs to its feet. The explanation of these results may be as
follows: During the initial part of the evoked head rotation, its
abnormal position should produce normal proprioceptive and
vestibular stimuli, starting a reflex reaction to slow down and
counteract the electrically evoked effect. As soon as the cat is
on its back, however, artificial and natural stimuli work to¬
gether, the first to continue the turning, and the second to bring
the animal to its usual horizontal position; the summation of
these two actions would explain the sudden jerk. Interaction


http'/www. propheticexplorer.com


186 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

between evoked and spontaneous activity has also been ob¬
served during conditioning experiments with cats in which
the animals often tried to suppress motor movements induced
by ESB (89).

A clear example of algebraic summation between voluntary
and evoked motility was observed in one of our cats with elec¬
trodes implanted in the left hidden motor cortex (48). Electrical
stimulation induced an extension and raising of the right fore¬
paw with proper postural adaptation. Offering of fish to the
animal resulted in a similar extension and raising of the limb
in order to seize the food. Simultaneous presentation of the fish
and stimulation of the cortex produced a motor response of
greater amplitude than usual; the cat miscalculated the neces¬
sary movement and overshot his target. He was unable to catch
the food until he made a series of corrective adjustments, and
then the fish was successfully captured and eaten. In addition
to demonstrating the interrelation between evoked and spon¬
taneous responses, this experiment also proved that the animal
was aware of an artificial disturbance, and after a brief period
of trial and error was able to correct its performance accordingly.

In the play of forces between spontaneous and evoked re¬
sponses, which one is more powerful? Will one of them be pre¬
potent over the other? Experimental results demonstrate that
when there is a conflict in the response, the stronger stimulus
dominates. For example, stimulation of the left sulcus presyl-
vius with 0.6 milliamperes in a cat named Nero caused a small
flexion of the right foreleg. When Nero was jumping from a
table to the floor, the same excitation did not produce any visi¬
ble effect, and the animal landed with perfect coordination,
showing good voluntary control of all his limbs. Electrical
flexion of the foreleg had therefore been completely inhibited
by the peremptory need to use the musculature in the jump.
If stimulation intensity was increased up to 1.8 milliamperes,
flexion of the limb appeared even when Nero was air borne in
the middle of a jump, and landing was disrupted by the inability
to use the right foreleg. In general, electrical stimulation of the


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


ELECTRICAL ACTIVATION OF THE “wILL” 187

brain was dominant over voluntary behavior, provided that
its intensity was sufficiently increased.

It is known that reflexes are predictable responses, rigidly
patterned and blindly performed. Similarly, electrical excita¬
tion of a peripheral motor nerve induces a stereotyped move¬
ment with little adaptation to external circumstances. In con¬
trast, willful activity generally has a purpose, and its perform¬
ance is adapted for the attainment of a determined aim, with a
continuous processing of proprioceptive and exteroceptive sen¬
sory information, with the use of feedback mechanisms, with
capacity for instantaneous readjustment of the central com¬
mand to adapt to changes in the environment, and with pre¬
diction of the future which requires spatiotemporal calculation
of speed, direction, and strategies of moving targets. Depend¬
ing on the location of cerebral stimulation, the responses ob¬
tained by ESB may either be similar to a blind reflex or have
all the above-mentioned characteristics of voluntary activity.

Stimulation of some points in the motor cortex and motor
pathways in the cat, monkey, and other animals may produce
simple movements, such as the flexion of a limb, which are com¬
pletely stereotyped and lack adaptation. These effects may be
interpreted as the activation of efferent structures where the
pattern of response has already been decided. At this level, the
neural functions are of conduction rather than of integration
and organization, and only minor variations are possible in
the circulating impulses, regardless of whether their origin was
spontaneous or artificial. To the contrary, there is plenty of
evidence that many of the effects evoked by ESB are oriented
toward the accomplishment of a specific aim with adaptation
of the motor performance to unexpected changes in environ¬
mental circumstances. The following examples substantiate
this statement.

In the cat, electrical stimulation of the inferior part of the
sulcus presylvius consistently induced licking movements with
well-organized opening and closing of the mouth and phasic
protrusion of the tongue. Under anesthesia, the licking was


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


l88 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

automatic and purposeless; but in the awake, free-moving
animal the response was directed toward some useful purpose,
and the cat searched for a target to lick—food, the hands of the
experimenter, the floor, or its own fur. In this case, motor per¬
formance and posture of the whole body adapted to the experi¬
mental setting, and in order to lick the investigator’s hand, for
example, the cat advanced a few steps and approached the hand
even if it moved slowly away. Another example of adaptation to
the environment is the “avoidance of obstacles” (48). Stimula¬
tion of the middle part of the presylvian sulcus in the cat in¬
duced a contralateral turning of the head in the horizontal
plane. The effect was reliable, but when the movement was
interrupted by placing an obstacle such as a book in its path,
the animal modified its performance and raised its head to
avoid the interposed obstacle before continuing the evoked
head turning.

The adaptability of artificially induced cerebral responses to
changes in the environment has been deafly demonstrated by
rhesus monkeys’ aggressive behavior which was selectively
directed by the animals against their natural enemies within the
group with a motor pattern of chasing and fighting which con¬
tinuously changed according to the unpredictable strategies
of those under attack. In this case, ESB evidently did not evoke
a predetermined motor effect but an emotional state of in¬
creased aggressiveness which was served by pre-established motor
skills and directed according to the previous history of social
relations (53).

Similar experiments have been performed in roosters (m).
If the bird was alone, motor restlessness was the only observable
effect of ESB, while the same stimulation of a rooster in a group
produced a state of increased aggressiveness and attacks on other
birds. Sharp fighting ensued with perfectly coordinated, typical
patterns of attack and defense in the group.

We may conclude that ESB can activate and influence some
of the cerebral mechanisms involved in willful behavior. In
this way we are able to investigate the neuronal functions re¬


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


ELECTRICAL ACTIVATION OF THE “wILL” 189

lated to the so-called will, and in the near future this experi¬
mental approach should permit clarification of such highly
controversial subjects as “freedom,” “individuality,” and “spon¬
taneity” in factual terms rather than in elusive semantic dis¬
cussions. The possibility of influencing willful activities by
electrical means has obvious ethical implications, which will be
discussed later.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


19


Characteristics and Limitations
of Brain Control


The possibility of man’s controlling the thoughts of other men
has ranked as high in human fantasy as the control over trans¬
mutation of metals, the possession of wings, or the power to
take a trip to the moon. Our generation has witnessed the ac¬
complishment of so many nearly impossible tasks that today we
are ready to accept almost anything. In the world of science,
however, speculation and fantasy cannot replace truth.

There is already abundant evidence that ESB can control a
wide range of functions, including motor activities and mental
manifestations, in animals and in man. We know that by electri¬
cal stimulation of specific cerebral structures we can make a
person friendlier or influence his train of thought. In spite of
its spectacular potential, ESB has practical and theoretical limi¬
tations which should be delineated.

Predictability

When we get into a car and press the starter, the motor will
almost certainly begin to run in a few seconds. The brain, how¬
ever, does not have the simplicity of a machine. When electrodes
are introduced into a cerebral structure and stimulation is ap¬
plied for the first time, we really cannot predict the quality,
localization, or intensity of the evoked effects. We do not even

igo


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


CHARACTERISTICS AND LIMITATIONS OF BRAIN CONTROL 191

know that a response will appear. This is especially true for
complex structures, like the amygdaloid region, which have
great functional multiplicity; but it is also the case in relatively
simple areas like the motor cortex. The anatomical and func¬
tional variability of the brain are factors which hinder predic¬
tion of ESB results (53). The importance of these limiting factors
is compounded by alterations in regional activity related to
changes in local, general, and environmental circumstances.
We know that certain functions are represented in specific
cerebral structures, but the precise location of a desired target
requires careful exploration, and implantation of only a few
contacts may be rather disappointing. After repeated explora¬
tions of a selected area in several subjects, predictability of the
observed responses in that area for that species can be assessed
with a higher degree of confidence. Present information about
functional mapping in most cerebral areas is still rather incom¬
plete.


Functional Monotom
✓ •

Electrical stimulation is a nonspecific stimulus which always
activates a group of neurons in a similar way because there is
no coded neural message or feedback carried to the stimulating
source. The responses, therefore, are repeated in a monotonous
way, and any variability is related to changes in the stimulated
subject. This functional monotomy rules out the possibility
that an investigator could direct a subject toward a target or
induce him, like a robot, to perform any complex task under
remote-controlled orders.

Science fiction has already imagined men with intracerebral
electrodes engaged in all kinds of mischief under the perverse
guidance of radio waves sent by some evil scientist. The inherent
limitations of ESB make realization of this fantasy very remote.
The flexion of a limb can be radio controlled and an emotional
state could also be set remotely, but the sequences of responses
and adaptation to the environment depend on established intra¬


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND


192

cerebral mechanisms whose complexity cannot be duplicated
by ESB. Even i£ we could stimulate diflEerent points of the brain
through twenty or thirty channels, it would be necessary to have
sensory feedback and computerized calculations for the pro¬
graming of simple spatiotemporal sequences. Induced perform¬
ance of more complex acts would be far beyond available meth¬
odology. It should be clarified that I am talking about directing
each phase of a response, £md not about complex behavior such
as lever pressing or fighting, which may be triggered by ESB
but develops according to individual experiential circumstances
which are beyond electrical control.

Skillful Performance

Many of the activities elicited by ESB certainly can be cate¬
gorized as skillful. Pressing a lever, climbing a cage wall, and
looking for a fight require good motor coordination and suit¬
able processing of information. Walking on two feet, which
has been repeatedly elicited in monkeys during stimulation of
the red nucleus (Figure 12), is another example of refined co¬
ordination and equilibrium seldom observed in spontaneous be¬
havior.

These facts demonstrate that ESB may result in different
types of skillful performance, but it must be understood that
these responses represent the manifestation of skills already
familiar to the subject. Motor learning requires the reception of
sensory inputs not only from the environment but also from the
performing muscles, and a relatively lengthy process of motor
training is required to perfect reactions related to each type
of performance and to store the appropriate ideokinetic for¬
mulas in the brain for future reference and use. Much of the
brain participates in learning, and a monotonous train of pulses
applied to a limited pool of neurons cannot be expected to
mimic its complexity. The acquisition of a new skill is theoreti¬
cally and practically beyond the possibilities of electrical stimu-


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


CHARACTERISTICS AND LIMITATIONS OF BRAIN CONTROL 193

lation, but ESB can create the desire to perform certain acts
which may be skillful.

Individual Stability

Personal identity and reactivity depend on a large number
of factors accumulated through many years of experience inter¬
acting with genetic trends within the complexity of neuronal
networks. Language and culture are among the essential ele¬
ments of individual structure. All these elements cannot be
substituted for by the delivery of electricity to the brain. Mem¬
ories can be recalled, emotions awakened, and conversations
speeded up by ESB, but the patients always express themselves
according to their background and experience. It is possible to
disturb consciousness, to confuse sensory interpretations, or to
elicit hallucinations during excitation of the brain. It is also
possible to induce fear, pleasure, and changes in aggressive be¬
havior, but these responses do not represent the creation of a
new personality—only a change in emotionality or reactivity
with the appearance of manifestations closely related to the
previous history of the subject.

ESB cannot substitute one personality for another because
electricity cannot replicate or influence all the innumerable
factors which integrate individual identity. Contrary to the
stories of science fiction writers, we cannot modify political
ideology, past history, or national loyalties by electrical tickling
of some secret areas of the brain. A complete change in per¬
sonality is beyond the theoretical and practical potential of
ESB, although limited modification of a determined aspect of
personal reactions is possible. In spite of important limitations,
we are certainly facing basic ethical problems about when, why,
and how some of these changes are acceptable, and especially
about who will have the responsibility of influencing the cere¬
bral activities of other human beings.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


194


PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND


Technical Complexity

Electrical stimulation of the central nervous system requires
careful planning, complex methodology, and the skillful col¬
laboration of specialists with knowledge and experience in
anatomy, neurophysiology, and psychology. Several prerequi¬
sites, including construction of the delicate multilead elec¬
trodes and refined facilities for stereotaxic neurosurgery, are
necessary. The selection of neuronal targets and appropriate
parameters of stimulation require further sophistication and
knowledge of functional brain mapping as well as electronic
technology. In addition, medical and psychiatric experience
is necessary in order to take care of the patient, to interpret
the results obtained, and to plan the delivery of stimulations.
These elaborate requirements limit the clinical application of
intracerebral electrodes which like other modem medical in¬
terventions depends on team work, equipment, and facilities
available in only a few medical centers. At the same time, the
procedure's complexity acts as a safeguard against the possible
improper use of ESB by untrained or unethical persons.

Functions Beyond the Control of ESB

We are in the initial steps of a new technology, and while it
is difficult to predict the limits of unknown territory, we may
suppose that cerebral manifestations which depend on the
elaboration of complex information will elude electrical con¬
trol. For example, reading a book or listening to a conversation
involves reception of many messages which cannot be mimicked
by ESB. A pattern of behavior which is not in the brain cannot
be organized or invented under electrical control. ESB cannot
be used as a teaching tool because skills such as playing the
piano, speaking a language, or solving a problem require com¬
plex sensory inputs. Sequential behavior or even elemental
motor responses cannot be synthetized by cerebral stimulation.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


CHARACTERISTICS AND LIMITATIONS OF BRAIN CONTROL 195

although they are easily evoked if they have already been estab¬
lished in the excited area as ideokinetic formulas. Since electri¬
cal stimulation does not carry specific thoughts it is not feasible
as a technique to implant ideas or direct behavioral performance
in a specific context. Because of its lack of symbolic meaning,
electricity could not induce effects comparable to some post¬
hypnotic performances.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


20


Medical Applications


The discovery of new therapies has been—and still is—a more
pressing need in cerebral disorders than in other fields of
medicine because of their greater consequences for the mental
and somatic well-being of patients. Unfortunately, advances in
this area have been relatively slow, partly because of the intrinsic
complexity of the problems involved, and partly because of a
traditional fear and reluctance to disturb or deal directly with
the material substratum of mental activities. At the beginning
of the century, the public was generally hostile to surgery and
considered it almost obscene for a surgeon to look into the
most intimate depths of the body (185). With cultural and
scientific advances this prejudice has slowly receded, and the
study of the human body is now recognized as essential for the
advance of medicine. Sexual taboos have diminished, and even
the scientific investigation of the phases and details of human
intercourse has at last been undertaken. All of the organs of
the body, including the heart, genitals, and brain, have been
accepted as suitable subjects for research.

Implantation of electrodes inside the human brain is like
installing a magic window to reveal the bursts of cellular dis¬
charges during functional activation of specific structures. The
meaning of these bursts is often difficult to decipher, hut some
correlations between electrical patterns and behavioral effects
have already been firmly established. The electrical line of
communication has also been used to send simple messages to

196


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


MEDICAL APPLICATIONS


197

the depth of the brain in order to arouse dormant functions
or to appease excessive neuronal firing. A new method was
thus found to impose therapeutic order upon disorderly activity.

In spite of the tremendous potential offered by the direct
access to the brain, medical applications were received with sus¬
picion and strong criticism and have progressed rather slowly.
The growing acceptance of even experimental surgical inter¬
ventions in most organs including the human heart is in sharp
contrast with the generally cold reception to the implantation
of wires in the human brain, even though this procedure has
been used in animals for forty years and has proved to be safe.
The reasons are to a great ex.tent related to the persistence of
old taboos, in scientists as well as in laymen, and to the more
logical fear of opening some Fedora’s box.

As experience overcomes opposition, cerebral explorations are
being extended to different hospitals around the world, as
shown by several recent symposia (159, 182, 216).

Diagnosis

The spontaneous electrical activity of the brain (electroen¬
cephalogram or EEG) can be recorded by means of surface
electrodes attached by conductive paste to the outside of the
scalp. This is a standard procedure used for diagnostic purposes
in several cerebral illnesses, such as epUepsy, which is character¬
ized by episodes of increased amplitude and synchronimtion of
neuronal activity which can be recorded and identified. Strong
electrical disturbances may, however, be present in structures
located in the depth of the brain which cannot be detected by
scalp EEG (57), and in this case the use of intracerebral elec¬
trodes may provide essential diagnostic information. For ex¬
ample, psychomotor epilepsy has been alleviated by surgical
removal of the tip of the temporal lobe where seizure activity
originated, and in these cases it is imperative to identify the
source of the fits and especially to decide whether they are uni¬
lateral or present on both sides of the brain. In spite of some


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


igS PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

controversial problems about the location, multiplicity, and
migration of epileptic foci, there is general agreement that depth
recordings through implanted electrodes can give valuable data
unobtainable by any other means.

The expected correlations between scalp EEG and mental
disturbances have failed to materialize in experimental studies,
although some mentally ill patients have exhibited electrical
abnormalities. Depth recordings have also failed to provide
decisive information about these patients, and for example,
the suggestion that septal spikes might be typical of schizo¬
phrenia (98) has not been confirmed (57). The absence of sig¬
nificant data must be attributed to the lack of refinement of
present methodology. Disturbed functions must have a back¬
ground of altered neuronal physiology which should be detect¬
able if more knowledge of the mechanisms involved and more
sophisticated techniques were available. One step in this
direction is the analysis of electrical activity by means of auto¬
correlation and cross-correlation (23) in order to recognize
periodicity of patterns among the noise of other signals. Com¬
puter analysis of power and spectral analysis of frequencies are
also new tools which will increase the future scientific and diag¬
nostic usefulness of electrical recordings. Depth recordings may
also be used for localization of tumors inside the unopened skull
to detect abnormally slow potential shifts from the tissue sur¬
rounding the neoplasm and the lack of spontaneous waves with¬
in the mass of tumoral cells.

In addition to knowledge derived from the study of spon¬
taneous brain waves, other valuable information may be ob¬
tained by recording the alterations evoked in intracerebral
electrical activity following application of sensory stimulation
or ESB. Presentation of flashes of light with a stroboscope, or
of auditory clicks, activates the corresponding cerebral analyzers
and may unveil areas of excessive reactivity. Epileptic patients
are especially sensitive to repeated flashes and may respond
with an activation of dormant electrical abnormalities or even
with a convulsive seizure. Administration of single or repeated


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


MEDICAL APPLICATIONS


199

electrical shocks may also help in the localization of malfunction¬
ing neuronal fields. Systemic administration of drugs which
increase or decrease brain excitability (such as metrazol or phe-
nobarbital) can be used in conjunction with evoked potentials
in order to test the specific pharmacological sensitivity of a
patient, thus orienting his medical or postsurgical therapy.

Electrical stimulation of the brain during surgical interven¬
tions, or during therapeutical destruction of limited cerebral
areas, is necessary in order to test local excitability and de¬
termine the functional localization of areas which must be
spared. This is particularly important during the surgical treat¬
ment of Parkinson’s disease, which requires freezing of cerebral
tissue around the pallidum or thalamus, close to motor path¬
ways in the internal capsule. Identification of these pathways is
imperative in order to avoid their accidental destruction and the
subsequent permanent motor paralysis of the patient.

Therapy

The cerebral tissue around the electrode contact may be de¬
stroyed by electrocoagulation, passing a suitable amount of
direct current. The main advantages of using implanted elec¬
trodes for this purpose, instead of open brain surgery, are that
careful functional explorations are possible before and after the
brain lesion is placed and, more importantly, that coagulation
can be controlled and repeated if necessary over a period of days
or weeks, according to the therapeutic results obtained. The
procedure has been used for therapy of involuntary movements,
intractable pain, focal epilepsy, and several mental disturb¬
ances including anxiety, fear, compulsive obsessions, and ag¬
gressive behavior. Some investigators report a remarkable thera¬
peutic success in obsessive patients; others are more skeptical
about the usefulness of depth electrodes and electrocoagula¬
tions in treating mental illness.

Electrical stimulation of specific structures has been used as
a therapeutic procedure, and beneficial eflEects have been ob-


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


200 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

tained in schizophrenic patients by repeated excitation of the
septum and other areas which produce pleasurable sensations
(99, 201, 233). In other cases of intractable pain, considerable
improvement has also been reported, and some patients have
been allowed to stimulate their own brains repeatedly by means
of portable stimulators. In one patient, spontaneous bursts of
aggressive behavior were diminished by brief periods of re¬
peated stimulation of the amygdaloid nucleus (60).

One of the promising medical applications of ESB is the pro¬
graming of long-term stimulations. Animal studies have shown
that repeated excitations of determined cerebral structures
produced lasting effects and that intermittent stimulations
could be continued indefinitely. Some results in man have also
been confirmatory. It should be emphasized that brain lesions
represent an irreversible destruction while brain stimulations
are far more physiological and conservative and do not rule out
placing of lesions if necessary. One example may clarify the
potential of this procedure. Nashold (160) has described the
case of one patient, suffering from very severe intention tremor
associated with multiple sclerosis, in whom stimulation of the
dentate nucleus of the cerebellum produced an inhibition of
the tremor with marked ipsilateral improvement of voluntary
motility. The speculation was that a cerebral pacemaker could be
activated by the patient himself when he desired to perform
voluntary movements.

Many other possible applications could be explored including
the treatment of anorexia nervosa by stimulation of the feeding
centers of the lateral hypothalamus, the induction of sleep in
cases of insomnia by excitation of the center median or of the
caudate nucleus, the regulation of circulating ACTH by acti¬
vation of the posterior hypothalamus, and the increase of-*
patients’ communication for psychotherapeutic purposes by
excitation of the temporal lobe.

A two-way radio communication system could be established
between the brain of a subject and a computer. Certain types
of neuronal activity related to behavioral disturbances such as


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


MEDICAL APPLICATIONS 201

anxiety, depression, or rage could be recognized in order to
trigger stimulation of specific inhibitory structures. The de¬
livery of brain stimulation on demand to correct cerebral dys¬
functions represents a new approach to therapeutic feedback.
While it is speculative, it is within the realm of possibility ac¬
cording to present knowledge and projected methodology.

Circumvention of Damaged Sensory Inputs

The miracle of giving light to the blind and sound to the deaf
has been made possible by implantation of electrodes, dem¬
onstrating the technical possibility of circumventing damaged
sensory receptors by direct electrical stimulation of the nervous
system.

Brindley and Lewin (24) have described the case of a 52-year-
old woman, totally blind after suffering bilateral glaucoma, in
whom an array of eighty small receiving coils were implanted
subcutaneously above the skull, terminating in eighty platinum
electrodes encased in a sheet of silicone rubber placed in direct
contact with the visual cortex of the right bccipital lobe. Each
receiving coil was tuned to a frequency of 6 or 9.5 megahertz
and could be activated by pressing a transmitting coil against
the scalp. With this type of transdermal stimulation, a visual
sensation was perceived by the patient in the left half of her
visual field as a very small spot of white light or sometimes as a
duplet or a cluster of points. The effects produced by stimula¬
tion of contacts 2.4 millimeters apart were easily distinguished,
and simultaneous excitation of several electrodes evoked the
perception of predictable simple visual patterns. The investiga¬
tors suppose that by implanting six hundred tiny electrodes it
would be possible for blind patients to discriminate visual pat¬
terns; they could also achieve a normal reading speed by using
electrical signals from an automatic page scanner.

Using a different approach, the Mexican investigator del
Campo (26) has designed an instrument called an “amaroscope,”
consisting of photoelectric cells, to transform luminous images


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


202 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

into electrical impulses which are modulated and fed through
electrodes placed over the skin above the eyes to stimulate the
supraorbital branches of the trigeminal nerve. Impulses are thus
carried to the reticular system and the cerebral cortex. The in¬
strument is not too sophisticated and its neurophysiological
principles are controversial, but its experimental testing in
more than loo persons has proved that visual perceptions may
be electrically produced in blind patients, even in some who
have no eyes at all.

Auditory sensations have also been produced in a deaf person
by electrical stimulation of the auditory nerve through per¬
manently implanted electrodes. Simmons et al. (208) studied a
6o-year-old male who had been totally deaf in his right ear for
several years and nearly deaf in the left for several months.
Under local anesthesia, a cluster of six electrodes was implanted
on the right auditory nerve with a connector anchored to the
skull just beneath the right ear. Two weeks after surgery,
electrical stimuli were able to produce perception of different
kinds of auditory sensations. Pitch varied with the point stimu¬
lated and also depended on the electrical parameters used. For
example, 3 to 4 pulses per second were heard as “clicks,” 10 per
second as “telephone ringing,” 30 per second as “bee buzz,”
and 100 to 300 per second could not be discriminated. Loudness
was related to amplitude of stimulation and to pulse duration,
and was less affected by its frequency.

To evaluate these studies we must understand that the re¬
finement of the senses cannot be duplicated by electronic
means because receptors are not passive transducers of energy
but active modulators and discriminators of impulses. The re¬
ciprocal feedback between peripheral and central neurons and
the processes of filtering and cross-correlation of information
which takes place during afferent transmission of impulses are
absent in the instrumental reception of inputs. It is doubtful
that refined perceptions comparable to physiological ones can
be provided by electronic means, but the perception of sensa¬
tions—-even if crude—when hope had been lost is certainly
encouraging and demands the continuation of research efforts.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


MEDICAL APPLICATIONS


203


Brain Viability

The clinical distinction between life and death was not too
difficult to establish in the past. When respiration and palpita¬
tions of the heart had ceased, a person was pronounced dead,
and there was little that a doctor could do. It is true that in
some extraordinary cases the signs of death were only apparent,
and a few patients have revived spontaneously, creating quite a
shock for their doctors, relatives, and for themselves, but these
fantastic stories are the very rare exceptions.

A new situation has been created in recent years because
medical technology has often taken the determination of human
death away from natural causality. Respiratory arrest is no
longer fatal, and many poliomyelitic victims have survived with
the help of iron lungs; cardiac block does not necessarily signal
the end of life because heart beats may be artificially controlled
by pacemakers; kidney failure will not poison the patient if
dialysis machines are available to clean his blood. To the grow¬
ing collection of ingenious electromechanical instruments a
new methodology has recently been added: the cross-circulation
between a sick human being and a healthy baboon in order to
clear the human blood. This procedure was first tested in De¬
cember, 1967, by Dr. Hume at the Virginia Medical College
Hospital to treat a woman patient in deep hepatic coma with
jaundice and edema. A 35-pound baboon was anesthetized,
cooled, and its blood completely washed out with Ringer solu¬
tion and replaced with human blood matched to the patient’s.
Then a cross-circulation was established from the ape’s leg to
the patient’s arm. In twelve hours the patient had excreted
about 5 liters of fluid through the baboon’s kidney and regained
consciousness. Twenty-two days later the patient went home,
and the baboon was alive and healthy, A similar procedure
was successfully used later in other cases (21).

Today the lives of many patients do not depend completely
on the well-being of their own organic functions but on the
availability of apes, organ donors, the voltage of a battery, in¬


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


204 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

tegrity of electronic circuits, proper management of pumps, and
teamwork of doctors and technicians. In certain cases death can
be delayed for weeks or months, and current technology has
placed upon doctors the tremendous responsibility, the nearly
deific power, of deciding the duration of patients’ survival.
A heated controversy, reaching the public and the British
Parliament, was created by the recent disclosure that in Lon¬
don’s Neasden Hospital the records of patients over sixty-five
years of age and suffering from malignant tumors or other serious
chronic diseases were marked “NTBR” (“not to be resusci¬
tated’’) in case of cardiac arrest. Artificial prolongation of human
life is time consuming and expensive in terms of instrumenta¬
tion and personnel, and it imposes added stress on the patients
and their families. Because resources are limited, it is materially
impossible to attempt to resuscitate all the patients who die
every day, and it is necessary to select those who have the best
chance of prolonged and useful survival. Why should life be
maintained in unconscious patients with irreversible brain
damage and no hope of recovery?

This dramatic decision between individual life and death
illustrates both man’s recently acquired power and the neces¬
sity to use it with intelligence and compassion. To make the
situation even more complex, the recent development of organ
transplantation is creating a literally “vital” conflict of in¬
terests because a person kept alive artificially owns many good
working organs—including kidneys, pancreas, heart, and bones
—that are needed by other dying patients.

Death, personality, and biological human rights must be
redefined in view of these new scientific advances. Possessions
to be disposed of after death include not only real estate, stocks,
and furniture, but teeth, corneas, and hearts as well. This pros¬
pect involves many ethical and legal questions and sounds al¬
together gruesome and uncomfortable, but that is only because
it is unfamiliar. Giving blood to be transfused, skin to be grafted,
spermatozoas for artificial insemination, and kidneys to be
transplanted are more acceptable practices because they do not


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


MEDICAL APPLICATIONS


205

depend on the death of the donor; but when death cannot be
avoided, the idea of the transfer and survival of some organs
should be considered reasonable.

The possibility of piecemeal survival of functions and organs
introduces the basic question of what part of the organism to
identify with human personality. There is general agreement
that the organ most fundamental to individual identity is not
the stomach, the liver, or even the heart, but the brain. In the
necessary redefinition of death it has been proposed that in
difficult cases when circulation, digestion, metabolic exchange,
and other functions are still active, the decisive information
about whether a person should be considered alive—entailing
the decision to continue or to withdraw artificial support for
survival—must come from the viability of the brain. In some
hospitals the ultimate arbiter of death is the EEG machine, and
at the Massachussetts General Hospital, Dr, Robert Schwab has
proposed that death should be determined by flat lines on all
EEG leads for twenty minutes of continuous recordings and lack
of response to sensory and mechanical stimuli. In the absence
of EEG activity tested twenty-four and forty-eight hours later,
death is presumed to have occurred even if (as happens in rare
cases) the heart is still beating normally.

In the near future it will be necessary to examine this ques¬
tion in greater detail in order to determine the parts of the
brain considered essential for the survival of human personality.
We already know that portions of the brain may be destroyed
or taken away with negligible or only moderate psychic changes.
Destruction of the motor cortex produces paralysis; ablation
of the temporal lobe may affect recent memory; and destruc¬
tion of the frontal lobes may modify foresight and affective re¬
actions, but in all these cases the patient’s behavior is recognized
as human. Destruction of the hypothalamus or reticular forma¬
tion, however, may induce permanent loss of consciousness, and
in this case it is questionable whether personal identity persists.
The possible piecemeal survival of psychological functions will
make the definition of man more difficult and will perhaps in¬


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


2 o6 physical control of the mind

crease the present problem of deciding what human life is. From
the examination of these questions, however, a deeper under¬
standing of the essential qualities of being human—^and of the
direction of their evolution with intelligent purpose—^will
emerge.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


21


Ethical Considerations


Placing electrodes inside o£ the brain, exploring the neuronal
depth of personality, and influencing behavior by electrical
stimulation have created a variety of problems, some of them
shared with general medical ethics and others more specifically
related to moral and philosophical issues of mental activity.


Clinical Use of New Procedures

One of the main objectives of animal research is the dis¬
covery of new principles and methods which can be applied
for the benefit of man. Their potential advantages and risks
cannot be ascertained until they have been extensively tested
in human subjects, and preliminary trials must always be con¬
sidered experimental. Evidence that penicillin or any other
new drug may be therapeutically effective is obtained initially in
vitro and then in different species of mammals, but the conclu¬
sive demonstration of its clinical safety and eflicacy requires
application to man. In spite of established safeguards, there is
an inherent possibility that unforeseen, slowly developing
side effects may have serious consequences. A thorium product
used in the early thirties as a contrast medium for X-ray analysis
of the liver was found to be radioactive and caused the slow
death of hundreds of patients. A supposedly innocuous drug, the
ill-famed thalidomide given as a sedative, had damaging effects
on fetal development, creating the tragedy of children born

807


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


2 o8 physical control of the mind

with severe physical deformities. Accidents like these have pro¬
moted more stringent regulations, but the gap between animal
and human biology is difficult to fill and in each case a com¬
promise must be reached between reasonable precautions and
possible risks.

The historical demonstration by Fulton and Jacobsen (8i)
that frustration and neurotic behavior in the chimpanzee could
be abolished by destruction of the frontal lobes was the start¬
ing point of lobotomy, which was widely used for treatment
of several types of mental illness in human patients. This
operation consisted of surgical disruption of the frontal lobe
connections and demonstrated the important fact that psychic
manifestations can be influenced by physical means as bold as
the surgeon’s knife. The Nobel Prize bestowed on the first
neurosurgeon to perform human lobotomies, Egas Moniz,
recognized the significance of the principle that the mind was
not so unreachable as formerly believed, and that it could be
the object of experimental investigation.

In spite of initial acclaim, lobotomy was soon severely criti¬
cized as a therapeutic procedure because it often produced con¬
comitant undesirable alterations of personality, and more
conservative treatments were actively sought in order to pro¬
vide a “less damaging, less sacrificial means of dealing with
mental disorders than are lobotomy, leucotomy, gyrectomy,
thalamotomy, and other intentional destructions of nervous
structures” (145). Among these efforts, implantation of elec¬
trodes in the brain offered promising possibilities. In monkeys,
stimulation or limited destruction of the caudate nucleus pro¬
duced several of the symptoms of frontal lobotomy with more
discrete behavioral changes (191). Implantation of electrodes
in man permitted access to any cerebral structure for recording,
stimulation, or destruction. Their potential clinical application
raised controversial issues about risks, rationale, and medical
efficacy, but there is general agreement that depth recordings
may provide significant information which cannot be obtained
by other means and is essential for the proper diagnosis and


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


ethical considerations 209

treatment of patients with some cerebral disturbances. Thera¬
peutic use of electrodes in cases of mental illness has been more
doubtful and must still be considered in an experimental phase.

Recordings and stimulations in a patient equipped with intra¬
cerebral leads provide basic information about neurophysio¬
logical mechanisms in man which may be of great value for the
patient himself, for the welfare of other patients, and for the
advance of science. In addition, they provide a unique oppor¬
tunity to obtain important data about neuronal functions which
may not be directly related to the patient’s illness. In this case
we are facing ethical issues of human research which must be
carefully considered.

Human Experimentation

While medical practice has generally accepted guidelines based
on the Hippocratic oath—to do what “I consider best for my
patients, and abstain from whatever is injurious”—^research
with human subjects has lacked traditional codes and has fol¬
lowed the investigator's personal criteria—^which have not always
been correct. According to Beecher (12), leading medical schools
and renowned doctors have sometimes conducted unethical
research. Extremely high doses of a drug have been adminis¬
tered, with resulting behavioral disturbances> in order to evalu¬
ate the toxicity of the product; placebos have been given instead
of a well-known beneficial drug, with a resulting increase in the
incidence and severity of illness; live cancer cells have been
injected under the skin of twenty-two elderly patients without
telling them what the shots were, at New York’s well-respected
Sloan-Kettering Institute. Beecher does not believe that these
studies demonstrate a willful disregard of the patient’s rights,
but a thoughtlessness in experimental design.

Although no formal ethical code has been universally accepted
for the performance of research in man, basic guidelines have
been formulated by the American Psychological Association
(43); by the judges of the Nuremberg war crime trials (218); by


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


?10 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

the World Medical Association (246); and by the Medical Re¬
search Council of Britain (153). A 1966 editorial in the New
England Journal of Medicine (161) states that in medicine and
in human investigations the welfare of the sick patient or the
experimental subject has traditionally been of prime importance.
“This implies clearly that therapeutic or theoretical experiments
with significant risk of morbidity or mortality are undertaken
only with a view to the immediate benefit of the patient; for
the experimental subject to whom no benefit may accrue, the
most meaningful possible informed and unforced consent must
be secured.” In the summer of 1966, the United States Public
Health Service issued regulations for their sponsored research
involving humans, specifying the need for full consent by the
participating subjects and careful review of the projects by an
ad hoc committee. In a detailed discussion, Wolfensberger (245)
clarified the meaning of informed consent: The experimental
subject understands all the essential aspects of the study, the
types and degrees of risks, the detrimental or beneficial conse¬
quences, if any, and the purpose of the research.

One of the main ethical issues is the conflict of interest be¬
tween science, progress, and society, and the rights of the
individual. The principles of personal dignity, privacy, and free¬
dom are often waived—voluntarily or forcefully—in favor of
the group. Firemen, policemen, and soldiers may risk or lose
their lives for the benefit of the community. Civilized activities
are full of regulations which limit behavioral freedom. We are
obliged to reveal our income, to pay taxes, and to serve in the
army. We cannot walk around naked, take flowers from public
gardens, or leave our cars where we please. We are searched
when crossing borders and put in jail if our conduct is con¬
sidered antisocial by the law. Although respect for the individual
is highly prized and accepted in theory, in practice it is often
challenged and curtailed. The balance between social duties
and individual rights is decided not by the individual but by
customs and laws established by the group.

In the case of medical research, it is difficult to write an ethical


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


ETHIGAL CONSIDERATIONS


211


code. As the Panel of Privacy and Behavioral Research concluded
in 1967, “legislation to assure appropriate recognition of the
rights of human subjects is neither necessary nor desirable,”
and “because of its relative inflexibility, legislation cannot meet
the challenge of the subtle and sensitive conflict of values under
consideration.” Ethical decisions in science require not only
moral judgment but also factual information, technical knowl¬
edge, and experience, especially in the evaluation of risks and
benefits. In order to decide to undergo open heart surgery, a
patient must have a medical evaluation of his condition and of
the state of the surgical art, a judgment which the doctor, but
rarely the patient, is prepared to make. In medical research,
consent is certainly essential, but the main responsibility still
lies with the investigator and his institution. The request for
consent from a patient—or from a student participating in a
research project—carries a heavy weight of moral authority and
a degree of coercion, and granting of it does not relieve the
director of full responsibility in the experimental design and
consequences. The simple request to perform a dubious pro¬
cedure must be considered unethical because it represents
psychological stress for the patient- Children and adults with
mental disturbances cannot give proper consent, and relatives
must be consulted. Their decisions, however, are easily influ¬
enced by the picture presented by the attending physician, thus
increasing his responsibility which preferably should be shared
by a group of three or more professional consultants.

There is one aspect of human research which is usually over¬
looked: the existence of a moral and social duty to advance
scientific knowledge and to improve the welfare of man. When
important medical information can be obtained with negligible
risk and without infringing on individual rights, the investigator
has the duty to use his intelligence and skills for this purpose.
Failure to do so represents the neglect of professional duties in
some way similar to the negligence of a medical doctor who does
not apply his full effort to the care of a patient. Subjects with
implanted electrodes provide a good example, because the use


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


212 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

of telemetry and video tape recordings in them makes possible
many studies concerning the sources of normal and abnormal
activities, spectral analysis of electrical waves, conduction time,
evoked potentials, and electrobehavioral correlations. This type
of research may provide data of exceptional value—available
only from man—without any risks or even demands on a pa¬
tient’s time or attention. Information can be obtained while the
subject is engaged in spontaneous normal activities like reading
a paper, watching television, or sleeping. Only the recording
equipment and research team need to be alert and working.
Methodology for the telemetric study of the brain is very new,
and it will take some time before its potential and practicality
are recognized and its use spreads to different hospitals. In my
opinion this research is both ethical and desirable.

However, procedures which represent risk or discomfort for
the patient should be ruled out. The implantation time of
electrodes cannot be prolonged unnecessarily, and administra¬
tion of drugs, injections, or catheterizations for research pur¬
poses are not acceptable. Any contemplated exception to this
rule should be very carefully evaluated and clearly explained
to the experimental subject.

When a patient needs to have electrodes in his brain for
a period of weeks or months, the medical doctors in charge face
a dual responsibility, first not to do anything harmful or un¬
pleasant for the sake of science, and second to do as much re¬
search as possible provided it is safe and comfortable for the
patient.

The use of healthy volunteers in medical research is contro¬
versial, partly because they are usually recruited from prisons,
the military services, universities, or other groups which are
more or less bound to authority and therefore have a diminished
capacity for free choice. One of the most famous experiments
was a study of antimalarial drugs which had to be performed
in man. In a well-planned research project i ,ooo army volunteers
in Australia were deliberately infected with malaria. This study
was later continued in several federal penitentiaries in the


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS 2 13

United States. A most dramatic and successful mass experiment
was the application of poliomyelitis vaccine to thousands of
school children a few years ago, statistically demonstrating the
effectiveness of a new vaccine. Decisions about experiments
like these must be reached by careful consideration of the factors
involved, with the basic ethical guidelines clearly in mind.

Individual volunteers have greater freedom of choice, and
I have received letters from many people offering themselves
as “human guinea pigs” for implantation of electrodes in their
brains. For both ethical and practical reasons their offers cannot
be accepted, but it is interesting to note the varied motivations
behind these proposals. They included pure scientific interest,
hopes for monetary reward or fame, manifestations of psychotic
disturbances, and also a most generous intent: Some people
wished to donate their brains for study in the hope that informa¬
tion could be obtained leading to the cure of loved ones whose
brain dysfunctions could not be cured by standard therapies.
The most articulate expression of this wish to contribute one’s
own brain for scientific research was that of a most distinguished
investigator. Dr. David Rioch, who at the close of a conference
about the unanesthetized brain, held in Washington, D.C., in
1957, declared:

When I come to retire ... I might quite reasonably approach an
experimental neurosiurgeon in whose work and scientific orientation
I had confidence and say “Let us do an experiment together, as
there are a number of things both you and I would like to find out.”
I would be considerably intrigued to know what “attitudes” and
“sensations” a good experimenter could evoke electrically from my
amygdala and even more intrigued to check personally on the sense
of euphoria and the sense of disphoria (185).

Electrical Manipulation of the Psyche

The most alarming aspect of ESB is that psychological reac¬
tivity can be influenced by applying a few volts to a determined
area of the brain. This fact has been interpreted by many people


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


214 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

as a disturbing threat to human integrity. In the past, the in¬
dividual could face risks and pressures with preservation of his
own identity. His body could be tortured, his thoughts and de¬
sires could be challenged by bribes, by emotions, and by public
opinion, and his behavior could be influenced by environmental
circumstances, but he always had the privilege of deciding his
own fate, of dying for an ideal without changing his mind.
Fidelity to our emotional and intellectual past gives each of
us a feeling of transcendental stability—and perhaps of im¬
mortality—^which is more precious than life itself.

New neurological technology, however, has a refined efficiency.
The individual is defenseless against direct manipulation of the
brain because he is deprived of his most intimate mechanisms
of biological reactivity. In experiments, electrical stimulation
of appropriate intensity always prevailed over free will; and, for
example, flexion of the hand evoked by stimulation of the motor
cortex cannot be voluntarily avoided. Destruction of the frontal
lobes produced changes in affectiveness which are beyond any
personal control.

The possibility of scientific annihilation of personal identity,
or even worse, its purposeful control, has sometimes been con¬
sidered a future threat more awful than atomic holocaust. Even
physicians have expressed doubts about the propriety of physical
tampering with the psyche, maintaining that personal identity
should be inviolable, that any attempt to modify individual
behavior is unethical, and that methods—and related research
—-which can influence the human brain should be banned. The
prospect of any degree of physical control of the mind provokes
a variety of objections: thecflogical objections because it affects
free will, moral objections because it affects individual responsi¬
bility, ethical objections because it may block self-defense
mechanisms, philosophical objections because it threatens per¬
sonal identity.

These objections, however, are debatable. A prohibition of
scientific advance is obviously naive and unrealistic. It could
not be universally imposed, and, more important, it is not


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS 215

knowledge itself but its improper use which should be regulated.
A knife is neither good nor bad; but it may be used by either
a surgeon or an assassim Science should be neutraly but scientists
should take sides (242). The mind is not a static, inborn entity
owned by the individual and self-sufficient, but the dynamic
organization of sensory perceptions of the external world, cor¬
related and reshaped through the internal anatomical and func¬
tional structure of the brain. Personality is not an intangible,
immutable way of reacting, but a flexible process in continuous
evolution, affected by its medium. Culture and education are
meant to shape patterns of reaction which are not innate in the
human organism; they are meant to impose limits on freedom
of choice. Moral codes may vary completely from civilization to
civilization. Polygamy was acceptable in biblical times, and it
is still practiced among Moslems, but it is rejected by many
other civilizations with strong s<x:ial, le^, religious, and
educational pressures to make behavior monogamous. Of course
there is no physical impediment to the acquisition of half a
dozen wives—at least until die law or the ladies catch up—but
then we enter into a play of forces, into the dynamic equilibrium
among all of the elements which determine behavioral choice.
If there are very strong reasons to react in a particular way (for
example, to have only one wife), the chance of living by a differ¬
ent custom is so slim as to be negligible.

This is precisely the role of electric^ Stimulation of the brain:
to add a new factor to the constellation of behavioial determin¬
ants. The result as shown experimentally in ammals is an alge¬
braic summation, with cerebral stimulation usually prepotent
over spontaneous reactions. It is accepted medical practice to try
and modify the antisocial or abnormal reactions of mental
patients. Psychozmalysis, the use of drugs such as energizers
and tranquilizers, the application of insulin or electroshock,
and other varieties of psychiatric treatment are all aimed at
influencing the abnormal f^rsonality of the patient in order to
change his undesirable mental characteristics. The possible use,
therefore> of implanted electrodes in mental patients should not


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


3 i6 physical control of the mind

pose unusual ethical complications if the accepted medical
rules are followed. Perhaps the limited efficiency of standard
psychiatric procedures is one reason that they have not caused
alarm among scientists or laymen. Psychoanalysis requires a
long time, and a person can easily withdraw his cooperation and
refuse to express intimate thoughts. Electroshock is a crude
method of doubtful efficacy in normal people. Although elec¬
trical stimulation of the brain is still in the initial stage of its
development, it is in contrast far more selective and powerful;
it may delay a heart beat, move a finger, bring a word to mem¬
ory, or set a determined behavioral tone.

When medical indications are dear and the standard thera¬
peutic procedures have failed, most patients and doctors are
willing to test a new method, provided that the possibility of
success outweighs the risk of worsening the situation. The crucial
decision to start applying a new therapeutic method to human
patients requires a combination of intelligent evaluation of
data, knowledge of comparative neurophysiology, foresight,
moral integrity, and courage. Excessive aggressiveness in a doctor
may cause irreparable damage, but too much caution may de¬
prive patients of needed help. The surgical procedure of
lobotomy was perhaps applied to many mental patients too
quickly, before its dangers and limitations were understood;
but pallidectomy and thalamotomy in the treatment of Parkin¬
son’s disease encountered formidable initial opposition before
attaining their present recognition and respected status.

While pharmacological and surgical treatment of sufferers of
mental illness is accepted as proper, people with other behavioral
deviations pose a different type of ethical problem. They may
be potentially dangerous to themselves and to society when their
mental functions are maintained within normal limits and only-
one aspect of their personal conduct is socially unacceptable.
The rights of an individual to obtain appropriate treatment
must be weighed with a professional evaluation of his behavioral
problems—and their possible neurological basis—^which neces¬
sitates a value judgment of the person’s behavior in comparison


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS 2l7

with accepted norms. One example will illustrate these con¬
siderations.

In the early 1950s, a patient in a state mental hospital ap¬
proached Dr. Hannibal Hamlin and me requesting help. She
was an attractive 24-year-old woman of average intelligence and
education who had a long record of arrests for disorderly con¬
duct. She had been repeatedly involved in bar brawls in which
she incited men to fight over her and had spent most of the pre¬
ceding few years either in jail or in mental institutions. The
patient expressed a strong desire as well as an inability to alter
her conduct, and because psychiatric treatment had failed, she
and her mother urgently requested that some kind of brain
surgery be performed in order to control her disreputable, im¬
pulsive behavior. They asked specificially that electrodes be
implanted to orient possible electrocoagulation of a limited
cerebral area; and if that wasn’t possible, they wanted lobotomy.

Medical knowledge and experience at that time could not
ascertain whether ESB or the application of cerebral lesions
could help to solve this patient’s problem, and surgical inter¬
vention was therefore rejected. When this decision was ex¬
plained, both the patient and her mother reacted with similar
anxious comments, asking, “What is the future? Only jail or the
hospital? Is there no hope?” This case revealed the limitations
of therapy and the dilemma of possible behavioral control.
Supposing that long-term stimulation of a determined brain
structure could influence the tendencies of a patient to drink,
flirt, and induce fights; would it be ethical to change her per¬
sonal characteristics? People are changing their character by
self-medication through hallucinogenic drugs, but do they have
the right to demand that doctors administer treatment that will
radically alter their behavior? What are the limits of individual
rights and doctors’ obligations?

As science seems to be approaching the possibility of con¬
trolling many aspects of behavior electronically and chemically,
these questions must be answered. If, as in the case of this patient,
the deviation of behavior conflicts with society so seriously as


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


2 1 8 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

to deprive her of her personal freedom, medical intervention
could be justified. The case of habitual criminal conduct is an¬
other example of this type of problem. Therapeutic decisions
related to psychic manipulation require moral integrity and
ethical education. Scientific training concentrates mainly in
natural sciences and often neglects the study and assimilation
of ethical codes, considering them beyond the realm of science.
Perhaps it is often forgotten that the investigator needs a set of
convictions and principles, not only to administrate grant money,
to give proper credit to the work of others, and to be civilized
with his colleagues, but especially to direct his life and his
research, and to foresee the implications of his own discoveries.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


22


Social Implications


From ancient times, man has tried to control the destiny of
other human beings by depriving them of liberty and submitting
them to obedience. Slaves have been forced to work and to serve
the caprices of their masters; prisoners have been chained to
row in the galleys; and men were and still are inducted into the
armed forces and sent thousands of miles away to create havoc,
take lives, and lose their own.

Biological assault has also existed throughout recorded his¬
tory. In ancient China, the feet of female children were bound
to reduce their size. In many countries thieves have been pun¬
ished by having their hands cut ofiE; males have been castrated
to inhibit sexual desire and then placed as eunuchs in charge
of harems; and in some African tribes it was customary to ablate
the clitoris of married females to block their possible interest in
other men and insure their fidelity. These barbaric practices
belong to the past, but the forceful imposition of biological
changes still continues in our age. Sterilization of human beings
by surgery or radiation has been legally imposed in some lands
as a punishment for sexual crimes or a preventive measure to
avoid the spread of genetic defects. In the face of the real danger
of population explosion, several scientists have proposed govern¬
ment enforced regulations to control fertility, and it is expected
that in the next few years an antifertility drug, which can be
added to the water supplies of cities, will be developed. Accord¬
ing to Ketchel (126), “Voluntary methods are to be preferred

axg


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


220 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

but only if they work. If they do not, then involuntary controls
must be imposed_Such measures are preferable to the starva¬

tion and misery resulting from overpopulation.”

When an individual’s behavior is judged unfit by members of
a society, the consequences may be forceful deprivation of lib¬
erty and incarceration. If the individual is confined to a mental
hospital, his undesirable conduct may cause the authorities to
administer drugs, by forceful injection if necessary, in order to
change or control his behavioral responses. In the early 1950s
an historical precedent was established for the deliberate de¬
struction of part of the brain as a legal treatment for criminals
(130). A man apprehended in Pittsburgh after committing a
series of robberies was given the alternative of a long jail sen¬
tence or submission to frontal lobe surgery which might curb or
eliminate his future criminal behavior. Lobotomy was per¬
formed, and although initially the patient appeared better ad¬
justed socially, several months later he committed more thefts.
When he realized that the police were closing in, he wrote a
letter to the surgeon expressing appreciation for his efforts and
regret that the operation had not been successful. Hoping that
the study of his case might help others, he donated his brain
to the surgeoh and committed suicide by shooting himself
through the heart. In spite of this therapeutic failure, the pos¬
sibility of surgical rehabilitation of criminals has been con¬
sidered by several scientists as more humane, more promising,
and less damaging for the individual than his incarceration
for life.

Even if our conduct is entirely within the law, we cannot
escape the intervention of the state in our private lives and in
our most intimate biology. In general, we are not even aware
of it. Many “free” societies, including the United States, do not
allow a bride and groom to marry legally until blood has been
drawn from their veins and a medical officer has certified the
absence of syphilis, a procedure which casts a rather insulting
doubt on their past integrity and intelligence. In order to cross
international borders, it is necessary to document that our skin
has recently been scarified and injected with smallpox. In many


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


SOCIAL IMPLICATIONS


221


cities, by governmental regulations, the drinking water floods
our bodies with chlorine for safety reasons and with fluoride for
strengthening our teeth. The table salt that we buy is usually
fortified with iodine to aid the proper physiology of our thyroid
gland. These intrusions into our private blood, teeth, and glands
are accepted, practiced, and enforced. Naturally they have been
legally introduced, are useful for the prevention of illness, and
generally benefit society and individuals, but they have also
already established the precedent of official manipulation of our
personal biology.

To evaluate the rationale of governmental intervention in our
bodies, we must realize that civilization represents a considerable
degree of biological artificiality, mainly the intelligent escape
from a primitive natural fate which was characterized by the
death of countless babies, the short span of life, and the high
incidence of illness and physical misery. Human health has
improved in a spectacular way precisely because official agencies
have had the knowledge and the power to influence our personal
biology, and it should be emphasized that health regulations are
similar in dictatorial and in democratic countries.

Our own existence from birth to death must be properly
certified to be officially recognized, and we are surrounded by
government-regulated industrial manipulations which extend to
the food we eat, the water we drink, and the conditioned air
we breathe. We are in a highly organized age where social and
individual needs often conflict, and social ruling usually prevails.
From the medical point of view this organization is highly bene¬
ficial, but the loss of personal self-determination is one of the
problems of civilized life which must be carefully confronted
if we are to reach reasonable compromises. Even if we agree
that individual freedom should in general bow to community
welfare, we enter into a new dimension when considering the
social implications of the new technology which can influence
personal structure and behavioral expression by surgical, chem¬
ical, and electrical manipulation of the brain. We may tolerate
the practicality of being inoculated with yellow fever when
visiting Asiatic countries, but shall we accept the theoretical


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


222


PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

future possibility of being forced to take a pill or submit to an
electric shock for the socially protective purpose of making us
more docile, infertile, better workers, or happier? How can we
decide the limits of social impositions on individual rights?

It is convenient to remember that the art of mental escape
from reality has been practiced from ancient times, especially
by using drugs. Opium, for example, has probably been known
since the Stone Age, and its extensive use in the Near and Far
East has sometimes been encouraged by local rulers, partly be¬
cause populations under opium habituation were more apathetic
and easier to govern. Peyote also has a long history, being known
to the Mexican Indians since pre-Columbian times and revered
by some as a link to the divine. A substance closely related to
peyote alkaloids is LSD (ddysergic acid diethylamide tartrate),
which has powerful effects on behavioral reactivity at a micro¬
gram dose, and which, along with marijuana, has contributed
to changes in the mental and behavioral attitudes of recent gen¬
erations. During the last fifteen years, a large number of tran¬
quilizers, energizers, and other psychoactive drugs have been
discovered, and their use has changed the atmosphere of mental
hospitals and the practice of psychiatry. They are highly bene¬
ficial both for patients and for relatively normal persons who
need pharmacological help to cope with the pressures of civil¬
ized life. The widespread use of psychoactive substances includ¬
ing alcohol, caffeine, nicotme, opium, chlorpromazine, and
LSD may have an incalculable impact on the social behavior
of large population groups. Administration of a chemical mist
in order to subdue hostile crowds has already been used as a
strategic weapon by armies and by local police. There is no
doubt that even more selective and powerful psychodrugs will
be discovered in the near future and that decisions must be
made to regulate their use and to prevent their abuse.

The history of ESB is very recent, but already there is abun¬
dant information about its effectiveness and fears about the
dangers of its social misuses. Could a ruthless dictator stand at a
master radio transmitter and stimulate the depth of the brains of
a mass of hopelessly enslaved people? This Orwellian possibility


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


SOCIAL IMPLICATIONS


223

may provide a good plot for a novel, but fortunately it is beyond
the theoretical and practical limits of ESB. By means of ESB
we cannot substitute one personality for another, nor can we
make a behaving robot of a human being. It is true that we can
influence emotional reactivity and perhaps make a patient
more aggressive or amorous, but in each case the details of
behavioral expression are related to an individual history which
cannot be created by ESB. The classical methods of punishment
and reward through normal inputs are more effective in induc¬
ing purposeful changes in behavorial activity than the modiflca-
tions of emotional tuning evoked by cerebral stimulation. Sev¬
eral of the psychoactive drugs may be nearly as effective and are
far simpler to use.

Both medical benefits and social implications of cerebral re¬
search depend on the acquisition of knowledge about brain
physiology, the possibility of investigating the mechanisms of
the mind experimentally, the new approach to the understand¬
ing of the determinants of reward and punishment in relation
to human emotions and desires, and the unveiling of the neu¬
ronal basis of personal identity.

Understanding of biology, physics, and other sciences facil¬
itated the process of ecological liberation and domination. Man
rebelled from natural determination and used his intelligence
and skills to impose a human purpose on the development of
the earth. We are now on the verge of a process of mental libera¬
tion and self-domination which is a continuation of our evolu¬
tion. Its experimental approach is based on the investigation
of the depth of the brain in behaving subjects. Its practical
applications do not rely on direct cerebral manipulations but on
the integration of neurophysiological and psychological prin¬
ciples leading to a more intelligent education, starting from the
moment of birth and continuing throughout life, with the pre¬
conceived plan of escaping frpm the blind forces of chance and
of influencing cerebral mechanisms and mental structure in
order to create a futine man with greater personal freedom and
originality, a member of a psychocivilized society, happier, less
destructive, and better balanced than present man (55).


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


23


Neurophysiology and Mental Activities


The scientific study and possible prediction of human behavior
have been challenged by several authors who questioned the
existence of a cause-efiEect relationship and even claimed that
analysis of intelligent goal-seeking activities, which are so typic¬
ally human, requires methodology completely different from
that used in physical sciences (179). For many years, Bertalanflfy
(17), in agreement with last century’s German idealistic philos¬
ophy, supported the view that organisms are more than the
sum of their parts. He favored a new conception of man based
on his faculties of symbolic expression and oflfered an organ-
ismal approach different from that of “hard science.” Criticizing
the stimulus-response paradigm, Bertalanflfy identihed it with
the “robot model” which Koestler has called “the ratomorphic
view of man” (129).

Controversy about the possible physicochemical determina¬
tion of human behavior is important because it involves the
concepts of free will and responsibility. Its philosophical history
begins before Democritus and passes through Aristotle, Spinoza,
Claude Bernard, and many other well-known authorities. In a
brief and lucid review, Griinbaum (90) has outlined the four
main arguments against causality of human behavior: (1) Since
each individual is unique, his behavior is not predictable or
amenable to causal description. (2) Human behavior is so com¬
plex that it eludes analysis of a problematic causality, (3) Human
behavior is oriented toward future goals and is not determined

224


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


NEUROPHYSIOLOGY AND MENTAL ACTIVrriES 2S5

by past facts as in the physical sciences. (4) The acceptance of
behavioral causality and predictability would deny responsi¬
bility, remorse, and possible choice of good and evil. Griinbaum
rejects these four arguments on logical and scientific bases, but
the best proof that most of us believe in at least a degree of
behavioral predictability is that we teach our children to talk,
to use the toilet, and to live in a civilized society, and that within
a range of variability we do succeed in educating them.

Modem cerebral physiology, which is fully deterministic,
provides a new set of arguments. It has been demonstrated that
when perception of sovmds is totally blocked, the auditory
neurons of the inferior colliculus are impoverished in specific
chemicals such as RNA. Lights, shapes, or moving shadows
presented to the eye produce specific electrical waves which can
be recorded in the occipital lobes and which are causally related
to the optic phenomena. Brain stimulation determines sensation,
movement, or emotion depending on the activated structure.
The material presented in this book includes many examples
of cause-effect between ESB and behavioral responses.

Against this experimental determinism it has been argued that
spontaneous behavior is different from laboratory phenomena
and, more important, that the gap between neuronal physiology
and mental activities is still immense. How can we relate elec¬
trical spikes or ionic changes in the cells with the reality of
enjoying music, being in love, or writing a book? Are mental
activities and neuronal physiology as unrelated to each other as
the message of a painting and the chemical structure of colors
and canvas? Kety (127) has indicated that there is no valid
physicochemical model to explain the phenomena of conscious¬
ness, and little likelihood of developing one. The sensation of a
blue sky cannot be understood or even described in terms of
changes in the retina, or spikes traveling through the optic
nerve, occipital cortex, and association areas.

To clarify this discussion let us review a classical experiment.
In a cat under deep anesthesia, electrodes can be placed in the
inner ear and connected with an electrical amplifier and a loud-


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


226 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

speaker. The spectacular result is that if we whisper in the cat’s
ear, “How are you?” the loudspeaker will reproduce “How are
you?” The interpretation of this phenomenon is not that the
cat has learned to speak English but that its ear has worked as a
microphone, transducing sound into electricity. The vibrations
of the air produced by the human voice are received by the
tympanic membrane and give rise to electrical signals in the
cochlea which are picked up by the recording electrodes. The
cochlea functions as an acoustic analyzer which generates "all
or none” spikes in single nerve fibers, sending coded messages
to the brain. Sensory inputs impinging on different sensory
receptors like the ear, eye, or skin originate patterns of electrical
signals which can be recorded at ascending levels of the central
nervous system.

In the attempt to correlate physicochemical events of the
brain with psychological phenomena, we must differentiate three
groups of neuronal functions: (i) Basic metabolic changes are
necessary to keep the nerve cells alive, receptive, and reactive.
These processes, which include ionic exchange, oxidation of
chemicals, and consumption of energy, are absolutely necessary
but are unspecific and not directly correlated with psychological
responses. They allow the traffic of signals independently of their
quality. (2) A material carrier of coded signals is needed to
circulate information through the central nervous system. This
carrier is represented by chemical changes and electrical im¬
pulses which can be recorded, identified, and measured. Without
senses, without neural conductors, or without basic metabolic
activity, reception of information is not possible, but these
mechanisms are to a great extent unlearned and automatic. At
these levels there is no understanding of messages, and the
signals have not yet been decoded. A gross similarity may be
found in a record player where the pickup cartridge transforms
the irregularities of record grooves into electrical patterns travel¬
ing through the electronic circuitry of the amplifier where they
can be mixed, delayed, or changed in tonality. At these levels,
the material carrier is formed by electrical pulses with a voltage


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


NEUROPHYSIOLOGY AND MENTAL ACTIVITIES 82';

which can be measured and a pattern which can be seen in the
oscilloscope, even without knowing that there is a musical mes¬
sage. In order to perceive the notes of the melody, a suitable
decoding mechanism, the loudspeaker, is necessary. One more
element is needed to understand the musical sounds: a suitable
sensor, a human being with previous training to recognize
music. (3) The symbolic Tneawing ol a message is not intrinsic
in the object or in the material carrier. Its understanding is not
provided automatically by inborn mechanisms within the brain.
Recognition of messages must be learned and is related to the
experiential history of each individual. When we show a pencil
to a monkey, a savage, and a cultured man, the visual sensory
inputs are transformed into electrical patterns and transmitted
through optic pathways. In all three cases this initial process is
probably comparable and the transmitted electrical signals are
probably similar, but the interpretation will be different. For
a monkey and for a savage, the p^cil is only a little stick; but
for a writer the pencil has many uses and meanings* con¬

veys a multitude of associations. Symbolism is not in the pencil
or in the receptive brain but in their previous encounters and
relations.

The distinction between material carrier and symbolic mean¬
ing is important for the clarification of the limitations of elec-
trophysiological studies of the bmin. Even if our methodology
for recording electrical codes of transmitted signals were highly
sophisticated, we would only be able to detect the carrier, and
not the meaning. We could identify the shape of a stick circulat¬
ing in visual pathways, but not its history. Symbolism cannot
be deciphered by any instrument when the reference point of
past experience is Unknown- The frame of reference which must
be examined to capture a meaning is the individual experience
stored inside the brain by means of special material carriers of
information, probably stereochemical combinations of amino-
acids and other substances forming the nudeoproteie structure
of memory traces. Symbolism is found by recalling experience
from memory storage and comparing it with the received inputs.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


228 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

Two events are therefore taking place: comparative evaluation
and temporal correlation. This constitutes the physiochemical
basis of individual reactivity, and it is a matter of definition
whether these processes are considered as material (because es¬
sential material events are involved) or as immaterial (because
the processes depend on comparison and temporal correlation).
It is more important to understand the terms of discussion than
to decide on a definition.

The human newborn brain has, among other qualities, the
capacity to learn languages, abstract thinking, and moral judg¬
ment, but not to create them. With the ideological materials
received during childhood and the initial training in how to use
them, a more adult brain may find new combinations and new
ideas, but only in reference to information received from the
outside. In each individual, conscious or subconscious under¬
standing of messages is probably dependent upon progressive
steps of chemical and electrical subcoding of sensory inputs,
with the resulting creation of new material carriers and codes
which activate a new series of electrical and chemical phenom¬
ena, involving constellations of specialized neurons. These ideas
are hypothetical but they have the advantage of being useful
working hypotheses that can be tested experimentally.

While recording of electrical activity in the brain provides
information limited to the carriers, it should be expected that
electrical stimulation of neuronal fields may activate intracere¬
bral processes related to both initial material carriers and subse¬
quent subcarriers of symbolic meaning and past experiences
stored in the brain. In this way we could differentiate between
the cerebral mechanisms responsible for simple transmission of
inputs and for the cognitive processing of received information.
At the present moment we still lack neurophysiological under¬
standing of how we enjoy music or recognize a pencil, but at
least we have methodologies and working hypotheses to investi¬
gate the problem, and already we can create musical and optic
hallucinatory perceptions by direct stimulation of some areas of
the brain.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


Part V


TOWARD A PSYCHO-
CIVILIZED SOCIETY


Since war begins in the minds of men, it is in the minds
of men that the defences of peace must be constructed.

—UNESCO Constitution


http:/www.propheticexplorer.i


Social Dependence and Individual Freedom


It was a blow to human pride when Gopernicus and other astron¬
omers discovered that the planet earth is neither the center of
the universe nor the center of the solar system, not even unique
among celestial bodies, but only an insignificant bit of matter
in the immensity of galaxies, many of which may contain other
highly developed planets (66, 113). The modesty of the spaceship
earth is a reality, and we must accept it and adapt to it. Only
then can we understand our universe and start planning to
conquer the stars.

Darwin gave our pride a second blow and made an historical
step toward understanding ourselves. Man had embellished fan¬
tasies about his unique origin as a descendent of gods, made
master of a world graciously created for his enjoyment and
fulfillment. Shattering this wishful thinking, Darwin developed
the ideas of Anaximander, Lamarck, and his own grandfather,
Erasmus, and proposed the doctrine of evolution. The different
forms of life developed gradually from a common ancestry
through a struggle for existence and survival of the fittest. Homo
sapiens was not created de novo by special design and was only
the remarkable product of a long process of biological evolution.
Man is different from monkeys and lizards, just as monkeys and
lizards differ from worms and amoebas. All are links in the
evolutionary process. A biological memory of ancient times is
preserved as functional traces in higher organisms. The chem¬
ical composition of the blood of mammals, for example, has

*31


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


252 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

a Strong resemblance to sea water where life probably originated.
Antecedents of a thinking brain may be found in lower animals,
and in varying degrees, mental abilities like memory, learning,
and problem solving are shared by octopus, rat, and man. By
accepting this reality we can perceive our continuing evolution
and become more motivated to influence the destiny of the
human race.

We may now be approaching a third equally momentous
discovery about ourselves. The analysis of mental activities in
the context of brain physiology indicates that our own self,
our ego, is not so unique or even independent, as Freud pointed
out many years ago. Study of the elements which constitute per¬
sonal identity reveals the two classical factors of nature and
nurture. These factors are given to, and not chosen by, the
individual. The amino acids which form the genes are selected
and assembled in the helix by natural chance, without inter¬
vention of the desires of the owner or the donors, and according
to laws related to the history of protozoas, fishes, and apes, be¬
yond the control or awareness of man. Genetically we are not
the masters but the slaves of millenniums of biological history.

The other factors which form personality originate in the en¬
vironment and are initially received by each baby without any
possible choice. The baby does not select his parents, country of
birth, or the language spoken around him. Personality is formed
by a constellation of borrowed elements related to ideological,
behavioral, and cultural systems, and dependent on a continuous
stream of sensory inputs. This is reality, and we must accept it
and adapt to it. Only then can we apply our intelligence to the
investigation and conquering of the human mind. Only then
can we contemplate development of a future psychocivilized
human being, a less cruel, happier, and better man. The concept
of individuals as self-sufficient and independent entities is based
on false premises.

In the Copernican universe, our planet and man himself
were demoted from their original geocentric position, but there
was still a comfortable sensation of security based on law and


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


SOCIAL DEPENDENCE AND INDIVIDUAL FREEDOM 233

order, and as Newton explained, the most complex celestial
phenomena could in fact be reduced to relatively simple for¬
mulas. Similar laws could be applied to falling apples or to the
attraction and repulsion of planets floating in the immensity
of sidereal space. Reality, however, was still more complex and
less stable, and a new understanding of the universe was pro¬
vided by the quantum theory of Planck and the uncertainty
principle of Heisenberg, culminating in the ideas of relativity
formulated by Einstein, Time and distance lost their former
absolute values and appeared to have a different meaning to
different observers.

The problem is that the universe has no center. Everything is
relative and all that we can do is to compare the relations among
given sets of values and express the result by mathematical
formulas. If the size of all existing materials in the earth was
suddenly reduced (or increased) 100 times (or any other amount),
no human being would be able to detect the spectacular change
because of the lack of units of reference. Two cars traveling at
the same speed are motionless with respect to each other. While
inside a jet airplane flying at 1,000 kilometers per hour, we
may take a slow walk down the aisle at a speed of 1 meter per
second. To say then that we are moving at 1,003.6 kilometers
per hour would be meaningless unless we specified our points
of reference. We do not have any absolute and immutable yard¬
stick. The limitation of the world of physics is that it can be
perceived only as the relativity of one value compared with
another.

These well-known concepts of physics have a direct applica¬
tion to the understanding of mental functions, to which some
absolute values were erroneously attributed in the past. The
mind also lacks a center, and in reality its functions are based
on the relativistic comparison of information which has not been
created by cerebral neurons but which originates in the environ¬
ment and is perceived through sensory reception of data as a
temporal sequence of experiences which are processed by cere¬
bral neurons and stored, to be used as future frames of reference.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


234 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

After all, the acceptance of relativity in physics is only a conse¬
quence of the physiological properties of our brain, which lacks
the intrinsic capability for absolute measurement of time or
space.

We must formulate Similar questions in psychology, knowing
that the brain is not able to produce absolute thoughts, to create
absolute values, or to unVeil intrinsic principles of ethics. There
is a psychological relatixnty parallel to the physical one, and our
task is not to discover “true” personalities, because the search
for absolute values is fantasy, but rather to investigate the origin,
reception, intracerebral circulation, and behavioral manifesta¬
tions of the sets of values which form the relative frame of
reference of each individual. The importance of this approach
is that in rejecting the immutability of values we also reject
the fatal determination of destiny, and instead of accepting
natural fate, we may gain a new personal freedom by using
intelligence, considering that the systems of ideology and be¬
havioral reactivity are only relative human creations which can
be modified by the feedback of reason.

Man may be considered a provisional collection of matter
and information, both provided by the environment, consti¬
tuting relative frames of reference to be compared, within the
limitations and under the terms of the human mind, with other
frames of reference.

We know that atoms of oxygen, carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen,
and other elements which form part of organic and inorganic
compounds, such as water, vegetables, and animal proteins, have
been combined in a special manner to constitute membranes,
cells, and other parts of living beings, without the help of “vital
spirits” or other metaphysical mysteries. Our living body is only
a transitory organization of chemical compounds. We may place
a radioactive tag in sodium or potassium ions, to follow their
metabolic pathways as they enter the body, circulate through
it, take part in specific activities, and are stored in some organ
or excreted to the outside. Every single ion which forms our
flesh pre-existed in nature. A small number of them, a minor


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


SOCIAL DEPENDENCE AND INDIVIDUAL FREEDOM 335

fraction of the immense total, form part of each organism during
its relatively brief span of existence, and all of these “personal”
atoms, which in reality lack any individual specificity, will revert
back to the environment. Atoms, organization, and time are the
only factors which constitute the organisms, a.nd nobody should
be disturbed or offended by the fact that he has not invented
or consciously chosen the ions that integrate his anatomical
structure. It is true that the astonishing unique properties of
awareness, thinking, and behaving are new qualities which did
not exist among the properties of the single ions, and that their
appearance is related to a tremendously complex organization
which we still do not comprehend. In order to understand and
accept this fact it may be helpful to consider that water has
different physical and chemical properties than its constituent
elements of hydrogen and oxygen. The complexity of organiza¬
tion may determine the emergence of new properties nonexist¬
ent in the simpler building blocks.

To establish a psychophysical parallel, we may consider that
words, concepts, information, patterns of response, and other
elements indispensable for mental activities pre-exist in cul¬
ture before each individual is bom. These elements enter the
organism by impinging on sensory inputs, and then circulate
through the central nervous system, taking part in specific
mental activities and finally being stored as memories and per¬
haps exteriorized as part of behavioral expression. The gamut
of words, symbols, and information necessary for ideological
processes must be provided from the outside, and only a small
portion of the existing immensity is used to structure the in¬
dividual mind. No one should be disturbed by the fact that
he is borrowing most of his mental constituents and that he has
not invented the alphabet, mathematics, ethics, history, or any
of the many subjects filling our brains.

We are provided with frames of mental reference and by
necessity our reactions—^and personal identity—^will be related
to this given frame. Individual uniqueness is merely the unique
chance in the acquisition, combination, and modulation of


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


236 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

available elements, and the relative central axis is not the in¬
dividual but the elements originating in the outside. There
is not much more merit—or responsibility—in learning to walk
or in speaking our native tongue than there is in growing hair.

Unless we are taught to think with critical evaluation of the
perceived reality and we understand the principle of psychologi¬
cal relativity, it will be very difficult to escape from the ideo¬
logical and behavioral imprinting of early childhood. The
individual may think that the most important fact of reality
is his own existence, but this is only his personal point of view,
a relative frame of reference which is not shared by the rest
of the living world. This self-importance also lacks historical
perspective, for the brief existence of one person should be
considered in terms of the world population, mankind, and the
whole universe. It is quite reasonable to feel that “I” am the
most important creature that ever existed, but unless I realize
the egocentric relativity of my appreciation at the same time,
I am ignoring many other frames of reference, as valuable as my
own, which are essential in order to understand my position
both among other living beings and in the context of cosmic
evolution. Understanding of the relative value of personal
existence from the individual and cosmic points of view as
complementary aspects of the same reality may facilitate the
personal adaptation to the environment. It may also provide
feedback possibilities of influencing this reality by using intelli¬
gent purpose to modify natural causality.

In Sartre’s (194) dualism of being-in-itself (a stone is a stone,
which being static always coincides with itself) and being-for-
itself (the realm of consciousness perpetually beyond itself),
the second aspect represents our existence as continuously
flowing out, preventing us from possessing our being the way we
can possess a static object, and creating the essential conflict
and anxiety over our desire for the security of being a stable
entity. This important concept should be supplemented by
recognition of the essential need for a continuous flowing in
of sensory inputs. Self-realization, after all, derives from the


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


SOCIAL DEPENDENCE AND INDIVIDUAL FREEDOM 237

processing of information coming from the environment, and
accomplishment is a feedback which establishes a congruence
between a drive and the sensory perception of a behavioral
performance. The existential flowing out cannot occur without
a previous flowing in, and what flow in and out are merely
information, cultural symbols, and behavioral patterns created
not by the individual but by the collective effort of many men—
most of them dead—accumulated through many thousands
of years and graciously given to each of us.

A clearer understanding of our continuous environmental
and social dependence will increase our interest in identifying
and investigating the factors, reasons, and mechanisms of this
dependence. Realization that the elements which form our
personality and originate in the surroundings are so essential
may promote the establishment of stronger intellectual and
emotional bonds with the cultural source, increasing our mo¬
tivation to enhance the environment which is the provider of
our personal building blocks. Social integration may be im¬
proved when it is understood that society forms the basis of
each individual and that personal destiny is related to and in
large part dependent on the destiny of the whole group. Aliena¬
tion from established cultural forms and lack of social responsi¬
bility could be diminished by an increased awareness of our
social dependence.

In primitive societies there was a limited choice of sensory
inputs, provided mainly by surrounding nature. As man was
bound to a small piece of territory, he had very few opportuni¬
ties for ecological, sociological, or ideological change, and nat¬
ural chance was the principle source of information. In present
civilized societies, many sensory inputs originate in the tech¬
nological surroundings created by man. Because of mass com¬
munications, important events are shared around the world.
The tragic death of one man, once an incident of local signifi¬
cance, may now be reported globally and felt as a personal loss
by millions of distant people. The work of one person who
discovers electricity or antibiotics may now transform the quality


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


238 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

of life in all countries. Different technologies, arts, sciences, and
political and religious ideologies affect the lives of most men.
In principle, adults can select their country, climate, and cul¬
ture and any setting from the sensory isolation of a psycholo¬
gist’s experimental cubicle to the sensory assault of a metropolis.

But the desires aiid mechanisms for choice are determined
mainly by early childhood experiences, cultural imprinting, and
learned patterns of response. Newborn babies are completely
dependent on parental care for the quality and quantity of
sensory inputs as well as for food and warmth. The elements
offered by the environment are almost infinite, but only a limited
number are used to shncture each individual. Their selection
depends on chance, which among many variables includes the
presence and behavior of parents and teachers. We must recog¬
nize that initially an individual has no control over the sensory
inputs which mold his mind, and that during the decisive
years of childhood, when each of us receives emotional im¬
pacts, behavioral formulas, and ideological frameworks, we are
unable to search independently for alternatives. Our initial
personality is structured in a rather automatic way when our
capacity for intelligent choice has not developed.

If we accept that early experience is decisive for the es¬
tablishment of personal identity, then we must accept that
individual mental structure is not self-determined but hetero-
determined by the interaction of genes received from our an¬
cestors and information received from the environment and
culture. Where, then, is the freedom to construct personal
identity? To clarify these ideas, let us remember that liberal
societies are based on the principle of individual self-determina¬
tion, with the assumption that each human being is born free
and has the right to develop his own mind, to construct his own
ideology, to shape his own behavior, and to express his person¬
ality without external pressures or indoctrination. The role
of education, which involves both parents and schools, is to
help these processes evolve with due respect for the individual.
One of the main goals in these societies is “to find ourselves,”


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


SOCIAL DEPENDENCE AND INDIVIDUAL FREEDOM 2 39

and to develop our potential while remaining Independent
and self-sufficient. Privacy has a high priority in its intellectual,
emotional, material, and territorial aspects, and personal free¬
dom stops with interference in the rights of others.

This kind of liberal orientation has great appeal, but un¬
fortunately its assumptions are not supported by neurophysio¬
logical and psychological studies of intracerebral mechanisms.
The brain of the newborn lacks the stored information, neur-
ronal circuits, and functional keyboards prerequisite to the
formulation of choice. The infant may have the right to be free,
but he has neither the option nor the biological mechanisms
for free behavior. Confrontation with a multiplicity of choices
may create confusion and anxiety in a child who does not yet
possess the necessary mental sophistication to choose. This
frustrating situation of inadequacy may have a traumatic and
deforming effect rather than a constructive and positive one.
The brain of an adult usually possesses the capacity to select
a response but even it is not self-sufficient; for the brain needs
constant environmental inputs in order to preserve mental
normality, and a flow of information is necessary to make each
judgment against the background of experience.

The decisive importance of children’s education has been
recognized in pedagogy, psychology, and sociology, and the
permissive or authoritarian orientation has been a highly con¬
troversial subject. Without entering directly into this debate,
I would like to point out the fallacy in the theory that permis¬
siveness develops the “true” and “free” personality of the child.
Permissiveness, like any other educational approach to human
relations, imposes a type of response which influences the pro¬
cessing of sensory inputs and establishes a pattern of behavior.
Education has consequences predictable within a range of
variability. Obviously if we were not expecting some result, we
would not educate. We may argue that the personality developed
through permissiveness is better adapted to present times, or
that it will have less—or more-—psychological and social con¬
flicts. We should understand, however, that a permissively


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


240 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

Structured child is as much the product of his parents’ manipu¬
lation as the child of the most authoritarian mother. The choice
is the parents’, not the child’s.

The brain, per se, with all its genes, is not sufl&cient for the
development of a mind in the absence of external information,
and the content of this information is decisive in the establish¬
ment of mental structure. Even the withdrawal of parental
care is a factor which can irrevocably shape future behavior
of the young, as demonstrated by Harlow’s neurotic mother¬
less monkeys and by the emotional and mental handicap suf¬
fered by homeless children.

When a parent passively accepts violent behavior, insulting
words, or physical assault from his child, he is positively rein¬
forcing this kind of reaction and is facilitating the establishment
of aggressive patterns which may be generalized to other social
situations later on. While physical aggression is rare in four
year olds, by six years of age a child has developed sufficient
motor skills and curiosity to engage in social interaction and
competition with his peers. Studies have shown that at this
point intermittent or differential reinforcing of antisocial
behavior is the most effective method for establishing patterns
of aggression (9). Some tendencies are inborn, but the quality
and quantity of their expression depend on experience. Repres¬
sion of violence may create undesirable conflicts and frustrations
only when the pattern of violence has already been created by
previous learning. A basic inborn drive like sex is a blind force
dependent on symbols, experience, and cultural patterns of
response.

Whatever we do or fail to do when we are in charge of a baby
will influence his future mental structure. Our attitude, there¬
fore, should not be to close our eyes and accept chance, but
to investigate the extracerebral and intracerebral elements
which intervene in the formation of personality. To study
what is going on inside of the brain is as important as to con¬
sider the other aspects of education and behavior.

These remarks are intended both to demonstrate that we


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


SOCIAL DEPENDENCE AND INDIVIDUAL FREEDOM 24 1

should not base our interpersonal relations on false or unproved
assumptions and to indicate the need to study these problems
experimentally within the framework of intracerebral physi¬
ology. As our power to influence the mental structure of man
continually increases, we face the question of the kind of peo¬
ple we would like to create. We must realize that parents and
educators are imprinting and manipulating the minds and
personalities of young people in any case, and that we are
responsible for giving coherent form and ethical purpose to the
psychogenetic elements transmitted to the child. The issue is
whether violence and other behavioral patterns are inborn and
inevitable or whether they are mainly related to a cultural
learning which may be influenced by intelligent planning.

Ecological forces cannot be ignored or destroyed. Liberation
from and domination of the environment became possible when
we discovered the laws of nature and directed them with our
intelligence. We cannot ignore the biological laws of the mind
either. We should use our intelligence to direct our behav¬
ior, rather than accept its determination by unknown forces.
Through education we should provide awareness of the ele¬
ments, including intracerebral mechanisms, which intervene
in the formation of personal identity, and we should teach the
processes of decision-making and intelligent choice. Personal
freedom is not a biological gift but a mental attribute which
must be learned and cultivated. To be free is not to satisfy
sexual drive, to fill an empty stomach, or to quarrel with our
wives because of our repressed fears or mother-infant relations.
Freedom requires the recognition of biological drives and their
intelligent direction through processes of sublimation, substitu¬
tion, postponement, or simply their satisfaction with civilized
refinement and enjoyment. Individual freedom will increase
when we understand the setting of our personality in early
childhood and when we develop means for the intelligent
evaluation and emotional interpretation of the information
reaching us from the environment.

We should try to establish, at the earliest possible moment


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


242 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

of the baby’s life, a program of psychogenesis, meaning the use
of available physiological, psychological, and psychiatric knowl¬
edge for the formation of the child’s personality. Courses on
psychogenesis should be taken by parents and educators as well
as by children as a part of the school curriculum. The postulates
of psychogenesis are: (i) The mind does not exist at the moment
of birth. (2) The mind cannot appear in the absence of sensory
inputs. (3) Individual identity and personal behavior are not
properties of the brain which will unfold automatically through
neuronal maturation, but are acquired functions which must be
learned and therefore depend essentially on the reception of
sensory inputs. (4) The purpose of education is not the un¬
veiling of individual mental functions but the creation, the
genesis of them. (5) Symbols from the environment will be
physically integrated within the brain as molecular changes in
the neuronal structure. (6) Man is not bom free but subservient
to genes and education. {7) Personal freedom is not inherited
nor is it a gift of nature, but one of the highest attainments of
civilization which requires awareness and intellectual and emo¬
tional training in order to process and choose consciously and
intelligently among environmental alternatives. (8) Education
should not be authoritarian because then mental flexibility is
reduced, handicapping creativity and forcing behavioral con¬
formity or producing hyperreactive rejection and rebellion.
Education should not be permissive either, because then other
kinds of automatisms are being developed, determined by the
blind chance of environmental circumstances. In a permissive
atmosphere, the individual may be a slave of his own emotions,
while an authoritarian upbringing creates a tyranny of in¬
hibitions and conformism. Both extremes are undesirable and
it is preferable to direct mental and behavioral development
toward a self-determination of goals, knowing that if we want to
create free individuals, we must teach them to be so (210).
Understanding of the cerebral mechanisms involved in behav¬
ioral responses provides a feedback which modifies these mech¬
anisms, introducing elements of conscious determination.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


SOCIAL DEPENDENCE AND INDIVIDUAL FREEDOM 343

In recent generations, there has been an amdous search for
freedom and personal identity, an attempt to escape from the
faceless mass of a technolc^cal society, ancl a rebellion against
traditional morality, ethical principles, and ideological cliches.
In this challenge to established values, sensory stimulation has
grown louder, men’s hair longer, skirts shorter, and rebellion has
become the goal—to be free from family, teachers, and society;
to let the mind float, searching for the depth of the self, perhaps
with psychedelic aids, perceiving a stream of uninhibit^ mes¬
sages and dreams; to live a natur^tl life without the artificial
pressures of schedules and obligations; to have free speech, free

expression, artistic creativity without established rules, and a

multiperception of feelings flooding the senses.

In this attitude, which is responsible for rnany of the present
conflicts and maladjustments, there is a fellacy similar to the
fallacy of permissive education. We cannot be free from parents,
teachers, and society because they are the extracerebral sources
of our minds, and to resent Or deny this reality is hot going to
change it, A young person can be proud of ivorking hard, but he
cannot take credit for being smart: studies have shown that
IQ is determined by the environment, and that the intellectual
and motor skills required for success must be taught by the
guardians of childhood. The persistence of dependence on an
initial source of emotions and information, like the mother, can
be undesirable, but this problem should not be confused with
the existence of bonds and education provided by the mother
and by society.

We may disagree with the system Of values and ideology given
to us, and subsequently we may espouse a different philosophy
and try to assume another identity. Great alterations are possible,
and we may cherish or curse oiir past, but its cultural elements
will be forever our frame of referehce. In the depth of our minds
we are going to discover only the remains of what we have
learned and experienced.

The young Americans wbo have taken refuge in Ibiza or Crete
seldom identify with the customs or ideology of their adopted


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


244 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

lands. They enjoy nature but do not participate in local culture.
They admit to feeling “American,” although they may reject
the present economic or political values of the United States,
Their basic emotional patterns of response were established
during early childhood and their later changes are limited. This
fact is in part related to the progressive loss of neuronal plasticity
through age.

The old temple inscription “Know Thyself” is often repeated
today, but perhaps it is not adequate. It should declare “Con¬
struct Thyself” as well. Shape your mind, train your thinking
power, and direct your emotions more rationally; liberate your
behavior from the ancestral burden of reptiles and monkeys—
be a man and use your intelligence to orient the reactions of your
mind.

The human being is a functional trinity of sensory inputs and
behavioral responses connected by the essential link of intra¬
cerebral processes. The three aspects are equally essential, even
if only the first two were considered important in the past. Today
we have begun to unravel the secrets of cerebral activities, and
a new perspective for the understanding of man is emerging
from the experimental complexities of neurobehavioral data.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


Natural Causality and Intelligent Planning
in the Organization of Human Behavior


Perhaps the most important quality of civilization is the sub¬
stitution of intelligent planning for natural chance. Today our
lives are not regulated by hunting needs, darkness of night, or
seasonal variations. We may request food by telephone, flip a
switch for light, or adjust a dial to obtain a room temperature.
At the same time that we have gained freedom from natural
elements, we have become increasingly dependent on coor¬
dinated technical planning. The accomplishments in outer space
travel are an outstanding example. Escape from gravity abolished
man’s historical bond to the earth; day and night rhythms were
drastically changed; time and space took on new dimensions;
the horizon vanished; the cardinal points lost meaning, and a
totally new system of references and computations had to be
created in order to navigate and survive orbiting around and
beyond the earth. It is symbolic that man’s new-found celestial
freedom required the greatest imaginable social dependence.
Every single bit of each space vehicle represented the combined
thinking and material efforts of thousands of men. Even the air to
be breathed inside the capsule had to be carefully calculated
and stored.

Manipulation of natural elements for the benefit of mankind
is usually accepted as highly desirable, and most of us are rather
proud of the colossal engineering efforts involved in changing

245


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


246 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

the course of a river, joining oceans formerly separated by land,
or reaching distant stars with our instruments. These wonder¬
ful realities are considered a logical consequence of our present
cultural system, although they would have been impossible to
materialize or even to conceive of several thousand years ago.
Can we imagine the attitude of primitive man about tampering
with the eternal stability of the rivers or about capturing the
sparks of lightning with a metallic rod? The suggestion would
have been rejected as foolish and impossible, if not sacrilegious.
“Reaching for the moon” was the expression for striving for an
unattainable goal, although that actual goal has now been
realized.

We may wonder whether man’s still ingrained conceptions
about the untouchable self are not reminiscent of the ancient
belief that it was completely beyond human power to alter om¬
nipotent nature. We are at the beginning of a new ideological
and technological revolution in which the objectives are not
physical power and control of the environment, but direct in¬
tervention into the fate of man himself.

The fact that the human brain is learning to influence its own
material and functional substratum should not be interpreted
as a foolish attempt to modify “cosmic design,” or to change
“God’s will,” but simply as the appearance of a new mechanism
determined by the normal evolution of natural chance. Human
domination of ecological forces should not be taken as a victory
against natural fate but as a result of it, in the same way that
the flight of a bird against gravity is not in defiance of physical
laws. Nature, not man, deserves credit for creating a thinking
brain. Natural evolution provided the cerebral properties of
originality, foresight, and awareness. The process was probably
comparable to the needs of warm-blooded animals which re¬
quired the development of a neuronal thermostat, located in the
hypothalamus, in order to regulate complex vasomotor and
metabolic mechanisms to keep body temperature within narrow
limits. The newcomer in the series of warm mammals seems to
be developing a novel and most useful homeostatic mechanism


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


NATURAL CAUSALITY AND INTELLIGENT PLANNING 247

which in the future will perhaps be referred to as the “psy-
chostat,” meaning the intelligent neuronal adaptation for the
maintenance of mental stability in spite of changes in external
and internal demands. Natural evolution should favor the de¬
velopment of this mechanism which certainly has great survival
value in the present world of tensions and conflicts. Natural
evolution is, however, too slow, and if we reco^ize the decisive
importance of the new development, we may be able to facilitate
the feedback of cognitive behavior upon its own material basis
of cerebral physiology.

When atomic energy was discovered, its destructive capa¬
bilities were developed much faster than its constructive ap¬
plications, and the blame for this tragedy must be placed on the
lack of human reason—on the functional inadequacy of our little
brains which have not yet learned to solve their behavioral
conflicts reasonably. The danger of atomic misuse may, hope¬
fully, be solved by new ideas produced by better brains to come,
while the risks derived from behavioral control may be created
and at the same time avoided by the same subject of inquiry,
the mind, which contains within itself all the elements for
search and for decision and cannot expect any external help. As
Dobzhansky (65) has said, “In giving rise to man, the evolution¬
ary process has, apparently for the first and only time in the
history of the Cosmos, become conscious of itself. This opens at
least a possibility that evolution may some day be directed by
man, and that prevalence of the absurd may be cut down.”

The phrase “control of human behavior” is emotionally
loaded, in part because of its threat to the “inviolability of the
ego” and in part because of unpleasant associations with dic¬
tatorships, brainwashing, and selfish exploitation of man. Well-
known novels like Huxley’s Brave New World (114), Orwell’s
1984 (168), and Condon’s The Manchurian Candidate (40) are
exposes of utopian societies with obedient, soma-drug"?ed, satis¬
fied individuals whose activities are planned by the master minds
of the ruling council. These satires are meant to shock the
reader, but other novels also based on cultural design and be-


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


248 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

havioral engineering, such as Skinner's Walden Two (209),
have more messianic tones. The problem of external controls
was well expressed by Skinner (210) when he described

a world in which there is food, clothing, and shelter for all, where
everyone chooses his own work and works on the average only 4
hours a day, where music and the arts flourish, where personal re¬
lationships develop under the most favorable circumstances, where
education prepares every child for the social and intellectual life
which lies before him, where—in short—people are truly happy,
secure, productive, creative, and forward looking. What is wrong
with it? Only one thing: someone “planned it that way.”

The concern about external planning depends to a great extent
on learned attitudes, and the circular problem is that arbiters
of ethical values are so biased by ideas of the prevailing, self-
perpetuating cultural system that they cannot objectively eval¬
uate their own evaluations. To own slaves was considered a
respectable manifestation of social status not too long ago. In¬
culcation of honesty, loyalty, bravery, and self-sacrifice is the
custom in many cultures, but by adding obedience and mobi¬
lizing the population for a^ressive action against other groups,
all these excellent qualities are perverted.

The dangers inherent in the control of human behavior are
recognized by Skinner as well as by most investigators, and the
hope that the new power acquired by the behavioral sciences
will be restricted to the scientists or to some benevolent elite
is little supported by either recent or distant history. Faith in
science has been shattered when the stupendous discoveries of
physics have been applied to kill several hundred thousand
human beings in a single blow, when teams of investigators have
been applying their skills to find more efficient napalm oils to
bum villages, when civilized countries are stockpiling deadly
gases, germs, and megatons of lethal power, and when govern¬
mental elites are using computers and “think centers” to cal¬
culate a game of destruction and retaliation. Greater efficiency
in behavioral control could be only a more subtle and dangerous


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


NATURAL CAUSALITY AND INTELLIGENT PLANNING 249

weapon. No wonder that Berkner (15) has posed the question
“Is there intelligent life on earth?” while Cole (38) expressed
universal concern by asking, “Can the world be saved?”

These very serious problems must be reci^nized and solutions
must be found. Danger has never stopped process; the risk is
not in the acquisition of knowledge but in its improper use;
notwithstanding problems and concerns, atomic investigations
will continue their explosive development, and control of hu¬
man behavior will advance rapidly in methodology and ap¬
plicability. We must accept the reality that different degrees
of behavioral control have been practiced since immemorial
times, are widely used at present, and will expand in the future.
Man is a social animal and interpersonal relations are a form
of mutual control. The mother certainly teaches her baby. The
policeman imposes order on city traflfic. To discuss whether hu¬
man behavior can or should be controlled is naive and mis¬
leading. We should discuss what kinds of controls are ethical,
considering the efficiency and mechanisms of existing procedures
and the desirable deg^-ee of these and other controls in the future.

Available techniques can be classified in two groups: (1) Use
of chemical and physical agents to induce modifications in
neurophysiological activity. This category includes psychoactive
drugs and direct electrical manipulation of the brain. (2) Use of
positive or negative social reinforcements, based on the sensory
relations between the subject and his environment, mainly other
human beings who are the suppliers of stimuli. This category
includes subliminal stimulation, conditioning, social pressure,
psychotherapy, hypnosis, sensory deprivation, and brainwashing.
In these situations the behavior of one individual is planned or
at least purposefully influenced by another.

In the control of behavior through psychotherapy, the doctor
uses his own experience and scientific knowledge in order to
influence the reactions of the patient who has consented to the
general procedure. In this situation, there is a communication
of values and behavioral characteristics, and it has been pointed
out that “whether or not the analyst is consciously tempted to


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


250 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

act as a teacher, model and ideal to his patients, he inevitably
does so to a greater or lesser extent; and this is a central aspect
of the psychoanalytic process” (152). Patients who improve after
psychotherapy have often changed their moral values on sex,
aggression, and authority to conform to those of the therapist,
but there is much less modification in the patients who have not
improved (189). The overwhelming experimental evidence
shows that human behavior can be controlled by psychological
means (131), and the new approach of physical manipulation
of the brain is only one more aspect of possible behavioral con¬
trol.

The Tvidely accepted principle that “all men are bom free
and equal” is cherished as the backbone of democratic societies
and the basis of human dignity. If we interpret the statement as
an ideal for social organization or as a symbolic expression of
human rights, the principle is certainly commendable. If we
analyze its biological basis, however, we realize that freedom
of the newborn is only wishful thinking, and that literal accept¬
ance of this fallacy may cause frustrations and conflicts. Expect¬
ing freedom, we may be puzzled by the reality of biological
determination and early imprinting compounded by the servi¬
tude to a mechanized and organized society. This dilemma
would be eased if we realized that liberty is not a natural, inborn
characteristic of human expression but a product of awareness
and intelligent thinking which must be acquired by conscious
individual and collective efforts. Civilization has accelerated the
elaboration of human potential including the possibility for
greater freedom, but its fulfillment is contingent on purposeful
efforts to escape from the countless elements of behavioral
determination.

Heredity is established by pure chance—not chosen by
parents or by the individual—and this genetic determination
represents the potential to be a genius or an idiot. Denying the
existence of mental functions in the newborn, emphasizing the
essentiality of extracerebral elements for the appearance of
the mind, and accepting that the baby lacks the capacity to search


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


NATURAL CAUSALITY AND INTELLIGENT PLANNING 25 1

for and to choose the decisive initial inputs leads to the conclu¬
sion of the possibility and convenience of intelligent planning as
superior to blind chance. The poet needs words-—which he did
not invent—to write a poem; the mason needs bricks, con¬
structed by someone else, to build a house; the thinker needs
ideas, provided by readings and experience, in order to develop
new concepts; and the baby, who is the first state of poets,
masons, and thinkers, has the absolute need of cultural inputs
in order to become a man.

The “personal identity” of the newborn is a question of
definition, because initially he has potentialities rather than
realities. Being left- or right-handed, more or less excitable,
possessing a white or black skin, and the faculty—or inability—
to learn are genetically determined characteristics. After the
baby is bom, the choices are: who is going to provide the neces¬
sary information and training, what and how much will be
provided, and the techniques to be used. The ideological vacuum
of the newborn brain cannot be filled by autochthonous neur¬
onal spikes but by experiences and cultural inputs; The unfor¬
tunate circumstance is that the baby, for whom the consequences
of these choices are so important, is totally unable to participate
in the discussion.

The elements which form the frame of reference for in¬
dividual mental structure include, among others, language,
knowledge, beliefs, and patterns of response, but the number of
existing cultural elements is enormous and only a few are re¬
ceived by each person. This requires a process of selection which
is influenced by (1) natural chance, represented, for example, by
country of birth, social environment, and economic factors;
(2) national organization which uses mass media to commu¬
nicate facts, news, and ideology with a variable degree of bias
(and which also controls the educational system and may deprive
people of specific knowledge and experiences by means of social
and political pressure, censorship, and repression); (3) family
and friends, who represent the most important sources of in¬
formation in early childhood; and (4) the individual himself.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


252 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

who may choose cultural elements, but only after he has acquired
the power of reason and choice, and within the limits of avail¬
able information. This power will be considerably biased by the
three previous groups of factors.

Let us accept that the structure erf mental qualities and their
behavioral manifestations depend on genetic, neurophysiolog¬
ical, and cultural factors which can be investigated, known, and
modified by intelligent planning. Let us accept also that the
necessary methodology is available or will soon be developed.
The most important question then is how we shall use this
power. How should the human mind be structured? Which
mental qualities and behavioral responses should be favored or
inhibited? Who will be the human artifact created by intelligent
manipulation? As Rogers has asked, "Who will be controlled?
Who will exercise control? What type of control will be ex¬
ercised? Most important of all... toward what end or what pur¬
pose, or in the pursuit of what value, will control be exercised?”
(188).

Powerful cultural determination is already being imposed on
the behavior of children and adults, but as history shows it has
not been too successful in preventing or solving human conflicts.
Our predicament is that the power to control behavior is progress¬
ing very rapidly in both knowledge and technology, while we
still do not know in which direction to use it. Skinner, who is
the main projxinent of cultural design, has listed the specifica¬
tions for a behavioral technology as follows: "Let men be happy,
informed, skillful, well behaved, and productive” (210), but in a
later publication (211) he has not been so definite about these
goals; and the implicit assumption is that behavioral control will
bring "a far better world for everyone.”

The contention that an ideal society should be "well behaved”
may be disputed by many and in any case requires a clarification
of meaning. In some old plantations slaves behaved very well,
worked hard, were submissive to their masters, and were prob¬
ably happier than some of the free blacks in modern ghettos.
In several dictatorial countries the general population is skillful.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


NATURAL CAUSALITY AND INTELIJGENT PLANNING 2^3

productive, well behaved, and perhaps as happy as those in more
democratic societies. It is doubtful, however, diat davery or
dictatorship should be our models. To outline a fdrmula for the
future ideal man is not easy. This is partly due to the fact that if
man is identified by his mental qualities, our difficulty is in¬
creased because we do not know these qualities well, and they
are evolving entities with an unpredictable future. How would
it have been possible lOO years ago to foresee the biological con¬
venience of resisting radiation or gravitational forces? These
concepts were beyond the thinking range of the epoch. How can
we outline the mental requirements for a mankind in search of
another planet to inhabit when the earth loses its warmth and
can no longer support life? Our present problem is far from clear
although it requires immediate action: HOw should we orient
human behavior in the present and in the next few decade?

The confusion about behavioral goals contrasts sharply with
the relative clarity of material needs. Food, clothing, and shelter
may be accepted as the most basic requirements, to which we may
add health, education, and leisure. The puzzling reality is that
the excellent material accomplishment of our present civiliza¬
tion has not only failed to solve human confiicts and clashes
but has increased their destructive efficiency; creating additional
and unexpected problems such as alienation and ecological
pollution without increasing humaq happine^. The new gen¬
erations of affluent societies experience growing restlessness and
escalating explosions of rebellion which may be interpreted as
an anxious search for identity and purpose. The complaint is
spiritual more than material, a rejection of the established order
with its “false” values, without, however, reaching the creative
crisis of a better cause. It is a wishful yearning for freedom
while remaining chained to behavioral patterm of the group:
contempt for television, automobiles, and detergents; contempt
for affiliations with the church, state, or military. This attitude
often leads the alienated to seek sex without love ami the arti¬
ficial paradise of mental distortion provided by drugs; to live
aimlessly for today while feeling the emptiness of the future.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


254 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

They search for the independent self without realizing its
essential biological and ideological dependence.

Some of our present problems derive from the lack of balance
between material and mental evolutions. We are civilized in our
physical ecological accomplishments but barbaric in our psy¬
chological responses. Within some limits we can control atoms,
trees, and animals, while we have not learned to control our¬
selves. New solutions are needed in order to civilize our psyche,
consciously to organize our eflEorts to develop a future psycho-
civilized society.

Recognizing that we must do something in order to under¬
stand the human mind better and to improve the human con¬
dition is not very original. This idea was expressed before
Platonic and Aristotelian tim«. What is surprising is the limited
practicality of the solutions proposed in the past. Why after
several thousand years of civilization are human beings con¬
tinuing to torture and kill each other? Why do we agree in our
efforts to understand and dominate natural forces, while we dis¬
agree on the organization of mankind? Why have some countries
reached a considerable degree of physical comfort without en¬
joying a comparable degree of personal happiness?

One aspect of the problem is certainly that the many factors
involved are not well known and may be in conflict. Another
is that philosophy, sociology, and the behavioral sciences have
been limited to the outside of organisms, ignoring the internal
organization which is responsible for behavioral activity. The
tremendous possibilities introduced by new methodologies will
allow the exploration of the depth of functioning brains and
the influencing of their physiological mechanisms. Knowledge
acquired through this approach will permit a more realistic and
precise understanding of the human mind and of its behavioral
consequences, and it will also permit the introduction of a
greater amount of awareness and intelligence in the determi¬
nation of behavioral responses. This orientation should not be
identified with authoritarian control. To the contrary, “aware¬
ness of our own needs and attitudes is our most effective instru-


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


NATURAL CAUSALITY AND INTELLIGENT PLANNING 255

merit for maintaining our own integrity and control over our
own reactions” (187), Awareness is a major element in defense
against external manipulation. “Throughout the course of his
life . . . an individual is an active participant in the creation of
his own mind, the development of his own self, and more
generally speaking, his own reality world” (28).

How much reason we use to influence our personal fate is up
to us. Even the most deterministic doctrine must accept the role
of individual intelligence as a feedback in the constellation of
behavioral determinants. Planning the organization of mental
functions in children—and in adults—may be oriented toward
an increase in the awareness of the cultural elements and neuro¬
logical mechanisms involved in decision-making. Increasing the
participation of conscious evaluation diminishes the automatism
of responses, increases responsibility, augments individual dif¬
ferentiation of reactivity, and permits enjoyment of a greater
degree of freedom because the choices are more thoughtful and
in accord with personal evaluation of the circumstances. One of
the aims of the planners of psychocivilization should be to ex¬
pose and avoid the psychological traps being built into our
increasingly organized societies. We should try to avoid the
present trend to dehumanize our behavior, in which social rela¬
tions are effective but not affective. Services in hospitals, schools,
and shops are progressively automatized and depersonalized, so
that now merchandise, information, words, and money may be
exchanged between people without personal contact.

These problems must be identified and understood at their
many sociological, psychological, and neurophysiological levels
in order to make decisions about how to face them. The psycho-
civilized trend should avoid the inculcation of rigid patterns of
response while favoring the power of reason through better
knowledge of the intervening factors, including intracerebral
functioning. To pontificate about moral codes or to impose re¬
strictive measures may be less desirable—^and less effective—
than to clarify the reasons for individual choice. A very impor¬
tant decision to make is whether we are going to accept the


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


256 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

prevailing orientation of human life toward construction of
more autorac^iles and designing of orbital bombs, or whether
we would prefer to dedicate greater social effort to investigating
and directing our own minds, which must create and interpret
our circumstances.

The fundamental question of who is going to exert the power
of behavioral conprol is easy to answer; everybody who is aware
of the elements involved and understands how they act upon us
will have that power. It is therefore essential that relevant in¬
formation not be restricted to a small elite but be shared by
all. In this way, solutions will be the product of collective think¬
ing, and more importantly, the individual will be provided with
a critical sense which will diminish his dependence on group
decisions and allow the search for new personal solutions and
therefore greater individual freedom.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


A Tentative Plan


A new technology has been developed for the exploration of
cerebral mechanisms in behaving subjects, and it has already
provided data about the intracerebral correlates of learning,
memory, drives, performance, and other aspects of mental func¬
tions. This methodology has proved that movements, sensations,
emotions, desires, ideas, and a variety of psychological phenom¬
ena may be induced, inhibited, or modified by electrical stimula¬
tion of specific areas of the brain. These facts have changed the
classical philosophical concept that the mind was beyond ex¬
perimental reach.

To study psychic mechanisms it is convenient to identify and
to investigate the elements responsible for the initiation of
mental activity at birth and for its ccmtinuation throughout
life. The newborn baby lacks detectable mental activity, and the
reception of sensory information from the environment is abso¬
lutely necessary for the developmenf of psychic manifestations.
The adult is also dependent on a ceaitinuous reception of sensory
inputs for the preservation of mental normality.

Understanding and study of the essential and continuous
dependence of the mind on sensory reception will favor man’s
social integration because it shows that we cannot live alone and
that we need constant inputs of information and sensations from
the environment for our mental survival. At the same time,
understanding and experimental investigation of the genetic,
environmental, and intracerebral elements which determine
mental structure will favor the intelligent selection of these

257

http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


258 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

elements, and thus increase the basis for individual difiEer-
entiation and personal freedom.

Many scientists have already been attracted by the potential of
the neurobehavioral sciences. Brain research institutes flourish,
publications are increasing in number, and the International
Brain Research Organization (IBRO) was recently founded to
promote study of the central nervous system and to encourage
international collaboration in this field. The social sciences,
which have a behavioral rather than a physiological orientation,
are also in rapid development, partly because of increasing
public awareness of ghettos, juvenile violence, educational prob¬
lems, and general social unrest. Social scientists investigate inter¬
personal and intergroup relations, considering factors like the
emotions, economy, culture, and working conditions, all of
which are involved in man’s adaptation to his ever more complex
surroundings. The source of behavioral interactions, however,
and the mechanisms underlying anxiety, violence, drives, and
motivations depend on mental activities, which are usually ex¬
cluded from these studies. Both the neurobehavioral and the so¬
cial sciences are very active fields, but their present rate of
growth is too slow and their objectives too limited to give
adequate support to the ambitious project of improving the
present imbalance of civilization.

I am well aware that although learning has detectable elec¬
trical correlates in the brain and emotional behavior may be
controlled by cerebral radio stimulation in monkey colonies,
these and similar facts are rather distant from the problems
created and the solutions required by juvenile delinquency or
by international tensions. We must realize, however, that the
potential of new fields must be evaluated by the importance of
the newly discovered principles and their possible future appli¬
cations.

When Papin saw the lid of a pot being raised by boiling water
and expressed this phenomenon as a physical law, it would have
been difficult to foresee electricity being produced by steam-
driven turbines or ocean liners crossing the seas. The experimen¬
tal reality was a daily household occurrence; understanding the


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


A TENTATIVE PLAN 259

potential applications of the principle was transcendental. If
we could modify mental mechanisms intelligently, the conse¬
quences would be far more important than the consequences of
extending man’s life span or limiting his birth rate, because to
influence mental processes is to influence the source of all
human activities.

To increase significantly the manpower and resources devoted
to neurobehavioral sciences it will be neciessary first to make the
public as well as the scientific and political authorities aware
that an effort of unusual proportions is essential, explaining the
reasons for this effort along with the consequences and possible
individual and social gains. Second, it should be made known
that the necessary technology is already available and that sig¬
nificant results have already been obtained. Third, a strategy
should be developed to mobilize public opiniam, talent, and re¬
sources. This strategy requires interdisciplinary collaboration
in order to organize a general plan of action which should in¬
clude the following aspects.

Scientific Investigation

Acquisition of new knowledge is the cornerstone of scientific
advance, and a massive increase in research into the cerebral
mechanisms of mental activity could be initiated simply by
applying the available technology on a larger scale. This effort,
however, cannot be generated by the scientists themselves but
must be promoted and organized by governmental action de¬
claring “conquering of the human mind” a national goal at
parity with conquering of poverty Or Imiding a man on the
moon. National agencies should be created in order to coor¬
dinate plans, budgets, and actions just as NASA in the United
States has directed public interest and technology, launching
the country into the adventures and accomplishments of outer
space. Fortunately brain research is much less expensive, and
rather than building up new industrial empires, it is necessary
to create neurobehavioral institutes with the specific purpose of
investigating the mechanisms of the behaving brain, while more


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


26o physical control of the mind

basic neurophysiological research continues at its normal rate
of growth. These institutes require interdisciplinary organiza¬
tion because their main purpose will be to correlate genetics,
anatomy, physiology, biochemistry, and psychopharmacology
with behavioral, mental, and sociological phenomena. The main
aim is to establish a scientific foundation for the creation of a
future psychocivilized society based on a better understanding
of mental activities, on the liberation from the domination of
irrational mental determinants, on the establishment of personal
freedom through intelligent choice, and on a balance between
the material and mental development of civilization with the
power of reason directing the use of increasing technological
control of our physical environment. The research will be
oriented toward its application to psychology, psychiatry, and
education without excluding philosophical implications.

The project of conquering the human mind could be a central
theme for international cooperation and understanding because
its aim is to know the mechanisms of the brain, which make all
men behave and misbehave, which give us pleasure and suffering,
which promote love and hate. The differences in genetic poten¬
tial among men are magnified grotesquely, like shadows on a
wall, by the educational environment in which they find them¬
selves. Even if political ideas, cultural values, and behavioral
reactivity vary, the basic physical, intellectual, and emotional
needs of man are the same and must have similar neurophysio¬
logical mechanisms which can be investigated. Hate and de¬
struction are not functional properties of the brain but elements
introduced through sensory inputs into the neuronal reactivity;
they originate not within the person, but in the environment.

Communication

Interdisciplinary communication is always important, but it
is even more essential in the neurobehavioral sciences because
they are at the crossroads of diverse disciplines. Cross-communi¬
cation should involve investigators not only in related biological
fields but also in areas which ordinarily have less contact with


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


A TENTATIVE PLAN 26 1

neural sciences, like sociology, pedagogy, and philosophy. At
present there is an important body of knowledge about cerebral
physiology and behavioral responses that has not been absorbed
into general scientific texts and has not evoked the philosofAiical
repercussions it deserves. Specialists usually recognize the need
to communicate beyond their own discipline, but in practice
they often neglect to do so, and this should be one of the pur¬
poses of the neurobehavioral institutes.

Manpower Shift

In free enterprise systems, a shift in manpower requires the
attraction and training of the corresponding personnel, and this
is usually accomplished by offering intellectual, economic, and
social incentives. With this procedure, talented workers have
been attracted to newly developing fields such as electronics
and outer space technology, and it will be necessary in the
neurobehavioral field as well. In this case, however, something
else is needed because a plan designed to modify the orientation
of civilization and to improve the balance between mechaniza¬
tion and mentalization must be based on suitable education of
youth, beginning with elementary schools and continuing
through the highest levels.

Education of Youth

Educators and psychologists have recognized that the intellec¬
tual and emotional impact of training received at an early age is
decisive for the rest of one’s life. Important conceptions about
mental activities and the functioning of the brain which will
have great influence on the student s future development should
be introduced as early as possible—just as today’s child is con¬
fronted with information about man’s escape from his terrestrial
environment via interplanetary flights. These subjects should
continue with greater sophistication at secondary school and
college levels, competing for teaching time with all other sub¬
jects. What I am proposing is a modification of the curriculum


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


262 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF THE MIND

to introduce the discipline of “psychogenesis.” Its purpose would
be to teach factual scientific material about cerebral mecha¬
nisms, to increase the student’s awareness of his own mental and
behavioral activity, and to show him how to use his intelligence
to decide which behavioral determinants to accept and which to
reject. The present orientation of courses in psychology and soci¬
ology should be adapted and expanded according to this plan.

Social Education

Understanding of the mechanisms of individual and social
behavior could be an important feedback factor for the modula¬
tion of behavioral responses because this understanding will
simultaneously increase the importance of individual intellect
and decrease the power of irrational automatisms. Education of
the general public would be facilitated by the natural interest
in understanding the activity of our own minds. The mass media
must be mobilized for this purpose, and preparation of enter¬
taining and informative programs should be encouraged and
promoted by the neurobehavioral institutes.

Related Problems

A host of medical, ethical, legal, and political questions are
involved in the possibility of intelligent choice among behav¬
ioral determinants and their control. Each of these asjjects
deserves careful study and should form part of the general plan
of action.

I want to emphasize that human happiness is a relative value
and depends as much on mental interpretation as on environ¬
mental reality. A better understanding of mental mechanisms
will favor the pursuit of happiness and diminish the unnecessary
suffering of human beings. The direction of the colossal forces
discovered by man requires the development of mental qualities
able to apply intelligence not only to the domination of nature
but also to the civilization of the human psyche.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


Bibliography


1. Ahfeld, J, F. Beitrage zur Lehre vom Uebergange der intra-

uterinen Athmung zur extrauterinen. Pp. 1-32 in: “Beitrage
zur Physiologie, Festschrift zu Carl Ludwig, zu seinem 70.
Geburtstage gewidmet von seinen Schiilem.” Leipzig: Vogel,
1890.

2. Alberts, W. W., E. W. Wright, Jr., G. Levin and B. Feinstein.

Types of responses elicited by electrical stimulation of certain
nuclei of the thalamus and basal ganglia in the human, EEG
din. Neurophysiol., 12:546, i960.

3. Altman, J. Autoradiographic and histological studies of post-

natal neurogenesis. II. J. comp. Neurol., 128:431-473, 1967.

4. Anderson, B., P. A. Jewell and S. Larsson. An appraisal of the

effects of diencephalic stimulation of conscious animals in
terms of normal behaviour. Pp. 76-89 in: “Neurological Basis
of Behaviour,” G. E. W. Wolstenholme and C. M. O'Conner,
(eds.) Boston; Little, Brown & Co., 400 pp., 1958.

5. Angulo y Gonzalez, A. W. Is myelinogeny an absolute index

of behavioral capability? J. comp. Neurol., 48:459-464, 1929.

6. Ashby, W. R. “Design for a Brain.” 2nd Ed. New York: Wiley,

286 pp., i960.

7. Austt, Garcia E., R. Arana, E. Migliaro, M. T. Sande and J.

P. Segundo. Changes in the EEG and in the tendon jerks in¬
duced by stimulation of the fornix in man. EEG din. Neuro¬
physiol., 6:653-661, 1954.

8. Baldwin, M. Electrical stimulation of the mesial temporal

region. Pp. 159-176 in: “Electrical Studies on the Unanesthe¬
tized Brain,” E R. Ramey and D. S. O’Doherty, (eds.) New
York: Paul B. Hoeber, 423 pp., i960.

9. Bandura, A. A social learning interpretation of psychological

dysfunctions. Pp. 293-344 in: “Foundations of Abnormal

263


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


264


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Psychology,” P. London and D. Rosenhan, (eds.) New York:
Rinehart and Winston, 644 pp., 1968.

10. Barrett, W. “Irrational Man. A Study in Existential Philos¬

ophy.” New York: Doubleday, 278 pp., 1958.

11 . Beacm, F. a. The perpetuation and evolution of biological

science. Amer. Psychologist, 21:943-949, 1966.

12. Beecher, H. K. Ethics and clinical research. New Eng. J. Med.,

274 ’» 354 - 1 360. 1966.

13. Bennett, E. L., M. C. Diamond, D. Krech, and M. R. Rosen-

zwEiG. Chemical and anatomical plasticity of brain. Science,
146:610-619, 1964.

14. Beritoff, J. S. “Neural Mechanisms of Higher Vertebrate

Behavior.” Trans, from Russian and Edited by W. T.
Liberson. Boston: Little Brown, 384 pp., 1965.

15. Berkner, L. V. Man versus technology. Population Bull., 22:83-

94, 1966.

16. Berlyne, D. E. “Conflict, Arousal, and Curiosity.” New York:

McGraw-Hill, 350 pp., i960.

17. Bertalanffy, L. von. “Robots, Men and Minds.” New York:

Braziller, 150 pp., 1967.

18. Bexton, W. H., W. Heron and T. H. Scott. Effects of decreased

variation in the sensory environment. Canad. J. Psychol.,
8:70-76, 1954.

19. Bickford, R. G., M. C. Petersen, H. W. Dodge, Jr. and C. W.

Sem-Jacobsen. Observations on depth stimulation of the
human brain through implanted electrographic leads. Proc.
Mayo Clin., 28:181-187, 1953.

20. Bishop, M. P., S. T. Elder and R. G. Heath. Intracranial

self-stimulation in man. Science, 140:394-396, 1963.

21. Bosman, S. C. W., j. Terblanche, S. J. Saunders, G. G. Harri¬

son, and C. N. Barnard. Cross-circulation between man and
baboon. Lancet, ii:583-585, 1968.

22. Brattgard, S.-O. The importance of adequate stimulation for

the chemical composition of retinal ganglion cells during early
post-natal development. Acta radio., Suppl. 96, 80 pp., 1952.

23. Brazier, M. A. B. “A History of the Electrical Activity of the

Brain. The First Half Century.” London: Pitman med. Publ.,
119 pp., 1961.

24. Brindley, G. S. and W. S. Lewin. The sensations produced by


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


BIBtlOGRAPHY 365

electrical stimulation of the visual cortex. J. Physiol., 196:479--
493 > 1968.

25. Cajal, S. Ramon y. "Histologie du Systteie Nerveux de

L’homme et des Vertdbres.” Vol, I & 11 . Paris; Malorie, 1909-
1911.

26. DEL Campo, a. Blind can “see” the shape of things. Med. World

News, Oct. 7, 142-143, 1966.

27. Canestrini, S. Uber das Sinnesleben des Neugeborenen.

Monogr. Gesamtgeb. Neurol. Psychiat., No. 5. Berlin:
Springer, 104 pp., 1913.

28 . Cantril, H. Sentio, ergo sum: “niotivatioh” reconsidered. J,

Psychol., 65:91-107, 1967.

29. Cantril, H. and W. K. Livingston. The concept of transaction

in psychology and neurology: J. iridiv. Psychol., 19:3-16, 1963.

30. Carmichael, L. The onset and early development of behavior.

Pp, 60-185 “Manual of Child Psychology,” L. Carmichael,
(ed.). New York: John Wiley, 2nd Ed., 1295 pp., 1960-

31. Caspari, E. Genetic basis of behavior. Pp. 103—127 in : “Behavior

and Evolution,” A. Roe and G. G. Simpson, (cds.) New
Haven: Yale Univ. Press, 557 pp„ 1958.

32. Chase, W. P. Color vision in infants. J. exp. Psychol., 20:203-

222,1937.

33. Cobb, S. Foreword. Pp. vii-viii in: "Electrical Stimulation of

the Brain,” D. E. Sheer, (ed.) Austin, Univ. Texas Press, 641
pp., 1961.

34. CoGHiLL, G. E. VI. The mechanism of integration in Ambly-

stoma punctatum. J. comp. Neurol., 41:95—152, 1926.

35. CoGHiLL, G. E. Correlated anatomical and physiological studies

of the growth of the nervous system of Amphibia: IX. The
mechanism of association of Amblystoma punctatum. J.
comp. Neurol., 51:311-375, 1930a.

36. CoGHiLL, G. F. The structural basis of the integration of be¬

havior. Proc. nat. Acad. Sci., 16:637-643, 1930b.

37. CoGHiLL, G. E. X. Corollaries of the anatomical and physiologi¬

cal study of Amblystoma from the age of earliest movement to
swimming. J. comp. Neurol,, 53:147-168, 1931.

38. Cole, L. C. Can the world be saved? BioScience, 18:679-684,

1968.

39. Compayre, G. “The Intellectual and Moral Development of the


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


266


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Child: Part I, (Trans, by M. E. Wilson). New York: Apple-
ton, 1896.

40. Condon, R. “The Manchurian Candidate.” New York:

McGraw-Hill, 311 pp., 1959.

41. CoNEL, J. L. “The Postnatal Development of the Human

Cerebral Cortex.” Vol. I, 114 pp. Vol. II, 136 pp. Vol. Ill, 158
pp. Cambridge, Harvard Univ. Press: 1939, 1941, i 947 -

42. Cox, V. C. and E. S. Valenstein. Attenuation of aversive prop¬

erties of peripheral shock by hypothalamic stimulation.
Science, 149:323-325. 1965-

43. Cranberg, L. Ethical code for scientists? Science, 141:1242, 1963.

44. DE Crinis, M. Die Entwicklung der Grosshimrinde nach der

Geburt in ihren Beziehungen zur intellektuellen Ausreifung
des Kindes. Wien. Klin. Wschr., 45:1161—1165, 1932.

45. Cruchet, R. La m^sure de I’intelligence chez I’enfant de la

naissance. J. m^. Bordeaux, 107:951—960, 1930.

46. DeCarlo, C. R. Perspectives on technology. Pp. 8-43 in;

“Technology and Social Change.” E. Ginzberg, (ed.) New
York: Columbia Univ. Press, 158 pp., 1964.

47. Delgado, J. M. R. Permanent implantation of multilead elec¬

trodes in the brain. Yale J. Biol. Med., 24:351—358, 1952a.

48. Delgado, J. M, R. Hidden motor cortex of the cat. Amer. J.

Physiol., 170:673-681, 1952b.

49. Delgado, J. M. R. Chronic implantation of intracerebral elec¬

trodes in animals. Pp. 25—36 in: “Electrical Stimulation of
the Brain,” D. E. Sheer, ed.), Austin: Univ. Texas Press, 641
pp. 1961.

50. Delgado, J. M. R. Emotional behavior in animals and humans.

Psychiat. Res. Rep., 12:259-271, i960.

51. Delgado, J. M. R. Cerebral heterostimulation in a monkey

colony. Science, 141:161-163, 1963.

52. Delgado, J. M. R. Electrodes for extracellular recording and

stimulation. Pp. 88-143 in: “Electrophysiological Methods,”
Vol. V, Part A: “Physical Techniques in Biological Research.”
N. L. Nastuk, (ed.). New York: Academic Press, 460 pp., 1964a.

53. Delgado, J. M. R. Free behavior and brain stimulation. Pp.

349-449 in: “International Review of Neurobiology,” Vol.
VI, C. C, Pfeiffer and J. R. Smythies, (eds.) New York: Aca¬
demic Press, 476 pp., 1964b.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


BIBLIOGRAPHY


267

54. Delgado, J. M. R. Sequential behavior repeatedly induced by

red nucleus stimulation in free monkeys. Science, 148:1361-
1363, 1965.

55. Delgado, J, M. R. Brain technology and psychocivilization.

Pp. 68-92 in: “Human Values and Advancing Technology. A
New Agenda for the Church in Mission.” G. P. Hall (ed.),
New York: Friendship Press, 175 pp., 1967.

56. Delgado, J. M. R. Aggression and defense under cerebral radio

control. Pp- 17 1-193 ^* 1 - “Aggression and Defense. Neural
Mechanisms and Social Patterns.” UCLA Forum in Medical
Sciences, No. 7, Vol. V, C. D. Clemente and D. B. Lindsley,
(eds.), Berkeley: Univ. Cal. Press, 361 pp., 1967.

57. Delgado, J. M. R. and H. Hamlin. Surface and depth electro-

graphy of the frontal lobes in conscious patients. EEC din.
Neurophysiol., 8:371-384, 1956.

58. Delgado, J. M. R. and H. Hamlin. Spontaneous and evoked

electrical seizures in animals and in humans. Pp. i33'“i58 in
“Electrical Studies on the Unanesthetired Brain.” Estelle R.
Ramey and Desmond S. O’Doherty, (eds.) New York: Paul
B. Hoeber 432 pp., i960. ■

59. Delgado, J. M. R., H. Hamlin and W. P. Chapman. Technique

of intracranial electrode implacement for recording and
stimulation and its possible theraj^utic value in psychotic
patients. Conf. neurol., I2;3i5'^3i9, 1952-

60. Delgado, J. M. R., V. Mark, W. Sweet, F. Ervin, G. Weiss, G.

Bach-y-Rita, and R. Hagiwara. Intracerebral radio stimula¬
tion and recording in completely free patients. J. nerv. ment.
Dis., 147:329-340, 1968.

61. Delgado, J. M. R. and D. Mir. Infatigability of pupillary

constriction evoked by stimulation in monkeys. Neurology,
i 6:939-950> 1966.

62. Delgado, J. M. R., W. W. Roberts, and N. E. Miller. Learning

motivated by electrical stimulation of the brain. Amer. J.
Physiol., 179:587-593, 1954.

63. Diamond, S., R. S. Balvin, and F. R. Diamond. “Inhibition and

Choice. A Neurobehavioral Approach to Problems of Plas¬
ticity in Behavior.” New York; Harper & Row, 456 pp., 1963.

64. Dobzhansky, Th. Genetics, sodety and evolution. Bull- N.Y.

Acad. Med., 38:451-459, 1962.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


268 BIBLIOGRAPHY

65. Dobzhansky, Th. "Mankind Evolving, The Evolution of the

Human Species.” New Haven; Yale Univ. Press, 381 pp,, 1962.

66. Dobzhansky, Th. Changing man. Science, 155:409-415. 1967.

67. Drever, J. "A Dictionary of Psychology.” Baltimore, Md.:

Penguin Books, Inc., 316 pp., 1952.

68 . DuBois-Reymond, E. Untersuchungen iiber thierische Elek-

tricitat, Vol. I. Berlin: Reimer, 1848. Vol. II, 1849.

69. Dubos, R. "The Torch of Life.” New York: Trident Press,

Simon & Schuster, 140 pp., 1962.

70. Dunbar, F. "Emotions and Bodily Changes. A Survey of Litera¬

ture on Psychosomatic Interrelationships 1910-1953.” New
York: Columbia Univ. Press, 1192 pp., 4th Ed., 1954.

71. Eccles, J. C. "The Neurophysiological Basis of Mind.” Ox¬

ford; Clarendon Press, 314 pp., 1953.

72. Erlanger, j. E. and H. S. Gasser. “Electrical signs of Nervous

Activity.” Philadelphia; Univ. Penn. Press, 221 pp., 1937.

73. Ervin, F. Participant in “Brain Stimulation in Behaving Sub¬

jects.” Neurosciences Research Program Workshop, Dec., 1966.

74. Feindel, W., W. Penfield and H. Jasper. Localization of epi¬

leptic discharge in temporal lobe automatism. Trans. Amer.
Neurol. Assoc., 14-17, 1952-

75. Field, J., H. W. Magoun, and W. E. Hall (eds.). "Handbook of

Physiology. Section 1: Neurophysiology.” Washington, D.C.;
Amer, Physiol. Soc., Vol. I, 1959, Vols. II & III, 1960.

76. Flechsig, P. E, "Gehirn und seele.” Leipzig: Veit 8c Co., 112

pp., 1896.

77. Florey, E. (ed.). “Nervous Inhibition.” Proc. Second Friday

Harbour Symp, New York: Pergamon Press, 475 pp., 1961.

78. Forbes, A. The interpretation of spinal reflexes in terms of

present knowledge of nerve conduction. Physiol. Rev,, 2:361-
414, 1922.

79. Forbes, H. S. and H. B. Forbes. Fetal sense reaction: hearing.

J. comp. Psychol., 7:353-355, 1927.

80. Freud, S. (1856-1939) "The Basic Writings of Sigmund Freud.”

Trans, and edited by A. A. Bull. New York; Modern Library,
1001 pp., 1938.

81. Fulton, J. F. and C. F. Jacobsen. The functions of the frontal

lobes, a comparative study in monkeys, chimpanzees and
man. Advances in mod. Biol. (Moscow), 4:113-123, 1935.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


BIBLIOGRAPHY 269

82. Furfey, P. H., M. a. Bonham, apd M, K.. Sargent. The mental

organization of the newborn. Ghild DevelpnL, 1:48-51, 1930.

83. Galvani, L. De viribus electricitatis in motu musculari. Com-

mentarius. Proc. Acad, Bologiia, 7:383-418. 1791-

84. Camper, E. Ban und Leisipngen eipes menschlicben^ Mittel-

hirnwesens (Arhinencephalie mit Encephalpcele). Z. ges.
Neurol. PsychiaU 102:154-235, 1926.

85. Geertz, C. The impact of the concept of culture on the con¬

cept of man. Bull. atom. Sci.> 22:2-8, 1966.

86. Genzmer, a. Utersuchungen iiber the Sinneswafmiehmungen

des neugeborenen Menschen. (dissertation, 1873). Halle:
Niemeyer, 1882.

87. Gerard, M. W. Afferent impulses of the trigeminal nerve. The

intramedullary course of the painful, thermal and tactile im¬
pulses. Arch. Neurol. Psychiat. (Chics^o), 9:306-338, 1923.

88. Gesell, a. L. “Infancy and Human Growth.” New York: Mac¬

millan, 418 pp., 1928.

89. Grastyan, E., K. Lissak and F. Kekesi. Facilitation and inhibi¬

tion of conditioned alimentary and defensive reflexes by
stimulation of the hypothalamus and reticular formation.

Acta {ffiysioi. Acad. Sd. hwhg,, 9:138-151. 1956.

90. Grunbaum, a. Causality and die science of human behavior.

Amer. Sci., 40:665-676, 1952.

91. Hamberger, C. a. and H. Hyden. Productipn of nucleoproteins

in the vestibular ganglion. Acta oto-laryng., Suppl. 75:53-81,

1949-

92. Harlow, H. F. Love in infant monkeys. Sci. Amer., 200:68-74,

1959-

93. Harlow, H. F., and M. K, Harlow, Learning to think. Sci.

Amer., 181:36-39, 1949.

94. Harlow, H. F. and M. K. Harlow. Sodal deprivation in mon¬

keys. Sci. Amer., 207:136r-146, 1962.

95. Harlow, H. F., M. K. Harlow, and D. R. Meyer. Learning

motivated by a manipulation drive. J. exp. Psychol., 40:228-
234 » 1950-

96. Hassler, R. Ueber die Bedeutung des pallidaren Systems fiir

Parkinsonsyndrom und Psychomotorik naeh Erfahrungen bei
gezielten Himoperationen. Brussels; ist int. Congr. Neuro-
surg., 1:171-178, 1957.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


270 BIBLIOGRAPHY

97. Hassler, R. and T. Reichert. Clinical effects produced by

stimulations of different thalamic nuclei in humans. EEG
din. Neurophysiol., 6:518, 1954.

98. Heath, R. G., “Studies in Schizophrenia, A multidisdplinary

Approach to Mind-Brain Relationships.” Cambridge; Har¬
vard Univ. Press, 619 pp., 1954.

99. Heath, R. G. Electrical self-stimulation of the brain in man.

Amer. J. Psychiat., 120:571-577, 1963.

100. Heath, R. G., R. R, Monroe and W. Mickle. Stimulation of

the amygdaloid nucleus in a schizophrenic patient. Amer. J.
Psychiat., 111:862-863, 1955.

101. Hebb, D. O, The innate organization of visual activity; I.

Perception of figures by rats reared in total darkness. J. genet.
Psychol., 51:101—126, 1937.

102. Hebb, D. O. “A Textbook of Psychology.” Philadelphia: Saun¬

ders, 276 pp., 1958.

103. Heron, W. The pathology of boredom. Sd. Amer., 196:52-56,

1957-

104. Herrick, C. J. “Neurological Foxmdations of Animal Behavior.”

New York: Hafner, 334 pp., 1962.

105. Hess, W. R. Stammganglien-Reizversuche. (Verh. Dtsch. physiol.

Ges., Sept., 1927). Ber. ges. Physiol, 42:554-555- »928.

106. Hess, W. R. “Beitrage zur Physiologie d. Hirnstammes I. Die

Methodik der lokalisierten Reizung. und Ausschaltung sub-
kortikaler Himabschnitte.” Leipzig: Geoig Thi^me, 122 pp.,
1932.

107. Hess, W. R. “The Functional Organization of the Dienceph¬

alon.” New York: Grune & Stratton, 180 pp., 1957.

108. Hess, W. R. “Hypothalamus und Thalamus. Experimental-

Dokumente.” Stuttgart: Georg Thieme Verag, 77 pp. 1968.

109. Higgins, J. W., G. F. Mahl, J. M. R. Delgado and H. Hamlin.

Behavioral changes during intracerebral electrical stimulation.
Arch. Neurol. Psychiat,, (Chicago), 76:399-419, 1956.

110. Hinsie, L. E. and R. J. Campbell. “Psychiatric Dictionary.”

New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 3rd Ed., 788 pp., i960.

111. Holst, E. von and U. von Saint Paul. Electrically controlled

behavior. Sd. Amer., 206:50-59, 1962.

112. Hooker, D. Fetal behavior. Res. Publ. Ass. nerv. ment. Dis.,

19:237-243- 1939-


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


BIBLIOGRAPHY 371

113. Huang, S. Life in space and humanity on the earth. Amer.

Scientist, 53:288-298, 1965,

114. Huxley, A. “Brave New World.” New York; Harper &

Brothers, 311 pp., 1932.

115. Hyden, H. Satellite cells in the nervous system. Sci. Amer.,

205:62-70, 1961.

116. Irwin, O. C. Infant responses to vertical movements. Child

Develpm., 3:167-169, 1932,

117. Irwin, O. C. Can infants have IQ’s? Psychol. Rev., 49:69-79,

1942.

118. Jakob, C. El lobulo frontal. Folia Neurobiol. Argentina, 3:1-

HL 1943-

119. James, W. “Principles of Psychology.” New York: Dover Publ.,

Vols. I & II, 688 pp. ea., 1950.

120. Jasper, H. H. and T. Rasmussen. Studies of clinicid and elec¬

trical response to deep temporal stimulation in man with some
considerations of functional anatomy. Res. Publ. Ass. nerv,
ment. Dis., 36:316-334, 1958.

121. Jennings, H. S. “The Biological Basis of Human Nature.” New

York: Norton, 384 pp., 1930.

122. Jung, R. Discussant. P. 198 in: “Brain Mechanisms and Con¬

sciousness.” J. F. Delafresnaye, (ed.). Springfield, Ill.: C. C,
Thomas, 1954.

123. Jung, R. and R. Hassler. The extrapyramidal motor system.

Pp. 863-927 in: "Handbook of Physiology,” Section 1;
Neurophysiology Vol. II, J. Field, H. W. Magoun and V. E.
Hall, (eds.) Baltimore, Md.: Williams Sc Wilkins, pp. 781-
1439. i960.

124. Jung, R., T. Reichert u. R. W. Meyer-Mickeleit. Ueber in-

tracerebrale Himpotenlialableitungen bet hirnchirurgjschen
Eingriffen. Dtsch. Z. Nervenheilk., 162:52-60, 1950.

125. Kasatkin, N. I., and A. M. Levikqva. On the development of

early conditioned reflexes and differentiations of auditory
stimuli in infants. J. exp, Psychol., 18:1-19, 1935.

126. Ketchel, M. M. Should birth control be mandatory? Med.

World News, Oct. 18:66-71, 1968.

127. Kety, S. a biologist examines the mind and behavior.

Science, 132:1861—1870, i960.

128. King, H. E. Psychological effects of excitation in the limbic


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


272


BIBLIOGRAPHY


system. Pp. 477-486 in: “Electrical Stimulation of the Brain/’
D. E. Sheer (ed.) Austin: Univ. Texas Press, 641 pp., 1961.

129. Koestler, a. “The Ghost in the Machine.” New York: Mac¬

millan, 584 pp., 1968.

130. Koskoff, Y. D. Personal Communication.

131. Krasner, L. Behavioral control and social responsibility. Amer.

Psychologist, 17:199-204, 1964.

132. Krech, D., M. R. Rosenzweig and E. L. Bennett. Environ¬

mental impoverishment, social isolation and changes in
brain chemistry and anatomy. Physiology and Behavior, 1:99-
104, 1966.

133. Kubie, L. Some implications for psychoanalysis of modem con¬

cepts of the organization of the brain. Psychoanalyt. Quart.,
22:21-68, 1953.

134. Kuhlenbeck, H. "Mind and Matter. An Appraisal of Their

Significance for Neurologic Theory.” Basel: S. Karger, 548
pp., 1961.

135. Kussmaul, a. "Utersuchungen fiber das Seelenleben des neuge-

borenen Menschen.” Leipzig: Winter, 1859.

136. Lane, H. H. The correlation between structure and function in

the development of the special senses of the white rat. Univ.
Okla. Bull (N. S. no. 140), pp. 1-88, 1917.

137. Lange, F. A. "History of Materialism.” 1873 (Trans, by E. C.

Thomas). New York: Harcourt Brace, 1925.

138. Langworthy, O. R. A correlated study of the development of

reflex activity in fetal and young kittens and the myelinization
of tracts in the nervous system. Contr. Embryol., Carnegie
Inst. Wash., 20, No. 114, 127-171, 1929.

139. Langworthy, O. R. Development of behavior patterns and

myelinization of the nervous system in the human fetus and
infant. Contr. Embryol. Carneg. Inst., 24: No. 139, 1933.

140. Lashley, K. S. Studies of cerebral function in learning: VI. The

theory that synaptic resistance is reduced by the passage of
the nerve impulse. Psychol. Rev., 31:369-375, 1924.

141. Leiderman, P. H., J. H. Mendelson, D. Wexler and P. Solo¬

mon. Sensory deprivation: clinical aspects. Arch. int. Med.,
101:389-396, 1958.

142. Levi-Strauss, C. “A World on the Wane.” Trans, by J. Rus¬

sell. London: Hutchinson & Co., 404 pp., 1961.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


bibliography 873

143. Lifton, R. J, “Thought Reform and the Psycholc^ of Totalism;

A Study of “Brainwashing” in China.” New York; W. W.
Norton, 510 pp., 1961,

144. Lillie, R. S. “Protoplasmic Action and Nervous System.”

Chicago, Ill.: Univ. Chicago Press, 2nd Ed,, 417 pp., 1932.

145. Lilly, J. C. Discussion of “Studies in Schizophrenia*” Pp- 528-

532, in "Studies in Schizophrenia,” Cambridge: Hanrard Univ.
Press, 619 pp,, 1954.

146. Lilly, J. C. Learning motivated by subcortical stimulation: the

start and stop patterns of behavior. Pp, yos^^i^ in: “Retic¬
ular Formation of the Brain,” Henry Ford Hosp. int Symp.,
H. H. Jasper, et al. (eds.), Boston: Little. Browi, 766 pp.,

1958-

147. Locke, J. “Essay Concerning Human Understanding.” (1690),

Cambridge: Harvard Univ, Press, 306 pp., 1931.

148. Lorenz, K. Ritualized fighting. Pp. 39^50 in: “The Natural

History of Aggression.” J. D, Carthy and F. J. Ebling, (eds.)
New York: Academic Press, 159 pp„ 1984.

149. Lorenz, K. "On Aggression.” New York: Harcoiirt, Brace &

World, 306 pp., 1966.

150. Mahl, G, F., a. Rothenbero, J. M. R, Delgado and H. Ham¬

lin, Psychological responses in the human to intracerebral
electric stimulation. Psychosom. M^,, 26:337-368, 1964.

151. Marcuse, H. One Dimensional Man, Boston: Beacon Press,

1964-

152. Marmor, j. Psychoanalytic therapy as an educational process:

Common denominators in the therapeutic approaches of dif¬
ferent psychoanalytic “schools.” Paper prejmnted to the Acad.
PsychoanaL, Chicago, May, 1961,

153. Medical Research Council. Responsibility in investigations

on human subjects. Brit. med. J., 2:178-179, 1964.

154. Miller, N. E. Leamable drives and rewards, Pp. 435-472 in:

“Handbook of Experimental Psychology,” S. S. Stevens, (ed.)
New York: John Wileyi, 1436 pp., 1951,

155. Minkowski, M. Sur Ics mouvements, 1 ^ reflexes, et les reactions

musculaires du foetus humain de 2 4 5 mois et leur rdations
avec le syst^e nerveux foetal. Rev. neurol., 37:1105-1118,
1235-1250, 1921.

156. Mittelmann, B. Motility in infants, children, and adults: pat-


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


274


BIBLIOGRAPHY


teming and psychodynamics. Psychoanal. Study of the Child,
9:142-177, 1954.

157. Montagu, A. “On Being Human.” New York: Hawthorne

Books, Inc., 128 pp., 2nd Ed., 1966.

158. Morgan, C. “Animal Life and Intelligence.” London: Arnold,

512 pp., 1890-91.

159. Nashoud, B. S. and W. V. Huber (eds.). Second Symposium on

Parkinson's Disease, J. Neurosurg., 24:117-481, 1966.

160. Nashold, B. S. Personal communication.

161. New England J. Med. Editorial: New Eng, J. Med., 275:785-

786, 1966.

162. Nissen, H. W., S. Machover, and E. F. Kinder. A study of

performance tests given to a group of native African Negro
Children. Brit. J. Psychol., 25:308-355, 1935.

163. Okuma, T., Y. Shimazono, T. Fukuda and H. Narabayashi.

Cortical and subcortical recordings in non-anesthetized and
anesthetized periods in man. EEC din. Neurophysiol. 6:269-
286, 1954.

164. Olds, J. Hypothalamic substrates of reward. Physiol. Rev.,

42:554-604, 1962.

165. Olds, J. and P, Milner. Positive reinforcement produced by

electrical stimulation of the septal area and other regions of
the rat brain. J. comp, physiol. Psychol., 47:419-428, 1954.

166. Ortega y Gasset, J. “Meditations on Quixote.” Trans, by E.

Rugg and D. Marin, with notes and introduction by J.
Marias. New York: W. W. Norton, 1961.

167. Ortega y Gasset, J. “History as a System.” New York: W. W.

Norton, 1961.

168. Orwell, G. “1984." New York: Harcourt, Brace, 314 pp., 1949.

169. Oxford Universal Dictionary. London: Oxford Univ. Press,

2515 pp., 1955.

170. Pasamanick, B. Research on the influence of sodocultural

variables upon organic factors in mental retardation. Amer, J.
ment. Defic., 64:316-320, 1959.

171. Pavlov, I. P. “Experimental Psychology.” New York: Philo¬

sophical Library, 653 pp., 1957.

172. Peiper, a. Der Saugvorgang. Ergebn. inn. Med. Kinderheilk,,

50-527-567. J 936 .

173. Peiper, A. Die neurologischen Grundlagen der psychischen


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


BIBLIOGIMk^PHY 275

Entwicklung. Mschr. Kinderheilk., 87:179-203, 1941.

174. Penfield, W. and H. Jasper. “Epilepsy and the Functional

Anatomy of the Human Brain.” Boston; Little, Brown, 896
PP-, 1954-

175. Peterson, F. and L. H. Rainey. The beginnings of mind in the

newborn. Bull. Lying-in Hosp., N.Y., 7:99-122, 1910.

176. pFLUGER, E. Die Lebensf^gkeit des menschlicfaen Foetus.

Pfliig. Arch. ges. Physiol., i4;628--629, 1877.

177. Piaget, J. “The Origins of Intelligence in Children,” Trans.

by Margaret Cook. New York: Int. Universities Phess, 419 pp.,

1953-

178. Piaget, J. Psychology, interdisciplinary relations and the sys¬

tem of sciences. Moscow: XVIII Int. Congr. Psychol., 47 pp.,
1966.

179. Platt, J. R. “The Step to Man.” New York: Wiley, 224 pp.,

1966.

180. Pratt, K. C., A. K. Nelson, and K. H. Sun. The behavior of the

newborn infant. Ohio State Univ. Stud., Contr. Psychol., No.
10, 1930.

181. Rainer, J. D. The concept of mind in the framework of

genetics. Pp. 65-79 “Theories of the Mind,” J- M. Scher,
(ed.) New York: The Free Press of Glencoe, 748 pp., 1962.

182. Ramey, E. R. and D. S. O’Doherty (eds.). “Electrical Studies

on the Unanesthetized Brain.” New York: Paul B. Hoeber,
Inc., 423 pp., i960.

183. Rank, O. “The Trauma of Birth.” New York; Harcourt Brace,

224 pp., 1929.

184. Riesen, a. H., K. L. Chow, J. Semmes, and H. W. Nissen.

Chimpanzee vision after four conditions pf light deprivation.
Amer. Psychologist, 6:282 (Abstract) 1951.

185. Rioch, D. McK. Concluding remarks. Pp. 402-412 in: “Electri¬

cal Studies on the Unanesthetized Brain,” E. R. Ramey and
D. S. O’Doherty, (edsj. New York: Paul B. Hoeber, 423 pp.,
1960.

186. Roberts, L. Activation and interference of cortical functions.

Pp. 533-553 in: “Electrical Stimulation of the Brain,” D. E.
Sheer (ed.) Austin: Univ. Texas Press, 641 pp., 1961.

187. Roe, a. Man’s forgotten weapon. Amer. Psychologist, 14:261-

266, 1959.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


8 7 6 BIBLIOGRAPHY

188. Rogers, C. R. and B. F. Skinner. Some issues concerning the

control of human behavior: A symposium. Science, 134:1057-
1066, 1956.

189. Rosenthal, D. Changes in moral values following psychother¬

apy. J. consult. Psychol., 19:431-436, 1955.

190. Rosenzweig, M. R., D. Krech, E. L. Bennet, and M. C.

Diamond. Modifying brain chemistry and anatomy by en¬
richment or impoverishment of experience. Pp. 258-297 in:
"Early Experience and Behavior," G. Newton and S. Levine,
(eds.) Springfield, Ill.; C. C. Thomas, 785 pp., 1968.

191. Rosvold, H. E. and J. M. R. Delgado. The effect on delayed-

altemation test performance of stimulating or destroying
electrically structures within the frontal lobes of the monkey’s
brain. J. comp, physiol. Psychol., 49.365-372, 1956.

192. Russell, B. “A History of Western Philosophy, and its Connec¬

tion with Political and Social Circumstances from the Earliest
Times to the Present Day.” New York: Simon and Schuster,
895 pp., 1945.

193. Sadcer, j. Preliminary study of the psychic life of the fetus and

the primary germ. Psychoanal. Rev., 28;327--358, 1941.

194. Sartre, J. P. "L'etre et le n^ant; essai d'ontologie phmom-

enologique.” Paris: Gallimard, 722 pp., 1943.

195. ScHER, J. M. (ed.). “Theories of the Mind,” New York: The Free

Press of Glencoe, 748 pp., 1962.

196. Science Editorial. Privacy and behavioral research. Preliminary

summary of the report of the panel on privacy and behavioral
research. Science, 155:535-538, 1967.

197. Schultz, D. P. “Sensory Restriction, Effects on Behavior.” New

York: Academic Press, 216 pp., 1965.

198. Sechenov, 1 . M. “Elements of Thought.” In Russian (1878).

Moscow: USSR Acad. Sci. Press, 1943.

199. Segundo, j. P., E, Garcia Aus Jr., R. Arana Iniguez and E.

Migliaro. Respiratory, electrocortical and spinal responses to
stimulation of fornix in man. EEG din. Neurophysiol., 6:537-
538, 1954.

200. Sem-Jacobsen, C. W. Electrical stimulation-effects on speech in

some areas around the third ventricle. EEG din. Neuro¬
physiol., 14:953-956. i96«-

201. Sem-Jacobsen, C. W. “Depth-Electrographic Stimulation of the


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


BIBLIOGRAPHY 277

Human Brain and Behavior: From Fourteen Years of Studies
and Treatment of Parkinson’s Disease and Mental Disorders
with Implanted Electrodes.” Springfield, Ill.; C. C. Thomas,
222 pp., 1968.

202. SeKdem, M. von. Raum und Gestaltaufiassimg bei operierten

Blindgeborenen vor und nach der Operation. Leipzig: Barth,
303 pp., 1932.

203. Sheer, D. E., (ed.). “Electrical Stimulation of the Brain.”

Austin: Univ. Texas Press, 641 pp., 1961.

204. Sherman, M. The differentiation of emotional responses in

infants: 1 . Judgments of emotional response from motion-
pictures views and from actual observation, J. comp. Psychol.,
7:265-284, 1927.

205. Sherrington, C. S. "The Integrative Action of the Nervous Sy^

tem.” Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. I^ess, 2nd Edi 433 pp.,

1947-

206. Sherrington, C. S. "Man on His Nature.” Cambridge: Cam¬

bridge Univ. Press, 413 pp., 1941,

207. Siegel, A. I. Deprivation of usual form definition in the ring

dove. I. Discriminatory learning. J. comp, physiol. Psychol,,
46:115-119, 1953.

208. Simmons, F. B., J. M. Epley, R, C. Lummis, N. Guttman, L. S.

Frishkopf, L. D. Harmon, E. Z wicker. Auditory nerve:
electrical stimulation in man. Science, 148:104-106, 1965.

209. Skinner, B, F. “Walden Two.” New York: Macmillan, 1948.

210. Skinner, B. F, Freedom and the control of men. Amer. Scholar,

Special Issue, 25:47-^5, Winter, i955'-56.

211. Skinner, B. F. The design of cultures. Daedalus, pp. 534-546.

Summer, 1961.

212. SouLAiRAC, A., J. Cahn, and J. Charpentier. “Pain.” New

York: Academic Press, 562 pp., 1968.

213. Spelt, D. K. The conditioning of the human fetus “in utero.”

J. exp. Psychol., 38:338-346, 1948-

214. Spiegel, E. A. and H. T. Wvcis- Stimulation of the brain stem

and basal ganglia in man. Pp. 487-497 in: "Electrical stimula¬
tion of the Brain," D. E. Sheer, (ed.) Austin: Univ. Texas
Press, 641 pp., 1961.

215. Spiegel, E. A. and H. Wycis. Stweoencephalotomy (thalamot¬

omy and related procedures). Part I, Methods and stereotaxic


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


278 BIBLIOGRAPHY

atlas of the human brain. New York: Grune & Stratton, Vol.
I, 176 pp., 1952.

216. Spiegel, E. A. and H. T. Wycis (eds.). Advances in stereo¬

encephalotomy. II. Pain, Convulsive Disorders, Behavioral
and other effects of stereoencephalotomy. Second Int. Sympo¬
sium on Stereoencephalotomy. Conf, neurol. (Basel), 27:456
pp., 1966.

217. Sprague, J. M., W. W. Chambers, and E. Stellar. Attentive,

affective, and adaptive behavior in the cat. Science, 133:165-

i 73 > 1961-

218. Stevens, H. A. In: Int. Congr. Sci,, Copenhagen, “Study of

Mental Retardation,” J. Oster, ed., Copenhagen: Berlingske
Bogtrykkeri, Vol. 1, 1964.

219. Stubbs, E. M. The effect of the factors of duration, intensity,

and pitch of sound stimuli on the responses of newborn in¬
fants. Univ. Iowa Stud. Child Welfare, 9:75-135, 1934-

220. Sweet, W. H. Pain. Pp. 459-506 in: “Handbook of Physiology,”

Section 1: Neurophysiology. Vol. 1. J. Field, H. W. Magoun,
W. E. Hall (eds.) Washington, D.C.: Amer. Physiol. Soc.,
779 pp., 1959.

221. Sweet, W. H. Participant in “Brain Stimulation in Behaving

Subjects.” Neurosdences Research Program Workshop. Dec.,
1966,

222. Taylor, J. H. Innate emotional responses in infants. Ohio

State Univ. Stud., Contrip. Psychol., No. i2:69--8i, 1934.

223. Teilhard de Chardin, P. “The Phenomenon of Man.” New

York: Harper & Row, 318 pp., 1959.

224. Terzuolo, C. a. and W. R. Adey. Sensorimotor cortical activ¬

ities. Pp. 797-835 in: “Handbook of Physiology,” Section 1:
Neurophysiology, Vol. II, J. Field, H. W. Magoun and V. E.
Hall, (eds.) Baltimore, Md.: Waverly Press, pp. 781-1439,
i960.

225. Thomas, A. and S. Chess. An approach to the study of sources

of individual differences in child behavior. J. Clin. exp.
Psychopath., 18:347-357, 1957.

226. Tilney, F. and L, Casamajor. Myelinogeny as applied to the

study of behavior. Arch. Neurol. Psychiat. (Chicago), 12:1-66,
1924.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


BIBLIOGRAPHY 279

227. Tinbergen, N. Some aspects of instinct and learning in birds.

Biol. hum. Affairs, 23:1-6, 1957.

228. Tracy, H. C. The development of motility and behavior reac¬

tions in the toadfish (Gpsanus Tau). J. comp. Neurol., 40:253-
369, 1926.

229. Umbach, W. Tiefen-und Cortex-ableitungen wahrend stereo-

taktischer Operationen am Menschen. Brussels: 1st int.
Congr. Neurosurg., 1:161-170, 1957.

230. Van Buren, J. M. Sensory, motor and autonomic effects of

mesial temporal stimulation in man. J. Neurpsurg., 18:273-
288, 1961.

231. Van Buren, J. M., C. L. Li, and G. A. Ojemann. The fronto-

striatal arrest response in man. EEG. din. Neurophysiol.,
21:114-130,1966.

232. Volta, A. On the electricity excited by the mere contact of

conducting substances of different kinds. Phil. Trans., 90:
403-431, 1800.

233. Walter, W. G. and H. J. Crow. Depth recording from the

human brain. EEG din. Neurophysiol., 16:68-72, 1964.

234. Walter, W. G. Participant in "Brain Stimulation in Behaving

Subjects.” Neurosciences Research Program Workshop, Dec.,
1966.

235. Warren, H. C. "Dictionary of Psychology.” Cambridge, Mass.:

Houghton Mifflin, 372 pp., 1934.

236. Watson, J. B. “Animal Education: An Experimental Study on

the Psychical Development of the M^ite Rat, Correlated with
the Growth of its Nervous System.” Chicago: Univ. Chicago
Press, 122 pp., 1903.

237. Watson, J. B. “Psychology from the Standpoint of a Behavior-

ist.” Philadelphia: Lippincott, 429 pp., 1919.

238. Webster’s Dictionary. "Webster’s Third New International

Dictionary.” Springfield, Mass.: G. & C. Merriam, 2662 pp.,
1961,

239. Weill, G. and C. Pfersdorff. Les functions visuelles de

I’aveugle-n^ op^re. Ann. med.-psychol., 93: Part 2, 367-382,

1935-

240. Weiss, A. P. The measurement of infant behavior, Psychol.

Rev., 36:453-471, 1929.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com


28o bibliography

241. Weiss, P. Self*differentiation of the basic patterns of coordina¬

tion. Comp. Psychol. Monogr., 17:96 pp., 1941.

242. Weiss, P. The growth of science: its liberating force and limita¬

tion. Pp. 60-69 “The Knowledge Explosion. Liberation
and Limitation.” F. Sweeney, (ed.) New York: Farrar, Straus
8c Giroux, 1966.

243. Wertheimer, M. Hebb and Senden on the role of learning in

perception. Amer. J. Psychol., 64:133-137, 1951.

244. West, L. J. Psychiatry, “brainwashing,” and the American char¬

acter. Amer. J. Psychiat., 120:842-850, 1964.

245. Wolfensberger, W. Ethical issues in research with human sub¬

jects. Science, i 55 : 47 - 5 L 1967*

246. World Medical Association. Human experimentation code of

ethics. Declaration of Helsinki. Brit. med. J., 2:177, 1964.


http:/www.propheticexplorer.coiti


About the Author

Jose M. R. Delgado was bom in Ronda, Spain, and
received his medical training at Madrid University,
where he was Associate Professor of Physiology until
1950 when he came to Yale University to work with
Dr. John Fulton. He is now Professor of Physiology at
Yale, where he has developed techniques for electrical
and chemical stimulation of the brain and has applied
them to the study of primate and human behavior.
He has published more than 200 scientific papers and
is a well-known authority in neuro^behavioral research.


About the Editor of this Series
Ruth Nanda Anshen, philosopher and editor, plans
and edits World Perspectives, Reli^ous Perspectives,
Credo Perspectives, Perspectives in Humanism and
The Science of Culture Series, She also writes and lec¬
tures on the relationship of knowledge to the nature
and meaning of man and existence.


http:/www. propheticexplorer.com
