Inside Argentina’s Killing Machine: U.S. Intelligence Documents Record Gruesome Human Rights Crimes of 1976-1983

Published: May 30, 2019 | Briefing Book # 673 | Edited by Carlos Osorio, Silvia Tandeciarz and Johanna Weech

Buenos Aires Police Chief told CIA " he wanted no prisoners for interrogation, only cadavers "
Junta leader General Rafael Videla sought to hide mass murder to protect Argentina’s image
Before coup, CIA analysts predicted rise of "hardline mentality... to dominate the Army”
U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Patricia Derian reported that “Argentina has the worst human rights record in South America”

[U.S. Embassy cable traffic shows that all through 1975 there were plans for a visit by Secretary of State Henry Kissinger to strengthen the relationship with the government of Isabel Peron. This FBI memo reports that Peronist Youth [JP] leader Dardo Cabo's intercepted mail shows his intention to "set up a big disturbance" during Secretary Kissinger's trip to Argentina. According to the source, "the Minister of the Interior directed an order to all police departments in Argentina" that "all JP regional leaders should be closely watched and if possible detained legally or extralegally, until after the visit of Secretary Kissinger." The source names two individuals detained "in keeping" with these instructions, "Dardo Cabo and Dante Gullo."]

Featured video

Declassification Diplomacy: United States Declassification Project for Argentina, April 12, 2019

More video and audio in Southern Cone Project Media Library

Argentina Collection

This Digital National Security Archive (DNSA) collection makes available 2,429 selected, previously classified government documents chronicling the development of U.S. policy as it attempted to deal with the tragedy experienced in Argentina during the late 1970s. This critical, formative period featured a political collapse verging on civil war; a military coup; and tens of thousands of illegal detentions, torture and kidnappings.

HIJOS, association of children of the disappeared at Plaza de Mayo in 2013. [Shared under creative commons by "Desost"]

Grandmothers of the Plaza de Mayo. [Shared under creative commons by "Mónica Hasenberg"]

Washington D.C., May 30, 2019 – On August 20, 1976, Argentine security personnel dynamited the bodies of thirty people – ten women and twenty men – who had been detained by the Federal Police and executed in the town of Pilar, north of Buenos Aires. The explosion scattered human remains over a wide radius. This gruesome display of repression was intended to send a bloody message to other alleged militants to cease their activities five months after the military coup, according to a CIA intelligence report posted today by the National Security Archive. But military junta leader General Rafael Videla was “annoyed that the bodies were left so prominently displayed,” sources told the CIA, because it “reflects adversely on the good name of Argentina."

Not that Videla opposed the mass murders, noted the CIA. “ Videla is in agreement that subversives should be killed , but [believes] that the entire matter should be dealt with discreetly.”

For the duration of the “dirty war” during the 1976-1983 military dictatorship, Argentine officials took extensive steps to hide their atrocities through the use of secret torture centers, disappeared victims, and faked battles with insurgents to cover up human rights crimes. Ceaseless efforts by the families of their victims, human rights organizations, courageous prosecutors and judges and survivors of the abuses have lifted the veil on the scale of repression and institutionalized brutality of the Argentine military.

Now, recently declassified U.S. intelligence reports provide comprehensive new information on the killing machine run by Argentina’s security forces during the military era. Officials from the CIA, FBI, and other U.S. government agencies recorded vivid details of the “extensive use of torture” by Argentina’s military regime to quell the leftist insurgency during the 1976-1983 dictatorship, according to a posting today of now-declassified U.S. intelligence materials by the National Security Archive. The recently released records describe “brutal methods employed by the military” during the period. "While numerous innocent people were tortured and killed by paramilitary units, most of the victims were at least supporters of the ERP or the Montoneros,” the CIA reported.

“We continue to receive numerous highly credible reports that torture is used routinely in the interrogation of detainees,” noted a graphic 1979 summary to the Secretary of State from Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights, Patricia Derian. “The electric ‘picana,’ something like a supercharged cattle prod, is still apparently a favorite tool, as is the ‘submarine’ treatment (immersion of the head in a tub of water, urine, excrement, blood, or a combination of these),” Derian reported. “There is no longer any doubt that Argentina has the worst human rights record in South America.”

The documents posted today are a small selection from a special “Argentina Declassification Project” authorized by President Barack Obama in connection with the 40th anniversary of the military coup in 2016, and completed by the Trump administration in April 2019. A final, historic transfer of 7,500 CIA, FBI, DOD, NSC, and State Department records to the Argentine government took place on April 12, 2019.

“These documents provide a riveting account of the Argentine military’s killing machine and its campaign to kidnap, clandestinely detain, torture, kill, and disappear thousands,” said Carlos Osorio, who directs the National Security Archive’s Southern Cone Documentation Project, served as an advisor to the government declassification project, and is overseeing the review and analysis of the newly released records. “The documents offer new solid evidence in dozens of human rights cases,” he noted, “and will advance hundreds of new cases where similar methods, units, perpetrators and clandestine centers were involved.”

Among the documents posted today are several FBI records that clarify the fate of Peronist activist Dardo Cabo in 1975 and Montonero leader Roberto Quieto in 1976. Quieto’s “interrogators in SIE [Army Intelligence Service] became enraged when they learned that the subject would be allowed to live and administered what they considered to be a lethal dose of poison…” reads an FBI cable. For his part, “Dardo Cabo , has lost the use of one of his arms as a result of the torture.”

While the large number of extralegal detentions, murders, and attempted cover-ups were often attributed to rogue squads, the documents point to a concerted campaign by the military’s National Intelligence Center (NIC) which collected information on insurgents, leftists and dissidents. The NIC then disseminated this information to police, military, and paramilitary units to carry out targeted operations against groups and individuals. These operations generally involved capturing those identified, subjecting them to brutal interrogation , killing them, and later disposing of their bodies.

Women were particular victims of sexual violence. In her report , Patricia Derian described the inhumane condition of fifty female detainees who had “not been exposed to the sun for so long that their skin color is greenish.” One document described live rats being used as a torture device on women. Pregnant women were tortured and their babies, born in captivity, taken from them. One declassified CIA cable included in this briefing book portrays the capture of an ERP leader and his pregnant wife ; while in captivity and prior to disappearing, she gave birth to a boy whose identity was only recovered four decades later by the Abuelas de Plaza de Mayo [the Grandmothers of the Plaza de Mayo].

CIA analytical reports written before the coup predicted the disregard for human rights and the rise of a "hardline mentality" in the military once they took power in March 1976. Intelligence cables reveal that the dictatorship’s machinery of repression continued operations well into 1983, just weeks before the transition to a democratically elected government.

Read the documents *

* These documents were identified and described with the help of undergraduate students from the College of William & Mary as part of a research internship led by Professor Silvia Tandeciarz and assisted by Johanna Weech. We would like to acknowledge the following students: Arianna Asfari, Emily Jackson, Pedro Ramos, Isabella Dickens-Bowman, and Johanna Weech (Spring 2018); Lauren Bauer, Grayson Cox, Emily Kate Earls, Brianna Ferebee, Molly Keck, Megan Leu, and Johanna Weech (Spring 2019).

Documents

FBI memorandum, "Visit of Secretary of State Kissinger to Argentina," April 21, 1975.
Apr 21, 1975 | Source Argentina Declassification Project, April 2019

Department of State report, "Political Violence in Argentina," Confidential, June 16, 1975.
Jun 16, 1975 | Source Argentina Declassification Project, April 2019
This confidential Department of State summary reveals the "severe" torture of two of the detained Peronist Youth leaders. On page four, in the section devoted to human rights, it states that according to a New York Times correspondent, the detained "have been severely tortured since they were arrested on April 17." "One of the two, Dardo Cabo, has lost the use of one of his arms as a result of the torture." Beyond, in the section pertaining to violence from the left, the summary reports that the Argentine government has "had some success" in hindering insurgent groups, "in many instances using information obtained from guerillas who are illegally detained, tortured during interrogation and then eliminated."

FBI cable, "Foreign Political Matters - Argentina; IS - Argentina," Secret, January 9, 1976.
Jan 9, 1976 | Source Argentina Declassification Project, April 2019
This cable from the Legat [Legal attaché] in Buenos Aires reports that second in command and insurgent Montonero leader Roberto Quieto has been "extra-legally detained..." and "subsequently transferred to another AAIS [Argentine Army Intelligence Service] safehouse in Buenos Aires province" where he has been subjected to "intense" and "continuing interrogation."

CIA report, "Whither Argentina: New Political System or More of the Same?" February 1976.
Feb 1, 1976 | Source Argentina Declassification Project, April 2019
In a comprehensive 23-page report, the CIA foreshadows the violence of the repression that the coming military regime will implement. The paper states, "Argentina seems on the verge of repeating a familiar political cycle: an elected civilian government is falling... [the] armed forces [are] being propelled to take over the government again." Due to political disunity and chaos, the harsh economic policies to be implemented, and the threat from insurgencies, the paper argues, "This time the rule of the Army would likely be much harsher and more authoritarian than any time In the past..." It concludes that, among others, "Torture, battlefield 'justice,' a fuzzing of the distinction between active guerrilla and civilian supporter, the use of arbitrary arrest and imprisonment, and the support of right-wing 'death' squads have all been noted as increasingly common Army (and police) tactics... [M]ore and more military and police are exposed to the notion that all means are justified in order to eliminate subversion and the threat to the state posed by the guerrilla/terrorists..."

FBI memorandum, "Roberto Quieto," Secret, March 5, 1976.
Mar 5, 1976 | Source Argentina Declassification Project, April 2019
This declassified FBI memo from Legal Attaché Robert Scherrer to Ambassador Hill clarifies that Roberto Quieto is still alive and being held at an Argentine Army cuartel in spite of "innumerable rumors circulating in Buenos Aires [...] that the Army had eliminated Quieto." According to an Argentine Army Intelligence Service (SIE) official, "SIE, acting on orders from Argentine Army G-2 [Army General Staff Intelligence Section], transferred the subject from his interrogators at various SIE safehouses to an Argentine Army cuartel indicating that the Argentine Army G-2 did not intend to eliminate the subject. Subject's interrogators in SIE became enraged when they learned that the subject would be allowed to live and administered what they considered to be a lethal dose of poison to the subject prior to transferring him." In spite of this, "the subject, although violently ill, survived the poisoning." The source also notes that "no disciplinary action was taken against those who poisoned Quieto and that the incident was dismissed in the form of a practical joke." Roberto Quieto has not been heard of since and remains disappeared.

CIA cable, "Direct Aid from the Cuban Embassy to Argentina," Secret, June 2, 1976.
Jun 2, 1976 | Source Argentina Declassification Project, April 2019
A CIA cable relating to "Conti's" interrogation is chilling for what is left out. The renowned Argentine writer Haroldo Conti was kidnapped in the early morning hours of May 5, 1976. He was last seen at the "Vesubio" clandestine detention center and remains disappeared. Along with information extracted through interrogation, CIA or FBI documents usually report on the Argentine security agency that kidnapped the victims; they note that they are tortured and then disposed of through the killing and hiding of the corpses. This document only gives the results of the interrogation. It is, nevertheless, significant as a rare official document indicating that Haroldo Conti has been detained by Argentine security forces and is being held under duress.

FBI cable, "Foreign Political Matters-Argentina; IS-ARgentina; Argentine Terrorist Activities; FPM-Argentina." Secret, July 8, 1976.
Jul 8, 1976 | Source Argentina Declassification Project, April 2019
In this FBI cable, Buenos Aires Legal Attaché Robert Scherrer reports that "three Roman Catholic Priests and two seminarians were brutally murdered in the rectory of St. Patrick's Church in Belgrano." It cites as its source the Acting Director of the Department of Federal Security (DFS) of the Federal Police of Argentina (FPA) who claims that the clergy were targeted because of "information indicating that two seminarians attached to St. Patrick's Parish in Belgrano were actively engaged in propaganda activities at the office of the Third World Movement."

CIA cable, "Capture by the Authorities of Domingo Mena, a High-Level Leader of the People's Revolutionary Army (ERP), which led to the Incident Resulting in the Killing of Mario Santucho, ERP Commander," Secret, July 29, 1976.
Jul 29, 1976 | Source Argentina Declassification Project, April 2019
ERP [People's Revolutionary Army] leader Domingo Mena is detained by security forces in mid-July in Buenos Aires. This CIA cable notes Mena's resistance "to reveal any information which would lead to the capture of" ERP Commander Mario Roberto Santucho. "The authorities, however, on searching Mena, discovered a piece of paper with an address on Venezuela Street in Villa Martelli ... which turned out to be the hideout of Santucho." At that site, "a shootout occurred, resulting in the death of Santucho and ERP leader Benito Urteaga, as well as the detention of a woman who was Santucho's mistress and another woman named Delfino (FNU)." The women described are Ana Lanzillotto de Mena and Santucho's wife, Liliana Delfino; both were pregnant. Lanzillotto and Delfino, along with Mena, were seen, visibly tortured, at Campo de Mayo clandestine detention center in September 1976. Before disappearing, along with Delfino and Mena, Ana Lanzillotto gave birth to a son in captivity whose identity was recovered with the help of the Abuelas de Plaza de Mayo in 2016. The Abuelas continue to search for the infant presumed to have been born to Delfino, also in captivity.

FBI memorandum, "ERP," Secret, August 3, 1976.
Aug 3, 1976 | Source Argentina Declassification Project, April 2019
This memo from Legal Attaché Scherrer describes the BAPP [Buenos Aires Provincial Police] intelligence service and SIE raid that ends in a shootout where ERP Commander Mario Roberto Santucho and ERP leader Jorge Benito Urteaga are killed. A SIE Captain is also killed during the shootout. Scherrer highlights that this "demonstrates the general modus operandi of Argentine security forces in running down leads secured from [captured] ERP prisoners and/or documentation..." The deceased Captain, Juan Carlos Leonetti, is a member of the "Reunión Central" [aka NIC, see below] within Military Intelligence Battalion 601.

CIA cable, "Individuals Connected with Argentina's Nuclear Energy Program Who Have Been Arrested for Leftist Involvement," Secret, August 5, 1976.
Aug 5, 1976 | Source Argentina Declassification Project, April 2019
The CIA identifies individuals "connected with the Argentine National Atomic Energy Commission (CNEA)" who were placed under detention by the authorities." These individuals have been "determined by the Military Junta to be sufficiently leftist to represent a threat to the security of Argentina's nuclear energy program." On page three, item one reads "Antonio Misetich is a chemist whose sister, Misetich de Maestre (FNU) was a Montonero..." Antonio remains disappeared.

CIA cable, "Responsibility of the Federal Police for Killing the Thirty People Whose Bodies Appeared 20 August 1976," August 25, 1976.
Aug 25, 1976 | Source Argentina Declassification Project, April 2019
In the early hours of August 20, 1976, thirty bodies are dynamited and the remains exposed for the public to see in what is known as the Fátima massacre. According to this CIA cable the "thirty individuals had been killed under Federal Police detention" and "[The] Operating levels of the Argentine Federal Police were responsible for killing" them. Further, "President Videla is extremely angry over the appearance of the thirty bodies in Pilar and sixteen bodies in another site." President Videla "is in agreement that subversives should be killed, but that the entire matter should be dealt with discreetly."

CIA cable, "The Role of the National Intelligence Center Within the Countersubversive Campaign," Secret, November 19, 1976.
Nov 19, 1976 | Source Argentina Declassification Project, April 2019
The National Intelligence Center (NIC), also known as "Reunion Central," and its network are at the core of the repression of the military dictatorship. The NIC, itself, "comes under the command of the Army and is under the immediate authority of the Army 601st Intelligence Battalion." It has the role of "...Analyzing confiscated documents and data provided by captured subversives." It "works in conjunction with the intelligence units of the Army [G-2, SIE, AAIS, Battalion 601], Navy [SIN, ESMA], Airforce, gendarmerie, maritime prefecture, Federal Police [FPA] and Buenos Aires provincial police [BAPP], as well as the State Intelligence Secretariat (SIDE) and the penitentiary intelligence service." "[T]he NIC occasionally participates in some action operations conducted by one of the security services. NIC action operations fall within the jurisdiction of the army first corps..." "Group one... [is in charge of the] ERP... Group two... [in charge of] Montoneros... Group five... [in charge of the Junta Coordinadora Revolucionaria] JCR." Created in 1971-72, the "Reunion Central" is named by different witnesess as "Central de Reunión, ," "Central Nacional de Inteligencia," "Central de Reunión de Inteligencia," and "Central de Reunión de Información." Linked to it are dozens of "Central de Operaciones de Inteligencia (COI)" spread through military zones, subzones and areas. The ones known for a fact to have existed are COI Zona 1 and " COI Subzona23; COI Area 234 ." These units are geared towards gathering and collating intelligence and imparting orders for operations, but they often have tactical teams operating from their own structure. The COI are sometimes named "Central de Reunion de Inteligencia (CRI)." These are also paired or overlap with hit squads called "Centros de Operaciones Tácticas (COT)."

Doc. 13. CIA cable, “Argentina: Criticism [over] ... ‘Soft’ Policy Toward Subversion,” Secret, December 3, 1976
Dec 3, 1976 | Source Argentina Declassification Project, April 2019
The CIA reports that powerful military commanders, like the head of the Army First Corps’ General Suarez Mason, the commander at the infamous “Campo de Mayo” General Santiago Omar Riveros, along with the head of the Buenos Aires Provincial Police (BAPP), all agreed “that it is time to stop being so easy on the terrorists in the country and start an all out war against them. The head of the BAPP states that starting immediately the BAPP would be taking a harder stance and “until further notice he wanted no prisoners for interrogation, only cadavers.” The report states that while some recent actions in La Plata region against subversives have been legitimate, “others have been fabrications… designed to explain away the killing of prisoners.”

FBI memorandum, "The Montoneros," Secret, December 11, 1976.
Dec 11, 1976 | Source Argentina Declassification Project, April 2019
This secret memo from Legal Attaché Robert Scherrer to the Ambassador reveals that, contrary to news disseminated by the Armed Forces and widely reproduced in the Argentine news media announcing "the alleged death of Montonero guerrilla leader, Norma Arrostito" in a shootout on December 2nd, 1976, "Arrostito is presently in the hands of Argentine security forces undergoing interrogation." According to an Argentine intelligence source, the "shootout between Argentina security forces in Buenos Aires province" was staged as part of "a contrived operation." Arrostito is captured alive in the vicinity of the shootout after having "taken a potion of potassium cyanide. An antidote was immediately given to Arrostito and she survived the attempt at suicide." Multiple survivor testimonies indicate Arrostito spends much of her captivity at the Navy Mechanics School Clandestine Detention Center (ESMA), where she is savagely tortured, until the time of her death in January 1978.

[Patricia Erb's] Statement, December 31, 1976.
Dec 31, 1976 | Source Department of State Argentina Declassification Project, 2002
This document released in 2002 by the Department of State is included here for it links evidence to several people mentioned in other documents rescently released. In a statement to the Mennonite Central Committee, Patricia Erb, a 19-year-old US citizen, reveals the vicious torture that she suffers and witnesses in the Army Campo de Mayo clandestine detention center. She is "abducted by armed men in civilian clothing" and held for several days before being moved to "the torture house." There, men "would begin interrogations" using torture in various forms: "beating with clubs, fists, kicking, immersing in water or in fecal substance to almost the drowning point and applying 'La Picana,' (electric machine) that is touched to the more sensitive parts of the body." "To cause a stronger sensation they would tie us with rope to a wire bed which carried an electrical current...splashing water on to augment the pain." The prisoners end these sessions "almost unconscious and moaning in great pain." At night, Erb testifies, "we were also at the mercy of being raped by the sub-officials." Erb lists in her statement the names she can remember of individuals detained with her. Among these she mentions " Eduardo Raul Merbilhaa ... Ana Maria Lansilotto [sic] pregnant...Domingo Menna [sic]... Liliana Delfino... " They all remain disappeared.

U.S. Embassy cable, "Argentines Question GOA Accounts of Terrorist Confrontations and Release Lists," Confidential, January 25, 1977.
Jan 25, 1977 | Source Argentina Declassification Project, April 2019
An Embassy cable reports with concern that, after almost two years of being in prison, "a number of independent sources have separatedly told Emboffs [Embassy Officials] that deaths of Peronist leader Dardo Cabo and Roberto Perliz in terrorist ambush on Jan 6 were engineered by security forces." A consistent story is relayed to the Embassy by the father of another victim also housed in the La Plata prison. This follows CIA reporting on December 3, 1976 , that while some recent actions in La Plata region against subversives have been legitimate, "others have been fabrications... designed to explain away the killing of prisoners."

Department of State memorandum, "Argentina Study Mission on Human Rights," March 22, 1977.
Mar 22, 1977 | Source Argentina Declassification Project, April 2019
This memo for Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights, Patt Derian, suggests "Conditions To Be Met [by Argentine military government] Prior To Trip" to Argentina a week later. The first condition is an "agreement to permit private interviews with political prisoners." Listed are 13 "Specific political prisoners with whom the mission may want to request private interviews." The list includes the prisoners' names and the detention centers where they are being held. Strikingly, the list includes "Manuela Elmina Santucho... held in concentration camp La Atomica... Eduardo Raul Melbilha... held at Campo de Mayo... Jorge Di Pascuale.... Held at Federal Police headquarters... [and] Raymundo Glayser [sic]... Famous filmmaker. Held at La Atomica..." All of them are disappeared.

Department of State, "[Letter to the Ambassador About Human Rights Abuses]," Confidential, April 7, 1977.
Apr 7, 1977 | Source Argentina Declassification Project, April 2019
A week after accompanying Patricia Derian on her trip to Argentina, Office of East Coast Affairs head Fred Rondon writes to Ambassador Robert Hill. His letter describes meetings held, captures general impressions, and offers specifics about the horrors going on in Argentina. Several descriptions are shocking for the graphic detail with which they describe violence committed against women. In one incident referring to the detention of a mother and daughter, the mother is "beaten with rubber truncheons" while "she could hear her daughter's screams in a nearby room." The mother is subsequently released but her daughter remains disappeared.

CIA cable, "Federal Police Investigation of the Death of Elena Holmberg," Secret, January 18, 1979.
Jan 18, 1979 | Source Argentina Declassification Project, April 2019
This partially excised CIA cable theorizes as to which branch of the Argentine Armed Forces is responsible for the murder of Elena Holmberg, an Argentine Foreign Ministry official "kidnapped" on December 20th, 1978. Holmberg's body is recovered in January from the Lujan river. "The press reported that autopsies performed on the body established that death had occurred within 48 hours of her abduction." The cable presents three theories: "A) The State Secretariat for Intelligence (SIDE) killed Holmberg," although "If the SIDE were responsible, Holmberg would have been held for extended interrogation and would not have been killed within 48 hours." "B) Subversives kidnapped and killed Homberg [excised] not [excised] likely." "C) The navy killed Holmberg because while in Paris she discovered that Admiral Emilio Massera, former Commander-in-Chief of the Navy, had met with the Montoneros... and that she had forwarded this information to high officials of the Argentine government."

Department of State report, "Next Steps in Argentina," Secret, January 26, 1979.
Jan 26, 1979 | Source Argentina Declassification Project, April 2019
Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights, Patricia Derian, urges Secretary of State Cyrus Vance to U.S. action. "The increasing magnitude and brutality of Argentine human rights violations convince me that it is time for us to take additional measures to underscore our concerns and bring pressure to bear on the Junta to make improvements," states Derian. At the end of the memo she makes several suggestions to impose sanctions on the military to force human rights improvements. To emphasize her point, she lists some of the most worrisome signs. "38 bodies, many of them without heads or hands, were recently washed ashore on one of Argentina's Atlantic beaches." "Our Embassy estimates that about 55 disappearances a month take place in Argentina." "For the past three weeks, security forces have arrested and threatened to imprison mothers of the disappeared who have held weekly silent demonstrations..." "We continue to receive... reports that torture is used routinely in the interrogation of detainees. The electric 'picana'... the 'submarine'..." Sources report that prison treatment "has deteriorated sharply." According to one source, "fifty female detainees recently transferred between prisons 'have not been exposed to the sun for so long that their skin color is greenish... Some have lost their eyesight. Many are mentally deranged.'"

U.S. Embassy cable, "GOA Counter-Insurgency Tactics, Unchanged," Secret, April 9, 1980.
Apr 9, 1980 | Source Argentina Declassification Project, April 2019
Disappeared Montoneros Horacio Campiglia and Susana Binstock have been captured in Brazil and are now being held at clandestine Army detention center Campo de Mayo. "[T]he long missing [Thelma] Jara de Cabezas is still being held by the Argentine Navy." In this cable, the U.S. Ambassador to Argentina, Raul Castro, concludes that this "confirms that the military government will show hardcore terrorists no mercy. The tactics of the dirty war remain in place. The major difference from the past is that today they are usually being applied with greater sophistication and selectivity against individuals."

CIA cable, "Continuing High Concern Within Security Forces Over Revelations of Excesses Committed During the Anti-Subversive Campaign," Secret, April 28, 1983.
Apr 28, 1983 | Source Argentina Declassification Project, April 2019
This CIA cable reports that, in anticipation of "the coming civilian government," there is "great concern within SIDE [State Secretariat for Intelligence] over revelations of secret detention and torture centers that had existed in Argentina." This concern "was based on the fact that the revelations were correct in their location of the centers and the identification of persons involved." The cable goes on to say " The 601st Intelligence Battallion, the operational arm of the Army Intelligence Service (SIE), were very concerned..."

CIA research paper, "Insurgent Success and Failure: Selected Case Studies," Secret, May 1983.
May 1, 1983 | Source Argentina Declassification Project, April 2019
Six months before the transfer to a democratic government, the CIA makes an assessment of the dictatorship's performance in counterinsurgency. The military "effectively coordinated the counterinsurgency effort through the National Intelligence Center (NIC) ... The NIC collected information from the various intelligence agencies, processed it, and disseminated it to appropriate units for exploitation. Paramilitary organizations were placed under the direct control of their parent organizations... While numerous innocent people were tortured and killed by paramilitary units, most of the victims were at least supporters of the ERP or the Montoneros. Intelligence units successfully penetrated both groups and extracted much information from captured insurgents through the extensive use of torture. Many of the detained insurgents were later killed to prevent their future release by a civilian government. "

CIA cable, "Apprehension and Scheduled Killing of Another Montonero," Secret, May 27, 1983.
May 27, 1983 | Source Argentina Declassification Project, April 2019
This CIA cable reports that "In late May 1983 [excised] one of the Argentine military services had detained a prominent Montonero named ((Haydar)) (fnu) on about 10 May. [Excised] the military service was almost finished interrogating Haydar, and it was planned to have him die in some sort of manufactured public incident. However, [excised] the military service believed that there was too much current controversy over other Montoneros who had died in similar incidents and it was planned to wait a week or so until this public interest had died down before killing Haydar."
