TIPPIT WITBESSES 
Statements or Witnesses - Sam GUINZARD 
Deposition - April 2, 1961)., 7 H 395-401 
Oulnyard Is a Negro and Ball calls him by his first name* He 
worked for the Harris Motor O©, used-car lot, 501 East Jefferson. He 
Is a 28-year-old porter (p.395) who In school "got to the sixth grade". 
His only troubles with the law have been poker fines and traffic tickets. 
He was polishing a statlonwagon when he heard 3 shots. He was In 
back of the oar lot, which faces 10th and Jefferson. He said he saw 
Oswald "right through the yard In front of the big white hotse ..." (p*396] 
f 
This was a block away. He says he also saw the man who was running 
"knocking enQ>ty sheila out of his pistol". I may be wrong, but I believe 
this la not possible. Two were found by the Oavla women, two were found 
by Benavides. The Davis women found them, as I recall their testimony, 
on their propeirty. Hence, this would have happened before the zninnlng 
man came Into Gulnyard's view If, In fact, he ever did. Gviinyard*a 
version Is that this was a one-hand - right hand - operation. His 
description of what the man was dolgg was "He was rolling them with his 
hand - with his thumb," Now that's awfully good vision for over a city 
block. But apparently to Ball, who conducted the examination. It was 
the iHnrt of vision he could expect from his witnesses. Nonetheless, It 
just Isn't credible. His description (which 1 believe Is at variance 
with that of the others) Is "he come down Patton until he got to about 
5 feet from the oomer of Jefferson and then he t\xmed across and went 
across to the west corner of Jefferson." He says he and Callaway were 
7 
together. (p.39p) 
He also said that Oswald was on the sane side of the street he 
was on. 
He estimates the closest distance he ever was to the running man 
as 10 feet and Is then confronted with Callaway's statement that the 
%

--- PAGE BREAK ---n the sane side of the street he 
was on. 
He estimates the closest distance he ever was to the running man 
as 10 feet and Is then confronted with Callaway's statement that the 
%

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2 - Gulnyard 
man waa on yhe west side and that when they meastired the distance Callaway 
said It was It came to 5^ feet. He also said Callaway foia>owed the man 
"tirylng to see which way he was going”. He last saw the running man 
going west on Jefferson. Apparently Callaway didn't go very far In 
purstilt because he and Otilnyard went tQ> to where Tlpplt was lying to- 
gether. 
Again Ball entirely misrepresents what happened: 
”Mr. Ball. Were you there when the truck came up that was driven 
by Benavides? ^ 
Mr. Gulnyard. Yes, sir, 
Mr. Ball. He came up right after this? 
Hr. Culnyard. Yes; he came up froa the east side - going west.” 
(p.398) 
The truth of the matter Is that Benavides was at the scene and by 
far the closest person at the time the shots were fired. It Is also 
clear Cninyard knew It because of the Incident Involving the shells, the 
exact location of which Benavides knew from observation. This makes It 
clear that <Hilnyaa?d Is willing to testify to almott ax^ythlng. The ques- 
tion la. Why? (p.398) 
At the lineup Ouinyard noticed all the men were about the same 
height, (p,399) 
He also Identified the second man. He claims the police officers 
told him absolutely nothing before he wnet Into the lineup and that, 
althoTigh he was with Callaway, Callaway also told him nothing. 
Gulnyard said he noticed the man was wearing black pants, brown 
shirt, "sort of light-gray-looking Jacket", and a white T.ahirt, This 
man was wearing a lot of clothes only to leave them open so the T.shlrt 
was visible and Identifiable. There Is no question asked about this.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ng Jacket", and a white T.ahirt, This 
man was wearing a lot of clothes only to leave them open so the T.shlrt 
was visible and Identifiable. There Is no question asked about this.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3 - Gulnyard 
but it must be obvious that if the man was wearing all this clothing 
the most Guinyard knew was that he was wearing a white undershirt. 
The use of the phrase "T-shirt" I believe is a dead giveaway that he 
was carefully primed, (p,l|.00) 
f