In Memory of our President John F. Kennedy


Welcome All (and everyone else too) !!

Thank you all for your co-operation,
encouragement, contributions, stamps,
suggestions, moral support! And for the
"thought notes" for our first issue.

i feel like this newsletter is going
to be good for us personally and hope
that somewhere along the way, it brings
good to others.

I guess being the editor and all, (!!) I
should state a policy. I haven't really
thought that far ahead, but 1 think we
should all follow these general
guidelines:

1 . RESPECT OTHERS' FEELINGS !!

We all seem to have varying degrees of
emotion about the JFK assassination and
related events. Some of us have studied
long and hard to find answers, and most
of us come to believe that certain things
we've discovered are pretty close to the
truth. Others may not have studied as
long, but we all know how our views
seem to take on strong fervor. I’d like
for us to admit that we all don't see the
same things about Kennedy's death, or
about Kennedy himself. But I encourage
each of us to tolerate, if not accept, the
views and emotions of others.

2. Strong cussing &. ranting &. raving
should be the privilege of the Editor,
only. I will generally edit out either
from your notes printed in any issue.


JFK Honor Guard goals and procedures:

1. Some of you will want to write for
the newsletter, while others won't. I'd
encourage you all to make some written
addition...if for no other reason than your
input is welcome here. Variety of view-
point and knowledge will benefit us all.
Helpful, too, are your suggestions.

2. Issue dates: Lord willing and the
Mac holding up, I will put together an
issue for us the last week of each month.

3. I've explained to each of you about
the generosity of the Service member
who has enabled us to conveniently get
this first issue together. For a limited
time. I'll be able to E-mail with you to
further newsletter publication.Be aware,
though, at some point, well likely be
using landmail (only) to coordinate our
efforts, (also, thank you all for under-
standing the situation and humoring me
on my E-mail paranoia!!!)

4. Giving issues to others: I know
that some of you will wish to share this
unique newsletter. That is up to you, but
I would ask you to let me know who you
share it with. The main reason is if I re-
ceive inquiries. I'd like to know how the
person heard of us. Another reason is
that I expect to be sending many of our
paper out myself, and will have to post
different issue costs to the general
public. I want to be fair, but not silly!


^»».»»»»»»»: O ur IPtttsidanl


A

f 3ohn £f. ^Kennedy



r

S


A

A

A

s


A

A

A

S


Olay 29, 1917

November 22, 1963


lf£
V


3


I

V

i


This should have been his 75th birthday. He would have been long
reti^ f^high office and the goexi or bad he could have done would be a

par \?m dd-- would could — Talk of what might have been. Words of

know about these J-sibili has because a parson or

‘tTr^s* high office. But the odds that should ha^s been in
his favor in contrast to the relatively unprotected Presidents m the pas ,
^eTagainst him. How this purred it still being debated and

ta '^S t ^akes JFK, and his death, so important? He won by a haired

r^eTof^te^ of the

3Hw.sssais mss-sj

s-st^ass •” hr-

He told them that errors of the past could be corrected, if y

"^s^s^ ^^tegSy possibility that ^ ^ *

we can just get leaders who think participatory democracy is not

3S^not by a lone nut but by a cons^mvoluing
sections of the government, alone or in that it

5 : — -

te 'Sf JFK's second legacy. We may realize that his ^th was not just
a waste of potential greatness, but, by awakening the .
lethargy, a beginning of true progress, after the missed chance ar
analyzed and understood. | Kimball W allis ©199 1


JFK

Whatever else may be satd of our
late President Kennedy, few will deny
that his time In the White House, with
his lovely young wife and children,
brought a glorious, charismatic
"Camelot" Image to our otherwise
rather drab government. He was our
Hero In a time when there were few
heros to be found. I will always believe
he was giving his best for our country.
He mode friends for the United States
everywhere he went, and his wife
brought a gracious, elegant Image to
our country. The children were a delight
to behold, as they ployed with their
parents, who mode time to be with
them.

I think the cruelty of the tragic day
in Dallas will never be entirely erased
from our memories, os he gave the lost
full measure of devotion” to our
country. Who knows what he might have
accomplished during his lifetime? He
was young, vital and dedicated to his
job, being President. He loved his
country and his country loved him.

We oil miss him, and no other
President since John F. Kennedy has
made us so proud of our country. Yes, he
made mistakes. Don’t we all? Or Is
somebody prepared to cast the ‘first
stone?” 1, among many others. I’m sure,
will never forget his small son,
Jon-Jon, saluting his father's casket In
one of the most poignant scenes 1 hove
ever witnessed, along with his brave
widow and daughter. I soy now one last
’Goodbye’ and “ Hail to the Chief."

{Margaret Matthews <81 992]


Ma y 1953

I wasn't aware then of JFK’s
birthday, but my family hod just moved
to on area right outside of D.C. and It
was a very exciting place to live;
something was always happening. While
"Blowing' In The Wind,” "Surfin' USA,
and Telstar" played on the radio,
Martin Luther King and the Student
Nonviolent Coordl rating Committee
were marching on Birmingham; change
was In the air, and it was a time of
anticipation and hope. We were being
led by the youngest president in US
history and his egresslve Attorney
General brother. We were pulling ahead
In the "Space race" and the economy
was good and the future seemed to look
pretty good,too.

Not all was perfect; many Americans
were nervous and upset still after the
problems with Cuba, the conflict In
SE Asia seemed to be escalating and
here at home a Baptist Church In Bir-
mingham had been bombed, killing four
little girls, victims of the Civil Rights
struggle. Later that summer, 3 college
students also succumbed to the viol-
ence that met that peaceful movement.

Yet overall, we were enthusiastic
about the times we were living in and
what might be ahead. We could not know
what would come in 6 months. We could
not see the changes, not for the better,
that our country would go through and
would not have believed that we would
raise our kids in a far more troubled
society. In May of ’63 we believed In our
country, our government, our dreams
end our ability to moke them come
about. It probably looked much the same
to our 35th President o n his 46th
birthday. {Jessica Bischoff <81992{


JFK Remembered '

1 was attending R.D. White School in Glendale, California. The school is still there


with it's big white building, vast lawn, and beautiful sycamore trees.

I was in Mrs. Ford s 3rd grade class when 1 heard the announcement over the
intercom system. The President had been shot! The class was stunned. What did it
mean? The teacher led us in a prayer. A few minutes later the principal came into our
room and announced John F. Kennedy's death. It was very sad. Like many school-


children across the nation, I was allowed to go home early.

Our family was stunned. The old black and white TV was on for three days. I saw
Lee Harvey Oswald murdered. I saw the funeral procession. I hearjd the final blowing
of Taps. I still have the newspaper clippings of those events,though I need no such


reminders: these scenes will be in my memory forever.

May 29th is JFK's birthday. He would have been 75 years old. Next year will be the
30th anniversary of his death. Obviously JFK was cut down in the prime. The
assassination of President Kennedy was more than a crime of murder. It was a crime
against all of us. Much has been written about JFK. Good or bad, right or wrong, he
was our President and he was much loved.

His death changed history, and it changed our lives forever. That day in
Dallas one family lost a husband, father, son, and brother. As a Nation, we lost our


President and our innocence.

Happy Birthday, Mr. President. We miss you. \ Gregory Brown ©1 992


Dear Jack,

Well here it is almost 29 years later. Where has time gone? Where did my years
go? It seems like only yesterday, as I stood at the brink of maturity, that you were
taken from me. Not through illness, or old age...but murdered.

Vou know I was still naive, trusting, then. You know the pride I took in our country,
our flog...crying as I sang the Star Stangled Banner...a creaky song: but ours! Remember
how I admired our military and KNEW they would take care of us, and help other
countries who wanted a democracy like ours; who wanted to make their countries like
the United States of America— the best and strongest and proudest country in the World!

Oh Jack — what a President you made!! I had Truman; old gran'daddy that he was. I
had Eisenhower...so confident with his great military background; but a bit too elderly
and stodgy for me. And then I had you! Strong and dignified when our country needed it;
dedicated to keeping us together end moving forward as countrymen...as brothers and
sisters os family. New to marriage and motherhood myself, I watched the First Family.
ALL the First Family! What fun you all had, when you weren't working to keep America
moving! How proud (but envious) I was of Jackie's class and beauty! And your kids were
healthy, happy, cared for and respected. Just like I thought America would always be.

But you were stolen from me: incredibly! I read the Warren Report.l've read hundreds
of books about your assassination in these 29 years. But I still don't know why. Some-
times I think if I could just know Who and Why, I could lay down this burden of sadness,
this grief at losing you. ...my President, my brother. No,Jack,l haven't forgotten you.

This JFK Honor Guard is a Birthday present to you; notes from these few who are
representing the Americans who will never forget what you meant to us and our country.

As ever, | w.B. Richards ©1992

Deame 1


One of Our Own

Many of you hove read the posted notes of Gary Savage. Some of you may not know
that he has been researching and gathering material for two years for his book
concerning JFK assassination-related evidence.

Soon he will present his book. JFK: FIRST DAY EVIDENCE.

Making Gary's book unique in the field is his collection of interviews (some
“first-time-given" ones!) of people familiar with the workings of the Dallas Police
Crime Lob in Nov. 1963. One of Gary's special interests is the sixth floor crime scene os
found by Dallas City and County lawmen. He'll also share with us is the "acoustic
evidence" — the DPD tape's origin and later analysis by DPD Communications Dept.

Gory Savage has his own views about what happened that day, ondVhile he will
present much evidence just as found by Dallas lawmen (including photos, interviews,
etc), his book will emphasize no theory, serving only to give us additional material to
help us make up our own mind on the events. At last report, he is moving closer to
publication. Gory Savage % The Shoppe Press P.O.Box 2741 Monroe, LA 71207-2741


One of our group received a letter from
Sen. Edward Kennedy, in reply to questions
about re-opening the government files.

The Senator wrote [concerning the JFK
issue] that the "continuing debate is still a
difficult & painful subject for my family.”
He odds "If the appropriate authorities
feel the existing files should be opened to
the public, our family will not object."


Our HONOR GUARD has been created so
that each of us may more directly Interact
on issues about JFK's assassination.

As a subscriber,you are encouraged to
send me art1cles,suggestions,11sts (book
shops,v1deo soles places/coincidences'.
Dead Witnesses, facts, etc etc etc.) and
"thought notes.” (ETC!) Issues will vary in
number of pages,ond central "themes."


Any material not used in one issue may
be used in a later one.! will also print your
name and home state,unless you say not to.


For $15.00 you will receive the first
12 Issues. Send money order to:

Deanie Richards
PO Box 3724 Akron, OH 44314


Thank those of you who sent the form
back to help us decide what is of interest.

AND THE WINNERS ARE!!

Most of you want to develop source lists
for a. newsletters b. videos c. hord-
to-find book shops d. small publisher
addresses e. study groups
One other would like to hove a source list
for audio and record medio. Another
suggests gathering autographs of the
histbricallu important: Here's a start:


(well, ya never know!!!)

Most ore interested in storting lists of
a. questions b. discoveries c. Who did it
Another mentioned listing Trivia Items
concerning the oss'n, a "did you know" list !
and making a list about events 1-10 years
ago, 20 urs ago.

All of you are interested In a campaign
to open the files. Mixed on sharing your
addresses. Mixed on signing articles. Most
are for various reviews and having our
own articles inc1uded.A11 responding think
this newsletter is a good idea.

As I’ve written you previously (E-mail)
this newsletter is going to be for us, and
it will grow and change as we go along.
This Issue appropriately starts with our
words about John Kennedy's life and death.


Subjects to think about for the next issue:
Which lists do we want to concentrate on
first? SOURCES FOR

1. videos 2 . hard-to- find book shops 3.
small publisher addresses 4. newsletters

5. study groups

6. record/cassette sources 7. other


I personally would like to start a DEAD
1ST (no! this is different than a Hit List!)

I think it would be relatively simple for
all of us to send in notation of those wit-
nesses, cops, gov’t folk, agents, newsmen,
evidence/testimony providers, and/or
involved with ass’n who have died since
mid- 1963. I’ll get the lists from Acc./Fact

and Conspiracy. Tell me what you think.
v_ '


4 .


\
