Two Men Charged


;;£tj


Of 10.000 Gum

/>• 7y* ->?

NEW YORK, Dec. 23 (AP) — Two reputed top in-
ternational arms traffickers have been arrested on a
variety of charges stemming from the alleged sale of
10,000 machine guns to police posing as revolution-
aries, the Manhattan district attorney announced to-
day.

Frank Terpil, 40, of McLean, Va., and George Kor-
kaia, 38, of Nutley, N. J., were arrested yeste ‘day at
the New York Hilton Hotel by i-ity police after the
pair negotiated a $2 million sale with two under-
cover police, District Attorney Robert Morgenthau
said.

Also being held as a material witness, but net
charged with any crime, was ex-Marine John
Dutcher, 40, a self-described assassin and soldi ^r of
fortune who allegedly agreed to train an arm/ in
the use of weapons sold by the pair, Morgenthau
said at a news conference. . »

The district attorney described Terpil and Kor-
kala as freelance military specialists who harbor fu-
gitives, sell illegal weapons and train terrorists and
military activists through a series of front compa-
nies throughout the world.

He said Terpil sold $3.2 million in weapons, explo-
sives and surveillance equipment to Uganda during
the rule of exiled President ldi Amin, and operated
various front businesses in Washington, Paris and
Panama.

Terpil, fired by the Central Intelligence Agency
in 1971, joined Korkala as a partner three years ago,
the district attorney said. *

Morgenthau said Korkala, who drives a car with
diplomatic plates registered to the Ugandan mission
to the United Nations, has been known to supply
arms to Libya and countries in the Middle East /
FBI agents, armed with a search warrant, raided
one of the pair’s companies, Amstech Co. in Nutley,
after the arrests and found a cache of sophisticated
“sample weaponry.” . v ' -

I* Terpil and Korkala were arrested ifter under-
qover agents gave them a 356.000 down payment on
the sale of 10,000 used MK2 and MK.3 machine guns,
t|} be delivered in 45 days, Morp/tmthau said the con-
fiscated guns are being held in England.

!• The two men were charged in connection with the
sijfh* or supply of a Browning automatic pistol and
the maCMa*. $uns 3 atU |.d a y t an( j sa i e or SU ppiy
Of a silenced sniper rifle, automatic pistol and other
explosives on other dates.

!*
