Shatterin


the 1con 0


Abraham
Lincoln
SAM DICKSON


A Jourmal of Historical Review Reprint


Order more postpaid copies of


Shattering the Icon of Abraham Lincoln
(Prices below valid through 1994)


$2.50 per copy
10 copies, $20
25 copies, $40
50 copies, $75
100 copies, $125
250 copies, $250


Shattering the Icon of Abraham Lincoln
is also available on audio cassette for $12 postpaid


California residents please add sales tax
—Order from—
INSTITUTE FOR HISTORICAL REVIEW


P.O. Box 2739
Newport Beach, CA 92659


Write for our complete catalog of books and tapes


First Reprint, July 1993
INSTITUTE FOR HISTORICAL REVIEW


This paper was presented to the
Seventh International Revisionist Conference,
1986, and published in the Fall 1986 issue of
The Journal of Historical Review


he astonishing thing about this paper on Abraham Lincoln is

that it is needed at all or is considered controversial. In my
opinion, one does not have to be a scholar to ferret out obscure and
suppressed facets of history to see Abraham Lincoln as he was.

My views on this subject are not unusual. They are those of the
overwhelming majority of Southerners both immediately before,
during and for decades after the War between the States. My views
were also shared by many in the North and the West. Only the
passage of time and the studious cultivation of the myth of Abraham
Lincoln, coupled with his timely death (timely in the sense of being
providential for his place in history) have caused Abraham Lincoln
to be raised to the level of a sacred cow in American history.

Nevertheless, even contemporary events show that the place and
role of Abraham Lincoln in American history are a subject which is
very sensitive to the Establishment. When Professor M.E. Bradford
of the University of Dallas was nominated by President Reagan to
head the National Endowment for the Humanities, a storm of abuse
and controversy exploded. Professor Bradford’s sin was that he
had the effrontery to criticize Abraham Lincoln. The New York
Times launched the attack, followed by a host of other
establishment liberal spokesmen and institutions and joined by so-
called ‘‘neo-conservatives” such as George Will. Mr. Will
excoriated Professor Bradford as “the nostalgic Confederate
remnant of the Conservative movement” and made it clear that neo-
conservatives have no use for any criticism of Abraham Lincoln.!
Obviously, Professor Bradford touched a raw and sensitive nerve
when he criticized a president who has been dead for over 120
years. One wonders after the lapse of so many years why this
matter is such a vital, important and sensitive one.

Part of the reason for the importance of Abraham Lincoln in the


2 SHATTERING THE ICON OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN


iconography of the left is explained by the Whig Theory of History
which is shared by most leftists in one form or another. The Whig
Theory of History holds that history, in particular the history of the
English-speaking peoples, is the history of freedom broadening
down from precedent to precedent as progress is made away from
tradition, authority, monarchy, and aristocracy toward democracy
and egalitarianism. The leftist adherents to the Whig Theory of His-
tory see Lincoln as part of a continuum running from .Runnymede
to Cromwell to the so-called Glorious Revolution to the American
Revolution to Lincoln to Wilson to Roosevelt to Kennedy and
beyond.

Of course, this Whig Theory of History is preposterous and
fallacious and maintained only by a thoroughly dishonest editing of
historical events. However, the leftists are correct in viewing
Lincoln and the effect of his career on the course of the United
States as moving America away from an aristocratic society founded
upon traditions, authority and property and towards a mass
democratic society founded upon universal suffrage, equality and
unlimited government-mandated social experimentation. While it is
not remarkable that leftists should admire Abraham Lincoln, it is
noteworthy and surprising that the Lincoln Myth has been marketed
to moderate and conservative Americans.

Part of the success enjoyed by the Lincoln Myth lies in the
timeliness of his death. By dying through an assassination at the
conclusion of the war and prior to the commencement of a bitter and
cruel peace, Lincoln could be used by all factions in America and
could be opposed by none. Hence, Radical Republicans used his
death, as well as a contrived propaganda campaign alleging that
Southern leaders, including Jefferson Davis, had plotted Lincoln’s
assassination, to inflame Northem opinion and to solidify their
leadership of the North in a campaign of humiliation, robbery and
persecution of the conquered and prostrate South and its vanquished
leaders.2 Southemers were likewise in no position to attack Lincoln.
The South’s situation after the war was similar to that of post-
World War II Germany, that is to say, utterly defeated, prostrate,
the victim of inflammatory lies about atrocities at Andersonville,
etc. Hence, the only prudent course for Southemers was to promote
those aspects of the Lincoln Myth (e.g., his alleged kindliness and
magnanimity) so as to defuse Northem anger and work patiently for
the amelioration of the condition of the South.

Having touched on the foregoing points, let us examine the real
Abraham Lincoln and his true place in American history. I have
selected the following areas of scrutiny: 1 Lincoln the man; 2 Lincoln


Lincoln The Man 3


from the standpoint of American patriotism and nationalism; 3
Lincoln and the coming of the War, 4 Lincoln’s conduct of the War,
5 Lincoln and his place in American history.


1. Lincoln The Man


The official image of Lincoln the man according to the Lincoln
Myth runs as follows: a man of upright character and honesty, a
man of peace and compassion for his Southem adversaries, and a
Christian of sincere religious convictions.

All of the above articles of faith are demonstrably false.

Lincoln was a demagogic politician who maneuvered with
consummate skill on all sides of many burning issues of the day.
Thus, in the famous debates with Stephen Douglas his position on
the question of Negro equality became several positions according
to which area of Illinois was hosting the debate. His pronounce-
ments ranged from denials of Negro equality and advocacy of an
inferior and degraded state of civil rights for the Negro to
affirmations of the equality of Negroes. This is not to say that
Lincoln was without principle. It is my belief, which will be
developed in this paper, that Lincoln was an abiding leftist but at the
same time was a crafty and dissimulating politician who was willing
shamelessly to try to fool all of the people, all of the time.

As to Lincoln’s alleged sincere “Christian” religious convictions,
it is well known to students of Lincoln that he was an atheist and
free-thinker. While like any crafty politician Lincoln was willing to
invoke the name of God to gamer support, no great importance
should be laid to this practice which is common in all democratic
societies.

Also, Lincoln believed in omens, was often depressed by seeing
blackbirds, and would interpret dreams that he had in ways that can
only be described as superstitious. Lincoln’s superstition is
frequently confused with piety.

Lincoin’s law partner, William Hemdon, was deeply disturbed
after Lincoln’s death by popular portrayals of Lincoln as a Christian
saint. As Dwight G. Anderson, author of a recent study of
Abraham Lincoln, points out, Hemdon knew that Lincoln had
written an essay denying the divinity of the Bible. This essay or
book of Lincoln’s came to be referred to as the “infidel book.”
Herndon’s lectures and writings on the subject of Lincoln’s atheism
provoked immediate defense of Lincoln as a devout Christian.
However, as Hemdon shrewdly pointed out, the fact of Lincoln’s
early atheism cannot be denied and Lincoln’s political career would


a SHATTERING THE ICON OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN


have been vastly helped by some public revelation of a dramatic
conversion to Christianity. No such conversion has ever been
established. Long after the controversy over Lincoln’s atheism or
devotion to Christianity, a statement of Lincoln’s was discovered
which Lincoln issued in reply to accusations that he was not a
Christian.3 Lincoln admitted that he was not a member of any
Christian church, but stated that he had not denied the truth of the
scriptures and had not spoken with intentional disrespect of religion
in general or of any particular Christian denomination. Lincoln’s
statement shows that Herndon was correct. The statement is artfully
worded but does not indicate any conversion to Christianity and
does not deny the assertions of Hemdon that Lincoln had denied the
divinity of the scriptures. Lincoln says only that he had not denied
their truth. Lincoln is to be admired for his honesty in this statement
in not concocting some vote-catching, bom-again experience. Our
admiration for his candor would be greater had he desisted from
piously self-serving references to the Almighty in political speeches
throughout his career.


2. Lincoln As Patriot And Nationalist


Regarding Lincoln’s patriotism and devotion to the Union, he
was devoted rather to the aggrandizement of his section and of his
faction, which dominated that section. When broader national
interests came into conflict with the interests of Lincoln and his
faction, Lincoln took the side of his faction, as will be shown later
in dealing with the Mexican-American War.

Lincoln’s first term in the Illinois legislature coincided with the
initial rumblings in Norther legislatures of the dangerous and
divisive slavery issue. Responsible Americans of both sections
recognized the danger posed to the American Union by the slavery
issue and sought to head it off. One means of doing this was to
have the legislatures of both sections pass identical resolutions
expressing a national consensus on the slavery issue from a
moderate point of view.

Stephen Douglas, a true American patriot, was among those
instrumental in seeking to have the Illinois legislature pass this
resolution. The resolution was overwhelmingly passed with only a
tiny minority voting against it. Among the handful of opponents
was a freshman member of the legislature, Abraham Lincoln
Beginning with this incident, Douglas was to be a lifelong
adversary of Lincoln.

Lincoln’s position on the Illinois resolution seriously impeaches


Lincoln As Patriot And Nationalist 5


those who try to make of Lincoln a white racist. The fact that
Lincoln was willing to go that far early in his career indicates that he
was committed to Negro equality at the inception of his career and
was on the far left of contemporary American thought about the
Negro and slavery issues. Furthermore, Lincoln’s opposition to the
resolution is strong evidence for his willingness to disrupt the
Union in order to promote his own faction’s success. Certainly, his
position on the resolution has to be laid to his discredit in assessing
his career.

This is not to say that Lincoln did not craftily dissemble his
views on slavery and the Negro as a practical politician, realizing the
limitations within which he strove to realize his ideals. For instance,
in late 1854 Lincoln was furious when he learned that radical
abolitionist Republicans meeting in Springfield had adopted fiery
anti-slavery resolutions and formed a party state central committee,
on which they took the liberty of placing Lincoln’s name.


I have been perplexed some to understand how my name was placed

in that committee. I was not consulted on the subject; nor was I

apprised of the appointment until I discovered it by accident two or

three weeks afterwards. I suppose that my opposition to the principle
of slavery is as strong as that of any number of the Republican party;

but I had also supposed that the extent [original emphasis] to which I

feel authorized to carry that opposition practically was not at all

satisfactory to that party.5

This letter shows that Lincoln was, in fact, a staunch opponent of
slavery but that he recognized, better than some abolitionists
sharing his views, that it was necessary to be careful in approaching
their goal.

Lincoln’s aggrandizement of his sectional and factional advantage
at the expense of the nation as a whole is most clearly evidenced by
his opposition to the war with Mexico. President James K. Polk,
certainly one of the greatest American presidents, was responsible
for almost doubling our national territory by means of the war with
Mexico. Through his efforts and through the heroism in battle of
many genuine American nationalists like Robert E. Lee and
Jefferson Davis, a whole empire was won, out of which would be
carved many of our states, from Texas to California.

President Polk’s war with Mexico was not universally popular,
however, even in the America of the 1840's. (It is noteworthy that
many modem Liberals consider the Mexican War to have been the
worst and most immoral war in our history, preferring such wars as
the War between the States, WWI and WWII as “moral” wars.)®
Among Polk’s opponents in the matter of the war was the freshman


6 SHATTERING THE ICON OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN


congressman from Illinois, Abraham Lincoln. On January 12,
1848, Lincoln spoke in the House of Representatives defending the
vote of his party a few days before in declaring “that the war with
Mexico was unnecessarily and unconstitutionally commenced by
the President.”? It was, in Carl Sandburg’s words, a fiercely
partisan speech, which led to strong criticism of Lincoln in Ilinois.
The result was that Abraham Lincoln was defeated for re-election to
Congress due to his opposition to national expansion and to the war
with Mexico.

It is also ironic to note that in his speech attacking President Polk
Lincoln made two statements which can be cited against him in his
own conduct in the War between the States. Lincoln stated:

Any people any where, being inclined and having the power, have

the right to rise up and shake off the existing government and form a
new one that suits them better... Any portion of such people that can,
may revolutionize, and make their own, of so much of the territory as
they inhabit. More than this, a majority of any portion of such
people may revolutionize, putting down a minority, intermingled
with, or near about them, who may oppose their movement.’


These remarks clearly can be cited to justify and condone the
actions of the South in seceding from the Union in 1860 and 1861.
To further the irony, Lincoln condemned President Polk’s initiation
of the War as unconstitutional on the grounds that Polk had sent
American troops into battle without congressional authority,? but
later, Lincoln would take far more dramatic steps to initiate war by
executive fiat without prior congressional approval, as required by
the Constitution, when it served his interests to do so in the
secession crisis.


3. Lincoln and the Coming of The War


As we have noted previously, Lincoln in the inception of his
public career in the Illinois State house took the radical position on
slavery by opposing the resolutions intended to soothe public
feelings in both sections.

The slavery issue continued to torment and divide the nation.
However, it would be a mistake to focus, as do most Northem
historians, solely upon the slavery issue as the cause of division
between the two sections.

The North was already losing its Anglo-Saxon character and was
rapidly changing with the inundation of non-Anglo-Saxon
immigrants from Europe. Furthermore, the North was industrializing
and her economic interests were in many respects directly


Lincoln and the Coming of The War 7


antithetical to those of the South. Hence the North desired the
erection of a high tariff barrier to enable herself to sell her industrial
products with a competitive advantage over imports from Europe.
Likewise, most of the nation’s foreign exchange was earned by
exports from the South. The tariff issue was critical in the division
of the nation and probably played the major role in determining the
North upon a policy of aggression and conquest when the secession
came.

Lincoln had always been a national Whig. His policies were
those in favor of a central banking system, which he championed
during his first term in the Ilinois legislature.!° The Bank of the
United States which Andrew Jackson opposed was similar to our
present day Federal Reserve System. Lincoln opposed resolutions
in the Illinois legislature supporting President Andrew Jackson,
who had vetoed the National Bank.'! Lincoln also favored high
tariffs, a strongly centralized goverment and intemal
improvements.!2 Lincoln himself had a direct personal reason to
support such policies, since he derived a significant portion of his
income from serving as attomey for the railroad interests.!3

The estrangement and antagonism between the two sections
gradually accelerated. In 1858 Lincoln made his famous “House
Divided” Speech. In this speech, Lincoln declared:


A house divided against itself cannot stand. I believe this government
cannot endure, permanently half slave and half free. Either the
opponents of slavery will arrest the further spread of it and place it
where the public mind shall rest in the belief that it is in the course
of ultimate extinction; or its advocates will push it forward until it
shall become alike lawful in all the states, old as well as new — North
as well as South.!4


Entranced by the Lincoln cult, Americans are prone to read or
hear the House Divided Speech with a tingling of the spine,
impressed by its dramatic tone. Set in the context of developing
regional antagonism, however, the speech seems to be that of an
irresponsible demagogue. The Union had existed half slave and half
free from its inception. There appears to be no logical reason why it
could not have continued to have existed in that fashion, given
responsible leadership and good will on both sides, until slavery
was eliminated by the progress of technology. Certainly the
delivery of such a speech was not responsible leadership, as it did
much to infuriate and alarm the South. This especially was true with
Lincoln’s election, which the South saw as the election of a man
who seemed to have declared himself on the side of those who
intended to violate the constitutional rights and property rights of


8 SHATTERING THE ICON OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN


Southemers and to interfere with their self-government. As is the
case with many dramatic speeches, the speech has its thrilling
aspects, but was utterly irresponsible and led to tragic results.
Lincoln’s activity with regard to the developing sectional strife
contrasts sharply with that of his major opponent Stephen A.
Douglas. Douglas consistently sought the national advantage,
having been a staunch supporter of President Polk in the war with
Mexico. Douglas strived to promote reconciliation and cooperation
between North and South, and to develop workable compromises
that avoided dogmatic impasses on either side.'5
Lincoln in the Lincoln-Douglas debates was his characteristic
demagogic and unprincipled self. In northern Illinois, in which the
German and other non-Anglo-Saxon immigrants now were playing
a major and perhaps decisive role, Lincoln declared himself
dramatically for Negro equality, raising his hands to the heavens
and declaring: “In the right to eat the bread his own hands have
eamed he is the equal of Judge Douglas, or of myself, or any living
man.” However, in southern Illinois, where conservative and
Southern sympathies ran strong, Lincoln declared himself opposed
to granting Negroes civil rights and stated that they were in fact an
inferior race.'6
Likewise, in 1858 in the course of the famous Lincoln-Douglas
debates, Lincoln wrote a meditation which was not used in his
debates and which his admiring biographer Sandburg described as a
“private affair between him and his conscience.” This statement ran
as follows:
Yet I have never failed — do not now fail — to remember that in
the Republican cause there is a higher aim than that of mere office. I
have not allowed myself to forget that the abolition of the slave trade
by Great Britain was agitated a hundred years before it was a final suc-
cess; that the measure had its open fire-eating opponents; its stealthy
“don’t care” opponents; its dollar and cent opponents; its inferior
race opponents; its negro equality opponents; and its religious and
good order opponents; that all these opponents got offices, and their
adversaries got none. But I also remember that though they blazed
like tallow candles for a century, at last they flickered in the socket,
died out, stank in the dark for a brief season, and were remembered no
more, even by the smell... I am proud, in my passing speck of time,
to contribute an humble mite to that glorious consummation, which
my own poor eyes may not last to see.!7


With his election in 1860, the real test of Abraham Lincoln’s
leadership in his country began. State after state in the South with-
drew from the Union, as it became obvious that the South was ex-
tremely agitated by his election. Lincoln had been elected with only


Lincoln and the Coming of The War 9


39% of the popular vote. Only the splintering of the moderate-to-
conservative majority made possible the election of this President.
No president since has ever been elected with so little popular
support. Certainly no president has ever been placed in office over
the determined opposition of so many of his fellow citizens.'*

Had Stephen A. Douglas been elected, it is almost certain that
secession and civil war would have been averted.

In his campaign Lincoln had avoided speaking on vital issues. In
the words of Reinhart H. Luthin, one of Lincoln’s better known
biographers, “From his election to his inauguration Lincoln’s
handling, or rather lack of handling of the bedeviling secession
crisis might be termed ‘calculated inactivity’ for he was to do
nothing about it nor was he to provide much leadership, with the
Republic tottering in the balance.”

Lincoln had long believed that Southern talk of secession was
nothing but bluff. In 1856 he had stated in a speech in Galena,
Illinois: “All this talk about the dissolution of the Union is
humbug.”20 He grossly underestimated secessionist sentiment and
overestimated pro-Union strength in the upper South and border
slave regions.

After Lincoln’s election, a conservative Senator, John J. Critten-
den of Kentucky, proposed a compromise to head off secession by
extending the Missouri Compromise line dividing slave states from
free states all the way to the Pacific.2! Lincoln rejected this
compromise and marshalled his party against all other compromises
with the South. Lincoln said as follows conceming this:


Let there be no compromise on the question of extending slavery. If
there be, all our labor is lost, and, ere long must be done again. The
dangerous ground — that into which some of our friends have a hanker-
ing to run — is Pop. Sov. [Popular Sovereignty]. Have none of it. Stand
firm. The tug has to come, and better now, than any time hereafter.”


Lincoln also instructed his legislative spokesman from Illinois in
Washington not to compromise with the South.2

Pleas poured into Lincoln from all regions of the country
imploring him to make some gesture to the South and give
leadership at that critical time. However, as Luthin describes it,
Lincoln continued his “sphinx-like silence” until his inauguration.

The Lincoln cultists often quote a letter which Lincoln wrote
during this period, to Alexander Hamilton Stephens of Georgia,
who later would serve as Vice President of the Confederacy. In this
letter, Lincoln is quoted as saying:


10 SHATTERING THE ICON OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN


For your eyes only
Springfield, Ill. Dec. 22, 1860
Hon. A.H. Stephens

My Dear Sir

Your obliging answer to my short note is just received and for
which please accept my thanks — I fully appreciate the present peril
the country is in, and the weight of responsibility on me.

Do the people of the South really entertain fears that a Republican
administration would directly, or indirectly, interfere with the slaves,
or with them about their slaves? If they do I wish to assure you, as
once a friend, and still, I hope, not as an enemy, that there is no
cause for such fear —

The South would be in no more danger in this respect than it was in
the days of Washington.

I suppose, however, this does not meet the case — You think
slavery is right and ought to be extended while we think it is wrong
and ought to be restricted — That I suppose is the rule — It certainly
is the only substantial difference between us —

Yours very truly,
A. Lincoln


The interesting thing about this letter, which as I say is often
quoted by Lincoln's admirers to show him in the official posture of
the loving father holding out his hands to his erring Southem sons,
is that the letter was never publicized and never received any
attention in the South. The reason for this is that the preamble of the
letter, which Lincoln’s admirers delete in the quotation, forbade
Stephens, a Unionist, upon his honor from showing it to anyone
else, stating that the letter is for his eyes only.

Lincoln and Stephens had served together in Congress and knew
each other very well. Lincoln, it may be anticipated, knew that
Stephens would not make use of the letter in his efforts to keep
Georgia (and thereby the South) in the Union in obedience to
Lincoln’s urgings.

The question then arises of why Lincoln wrote the letter at all.
No one can answer that question with certainly but it would appear
that Lincoln believed that he could entice Stephens into coming
North and siding with the Union in the impending sectional war.
This policy of Lincoln worked with his later Vice-President,
Andrew Johnson, who had also served in Congress with Lincoln,
representing eastern Tennessee, and who went North and supported
the Union during the War.

Certainly any responsible American would agree that Lincoln
should have moved energetically to try to deter the secession
movement. The fact is that Lincoln did not. On his way to
Washington Lincoln visited with a number of the so-called “war
govemors” in the North. These were men like Govemor Andrew


Lincoln and the Coming of The War 11


G. Curtin of Pennsylvania who were in favor of coercing the South
by armed force into remaining in the Union and thus remaining
subject to the North’s tariff laws.

While in Pennsylvania, Lincoln spoke at Independence Hall. He
alluded to the Declaration of Independence and made clear that the
Constitution was in conflict with the Declaration of Independence,
and that it was his intention to reform the Constitution to bring it in
line with the principles of the Declaration. Lincoln stated as follows:


I have never had a feeling politically that did not spring from the
sentiments embodied in the Declaration of Independence... if this
country cannot be saved without giving up that principle [equality] I
was about to say that I would rather be assassinated on this spot than
to surrender it.26


These statements were not calculated to soothe suspicions of
Southern conservatives; they also reflect Lincoln's innate radicalism
and dissatisfaction with the American Constitution. His
dissatisfaction with the limitations imposed on government and
executive power by the Constitution were later to become evident in
his precipitation of the war and his conduct of that war.

As Stephen Douglas pointed out in the United States Senate, as
the secession crisis developed, there were three possible courses for
the United States to take in dealing with the sectional crisis: 1 The
Union could be saved by compromise and reconciliation between
men of good will in both sections; 2 The South could be allowed to
withdraw in peace and set up her own government independent of
the North; 3 The South could be coerced by military force into
remaining subject to the Union. According to Douglas, the best
solution would have been one based on compromise and
reconciliation. The next best would have been to allow the South to
depart in peace. The worst was to resort to violent military force to
coerce the South into the Union like a conquered province.” —

In his inaugural address, Lincoln was ambiguous, making his
famous gesture to the South in its conclusion but also containing
passages stating that he would not recognize secession and would
enforce the laws in all states. His original draft was much more
warlike but Seward convinced him to soften it.

Continuing efforts were made to negotiate a peaceful separation.
Virginia sent three commissioners to meet with Lincoln shortly
prior to Lincoln’s attempt to resupply Fort Sumter, which led to the
bombardment of Fort Sumter and the outbreak of the War.
According to the Virginia commissioners, Lincoln equivocated as to
whether he would resort to armed force to coerce the seceded states


12 SHATTERING THE ICON OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN


back into the Union. Virginia at that point had not seceded but had
placed her legislature in a state of continuous session to await
further developments. The Virginia commissioners had made it
clear that if the Lincoln administration resorted to armed force
against the South, Virginia and the other states of the South which
had not already seceded would also go out and join their seceded
sisters.29

Lincoln equivocated with the commissioners. However, his
greatest concem voiced to them was, “What about my tariff?’ This
shows once again Lincoln’s committment to the huge vested
industrial and financial interests of the North. The war in Lincoln’s
mind had to be fought to establish the supremacy of that financial
oligarchy. The tariff under Lincoln was instated with a vigor and
was raised to unparalleled heights.3! This economic policy of anti-
Southern tariffs and economic exploitation of the South was to be
continued for almost eighty years after the war and was only
abandoned in the face of the crisis of World War II.22

Lincoln after his inauguration temporarized and maneuvered. All
proposals in the so-called “Peace Congress” failed, receiving no
support from the administration. It was necessary to provoke the
South into firing the first shot so as to rally Northern opinion, at
that point strongly divided, behind a war to coerce the South. This
was achieved by dispatching resupply ships to Fort Sumter, thus
breaking his commitments and assurances to the South that he
would not reinforce the Federal forts in the South.33

When the news of the planned resupply of Fort Sumter reached
the South, the bombardment of the fort was begun. Lincoln then
used the act of firing upon the American flag to rally Northen
opinion to his cause and put up a public pretence that the situation in
the South was merely that of a minority of conspirators preventing
the expression of the true Union sentiments of the loyalist majorities
in the South. Lincoln may have believed this himself, because he
always overestimated his ability to divide the South and to provoke
animosity between the social classes in the South. It would not be
until the war had been raging for over a year that Lincoln would
realize that this was not to be.

After the surrender of Fort Sumter, Lincoln issued an executive
proclamation calling for 75,000 volunteers to form an army to
invade the South. Virginia and the other remaining Souther states
withdrew and the Confederacy assumed its basic geography.

In 1848 during his efforts to oppose the war with Mexico,
Lincoln had attacked President Polk upon the floor of the House for
having sent units of the United States Army into a disputed border


Lincoln's Conduct of The War 13


region between Mexico and the United States. Lincoln said that the
President’s action violated the Constitution’s requirement that only
Congress could declare war. Lincoln’s own action in raising an
army by Executive Order was a far greater violation of these same
provisions of the Constitution dealing with the declaration of war,
than the alleged violations of President Polk which he had attacked.
The “Executive Order Army” could be said to be the precursor of
the whole litany of executive orders which have been a favorite
device of presidents from the Roosevelt administration onward. The
war governors, nevertheless, hastened to provide Lincoln with the
militia units and volunteers which he needed to commence the
hostilities and the war was on.

The efforts of true American patriots like Stephen A. Douglas to
save the Union by conciliation and compromise had been
successfully thwarted. Lincoln had achieved his opportunity to
rededicate the nation to the radical principles of the Declaration of
Independence and to get around the impediment of the Constitution.


4. Lincoln’s Conduct of the War


A civil war is usually marked by an intensity in feeling and an
atrociousness of conduct which is often lacking in wars between
rival powers. It is fair to say that the War between the States was
waged by the Lincoln administration with a barbarity rarely equalled
in any other war in American history.

Lincoln suspended the writ of habeas corpus throughout the
nation. He assumed the power to close newspapers and in fact
closed hundreds of them in the North which dared criticize his
policies. He arrested elected officials, including former members of
Congress, who opposed him.35

Vice-President John C. Breckenridge, who finished second to
Lincoln in electoral votes in the 1860 election, presided over the offi-
cial election and swore in his successor, Hannibal Hamlin. Brecken-
ridge, a Kentuckian, was opposed to disunion and to Lincoln. His
criticism of Lincoln was censored and the Associated Press was
barred from reporting his remarks. Breckenridge remained in
Washington until after the First Battle of Manassas, hoping and
working for peace.36 He later became a Confederate general.

The first taste of what was to come in the South in the course of
the war was seen in the border states. In Missouri, the Anglo-
Saxon population was disarmed and the state was garrisoned with
volunteer units of Germans who could be counted on to support the
Lincoln administration. The Anglo-Saxon population of the whole
westem tier of counties in Missouri were deported from their homes


14 SHATTERING THE ICON OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN


by General Ewing’s General Order Number 11, which depopulated
the region by forcibly evacuating the women and children on the
shortest of notice, along with buming their houses and stealing their
property. Among those experiencing this deportation and expropria-
tion was the mother of later President Harry S. Truman. The
memories of the sufferings she and her family had endured while
she was a small child stayed with Mrs. Truman throughout her life.
On one occasion the aspiring young politician told his mother that
he had been invited to dinner at the house of a prominent family in
Kansas City. His mother admonished him to tum the silver over and
check the hallmark because, “It’s probably ours.” On another occa-
sion, Truman showed his mother his new National Guard uniform
only to be ordered out of the house because the pants were blue.

In Maryland, Kentucky and Missouri, Northern troops fired on
pro-Southern demonstrators, dispersed legislatures, expelled elected
officials and otherwise demonstrated that no respect for
constitutional rights or liberties would be shown during the course
of the war.

It is amazing that the Lincoln cultists have been able to shield
Lincoln from the Northern atrocities committed during the war
under his tenure as Commander-in-Chief of its armies. The
standard line on this point, usually implied rather than stated, is that
Lincoln sat in the White House exuding love for Southerners, in
blissful ignorance of what Sherman, Ewing, Pope, Butler and
others were doing. This, of course, is unworthy of belief and is an
impossibility, given the widespread jubilant publicity in the North
over the depredations of the Northern armies against the Southem
people.3”

General Ewing’s General Order Number 11 in Missouri was
merely a taste of what was to come throughout the South. The most
famous and widely known example of Northem atrocities was the
campaign of General William Tecumseh Sherman in Georgia. No
portion of this country has ever felt the scourge of war like the State
of Georgia experienced it.

The city of Atlanta, after its surrender, was bumed to the ground,
and only a handful of churches and a few outlying residences
escaped the holocaust. More than 4,000 edifices were burned,
which was approximately 92% of the city. Only 450 buildings of
any sort escaped this ruthless burning, in a city which had a
population of 14,000. Captain Daniel Oakey of the Second
Massachusetts Volunteers recounted the buming of Atlanta as
follows: “Sixty thousand of us witnessed the destruction of Atlanta,
while our post band and that of the 33rd Massachusetts played


Lincoln’s Conduct of The War 15


martial airs and operatic selections.”’38 Like the bombing of Dresden,
this massive destruction of civilian property was of no military
importance. On November 15, 1864, the march of the Northem
troops across Georgia from Atlanta to Savannah began. Sherman
created a charred avenue over 40 miles wide, destroying all
railroads, seizing all provisions, pillaging, plundering and buming.
There was no military force available to obstruct his course.%?

The devastation in Georgia was so complete that entire commun-
ities disappeared never to be heard of again. Perhaps the most
dramatic of these occurred at the milltown of New Manchester on
Sweetwater Creek in Douglas County, Georgia. The Union forces
had occupied the town without a shot being fired on July 2, 1864.
Most of the workers in the mill were women and were told to retum
to their homes. They were told that they would be taken out of the
path of the advancing army. The mill was destroyed and the town
was placed under guard. On July 8, the entire town, including the
homes of the workers, was bumed to the ground. Having
destroyed the entire town, only the population remained, most of
them women and children with a few men. The women and
children were separated from the men and herded into wagons. The
wagon train then set off for Marietta, Georgia, some 16 miles
away. During the joummey the women were forced to endure the
sexual advances of the Union soldiers. In Marietta the group was
joined by a similar group of deported women from Roswell,
Georgia. On July 20, the entire group of women and children were
shipped by train from Georgia to Louisville, Kentucky.*° Not one
woman or child is known to have retumed to New Manchester. To
the credit of the North, even in that section, there was strong
opposition to the policy of deporting women and children.

Are we really to believe that Abraham Lincoln knew nothing of
the depredations of Sherman’s troops? The atrocious deeds of his
troops were reported widely throughout the Northern press and
extended over a period of many months, not ending until the final
surrender of the Confederacy, by which time Sherman had similarly
torched Columbia, South Carolina, and laid waste to parts of
Georgia, South Carolina, and North Carolina. Sherman, besides
his legendary “War is hell” comment, wrote his wife in Savannah,
Georgia, of popular opinion of the Northem liberators: “They
regard us just as the Romans did the Goths and the parallel is not
unjust.””41

However, one should not be too hasty in condemning Lincoln.
Lincoln shared the democratic sensitivity to deportations which
certainly justify his being included in the trinity of Lincoln, Wilson


16 SHATTERING THE ICON OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN


and F.D.R. on the subject of deportations. Not all deportations were
tolerated by the White House during the war. Thus for instance
when General Grant ordered Jewish speculators expelled from
Tennessee, Lincoln quickly issued a peremptory order to Grant,
rescinding his order and rebuking him for having deported the
Jewish speculators.42 Like Wilson, F.D.R. and other ideological
descendants of Lincoln, Lincoln knew where a democracy has to
draw the line. After all, a distinction has to be made between Anglo-
Saxon women and children, textile workers and farmers, and
Jewish speculators.

Nor were the outrages of the Northem armies confined to the
states of Georgia and South Carolina. In Virginia, for example,
between July 18 and July 23, 1862, General John Pope issued four
general orders providing that the Union army would as far as
possible subsist upon the country, i.e., steal food from the civilians.
All villages and neighborhoods through which the Union forces
marched would be placed “under contribution.” Civilians living
along the line of march would be punished if there were any injuries
to railroads or other roads by bands of unknown guerillas. Also,
Brigadier General Adolph von Steinwehr seized civilians as hostages
so that they could be executed if any of his soldiers were killed by
unknown persons. (One recalls the righteous indignation
periodically vented at Germans for reprisals taken against civilians
for guerilla actions of the “gallant resistance” in World War II.)
Those refusing to take the oath of allegiance to the United States
would be banished from their homes; if found at any point within
the Federal lines or in the rear, they would be executed as spies.
Anyone who communicated with the enemy was subject to the
death penalty. As Hudson Strode points out in his marvelous
biography of Jefferson Davis, a mother who sent her son a letter
could be regarded as a spy.*3 Pope also proceeded to arm the
recently-freed slaves against the whites. General McClellan deserves
this country’s admiration for denouncing Pope as “an upstart
braggart” and a man who mistook brutality in war for power.

President Jefferson Davis writing to General Robert E. Lee,
reacted to Pope’s orders as follows:


We find ourselves driven by our enemies in their steady progress
towards a practice which we abhor and which we are vainly struggling
to avoid. Some of the military authorities of the United States seem to
suppose that better success will attend a savage war in which no quarter
is to be given and no sex to be spared. For the present, we renounce
the right of retaliation on the innocent and shall continue to treat the
private enlisted soldiers of General Pope's army as prisoners of war;


Lincoln’s Conduct of The War 17


but if, after notice to the government in Washington, these savage
practices are continued, we shall be reluctantly forced to the last resort
of accepting war on the terms chosen by our foes, until the outraged
voice of the common humanity forces a respect for the recognized
Tules of war.

You are therefore instructed to communicate to the Commander in
Chief of the Armies of the United States the contents of this letter —
to the end that he may be notified of our intention not to consider any
— hereafter captured from General Pope’s army as prisoners of
war,


General Lee also wrote to the United States govemment
condemning Pope’s practices and waming of the results they would
lead to. While General Halleck refused to accept Lee’s letter
because of its insulting statements about the United States
goverment, nevertheless Pope’s orders were modified and von
Steinwehr was reprimanded for the conduct of his troops.“

Like his ideological descendants, Wilson and F.D.R., Lincoln
did not hesitate to cooperate with antagonistic ethnic groups against
his own people. Thus the armies of the North were swelled with
hundreds of thousands of mercenary soldiers from Europe, lured to
the United States by a circular known as “the notorious Number
19” in the South. This circular from William H. Seward offered
inducement in the form of pay and bounties to enlist in the service
of the North, which already enjoyed an advantage in numbers of
four times the White population of the South. The circular was
evasive about service in the Army. Consul General John Bigelow in
Paris organized a network of immigration agencies across Europe
offering free land under the Homestead Act of 1862. After the war
Bigelow stated that the tremendous success of recruiting of these
foreign mercenaries accounted for the “mysterious repletion of our
amy during the four years of war.’’47

Large numbers of Irish and German mercenaries arrived to assist
in the suppression of the South. According to the New York
Herald, almost 150,000 immigrants were estimated to have joined
the army early in the war. Admiral Porter estimated that a majority
of the eighty thousand seamen were aliens. Ultimately, it is
estimated that between 400,000 and 500,000 mercenary troops
were enrolled in the Northern army to subjugate the South.#

Pope Pius IX wrote a personal letter to Jefferson Davis for the
Confederacy to use in Ireland and in Catholic areas of Germany to
stem the recruitment of such mercenary troops.” This letter was
read in Catholic churchs across Europe to discourage Union recruit-
ment efforts.5° Without the large influx of mercenaries, the primitive
and wasteful military tactics of Grant would have sickened the


18 SHATTERING THE ICON OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN


Norther public far sooner than it did.

Southem prisoners of war also seemed to have escaped Lincoln’s
much acclaimed magnanimity. The death rate of Southem prisoners
in Northen prison camps was much higher than the rate of
Northern prisoners in Southem P.O.W. camps. To this disparity
must be added the fact that the North could not claim lack of food or
medicine as a reason for the horrifying high death rate in the
prisons. In fact, the North refused to permit the shipment of
medicine or food to Union prisoners in Souther hands. Jefferson
Davis offered to pay two or three times the market price for
medicine in commodities such as cotton, tobacco or even gold for
the exclusive use of Northem prisoners, to be dispensed by
Northern surgeons. This offer was ignored by Lincoln. Finally, the
Confederates offered to release 13,000 of the most desperate cases
without an equivalent exchange by the Lincoln govemment. The
Lincoln administration waited from August to October to collect the
prisoners. After they were released, atrocity photographs of the
men were circulated in the North to show how the typical prisoner
in Southern hands was supposedly treated.5!

Sherman used Southern prisoners of war to clear mine fields by
marching them back and forth across land outside Savannah where
mines were suspected. Southem prisoners were also herded in front
of Northern emplacements under Confederate artillery fire so as to
force Southemers to fire on their own men. Thus in the siege of
Charleston, 50 Confederate officers were placed in a holding pen in
front of Fort Wagner on Morris Island, so as to expose them to the
fire of Confederate batteries shelling the Northem positions. On
June 23, 1864, an order was issued to this effect from the office of
the Commissary-General of Prisoners in Washington, D.C.52 Once
again, the idea that Lincoln was ignorant of the atrocious conditions
under which Souther prisoners were held or the misuse of such
prisoners is not tenable.

There is a French saying: the more things change, the more they
remain the same. A book that has gotten fairly widespread
distribution in the United States in the last year, called The Long
Surrender, is worth reading because it shows us that we Americans
are no more moral than foreign peoples. We have committed the
same kind of war crimes that other people have committed. During
the height of the hullabaloo raised over the Bitburg visit by Reagan,
I learned of the disrespect shown to the Southern war dead in the
course of the war. Among things cited by Burke Davis in The Long
Surrender was the fact that after the Battle of Sharpsburg in
Maryland, the Northemers announced that they would not pernit


Lincoln’s Conduct of The War 19


anyone to accord Christian burials to the Southem soldiers of war
— they ordered the bodies to be left out to rot and to decompose.
Only after the rot had gotten to the point where the public’s health
was being endangered were the rotted remains scooped together and
buried in unmarked common ground.53

Likewise after the war — of course, this can’t be laid to
Lincoln’s account since he too was dead — the North posted
soldiers at military cemeteries to prevent Southern women from
putting flowers on the graves of their deceased husbands, fathers,
sons and brothers.*4

When Richmond fell another interesting little tidbit of American
history occurred. Lincoln’s subordinates ordered that the Episcopal
churches, in which it is the custom to pray for the leader of the
country, were to pray for Abraham Lincoln in conquered areas of
the South. If they refused to pray for Abraham Lincoln, Northem
troops were to take the priest away from the altar, thrust him out of
the church, close the church and turn the church over to Northem
denominations.

Another development in the course of the war which shows
something of the barbarity with which it was waged is the famous
incident involving Benjamin Butler in New Orleans. General Butler
was one of the most ruthless and cruel Northern generals. When he
occupied New Orleans he embarked upon a course of insult and
abuse toward the civilian population. There were hardly any males
of military age left in New Orleans. They had all been sent off to the
army, so that the women were deprived of their sons, husbands and
fathers to protect them. It was apparently inconceivable to Butler
that these women would not welcome their Northern conquerors
under the circumstances of the war and he took umbrage at the fact
that one Souther lady spat at a Norther soldier who persisted in
making advances toward her. When Butler heard of this he issued
his Order Number 28 which read as follows:


As the officers and soldiers of the United States have been subject
to repeated insults from the women, calling themselves “ladies” of New
Orleans in retum for the most scrupulous non-interference and courtesy
on our part [it is to be noted that there were Negro troops among the
occupying army] it is ordered that hereafter when any female shall, by
word, gesture or movement insult or show contempt for any officer or
soldier of the United States she shall be regarded and held liable to be
treated as a woman of the town plying her avocation.55


This in essence was a “right to rape” order which he issued to his
troops and he undoubtedly, given his personality, was gratified by
the effect it worked upon the civilian population. I assume that he


20 SHATTERING THE ICON OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN


was also astonished at the outrage that it aroused around the world,
because the order redounded to the great discredit of the United
States. Palmerston, the British Prime Minister, wrote to Charles
Francis Adams, the U.S. Minister in London the following
conceming Butler’s order:


I will venture to say that no example can be found in the history of
civilized nations till the publication of this order of a general guilty
in cold blood of so infamous an act as deliberately to hand over the
female inhabitants of a conquered city to the unbridled license of an
unrestrained soldiery.55


Later he said to the English Parliament: “It is a proclamation to
which I do not scruple to attach the epithet ‘infamous.’ Any English-
man must blush to think that such an act has been committed by one
belonging to the Anglo-Saxon race.”

Likewise the French Minister in Washington, Mercier, who was
concemed because so many of the women in New Orleans were of
French extraction, issued strong remonstrances from the French
government. Finally, Lincoln relieved Butler of his command —
but not because of Butler’s treatment of the civilians of New
Orleans; not because Butler and his brother were believed to be
selling supplies through the black market to the Confederates; not
because Butler ordered a civilian hanged: Lincoln did not remove
Butler for these reasons. It was when Butler began confiscating
foreign property and all of the foreign consuls united and objected
to his behavior in a unanimous letter to Washington that Butler was
removed. Lincoln’s reaction to the complaints was to give Butler
the assignment of Commander of the Department of Virginia and
North Carolina and Commissioner of Prisoner-of-War
Exchanges.5¢ What Lincoln expected of prisoner of war exchanges
can be gauged from this appointment.

When Lincoln appointed Butler he also warned Butler that if he
were captured, “He [Jeff Davis] has a price on your head and will
hang you for sure.” This was the man Lincoln expected would be
able to ensure humane treatment for prisoners of war and their
exchange. The Confederate commissioner at first refused to meet
with Butler. A few months after Butler’s appointment, Grant
ordered all further exchanges to cease.

Lincoln’s depredations in the course of the war were not
confined, however, to the South. As mentioned above Lincoln also
interfered with the functioning of constitutional government in the
North by arresting elected representatives of the people and holding
them for military trial.5? By Executive Order he closed down


Lincoln’s Conduct of The War 21


hundreds of newspapers in the North which criticized the war. He
abolished the writ of habeas corpus and is estimated to have held as
many as 20,000 civilians in detention without trial.58 The suffering
of the North, while not as horrific as that of the South, especially
since the Norther civilian population at large escaped its severity,
was none the less very real. The battle losses were far in excess of
anyone’s expectations.59

In this regard it is worth noting the famous letter to Lidia P.
Bixby which Lincoln cultists love to cite. The text of the famous
letter is as follows:


Dear Madam:

I have been shown in the files of the War Department a statement of
the Adjutant General of Massachusetts, that you are the mother of five
sons who have died gloriously on the field of battle.

I feel how weak and frivolous must be any words of mine which
could attempt to beguile you from the grief of a loss overwhelming.
But I cannot refrain from tendering to you the consolation that may
be found in the thanks of the Republic they died to save.

I pray our Heavenly Father may assuage the anguish of your
bereavement, and leave you only the cherished memory of the loved
and lost, and the solemn pride that must be yours, to have laid so
costly a sacrifice on the altar of Freedom.

Yours, sincerely and respectfully,

A Lincoln®


This letter received much publicity in the North, calculated as it
was to touch the heart of any reader.

Those of us who are not Lincoln admirers may see in it a sterling
example of the humbug and hypocrisy that is an inescapable part of
any democracy. Lincoln’s own son, Robert Todd Lincoln, was of
military age and was also a resident of Massachusetts during the
bloodletting of the War between the States. Unlike Mrs. Bixby’s
sons, however, Abraham Lincoln’s son fought the war at Andover
and Harvard. Only in the closing months of the War did young
Robert finally see military service. His service was confined to
serving on General Grant's staff where he enjoyed a bird’s eye
view of the war’s conclusion with the rank of Captain and Assistant
Adjutant General.®

But Lincoln’s behavior in sheltering his son from the war at the
same time he was consigning the sons of so many Northem
mothers to battle contrasts sharply with the behavior of Robert E.
Lee and other Southem leaders. Most of the sons of Southem
leaders fought in the war. There was a famous example in one battle
in which Lee was riding by an artillery unit. It was a hot day and


22 SHATTERING THE ICON OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN


the men had stripped themselves of their uniforms. They were
blackened by the smoke from the cannons. As Lee rode by, one
private, black with powder, ran out of the unit and spoke to the
General. Lee said: “Well, my man, what can I do for you?” The
artilleryman replied to him, “Why, General, don’t you know me?”
It was Robert E. (“Rob”) Lee, Jr., Lee’s son and namesake in the
thick of battle. Another of Lee’s sons, William Fitzhugh Lee, would
be captured about the middle of the war, and Custis Lee would later
be taken prisoner by the North in the closing days of the war.62

Finally, most Americans accept as an article of faith that had
Lincoln lived he would have conducted a policy of magnanimity
toward the South during Reconstruction. In view of the methods by
which he provoked the war and the methods by which he waged the
war, such is mere supposition. There are various statements of
Lincoln's that are cited (that he was going to treat them as if they
had never left, and all of that) but since Lincoln spoke out of both
sides of his mouth, not too much credit can be laid to such remarks.

For example, Lincoln indicated that he was in favor of Negro
suffrage in Louisiana, which would have placed the white
Louisianans in a politically untenable position. He was upset when
the Unionist—-dominated legislature of the Reconstruction
govemment did not grant suffrage to Negroes and he expressed a
desire that Negro suffrage be granted.® Indeed, after Lincoln’s last
cabinet meeting Attomey General Joshua Speed, an advocate of
Negro suffrage, told Chief Justice Salmon P. Chase that Lincoln
“never seemed so near our views.” Of course, after Lincoln’s
assassination, Negroes were given the right to vote and they were
manipulated by Northem carpetbaggers into passing harsh laws
against the formerly rebellious, white, Southern population.


5. Lincoln and His Place in American History


What then is the proper place of Abraham Lincoln in American
history and why they should we as Revisionists question Abraham
Lincoln?

The proper place of Abraham Lincoln in American history is as
part of the liberal trinity of F.D.R., Wilson and Lincoln. He had the
same values they had. He advanced the country toward unlimited
government as they did. He was willing to use foreigners and
minority groups against his own people. He was willing to have a
selective “democratic” conscience when it came to subjects like
deportations. He properly ought to be considered as a major liberal
force, as someone who moved the country toward the left and


Lincoln and His Place in American History 23


toward the situation which exists today. He successfully defeated
the South. The labors of the South for its freedom were all in vain.
Seventy-five percent of the white male population of military age
served in the Southern armies but could not overcome the disparity
in numbers of the North’s mercenaries.* The cherished dream of
Southern independence was not to be. Lincoln should be seen as an
example of the amazing inability of Americans to assess their
history objectively because while some things may be little known,
certainly everyone has heard of General Sherman’s march to the
Sea. We cannot exonerate Abraham Lincoln from this atrocity. Yet
somehow the question is never even asked by Americans — if
Lincoln was so wonderful and magnanimous and kind and good,
why did the March to the Sea take place?

The Lincoln myth exemplifies the lack of historical sense and
objectivity of Americans, the ability to accept “official” history
even in the face of obvious facts.


Notes


1. See, for example, Eric Foner, “Lincoln, Bradford and the Conservatives,”
The New York Times, February 13, 1981.

2. Burke Davis, The Long Surrender (New York: Random House, 1985),
pp. 108-09, 203.

3. Dwight G. Anderson, Abraham Lincoln: The Question for Immortality
(New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1982), p. 66. Ward Hill Lamon, one of
Lincoln's closest friends, wrote: “He perceived no reason for i
his convictions, but he did perceive many good and cogent reasons for
not making them public.”

4. Edgar Lee Masters, Lincoln, the Man (New York: Dodd, Mead & Co.
1931), pp. 40-3; Robert W. Johansen, Stephen A. Douglas (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1973), pp. 54-5.

5. Reinhard H. Luthin, The Real Abraham Lincoln (Englewood Cliffs, New
Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1960), p. 178.

6. David L. Hoggan, The Myth of the New History (Torrance, California:
Institute for Historical Review, 1985), p. 72 et. seq.

7. Carl Sandburg, Abraham Lincoln (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons,
1926), Volume 1, p. 367. Sangamon Edition (referred herein as “SE”).

8. Sandburg, Vol. I, p. 369 SE.

9. Masters, pp. 97-8.

10. Johansen, p. 53.

11. Masters, p. 81.

12. Masters, p. 82.

13. Dee Alexander Brown, Hear the Lonesome Whistle Blow: Railroads in
the West (New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1977), pp. 10-12.
This book also details the Republicans’ use of the railroads as a
political tool and weapon during and after the War between the States.

14. Sandburg, Vol. 2, pp. 103—04 SE.


16.
17.


B RSE


23


REBBESS


. Ellis Gibbs Amal, The Shore Dimly Seen


SHATTERING THE ICON OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN


Johansen, see general chapters XXIX and XXX.

Sandburg, Vol. 2, p. 159 SE.

Carl Sandburg, Reader's Digest Illustrated Edition Abraham Lincoln: The
Prairie Years and the War Years (Pleasantville, New York: The Reader's
Digest Association, 1970), p. 136. (“RD”)


. Luthin, p. 238. It is worth pointing out that Lincoln got the same


percentage of the vote as Fremont received in 1856 while the combined
Douglas-Breckenridge slates increased the Democratic popular vote.
This does not include Bell, who got nearly one third of Lincoln's
popular vote total. The Douglas-Breckenridge vote increased from 45%
(1.8 million) to 47% (2.2 million).

Luthin's chapter 16 outlines this nicely.

Luthin, p. 242.

loc. cit.

loc, cit.

op. cit., p. 243.

loc. cit. Lincoln “pondered over patronage” while the Union dissolved.
Alexander Hamilton Stephens, A Constitutional View of the Late War
Between the States, Its Causes, Character, Conduct and Results (New
York: National Publishing Company, 1868), Volume II, p. 266.

Sandburg, Vol. 3, p. 73 SE; Masters, p. 380.

Johannsen, p. 850.

Hudson Strode, Jefferson Davis, Confederate President (New York:
Harcourt, Brace & World, 1959), p. 8.

C.R. Vaughan, D.D., Editor, Discussions by Robert Dabney, DD.,
LLD., Volume IV (Harrisburg, Virginia: Sprinkle Publications, 1979),
pp. 87-100, quoting the memoirs of Colonel John B. Baldwin, a
member of the Virginia Peace Commission.


. Vaughan, p. 94.


M.E. Bradford, Remembering Who We Are; Observations of a Southern
Conservative (Athens, Georgia: The University of Georgia Press, 1985),
p. 147. Lincoln raised the tariff from 18.84% to 47.56%. The tariff
stayed above 40% in all but two years from Lincoln's administraion to
the election of Woodrow Wilson. The policy amounted to a bnutally
effective policy of treating the South as a colonial possession
transferring wealth from the South to the Northern plutocrats.

(Philadelphia, Pennsylvania:
JB. Lippi Cc y, 1946), pp. 165-185. Ellis Amall was
Sua et Gateaae fat 1943 to 1947. A staunch New Deal
Democrat, he was one of the most liberal governors ever elected in this
history of the State. An example of what Wilmot Robertson styled an
“old believer” liberal, he also appears to be that rarest of all creatures
— an honest Southern liberal whose belief in multi-racialism does not
include the usual hatred for his own people and region. The chapter of
the book referred to in this footnote is a concise and convincing
summary of the Northern exploitation of its Southern colony after the
War for Southem


Independence.
. Strode, Jefferson Davis, Confederate President, pp. 28-31; John Shipley


Tilley, The Coming of the Glory (New York: Stratford House, 1949),
pp. 58-9. See also Masters, pp. 390-96.


. What kind of war did Lincoln expect? The largest single field army in


the Mexican War was 11,000. After calling out the 75,000 militia,


Notes 25


35.


Lincoln on May 3, 1861 authorized enlistment of 82,000 additional
soldiers. On July 4, 1861 he asked for 400,000 volunteers. The First
Battle of Manassas was not fought until July 21, 1861. What did Lincoln
plan to do with over half a million troops? Ludwell H. Johnson, Division
and Reunion: America 1847-77 (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1978),
p. 89.

Bradford, pp. 149-150; Masters pp. 422-23. The mayor of Washington,
D.C., Congressman Vallandigham of Ohio and a large portion of the
Maryland legislature were jailed.

Davis, pp. 69-70.

It is worth noting that Dr. Goebbels did not overlook the Northern
campaign techniques. German propaganda in the Second World War
cited Union conduct as a example of what Europe could expect if the
Americans were to begin their crusading on a broad scale. Evidently the
Nazis felt the Lincoln government would be a model for the Roosevelt
government. An example of this propaganda is printed in the English
language version of Signal.

Those who wish to shield Lincoln from personal responsibility for the
wartime atrocities must grapple with the case of Ivan Basilovitch
Turchin, a Russian cossack in the service of the North.

The little town of Athens, Alabama, a community of 1,200 is perhaps
the only community in America ever to experience the horrors of wars
as waged in Eastern Europe.

On May 2, 1862, Turchin marched his four regiments into the town
and ordered them to stack arms. Turchin then told them he would shut
his eyes to whatever they wished to do to the town’s inhabitants,
according to a reporter for the New York Herald.

Turchin’s men, unleashed on the civilian population, proceeded to loot
stores, private homes, barns and smokehouses. The townspeople who
rushed to the sound of breaking doors and glass were directed away at
bayonet point. Women were reportedly insulted and raped. A pregnant
woman whose husband was thought to have joined guerilla bands
opposing Turchin was so badly mistreated that she miscarried and died.

Turchin established his headquarters in the house of the J.W.S. Donnell
family. Turchin refused to allow doctors into the house to treat Donnell’s
sick daughter who died shortly thereafter. When the Donnells asked that
the brigade band stop playing loud music which was disturbing the sick
and dying girl, Turchin told them that “patriotic music” helped speed a
soul to heaven.

Turchin told fellow officers that all White Southerners would be killed
and their lands divided between the slaves and immigrants.

To the credit of the North native-born federal officers were revolted by
and ashamed of the atrocities and a court martial was convened against
Turchin by Union General Ormsby McKnight Mitchell.

Turchin excused his conduct by claiming that some residents had spat


38.


39.


41.
42.


SHATTERING THE ICON OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN


at his soldiers and that the townspeople had had the effrontery to cheer
Southern cavalry men who had fought Turchin the day before.

However, Brigadier General James A. Garfield, who later was to
become President of the United States, ruled that Turchin should be
kicked out of the service because of his atrocious conduct.

Despite the laudable and courageous actions of native-born federal
officers in convening the court martial and seeking turchin's removal
from the army, their commander-in-chief in Washington had different
ideas.

Abraham Lincoln rushed through congress a promotion for Turchin to
the rank of brigadier general. Turchin was welcomed home to Chicago
by a cheering mob of hate-crazed Northerners and a band playing “Lo
the conquering Hero comes.” (It is rather fitting that this particular tune
and song should have been played to welcome Turchin inasmuch as it
was composed in honor of the Duke of Cumberland (“Bill the Butcher”
who directed the cruel, bloody and savage terror campaign against the
Scottish supporters of the Stuarts in the 1745 uprising).

Lincoln’s actions in promoting Turchin and thwarting the court martial
convened by his own native-born officers are difficult to reconcile with
the idea that the atrocious conduct of Northern troops occurred without
either his knowledge or his consent. (The Birmingham News, Feb. 22,
1987, page 1A).

Joseph T. Derry, A.M., edited by General Clements A. Evans, Georgia:
Confederate Military History (Secaucus, New Jersey: The Blue and Gray
Press), Volume IV, p. 360.

Derry, pp. 360-69; Masters, pp. 455-62. See also F.J.P. Veale, Advance
to Barbarism (Costa Mesa, California: Institute for Historical Review,
1979), p. 122: “Sherman only executed the most dramatic and devastat-
ing example of the strategy that was laid down by President Lincoln
himself... That Lincoln determined the basic lines of Northern military
strategy has been well established in such books as Collin R. Ballard’s
The Military Genius of Abraham Lincoln and T. Harry Williams’ Lincoln
and His Generals. Grant only efficiently applied Lincoln’s military
policy in the field...”

Atlanta Journal Constitution, Atlanta Weekly Magazine, April 3, 1983,
p. 22.

Strode, Jefferson Davis, Confederate President, p. 125.

Sandburg, Vol. 4, p. 176. The New York Times comment on this incident
is revealing as well: “The order, to be sure, was promptly set aside by
the President but the affront to the Jews conveyed by its issue was not
so easily effaced. A committee of Jews took it upon themselves to thank
{emphasis in original] President Lincoln at Washington for so promptly
annulling the odious order. Against the conduct of this committee the
bulk of Jews vehemently protest. They say that they have no thanks for
an act of simple and imperative justice — but grounds for deep and just


Notes 27


61.


63.


65.


complaint against the government, that General Grant has not been
dismissed from the service.”

Strode, pp. 289-90.

op. cit., p. 290.

op. cit., p. 290-91.

op. cit., p. 291.

op. cit., p. 500.

op. cit., pp. 500-501.

op. cit., p. 501.

There is an Irish song of the era that goes:

“Hey, boys, do take my advice,

“To America I'd have you not to be coming,

“For there’s nothin’ here but war,

“Where the murderin’ cannon roar,

“And I wish I was back in dear ole Erin.”

The Song refers to “Mr. Lincoln’s war” and being handed a gun upon
arrival at the pier.

Strode, pp. 111-13.

Confederate Veteran Magazine, January-February, 1986, p. 7.

Davis, pp. 191-92.

Ibid.

Robert Werlich, “Beast” Butler: The Incredible Career of Union Major
General Benjamin F. Butler (Washington, D.C.: The Quaker Press,
1962), p. 39.

Werlich, pp. 89-90.

Masters, pp. 422-23.

Johnson, p. 125.

General Henry Halleck, General-in-Chief of the Union Armies, wrote to
Sherman in 1864: “It seems little better than murder to give important
commands to men such as Banks, Butler, McClernand, Sigel and Lew,
and yet it seems impossible to prevent it.” (Quoted in Johnson, p. 90.)
Lincoln’s search for a politically “right” general continued.

Sanburg, Vol. 5, pp. 665-69 SE.

Sanburg, pp. 548-49 RD.

Clifford Dowdy, Lee (New York: Bonanza Books, 1965), p. 295.
Stephen B. Oates, Abraham Lincoln: The Man Behind the Myths (New
York: New American Library, 1984), p. 143. Oates is a liberal who
mustered plenty of information about Lincoln's radicalism.

Oates, p. 145.

Marxists have never been in doubt as to Lincoln’s appropriate place (to
their minds) in American history.

Conservative admirers of Lincoln such as George Will, who spearhead-
ed the hullabaloo raised against Professor M.E. Bradford's nomination
to head the National Endowment for the Humanities might be discomfit-
ed to find themselves in the company of Communists and Marxists.


SHATTERING THE ICON OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN


Karl Marx was a fervent Lincoln admirer and exerted his propaganda
efforts in Europe in favor of the North throughout the war.

When the Communists in the Spanish Civil War organized their
International Brigades of foreign volunteers to crush Spanish nationalists
in the 1930's, the American brigade was named appropriately enough
“The Abraham Lincoln Brigade.”

Communists in particular and Marxists in general have always admired
Lincoln as our country’s “greatest” president, as was shown correctly in
the 1987 TV movie “Amerika” which depicted a Communist run USA
in which the cult of Lincoln was carried to even greater lengths by the
new Communist rulers.

On November 24, 1989, the Associated Press reported an interview

with Mao Xinyu, the grandson and still fervent supporter of Mao-Tse-
Tung. Young Mao said he would like to visit America. The sole specific
sights he mention as “must-sees” were Abraham Lincoln’s hometown
and the Lincoln Memorial. “Lincoln was a progressive capitalist
revolutionary uniting the North and the South,” he said. (Atlanta Journal
Constitution, Nov. 24, 1989, p. A-24.)
Cost of the war to the South: approximately 100,000 battle deaths,
200,000 disease deaths, 230,000 wounded of 850,000 in service.
Approximately 62% casualties for the entire war. It has been estimated
that 75% of all Southern white males of military age served in the
Confederate armies. (Johnson).


PENETRATING, HARD-TO-FIND BOOKS


Order these books from


INSTITUTE FOR HISTORICAL REVIEW


P.O. Box 2739 + Newport Beach, CA 92659
Check, money order, Visa or MasterCard accepted.
When ordering, please include 10% of your order value to cover postage.
California residents must add 7.75% sales tax.
Prices valid through 1994


0030 THE ANTICHRIST panei ee y nonin ric salle ale so" opeenctei i ertirareo oa


ty,
introduction is as furious assault on both “religions of the book” as has been lished Ameri
0649 AScawites 1 hs pan : ae Pa
at the Evidence by Judge Wilhelm ich. The German jurist’
brilliant examination of the sick celtaes Sor tarcace Coneaieaties ef one’ taste take
Aca! acaecerbmmstearagron fl chewior bathing seorinlie teamed ater a Sona ried
ry evidence. An Revisionist


while sédliaiag Gonen hdidgrecks Ys hence, Hb., 396
sear'te. siise pp., photos, maps, biblio., winder, $1095


0957 BARNES AGAINST THE BLACKOUT: Essays Against Interventionism by Elmer Barnes, With
sy pesducees Ur poses F Vase: lanetcae Matecion Mary Mau Macnee nw he ea of ov gee
Revisionist voices against interventionism. hor png dmcgtnerceg terme pine tie Bomgay ae frome
and reviews (indexed for the first time ever!) on how America blundered into World War II, and how a
ee ee ee ee ee ee promoted and promotes
perpetual peace” Marshall Plan to the New World Order. Must reading
300 SEMIND im Rawle pon : ;
UR TION: ———— of Today's Mideast Conflict
Robert John. Definitive study of the Establishment treachery dont ii cho he i
hte Pasian homeland, hea Land free reat eons interlopers from eastern Europe.
atk tieeeae a format of the British Middle-East expert's JHR
0198 BURDEN OF EMPIRE: America's Road from Self-Rule to Servitude by Garet Garrett. With
Sacdecura. yrabiadens t C'amiis hear poctach entakanr agine an bee taeioue eons tnbeoed 1
surrender their freedoms under Roosevelt and Truman — freedoms that have never been reclaimed. A
— ~—_ . for = aah ne a prophecy of the internationalist Empire (or New
or r), and an tus to sober stoc! and realisti -
as Shop, ao g ic action for hard-headed American
CAMPAIGN IN RUSSIA: The Waffen SS on the Eastern Front by Leon Degrelle. An unparalleled
pester hh aes hese aerosol te she pre
aus eadrat gh te terro’ sates day aiaes pane 1 Probert
r,
renee Be sprik are, of te Treet Gy” boss


of Auschwitz by Fred A. Leuchter.
edition of the Leuchter Report, with a foreword by Britain's


with diagrams, maps, photos, and presents I
Dadicgs i hnscberhe coed taste; sud ipiolan, x eonle ad ghesenes, have haber America’s |
ee ee or op adpeonag


photos, $20.00
0261 COMMANDO EXTRAORDINARY by Charles Foley. Classic biography of Otto Sko eee
i clbcer Was wee MEE Wars and Ox teroed Wai Wars scesaniit comennata. Real


by 00
0687 THE “CONFESSIONS” OF KURT GERSTEIN by Henri Roques. The famous French university
dissertation which debunks the key “Holocaust” testimony
the anti-German and anti-Catholic hysteria stirred by Rolf Hochhuth’s The Deputy. A scholarly Revisionist
classic! Pb., 318 pp., biblio., index, map, charts, $11.00
0715 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES: Its Sources and Applications by Thomas James
Norton. This is a handbook for citizens as well as public officials. It takes apart the Constitution sentence by
sentence and gives, first, the and historical pope ated preys evap reer a
subsequent histories and applications. An enormous amount of historical scholarship and profound
perspective on all facets of the law of the land our forebears fought to achieve. A great companion piece to
55 Men: The Story of the Constitution by Fred Rodell. Introduction by Dr. Martin A. Larson. Pb. 319 pp.
index $10.95
0707 55 MEN: The Story of the Constitution by Fred Rodell. In 1987 we commemorated the 200th
anniversary of the Constitution of the United States of America. The Constitution and the Bill of Rights (the
first ten Amendments) have proven so effective that only 16 Amendments have been added since 1791.
Despite bloodless and sentimental evocations of the “Founding Fathers," our country’s basic law had a far


$12.95
0008 THE CONTROVERSY OF ZION by Douglas Reed. The London Times foreign correspondent brings


finely woven tapestry of two and a half millennia of Jewish and Gentile history. Ranging from the ancient
writings of Torah and Talmud to The Protocols of Zion, from Weishaupt’s Illuminati to the French and
Russian revolutions to the present day, The Controversy of Zion is the most up-to-date (first published in
1978) and informative synthesis of classical conspiracy theory available today. New edition with Preface by
Ivor Benson, Pb., 588 pp., biblio., index, $12.95

0259 THE CROSS OF IRON by Willi Heinrich. Epic novel of the German Landser (combat infantryman) on
the Eastern Front. A grim, realistic account of the most terrible fighting the world has ever seen, written by
a battle-hardened veteran of the German Wehrmacht. Classic German bestseller. Hb., 456 pp., $17.95
0168 THE CRUISE OF THE RAIDER WOLF by Roy Al . Recounts one of the 20th century's strangest
and most stirring sea adventures — the successful round-the


Wolf sank 135,000 tons of Allied shipping. Hb., 270 pp., $15.95
0326 “DEMOCRACY” IN ISRAEL by Noman F. Dacey. The noted economist and bestselling author (How
to Avoid Probate) tackles a Mideast big lie; that Israel is a beacon of in a sea of Arab tyranny.
See ne mn nny nO oO COE Oe
Pb., 74 pp., $4.00

0389 THE DISSOLUTION OF og mie sib ere N. Sanning, foreword ae
Butz. A masterly, unprecedented and so far unique demographic study of European Jewry 1931-1945,
Dissolution gives the most probable accounting of the actual fate of millions of Jews airily consigned to
nonexistent “gas chambers” by the Holohoaxers. Sanning analyzes the (often fragmentary) census data and
the extraordinary population displacements which occurred before, during, and after World War I, which


others. Pb., 198 pp., illus., $8.00

0196 THE DYNAMICS OF WAR AND REVOLUTION by Lawrence Dennis. The man best known to
revisionists for his role in the FDR's 1944 Sedition Trial was one of the 20th century's most — and
trenchant thinkers. Dennis, who saw the forces that make for international political upheaval up close as a
State diplomat and international banker, defies standard “liberal” and “conservative” shibboleths alike
to the role of over-production and hyper-capitalism, international and debt money in produc-
ing internal chaos (revolution) and external strife (war). Pb., 259 pp., $12.00


0501 THE ESSENE CHRISTIAN FAITH by Dr. Martin A. Larson. Dr. Larson's close of the
Scrolls, or atleast those portions of the breathtaking 1947 archeolopieal ind which ane hee trcelecsd
Prot ls ake aeranet and influence on Christan, World-tenowned Scrolls scholar Milar Burrows
“An enormous amount wo! 0) has ” Hb.
SE 26 iN eso
IN WARTIME by Arthur Ponsonby, M.P. First published in 1928, this volume

authoritatively debunks numerous atrocity lies fabricated circulated about the Germans during World War
I. Learn how professional liars — three decades before the Holocaust lies — manufactured such fakes as
a “German corpse factory,” “the crucified Canadian,” handless
typewriter, scissors and paste to lead millions to misery, mutilation,
Poe 92 ee ges ions concemed to see through government and media les today, and tomorrow.
0955 FLASHPOINT —KRISTALLNACHT 1938: Instigators, Victims and Beneficiaries
At last, a thorough, skeptical, Revisionist study of the 1938 “Crystal Night” incident, bi beg vara
Comtrcace, las 0 cot long stmcing ove oem Miueae Masea Re ae oe

’ iong-
in its actual historical context, and raises tantalizing ns soaad
pod pORCED VAL: Wee pterep te Paled by bn

: When ion F; David H . The

of the origins of the Second World War, which has gone ae Vinca conse eee
first major study of the war's outbreak to utilize Polish
history of the first importance. Bursting with

seminar in modern


siege of the Tuileries, etc. Beautifully written, an indispensable corrective
revolution that forged the modern age in Europe. Pb., 519 pp., index, $8.95
0366 GRUESOME HARVEST: The Allies’ Postwar War Against the German People, by Ralph F. Keeling.
With an introduction by Theodore J. O'Keefe, One of the first books to detail the numerous crimes inflicted
on the Germans after World War II — the mass expulsions, imposed famine, systematic rapine and theft,
occupiers. Bristling with contemporary documentation and
humanitarian outrage, this account of what Time called “history's most .
in every revisionist library. Pb., 151 pp., $9.00 oa nse ering pee _—
0301 THE HOAX OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY by Dr. Arthur R. Butz. The book that sparked
present-day American Holocaust Revisionism, Butz's Hoax remains an study of the
Extermination legend, from Auschwitz to Zyklon. Butz's mastery of the source material and co , Critical eye
— ae as valuable today as when it first appeared 14 years ago. Pb., 369 pp., illus., maps,
0689 THE HOLOCAUST STORY AND THE LIES OF ULYSSES Paul Rassinier. Tenth annive: reissue
of Paul Rassinier (ihe father of Holocaust Revsonisn)'s classic dies of the Geswan rouceernuis cose
breaking sohes Dy te Ponce eneean Jewry. No Revsionis Ubrary is complete without these ground.


of The Lightning and the Sun, Hindu-Nordicist Devi argues passionately beyond
the anthropocentric, recognizing the rights of all living things. A stimulating look at humankind’s custome and
prejudices toward animals—from Jewish ritual slaughter to laboratory — which will provoke,
inform, and perhaps infuriate, humans and “humanists” across the spectrum. Pb., 200 pp., $12.00
0956 INNOCENT AT DACHAU by Joseph Halow, The author, a court at the postwar war crimes
trials held at Dachau, returned to the transcripts -— and his memories of those trials ‘afer re dees
years for a fresh look at how injustice was done to the defendants, and to historical truth, Innocent at
Dachau incorporates the personal experience of a sensitive American observer and original archival research
Fizos. + Maer Revisionist contribution to the study of the postwar trials of the Germans. Pb., 280 pp.
0513 THE JEFFERSON BIBLE: Thomas Jefferson on the Gospels. Separating himself from the
established churches of his day, Jefferson discarded both the Old Testarnent the works of Pied, sad ot
from the Gospels the basic story and teachings of Jesus. In an October 12, 1813 letter to John Adams, he
said jon Lio = easily oo as aoe a dung hill." This is a new edition of the
-suppressed Jefferson , Set in new, lor reading, with an introduction by Bib

wl eon OF TR ain Lara. Po 130, 3.00 nies

Journalist Wilton, Russia co t
of the London Times, was the Sst Western journal %0 teach ie woene of Be mente ne
Tl and his family in Ekaterinburg (Sverdlovsk). This long-suppressed book, first published in 1920 and based


on Wilton’s own investigation and his familiarity with the official White Russian inquest, tells the real story
of who murdered the Romanovs — and why. With an updated (post-Glasnost) introduction and appendix
by Journal of Historical Review editor Mark Weber. Pb., photos, biblio., index, $12.95
0166 THE LIFE AND DEATH OF THE LUFTWAFFE by Werner Baumbach. Stirring, inside account of the
triumph and tragedy of the Third Reich’s air force. For his stunning courage and skill as a JU-88 dive bomber
pilot against British and Soviet forces, author Baumbach became the first German flyer to earn the coveted
Knights Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords. By war's end, this 28-year-old Colonel was chief of the Luftwaffe’s
bomber command. Hb., 224 pp., index, photos. $15.95
0737 LINDBERGH ON THE FEDERAL RESERVE by Charles A. Lindbergh, Sr. How panics are engineered;
origins of the capital vs. labor conflict; how the bankers get the press in their pockets; what the Federal
Reserve Act really accomplished; the real purpose of war; economic and financial evils, and the way out:
expert observations and wise commentary by a man in a position to know—Congressman Charles Lindbergh,
father of the famed aviator. First published in 1923, this book is every bit as relevant today as it was then
—_ b igensm even more so. Pb., 249 pp., index, $9.00
0165 FROM MOSCOW TO BERLIN: Marshal Zhukov’s Greatest Battles by Georgi K. Zhukov. The
t Soviet commander tells how he directed the Red Army’s bitter last-ditch defense of Moscow, master-
minded the encirclement and defeat of the German Sixth Army at Stalingrad, smashed the last great German
counteroffensive of Kursk-Orel, and led-the climatic assault on Hitler's Berlin. Hb., 304 pp., photos, $18.95
0195 THE MYTH OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY: An Evaluation of the Spiritual-Intellectual
Confrontations of Our Age by Alfred Rosenberg. With a preface by Peter Peel, introduction by James
Whisker. The best-known work of the best-known philosopher of National Socialism, The Myth is one of the
supreme expositions of the values of mind and will that differentiate Aryan and Jew, Nordic and Semite, and
lock the races in eternal, existential conflict. Its author paid for this book with his life at the hands of his
captors in Nuremberg. This edition, back in print, continues to be the first and only English-language
translation of this vital work. Cloth, 512 pp., index, $19.00
0662 NO TIME FOR SILENCE by Austin App. A well-established scholar of English literature at the outbreak
of World War II, the late App soon turned his pen to heartfelt calls for a just and humane policy toward
Germany. Here, for the first time under one cover, are fourteen of Austin App’s hardest-hitting Revisionist
booklets and pamphlets. They run the gamut from searing indictments of the crimes of the Allies to
compassionate pleas for justice and mercy for the victims of Yalta and Potsdam. Each is a cry from the heart
— and the head — bursting with facts and insights that the Establishment’s media and academia have long
sought to suppress. Dr. App shirks no theme of contemporary World War II Revisionism, from the Holocaust
hoax to Operation Keelhaul. Pb., 150 pp., $6.95
0044 ONWARD CHRISTIAN SOLDIERS by Donald Day. The Chicago Tribune’s northern Europe
correspondent from 1920-40, Day used his base in Riga, Latvia to report unflinchingly on the realities of
Soviet tyranny and Red subversion in the Baltic. Aho from entering the USSR, fired from the Tribune at
the instance of the U.S. State Department, Day threw in his lot with the brave Finns and their German allies
during their anti-Bolshevist crusade. Onward Christian Soldiers bristles with Day’s insights and
reminiscences of northern Europe — Scandinavia, Germany, Poland, Danzig, Lithuania, and his beloved Latvia,
Estonia, and Finland in the years between the wars. With an introduction by legendary Tribune
correspondent Walter Trohan, Onward Christian Soldiers pulls no punches on the Jewish role in
See e and on Britain and America’s hypocrisy in posing as defenders of Christian civilization. Pb., 207
pp., index, $7.00
0260 PANZER LEADER by Heinz Guderian. A riveting autobiography by the man who designed Hitler’s
Blitzkrieg tactics and then put them into practice — in Poland, in France, in Russia. Guderian’s role on the
German General Staff and his part in judging and condemning the anti-Hitler conspirators of July 20, 1944
make this an indispensable book for understanding Ge ’s war. Hb., 528 pp., illus., index, $17.95
0189 PAVED WITH GOOD INTENTIONS: The Failure of Race Relations in Contemporary America
by Jared Taylor. One of the most important books about race in America to be published in a generation,
Paved with Good Intentions examines unflinchingly, then thoroughly debunks, academia and media's catch-
all explanation for black economic and social failure (“white racism”). Just as important, author Taylor
exposes the hypocrisy and taboo by which America’s political, educational, and communications Establish-
a have made frank and factual discussion about race almost impossible today. Hb., notes, index, 416
pp-, $22.95
0978 PEARL HARBOR: The Story of the Secret War by George Morgenstern. Hailed by Revisionist giants
Barnes, Beard, and Tansill when it appeared shortly after World War II, this classic remains unsurpassed as
a one-volume treatment of America’s Day of Infamy. Pearl Harbor is the indispensable introduction to the
question of who bears the blame for the Pearl Harbor surprise, and, more important, for America’s entry,
through the “back door” into World War II. Pb., 425 pp., index, biblio., maps, $14.95
0377 PERPETUAL WAR FOR PERPETUAL PEACE: A Critical Examination of the Foreign Policy of
Franklin Delano Roosevelt and Its Aftermath. Edited by Harry Elmer Barnes. Out of print since the July
4, 1984 terror bombing of IHR, this is the classic revisionist study of how FDR maneuvered America, against
the wishes of most of its citizens, into war against Germany and Japan, and how FDR’s war policy ended in


betrayal, disillusion, and endless war, cold and hot. Eight revisionist scholars, led by the incomparable
Barnes, in eleven concise, scintillating essays on every aspect of FDR’s secret diplomatic “h military ee

le as a history and a reference. Pb., 740 pp., indexes, $18.00
0241 THE PHILOSOPHY OF ALFRED ROSENBERG by James B. Whisker. An interpretive essay into the
philosophy of Alfred Rosenberg, the most influential National Socialist thinker, who wrote on art,
religion, and Western racial history. Professor Whisker traces the influence predecessors from Justin Martyr
and Meister Eckhart to Nietzsche and Gobineau exercised on Rosenberg, then gives a comprehensive and
highly readable overview of Rosenberg’s philosophy, a mainspring of ideology. Pb., 120 pp., $13.00
0058 THE PHILOSOPHY OF FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE by Henry Mencken. “There is no escaping Nietz-
sche,” writes the quintessential American savant and gadfly, Henry L. Mencken, at the outset of this classic.
Mencken then elucidates the German’s life and philosophy with brilliant pyrotechnics and profound
understanding. A must for the library of anyone who would understand the , beauty, and danger of the
best in modern writing and thought. Pb., 325 pp., $11.00
0383 PRISONER OF PEACE: The Flight to Britain and its Aftermath by Rudolf Hess, ed. by George Pile.
The late martyr’s moving prison letters to his beloved wife, spanning the years of his imprisonment in Eng-
land, Nuremberg and Spandau 1941-1951. These letters, along with other letters and commentary on Hess's
peace mission to England, present an eloquent case for the solitary prisoner of Spandau Fortress — the 20th
century's Man in the Iron Mask — whose only crime was his desire for peace between Germany and
England. Pb., 151 pp., $7.95
0164 THE RED KNIGHT OF GERMANY by Floyd Gibbons. Classic account of the legendary “Red Baron.”
Unforgettable story of Baron Manfred von Richthofen, the First World War German ace who led the “Flying
on gated —— bd — after another. Hb., 383 pp., $18.95

CRET : Electricity, Radiation and Your George Lakh . The

disease-arresting experiments of this Tesla associate, inventor of the aie eae Pons
the field of biological resonance and healing. Fascinating reading. Pb., 214 pp., illus., index, $9.95
0948 THE SECRET TEAM by Fletcher Prouty. A career officer in Army intelligence who worked intimately
with the CIA exposes the harmful effects of the Agency's “‘covert action” interventions around the globe —
and at home. Prouty draws relentless conclusions his study and first-hand observation of the CIA's thirst
for power and control during the first decades of America’s postwar imperium. Pb., 512 pp., index, $14.95
0254 STUKA PILOT by Hans Ulrich Rudel. The classic account of Germany's dive bombers on the Eastern
Front during WWII, written by the Third Reich’s most decorated hero. Hans Rudel flew over 2,500 missions
and destroyed over 500 tanks, 150 gun emplacements, 800 further combat vehicles, and the Soviet
battleship Marat plus a Red cruiser! Hb., 231 pp., $14.95
0616 A TRIAL ON TRIAL: The Great Sedition Trial of 1944 by Lawrence Dennis and Maximilian St.
George. A first-hand account of the Roosevelt regime’s attempt to throttle non-interventionist and anti-Co-
mmunist dissent through “guilt by association” and “conspiracy” ploys. Defendant Lawrence Dennis and trial
lawyer St. George present a brilliant, lucidly reasoned critique of the closest thing America has yet had to a
Soviet show trial. Must reading for patriots, civil libertarians, and everyone interested in this country’s past
— and future. Pb., 502 pp., illus. index, $12.00
0615 WHO STARTED THE FIRST WORLD WAR? by Harry Elmer Barnes. A masterful over-view of the
controversy over the war-guilt question in World War I 5 he Revisionist founding father. Best brief antidote
to the anti-German propaganda. Contains a glossary of the major participating personalities by the late Dr.
Peter H. Peel. Pb., 66 pp., $4.00
0935 WHY I SURVIVED THE A-BOMB by Akira Kohchi. Hiroshima native Kohchi was a 16-year-old
schoolboy when his city was devastated by the first nuclear attack in history. He tells the dramatic, personal
story of how he experienced and survived the bombing, and provides a gripping account of his search for
his family through the burning, radioactive rubble of the doomed city. Then Kohchi recalls how, years later,
he forced himself to come to grips with his past and uncover the facts about the bombing. and the history
that led up to it. The author’s remarkable frankness and deep hum
of a war crime which dwarfs almost all others a unique and indi:


= photos, $19.95

0169 WITH ROMMEL IN THE DESERT by Heinz Werner Schi
campaign and the German general who made it the stuff of legenc
own staff, here is a unique look at both the martial and hum
enigmatic figures of the Second World War. Hb., 240 pp., $15.9
0733 THE ZIONIST FACTOR by Ivor Benson. Developments in
mankind into the catastrophe of another war make it more

as one of the major forces shaping the history of our century.
Benson, unravels the history, mystery and phenomenal power of
216 pp., $11.00


Ready for more uncompromising
historical honesty? Subscribe today to


The Journal of
Historical Review


Now in its exciting


The Journal of new full-sized bi-


2 E r monthly format, The
Historical Review [QgziSESS a
been expanded to
embrace a broader
historical revisionism.
We're taking on a
wider range of issues
with the same high re-
gard for facts and the
same keen analysis on
which Journal readers
have come to rely.

And now that The
Journal incorporates
the IHR Newsletter, you
have a single source
for an abundance of
interesting, insightful
news and thoughtful
commentary on issues
that affect you, your
community and the
world around you. And
you'll be kept right up to date as well on the activities of the
world’s foremost institution dedicated to setting the record
straight and keeping it that way — the Institute for Historical
Review.

The new Journal is now published more frequently, it’s
easier to read, more visually appealing, and addresses a
broader range of your interests. But most important is what
has not changed — the distinctive qualities that have always
distinguished The Journal: its taboo-smashing iconoclasm, its
independent, scholarly perspective on issues and events, and
its uncompromising devotion to historical honesty.

Subscriptions are still only $40 per year, $65 for two years,
or $90 for three years (foreign subscribers please add $10 per
year). Please remit by check, money order, Visa or MasterCard.


Why not subscribe today? And why not give a gift subscription
to a friend, or local public or college library?
Institute for Historical Review
P.O. Box 2739 » Newport Beach, CA 92659


ABRAHAM LINCOLN
FREEMASON


AN ADDRESS


Delivered before Harmony Lodge No. 17, F.A.A.M.
Washington, D. C., January 28, 1914


By
DR. L. D. CARMAN, P. M.


With an Appendix Containing the Actions
taken by the
Masonic Grand Lodges of the United States
on Lincoln’s Death


PRINTED FOR PRIVATE DISTRIBUTION
1914


ABRAHAM LINCOLN, FREEMASON.


IVorshipful Master and Brethren:

The subject of my remarks this evening will be Abraham
Lincoln, Freemason. It may be regarded as somewhat  pre-
sumptuous to give this address this title, when Lincoln is not
considered as one of the Masonie Presidents of the United
States, and while *Abrahain Lincoln and Freemasonry” inight
be deemed by some as a preferable title, Abraham Lincoln, Free-
mason, is nevertheless the subject.

It once was facetiously attempted to preve that Lincoln was a
Mormon because in one of his early speeches he made a number
of references to throat cutting, the penalty of the first Mormon
oath, and because in another address shortky before his first in-
auguration he stated that sooner than surrender a certain prin-
ciple he would have his body burned to ashes and those ashes
scattered to the winds of heaven, the peculiar language in the
third Mormon oath.

While it has been said that anything ean be proved in Masonry,
it is not attempted to prove that Lincoln was a member of the
secret socicty called Mormons or of the secret society called
Freemasons, but a number of interesting facts concerning Lin-
coln and his connection with our Order are presented for con-
sideration.

One of Lincoli’s most intimate friends in carly life was Bow!-
ing Green, an earnest Mason, a Past Master and a member of
the old Grand Lodge of Illinois, the records of that Lodge show-
ing him to have attended the communications of 1826 and 1827.

While Lincoln was never formally received into the Masonic
Order, he first saw Masonic light in connection with lis friend-
ship and close association with Bowling Green. [loner to him
who may safely be called the Masonic Preceptor of Abraham
Lincoln.

It was not an unusual practice in the carly days of Masonry
in this country in sparsely settled localities, remote from an
active Lodge, for several members of the fraternity to get to-
gether, form an emergent or occasional Lodge and make Masons,


with no record being made of the proceedings. If Lincoln was
not thus made a Mason, he in some manner obtained consider-
able Masonic knowledge and probably from Bowling Green
prior to 1837 when Lincoln removed from Menard County, IIL,
to Springfield.

When in 1812 Bowling Green died and was buried with Ma-
sonic honors it is somewhat significant that Lineoln was selected
by the fraternity to make the address at the funeral, an address
he was unable to finish, breaking down with emotion during the
delivery.

If Lincoln was not a Mason irregularly made, he must have
been in sympathy with the known objects of the Order to have
been invited to speak at a Masonic funeral.

Clinton Lodge, No. 19, at Petersburg, HL, was granted its
dispensation by the Grand Lodge in October, 1812, and the
funeral referred to was evidently under the auspices of the
Masons who formed this Lodge.

As a matter of historical interest the list of members of Cliu-
ton Lodge in 1815 is given, as all the members were acquaint-
ances if not friends of the future President. It will be noted
that John MeNeal, the betrothed of .\im Rutledge, Lincoln’s first
love, was Junior Warden.

List of Members of Clinton Lodge. No. 19, Petersburg, Ill.
1845: John Bennett, W. M.. Martin S. Morris, S. W., John
MeNeal, J. W., Nathan Dresser, Secretary, Jacob West, Treas-
urer, David McMurphy, $. D., Wm. B. Kirk, J. D., Aaron B.
White, Tyler, M. M. John B. Broadwell, Chas. G. Brooks, Lewis
B. Wynne, Chas. B. Waldo, Thos. L. Harris, Benj. Newman,
F. ¢., Ambrose E. Rankin, E. A., Jas. Short.

Prior to 1840 there was a Lodge at Springfield, Tl., which
at the organization of the existing Grand Lodge of Ilinois in
that year, became Springfield Lodge, No. +t.

List of Members of Springfield Lodge, 1810: M. Llelm, W.
M., Alex. Lindsay, 5. W., Jas. Adams, J. W.. Love S. Cornwall,
Secretary, M. Boyle, Treasurer, M. J. Kelly, S. D., J. S. Kil-
laly, J. D., James Maxey, Tyler, M. M. Jas. R. Gray, Philo
Deers, B. C. Webster, W. Cudmore, Samuel L. Hesser, Joseph
Firey, Isaac R. Brancher, Wm. Harvey, Francis Springer, S. A.


Douglas, Jas. Gevisler, Jr., Alex. Shields, Jas. F. Reed, J.
Wickersham, John Uhler, Jas. Briggs, John S. Roberts, L. B.
Adams, F. A. McNeill, Jas. Shepherd, Henry Carrigan.

James Shields, later General and U. S. Senator, was J. W. of
this Lodge in 1841 and was afterward the first Master of Na-
tional Lodge in this city. As Harmony Lodge is an offspring
of National Lodge we have an indirect connection with the first
Lodge in Springfield, Hltnois, whose members were fellow towns-
men ct Lincoln if nothing more.

Stephen A. Douglas does not appear in list of members of
Springfield Lodge after 1843.

In his younger days, Feb. 22, 1842, Lincoln delivered a long
lecture on ‘femperance, one of the Masonic virtues.

On another anniversary of the birth of that distinguished man
and Mason, George Washington, Lineolu delivered a speech on
Inventions, in the course of which he alluded to the first inven-
tion, the fig leaf apron, showing his acquaintance with that ven-
erable Masonic claim that Adam was the first Mason as he wore
the first apron.

Lincoln also had some knowledge of operative masonry, the
hammer, square and compass were familiar’to his hands, and in
his early occupation as surveyor he laid out squares and caleu-
lated horizontals and perpendiculars.


“For not by dainty hands in kid the shackles fell to rust,
But warty, horny were the palms that made the nation just.”


LINCOLN’S MASONIC WORDS.


References are to Federal Edition of Lincoln’s Works.

“They were pillars of the temple of Liberty, and now that
they have crumbled away the temple must fall unless we, their
descendants’ supply their places with other pillars, hewn from
the solid quarry of sober reason.” 1-160.

In a speeeh about the Bank, made in 1837, occur the words,
“Oath of secrecy,” “divulged a secret,
have his secret mark?”


966


does not every merchant
“Sound the alarm.”  1-139-1.10,

Another sentence: “Such belong not to the family of the lion
or the tribe of the eagle.” 1-157,


6


In the Lost ‘Township letter with the composition of which he
probably had something to do, occurs the following: “I defy
Daniel Webster, | defy King Solomon.” 1-285. As this letter
was making sport of James Shields, an officer of Springfield
Lodge, this sentence may have had more intended significance
than would ordinarily appear.

Tere are some more of his Masonic words:

“T wish to stand erect before the country.” 3-169.

“Will cling to it with a desperate grip.” 3-169,

“The sharp point against him.” 3-169,

“Tf you have ever studied Geometry you remember that by a
course of reasoning Euclid proves that all the angles in a tri-
angle are equal io two right angles.” 1-69.

“Phe cements which bind together the different parts of the
Union.” 4-258.

“The cirele from which all their propositions radiate.” 4-263.

“Charter of freedom.” 5-155.

“Marks another step.” 5-161,

“Our children and our children’s children.” 6-151.

The word “spot” has a peculiar place in Masonry and _ this
word affords the basis for the famous so-called Spot resolutions
introduced by Lincoln in Congress during the Mexican War,
Dec. 22, 1847.

In his speech at Philadelphia before inauguration he said that
he “Would rather be assassinated on the spot than surrender,”
and the words “Fatal blow” though copied, were frequently used
in the joint debate with Donglas at Freeport, August 22, 1858.

Several times he used the words “Darkness to light,” and in
his telegram to General Sherman on his march to the sea, he said:

“It brings those who sat in darkness to see a great light.”
qeRT.

In a letter to Speed he said, “UML will be Tlarmony,” a senti-
ment peculiar to this Ledge at least. 2-5.

In speaking of slavery and not of Masonry he once referred
to “blue lodges as they call them everywhere doing their sceret
and deadly work.” 2-271.

We are all familiar with that now English classic the address
at Gettysburg, Masonic in every line. Note the emphasis by


repetition placed upon the word “dedicate.” Mark the conclu-
sion “Government of the people, by the people, for the people
shall not perish from the earth.”

The man who wrote the Gettysburg address not a Mason?

Listen to these words: “Let us have faith that right makes
might, and in that faith, Jet us, to the end, dare to do our duty,
as we understand it.”

“And having thus chosen our course, without guile and with
pure purpose, let us reuew our trust in God, and go forward
without fear and with manly hearts.”

“With malice toward none, with charity for all, with firmness
in the right as God gives us to see the right, let us strive on to
finish the work we are in.”

‘The man who spoke these words not a Mason?

With the tinge of a mystic, the inspiration of a prophet, the
man who regarded all men as his brethren, that man not a
Mason?

The man who spoke like a Mason, lived like a Mason and died
like a Mason, that man not a Mason?

No! No! No! and a thousand times No! The true Masonic
spirit breathes throughout the life of this remarkable man.

In 1866 the Government published a volume containing the
tributes of foreign nations to Abraham Lincoln. In this single
voluine appear the resolutions and tributes of forty-four foreign
Masonic grand lodges and subordinate bodies.

Was Lincoln a Mason to them? Of these forty-four lodges
how many called Lincoln brother? Only twenty. Here is doc-
umentary evidence of a kind. ‘Twenty contemporaneous docu-
ments coucerning our illustrious brother, Abraham Lincoln.

As the volume referred to is not a rare work, only the list of
lodges is here given with such portion of the resolutions as re-
ferred to Lincoln as a Freemason.


FOREIGN MASONIC LODGES ON DEA’TH OF
LINCOLN.


3elgium. Septentrion Masonic Lodge of Ghent.
“Lincoln personified the cause of liberty and human fraternity.”


Frauce. Lodge of La Franche Union, at Choisy-Le-Roy. De-
partment of Seine.

“We mourn the loss of a brother whose memory will ever be
dear to patriots and Free Masons. He honored Masonry.”

“From this date the name of Abraham Lincoln is inseribed on
the list of our members, and at each session for three months, a
brother will rise at the call of his name and answer: ‘Abraham
Lincoln died like a Mason to clevate humanity outraged by slav-
ery. At the expiration of three months we will celebrate a
Masonie funeral to his memory.”

Perfeet Union Masonic Lodge, Orieut of Confoleus. Charente.
New Friendship Lodge of Grasse.

“Syinpathy for the glorious death ef one who, after having
used the hammer, square and compass, those living implements
of our imunortal society. ete.”

United Benefactors of Gentilly.
To Grand Lodge of N. Y.

“The very illustrious brother, \brahani Lincoln, has given his
life for the love of his country, ete., thus setting the most noble
example a Masonic brother can give to his brethren. Free Ma-
sonry has suffered an irreparable loss.”

Orion Lodge of St. John, Gaillac Orient.
Lodge of Toleration and Progress, Lure.

“Sympathy for the memory of Brother Lincoln.”
L’Escole de la Morale Lodge of Libourne.

“Lincoln, our illustrious brother.” “Lodge will mourn for
three months.”

Lodge of Les Arts Reunis, Orient of Macon,

“The glorious martyr of equality and fraternity.”
Friends of Truth Lodge, Metz.

Lodge of St. John of Jerusalem, Nancy.

“The great Masonic association that gloricd in calling Mr. Lin-
coln one of its children.”
Clement Friendship Lodge, Paris.

“We Masons mourn him not only as a brother, but as a friend
of the whole human race. Lincoln's first thought was the Ma-
son’s motto: fraternity.”

Lodge of Triumphant Friends, Paris.


Chapter of Mars and the Arts, Paris.

“A stronger bond, a more intimate union than the conmion tie
united us particularly to his great heart. Abraham Lincoln was
our brother.”

Sovereign Chapter of the Friends of the Conntry, Valley of Paris.

“Glory to our brother, Lincoln, who practiced the virtues in-
culeated by our order, and who Masonry is proud to number
among the number of her children.”
i’Avenir Lodge, Paris.

“Regret for the death of Brother Abraham Lincoln.”

Scotch Masonic Lodge La Prevoyance, Paris.
St. John’s Lodge No. 147, !Leroes of Humanity.

“All Free Masonry mourns the death of Abraham Lincoln and
this lodge also regrets the less of a man who was an honor to
our order, etc.”

Ancient Accepted Scotch Rite, Paris.

“Lincoln, whom we had the honor to count among our
brothers.”

Lodge of Henry the Fourth, Paris.
Perseverance Lodge, Paris.

“Tas any living man practiced so well the humane principles
inculeated by Free Masonry? And who is mere deserving of
the regrets of their brethren?” Lodge ordered a triple mourning
salute in memory of Brother Lincoln.

Lodge of Admirers of the Universe, Paris.

“The memory of Brother Abraham Lincoln.”
Scoteh [live Lodge, Paris.

“T’ree Masonry is moved with just indignation at the atrocious
erime that has deprived it of one of its most illustrious represen-
tatives.” “Condolence for the loss of the zealous Mason who
has proclaimed the great Masonic principles of liberty, equality
and fraternity.” “Memory of the very illustrious brother, Abra-
ham Lincoln.”

Lodge of St. John of Jerusalem, Paris, to Grand Lodge of New
York:

“The glorious death of one who had handled the hanmmer,
square and compass.”
Harmony Lodge of Paris.


10


Lodge Saint Pierre des Acacias, Paris.

“Brother Abraham Lincoln, member of the Grand Lodge of
New York.”

“Death of their brother, Abraham Lincoln.”

Lodge of the Fraternity of the People, Paris.

“The horrible outrage to which Brother Lincoln has fallen a

vietim.”
Scotch Lodge, No. 1.16, the Right Line.

“The crime, ete., deprives Masonry of a brother.”

Rite of Mizraim. Supreme Grand Council.
Loge Renaissance.

“All the virtues possessed by Lincoin are Masonic virtues, syn.
bolized in our degrees of initiation.

“When an apprentice. he purged his mind of all the subversive
passions, which was an indispensable preparation for the good
conduct of life.

“As a companion he had learned to live orderly by labor, and a
scrupulous observance of right and justice, a course which was
marked out by rule, square and compasses.

“Tinally, like Hiram, he suceumbed to the blows of an out-
rageous pride for having remained inflexible in the discharge of
his duty.”

Lodge of St. Augustus the Beneficent, to Grand Lodge of New
York:

“First, the son of a laboring man, he was an apprentice, then
he became a journeyman, and last, a master, thus realizing our
Masonic symbols.”

Cradle of Henry the Fourth Lodge, Pau.
Friends of Perfect Union Lodge, Perpignan.

“An illustrious Mason, the very dear brother, Abraham Lin-
coln.”

“Our very illustrious brother, Abraham Lincoln.”

Royal Scotch Lodge the Elect of St. Stephen.
Lodge of Good Faith, St. Germain en Laye.

The Gazette de France, May 5, 1865, spoke of Abraham Lin-
coln as of the Grand Lodge of New York. P. 124.

Grand Lodge of Freemasons of Ireland.
Grand Lodge of Freemasons of Scotland.


11


England. Lodge of Gymmosophists, London.
“Abraham Lincoln, member of the Grand Lodge of New
York.”
Italy. Social Progress Lodge, Florence.
Lodge Anziani Virtuosi, Leghorn.
Lodge le Lume e la Verita, Messina.
Italian Una Lodge, Parma.
Grand Orient of Masonry in Italy, ‘Turin.
Italian Masonic Lodge, Carthage and Utica, Tunis.
Germania of the Golden Horn Masonic Lodge, Constantinople.
“TIave lost a brother in the person of the illustrious deceased
and have seen but few like him since the foundation of the order.”


12

It will be noted that there are several references in these reso-
lutions to Abraham Lincoln, member of the Grand Lodge of
New York. It is possible that this error arose from the fact
that this Grand Lodge participated in the funeral ceremonies in
New York City, as the Grand Lodge and other Masonic bodies
in the several States through which Lincoln’s body was carried
on its way from Washington to Springfield took part in the cere-
monies in their States.

The Grand Lodge of New York, however, was unaware that
Lincoln was a member of that Lodge or any other, as the D. G.
M. of that jurisdiction on April 19, 1865, the day of mourning,
addressed a letter to Bro. B. B. French of Washington, which
was answered as follows:


Trom Masonic Monthly, May, 1865, p. 361,
Office of the G. M. of Knights Templar of the U.S. A.
City of Washington, April 21, 1865.
R. W. Rob’t. D. Holmes, D. G. Master, G. L. of N.Y.
My Drar Str anp R. W. Brorier:

Yours of the 19th is just received. President Lincoln was not
a Freemason. Ie once told me in the presence of M. W. Bro.
J. W. Simons, that he had at one time made up his mind to apply
for admission to our Fraternity but that he feared he was too
lazy to attend to his duty as a Mason, as he should like to do,
and that he had not carried out his intentions.

T told him that it was not too late now. ‘Well,” said he, “as
likely as not I shall apply to you some day to let me in.”

He was the most pure hearted, honest, upright man I ever
knew, and ought to have been a Mason. IJlad he been my own
father I could not have lamented his death more sincerely than
T do.

Very truly and Fraternally yours,
B. B. FRENcH.


An examination of the transactions of all the Grand Lodges
of the United States in existence in 1865, shows some reference


13


by the Grand Master to the death of Lincoln or some action by
the Grand Lodge of the following jurisdictions:


Connecticut. Massachusetts.
District of Columbia. Nevada.
Indiana. New Hampshire.
Ilinois. New York.
Towa. Ohio.

Maine. Wisconsin.


As would be expected no notice of the death of the President
was taken by any Southern State, but their transactions for 1565
afford pathetic reading of tales of fire and sword.

Other Grand Masters and Grand Lodges occupied themselves
with matters of Masonic routine only.

These actions of the Masonie Grand Lodges of the United
States upon the death of Lincoln have not until this time been
brought together.

Comparison has been heretofore made between Abraham Lin-
coln and one of our first most exeellent Grand Masters, in his
virtuous and anuable conduet, in his unfeigned piety to God and
in his inflesible fidelity to his trust, the Hiram who was also
slain, and like him, his memory is not dimmed by the passing
years.


14


APPENDIX.
CONNECTICUT.


From address of David E. Bostwick, G. M., May 10, 1865.

While our hearts were swelling with gratitude to God that the
dark clouds seemed lifting with signs of a coming peace, we
are again plunged into the depths of sorrow at the loss of our
beloved chief magistrate, upon whom all seemed to lean with
confidence in this great emergency, struck down by the hands
of a cowardly assassin.


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, MAY 2, 1865.


From address of George C. Whiting, G. M.

On the evening of the 14th of April—a day which had been
previously observed by the Christian world as the anniversary
of the cruel murder of the Prince of Peace—our honored and
beloved President, whilst enjoying a brief relaxation from the
responsibilities and cares of his high official station, was stricken
down by the hand of a wretched and misguided man. His crime
no mortal thought can measure, and none but Him who hath
said “vengeance is mine, I will repay,” can adequately punish.
Me stands before the bar of the Judge Eternal, and our just
though puny anger is hushed in the awful wrath of offended
Deity.

As members of a loyal and order-loving association, peculiarly
bound to be peaceable subjects to the civil powers, and never
to be concerned in plots or conspiracies against the peace and
welfare of the nation, nor to behave undutifully to magistrates,
are called to share in the deep and universal sorrow, it is meet
that we should recognize the amiable and virtuous conduct, and
the inflexible fidelity to his trust, which so marked him as the
fit successor to our illustrious brother—the great and good Wash-
ington—and in some appropriate form give expression to our
sense of the loss our country has sustained—for, in the language
of the great poet, he


“Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been
So clear in his great office, that lis virtues


15


gainst


Will plead like angels, trumpet-tong’d, a
‘The deep damnation of his taking off;
And pity, like a naked, new-born babe,
Striding the blast, or heaven’s cherabim, hors’d
Upon the sightless couriers of the air,

Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye

That tears shall drown the wind.”


That portion of the address of the G. M. alluding to the as-
sassination of President Lincoln was referred to Brothers B. B.
French, R. MeCurdy, and P. [Tooe, who retired and subsequently
reported the following preamble and resolutions:

Whereas, on the evening of April 1'th, Abraham Lincoln,
President of the United States of America, was stricken down
in death by the hand of an assassin, by which a cloud of grief
was spread over the people, in the deepest affection of whose
hearts his many virtues had enshrined him;

And whereas, although he was not a member of our order, by
his pure, and honest, and upright life, every act of which was
marked by charity, brotherly love, relief and truth, he illustrated
all the attributes that should beautify the life of a I*ree and Ac-
cepted Mason;

Therefore does the Grand Lodge of the District of Columbia
deem it eminently proper to announce to their Brethren and the
world, their public appreciation of the dread calamity which has
befallen the nation in the tragical death of its Chief Magistrate,
their sorrow for its occurrence, and their abhorrence and detes-
tation for the crime which, and the criminal who so wickedly
removed him from the scenes of earth.

Resolved, ‘Vhat while the blow of the assassin which struck
down Abraham Lincoln, almost paralyzed the hearts of his fel-
low-citizens, to which he seemed dearer than any man who has
lived since Washingion, it has in no wise disconcerted the action
of the Federal Government, the existence of which depends not
upon the life of any man, but ever lives in the patriotism of the
American people.

Resolved, That this Grand Lodge can find no words of suffi-
cient strength to express their horror and detestation of the act
which deprived our country of its good, and pure, and virtuous


16


Chief Magistrate, nor of the wicked assassin by whose hand the
awful deed was done, and who has gone to meet the penalty of
his crime. “Vengeance is mine, I will repay, saith the Lord.”

Resolved, ‘Vhat this Grand Lodge hereby expresses its high
admiration of the character of the late President, whose life was
without a blemish, and who passed away from earth in the very
zenith of his fame; the goodness and kindness of whose heart
was a proverb, and shall live in the memories of a grateful peo-
ple, and be handed down from generation to generation as long
as time shall last.

Resolved, That the bereaved widow and children of our mur-
dered friend, have our sincere and heartfelt sympathies, and our
fervent prayer that the God of the widow and the fatherless will
so temper this dreadful affliction with merey as to enable them
to sustain their burden with fortitude, and to say in submission
and humility, “The Lord gave and the Lord hath taken away:
blessed be the name of the Lord.”

Resolved, That the officers and members of this Grand Lodge
will wear the usual badge of mourning for six months, in testi-
mony of their respect for the memory of the great and good man
who has fallen.

Resolved, That the Grand Secretary be directed to cause these
proceedings to be published in the National Freemason and the
newspapers of this city, to have a copy of them properly en-
grossed and signed by the proper officers, and, under the seal of
the Grand Lodge, presented to the family of the deceased.

Which was received and the resolutions adopted.


INDIANA.


‘Tribute to Abraham Lincoln. :

At meeting of the Grand Lodge May 24, 1865, Brother Al-
bert Lange asked that the rules be suspended to permit him to
offer the following which was granted:

Whereas, In the inscrutable Providence of Almighty God,
Abraham Lincoln, the first citizen of the United States by offieial
station, the first by the rectitude of his life and daily conduct,
the first by his devotion to the honor, interest and integrity of
the country, the first by the power and influence which he wielded


17


with wisdom, sagacity and courage, has been stricken down by
the hand of an assassin;

And, whereas, It is due that this Grand Lodge, representing
328 subordinate Lodges scattered over the whole expanse of the
State of Indiana, should give expression to their sentiments at
the appalling blow, which, like a thunderbolt from a cloudless
sky, struck the heart of the whole nation; therefore,

Resolved, 1st. That we look with abhorrence upon the act,
which took from us and the country, which he so faithfully
served, the man who through four years of deadly strife, with
an eye single to the maintenance of the Government, has guided
and directed us, and who, with the haven of peace and security
in sight, was by a dastardly act snatched from the full fruition
of his labors.

Resolved, 2d. Yhat we concur with freedom loving people all
over the globe, in the expressions of regret and deep sorrow,
which this event has called forth, and that we will cherish Abra-
ham Lincoln as the great Emancipator of an oppressed race with
undying affection, trusting, that history, poetry and art will unite
to keep his memory green in the remembrance of virtuous men
for ever and ever.

Resolved, 3d. That a copy of these resolutions be forwarded
to the bereaved widow and family of the deceased in token of
our heartfelt sympathy with the great loss, which they and the
country at large have sustained.

Above unanimously concurred in and adopted.


ILLINOIS.


From address of I]. P. H. Bromwell, G. M., Oct. 3, 1865.

On the 14th day of April, Abraham Lincoln, President of the
United States, was slain by the murderous hand of a ruffian. Te
fell at a time when he could least be spared when all eyes were
turned to “the good President” as to the only being who could
restore the Union, heal the wounds of war, and set the Govern-
ment in motion in harmony with the new order of things. At
that moment God permitted him to be taken away, to teach us
“that the Most [igh ruleth in the kingdoms of men and giveth it
to whomsoever he will.” Abraham Lincoln, the pure patriot,


18


the wise statesman, the good President, the honest man, died a
martyr to his country, to liberty and truth, and was mourned for
as no man has ever been mourned. Tle was not a Free Mason,
but in his life and character he illustrated many of the virtues
taught aud cherished by the Craft.

T herewith subinit a letter of sympathy and condolence from
Renaissance Lodge working under the jurisdiction of the Grand
Orient of France.

In October, 1867. the Grand Lodge of Hlinois chartered Abra-
ham Lincoln Lodge, No. 518, at Young .\merica, Warren County,
Ilinois.

IOWA.


From address of Edward .\. Guilbert, M. D., G. M., June 6, 1865,

Forth from the furnace fires of the most terrible internecine
struggle of all time, the nation has come, as came Jupiter out of
the war with the Titans. endowed with resistless strength and
power, with her nable escutcheon cleansed from the plague-spot
which has so long polluted it, the republic stands proudly now in
the light of God’s approving smile, “redeemed, regenerated, DIS-
ENTHRALLED.”


Now is the winter of our discontent

Made glorious summer by our boys in blue;

And all the clouds that low'r'd upon the land,

In the deep bosom of the ocean buried.

Now are our brows bound with victorious wreaths,
Our bruised arms hung up for monuments ;

Our stern alarms changed to merry meetings ;
Our dreadiul marches to delightful measures.
Grim-visaged war hath smoothed his wrinkled front,
And now instead of mounting barbed steeds

‘lo fright the souls of fearful adversaries,

Te capers uimbly in a lady's chamber

‘To the lascivious pleasing of a lute.”

Truly, the cloud has turned a “silver lining” to the light, but
yet like a seintillant diamond in a setting of jet, that “silver lin-
ing” is bordered with the emblems of mourning. Even in the
hour of victory, while the glad Io! rang over the jubilant North


19


and the wecreated South, “there was death in the White lfouse™ ;
the head of the nation—the wise and pure—the clement and
faithful President was “done to death” by the assassin’s bullet,
and he who was fast becoming the idol of his countrymen, was
not! Mournfully sublime was the instantancous and universal
transition from delirious joy to profoundest sorrow. In a mo-
ment of time the notes of exultant clarions and the sonorous
tenor of the republic’s Te Deum changed into muffled drum-
beats, and the thrilling baritone of heart-born wailing.


“Tle had borne his faculties so meek, had been
So clear in his great office, that his virtues

Did plead like angels trumpet-tongued, against
The deep damnation of this taking off.”


Like a wounded hyena in its expiring throcs, rebellion struck
her last vicious blow at the nation’s life, and thereby slew the
truest friend the insurgents had. Yet how swift was the pun-
ishment the fiendist agent of a fiendish cabal received. And how
few there are that mourn because amid retributive physical pangs
of the most exquisitely painful character, this modern Judas
gave up his worthless life and went to his reward.

Let every true Mason praise the G. A. O. ‘IT. U. that the
execrable conspiracy against the Government of our fathers, was
in part unsuccessful, and that with scarcely a perceptible devia-
tion from her direct course, the gallant ship of state went stead-
ily on, albeit her pilot had fallen at her helm, a victim of one of
the most damnable crimes of history. Could any fact more
forcefully demonstrate the stability of the republic—more nota-
bly evince the protecting care of the Omnipotent,—inore grandly
attest Columbia's title to emblazon on her shield the additional
motto—ESTO PERPE’TUA! than that the warworn ship of
state unchecked by that “sudden sound and shock” which would
have precipitated almost any other country into the maelstrom
of revolution, pursued her stately voyage, leaving as tuminous
a wake as ever behind her. God, Himself had given her a mis-
sion to perform. Te knew that


—"humanity with all its fears,
With all its hopes of future years,
Was hanging breathless on her fate”;


bt oe ee aurea ry 6 bn OX HOF betas nn. hE S R


20


and in His good providence He saved her harmless from the
shock, and capacitated the appalled people soon to see that it


"


“Was of the wave and not the rock!


The helmsman was gone, but as ever “strong and great,” the
glorious ship saited on! her meteor flag to be sure was at half-
mast in sorrow for her loss, but in mute, vet cloquent attestation
of the worth of him who was receiving the sublimest funeral
obsequies the world ever saw. And worthy was he of them:


Tor he wou not power with the sword,
But by the love a nation bore
Tor hin whose very soul was stirr’d
With love for those he ruled o'er.
With steady stride, onward he went,
The light of great deeds on him beaming ;
Up, up Fame’s mountain's steep ascent
Its peak unto; and while around him streaming
Were fruition’s banners; from that sununit high,
Like Moses who Pisgah aseended to die—
[le sprang from the earth to his home in the sky.


Masons’ hands assisted to bear him to the “equal grave”:
D>
Masons’ Lodges were clad in the emblems of mourning for de-
oO dD
parted worth, and Masons mingled their laments with those of
the nation, which


—around his bier
A\re gather'd in sorrow and fear
Longing to see of this stroke the end,
And mourning a father and a friend!
And their offspring in all coming time,
Shalt remember well the ruler brave
And be guided by his star subline,
And shall make a shrine of his lonely grave!


And it was fitting that Masons should thus evince their love
of country and their regard for its murdered ruler, who, though
he was not a Mason, revered the Order, and was himself com-
posed of the stuff out of which the most capable, the most be-
nignant fraters are made.

‘The committee on the address reported as follows:


Your commiitee recommend that we hereby express our sat-
isfaction with the appropriate and timely eulogy on the death of
President Lincoln, aud that the thanks of this Grand Lodge are
due to the M. W. G. M. for this portion of his address.

On motion of Bro. Parvin, G. S., the M. W. G. M. appointed
as a committee to report resolutions expressive of the feelings
of this Grand Lodge in regard to the assassination of our laic
President the following brethren:

Col. John Scott.

Gov. Wm. M. Stone,

Lieut. Gov. Ei. W. kastman.

‘The special conmiitee on the assassination of President Lin-
coln presented the following report and resolutions, which were
unaninousty adopted:

Your commitiee, appomted to express by resolution the sense
of the Grand Lodge of lowa in relation to the awful calamity
which bas befallen our nation in the murder of Abraham Lin-
coln, late President of the United States, knowing that words are
but a mockery, and cannot relieve the burdened heart, yet feel-
ing that propriety and duty require that this Grand Lodge should
not be silent, present the following resolutions:

1. Resolved, That in our lamented late President we recognize
a patriot and statesman of purity and wisdom, who has safely
carried our country through the most terrible ordeal of the past
four years, earning the admiration of the world by his purity of
intention and singleuess of purpose, and the unbounded gratitude
of thirty millions of his countrymen. That Abrahani Lincoln
should and will be revered while time shall last, as great and
good among names uot born to die.

2. Resolved, That as Masons we are taught to detest con-
spiracies, plots and rebellions; and m an especial manner to ab-
hor assassination.

3. Resolved, That in depriving our nation of its chief, by as-
sassination, we recognize a crime without a name; and for which
language fails to express our grief and horror.

4d. Resolved, That we humbly approach the grave of our mur-
dered President, and with sorrow for his sad fate, will rear a


22


broken column to commemorate his many virtues and his un-
tituely death.
Joun Scort,
W. M. STONE,
Enxocu EAstMan.
Proceedings of the Grand Lodge of lowa, June 8, 1865.


MAINE.


From address of William P. Preble, G. M., May 2, 1865.

We will not be unmindful of the great loss sustained by our
beloved country in the fiendish and indignant assassination of one
whose greatest failing (if any he had) was, that from the up-
rightness, purity and tender heartedness of his own nature, he
could not conceive that any human being could be so utterly de-
praved as to raise his hand in murderous assault upon one who,
by his unceasing and untiring loving kindness, forgiveness and
patience, stood between him and his rebellious and traitorous as-
sociates and sympathizers and the fierce and long endured and
smothered wrath of a justly incensed and outraged people.
Though our horizon is again overshadowed with clouds, just as
we all began to hope that the glorious sun of peace was about to
rise upon and bless us, we will not give way to useless repinings,
but with a firm faith and reliance that our Supreme Grand Mas-
ter does not permit any calamity however great or appalling, to
befall an individual, much less a nation, but for some great and
wise purpose. we will, while renewing our vows of faithfulness
to the great principles of our Order, bow in humble submission
to his inscrutable dispensations, earuestly invoking his protection
and guidance upon our whole country in this her time of peace
and that in his own good time he will again unite us into one
great and happy people.


MASSACHUSETTS. TP. 20, 1865.


Bethesda Lodge forwarded resolution of sympathy to Grand
lodge “the expression of their most sincere condolence and re-
eret on the loss of so great and good a man as Abraham Lincoln
whose memory should ever be cherished by those who profess
the principles of our ancient institution.”

Valparaiso, July 31, 1865.


23


NEVADA.


From address of Joseph De Bell, G. M., Virginia City.

“April 19, 1865. On this day were held the funeral obsequies
of our late Chief Magistrate. The hands of an assassin robbed
of life the beloved head of the nation. That nation covered its
face and wept. I deemed it both right and proper that we as
Masons should join in the coneord of sorrow and deposit in the
open grave of the martyred President our ‘chaplet of living
laurel.’ I therefore convened the Grand Lodge and that body,
accompanied by a large number of the fraternity, jomed in thie
funeral procession.”


NEW HAMPSHIRE.


From address of Jonathan E. Sargent, G. M., June 11, 1865.

“We, as Masons. as well as citizens, may properly mourn for
the national calamity which recently befell us, when the chosen
head and ruler of this nation fell by the hand of the base and
cowardly assassin.”


NEW YORK.


G. L. Report, 1865, p. 43. Report of D. G. M. Robert D.
Holmes, May 10, 1865.

On the occasion of the obsequies of our late President I
deemed it proper to respond to the invitation of the civic authori-
tics to take part in the solemn ceremonies of the day. In this
W. M. Sir, you agreed with me, and being thus empowered
I invited the whole of the local craft to take a position in the
procession. Over five thousand brethren responded, and by my
direction were dressed in black, with crepe on the left arm, and
a sprig of evergreen in the left lapel of the coat of each, the
Masters having been distinguished solely by their gavels which
they carried dressed in mourning.


NEW YORK, p. 93, 1865.


From report of M. W. John L. Lewis, Chairman Committee of
Foreign Correspondence.

And there is a sorrow which we bear in common with our

stricken nation, nay, let us add of the other nations of the earth,


eww rer se © Sk SO OF 6 EO CKEV SU SOTTO SF dba WOOF A dR VTATATS «oS. a eVaratse. 2. 2k


PS ee ee eee ee ee eee ee eee eee ee eee eee eee ee ee ee


24


that onr honored Chief Magistrate has been removed by the
wicked hand of violence in the hour of his greatest and noblest
triumphs. [t is the heart throb of an undivided people, who, for-
getting every past difference, and every division which has for a
brief time separated them, mournfully entwine the laurel with
the cypress.


OTILO.


From address of Thomas Sparrow, G. AM. Oct. 17, 1865,

Qn the moruing of the 15th of April last, the public mind was
astounded by the announcement that the constitutional Ruler of
this great nation had been basely murdered; that he who so lately
was in every mouth the theme o7 praise or blame, had gone be-
yond the reach of both. No man was ever called to greater trials
in political life. No man ever bore those trials with greater pa-
tience. In the very midst of them, in the very last exposition of
his principles and purposes, he paused to give utterance to the
noble sentiment, which I trust, will govern us on this and every
other occasion: “With charity towards all, with malice to none.
doing the right. so far as God gives us to know the right, let us
strive to finish the work we are in.” Praise to the man who
could utter such a sentiment.

He was stricken down at the very moment when the minds of
men of all parties and every diversity of views had acquired con-
fidence in his moderation and wisdom, and were turned towards
him as the only one capable of adjusting the complicated ques-
tions arising out of the state of the country and the bitter ani-
mosity generated by four years of civil strife.

“Praise to the man. A nation stood
Beside his coffin with wet eyes;
ler brave, her beautiful her good,
-\s when a loved one dies.”


In the universal grief of the nation, I thought it proper that
the fraternity, as such, should express not only their utter ab-
horrence of “the deep damnation of his taking off,” but pay a
tribute of respect to his virtues as a man and his integrity as a
public servant. .\ccordingly at the request of the brethren of
Cleveland, I issued a Dispensation authorizing them to appear


RAD OF OS BG t QAM es A 2 6 RV Ee 8 A Re me a AR Ma Pe ee Re ee ee EAP Bw oo


25


in public on the reception of his remains in that city, aud on thei
arrival here, I opened the Grand Lodge, and, in conjunction with
the R. W. Deputy Grand Master, and a large concourse of
brethren, from all parts of the State, participated in his funeral
obsequies.

The Death of the President.

Your committee to whom was referred so much of the Grand
Master's address as related to the death of the late President of
the United States, beg leave to report that there has been, and
can be, but one feeling among the craft in Ohic in relation to
the death of the late President Lincoln, and that is of deep
regret at his decease, and of the utmost abhorrence of the crime
by which he was removed. Your committee sincerely and heart-
ily reciprocate the sentiments expressed by the Grand Master in
relation to the lamentable event, and approve the language in
which they were uttered.

Your committee submit for your approval the following:

Resolved, hat the Freemasons of Ohio yield to no class of
citizens in their devotion to the Government and Union estab-
lished by our patriotic fathers, and have attested their loyalty
thereto in every possible manner, the record of which is found
not only at home, but on many a crimsoned field.

Resolved, That while we sympathize with the country at large
in the bereavement which it sustained in the death of the Presi-
dent, we regard with unmixed abhorrence and detestation the
fiendish act which deprived the nation of its constitutional head
at a perilous juncture in its history.

Respectfully submitted,
CorneLius Moore,
Jno. D. O'Connor,
J.T. Bakn ui.
Above resolutions were unanimously adopted.


WISCONSIN.


From address of G. W. Washburn, G. M., June 13, 1865,
But while we may rejoice that victory has perched upon our
banners and right has come out triumphant in the contest. we


26


cannot fail to share in the general grief that he whose position
made him conspicuous above all others, should be destined to
close his career upon this earth by the hand of a brutal and cow-
ardly wretch, who runs from the scene of his terrible crime,
exulting in his infamy and shame.

It is not for me to pronounce the President’s eulogy, nor is
this the oceasion for it. History will deal fairly by him and the
world will judge him in kindness.


Why Everything You Think
You Know About the Lincoln
Assassination is Wrong


David Mcgowan


In just a little over a year — in what will be an historic 150-year anniversary — the American
people, and likely people all around the world, will come together in remembrance of the man
who was once rather preposterously described by a biographer as “the most gentle, most
magnanimous, most Christ-like ruler of all time.” That man, of course, was Abraham Lincoln,
allegedly the 16th and most beloved President of these United States.

I say “allegedly” here because it is hard to see how someone could be the president of an entity
that didn’t actually exist. And the reality is that during Lincoln’s tenure, there was no such thing
as the “United” States. There were Northern states presided over by Washington, and there were
Confederate states presided over by a parallel government in Richmond, but there certainly
weren’t any “united” states. Wouldn’t it then be just as accurate to describe Jefferson Davis as
the 16th president of the United States? Just checking.

I also say “allegedly” here because Lincoln was most certainly not, during his lifetime, a beloved
man. He was thoroughly despised throughout half the country, and wasn’t even all that popular
in the north. He received merely 40% of the popular vote in 1860 and could have, as more honest
historians have noted, been very easily defeated had the Democratic Party bothered to field a
viable candidate. But Lincoln was clearly the anointed one.

As we all know, Abraham Lincoln was assassinated by famed actor and Southern sympathizer
John Wilkes Booth on the evening of April 14, 1865 (which happened to be Good Friday) while
attending a play at Ford’s Theater in Washington, DC. Just five days earlier, General Robert E.
Lee had surrendered to General Ulysses S. Grant at Appomattox, effectively signaling an end to
the unfathomably bloody US Civil War. What is less widely known is that the assassination

of Lincoln was allegedly part of a larger plot that was to have included the simultaneous
assassinations of General Grant, Vice President Andrew Johnson, Secretary of State William
Seward and Secretary of War Edwin Stanton.


John Wilkes Booth, in a Masonic pose


This alleged plot, which is part of the official history of the Lincoln assassination, obviously
involved people other than John Wilkes Booth. Nine of those people faced trial as co-
conspirators, eight by military tribunal (Mary Surrat, David Herold, George Atzerodt, Dr.


Samuel Mudd, Samuel Arnold, Michael O’Laughlen, Edward Spangler, and Lewis Paine [or
Lewis Payne, or Lewis Powell, depending upon who is telling the tale]), and one who later stood
trial alone (John Surrat). Four were executed, three received life sentences, one was given a six-
year prison term, and one was acquitted. As for Booth, he was captured and gunned down at
Garrett’s barn on April 26, 1865 and so never made it to trial.

And that, in a nutshell, is the official narrative of the Lincoln assassination. It is an unusual
narrative, to be sure, because it explicitly acknowledges a ‘conspiracy’ surrounding the death of
a president. Of course, many of the details are usually left out when the story is told, leading
many to think of John Wilkes Booth as just another ‘lone nut’ assassin. But Booth was hardly a
lone nut and there was in fact a conspiracy at the heart of the Lincoln assassination, though the
people targeted by the government weren’t the real conspirators; the real conspirators were the
very people who orchestrated the witch hunt against the scapegoats.

But before we get to that, let’s first skip ahead and look at some of the forgotten aftermath of the
assassination, because there is always much to be learned by examining the fates that befall those
involved to varying degrees in political conspiracies, especially those unfortunate souls whose
names are largely consigned to the dustbins of history.

Let’s begin with Sergeant Thomas “Boston” Corbett, the Jack Ruby of the Lincoln assassination.
Corbett was a strange character if ever there was one. How strange, you ask? Strange enough to
have reportedly castrated himself circa 1858, and to have then opted not to seek medical
attention until he had tended to other, apparently more important, business. He was widely
considered to be mentally unbalanced, shockingly enough, and he often spoke of hearing
disembodied voices. He was mockingly referred to by his fellow soldiers as “the Glory to God
man” due to his rather unorthodox religious beliefs, which he wasn’t shy about sharing.


Thomas “Boston” Corbett


Due to his bizarre behavior and his unwillingness, or inability, to follow orders, Corbett had been
court-martialed and discharged from the service. For some unexplained reason though, he was
allowed to re-enlist in 1863 and he quickly thereafter rose to the rank of sergeant. In April 1865,
he was assigned to the elite team that captured Booth and, in defiance of direct orders, he
personally shot and killed the man who was said to be Booth. Corbett was never reprimanded or
disciplined for his actions and in fact profited handsomely by touring the country for years as
“The Man Who Killed Booth.”

In 1887, Corbett was appointed as the clerk/doorman of the Kansas state legislature. Things
didn’t go so well for him after that. According to some reports, one day he just decided to shoot
the place up, though other accounts hold that he didn’t fire his weapon but merely brandished it
and issued threats. Whatever the case, he quickly found himself committed to a mental asylum.


He managed to escape soon enough though and may have briefly surfaced in Texas before never
being seen or heard from again.

Let’s next turn our attention to Major Henry Rathbone and Clara Harris, the couple who were
sharing the presidential box at Ford’s Theater with Abe and Mary Lincoln. At the time, Rathbone
was dating Harris, who was both Rathbone’s stepsister and the daughter of US Senator Ira
Harris. Rathbone was reportedly deeply cut when he attempted to disarm and detain Booth, who
escaped by leaping over the railing and onto the stage.


Clara Harris


Major Henry Rathbone
Rathbone later married Harris and the two started a family and moved to Germany, where
Rathbone served as the US Consul to Hanover. Things didn’t work out so well though for the
Rathbones; in December 1883, Henry tried to kill his children and, when thwarted in that effort,
instead shot and brutally carved up wife Clara, before turning the knife on himself. Like Corbett,
he was sent off to an asylum, but unlike Corbett, Henry Rathbone spent the rest of his life there.
Since I mentioned Mary Todd Lincoln just a couple paragraphs ago, I should probably mention
that she also ended up in an insane asylum. Always a bit on the crazy side, Mary became
considerably crazier after the assassination, exhibiting increasingly erratic behavior and suffering
from vivid hallucinations. She was ultimately committed by her own son, Robert Todd Lincoln.


Mary Todd Lincoln
To say that Robert Lincoln had some rather unusual aspects to his life story would be quite an
understatement. To begin with, we could note that he had the distinction of being the only man in
history with direct links to three presidential assassinations. Just twenty-one when his father was
gunned down, he subsequently was present at the assassinations of James Garfield in 1881 and
William McKinley in 1901. He was also the only Lincoln son to survive his childhood; brother
Eddie died at age 3 in 1850, brother Willie at age 11 in 1862, and brother Tad barely made it to
age 18 before dying in 1871.
According to Robert Lincoln’s own account, he was involved in a truly bizarre incident in late
1864/early 1865, not long before the death of his father. The younger Lincoln was saved from
serious injury and possible death when he was pulled to safety by a stranger during a mishap on a
train platform. That stranger just happened to be Edwin Booth, an older brother of John Wilkes
Booth. Lincoln later maintained a long-term friendship and possible romance with Lucy Hale,


the daughter of US Senator John Hale and a former paramour and fiancé of John Wilkes Booth.
Small world, I guess.


Robert Todd Lincoln
Speaking of Edwin Booth, on June 9, 1893, just as his casket was being carried for burial (he had
died two days earlier), Ford’s Theater mysteriously collapsed, killing 22 people and injuring
another 68. The building had been converted into a government record storage facility and some
of the records of the assassination were lost in the wreckage. Shit happens.
Edwin and John’s sister, Rosalie Booth, died under mysterious circumstances in January 1880;
rumors at the time spoke of a “mysterious assailant.” Edwin Booth Clark, a son of sister Asia
Booth and therefore a nephew of John Wilkes Booth, attended Annapolis and became a US
Naval officer, but he thereafter disappeared at sea. Officially, he committed suicide by jumping
overboard. And Junius Brutus Booth, the patriarch of the Booth clan, is said to have gone insane.


The Booth siblings — John Wilkes, Edwin and Junius, Jr.
US Senator Preston King, credited with being one of the guys who supposedly prevented a
mercy petition on behalf of Mary Surrat from reaching President Andrew Johnson, decided on
November 12, 1865 to go swimming in New York with a bag of bullets tied around his neck.
Officially, his death was a very innovative suicide. US Senator James Lane, the other guy
credited with supposedly preventing the mercy petition on behalf of Surrat from reaching
Johnson, shot himself in the head while jumping from a carriage in Leavenworth, Kansas on July
1, 1866. Or else he slit his own throat. Whichever sounds better to you.


Senator Preston King


Senator James Lane


US Senator John Conness, a likely conspirator and a pallbearer at Lincoln’s funeral, was
committed to an insane asylum, where he later died. There was a lot of that sort of thing going
around in those days. The body of William Peterson — the owner of the boardinghouse

where Lincoln was taken immediately after being shot, and where he died the next morning —
was found on the grounds of the Smithsonian loaded with the drug laudanum. His death,
needless to say, was ruled a suicide.


Senator John Conness


Colonel William Browning, who was Vice President Andrew Johnson’s personal secretary as
well as being a personal friend to John Wilkes Booth (Browning claimed that Johnson was close
to Booth as well), is believed to have been murdered, though details are sketchy. Less sketchy
were the murders of Frank Boyle and William Watson, both of whom had the misfortune of
physically resembling John Wilkes Booth. Both of their bodies were turned over to the War
Department by overzealous vigilantes for the reward that was being offered. Stanton’s
department covered up the murders by unceremoniously disposing of the bodies, one of which
was dumped into the Potomac River.

Frances Adeline Seward and Frances Adeline “Fanny” Seward had the misfortune of bearing
witness to the staged attack on William Seward, sitting Secretary of State and the husband

of Frances and the father of Fanny. Frances died of a reported heart attack on June 21, 1865, the
summer solstice, just two months after the assassination of Lincoln and the alleged attempt on


her husband’s life. Fanny died the next year, on October 29, 1866, just before Halloween. She
was just twenty-one; the cause of her death remains unknown. A few years later, in 1870,
William Seward legally ‘adopted’ his young ‘companion,’ Olive Risley, as his ‘daughter.’ Risley
was 26 at the time and Seward was 69.


William Seward, in a Masonic pose, with daughter Fanny
Lafayette Baker was undoubtedly one of the central conspirators involved in
the Lincoln assassination. As ‘Honest’ Abe’s spymaster and head of the NDP, forerunner of the
US Secret Service, Baker had instituted a reign of terror, just as he had previously done as a
member of San Francisco’s Vigilance Committee, running roughshod over the US Constitution.
Under Baker’s (and Stanton’s) tyrannical watch, there were 260,000 dubious arrests made and
some 38,000 people held without trial as political prisoners. Baker also introduced such


innovations as midnight raids, forced entry without warrants, imprisonment without bail, and
summary arrests.

Circa 1867, Baker published a book revealing the existence of what was said to be Booth’s
suppressed diary. He subsequently barricaded himself in his home and told friends that a secret
cabal was intent on killing him. Press reports from December 1867 through February 1868 tell of
repeated attempts made on his life; he was shot at twice, stabbed on his own front porch, and
beaten by three or four men who attempted to abduct him. Nevertheless, when he turned up dead
on July 3, 1868, the cause of death was said to be meningitis, necessitating an immediate, sealed
burial. A later exhumation though indicated that the cause of death was actually arsenic
poisoning. Baker left behind cryptic notes alluding to a conspiracy behind

the Lincolnassassination involving eleven members of Congress, twelve US Army officers, three
US Navy officers, one governor, five bankers, three nationally known newspapermen, and eleven
wealthy industrialists.


Lafayette Baker
Police officer John F. Parker had the dubious distinction of being the guy who was supposed to
be guarding Lincoln at the time of the assassination, except that he instead opted to wander over
next door to get good and drunk. Parker had a seriously checkered history with the department,
having been written up on multiple occasions for conduct unbecoming an officer, the use of
insolent language, visiting a house of prostitution, inappropriately discharging his weapon,
sleeping on duty, and being drunk on duty. He was nevertheless assigned the task of guarding the
president, a development that historians have been unable to explain. And he was assigned that
task just in time to be neglecting his duties when Lincoln was shot.
Parker was never reprimanded in any way for abandoning his post and leaving the president
vulnerable. In fact, he was returned to duty at the White House, an honor usually reserved for
senior officers with unblemished records. He was released from duty though in 1868, just
after Stanton relinquished his post as Secretary of War. Parker was never seen or heard from
again, and it is believed that he was either killed or went into hiding to avoid being killed.
Next up is Edwin Stanton, Lincoln’s Secretary of War and a seriously deranged individual. Prior
to his emergence on the national scene, Stanton’s greatest claim-to-fame was securing an
acquittal for US Representative Daniel Sickles on murder charges. On February 27, 1859,
Sickles had gunned down the unarmed Philip Barton Key II, US Attorney for the District of
Columbia and the son of famed composer Francis Scott Key. Stanton argued a temporary
insanity defense for the first time in US history.


Edwin Stanton


The media, apparently every bit as corrupt in those days as it is today, overwhelmingly supported
Sickles while vilifying both Key and Sickles’ wife, who had reportedly been having an affair.
Though standing trial for a capital offense, Sickles was allowed to stay in his jailer’s apartment,
have unlimited visitors, and, most amazingly, retain his weapon. As already stated, Sickles was
acquitted and was subsequently allowed to retain his seat in the House of Representatives. He
later became a Civil War general and the US Minister to Spain.

Elsewhere in Stanton’s biography, we find that at various times in his life he personally ordered
the exhumation of at least two bodies, one of them being his daughter Lucy, who was dug up
circa 1842. According to reports, Stanton kept his daughter’s decomposing corpse in a special
container in his home for at least a year. Nothing there that would cause anyone to question his
fitness to serve as Secretary of War.


Stanton became a national figure when he was appointed by President Buchanan to serve as
Attorney General on December 20, 1860, just weeks before Lincoln took office. He went on to
wield considerable power in both the Lincoln and Johnson Administrations. Indeed, Johnson’s
attempted dismissal of Stanton lead directly to the impeachment proceedings begun against

him. Stanton’s reign came to an end though on December 24, 1869, when he turned up dead of
unstated causes (though some reports allude to suicide, just as his brother had reportedly done in
1846). He had been nominated for a seat on the US Supreme Court by President Grant and
confirmed by the US Senate, but he died before he could take that seat.

That is a whole lot of tragedy to befall a lot of people who were in a position to know more about
the Lincoln assassination than they should have. There was though at least one guy who saw his
fortunes rise. Major General Lew Wallace was a member of the hopelessly corrupt military
tribunal that sat in judgment of Mary Surrat and others. In 1880, he became far better known as a
writer of historical fiction when he wrote and published Ben Hur, the best-selling novel of the
nineteenth century. Well over a hundred years later, it is still in print.


pe -
Ga . ’


|
=


Lew Wallace


I know what you must be thinking here: “How the hell could you leave Francis Tumblety out of
the previous post? Compared to him, guys like Boston Corbett, Henry Rathbone and Edwin
Stanton seem perfectly sane. And whose name was in the news in a weirder way in the years
following the assassination than the esteemed Dr. Francis Tumblety? And in addition, doesn’t he
deserve honorable mention for the ridiculous facial hair alone?”

I can’t really argue much with any of that. I think it was probably a subconscious omission so
that I would have something really good to start this post with. Because as stories go, the Francis
Tumblety story is pretty damn good. And seriously strange. But before getting to that, I must
also quickly add Father Wiget to the list. Not much can be dug up on him other than that he was
assigned as Mary Surrat’s spiritual adviser during the brief period that she sat in her cell waiting
to be executed, and he died shortly thereafter.

Moving on now to the man of the hour, Francis Tumblety was arrested on May 5, 1865, on
suspicion of being complicit in the plot to assassinate Abraham Lincoln. Tumblety was an
associate of — and by some reports a sometime employer of — executed conspirator David Herold.
His arrest was ordered by Secretary of War Edwin Stanton. To be fair to Tumblety though, it
should be noted that he was only one of some 2,000 people who were arrested as possible
conspirators. That’s how things work in a democracy, you see — falsely imprison first, ask
questions later.


The esteemed Dr. Francis Tumblety
In any event, Tumblety was held for nearly a month before being released on May 30, 1865.
Prior to his arrest, he had lived a very colorful life. Born circa 1833 and raised in New York,
Tumblety was widely viewed as a charlatan and a kook. While still a minor, he reportedly
peddled pornographic materials. He soon transformed into a quack “Indian herb doctor” who was
run out of various parts of the country for running cons. In one reported case, he was directly
involved in the death of a ‘patient,’ though he suffered no repercussions for his actions.
According to one account, he kept a collection of human uteruses on display in
his Washington, DC home.
Some twenty-three years after his arrest in Washington, Tumblety took up lodging in, of all
places, a boardinghouse in London’s Whitechapel district. He was identified at that time, and has
been identified by various researchers since that time, as being a prime suspect in the still


unsolved Jack the Ripper murders. Following an arrest on November 7, 1888 for “gross
indecency,” Tumblety fled the country on November 20 under an assumed name and quickly
made his way back to the US, where he died some five years later.

What are the odds, one wonders, that the very same guy would be suspected of involvement in
two such completely different and seemingly unconnected crimes? Two crimes separated by a
vast ocean and the passage of nearly two-and-a-half decades? Probably about the same odds that
a guy like


2 is Is FAS 28 28 2c 2g 2g 2g is 288 28 218 28 2s 2g 2g 2s 2s 28s 28 28 2S 2s 2g 2g 2g 2g 2s 28 28 28 26 2g 2g 2g 2g 2s 2s 28 28 2s 2k 2k 2s 2k 2 2s 2s 2s 2 2 2k ok


Pictured below is the single-shot derringer that, according to the legend we all know so well,
John Wilkes Booth used to assassinate President Abraham Lincoln. One of the most iconic
pieces of historical memorabilia that this country has to offer, it has been displayed for decades,
viewed by millions, and written about by thousands. But after the passage of 149 years, it doesn’t
appear that anyone has ever thought to question why Booth, an intelligent and educated man by
all accounts, would choose such a ridiculous weapon to take with him on his mission.


Let’s imagine that it is the evening of April 14, 1865, and you are John Wilkes Booth. Your
mission is to assassinate the president. In a crowded theater. In the middle of Washington, which,
at the time, is heavily fortified and militarized. Because there is, you know, a war going on. And
the enemy’s base of operations — in Richmond, Virginia — is only 100 miles away. So the
nation’s capital is crawling with armed military personnel, armed police patrols, and armed thugs
in the employ of Baker and Stanton.


Your mission then is not going to be an easy one. The president is under armed guard, or at least
he’s supposed to be. He’s also supposed to be in the company of General Ulysses S. Grant, who
is known to always be armed. Of course, Grant has fortuitously opted to get the hell out of
Dodge just hours before he was to have accompanied the Lincolns to the theater, but you
shouldn’t have any way of knowing that, just as you shouldn’t have any way of knowing that
Parker will desert his post. And there will be no shortage of other armed personnel in Ford’s
Theater, including Army Captain Theodore McGowan (no relation), who is seated very near the
door to Lincoln’s box seats.

So you have to assume that you’re going to have to get past at least two armed attendants, and
probably more, to get to the president. And you’re going to have to do that without firing a shot,
since you only have one and you will need to save that for Abe. And since the only realistic
chance you have of actually killing Lincoln with your wildly inaccurate weapon is by sneaking
up behind him and delivering a contact wound to his head, you’re going to have to get past any
guards without making any noise. And since Grant is supposedly also on the hit list, you’re going
to have to kill him as well, which I guess you’ll have to do by bludgeoning him with your empty
gun. That should work out pretty well.


Ford’s Theater, circa 1865
You’re not on a suicide mission, by the way, so even if you somehow manage to successfully
assassinate the president, and presumably General Grant as well, you’re still going to have some
major problems on your hands. First of all, you’re going to have to make your escape from a
theater full of people, many of them armed. Because in April 1865, the beginning of the era that
will be mythologized as the ‘Wild West’ days, there are guns everywhere and everyone is
packing heat. And you, of course, will have blown your wad and will be unarmed.
If you somehow manage to make your way out of the theater, then you will face the daunting
prospect of making your way out of the city and across the Potomac. And as I may have
mentioned, DC is swarming with armed soldiers, armed spies and armed police, as well as armed


citizens. And your only means of defending yourself will be with a dagger, which probably isn’t
going to be very effective.

Your goal is to reach the Navy Yard Bridge, which will get you across the Potomac and to
relative safety. But even if you reach it, you’ve still got a big hurdle to overcome: the bridge has
a strict curfew and the armed guard is under standing orders not to allow anyone to cross without
explicit authorization. If you attempt to cross without anyway, you will be shot. A gun might
come in handy, but you won’t have one.


Chemie


‘
f


The Navy Yard Bridge, John Wilkes Booth’s passage out of town
To recap then, you have set a very ambitious goal for yourself. You must first get to the
president, who is sitting in a private box in a crowded theater with at least two armed attendants.
You must then kill the president with a single shot, because your weapon doesn’t allow for
second chances, and also somehow kill General Grant. You must then, in an unarmed state, make
an escape first from the theater and then from the city, and you must get past an armed guard at
the bridge. And you have to do all of that with just one bullet. It’s hard to see how anything
could go wrong with such a brilliant plan.

Of course, it doesn’t have to be this way. There are other weapons available. Weapons better
suited to your mission. And as an alleged Southern operative, you should surely know that. It
was, after all, Confederate guerilla groups that pioneered the shock-and-awe tactic of using
overwhelming force in the form of multiple revolvers. We’ve all seen images of Wild West
gunslingers riding hard with their reins in their teeth, six-shooters blazing in both hands. It’s only
natural to dismiss such images as a hackneyed Hollywood creation. But strangely enough, it’s
actually not. Rebel groups like Mosby’s Rangers and Quantrill’s Raiders really did train to do
exactly that. And they wore custom-made holsters that could hold as many as six revolvers, three


on each side. That allowed them to get off as many as 36 shots before their overwhelmed Union
adversaries, armed with muskets, could reload and get off so much as a second shot.

Those semi-mythical figures in American history that we know as Frank and Jesse James, and
Jim, Bob, John and Cole Younger, and Bill, Grat, Bob and Emmett Dalton, learned the skills
they later employed as Wild West ‘outlaws’ while riding with the likes of William Quantrill and
“Bloody Bill” Anderson. But that’s not really the point here — the point here is that revolvers are
easy to come by and might serve you better than a nearly-worthless single-shot derringer. And
according to the official story, you definitely have access to at least two of them (pictured
below).


There are other things you might want to consider as well, such as not committing the crime as
John Wilkes Booth. You are, after all, a famous stage actor, which means that you are also a
wardrobe and makeup guy. Because in your era, you and your contemporaries have to handle


those duties yourselves, so you travel with a couple large trunks full of stuff like wigs and fake
beards. You could easily don a convincing disguise so as not to be easily recognized. Then you
don’t have to worry about getting out of the city alive; all you have to do is make it out of the
theater, quickly ditch the disguise, and then you can circle around and rejoin the crowd at Ford’s
without arousing any suspicion at all.

And you do, after all, have a lot at stake. Even if you manage to make an escape from DC, your
lifestyle and career will be distant memories. All the fame, all the female adoration, all the
success, all the wealth ... it will all be gone if you commit the crime as John Wilkes Booth. So
you might want to put on a disguise. And replace that derringer with a revolver or two. And
maybe bring an accomplice or two along for additional firepower. You have quite a few co-
conspirators to choose from.

You also might want to reconsider whether Ford’s Theater is the best place to do this. According
to numerous historians, Lincoln has a bad habit of ignoring advice from aides and strolling
around Washington unescorted at times, leaving him seriously vulnerable. That might make it a
bit easier to successfully pull this off.


FANNY BROWN
(‘Pretty Fay Brown’)


Fanny Brown, one of Booth’s many paramours
In summary then, your best bet is probably to make the attempt on Lincoln’s life when he is
alone and unprotected. And you should probably bring along some more impressive firepower,
just in case. If you are determined to do it in the theater, you should don a disguise and bring
along a couple other gunmen in case one or more of you are killed or physically prevented from


reaching the president. The dumbest thing you could probably do would be to go it alone, as
John Wilkes Booth, and arm yourself only with a derringer. But I guess you can’t argue with
success ... right?

Meanwhile, one of your comrades-in-arms, Lewis Paine/Payne/Powell, has a difficult task ahead
of him as well. His goal is to kill Lincoln’s Secretary of State, William Seward, who is
recuperating at his stately manor in the heart of DC after being severely injured in a fall from a
horse-drawn carriage just nine days earlier. Seward had suffered a broken lower jaw, a fractured
right arm, torn ligaments in his foot, and heavy bruising over much of his body.

The 63-year-old secretary is therefore physically vulnerable, but assassinating him is still not
going to be easy. For starters, Paine is going to have to gain access to the estate. Then he’s going
to have to find Seward without knowing the layout of the home or which floor or which of the
many rooms the secretary is in. And he’s going to have to get past a lot of people, because there
are no less than eight other able-bodied adults in the home, five of them men, two of whom are
military personnel. And there are readily accessible weapons in the home. And, as I may have
mentioned, there are armed patrols all over the city, and they are quite capable of quickly
responding to any signs of a disturbance at the Secretary of State’s residence.


Be oe eS oS 3 :
The rear view of Ford’s Theater and ‘Baptist Alley’
The attack on Seward has been all but written out of our history books, but in 1865 it was
portrayed as an integral component of the plot against Lincoln, particularly during the show trial
of the alleged conspirators. It is now mentioned only in passing, if at all. Which is probably
because the story doesn’t make a whole lot of sense.

In the home are: William Seward, the injured Secretary of State; William Bell, Seward’s black
servant; Frederick Seward, William’s son as well as his Assistant Secretary of State; Major
Augustus Seward, another son and a career Army officer (who will be promoted in a few weeks
to lieutenant colonel); Private George Robinson, Seward’s personal attendant (who will be


promoted to sergeant in a few weeks); Emerick Hansell, a US State Department courier; Frances
Seward, the secretary’s wife (who will be dead very soon); Fanny Seward, his daughter (who
will be dead fairly soon); and, finally, the wife of one of the Seward sons.

Payne of course is going it alone, just like Booth, for reasons that have apparently never required
an explanation. The five able-bodied men in the house, at least a couple of whom are likely
armed, will pose a physical challenge. The three women will pose less of a physical threat, but
one or more of them are very likely to run out into the street to summon any nearby patrols. And
just the fact that there are so many people in the way will make it extremely difficult for Powell
to control the situation.


S Another of


Booth’s paramours, this one unidentified
Paine’s mission is not unlike Booth’s; he must enter the building, work his way past any
resistance to get to his target, take out his target, work his way back out of the building past any
resistance, and then somehow find his way out of Washington. But unlike Booth, Payne won’t
have even a single bullet to work with. Instead, he is going in armed only with a bludgeon and a
knife. And he’ll be coming out with nothing but the clothes on his back.


Technically speaking, he will be carrying a gun, but it doesn’t work and so is only useful as a
bludgeon. In a city overflowing with guns, Paine has chosen to bring one that doesn’t work.
Which means that, luckily for the Sewards, no one is going to die.

Paine though is going to leave quite a trail of destruction once he enters the estate, which sits just
a half-dozen blocks from Ford’s Theater. Frederick Seward will be left gravely injured, with his
head reportedly split open and his skull fractured in two places. Major Augustus Seward will also
receive severe head injuries, with one report claiming that he was half scalped. Private Robinson
will also be seriously wounded, with deep stab wounds to his chest. Emerick Hansell will receive
at least one deep, very serious chest wound as well. Fanny Seward will be wounded as well, in
some unspecified manner. And William Seward — who is lying in bed on his back, unable to
defend himself — will be brutally stabbed about the head and neck, but will, despite his already
weakened condition, miraculously survive.

Fhe 2fg 2s 2S 2fg 2s 28 2g 2s 2s fe 2s 2s 2fe 2s 2s fe 2s 2s fe 2s 2S fe is 2s oie 2s 2s 2s 2s 2s oie 2s 2s oie is 2s fe 2s 2s 2s 2s 2s 2s 2s 2s 2s 2s 2s 2s 2s 2s 2s 2 2 2k 2s ok

It is difficult to believe that the attack on Secretary of State Seward ever took place at all. Lewis
Paine supposedly gravely wounded six people in hand-to-hand combat, four of them able-bodied
men, and yet, as photos taken soon after his arrest just days later reveal, he didn’t have so much
as a scratch on him. He supposedly left his hat, gun and knife behind, creating a handy evidence
trail, but why would he leave his only weapons behind? He also allegedly left a bloodstained
coat with gloves and a fake moustache in the pocket in the woods just outside of DC. Lewis
Paine was apparently a very considerate attempted assassin.


Lewis Paine, April 1865
The descriptions of the conditions of the victims came from the first three people to conveniently
arrive at the crime scene: Secretary of War Edwin Stanton, Secretary of the Navy Gideon
Welles, and Surgeon General Joseph Barnes. You know, just your typical first responders. None
of them reported seeing Augustus there. Stanton initially claimed that only William Seward, Fred
Seward and George Robinson were injured; Augustus Seward, Emerick Hansell and Fanny
Seward were later added to the victim list, apparently so that the prosecution would have suitable
witnesses. It was an entire month before Fanny Seward came forward with her account of the
attack.
Augustus was later presented at trial as both a victim of and an eyewitness to the attack — the
attack that very likely didn’t take place, in the home he wasn’t actually in at the time. His
testimony was wildly at odds with that of Robinson, with both men claiming that they had been
in the room and personally witnessed the attack on William Seward. Not only did their accounts
significantly differ, but neither really explained why it was that with the two of them in the room,
and with Frederick and Hansell in the home as well, they were unable to defend the secretary.


© Mads Dah! Madsen Dynamichrome

This remarkable image of Paine, captured in April 1865, has been lovingly colorized
It is impossible to determine whether the alleged attack ever took place, but it appears extremely
unlikely. It does not seem logistically possible for one barely armed man to have done what


Paine is supposed to have done. And it doesn’t seem physically possible for him to have done so
without sustaining a single visible injury. There is no tangible evidence that Paine ever entered
the home. The only ‘evidence’ that has ever existed is the dubious (and conflicting) accounts told
by the alleged victims and by the high-ranking cabinet officials who just happened to be first on
the scene.

Let’s now briefly review the key elements of this story: two assassins; three targets; numerous
people to get through to get to those targets; numerous other people to get by to flee the scene; a
city essentially under martial law; and one — exactly one — bullet. Anyone see anything wrong
with that scenario?


Anyone notice anything peculiar about the two images of Lewis Powell in my last post?
Anything at all? Other than, of course, the fact that one of them had been colorized, making it
appear unsettlingly contemporary? Because they are, to be sure, very unusual images.

There’s really nothing else like them in all of recorded history — except for, that is, the
remarkable images that also exist of most of his alleged co-conspirators. And perhaps it is time
for us to now meet those alleged conspirators, beginning with the rather dashing gentleman
pictured below, Mr. Samuel Bland Arnold, who looks almost like he could be a 21st century
actor posing for a publicity photo for his latest blockbuster film.


Arnold was thirty at the time of the assassination and was working as a commissary clerk at
Fortress Monroe, Virginia. He was said to be a former Confederate soldier, though it seems very
likely that he was actually a Union operative (as appears to be the case with almost all of Booth’s
alleged accomplices). The files of the Bureau of Military Justice (a misnomer if ever there was
one) contain the following tidbits of information on Arnold:

“Samuel B. Arnold was born at Georgetown, D.C., of highly respectable parents ... He was first
sent to be educated at Georgetown College, from there he was sent to the Reverend J.H. Dashills,
[in] Baltimore County, his parents having removed from Georgetown to Baltimore. He was one
year in Rockingham County, Virginia, under the charge of the Reverend Mr. Gibbins, and
afterward sent to Saint Timothy Hall, Catonsville, Maryland, and place[d] under the Rev. L.
Vanbakelin.”

The picture painted here is of a well educated young man who had a rather privileged upbringing
in and around the nation’s capital. Not at all the kind of guy you would expect to have donned a
Confederate uniform, unless he did so as a covert Union operative. Arnold was convicted of


complicity in the plot to kill Lincoln and was handed a life sentence by the military tribunal. He
served only four years though before being pardoned by President Johnson and released in
1869. Arnold lived to the ripe old age of seventy-two, passing away on the autumnal equinox of
1906.

Next up is Michael O’ Laughlin (or O’ Laughlen — the two are used interchangeably throughout
the literature on the assassination), who, like Arnold, was a ruggedly handsome, well dressed
young man from a well-to-do family. Just twenty-four when Lincoln was shot, O’ Laughlin had
known Booth since childhood, when they had lived across the street from each other

in Baltimore (Arnold had also been a childhood friend of Mr. Booth). The Bureau of Military
Justice files reveal the following about O’ Laughlin:

“Michael O’ Laughlin was born in the City of Baltimore ... He was educated at a School
conducted by a highly respectable Teacher at the corner of Front and LaFayette Sts., and after
leaving School learned the trade of ornamental Plaster work, and also acquired the art of
Engraving. The company he was in the habit of associating with was not of a character that a
person indisposed to evil would have made choice of. His appearance was generally of a genteel
character.”


In 1865, O’ Laughlin was working for his older brother as a clerk in a Baltimore feed store. That
brother, according to government files, was a member of the Knights of the Golden Circle.
Testimony before the military tribunal indicated that Michael likely was as well. Convicted by
that tribunal, O’ Laughlin was given a life sentence, which proved to be a death sentence when he
contracted yellow fever in prison and died, strangely enough, on or about the autumnal equinox
of 1867. His remains are interred in the same Baltimore cemetery where Arnold and Booth can
be found.

Like Arnold and O’Laughlin (and Booth), David Edgar Herold (frequently identified in print as
David Herald) was a well educated young man from an upscale family. Herold was born

in Maryland and raised in — where else? — Washington, DC. His father was the chief clerk at the
Washington Navy Yard store — the same Washington Navy Yard whose guarded bridge Booth
and Herold were inexplicably allowed to cross on the night of April 14, 1865.


Herold attended Georgetown College, followed by the Rittenhouse Academy and then the
prestigious Charlotte Hall Military Academy. He later went to work for various pharmacists and
doctors, including our old friend “Dr.” Francis Tumblety. On one occasion in 1863, when he was
dispatched to the White House to deliver a bottle of castor oil, Herold had the honor of
personally meeting President Lincoln.


Tried along with seven of his alleged co-conspirators, Herold was found guilty and sentenced to
death by hanging. That sentence was carried out on July 7, 1865, just after Herold’s twenty-third
birthday. He is, as would be expected, buried in the Congressional Cemetery in Washington, DC.
Thus far we have met four lads (Booth, Herold, McLaughlin, and Arnold) who all were raised in
and lived and worked in the Baltimore/Washington DC area. Considering that the conspiracy to
kill Lincoln, to the extent that it is acknowledged at all, is invariably cast as a Confederate
conspiracy, there don’t appear to have been too many southerners in the crowd. There was at
least one though — our old friend Lewis Thornton Powell.

The youngest of the alleged conspirators — just twenty at the time of the assassination — Powell
was also known as Lewis Paine, Lewis Payne, Reverend Wood, The Reverend, James Wood,
Mosby, and Kincheloe, among other aliases. As his shadowy identities would seem to imply, he
was by many accounts an intelligence operative. Raised in Alabama, Georgia and Florida,
Powell was educated by his father, the Reverend George C. Powell.


Lewis entered the service at a young age — either sixteen or seventeen, depending upon the
source. Powell’s two older brothers enlisted as well, with all three serving with the 2nd Florida
Infantry. Lewis was the only one of the three to survive the Civil War. Wounded at Gettysburg in
early July 1863, he was taken prisoner and sent to a POW hospital. Following his recovery, he
was put to work as a male nurse in a hospital in Baltimore, from where he reportedly escaped,
apparently by basically walking out the door.

After that, according to historian Theodore Roscoe (The Web of Conspiracy), his “movements
are hard to follow.” Author Jim Bishop added, in The Day Lincoln Was Shot, that “There is an
unexplained hitch in his [military] records.” According to various accounts, he went to work with
the paramilitary forces serving under John Singleton Mosby. In January 1865, he turned up in a
boardinghouse in Baltimore, Maryland and allegedly became a Lincoln assassination conspirator.
On July 7, 1865, he was hanged.


There is scant evidence that Powell knew Booth at all, though an apocryphal tale is often told of
a very young Lewis meeting Booth in a theater following a performance by the acclaimed actor.
There doesn’t appear to be any evidence at all linking him to the other alleged conspirators. He
photographed really well though.

Moving back up north, we next meet the hapless Ned Spangler, also known as Ed Spangler,
Edward Spangler, Edman Spangler, and Edmund Spangler. The oldest of the alleged male
conspirators at thirty-nine, Spangler was a journeyman carpenter originally from Pennsylvania,
though he had spent the majority of his life in the Baltimore area. During the Civil War, he was
living in Washington, DC, where he was employed at Ford’s Theater as a carpenter and
stagehand.


Spangler had met Booth many years earlier when he worked on the Booth family’s Tudor
mansion. In the aftermath of the Lincoln assassination, he was accused of holding Booth’s horse
and aiding and abetting the actor’s escape from the theater. The charges though were dubious at
best. Sentenced to a six-year prison term, the most lenient sentence handed down by the military
tribunal, he was pardoned four years later by President Andrew Johnson. Spangler died on
February 7, 1875, reportedly of tuberculosis.

Next up is the only foreign national in the group, George Andrew Atzerodt, who was brought
over to America from Germany when he was eight. Raised in, of course, Maryland, Atzerodt and
his brother owned a carriage repair shop where George worked as a painter. At the time of the
assassination, he was twenty-nine.


The military tribunal maintained that Atzerodt had been assigned the task of assassinating newly-
installed Vice President Andrew Johnson, but he had allegedly lost his nerve and failed to carry
out the assignment. In truth, there is no real evidence that Johnson, who was likely involved or at
least had knowledge of the plot, was ever targeted. As with Stanton, this was a case of the
conspirators themselves claiming to be intended victims. Atzerodt was found guilty of his
alleged crimes and was hanged on July 7, 1865.

The seventh of the alleged conspirators was Dr. Samuel Mudd, yet another Marylander. Like
many of the others, Mudd was born into a large, well-to-do family and he was well educated,
having graduated from both GeorgetownCollege in DC and the medical school at

the University of Maryland in Baltimore. Mudd worked as both a country doctor and a tobacco
farmer, and was reportedly a slave owner who harbored southern sympathies.


Mudd, thirty-two at the time, stood trial along with the others on charges of having aided and
abetted Booth’s plot and having offered medical aid to the injured actor. His actual role has been
fiercely debated by mainstream historians, all of whom have grossly misrepresented

the Lincoln assassination. Convicted by the tribunal, Mudd was sentenced to life in prison but
was pardoned just four years later by Johnson.

Having now met seven of the nine people who stood trial as Booth’s alleged co-conspirators, is
there anything that stands out as unusual about the images adorning this post? Anything at all?
And keep in mind that these are official booking photos, otherwise known as mugshots. But they
certainly don’t look like any other mugshots ever taken. We certainly have no such images of
Lee Harvey Oswald. Or Sirhan Sirhan. Or Charles Guiteau. Or Leon Czolgosz. Or James Earl
Ray. Or John Hinckley. Or Mark David Chapman. Or any other alleged assassin or attempted
assassin. Or anyone ever arrested on suspicion of having committed any crime.


No one else, you see, had one of the top professional photographers of the era come by to take
their mugshots. No one else had the benefit of dramatic backdrops, professional lighting, and
flattering poses and camera angles. And no one else was photographed by the very same guy,
Alexander Gardner, who was long credited as being the guy who took the last known images of
President Abraham Lincoln.

When called upon to photograph the people accused of plotting against that

president, Gardner certainly rose to the occasion. The images of the alleged Lincoln conspirators
are arguably the finest work that the Civil War photographer ever did. The portraits of the
conspirators’ victim, taken not long before Lincoln’s death, are rather lackluster in comparison.


The very same Alexander Gardner was also the guy who, just weeks after lovingly
photographing the alleged conspirators, photographed several of those same conspirators being
led to the gallows and hanged. And the guy who officially photographed Lincoln’s funeral. And
the guy who took the only image of what was claimed to be the body of John Wilkes Booth, after
the actor had allegedly been gunned down and transported back to Washington.


Left to right: Mary Surratt, Lewis Powell, David Herold, and George Atzerodt
That image though won’t be displayed here, for reasons explained by author W.C. Jameson
(Return of Assassin): “Following the work of the identification committee, the body was
photographed by Alexander Gardner, one of the members. Gardner conducted his work in the
presence of War Department detective James A. Wardell. Gardner was allowed to take only one
photograph and was quickly hastened to a darkroom to develop it. Wardell stood by his side the
entire time, and when the picture was finished, Wardell took possession of it, along with the
plate ... Moments later, Lafayette Baker took the photographic plate from Wardell. In response
to subsequent inquiries, the government denied that any photographs were ever taken of the body
... To this day, no one knows what became of either the picture or the plate.”
Theodore Roscoe adds that, “Undoubtedly Gardner gave the glass plate to Lafayette Baker or
to Stanton. But the Secret Service Chief made no mention of it in his history. Stanton never
mentioned it. War Department records are absolutely silent on the subject. The photograph never
reached public domain.”
Nothing unusual about any of that. Returning now to the collection of the world’s most
glamorous mugshots, it should be noted that there are, beyond their mere existence, other
curiosities concerning these photos. Like the fact that the photo of Dr. Mudd that was officially
released, and presented above, isn’t actually Dr. Mudd at all. It appears to be Hartmann Richter,
a cousin of George Atzerodt who was never charged with any complicity in the assassination
plot. The real Dr. Mudd is pictured below.


And then there is the guy in the next image, officially photographed as a conspirator yet never
charged, tried or even identified. The government just pretended as though he never existed.


The appearance of the alleged conspirators in these striking images stands in stark contrast to
their treatment throughout their confinement, which can only be described as barbaric. The
suspects’ ankles and wrists were kept shackled at all times. They were forced to wear specially-
designed heavy leather hoods at all times other than when they were in court. The hoods were
very tightly fit and featured pads that put tremendous pressure on the prisoners’ eyes, causing
intense pain in addition to subjecting the wearers to extreme and prolonged sensory deprivation.
Some of the prisoners were also fitted with iron collars attached to a heavy ball and chain. These
also had to be worn at all times.

All suspects were confined to tiny solitary cells outfitted with just a thin straw mattress, a worn
army blanket, and an open bucket to use as a toilet. They were allowed no visitors and their
guards were even forbidden from speaking to them. Armed sentries kept watch at all times to
ensure that the prisoners had no human interaction whatsoever. Each suspect was assigned to a


cluster of three cells, insuring that they had no neighbors to interact with. It was widely rumored
that they were being tortured in more overt ways as well, which was undoubtedly the case.

No attorneys were provided for the defendants; they had to retain their own counsel, despite
being completely cut off from the outside world. Consequently, some of them began the
proceedings with no representation. Even after obtaining counsel, they were not allowed to have
any private consultations with their attorneys. And they were not allowed to testify or speak in
court at all, nor could any statements made by them be introduced.

But other than all that — and numerous other factors, which will be discussed later — the
conspirators were given a fair trial. Let’s now close out this edition by meeting the last of the
alleged conspirators who were tried by military tribunal — the one who, without explanation, was
not photographed by Mr. Gardner. That would be, of course, Mary Surratt, the first woman to be
executed in these United States.


Surratt was, shockingly, a native Marylander from a rather wealthy family. Born sometime in the
early 1820s (no one seems to know exactly when), she was educated at a private Catholic
boarding school in Alexandria, Virginia, at a time when, as Theodore Roscoe noted, “higher
learning for females was frowned upon as radical.” At fifteen (or sixteen, or nineteen), she
married John Surratt, with whom she had three offspring, Isaac, Anna, and John, Jr.

The Surratts did well for themselves for a number of years. At one time, John owned as many as
1,200 acres of land and a number of businesses, including a hotel, a tavern and a boardinghouse.
Much of that land straddled the border between DC and Maryland, just thirteen miles from
downtown Washington, DC. The settlement there soon came to be known as Surrattsville, which
is frequently claimed to have been heavily involved in Confederate espionage activities.
Spymaster Lafayette Baker, accompanied by some 300 Union soldiers, converged on
Surrattsville in late 1861 to launch a full investigation of the Surratt family and various others
suspected of involvement in the Confederate underground. According to pseudo-historian Roy
Chamlee, Jr. Lincoln’s Assassins), Baker’s team unearthed compelling evidence of a vast
network of covert Confederate operations. They made though only a few token arrests, which,
given that thousands elsewhere were rounded up by Baker’s thugs in mass arrests based on far
less evidence than what was found in Surrattsville, strongly suggests that the operations in
Surrattsville weren’t actually aimed at aiding the south,

In any event, John Surratt died in 1862 and his widow fell upon hard times. She was nevertheless
able to finance a costly move to the heart of DC in late 1864, taking possession of a
boardinghouse just four blocks from Ford’s Theater. It was in that boardinghouse that Booth and
the others allegedly plotted first the kidnapping of, and then the assassination of Abraham
Lincoln. Found guilty by the military tribunal, Mary Surratt was hanged on July 7, 1865.


In the last installment, we met the seven men and one woman who faced trial by military tribunal
for their alleged roles in the plot to assassinate President Abraham Lincoln. But there were two
others involved in the supposed conspiracy: the mastermind and assassin, John Wilkes Booth,
and his alleged right-hand man, John Harrison Surratt, Jr., son of the executed Mary Surratt.
Like most of his alleged co-conspirators, Surratt was a well educated, good looking young man
from a well-to-do Northern family. He was born in April 1844 to John and Mary Surratt, and was
baptized at St. Peter’s Church in — where else? — Washington, DC. He was educated at St.
Charles College in, naturally enough, Maryland. At the tender age of eighteen, following the
death of his father, Surratt became the Postmaster of Surratsville. Beyond that, little is known
about the early life of the man cast by the government as Booth’s primary accomplice. As
Theodore Roscoe wrote in The Web of Conspiracy:

“Official records on John Harrison Surratt, Jr., are similarly devoid of depth ... He passes
through Washington like a shadow. His appearances in the house on H Street are shadowy. Now
he is glimpsed in Richmond. Next he is glimpsed in Canada. The authorities can never quite lay
their hands on him, and neither can the historians. Of the immediate members of Booth’s coterie,
least is known about John Harrison Surratt, Jr.”


John Harrison Surratt, Jr., as sketched by an artist for Harper’s Weekly
Roscoe claims, as have many other historians, that Surratt “operated as spy and as message-
bearer, conveying Confederate dispatches between Richmond, Washington,
and Montreal, Canada. By the time Mrs. Surratt’s boardinghouse was well established
in Washington, John H. Surratt had become a well paid and highly adept operator in the Secret
Service of the C.S.A. [Confederate States of America] Maybe so. It seems far more likely
though, given various facts of the case, that he was actually a Union operative posing as a
Confederate operative. Or that the two ‘sides’ were actually one and the same, as seems likely.
Of the ten alleged conspirators, Surratt, who celebrated his 21st birthday just one day
before Lincoln was gunned down, was the only one not to be captured or killed in the massive
manhunt that followed the assassination. He quickly made his way to Canada, where he found
sanctuary with a Catholic priest during the time that his mother was being tried, sentenced and
hanged. He left Canada in early September, some two months after the executions had been
carried out. From that point on, the US government appears to have been well aware of his
movements and whereabouts.


John Surratt in his Papal Zouave uniform
On March 4, 1867, the Washington Daily Morning Chronicle summarized the findings of an
investigation by the Judiciary Committee of the House of Representatives as follows: “It appears


that Surratt sailed from Canada in September 1865, and landed in Liverpool on the 27th of the
same month; that the fact of his landing was communicated to Secretary Seward by the
American vice consul, Mr. Wilding. No steps were taken by the President or Secretary of State to
secure his arrest. No demand was made upon England for his return to this country, nor is there
any evidence of the procurement or attempted procurement of an indictment against him.”
Surratt himself would later say that, “While I was in London, Liverpool and Birmingham, our
consuls at those ports knew who I was and advised our State Department of my whereabouts, but
nothing was done.” Curious behavior indeed for a government that had, just months earlier,
aggressively prosecuted and executed lesser conspirators.

On November 24, 1865, two months into Surratt’s leisurely stay in England, Secretary of War
Edwin Stanton abruptly withdrew the standing reward on Surratt’s head, clearly signaling to
Europe and elsewhere that the US wasn’t all that interested in pursuing the capture and
prosecution of the alleged conspirator. Stanton, needless to say, offered no explanation for his
unusual actions.

In April 1866, Surratt sailed from England to Italy, arriving in Rome, where he was almost
immediately assigned a position with the Pope’s elite Papal Zouave military guard. On April 21,
a fellow Zouave, Henri de Sainte-Marie, who happened to be an old friend from Maryland,
informed America’s minister to Rome, General Rufus King, of Surratt’s whereabouts and true
identity. A Cardinal Antonelli explained to King that “if the American government desired the
surrender of the criminal there would be no difficulty in the way.” The US government,
nevertheless, chose to look the other way.

Returning once again to the summary of the findings of the House Committee, we find that
“news of [Surratt’s] presence in Rome did reach the ears of minister King. He was informed by
another than the Secretary of State that Surratt was in the military service of the Pope, and
communicated the fact by letter, dated August 8, 1866, to his department. Notwithstanding this,
no steps were taken to identify or secure the arrest of the supposed conspirator and assassin ...”
[emphasis added]

No explanation was given, of course, for the nearly four-month delay in drafting and sending the
letter. On November 11, 1866, after Surratt had been going about his business in Rome for some
seven months, making no effort to disguise himself, Papal authorities ordered his arrest. He
allegedly then leapt from a cliff and made his escape, somehow supposedly surviving a 100-foot
drop and evading at least 50 soldiers who were in hot pursuit within minutes. He then casually
made his way across Italy, keeping a low profile by continuing to wear the garishly colored
uniform of the Papal Zouave.


4

F a

Barracks at Veroli, Italy, from where John Surrat purportedly escaped

After making his way to Naples, where he was sheltered by the local police and allowed to sleep
at the station as a non-paying guest for three nights, he booked passage first to Malta and then to
Alexandria, Egypt. On November 27, 1866, he was finally arrested by US authorities. It was
almost another full month though before he was dispatched back to the US aboard the Swatara, a
US Navy vessel, which set sail on the winter solstice, December 21, 1866.


That return voyage took unusually long to reach the states, nearly a month and a half. Had a
paddleboat been available, Washington likely would have opted to use that. Upon reaching US
shores, the vessel was delayed for another few weeks while the crew waited for ice to melt on
the Potomac. There were, of course, other ports available from which Surratt could have been
quickly transported by train to Washington, but authorities chose to delay his arrival for as long
as possible.

As researcher Vaughan Shelton (Mask for Treason) wrote, “When the papal government

in Rome finally forced the issue by arresting Surratt, every possible tactic was used to delay his
return.” Otto Eisenschiml (/n the Shadow of Lincoln’s Death) concurred, noting that

“Stanton had tried his utmost to keep Surratt from being brought back at all ...”

On February 4, 1867, the Grand Jury of the District of Columbia indicted John Surratt, who was
still being held aboard the Swatara at the mouth of the Potomac. On February 19,

the Swatara finally anchored at the Washington Navy Yard and Surratt set foot on US soil for
the first time in nearly two years. A bench warrant for his arrest was issued that same day. Four
days later, on February 23, Surratt was brought to court to enter a plea.


Lead defense attorney Joseph H. Bradley


Co-counsel
Richard T. Merrick

On April 18, 1867, Surratt’s defense attorneys filed a motion to set a date for the start of the trial,
saying they were fully prepared to proceed. On that very same day, the district attorney’s office
filed a motion for a continuance. It was just the first of many attempts by the state to delay the
onset of the trial. The New York Herald reported, on May 19, 1867, that the “prisoner’s legal
representatives have over and over again reported themselves ready, but, contrary to the general
ruling, the prosecution, after six months of preparation, has never yet been able to say, ‘We are
prepared to proceed with the trial.’” Ten days later, the Baltimore Sun added that it “is hinted
that, for reasons not made public, the trial of Surratt is not at all desirable.”


The question that most obviously comes to mind throughout this sordid chapter of US history is
why the government suddenly lost the desire to aggressively pursue and prosecute the last
alleged Lincoln conspirator? The primary reason is that, with the war over, Washington no
longer had any justification for seeking ‘justice’ through a military tribunal and would have to
rely instead on civilian courts. And that meant that the proceedings couldn’t be controlled and
corrupted to nearly the extent that they had been throughout the first mock trial.

That presented Washington with a huge problem. Without the muzzling of the defendant, and
without the wholesale introduction of perjured testimony and manufactured evidence, and with
the requirement that actual rules of law be followed, the state had little chance for a conviction.
And given that eight others had already been either executed or exiled to America’s version

of Siberia, despite the fact that they had played lesser roles in the alleged conspiracy, it wasn’t
going to look very good to have John Surratt walk out of the courtroom a free man.

In addition, the government had pulled out all the stops to lay the assassination to rest as quickly
as possible. The other alleged conspirators had been rounded up, indicted, tried, convicted,
sentenced, and executed/imprisoned in less than three months, primarily

because Washington had a vested interest in wrapping things up as quickly as possible, before
too many troubling questions could be raised. The last thing they now wanted to do was reopen
the case to public scrutiny.

Given little choice though in the matter, the case proceeded to trial in June 1867. And true to
form, the state did its very best to rig the proceedings. As America’s first Secret Service chief,
William P. Wood, later wrote, Surratt was “confronted with an abundance of perjured
testimony.” He was also confronted with an abundance of bogus evidence, including a document
that had supposedly been in the water for six weeks before being recovered, but which showed
no signs of exposure whatsoever.

And then there were the laughably biased jury instructions delivered by presiding Judge George
Fisher, which kicked off with the immortal words: “Whoso sheddeth man’s blood by man shall
his blood be shed. So spake the Almighty.” One would have to search far and wide through the
annals of American jurisprudence to find a more wildly inappropriate set of jury instructions.


Presiding Judge George P. Fisher
To insure that the trial was properly rigged, Secretary of State William Seward hired Edwards
Pierrepont, an old friend of Secretary of War Edwin Stanton, to assist the prosecution, although
neither the State Department nor the War Department should have had anything to do with what
was ostensibly a civil trial. Pierrepont was a descendant of James Pierepont, a cofounder
of Yale University. Also hired by Seward, to assist Pierrepont, was Albert G. Riddle. Secretary
of the Navy Gideon Welles’ diary would later reveal that Riddle “had been employed by Seward
to hunt up, or manufacture, testimony against Surratt.”
One of the most bizarre aspects of the Surratt trial was the testimony delivered by our old friend
Henry Rathbone, who was called to the stand, as he had been at the military trial, to provide
eyewitness testimony as to the shooting of Lincoln. Although it was not commented upon at the


time, or for decades after, Rathbone was clearly not spontaneously recalling events as they had
happened, but rather was reciting his testimony from a memorized script.

That script appears to have been created on April 17, 1865, two days after Lincoln died, when
Rathbone was purportedly deposed. A portion of that alleged deposition reads as follows: “That
on April 14th, 1865, at about 20 minutes past 8 o’clock in the evening, he, with Miss Clara H.
Harris, left his residence, at the corner of Fifteenth and H Streets, and joined the President and
Mrs. Lincoln, and went with them in their carriage to Ford’s Theater, in Tenth Street ... When
the party entered the box, a cushioned armchair was standing at the end of the box farthest from
the stage and nearest the audience ... When the second scene of the third act was being
performed, and while this deponent was intently observing the proceedings upon the stage, with
his back toward the door, he heard the discharge of a pistol behind him, and looking around, saw,
through the smoke, a man between the door and the President ... This deponent instantly sprang
toward him and seized him; he wrested himself from the grasp, and made a violent thrust at the
breast of deponent with a large knife. Deponent parried the blow by striking it up, and received a
wound several inches deep in his left arm, between the elbow and the shoulder ...”

One month later, on May 15, 1865, Rathbone testified before the military tribunal. With the
exception of delivering his testimony in the first person, it was a nearly verbatim recital of the
script prepared the month before, and went a little something like this: “On the evening of the
14th of April last, at about 20 minutes past 8 o’clock, I, in company with Miss Harris, left my
residence at the corner of Fifteenth and H Streets, and joined the President and Mrs. Lincoln, and
went with them, in their carriage, to Ford’s Theater in Tenth Street ... On entering the box there
was a large armchair that was placed nearest the audience, farthest from the stage ... When the
second scene of the third act was being performed, and while I was intently observing the
proceedings upon the stage, with my back towards the door, I heard the discharge of a pistol
behind me, and, looking round, saw, through the smoke, a man between the door and the
President ... I instantly sprang towards him, and seized him. He wrested himself from my grasp,
and made a violent thrust at my breast with a large knife. I parried the blow by striking it up, and
received a wound several inches deep in my left arm, between the elbow and the shoulder ...”

A little over two years later, on June 17, 1867, Rathbone dusted off his script and delivered the
following testimony at the trial of John Surratt: “On the evening of the 14th of April, at about 20
minutes past 8, I, in company with Miss Harris, left my residence at the corner of Fifteenth and
H streets, and joined the President and Mrs. Lincoln, and went with them in their carriage to
Ford’s Theater, on Tenth street ... On entering the box there was a large armchair placed nearest
the audience, and furthest from the stage ... When the second scene of the third act was being
performed, and while I was intently observing the performance on the stage, I heard the report of
a pistol from behind me, and on looking round saw dimly through the smoke the form of a man
between the President and the door ... [immediately sprung towards him and seized him. He
wrested himself from my grasp, and at the same time made a violent thrust at me with a large
knife. I parried the blow by striking it up, and received it on my left arm, between the elbow and
the shoulder, and received a deep wound ...”


State Department/War Department representatives Edwards Pierrepont


Albert G. Riddle
In the end though, the government’s brazen attempts to corrupt the proceedings failed to pay
dividends and the jury was left hung 8-4 in favor of acquittal. Even with the obviously perjured
testimony, the manufactured evidence, and the wildly inappropriate jury instructions, the state
was only able to secure four votes for conviction. And Surratt had found himself a number of
new fans. As Eisenschiml noted, “The ladies of Washington considered him quite attractive and
thronged the courtroom.”
John Harrison Surratt walked out of court a free man, and the state quietly opted not to further
pursue the charges. Five years later, he married Mary Victorine Hunter, a second cousin of none
other than Francis Scott Key, whose son’s murderer, it will be recalled, was defended by Edwin


Stanton. Key’s great-great-granddaughter Pauline Potter, by the way, later married Baron
Philippe de Rothschild, of the infamous Rothschild banking family.

Surratt lived to the ripe old age of 72, passing away, curiously enough, on April 21, 1916,
precisely 50 years to the day from when he had been identified in Rome as a member of the
Papal Zouave. It is said that he had penned a biography, but he supposedly opted to burn it a few
days before his death. In a similar vein, Robert Todd Lincoln is said to have burned all his
father’s private papers shortly before his own death — because, I suppose, one wouldn’t want the
truth about the assassination of one’s father to reach the public domain.


Defense attorney Joseph H. Bradley, whom we met in the last installment, had this to say to the
jury and spectators at John Surratt’s trial: “Who was John Wilkes Booth? ... He was a man of
polished exterior, pleasing address, highly respectable in every regard, received into the best
circles of society; his company sought after; exceedingly bold, courteous, and considered
generous to a fault; a warm and liberal-hearted friend, a man who had obtained a reputation upon
the stage.”

The woman who once reported him for rape in Philadelphia, and the irate, jealous husband who
once severely throttled him in Syracuse, New York, might disagree.

Francis Wilson, one of Booth’s biographers (John Wilkes Booth: Fact and Fiction of Lincoln’s
Assassination), posed the following question: “How was it possible for Booth to obtain such
power over a fellow human being as to command him to perform an act of murder and to know
that that command would be enthusiastically obeyed?” A little over a century after the
assassination of Lincoln, prosecutor Vincent Bugliosi would ponder the very same question
about a guy by the name of Charlie Manson: “I tend to think that there is something more, some
missing link that enabled him to so rape and bastardize the minds of his followers that they
would go against the most ingrained of all commandments, Thou shalt not kill, and willingly,
even eagerly, murder at his command.”

A friend of Booth’s from childhood, John Deery, said that the John Wilkes Booth that he knew
“cast a spell over most men with whom he came in contact, and I believe all women without
exception.”


oe Ven


Junius Brutus Booth, father of John Wilkes Booth
So who was this charismatic enigma known as John Wilkes Booth — the man known to history as
possibly the most famous assassin who ever lived? Just about everyone knows that he was an
actor, one of the finest and arguably the most popular of his generation. But he was much more
than just that, a fact obscured by the century-and-a-half focus on John Wilkes Booth the actor. In
reality, John Wilkes Booth, and the Booth family in general, were very deeply tied to the power


structures in Washington and London, and had been for a very, very long time. And they still are
today.

Booth’s most famous ancestor was undoubtedly his namesake, John Wilkes, who lived from
October 17, 1725 until December 26, 1797. Throughout his life, Wilkes served as a Member of
Parliament, a judge, a journalist and essayist, and the Lord Mayor of London. A revered
statesman, Wilkes was also a member of the Hellfire Club and a noted libertine (other notable
libertines throughout history include the Marquis de Sade, Aleister Crowley, and Anton LaVey).
That would be the same Hellfire Club that included as a member a ‘Founding Father” by the
name of Benjamin Franklin. And that would be the same Benjamin Franklin

whose London home from that era yielded the remains of at least ten bodies, six of them
children.


~*~


et a,
ae


Lord Mayor of London John Wilkes
It was the Hellfire Club, by the way, that first coined the phrase “Do what thou wilt,” which was
later appropriated by Aleister Crowley. And it was the Hellfire Club that was widely rumored
during its heyday to be conducting black masses and other occult/Satanic rituals, along with
drunken orgies and various other acts of debauchery.


John Wilkes was also notable for being considered during his lifetime the ugliest man in all

of England. He never though suffered from a shortage of beautiful female companions. Aside
from a nine-year marriage, Wilkes remained single for his 72 years on this planet and was
considered quite the ladies man, fathering an unknown number of children. Like his descendent
and namesake, Wilkes apparently had a knack for “cast[ing] a spell” over women.


| The
Hell-Fire
W\ Clubs me


SEX, SATANISM AND
SECRET SOCIETIES


EVELYN LORD


Two other of John Wilkes Booth’s famous ancestors were Henry Booth, the Ist Earl of
Warrington, who lived from 1652 to 1694, and his son George Booth, who lived from 1675 to
1758 and succeeded his father as the 2nd (and last) Earl of Warrington. At various times during
his life, Henry Booth served as a Member of Parliament, a member of the Privy Council of
England, a noted writer, and a mayor.

John Wilkes Booth was also descended from Barton Booth, who lived from 1681 to 1733 and
who was described by one biographer as the “most popular actor with the English royalty known
to history.” Many generations later, namesake Sydney Barton Booth, a son of Junius Brutus
Booth, Jr., would become an actor and writer of some renown before passing away in 1937.


Henry and George Booth, the Ist and 2nd Earls of Warrington
The alleged assassin’s grandfather was Richard Booth, an eccentric English barrister with a
fondness for alcohol — a fondness that would be shared by his son, Junius Brutus Booth, and his
grandson, John Wilkes Booth. Junius was born in London in 1796 and was performing on stage
by the age of seventeen. At nineteen, he married Marie Christine Adelaide Delannoy. Less than
five months later, she bore him his first child, who died in infancy, as would a number of Junius
Brutus Booth’s offspring.
In June 1821, at the age of twenty-five, Junius set sail for America with his mistress, Mary Ann
Holmes, leaving behind his wife and only surviving child, Richard Junius Booth. Junius and
Mary Ann would pose as man and wife for the next thirty years, producing no fewer than ten
illegitimate offspring, four of whom didn’t make it through childhood. The pair weren’t actually
married until 1851, the year Junius finally divorced his actual wife, and were married just one
year before Junius passed away in November 1852.


During his lifetime, Junius was considered to be one of the finest actors of his generation. He
was also regarded as a playwright, scholar, philosopher and linguist. Named for one of the most
notorious assassins of all time, Junius once set a fine example for son John by sending a letter to
then-President Andrew Jackson threatening to slit his throat and/or have him burned at the stake.
And he thoughtfully signed that letter and included a return address. It was, nevertheless,
dismissed as either a hoax or a joke.


S
cS
ina)
aS
is}
S


Junius and Mary Ann purchased a 150-acre estate in Maryland that would ultimately feature a
large pool, stables, and a Gothic home known as Tudor Hall, listed in the National Register of
Historic Places. Junius began construction on the home shortly before his death and so never
lived there, though his offspring, including John Wilkes Booth, did. Ned Spangler, it will be
recalled, was involved in the construction of the home.

John Wilkes Booth, the ninth of Junius and Mary Ann’s ten offspring, was born on May 10,
1838. A well educated young man, he was regarded as an excellent horseman and marksman as
well as a talented athlete. Like his father, he made his acting debut at seventeen, in an 1855
production of Richard III. By 1861, he was one of the most popular actors in America and there
was considerable demand for his services.


™® -
| Aes


"


Abraham Lincoln and John Wilkes Booth at Lincoln’s second inaugural address


On December 2, 1859, John Wilkes Booth was among the soldiers standing guard on the scaffold
when probable agent provocateur John Brown was hanged. Booth was not a soldier though — he
purportedly either borrowed or stole a militia uniform and posed as a soldier to secure the
position. On March 4, 1865, Booth found himself prominently placed among the onlookers

at Lincoln’s second inaugural address. He was there as a guest of US Senator John P. Hale.
Unknown at the time was that Booth was secretly engaged to Hale’s daughter, Lucy Hale.
Senator Hale had worked closely with fellow Senator William Seward before Seward’s
appointment as Secretary of State. Notably, Hale was a northern senator, representing New
Hampshire, and he was known for his staunchly abolitionist views. It makes perfect sense then
that his daughter would be engaged to an alleged Confederate operative.


Senator John P. Hale
During John Wilkes Booth’s lifetime, there was another member of the Booth/Wilkes clan who
achieved a considerable amount of public notoriety. Charles Wilkes was a US naval officer who
ultimately attained the rank of rear admiral, as well as a celebrated explorer who led the United


States Exploring Expedition from 1838 to 1842. He was also a great-nephew of John Wilkes,
making him a blood relative of John Wilkes Booth and his numerous siblings.

Charles Wilkes was raised by his aunt, Elizabeth Ann Seton, who was a woman of considerable
social prominence who later became the first American-born woman to be canonized by the
Catholic Church. In the 1820s, Wilkes counted among his associates a genocidal Grand Master
Mason by the name of Andrew Jackson — the same Andrew Jackson who was also, by some
reports, a friend of Junius Brutus Booth, the guy who ‘jokingly’ threatened to assassinate him.


Charles Wilkes
Many years later, another member of the Booth clan, Theresa Cara Booth, was born on
September 23, 1954. Theresa is a direct descendent of Algernon Booth, Junius Brutus Booth’s
brother and John Wilkes Booth’s uncle. She became an attorney in 1976 and a member of the


Queen’s Counsel in 1995. Two years later, Theresa Booth — better known as Cherie Blair, wife
of Tony Blair — became the First Lady of Downing Street. Nothing unusual about that, I suppose.
In the aftermath of the Lincoln assassination, actors were viewed with considerable suspicion
across the country. The entire cast of Our American Cousin was arrested and numerous other
productions closed for a time due to the lynch-mob mentality that was sweeping the nation. No
one was above suspicion and, as previously noted, more than 2,000 people were arrested as
possible co-conspirators. Those with only the loosest connections to the accused coup plotters
were scooped up and held for varying lengths of time.

Two of John Wilkes Booth’s brothers, Edwin and Junius Brutus, Jr., were fellow actors. Clearly
then they had two big strikes against them, which should have put them at the very top of the
government’s round-up list. And yet not a single member of the Booth clan was arrested in the
frenzy of arrests and accusations. Not one. It always helps to have friends in high places.


Se ee ee ee


The Op-Ed page of the Los Angeles Times apparently now operates in part as a forum for unpaid
advertisements for intelligence agency-approved works of fiction. I say that because just a few
days ago that page featured what was essentially a half-page ad for Jeff Bauman’s hopelessly
fraudulent account of the Boston Marathon bombings. And yesterday that same page featured a
barely disguised advertisement for a book written by a professional liar by the name of Mel
Ayton.

Ayton has apparently penned a whole series of disinformational books on various presidential
assassinations and attempted assassinations. His latest, Hunting the President: Threats, Plots and
Assassination Attempts — From FDR to Obama, carries on in that fine tradition. The following
paragraph is from his wildly inaccurate Op-Ed piece:

“Lincoln was the first American president to be assassinated. But the motivations that drove his
assassin were unfortunately not unique. Understanding the nature of those who want to kill a
president goes considerably further toward explaining assassinations than looking to fanciful
conspiracy theories.”


Cherie Blair, aka Theresa Cara Booth
Let’s now take a peek at what “fanciful” theory it is that Ayton is pitching: “Booth’s desire for
fame and recognition is a common theme among assassins. In researching a book on presidential
killers and would-be killers, I found that they tended to share certain personality traits. While
some had been treated for mental illness, an even more predominant characteristic is that many
of them were disillusioned with and resentful of American society after a lifetime of failure. And
most of them also had a burning desire for notoriety. Killing an American president, most would-
be assassins believed, would win them a place in history, making a ‘somebody’ out of a
“‘nobody.’”


Every single word of the preceding paragraph can only be described as complete and utter
bullshit. Booth already had fame and recognition beyond his wildest dreams. He was far from
being a “nobody.” To the contrary, he was making upwards of $20,000 a year, a staggering
amount in those days, and had the love, respect and admiration of men and women all across the
country. He was wealthy, good looking, supremely talented, and had lived a very charmed life.
And given that he was only twenty-six at the time of the assassination, it is hardly accurate to say
that he had faced a “lifetime” of failure. In truth, he had never known failure at all in his short
life.

Compulsive liar Ayton’s body of work is, unfortunately, typical of what has been written about
Lincoln and his alleged assassin over the last 149 years. Listed below, in order of the date of
release, are some of the more honest books that have been published (some decidedly better than
others).

Bates, Finis L. The Escape and Suicide of John Wilkes Booth, J.L Nichols & Company, 1907


Wilson, Francis John Wilkes Booth: Fact and Fiction of Lincoln’s Assassination, Houghton
Mifflin Company, 1929


Eisenschiml, Otto Why Was Lincoln Murdered?, Little, Brown and Company, 1937
Eisenschiml, Otto In the Shadow of Lincoln’s Death, Wilfred Funk, Inc., 1940

Roscoe, Theodore The Web of Conspiracy, Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1959

Shelton, Vaughan Mask for Treason: The Lincoln Murder Trial, Stackpole Books, 1965


Balsiger, David and Charles Sellier, Jr. The Lincoln Conspiracy, Schick Sunn Classic Books,
1977


Jameson, W.C. Return of Assassin: John Wilkes Booth, Republic of Texas Press, 1999


“The assassination of President Abraham Lincoln, only days after the end of the war, was a
terrible tragedy. Much has been speculated about the events leading up to the murder and
immediately afterward, but few people know what really happened.” So says Bill O’Reilly on
page | of his tome on the Lincoln assassination. What he doesn’t tell readers is that after reading
his novelized account, they will still have no clue what really happened.

One thing that O’Reilly opts to leave out of his book entirely is the mockery of a trial held for the
alleged conspirators. After spending the first 276 pages of his book covering the period from
April 1, 1865 to April 26, 1865 (the day Booth was allegedly gunned down at Garrett’s barn),
O’Reilly then abruptly jumps ahead to July 7, 1865, the day four of the alleged conspirators were
hanged. Apparently nothing of significance happened in May or June of 1865. Or maybe it is
best not to shine too bright a light on one of the most sordid chapters of US history.

US Navy Secretary Gideon Welles is on record as stating that Secretary of War Edwin Stanton
wanted the alleged conspirators to be “tried and executed before President Lincoln was buried.”


Convictions were obviously a given. Lincoln was laid to rest on May 4, 1865, nineteen days after
he died and just before the trial of the conspirators began, thwarting Stanton’s wishes, but
‘justice’ was dispensed very quickly nonetheless.

Stanton favored a military trial, a course of action opposed by various other members of

the Lincoln cabinet, including both Welles and former Attorney General Edward Bates, who
noted that “if the offenders are done to death by that tribunal, however truly guilty, they will pass
for martyrs with half the world.” Many believed that a military trial would be unconstitutional
given that all of the defendants were civilians. Stanton nevertheless prevailed.

It would in fact be later determined that the proceedings had been unconstitutional, both because
the suspects were subjected to military ‘justice,’ and because they were denied their right to
individual trials. That ruling would not, however, resurrect the five alleged conspirators who paid
with their lives.

While awaiting what passed for a trial, the prisoners were held in appalling conditions aboard
two ironclad vessels, the Montauk and the Saugus (except for Mudd and Surratt, who were
reportedly held elsewhere and spared the tortuous hoods). Very special attention appears to have
been paid to Lewis Powell. Throughout his confinement, Powell was personally guarded by
Thomas T. Eckert, which is undoubtedly the only time in the nation’s history that a sitting
Assistant Secretary of War served as a lowly prison guard. Even more curiously, despite the fact
that Powell was kept shackled, hooded, isolated, and otherwise deprived, he was nevertheless
allowed to keep a knife while imprisoned. And false reports were circulated indicating that he
was suicidal.


Thomas T. Eckert


It is perfectly clear, in retrospect, that the government had contingency plans to have Powell
“suicided’ if necessary.

On May 1, 1865, newly-installed President Andrew Johnson ordered that the eight alleged
conspirators face a nine-man military tribunal. The members of that tribunal — seven generals
and two colonels — were all handpicked by Stanton. All but a couple were unknown to the public
and none of them knew anything about the so-called ‘rule of law’ or about evidentiary or
procedural rules. That didn’t prove to be a problem though — they just made up the tribunal rules
as they went along.

As Vaughan Shelton wrote back in 1965, “All but one or two were nearly as unknown then as
they are now. There was not a noteworthy war record in the whole group. In fact the two whose
names might be recognized by the average reader — Major General David Hunter, presiding
officer, and Major General Lew Wallace (later author of Ben Hur) — had attained rank by
political connections, and their names had been associated with military defeats throughout the
four-year contest. All appeared to be qualified largely by their prejudices, total ignorance of the
law, and subservience to the will of the prosecutors. It was common talk in Washington that the
military commission was assembled for the purpose of convicting the accused persons — not to
weigh the merits of their cases.”


Besides being completely unqualified to sit in judgment of the accused, the panel had something
else in common, as various photographs reveal: many of them, maybe all of them, were
Freemasons. As were the prosecutors. And at least some of the defense attorneys. And Edwin
Stanton. And Lafayette Baker. And John Wilkes Booth. And seemingly just about everyone else
who played a prominent role in the assassination conspiracy and cover-up. And many of the
generals who directed the action on the battlefields of the Civil War. On both sides.


. P| i ~
Confederate General Albert Pike
Seated on the panel were Major General David “Black Dave” Hunter, Brigadier General Albion
Parris Howe, Lieutenant Colonel David Ramsey Clendenin, Brigadier General Thomas Maley
Harris, Brevet Brigadier General James Adams Ekin, Major General Lew Wallace, Brevet
Colonel Charles Henry Tompkins, Brigadier General Robert Sanford Foster, and Brevet Major
General August Valentine Kautz. The lead prosecutor was Brigadier General Joseph Holt, then
the Judge Advocate General of the United States Army and a former Secretary of War. Joining
him as Special Judge Advocates were John Armor Bingham, a US Representative from Ohio and
a future US Ambassador to Japan, and Brevet Brigadier General Henry Lawrence Burnett. Both
Bingham and Burnett were appointed, of course, by Edwin Stanton.


Pretty Masons all in a row: the nine tribunal members and three prosecutors
Shockingly enough, the assembled panel of ‘judges’ showed extreme bias throughout the seven-
week proceedings. That bias was revealed, for example, by the jurists’ handling of objections.
The defense attorneys, most of whom appear to have actually been working for the state, lodged
only twelve objections, all of which were overruled. Prosecutors, on the other hand, voiced fifty-
four objections, fifty-one of which were sustained.

The prisoners were arraigned on May 10, 1865, just one day after the charges against them had
been read (Holt wanted those charges withheld from the press and public). Two days later, on
May 12, testimony began. The defendants had been given just three days to obtain legal counsel,
which they had to do while being quite literally muzzled. Ultimately assembled for the defense
were Captain William Doster, Frederick Stone, Thomas Ewing, Jr., Walter Smith Cox, and
Colonel Frederick Aiken.

Three members of that group appear to have been richly rewarded for their ‘service’ to country.
Just two years after the ‘trial,’ Stone became a US Representative from Maryland. Ewing also
joined the US Congress, representing a district in Ohio. Cox became a federal judge and, perhaps
quite tellingly, presided at the trial of alleged presidential assassin Charles Guiteau just a couple
years after being seated.


Defense attorney Frederick Stone
Aiken, who represented Mary Surratt after the curious withdrawal of her first attorney, Reverdy
Johnson — who was a sitting US Senator, a former US Attorney General, and a future Minister to
the UK — may have actually been legitimately working on behalf of his client. Notably, he faced
a much different fate after the trial concluded than did Stone, Ewing and Cox. Within a year,


Aiken’s law practice had imploded and he had been arrested for bouncing a check. He died in
1878 at the relatively young age of forty-six and was buried in an unmarked grave.

Very little else is known about the young defense attorney. As his Wikipedia page notes,
“Information on Aiken’s early life is largely unknown; his date of birth, city of birth, and even
his full name varies depending on source.” And “like his birth records, his war service also
remains largely unknown.” Even less appears to be known about the ethereal William Doster,
who was tasked with defending both Atzerodt and Powell, and who also may not have been
thoroughly co-opted.

The reality though is that no defense attorney, no matter how devoted or how skilled, could have
saved any of the defendants from their fates. All that was required for conviction was a simple
majority of five votes — five votes from a nine-man panel predisposed to convict before the trial
even began. Only one additional vote was required to impose the death penalty. And the
tribunal’s pronouncements would be final; there would be no appeals allowed. All of that, of
course, was brazenly unconstitutional.


Union General George McClellan
Stanton’s War Department did not just put the eight defendants on trial; the entire Confederacy
was put on trial in a shameless attempt to inflame public opinion and inspire bloodlust.


As Shelton noted, witnesses told tales of “Plots to burn northern cities, start epidemics, instigate
riots” and other nefarious deeds, including poisoning public water supplies, destroying historical
buildings, and starving Union POWs. Most of these alleged plots were never actually carried out.
And even if they had been, none of that had any relevance at all as to the guilt or innocence of
the defendants and would not have been allowed into evidence in any legitimate court
proceedings.

Another problem with the introduction of such testimony is that most of the ‘witnesses’ who
delivered it didn’t actually exist. One such witness who testified as “Sanford Conover,” for
example, was actually Charles Dunham, who also used the alias “James Watson Wallace.” It was
later revealed that Dunham had run what was dubbed a “school for perjured witnesses” at the
National Hotel, where he had coached others on how to properly deliver their perjured testimony.
Dunham soon found himself in prison after being convicted for both perjury and suborning
perjury.

One of those receiving schooling was “Richard Montgomery,” who was actually James
Thompson, a burglar from New York with a long criminal record. Appearing as “Henry Van
Steinacker” was Hans Von Winklestein, a prison inmate who gained his release shortly after
testifying. A Canadian presented to the court as “Dr.” James Merritt was denounced by his own
government as a fraud and a quack. And so on.


ne


U

a en ‘ e , x =

Thomas Harris, David Hunter, August Kautz, Albion Howe, Lew Wallace, and John
Bingham

Defense attorney Doster, whose vehement objection to the introduction of the irrelevant,

inflammatory testimony was overruled, would later claim that some of the other prosecution

witnesses were actually NDP detectives paid by the government for their testimony. And it


would later be revealed that NDP chief Lafayette Baker’s order to his underlings instructed them
to “extort confessions and procure testimony to establish the conspiracy ... by promises,
rewards, threats, deceit, force, or any other effectual means.”

Many of the state’s witnesses were in fact paid handsomely for their testimony. Merritt, for
example, collected a $6,000 paycheck, the equivalent of more than $150,000 today. Not bad for a
day’s work.

There were numerous other irregularities in 1865’s version of The Trial of the Century. Major
Henry Rathbone, as we have already seen, delivered a bizarrely verbatim recital of his deposition
testimony. For those who have forgotten, here’s another little taste of Rathbone’s version of
events, first from his deposition on April 17, 1865, and then from his testimony before the
tribunal one month later, on May 15, 1865.

“Deponent then turned to the President; his position was not changed; his head was slightly bent
forward, and his eyes were closed. Deponent saw that he was unconscious, and supposing him
mortally wounded, rushed to the door for the purpose of calling medical aid. On reaching the
outer door of the passageway, as above described, deponent found it barred by a heavy piece of
plank, one end of which was secured in the wall ... This wedge, or bar, was about four feet from
the floor. Persons upon the outside were beating against the door for the purpose of entering.
Deponent removed the bar, and the door was opened ...”

“T then turned to the President. His position was not changed: his head was slightly bent forward,
and his eyes were closed. I saw that he was unconscious, and, supposing him mortally wounded,
rushed to the door for the purpose of calling medical aid. On reaching the outer door of the
passageway, I found it barred by a heavy piece of plank, one end of which was secured in the
wall ... This wedge or bar, was about four feet from the floor. Persons upon the outside were
beating against the door for the purpose of entering. I removed the bar, and the door was opened


Union General William Tecumseh Sherman

Rathbone was clearly ‘reading’ his testimony from a memorized script, which raises the obvious
question of: why? Why was Rathbone so thoroughly rehearsed that he was able to recite his
deposition testimony virtually verbatim, without even minor variations in the wording?
Historians, needless to say, have never addressed that question. Another question that has never
been addressed is why the photo of John Wilkes Booth that was used throughout the trial wasn’t
actually of John Wilkes Booth; it was instead an image of his brother, Edwin Booth. What that
means, of course, is that every witness who identified Booth as the man they had seen or heard
discussing, carrying out, or fleeing from the assassination, was actually identifying Edwin Booth
as the culprit. And again, the obvious question that is raised, but that has never been asked or
answered, is: why?

In a bold move, defense counsel Doster subpoenaed sitting President Andrew Johnson to appear
as a witness, but Johnson cavalierly ignored the summons, with no legal repercussions.
Numerous other witnesses who should have been called were strangely absent from the
proceedings, like Mary Todd Lincoln and Clara Harris, both of whom were eyewitnesses to the
assassination of Lincoln. And William Seward, Frederick Seward, Fanny Seward, Frances
Seward, and Emerick Hansell, all of whom were allegedly eyewitnesses to the supposed
bloodbath at the Seward home.


The three witnesses who did testify about the alleged attack at the Seward residence — William
Bell, George Robinson and Augustus Seward — presented wildly contradictory and problematic
accounts, made all the more problematic by the fact that, according to all the early reports,
Augustus Seward wasn’t actually at the home at the time of the alleged attack.


Confederate General Robert E. Lee with various other Confederate generals in 1869
It will probably come as a shock to no one that in 1865 America, the testimony of a black man
carried considerably less weight than the testimony of a white man, especially when the white
men in question were the Secretary of State, an Assistant Secretary of State, and a US State
Department courier. Why then did the state leave William Seward, Frederick Seward and
Emerick Hansell (along with three of the Seward women) on the sidelines while calling to the
stand two black servants — two men who were, if we’re being honest here, just a step above
slaves in the social hierarchy of the time?
According to reports, there were as many as eight eyewitnesses to the carnage at the Seward
mansion — six of them white and five of them members of the Seward family. But the only two
of the eight called were a black ‘houseboy’ who was unable to give his age when asked in court,
and a black nurse. The only member of the Seward family who was called was the one who
wasn’t actually home and therefore didn’t witness anything.


Defense attorney Thomas Ewing, Jr.
As previously stated, the first arrivals to the house after the alleged attack were Secretary of War
Edwin Stanton, Secretary of the Navy Gideon Welles, and Surgeon General Joseph Barnes.
Arriving shortly after them was Assistant Secretary of War Thomas Eckert, who would soon be
serving as Lewis Powell’s prison guard. Unanswered, of course, is the question of why these four
prominent individuals converged on the Seward house before anyone else arrived. And why they
didn’t instead head immediately to Ford’s Theater, where the president lay near death.
No mention was made by any of them of encountering Major Augustus Seward that evening.
And testimony at the tribunal also indicated that Augustus was not at home the evening of April
14. And yet, nevertheless, he was presented to the courtroom and to the public as the principal
eyewitness to the alleged carnage.


According to the official story, Powell came calling at the Seward home the night of April 14
under the guise of delivering medicine for the ailing William Seward. He was greeted by
houseboy Bell, whom he allegedly brushed past while insisting that he was to hand-deliver the
medications. Powell was then confronted at the top of the stairs by Frederick Seward, who
insisted that Powell leave the package with him and not bother the sleeping Secretary of State.
Powell then turned to leave, took a few steps down the stairs, and then pulled a gun and
attempted to shoot Frederick. When the gun failed to fire, he supposedly bum-

rushed Frederick and brutally beat him nearly to death.

According to Bill O’Reilly’s overwrought version of events, “The two men grapple as Powell
leaps up onto the landing and then uses the butt of his gun to pistol-whip Frederick. Finally,
Frederick Seward is knocked unconscious. His body makes a horrible thud as he collapses to the
floor, his skull shattered in two places, gray matter trickling out through the gashes, blood
streaming down his face.”

During that encounter, Fanny Seward supposedly looked out from her father’s room and in doing
so conveniently gave away William Seward’s location. So after incapacitating Frederick, Powell
next burst into William Seward’s room and encountered George Robinson, whom he grappled
with before beginning to brutally slash away at Seward. At that time, Augustus Seward, who had
been awakened by all the commotion, allegedly entered the room and began grappling with
Powell. Powell though got the best of him as well and then bolted out of the room and down the
stairs. In most versions of the story, there is no further mention of Fanny Seward, who was
supposedly in her father’s room throughout the ordeal.

On his way out of the house, Powell allegedly encountered Hansell, who had just arrived at the
home. Hansell was supposedly brutally attacked and left for dead just inside the entrance to the
home. Powell then exited the residence and rode off into the night. And that, in a nutshell, is the
official story of how one man was allegedly able to leave at least five people mortally wounded
while walking away without a scratch.


Frederick Seward, showing the severe scarring from his alleged beating
The witnesses who appeared before the military tribunal, however, had a very hard time keeping
the details of that story straight. Here is a portion of Robinson’s testimony, delivered on May 19,
1865: “The first I saw of [Powell] I heard a scuffling in the hall; I opened the door to see what
the trouble was; as I opened the door he stood close up to it; as soon as it was opened wide
enough he struck me and knocked me partially down and then rushed up to the bed of Mr.
Seward, struck him and maimed him; as soon as I could get on my feet I endeavored to haul him
off the bed and he turned on me; in the scuffle there was a man come into the room who clutched
him; between the two of us we got him to the door, or by the door, when he clinched his hand
around my neck, knocked me down, broke away from the other man and rushed down stairs.”
Amazingly enough, neither the prosecutors nor the defense attorneys bothered to ask him who
this other mystery man was. Clearly though it wasn’t Augustus Seward, who Robinson, a
household servant, would certainly have recognized. When asked specifically whether he saw
Powell’s alleged “encounter with Major Seward,” Robinson replied that he “did not see that.”
When asked about Frederick Seward, he responded as follows: “I did not see Mr. Frederick
Seward around at all.” So George Robinson did not see the guy who was supposedly lying in a
bloody heap just outside the door to William Seward’s room. He also didn’t see the guy who


supposedly assisted him with trying to subdue Powell. And he didn’t see, or at least didn’t
mention, Fanny Seward. But he did see some mysterious, unidentified stranger.

When later asked, “Where was [Frederick] when [Powell] came out [of Seward’s room]?”, his
unexpected response was: “The first I saw of Mr. Frederick was in the room standing up; he had
come inside the door.” So it appears that the guy who was lying near death somehow magically
got up and strolled into the room, hopefully after pushing the gray matter back into his shattered
skull.


Josepn Horr Coronet. Henry L. Burner Joun A, Bincam

The prosecution team: one of Burnett’s duties was to oversee the rewriting of the trial transcript
to remove various contradictions and inconsistencies

Robinson also told the court that he never heard Powell utter a sound throughout the ordeal.
Judge Advocate Holt, sounding a bit incredulous and clearly not getting the answers he wanted,
asked the witness this question: “You say that this man, during the whole of this bloody work,
made no remark at all; that he said nothing?” Robinson responded with: “I did not hear him
make any remark.”
Let’s now listen in to some of Augustus Seward’s testimony, because this is where it really gets
interesting: “I retired to bed about 7 o’clock on the night of the 14th, with the understanding that
I would be called at 11 o’clock, to sit up with my father; I very shortly fell asleep, and so
remained until wakened by the screams of my sister; I jumped out of bed and ran into my
father’s room in my shirt and drawers; the gas in the room had been shut down rather low, and I
saw what appeared to be two men, one trying to hold the other; my first impression was that my
father had become delirious, and that the nurse was trying to hold him. I went up and took hold
of him, but saw at once from his size and the struggle that it was not my father; it then struck me
that the nurse had become delirious and was striking about the room at random; knowing the
delicate state of my father’s health, I endeavored to shove the person I had hold of to the door,
with the intention of putting him out of his room; while I was pushing him he struck me five or
six times over the head with whatever he had in his left hand; I supposed it at the time to be a
bottle or decanter he had seized from the table; during this time he repeated with an intensely


strong voice-‘I am mad, I am mad;’ on reaching the hall he gave a sudden turn and breaking
away from me, disappeared down stairs.”

You got all that straight? Augustus first mistook Powell — a strapping, physically fit, 20-year-old
man — for his frail, 63-year-old, bedridden father. Following that, he next mistook Powell, a
decidedly fair-skinned Caucasian lad, for his father’s black nurse. He also completely failed to
notice that Robinson was right alongside him grappling with Powell. And he failed to notice that
his sister was in the room. And he distinctly heard Powell loudly proclaiming himself to be mad,
even though Robinson, also in the room, didn’t hear Powell utter a word.

Augustus was also asked about his brother Frederick, to which he responded: “I never saw
anything of my brother the whole time.” In other words, he didn’t notice that he had to
practically step over his brother’s prone, bloody body to get to his father’s room. And he
apparently wasn’t paying attention when Frederick stood up and walked into that room.


7 aye
Booths Pho: ograjihe


op et.


: f ave
¢)


It’s Booth’s photograph — just not the right Booth
Coupled with the conflicting testimony of Seward and Robinson, there is the enduring mystery
surrounding Emerick Hansell. According to the official version of events, Hansell was left lying
nearly lifeless just inside the front door of the home. But Dr. T.S. Verdi, the Seward family
physician, testified that he “found Mr. Hansell, a messenger of the State Department, lying on a
bed, wounded by a cut in the side some two and a half inches deep.” He went on to say that that
bed was in a third-floor bedroom! Needless to say, no explanation was offered as to how and
why Hansell could have ended up there. On that particular night, apparently, it was not
uncommon for mortally wounded guys to get up all by themselves and wander around the
Seward manor.
It seems pretty obvious that of all the witnesses to testify before the tribunal, none were more
important to securing convictions than those who claimed to have witnessed the crimes actually
being committed. It seems more than a bit odd then that the state bypassed both the First Lady
and a senator’s daughter in favor of an otherwise obscure future murderer named Henry
Rathbone, who was clearly reading from a script written by unseen others. And it also seems
more than a little odd that the state also left no fewer than five members of the Seward
household and a State Department courier sitting on the sidelines in favor of two lowly
household servants and a member of the Seward family who, by all accounts other than his own,
wasn’t even in the home that night.


It is on the shoulders of those four men — Augustus Seward, William Bell, George Robinson, and
Henry Rathbone, all of whom are all but forgotten and all of whom presented obviously perjured
testimony — that the official story of what happened on the evening of April 14, 1865 in the
presidential box at Ford’s Theater and at the Seward home has now rested for 149 years.


, rete OF Mado


Defense attorney William Doster
As for Bell, his testimony was problematic as well: “When [Powell] came he rang the bell and I
went to the door, and this man came in; he had a little package in his hand, and said it was
medicine from Dr. Verdi; he said he was sent by Dr. Verdi with particular directions how he was
to take the medicine, and he said he must go up; I told him he could not go up ... he said that
would not do, and I started to go up, and finding he would go up I started past him and went up
the stairs before him ... I noticed that his step was very heavy, and I asked him not to walk so
heavy, he would disturb Mr. Seward; he met Mr. Frederick Seward on the steps outside the door,
and had some conversation with him in the hall.”
After describing a lengthy argument between Powell and Frederick Seward, Bell testified that
Powell “started toward the steps as if to go down, and I started to go down before him; I had
gone about three steps, and turned around, saying ‘don’t walk so heavy;’ by the time I had turned
round he jumped back and struck Mr. Frederick Seward, and by the time I had turned clear
around, Mr. Frederick Seward had fallen, and thrown up his hands, then I ran downstairs and
called ‘murder;’ I went to the front door and cried murder; then I ran down to General Auger’s
headquarters at the corner.”
Finding no one there, Bell ran back to the house in time to see Powell run out and get on his
horse. Asked if he saw “with what [Powell] struck Mr. Fred. Seward,” Bell responded that “‘it
appeared to be round and wound with velvet; I took it to be a knife afterwards.” For the record, it
was actually supposed to be a gun.
Probably seeking to avoid perjuring himself too brazenly, Bell adopted the “I didn’t see nothing”
approach. Powell, acting with superhuman strength and speed, managed to get to and subdue


Frederick Seward before Bell could even turn around — after which Bell left the house, missing
the rest of the carnage and returning just in time to witness Powell’s escape.

One wonders though how Emerick Hansell, the Steven Parent of this story (look it up), somehow
managed to not see or hear Bell’s frantic flight and shouts of “murder” as he approached the
Seward house that night. And why no patrols were near enough to respond to his cries. And
exactly how long it took William Bell to turn “clear around.” In any event, we know that we can
rule Bell out as being the mystery man who assisted George Robinson.


Union General Ambrose Burnside
Amazingly enough, after nearly a century-and-a-half, no one has ever seriously questioned the
official narrative of what exactly happened that night. There have been just a relative handful of
books written that question various aspects of the assassination, such as whether there were
other, unseen conspirators, and whether John Wilkes Booth really was gunned down at Garrett’s
barn, but even the authors of those books have unquestioningly accepted that what the state says
went down in that presidential box and in the Seward home really did happen.
But why? On what basis should we blindly accept those aspects of the official story? Why should
we believe a guy who when called upon three times to tell his story under oath, told that story in
the exact same words all three times? And why should we believe two guys who supposedly
stood side-by-side to fight off an intruder without either noticing the other’s presence? And who
both somehow failed to notice the allegedly mortally wounded Frederick Seward lying right


outside the door? And why should we believe a guy who absurdly claimed that he confused a
young, physically fit Lewis Powell for his own invalid, aging father, and then claimed to have
confused the very same Lewis Powell with the shorter, older, and much darker George
Robinson?

How is it possible that no one has questioned any of that? Do I have to fucking do everything
around here?

There were, needless to say, other irregularities in what passed for a trial, including the
wholesale suppression of exculpatory evidence. And the introduction of brazenly manufactured
evidence, like a supposed cipher letter, also introduced into evidence at John Surratt’s trial, that
had allegedly been retrieved from a river but that clearly had never been in the water.


Confederate General Robert E. Lee, with son
To briefly recap then, all of the following were distinguishing characteristics of the ‘trial’ of the
conspirators:


1. The defendants were informed of the charges against them just 72 hours before the trial
began, depriving them of the ability to put together an effective defense.
2. The defendants, all civilians, were subjected to military justice.


The defendants were denied their right to individual trials.

The defendants were not allowed to speak in their own defense.

The state willfully withheld the list of prosecution witnesses, denying the defendants their
right to know the nature of the testimony they would be defending themselves against.
6. The state freely introduced inflammatory, prejudicial testimony.

7. The state made extensive use of witnesses testifying under assumed identities.

8. The state made extensive use of paid witnesses.

9. The defendants were prohibited from privately consulting with their attorneys.

10. The state was not shy about suppressing exculpatory evidence.

11. The state was also not shy about introducing manufactured evidence.

12. The state allowed subpoenaed defense witnesses to ignore those subpoenas.

13. Only a simple majority was required to convict, and only a 2/3 majority was required to
impose the death penalty.


ee


And yet, through seven weeks of the most extreme prosecutorial misconduct imaginable, the
entire defense team raised only twelve objections. They should have raised that many just during
the first hour of the first day of the proceedings. If not sooner.


Union General John Pope
On June 29, 1965, the tribunal members met in a secret session to begin reviewing the evidence.
It didn’t take them long to find all the defendants guilty. On July 5, President Johnson approved


all the sentences handed down by the commissioners, including the death sentence for Mary
Surratt. The very next day, four of the prisoners were informed that they would hang in less than
24 hours.

Mary Surratt’s spiritual advisers were denied access to her until they gave their assurances that
they would not proclaim their belief in her innocence. Even then, they were allowed access only
for a few hours. All of the prisoners were guarded very closely during their final hours by
Thomas Eckert, Lafayette Baker, and a number of his thuggish detectives. Some of the gathered
witnesses described the condemned prisoners as looking drugged as they were led to the gallows
by Baker’s men.

More than a thousand soldiers ringed the prison walls to keep protestors at bay. Just after 1:30
PM on the afternoon of July 7, 1865, four soldiers kicked away the posts that were temporarily
supporting the floor of the gallows and Mary Surratt, Lewis Thornton Powell, David Herold, and
George Adzerodt fell to their deaths.

Meanwhile, military personnel escorted Dr. Samuel Mudd, Michael O’ Laughlin, Ed Spangler,
and Samuel Arnold to a remote, isolated, desolate facility known as Fort Jefferson in the Dry
Tortugas off the coast of Florida. Photos reveal that what was once undoubtedly a gorgeous
tropical atoll had been converted by the US military into a veritable hell on Earth. The facility
reportedly featured underground torture cells and dungeons. All four prisoners were held in
solitary confinement in conditions so appalling that one of them, Michael O’ Laughlin, was dead
within two years.


Fort Jefferson in the Dry Tortugas
And that, dear readers, is how ‘justice’ was meted out to the eight alleged accomplices of John
Wilkes Booth.


In my continuing quest to gain some kind of understanding of exactly what happened on the
night of April 14, 1865, I have worked my way through several more rather tedious treatments of
the Lincoln assassination, including a relatively new tome by Leonard Guttridge and Ray Neff
(Dark Union, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2003) that adds several new layers of complexity to the
fabled attack on Secretary of State William Seward. And by “new layers of complexity,” I really
mean new layers of absurdity.

One thing we learn from the authors is that the “house where the Sewards lived was a thirty-
room mansion overlooking Lafayette Square.” A three-story, thirty-room mansion. But like
virtually everyone else who has written about the alleged attack at the Seward home, the authors
offer little commentary on how Lewis Powell, who by all accounts had never been in the home,
could have so easily navigated his way through it.

The authors also inform us that, “This was no assassin’s work. Seward’s body was otherwise
unscathed. The knife struck nowhere near the heart or any other vital organ. It was not aimed at
the windpipe. It targeted Seward’s face — in particular, his ligatured jaw.” In other words, none of
the wounds that Seward allegedly sustained that night were inconsistent with the injuries he was
known to have suffered as a result of the carriage accident. It is, I have to say, a rather
remarkable ‘coincidence’ that Powell’s knife struck only where Seward was previously injured.


Photos: National Archives | HistoricCamdenCounty.com


WASHINGTON, D.C. (April 14, 1865) — Secretary of State William Seward as he looked
before he was attacked (right) by Lewis Thornton Powell. Seward survived but was disfig-
ured by the knife attack (left).


Contradicting virtually everything else that has been written about the alleged attempted
assassination of Seward, Guttridge and Neff also claim that “Two male nurses had been assigned
to the secretary, and two State Department messengers, each armed with a Colt revolver, were
working shifts as Seward’s bodyguard. That Good Friday evening one of the messengers,
Emerick Hansell, reached Seward’s home shortly after nine in the evening ... After a meal in the
kitchen, he settled himself in an alcove on the third floor, where most of the family bedrooms
were located.”

So now we find that, in addition to two active-duty military personnel (George Robinson and
Augustus Seward) and two other able-bodied men (William Bell and Frederick Seward) being
present in the home, William Seward actually had an armed guard stationed right down the hall
from his room — and yet Powell was still able to locate, get to, and brutally attack his target. Well
done, Mr. Powell!


According to Guttridge and Neff, Hansell didn’t enter into the melee until after William Seward

had been attacked and Powell was grappling with Robinson: “Then another figure plunged into

the room. It wasn’t Fred. He had already staggered to his bedroom, beaten nearly senseless. The

new arrival was Emerick Hansell ... He heard Robinson cry, ‘Hansey, help me.
- bil 8


999


The always photogenic Lewis Powell
In case anyone missed any of that, let’s run through the scenario presented by Neff and
Guttridge: William Seward had an armed guard stationed just down the hall from his room. We
have no idea why he had an armed guard since the President didn’t even have one, but we’ll just
play along and say that he had one. That guard though didn’t respond when Powell came calling
at the door, forcing his way in. He didn’t respond when Powell argued with Bell and pushed past
him. He didn’t respond when Powell “walked heavy” up two flights of stairs. He didn’t respond


when Frederick Powell stood on the landing loudly arguing with Powell. He didn’t respond when
Powell then physically attackedFrederick, leaving him for dead (or to wander off to his bedroom,
or to get up and wander into his father’s room). He didn’t respond when William Bell ran from
the house screaming “murder!” He didn’t respond when Powell forced his way into William
Seward’s room. He didn’t respond when Powell attacked first Robinson and then Seward. No, it
wasn’t until Powell was fighting his way out of the bedroom that Hansell decided to respond.
And even then, despite the fact that Powell had nearly killed three people, including the guy that
Hansell was assigned to protect, he opted not to use his weapon, choosing instead to become
another casualty.

Does all of that make perfect sense to everyone?

If so, then this infinitely fascinating bit of assassination trivia should make perfect sense as well:
“The Seward episode was further complicated by a coincidence. Within twenty-four hours of the
Good Friday attack, newspapers reported that Emerick Hansell, the State Department messenger
on protective duty and knifed on the third floor, had died of his wounds. The obituaries were all
but correct. There were two men named Emerick Hansell. One had indeed succumbed

in Washington, but he was a farrier at the Union cavalry depot at Giesboro at the edge of the city.
His widow was informed that he was kicked in the head while shoeing a horse. He lingered a
week, to die just eight hours after the stabbing of his namesake.”

Call me a skeptic if you will, but Iam finding it very difficult to believe that that was a
‘coincidence.’ Truth be told, I’m finding it almost impossible to believe that there were two guys
named Emerick Hansell living in Washington, DCin 1865, let alone that one of them died within
hours of the other being brutally attacked. If such reports did indeed circulate, then they had to
be deliberately false reports. And those false reports led to a very predictable outcome:

“The farrier’s death had the effect of stilling questions that only the other Hansell might have
answered. Many years would pass before the State Department’s messenger, then in pensioned
retirement following a resumed career on the federal payroll, would give his story under strict
guarantees of confidentiality. His recollection then was that he had been the third man on the
landing, rushing to Private Robinson’s aid, convinced that the man he and the soldier grappled
with was Major Augustus Seward, the secretary’s troubled son.”

It is obvious from this passage that Guttridge and Neff based their account of the alleged attack
at the Seward residence on Hansell’s belated, off-the-record recollections. The authors appear to
be unaware that Hansell’s story is wildly at odds with the accounts of other supposed witnesses,
or perhaps they just don’t care.


-
‘ant te
Va a
>. ET ee
. Sd
*.


aoe eee ING
The Seward family home in Washington, DC
We now have testimony from three guys claiming to have been in William Seward’s bedroom
and to have acted in his defense. One of them, Augustus Seward, had no one assisting him and
he thought he was fighting against either his father or his father’s nurse. Another of them,
Emerick Hansell, was assisted only by Robinson and thought he was grappling with Augustus
Seward. The third, George Robinson, thought that he was fighting with a guy he described to a
newspaper reporter as having “light sandy hair, whiskers and moustache.” And he, of course,
thought that he was assisted by someone who was never identified.
None of the three saw Frederick Seward lying unconscious outside William Seward’s room, but
Robinson did see him enter the room. None of them made any mention of the presence of Fanny
Seward, though her belatedly released statement would hold that she was in the room as well.
None of them saw Frances or Anna Seward either, though you would think they would have
come to see what all the commotion was about at some point. Though Powell and Hansell were
both supposedly packing heat, and Augustus Seward’s testimony at trial indicated that he
retrieved a gun as well, not a single shot was fired that night at the Seward mansion. After being
awakened by the commotion, which necessarily would have included Bell’s shouts of murder,
Major Seward nevertheless opted to initially respond without a weapon. Hansell apparently
responded without his weapon as well. And Bell, ignoring the fact that Seward already had an
armed guard and a militarily trained and armed son, felt the need to run down the street seeking
outside help.
It’s hard to imagine a more ridiculously contradictory set of stories. Two of the ‘witnesses’
essentially identified each other as the assailant, and the third offered up a description that did
not in any way fit the always clean-shaven Lewis Powell. To say that there was reasonable doubt
in this case would be a serious understatement, but the tribunal had no problem convicting
Powell and sentencing him to death (there were even, as previously stated, contingency plans to
have him executed before the trial even concluded).


But then again, Doster did wrap up his ‘defense’ of Powell by delivering a closing argument that
began as follows: “May it please the court: There are three things in the case of the prisoner,
Powell, which are admitted beyond civil or dispute: (1) That he is the person who attempted to
take the life of the Secretary of State. (2) That he is not within the medical definition of insanity.
(3) That he believed what he did was right and justifiable. The question of his identity and the
question of his sanity are, therefore, settled, and among the things of the past.” With a defense
like that, how could he lose?


Lewis Powell’s empty gravesite
Perhaps James Swanson, who appears to fancy himself to be the reigning expert on
the Lincoln assassination, can clear up the confusion surrounding what exactly happened at the
Seward manor. In his bestselling Manhunt: The Twelve-Day Chase for Lincoln’s Killer (William
Morrow, 2006) Swanson spins a uniquely preposterous account of the alleged attack. Like other
self-styled historians, he handpicks facts from the accounts of various alleged participants while
conveniently leaving out all the contradictory elements of those accounts.
One thing that Swanson does get right in his overly wordy account is an acknowledgement that
Powell’s alleged assignment would have been a very difficult one: “This was a difficult mission
even for a man like Powell, a battle-hardened and extremely strong ex-Confederate soldier.
Powell had three problems. First, how could he get inside Seward’s house? ... Once inside, it
was Powell’s job to track down Secretary Seward in the sprawling, three-story mansion ...
Powell faced a third challenge: he did not know how many occupants ... were on the premises.”
In Swanson’s telling of the tale, on the night of April 14, 1865, “Fanny [Seward] watched over
her father and listened to the sights and sounds of the never-ending celebrations in the streets.”
Of primary interest here is the mention of the “never-ending celebrations.” General Lee had just
surrendered to General Grant, the Civil War was all but over, and the nation’s capitol was in a
celebratory mood. Just the night before, public buildings and private homes across the city were
lit up with candles and gaslights while fireworks exploded overhead, providing, by all accounts,
a uniquely awe-inspiring view of the city.
The next day, April 14, was a Friday and those celebrations continued well into the night, with
tens of thousands of people taking to the streets to join in the revelry. The Seward mansion sat,
as previously noted, right across the street from Lafayette Square, which surely would have been
filled that night with a sizable portion of that mass of humanity. Keep that in mind as we work
our way through Swanson’s highly dubious account.
“Around 10:00 P.M.,” according to Swanson, Fanny Seward “put down her book, Legends of
Charlemagne, turned down the gaslights, and, along with Sergeant George Robinson, a wounded
veteran now serving as an army nurse, kept watch over her recovering father.” For the record,
Robinson was not yet a sergeant, which is one of many factual inaccuracies that can be found
throughout Swanson’s supposedly authoritative books.
Shortly after Fanny had lowered the lights, Lewis Powell approached the front door of the home
and “rang the bell ... [and] William Bell, a nineteen-year-old black servant, hurried to answer the


door.” Amazingly, Swanson knows what William’s age was at the time even though Bell himself
was unable to provide that information when asked at trial! In any event, an argument ensued
between Powell and Bell and, “For five minutes, the assassin and the servant bickered about
whether Powell would leave the medicine with Bell.”

Powell next pushed past Bell and proceeded up the stairs, where, as we know, he encountered
Fred Seward and argued with him as well. After appearing to lose the argument, Powell began to
retreat down the stairs but then quickly pivoted and attempted to shoot Fred Seward. When the
gun failed to fire, “Powell raised the pistol high in the air and brought down a crushing blow to
Seward’s head. He hit him so hard that he broke the pistol’s steel ramrod, jamming the cylinder
and making it impossible to fire again.”

Broke the steel ramrod?! No shit? I could see possibly bending it, but how do you “break” a steel
ramrod? Had Powell or anyone else hit Seward with that kind of force, and then delivered a few
more equally devastating blows, he would certainly have killed him. But according to Swanson,
Powell didn’t even knock him down (directly contradicting, of course, Bell’s sworn testimony at
trial): “Powell moved lightning fast. He shoved Fred aside and struck Robinson in the forehead
hard with the knife.” Swanson later informs us that Fred remained conscious and on his feet
throughout the ordeal, though he mostly just “wandered around the house like a zombie,
babbling the same phrase, ‘It is ... itis,’ over and over unable to complete the thought.”
Meanwhile, “The assassin pushed past the reeling sergeant and the waiflike girl blocking his path
and sprinted to the bed” where the ailing William Seward lay helpless. According to Swanson,
the only thing that saved Seward’s life was Powell’s poor aim, which resulted in him completely
missing the motionless secretary of state with his first two knife thrusts. By the time he
connected, Robinson had rejoined the fight and was attempting to pull Powell away from
Seward. At about that time, “Fanny ... screamed, not once, but in a ceaseless, howling, and
terrifying wail that woke her brother Augustus, or ‘Gus,’ who was asleep in a room nearby.
Fanny then opened a window and screamed to the street below.”

So now, in addition to Bell running down the street screaming “murder,” we have Fanny Seward
screaming out an open window. And yet still, with celebrants swarming around the capitol, no
one was able to respond in time to even see Powell, let alone try to stop him! Sounds perfectly
reasonable to me. As does the fact that “Gus” was able to sleep through the knock on the door,
the argument between Bell and Powell, Powell’s noisy ascent of the stairs, Powell’s argument
with Frederick, Powell’s attack on Frederick, Powell forcing his way into William Seward’s
room, Powell’s attack on Robinson, Powell’s attack on William Seward, and all the screaming
that all the victims would undoubtedly have been doing as they were being viciously attacked.
Old Gus was a pretty sound sleeper, I guess.

According to Swanson, Augustus Seward and George Robinson then jointly battled Powell,
which we already know directly contradicts the sworn testimony of both of them. That fight
supposedly spilled over into the hallway outside Seward’s room. At that time, “Secretary
Seward’s wife, alarmed by Fanny’s screams, emerged from her third-floor, back bedroom in time
to witness the climax of the hallway struggle between Powell and her son Gus.
Uncomprehending, she assumed that her husband had become delirious and was running amok.
Fred’s wife, Anna, rushed to the scene ...”

Apparently Frances and Anna Seward slept even more soundly than Augustus. With their arrival
though, Powell was outnumbered six to one, and that didn’t even include Hansell, who,
according to Swanson, decided that his best bet was to get the hell out of Dodge: “On [Powell’s]
way out, he caught up with Emerick Hansell, who was running down the staircase, trying to stay


ahead of the assassin. The State Department messenger, on duty at Seward’s home, was fleeing
rather than joining the battle.”

Of course he was. That’s probably why we all remember him being lynched, which is
undoubtedly what would have happened if Swanson’s tall tale was true. I guess Hansell slept
through most of the ordeal as well, foolishly choosing to flee at the same time as Powell. You’d
think he would have just stayed wherever it was that he was hiding. Or run sooner. Those would
have been safer options. But then again, since he had a gun and was backed up by at least six
people, and the assailant was unarmed, maybe he should have just done his job. That way, he
wouldn’t have had to haul his gravely wounded body up two flights of stairs to get into bed
before the doctor got there.

It is more than a little odd, I must say, that both Augustus Seward and Frances Seward claimed to
initially believe that the ‘intruder’ was actually William Seward “running amok.” Was that a
common thing for the secretary of state to do? Even when everyone knew that he was confined
to bed and completely immobile?

Mr. Robinson, by the way, had a change of heart after telling a reporter about the intruder with
“light sandy hair, whiskers and moustache.” By the time the trial rolled around just a few weeks
later, Robinson was sure that Powell was the assailant. That may have been due to the fact that
he had received a gold medal, $5,000 in cash, and a promotion. And he later was awarded the
knife allegedly used by Powell in the attack.


It is impossible for me to believe that the alleged events at the Seward home ever took place. All
the available evidence overwhelmingly suggests that it was an entirely manufactured affair.
Fanny and Frances Seward, as previously discussed, did not live long after the alleged attack.
Neither, of course, did Lewis Powell. William and Frederick Seward chose to never speak
publicly about the alleged incident. Augustus Seward, George Robinson, William Bell, and
(belatedly) Emerick Hansell gave wildly conflicting accounts. And as mainstream historians
continue to work diligently to bend the conflicting accounts into some kind of believable
storyline, the story just gets more and more ridiculous.

The more deeply immersed in this I become, the more I am convinced that the key to
understanding the Lincoln assassination may be in understanding what didn’t happen at the
Seward residence. For if the alleged parallel attack on the Sewards never took place, then clearly
there was much more to the events of April 14, 1865 than the activities of John Wilkes Booth
and a ragtag band of conspirators.

Before wrapping up, let’s take a look at one final curiosity surrounding the alleged attack on the
Seward family: in all the accounts that I have read — and I have now worked my way through
fourteen books chronicling the Lincoln assassination — it is either stated or implied that Powell
(and Bell) ascended just one flight of stairs to get to William Seward’s bedroom, and descended
just one flight to exit the house. But Seward’s bedroom was on the third floor of the home, which
meant that reaching him (and Frederick and the rest of the cast) would have required first
ascending one flight of stairs, then crossing a second-floor landing, and then ascending a second
flight of stairs.

That curious fact seems to have remained deliberately obscured for many, many years now. And
it’s not hard to figure out why, for if that fact is pointed out, it raises the very obvious question of
exactly how Powell would have known to bypass the home’s second floor and proceed directly
to the third.


If there is anything we can be certain about in regards to the assassination of President Abraham
Lincoln, it is that we will never know what really happened in the presidential box at Ford’s
Theatre at approximately 10:15 PM on the night of April 14, 1865.

In addition to the guy who made a hasty exit across the stage and out the back door, and the guy
who caught a bullet to the head and never regained consciousness, there were, depending upon
which version of events one chooses to believe, either three or four eyewitnesses present in that
box that fateful evening. Mary Todd Lincoln was certainly there, as were Major Henry Rathbone
and his fiancé/stepsister Clara Harris. By some accounts (including Forbes’ own account)
presidential aide Charles Forbes was there as well.

The Lincoln party arrived at the theater around 8:30 PM, about a half-hour after the play, Our
American Cousin, had begun. The show was briefly halted while the band played “Hail to the
Chief,” accompanied by a rousing ovation from the crowd, after which the Lincolns and their
guests quietly took their seats and the play resumed. Some two hours later, the president lay
mortally wounded with a lead ball lodged in his brain.


Of the four potential eyewitnesses, none were ever questioned by reporters. Only one was ever
questioned by authorities. Only one was ever deposed. Only one was ever called upon to testify
as to what he or she witnessed that evening. Only one ever spoke publicly in any way about what
exactly transpired in that box. Despite the fact that the Lincoln assassination was billed as the
Crime of the Century, authorities seem to have had no interest at all in speaking with the handful
of people who actually witnessed the event.

As for Mary Todd Lincoln, the only words of hers that were ever made public concerning the
death of her husband were from a personal letter she sent to an Edward Lewis Baker, Jr. in 1877,
twelve years after the assassination. And those strangely punctuated words shed no light at all on
the events of that evening: “God, gives us our beloved ones, we make them our idols, they are
removed from us, & we have patiently to await the time, when, He, reunites us to them. And the
waiting, is so long! My bereavements, have been so intense, the most loving and devoted of
husbands, torn from my side, my hand within his own, at the time — and God has recalled from


this earth, sons, the most idolising, the noblest, purest, most talented — that were ever given to
parents — Their presence grand & beautiful — too good for this world, so full of sorrow — Yet the
time will come, when the severance, will be over, together husband, wife and children — never
more to be separated — I grieve for those who have been called upon to give up their precious
ones, and until the sunlight of a happier clime dawns upon us, we will never know until then,
why, we have been visited, by such sorrow.”

Clara Harris was similarly tight-lipped about what she witnessed at Ford’s Theatre. Her account
also comes from personal correspondence, this one written on April 29, 1865, just two weeks
after the tragedy: “That terrible Friday night is to me yet almost like some dreadful vision ... We
four composed the party that evening. They drove to our door in the gayest spirits; chatting on
our way — and the President was received with the greatest enthusiasm. They say we were
watched by the assassins; ay, as we alighted from the carriage. Oh, how could anyone be so cruel
as to strike that kind, dear, honest face! And when I think of that fiend barring himself in alone
with us, my blood runs cold. My dress is saturated with blood; my hands and face were covered.
You may imagine what a scene! And so, all through that dreadful night, when we stood by that
dying bed. Poor Mrs. Lincoln was and is almost crazy. Henry narrowly escaped with his life. The
knife struck at his heart with all the force of a practiced and powerful arm; he fortunately parried
the blow, and received a wound in his arm, extending along the bone, from the elbow nearly to
the shoulder. He concealed it for some time, but was finally carried home in swoon; the loss of
blood had been so great from an artery and veins severed. He is now getting quite well, but
cannot as yet use his arm ...”

It wasn’t until almost thirty years after the assassination that Charles Forbes swore out an
affidavit; unfortunately, that affidavit also fails to shed any light at all on the events of that
evening: “I was the personal attendant of the late President Lincoln from shortly after his first
inauguration up to the time he fell by the assassin’s bullet ... | accompanied him in the carriage,
was with him from the carriage to the box in the theatre, and was in the box when the assassin
fired his fatal shot.” Curious that nearly three decades after John Wilkes Booth was identified as
the assassin, Forbes referred to him merely as “the assassin.”

And that, dear readers, is the sum total of what we have from three of the four eyewitnesses.
Considering once again that this was, as I may have mentioned, the Crime of the Century, that is
a rather remarkable set of circumstances.


FORD'S THEATRE


That leaves us with only the tale told by Major Henry Rathbone, which we already know was a
hopelessly scripted, rehearsed affair that he told under oath in almost exactly the same words on
no less than three occasions. And yet it is the only account we have — the only account we will
ever have — so we must look at it in its entirety, as originally told at his April 17, 1865
deposition. It is a strange tale, to be sure, and it would seem to indicate that Rathbone spent more
time studying the physical characteristics of the room than he did watching the play:

“The box assigned to the President is in the second tier, on the right hand side of the audience
and was occupied by the President and Mrs. Lincoln, Miss Harris and this deponent and by no
other person. The box is entered by passing from the front of the building in the rear of the dress
circle to a small entry or passageway about eight feet in length and four feet in width. This
passageway is entered by a door which opens on the inner side. This door is placed as to make an
acute angle between it and the wall behind it on the inner side. At the inner end of this
passageway is another door standing squarely across and opening into the box. On the left hand
side of the passageway and very near the inner end is a third door which also opens into the box.
This latter door was closed. The party entered the box through the door at the end of the
passageway. The box is so constructed that it may be divided into two by a movable partition,
one of the doors described opening into each. The front of the box is about ten or twelve feet in


length and in the center of the railing is a small pillar overhung with a curtain. The depth of the
box from front to rear is about nine feet. The elevation of the box above the stage including the
railing is about ten or twelve feet.

“When the party entered the box a cushioned armchair was standing at the end of the box
furthest from the stage and nearest the audience. This was also the nearest point to the door from
which the box is entered. The President seated himself in this chair and, except that he once left
the chair for the purpose of putting on his overcoat, remained so seated until he was shot. Mrs.
Lincoln was seated in a chair between the President and the pillar in the centre, above described.
At the opposite end of the box — that nearest the stage — were two chairs. In one of these,
standing in the corner, Miss Harris was seated. At her left hand and along the wall running from
that end of the box to the rear stood a small sofa. At the end of this sofa next to Miss Harris this
deponent was seated, and the President, as they were sitting, was about seven or eight feet and
the distance between this deponent and the door was about the same. The distance between the
President as he sat and the door was about four or five feet. The door, according to the
recollections of this deponent, was not closed during the evening.

“When the second scene of the third act was being performed and while this deponent was
intently viewing the proceedings upon the stage with his back toward the door he heard the
discharge of a pistol behind him and looking round saw through the smoke, a man between the
door and the President. At the same time deponent heard him shout some word which deponent
thinks was ‘Freedom.’ This deponent instantly sprang towards him and seized him. He wrested
himself from the grasp and made a violent thrust at the breast of this deponent with a large knife.
Deponent parried the blow by striking it up and received a wound several inches deep in his left
arm between the elbow and the shoulder. The orifice of the wound is about an inch and a half in
length and extends upwards towards the shoulder several inches. The man rushed to the front of
the box and deponent endeavored to seize him again but only caught his clothes as he was
leaping over the railing of the box. The clothes, as this deponent believes, were torn in this
attempt to seize him. As he went over upon the stage, deponent cried out with a loud voice ‘Stop
that man.’ Deponent then turned to the President. His position was not changed. His head was
slightly bent forward and his eyes were closed. Deponent saw that he was unconscious and,
supposing him mortally wounded, rushed to the door for the purpose of calling medical aid. On
reaching the outer door of the passageway as above described, deponent found it barred by a
heavy piece of plank, one end of which secured in the wall and the other resting against the door.
It had been so securely fastened that it required considerable force to remove it. This wedge or
bar was about four feet from the floor. Persons upon the outside were beating against the door for
the purpose of entering. Deponent removed the bar and the door was opened. Several persons
who represented themselves to be surgeons were allowed to enter. Deponent saw there Colonel
Crawford and requested him to prevent other persons from entering the box. Deponent then
returned to the box and found the surgeon examining the Presidents person. They had not yet
discovered the wound. As soon as it was discovered, it was determined to remove him from the
Theatre. He was carried out this deponent then proceeded to assist Mrs. Lincoln, who was
intensely excited, to leave the Theatre. On reaching the head of the stairs, deponent requested
Major Potter to aid him in assisting Mrs. Lincoln across the street to the house which the
President was being conveyed. The wound which the deponent had received had been bleeding
very profusely and on reaching the house, feeling very faint from the loss of blood, he seated
himself in the hall and soon after fainted away and was laid upon the floor. Upon the return of
consciousness deponent was taken in the carriage to his residence.


“Tn review of this transaction it is the confident belief of this deponent that the time which
elapsed between the discharge of the pistol and the time when the assassin leaped from the box
did not exceed thirty seconds. Neither Mrs. Lincoln nor Miss Harris had left their seats.”


Rathbone’s deposition and subsequent testimony were given at a time when attorneys did not
have the luxury of submitting photographic evidence to set the scene for jurors. It appears then
that prosecutors used his detailed physical description to paint a mental image for those in the
courtroom. And it is very hard to believe that Rathbone would have spontaneously offered up
such testimony. Those details were undoubtedly provided to him as part of the script he appears
to have been following.

Let us now look at all the other reasons why Rathbone’s account is seriously lacking in
credibility. First of all, he claims that the alleged assailant was in the box for up to thirty seconds
after shooting Lincoln, long enough to grapple with and seriously wound Rathbone. But the
accounts of other witnesses in the theater that evening directly contradict that notion. A witness
identified only as “Basset,” for instance, claimed that “A second after the shot was fired a man
vaulted over the ballister of the box.” Witness Frederick Sawyer wrote that, “The whole
occurrence, the shot, the leap, the escape — was done while you could count to eight.” Actor
Harry Hawk, after describing the sequence of events, claimed that “The above all occurred in the
space of a few seconds, and at the time I did not know the president was shot.”

How then was there time for the alleged struggle with Rathbone? And if Rathbone had been
grappling with an assailant as said assailant was leaping over the front railing, as Rathbone
claimed, those actions would have been visible to many of the witnesses in the theater. And yet


none of the witnesses who claimed to see the man leap from the box mentioned seeing him
struggling with Rathbone either before or while doing so.


Another problem is that Rathbone claims to have suffered a substantial wound that bled
profusely, so much so that his fiancé allegedly found herself drenched in blood, and yet of all the
witnesses who said they saw the fleeing man prominently brandish a large knife as he made his
exit across the stage, not one of them mentioned seeing any blood on that knife. Or on the man’s
hands. Or on his clothing. How is it possible that he could have cut Rathbone so severely, and
then continued grappling with him, and yet walked away with no visible blood on him?

Yet another minor problem is that neither Rathbone nor his fiancé made any mention of his very
serious wound ever being treated. He claimed that the wound was so severe that he passed out
from blood loss, but that he then was merely taken home and dropped off. According to the
official story, there were at least three skilled surgeons on hand, none of whom could really do
much for the mortally wounded Lincoln. Why then didn’t anyone bother to attend to such a
grave wound inflicted on a guest of the President? From what I hear, those severed arteries can
be a real killer if left unattended.

What we seem to have here is a situation in which: (a) witness accounts don’t allow for enough
time for Rathbone to have been seriously wounded; (b) Rathbone never received treatment for a
serious wound; (c) the knife that allegedly inflicted the wound was bloodless just seconds later,
as was the guy carrying it; and (d) none of the self-proclaimed witnesses in the theater that night
saw Rathbone grappling with his alleged assailant.


Family Circle & State Box Level


Laura Keene's Dressing Room


THEATEE ButLpiInc Hallway Door
WEST ELEVATION
Main Entrance & Box Office


Pi a FORD'S THEATRE
NORTHWEST


*
SUTIONAL MAUR SEHWEE, MUCK OF PLANS AND DESIGN


Moving on to other peculiarities in Rathbone’s account, one obvious question that is raised is:
why would John Wilkes Booth, or anyone else entering the box for the purpose of killing
Lincoln in the manner in which it occurred, take the time to wedge the outer door shut? Any
pursuers weren’t going to come from that direction. And if the alleged plan went awry, the
assailant might need to flee in that direction. So why cut off a possible means of escape? And
how is it that a sturdy wood plank of the precise length needed to do the job just happened to be
on hand? Those are questions that historians have never really provided satisfactory answers to.
According to Rathbone’s account, the inner door to the box was open all night. How then would
the party not have heard an intruder enter the outer door and then close it and forcibly wedge it
shut ... before sneaking up behind the President? It doesn’t seem possible for an uninvited
intruder to have done that. And there was no reason to do it. Booth, it will be recalled, was
ludicrously armed with a single-shot derringer. The plan, therefore, was heavily dependent upon
the element of surprise. Why then risk discovery by pointlessly wedging the door shut?

Who then really wedged that door shut and why? Did it benefit the alleged assailant, or did it
provide a window of opportunity to stage the scene before any responders could get to the
president?

Several other questions are raised by Rathbone’s account, including why the president was
seated furthest from the stage and closest to the door? Wouldn’t the guest of honor customarily


get the best seat in the house? Why had the furniture in the box that day been arranged to place
him furthest from the stage? And being that he was the fourth member of the party, why didn’t
Rathbone sit in the fourth chair along the front of the box? Why did he choose instead to sit
alone on a sofa slightly behind the others?


Kg


State Box


Beyond the problems with Rathbone’s account, there are other problems with the official story of
what went down in Ford’s Theatre on April 14, 1865. According to witness accounts, the man
fleeing across the stage brandished his knife in his right hand, indicating that he was right-
handed. But the bullet that killed Lincoln, purportedly fired by an assailant standing behind him,
entered behind his left ear and traveled diagonally through the brain cavity, ending up behind his
right eye. That would be a rather tricky shot to pull off for a right-hander. To the extent that
historians have addressed this anomaly, it is generally claimed that Lincoln turned his head just
as the shot was fired. But that is purely speculation aimed at bringing the known facts of the case
in line with the official story.

According to all the early witness accounts, events played out very quickly and the suspect was
across the stage and out of the building before anyone realized what had happened. It was only
then, when it was too late to apprehend the suspect, that Mary Lincoln’s anguished cries from the


box could be heard, along with Rathbone’s futile exhortations to stop the fleeing suspect. But
why did it take so long for Mary Todd and the others to cry out?

Mary Lincoln had had her husband gunned down as he sat right beside her, hand in hand. She
had then witnessed a violent struggle between her husband’s killer and Major Rathbone, during
which Rathbone was grievously wounded, bathing the box in blood. Had Rathbone succumbed
to his alleged wound, Mary and Clara would have been left alone in that box with a knife-
wielding madman. You would think then that they would have been screaming bloody murder
throughout the ordeal, and quite likely trying to exit that box. Help, after all, was just steps away.
But instead the two ladies remained stoic, and seated, throughout the performance. It wasn’t until
the assailant had leaped from the box to the stage, regained his footing, run across the stage and
then exited the building that Mary verbally responded to the attack. And Clara Harris never
responded at all.

Why the curiously delayed reactions from everyone in the presidential box? And why, as
previously asked in this series, would the assailant have chosen such a fundamentally
preposterous weapon as a single-shot derringer for this mission? And who would plan an escape
route that included an exceedingly risky leap onto a very hard stage floor below, especially while
wearing riding boots with spurs? Was that really a planned escape route, or was it an improvised
one?

Such are the questions that historians have avoided asking for 150 years now.


One thing that we cannot definitively conclude from the early witness accounts, contrary to
popular opinion, is that the guy who hastily exited Ford’s Theatre that evening was John Wilkes
Booth. In witness accounts recorded years after the official story had cast a long shadow over
that day’s events, Booth’s name pops up fairly often. But it isn’t so easy to find in the early
accounts.


One guy closest to the scene was Army Captain Theodore McGowan, who was seated in Ford’s
Theatre not far from the entrance to the president’s box. I like to think that this guy was an
upright sort of guy, primarily because he had a very honorable name. When called upon to testify
at the military tribunal, McGowan had this to say: “I was present at Ford’s Theatre on the night
of the assassination. I was sitting in the aisle leading by the wall toward the door of the
President’s box, when a man came and disturbed me in my seat, causing me to push my chair
forward to permit him to pass; he stopped about three feet from where I was sitting, and leisurely
took a survey of the house. I looked at him because he happened to be in my line of sight ... I
know J. Wilkes Booth, but, not seeing the face of the assassin fully, I did not at the time
recognize him as Booth.”

So here we have a guy who knew Booth, and yet from just three feet away, with the guy directly
in his line of sight, he did not recognize the man in the theater as Booth. It is a fairly safe bet that
the government exerted considerable pressure on Captain McGowan to positively identify Booth,
and yet he proved unable, or unwilling, to do so. Curious also that McGowan referred to him in
the present tense when Booth was supposed to be dead.

So what are we to make of all of this? Was Rathbone really gravely injured? Or was his wound a
substantially less severe one that was self-inflicted while responders were held at bay by the
barricaded door? Was it really John Wilkes Booth who entered the presidential box that evening?
And whoever it was, did he enter for the purpose of assassinating the president? Would a small
derringer have been the weapon of choice for an assassin, or was it a weapon that would have
been easy for someone else in that box to have brought along?

One thing we do know — Henry Rathbone’s actions in the years after the assassination clearly
demonstrated that he was fully capable of two things: murder, and self-inflicted knife wounds.


It should be noted here that it has never made any sense at all why John Wilkes Booth would
have chosen Ford’s Theatre as the ideal site to assassinate the president. As eyewitness Edwin
Bates noted the day after the shooting, “the probability was that the man when found would be
discovered to be some insane person, that the lowest depths of human depravity even in a rebel
of the worst type would not permit to commit such a horrible deed in so bold a manner before
thousands of people & where there could be so little chance of escape.” (Timothy S. Good We
Saw Lincoln Shot, University Press of Mississippi, 1995)

As H. Donald Winkler has written, there were numerous opportunities to kill Lincoln that would
not have put the assassin at such high risk of capture: “the president had made himself an easy
target. He stole away for solitary walks, especially at night. He held public receptions where
security was almost nonexistent. He conferred with generals in the field. He stood atop a parapet
at Fort Stevens on the outskirts of Washington for a clear view of Jubal Early’s approaching
Confederate forces as soldiers around him were shot dead. He attended the theater frequently. He
had walked virtually unguarded through the streets of the fallen Confederate capital. When he
and his family stayed at his summer retreat at the Soldiers Home on the outskirts of Washington,
he often rode back and forth to the White House in an unguarded carriage. Nearly every night,
before going to bed, he strolled without protection down a densely shaded path through the
White House grounds to the War Department’s telegraph office to learn the latest news from the
war front.” (H. Donald Winkler Lincoln and Booth, Cumberland House, 2003)


The only conceivable reason to carry out the mission at Ford’s was to make the assassination as
much of a public spectacle as possible. Which was also true, of course, of the events that played
out in Dealey Plaza on November 22, 1963, and the events that played out in New York on
September 11, 2001. If there had been television in 1865, you can bet that the cameras would
have been rolling in Ford’s Theatre on the night of April 14.

Beginning at about 10:30 PM or shortly thereafter on that particular evening, a curious series of
events played out in Washington, DC. At about that time, according to the official narrative, a
man riding hell-bent-for-leather to get out of town approached the Navy Yard Bridge. The bridge
though was closed due to a curfew imposed by the War Department, and armed guards were
under standing orders not to let anyone cross without official authorization.

The rider on the swift horse allegedly identified himself as John Wilkes Booth. He did not, of
course, need to do that. It wasn’t as if the guard, Silas Cobb, was going to ask him for an ID to
verify his identity. In those days, a man had to be taken at his word as to who he really was.
Those engaged in activities that could earn you jail time, or worse, generally used an array of
aliases. But the guy who had allegedly committed the ‘Crime of the Century’ just minutes earlier
purportedly used his real name.

In that regard, Booth was a very accommodating kind of guy. Earlier in the day, when he had
supposedly stopped by the Kirkwood House to visit Vice President Johnson — a guy supposedly
slated to be assassinated just hours later — Booth had thoughtfully left a calling card. According
to Capt. Theodore McGowan, he left another one at the entrance to the presidential box at Ford’s
Theatre: “He took a small pack of visiting-cards from his pocket, selecting one and replacing the
others, stood a second, perhaps, with it in his hand, and then showed it to the President’s
messenger, who was sitting just below him.” Booth was a big believer, it seems, in dropping
breadcrumbs along the evidence trail.

Silas Cobb, for reasons that historians have never been able to explain, and often have never
attempted to explain, allowed the rider to pass over the closed bridge and into Maryland. Cobb
was never reprimanded or punished in any way for allowing the president’s assassin to escape
the city — which is okay, I suppose, since the same is true of everyone else who blatantly
‘dropped the ball’ that night.

Just minutes later, another rider looking to cross into Maryland approached the bridge. This
rider, who would later be identified in the official narrative as David Herold, failed to properly
identify himself. He was, nevertheless, also allowed to cross the officially closed bridge. Minutes
after that, a third rider supposedly approached the bridge. This one, local stableman John
Fletcher, was supposedly in hot pursuit of David Herold.

Fletcher would later claim that he had seen Herold riding through town on a horse that was
supposed to have been returned, and, fearing that the horse was being stolen, he had run back to
his stables, saddled and mounted another horse, and took off in pursuit of Herold. Cobb
supposedly told Fletcher that he would let him pass, once again in violation of standing orders,
but that he wouldn’t be able to return, so Fletcher abandoned his alleged pursuit and returned to
his stables.

This alleged sequence of events raises any number of deeply troubling questions that historians
have done their very best to avoid answering, or even addressing. First and most obviously, why
were both Booth and Herold allegedly allowed to pass over a closed bridge despite standing
orders to the contrary? Another obvious question is how would John Fletcher have possibly
known, after going to fetch his own horse, which way David Herold was headed on the dark
streets of Washington?


Yet another painfully obvious question is why would John Wilkes Booth have given his real
name? True enough, this was 1865 and travel was by horseback and the world was not a
connected sort of place, so Booth would have been confident that Cobb would have had no clue
yet about the shooting of Lincoln. But pursuers would surely be on the way very soon, with
Ford’s Theatre just three miles away, and tipping them off as to your flight path probably isn’t
such a good idea.

The next obvious question is why didn’t pursuers arrive there shortly after this sequence of
events? Indeed, why didn’t anyone arrive there throughout the entire night? Secretary of War
Edwin Stanton, who quickly assumed control of the manhunt, had an impressive array of
manpower at his disposal: federal troops, metro police, cavalry troops, provost marshals, and
Lafayette Baker’s NDP detectives. Yet none of them ever made their way over to the Navy Yard
Bridge, though it was well known as an underground Confederate route.

Manpower was deployed first to the north and northwest, the least likely escape routes. The only
hole in the dragnet throughout the entire night was the underground route to the South across the
Navy Yard Bridge, which was never mentioned that night in any War Department dispatches.
Had anyone involved in the manhunt — anyone at all — bothered to stop by the Navy Yard Bridge,
it would have been quickly discovered that Booth and a likely accomplice had crossed over into
Maryland. But that didn’t happen and pursuers were instead sent on wild goose chases
throughout the night.

Another less obvious question is why was Booth so woefully unprepared for his escape? He had
to assume that he was going to have to hide out for a time and/or survive on the trail. Why then
did he bring no provisions with him? No change of clothes, no bedroll or blanket, no weapons
other than his dagger, no toiletries or razor, no food. Nothing that would be required for survival
on the road. And the same was true of Herold.

Why would Booth, or any reasonably sane person, plot an assassination at a venue from which
escape was highly unlikely? Why would the very first phase of that escape involve an incredibly
risky leap onto a hard stage floor while wearing riding boots with spurs? Why would his escape
route necessitate crossing a bridge that he had no reasonable expectation of being allowed to
cross? And why would he have failed to bring along any provisions to survive during his time on
the lam?

There is also the question of why there was a two to three-hour interruption in telegraph service
in and out of Washington following the assassination. Stanton had been installed as Secretary of
War in January 1862 on the recommendation of Secretary of State William Seward. On February
14, Lincoln had signed Executive Order #1, giving Stanton the power of arbitrary arrest. That too
had been at Seward’s urging. By early March, Stanton had assumed control of all the nation’s
telegraph lines and had the machinery comprising the hub of the system moved to the War
Department offices. He would soon seize control of the country’s transportation system as well.
In addition to the civilian telegraph system, the War Department had its own system as well, to
transmit secure news and updates on the war effort. Both systems were housed next to Stanton’s
office at the War Department. On the night of April 14, the civilian telegraph service was out for
up to three hours following the assassination, disrupting communications in and out of
Washington. That curious fact was never publicly acknowledged. There was also an unexplained
delay in getting the news out on the War Department’s telegraph service. The first dispatch
concerning the shooting of Lincoln was not written until 1:30 AM, more than three hours after
the events at Ford’s Theatre; it wasn’t sent until 2:15 AM, some four hours after the curtain fell
at Ford’s.


Then there were the curious actions of LA Gobright, the Associated Press agent in the nation’s
capitol. At around 11:00 PM, he sent out his first dispatch, which was oddly vague and lacking in
details. Even odder, he quickly followed it with a second dispatch instructing recipients that the
first message was “stopped.” Gobright, it should be noted, was very close to the scene and knew
what had gone down. He supposedly rushed over to Ford’s immediately after the shooting and is
credited with being the guy who allegedly found the derringer on the floor of the box, where it
had conveniently been left behind but had apparently not been noticed by anyone else. I guess
securing the crime scene wasn’t a big priority in those days, even when it was the scene of the
Crime of the Century, so it was up to reporters to gather the physical evidence.

And some of you probably thought that having controlled assets in the media was some kind of
mid-20th century innovation that began with Operation Mockingbird. Guess again.

Yet another problem with the official story is that this was supposed to be a very well planned,
coordinated attack on multiple targets. The attacks on President Lincoln in Ford’s Theatre,
Secretary of State William Seward in his family home, Vice President Andrew Johnson in his
hotel room, and possibly Secretary of War Edwin Stanton in his family home, were supposed to
occur simultaneously, which would have been an extremely difficult operation to pull off given
the limitations in communications in those days.

A considerable amount of research and planning would have had to go into such an ambitious
project. But the reality is that it wasn’t known that the Lincolns were going to be attending
Ford’s Theatre until the very day that Lincoln was shot, which didn’t leave a lot of time to plan
such an intricate series of attacks. Yet we are to believe the plan was thwarted only by such
things as Lewis Powell’s ineptitude with a knife and George Adzerodt’s cowardice.

And if there was an extensive amount of planning done, then why was no thought apparently
given to the aftermath and escape? Lewis Powell never made it out of the city and supposedly
ended up hiding out in a tree for a few days. Booth chose an escape route that included a
dangerous jump onto a stage floor in front of hundreds of potential pursuers, followed by
heading directly to a closed bridge under armed guard. And then he was off into the wilderness
for an extended stay, with a broken leg and no provisions.

One aspect of the events of that day that is frequently downplayed is the late cancellation by
General Ulysses Grant and his wife, which was highly unusual. Declining a presidential
invitation was all but unthinkable in those days; canceling at the eleventh hour was obviously an
even worse affront. Especially when this was to be a major historical event — the first joint public
appearance of the victorious president and his heroic general. And especially when the reason
given for the cancellation — that the Grants had to catch an evening train to go see their kids in
New Jersey — didn’t hold much water.

As Winkler has written, “the Grants could have taken a Saturday morning train with better
connections than the six o’clock Friday evening train, which was much slower and necessitated a
long wait in Philadelphia. The morning train would have reunited the Grants with their children
just two hours later than the earlier train.” So the Grants could have spent the evening at the
theater basking in the adulation of the crowd, then enjoyed a good night’s sleep in Washington,
and still got to their children almost as quickly. Why then would they choose to both
inconvenience themselves and snub the president?

And they were not the only ones to snub the president. After the cancellation by the Grants,
Lincoln asked a few other notable figures in Washington, who all declined. One of them was
Speaker of the House Schuyler Colfax, Jr., who would, four years later, take over the vice-
president’s office. And so it was that the guys who would take over as president and vice-


president when Lincoln’s term expired both opted to snub Lincoln on the evening of his
assassination. Lucky break for them, I guess. And the guy who immediately took over at the
White House, just as soon as he sobered up, caught a really lucky break when George Adzerodt
supposedly opted not to assassinate him.

Schuyler Colfax, by the way, was a member of the extended van Cortland/Schuyler/Rensselaer
clan that also includes Laurel Canyon’s own David van Cortland Crosby.

By various accounts, Lincoln walked over to the War Department on the afternoon/evening of
April 14 to ask Stanton if Major Thomas Eckert might serve as his guest/bodyguard that evening.
Eckert had run the War Department’s telegraph service since 1862. He was a large, powerfully
built, physically imposing man who historians agree would have provided Lincoln with
considerable protection. But Stanton refused, claiming that Eckert had important work to do that
night. In truth, Eckert would be at home that evening, doing nothing of any importance.

Though Eckert was ostensibly recruited by the War Department based on his expertise with
telegraph systems, he was a close confidant of Stanton who was known to receive assignments
far removed from organizing and running communications systems. One of those assignments, as
previously noted, was as Lewis Powell’s personal guard during his confinement and ‘trial.’ Not
long after completing that assignment, Eckert was rewarded with a promotion to Assistant
Secretary of War.

Yet another longstanding problem with the official story is the unexplained assignment of ne’ er-
do-well police officer John Parker as Lincoln’s personal bodyguard, an assignment he had landed
just over a week earlier. That assignment had come, though no one really likes to talk much
about it, at the instigation of Mary Todd Lincoln. Mary wrote a letter on April 3, 1865,
handwritten on White Hose stationary, that read as follows: “This is to certify that John F.
Parker, a member of the Metropolitan Police, has been detailed for duty at the Executive
Mansion. By order of Mrs. Lincoln.” The next day, she wrote another requesting that Parker be
exempted from the draft.

Due directly to Mary Lincoln’s actions, it was Parker who was assigned to guard the president at
Ford’s Theatre. True to his nature, he arrived at least two hours late for that assignment. And
then promptly abandoned his post, leaving the president unguarded. So that he could wander next
door and get good and drunk, by some accounts. He next surfaced at 6:00 AM the next morning
at the police precinct, in the company of a drunken hooker. Parker attempted to book her, but
records indicate that he was unable to make a case against her and she was released. Parker had a
habit of arresting prostitutes who refused to provide him with free services. In any event, the
important point here is that Parker obviously had more important business to attend to than
preventing the assassination of the president.

Metro police superintendent A.C. Richards — the same guy who the industrious AP agent
supposedly turned the derringer over to — filed charges against Parker in May 1865. But those
charges were dropped the next month without explanation and Parker continued on in his
position. Numerous questions still surround this particular aspect of the assassination, as
summarized by H. Donald Winkler:

“Inquiring minds should have raised the following questions regarding Mary Lincoln, Edwin M.
Stanton, and John Parker: On what basis and on whose authority did the first lady authorize
Parker’s assignment to the White House? On whose recommendation was Parker’s name
submitted to her? Was she aware of Parker’s record? If she was, why did she want such a person
to guard her husband? If she was not familiar with Parker, what prompted her to approve him
without knowing more about him? Did she know him at all? Was she related to him, or did she


think she was related to him? (Her mother’s family name was Parker.) Did she authorize Parker
to leave his post to watch the play? Was Stanton aware of Parker’s assignment to the White
House? If he was not, should he have been? If he was, why didn’t he object to it? Considering
the secretary’s concern for the president’s safety, shouldn’t his department have investigated
anyone proposed for assignment to protect the president? Considering the innocent people
arrested after the assassination, why didn’t Stanton order Parker’s arrest or at least investigate his
apparent misconduct? Was it not possible that Parker was part of Booth’s conspiracy? Didn’t that
possibility deserve investigation? Regarding Parker’s superiors, did Stanton consider that one of
them might have issued orders allowing Parker to leave his post? Was he aware of Mary
Lincoln’s endorsement of Parker? Was that a factor in his decision not to arrest Parker? Did the
secretary in any way try to influence any pending charges against Parker? If so, why? Was he
trying to protect Mary Lincoln? Did Stanton know Parker or have any contact with him before
April 14? Did any of his staff know Parker? Did Parker have any communication with Mary
Lincoln, John Wilkes Booth, Stanton, or anyone from the War Department on or before April 14,
1865? Did he know Booth? Did Booth bribe him to leave his post? Who dictated Parker’s duties
for that night? What specifically were his instructions? Why did he leave his post? Did it not
occur to Parker that by doing so he was jeopardizing the president’s life?”

As Winkler added, “Such questions apparently were never asked, and the participants never
commented on them. No one seemed to want to set the record straight.”

Keep in mind that that lengthy list of questions only covers one small aspect of the events of that
day. There are literally hundreds of unanswered, and frequently unasked, questions still
surrounding the Lincoln assassination. As one further example, there is the question of how it
was that in at least a half-dozen isolated pockets of the country, news of Lincoln’s assassination
was reported four to twelve hours before the Lincolns had arrived at Ford’s Theatre?

Folks in St. Joseph, Minnesota, which was 40 miles from the nearest railroad and 80 miles from
the nearest telegraph service, learned of Lincoln’s death while he was still very much alive. So
did the good people of Manchester, New Hampshire. And the people living in Middleton, New
York. And in Newburgh, New York as well. Ace reporters at the Whig Press got the scoop
before the shot was fired.

Shit happens, I guess. Maybe they had caught wind of the fact that, a couple weeks before the
assassination, Mary Todd Lincoln, who was known to go on extravagant shopping sprees, had
purchased some $25,000 (in today’s dollars) worth of mourning clothes. It’s always good to be
prepared. Even when your husband isn’t even ill, let alone dying.


When we left off on the last outing, two men officially identified as John Wilkes Booth and
David Herold had just crossed the Navy Yard Bridge from Washington, DC into Maryland. They
were the only two people to cross the bridge after curfew that fateful night, so being allowed to
do so was quite the lucky break for the pair. Just as it had been a lucky break for Booth that
Lincoln’s bodyguard for the evening, John Parker, had abandoned his post (as had coachman
Francis Burns and presidential aide Charles Forbes, all three of whom went next door to drink in
the same bar as John Wilkes Booth), and that General Grant and his military entourage had not
accompanied the Lincoln party to the theater.

Booth caught numerous ‘lucky breaks’ that night, like having the telegraph service go down right
after the assassination. But as Thomas Eckert later explained to a congressional committee, that


apparently was a trivial matter: “It did not at the time seem sufficiently important, as the
interruption only continued about two hours. I was so full of business of almost every character
that I could not give it my personal attention ... I could not ascertain with certainty what the facts
were without making a personal investigation, and I had not time to do that.”

For those who may have forgotten, Eckert was hired specifically to set up and maintain the
telegraph system, which naturally raises the question of what other, more important “business of
every character” he had to attend to on a night when keeping the system running should have
been, one would think, of utmost importance.


\ ae
WASHIN IN Rez


Showing the Routes of


‘Proposed Abduction of Lincoln
and
Actual Flight of Booth


SCALE OF MILES
a5


Bowling Green


INDEX:
Ff = Ford's Theatre
S$ = Soldier’s Home
8 = Benning's Bridge
N = Wavy Yard
D = Dent's Meadows
G = Goose Cr.
H = Col.Hughe's
A = Avon Cr.
C = Gambo Cr, Bridge
L = Lucas Cabin


df
Abductio,


Route of Pro


a


Garrett Farma*
\ VIRGINIA


f


‘4 ® Bowling Green


BOOTH’S ESCAPE |] Ford's
Theatre


MA\RYLAND


Surrattsville


Peregrine Pine Thick
Davis Farm


Port Conwa
Port Royal 7
Garrett Farm 2 VIRGINIA
Bp
Cen, ck
e Bowling Green Rez


CJ
>


Four versions of Booth’s alleged escape route
Leonard Guttridge and Ray Neff have written in Dark Union that Booth caught another lucky
break when, at the same time that the telegraph system mysteriously went down, “someone at the
gasworks on Maryland Avenue shut off the gas that fed the lights around the Capitol and
westward along Pennsylvania Avenue,” plunging the assassin’s escape route into darkness at a
most opportune time. (Leonard Guttridge and Ray Neff Dark Union: The Secret Web of
Profiteers, Politicians, and Booth Conspirators That Led to Lincoln’s Death, Wiley, 2003)
Booth also caught a lucky break when his questionable choice of a firearm turned out to be
surprisingly adequate for the job. He took a huge risk, it will be recalled, in bringing a Derringer
as his only firearm — a risk that was, as James Swanson noted in Manhunt, completely
unnecessary: “Booth couldn’t have chosen the Deringer [sic] because he could not obtain a
revolver. He had already purchased at least four, and if he did not have any in his hotel room
within easy reach, he could have gone out and bought another one. In the war capital of the
Union, thousands of guns, including small, lightweight pocket-sized revolvers, were for sale in


the shops of Washington.” (James Swanson Manhunt: The 12-Day Chase for Lincoln’s Killer,
William Morrow, 2006)

Another lucky break for Booth was that the locks on both of the doors leading into the
presidential box at Ford’s Theatre were conveniently broken, rendering them useless. And a spy
hole had been drilled into one of them at eye level, so that someone approaching could survey
the scene inside the booth before entering. Both of those anomalies were apparently unnoticed by
Lincoln and his not-very-security-oriented entourage. And, as previously discussed, a heavy
piece of lumber precisely long enough to wedge the door shut happened to be on hand. Many
historians have claimed that Booth himself had come by earlier in the day and broken the locks,
drilled the hole, and fashioned and hidden the wedge for the door, but no evidence to support
such claims has ever been presented.

Booth also caught a lucky break in that he was able to successfully execute an unlikely and
extremely risky escape from a crowded theater. As no less a scholar than Bill O’Reilly has had
written for him, “A less informed man might worry about being trapped in a building with a
limited number of exits, no windows, and a crowd of witnesses—many of them able-bodied men
just back from the war.” Donald Winkler was a bit more blunt in his assessment: “It sounded like
a foolhardy plan with no chance of success. How could one man with a single-shot derringer, a
bullet, and a knife walk nonchalantly through a crowded theater, pass unobstructed through two
doors into the State Box, stand behind the president without being seen by the two occupants in
the box, kill the president with no one hearing the sound of the shot, leap eleven feet to the stage,
take time to yell a message to the audience, and escape through a rear exit? Fulfilling this
mission required far more than blind luck.” (Bill O’Reilly and Martin Dugard Killing Lincoln:
The Shocking Assassination That Changed America Forever, Henry Holt, 2011; and H. Donald
Winkler Lincoln and Booth: More Light on the Conspiracy, Cumberland House, 2003)

Actually, there were obviously more than two occupants in the box and plenty of people heard
the shot, but such glaring errors are commonplace in the existing literature on the assassination.
So having caught numerous ‘lucky breaks,’ Booth and Herold rode off separately into the
Maryland night, with Booth having a lead on Herold. No mention is ever made of why Powell,
who had supposedly attacked the Seward family, and Adzerodt, who was supposed to have killed
second-in-command Andrew Johnson, were not included in the escape plan. In any event, Booth
and Herold supposedly met up eight miles from the city limits. How they did so in the dark and
with no communication devices is anyone’s guess. No mention is made in the literature of Booth
asking Herold anything about how the alleged attack at the Seward mansion had gone down, or
about the attack on Johnson that had supposedly been planned, or about what had become of
Powell and Adzerodt.


The Surrat Tavern in Surrattsville
The pair’s first stop, so the story goes, was at Mary Surratt’s tavern in Surrattsville, run by John
Lloyd. They allegedly arrived there around midnight. Lloyd, known as a raging drunkard,
allegedly supplied the pair with two carbines, field glasses, and booze. By many accounts, his
confession to such high crimes was obtained through torture. And it is never explained why the
pair wouldn’t have already had those items, and various other provisions, from the outset. Lloyd
became a witness for the prosecution at the pseudo-trial of the conspirators. Of course, his other
option was certain conviction and probable execution, so he was highly motivated to tell the
story the government wanted him to tell.
The pair’s next stop — at about 4:30 in the morning on April 15, 1865, with Lincoln still clinging
to life — was at the home of Dr. Samuel Mudd, who gained the dubious distinction of being the
only person along Booth’s alleged escape route to be prosecuted and convicted. “Wanted”
posters issued by Secretary of War Edwin Stanton warned that “All persons harboring or
secreting the conspirators or aiding their concealment or escape, will be treated as accomplices in
the murder of the President and shall be subject to trial before a military commission, and the
punishment of death.” As we shall see though, various historians have identified at least two
dozen people who supposedly provided aid and comfort to the fugitives, and none of them, other
than Mudd, were ever prosecuted for their alleged crimes and all of their names are now long
forgotten.


The home of Dr. Mudd and family
Booth and Herold supposedly introduced themselves to Mudd using the aliases of Tyson and
Henson, and by some accounts, Booth wore a fake beard — which of course makes perfect sense
since Booth had chosen not to don a disguise before committing the crime, and had left his real
name scattered about the crime scene and the escape route. And by virtually all accounts, Mudd
knew Booth and had had prior dealings with him, so the good doctor would surely have seen
through a cheap disguise. For the record, Mudd claimed that he did not recognize the man he
treated as John Wilkes Booth, and he could not identify David Herold from a photograph.
Herold, meanwhile, maintained that he had crossed the bridge out of Washington on the
afternoon of April 14 and was long gone from the city when Lincoln was shot. He also claimed
that he had not gone to the Mudd house with Booth or anyone else. And evidence does indeed
suggest that Herold spent the afternoon of April 14 on a horseback ride in the Maryland
countryside. And he did so with — and I couldn’t possibly make this stuff up — a sixteen-year-old
kid by the name of Johnny Booth, who was apparently not related to the far more famous John
Booth. Herold and the young Booth got drunk and passed out and were found the next morning
by Johnny’s father. Johnny and his father, of course, were not called upon the testify at the mock
trial.
Meanwhile, Mudd repaired the damage to his visitor’s leg, which he later described in a
statement as a not very serious or painful wound, and fashioned a splint for him. He then offered
the exhausted travelers sleeping accommodations. After catching some sleep and paying the
good doctor for his services, the pair left later that day. At the infamous trial of the conspirators,


the story did not pick up again until nine days later, on April 24, when the pair allegedly took a
ferry across the Rappahannock River. Various historical narratives have filled in those missing


nine days, though not necessarily with a story that has much credibility.
err é we ‘ ~ eT 8:


The Best of


Thomas Jones and namesake
According to Lincoln folklore, a guy by the name of Oswell Swann (sometimes identified as
Oswald Swann), described as being half black and half Indian, guided the pair to the home of a
Samuel Cox at about 1:00 AM on April 16, 1865. Cox allegedly advised Booth and Herold to
hide out in a nearby pine thicket, and had his overseer, Franklin Robey, guide them there. He
then summoned Thomas Jones to supply them with food, blankets, and newspapers. Needless to
say, none of these men were ever prosecuted for their alleged capital offenses.


Samuel Cox


Booth and Herold supposedly spent five long days cooling their heels in that pine thicket. During
that time, they had to keep quiet at all times for fear of alerting any nearby patrols to their
whereabouts. They couldn’t light a fire to keep warm. And Booth is generally described as being
immobilized and in considerable pain from his injury (the one that Dr. Mudd described as not
particularly painful). According to the best-selling Manhunt, for example, “Booth never rose
from the ground during the time in the thicket.” So the wealthy, accomplished, well-bred actor
spent five agonizing days lying hungry and motionless on the cold, unforgiving ground of a
Maryland pine thicket. Sounds perfectly reasonable.

One problem with that tall tale though concerns the fate of Booth’s and Herold’s horses. It is
agreed that they surely had horses when they arrived at the pine thicket, and they would have had
to get rid of them to avoid giving away their position to any passing patrols. So what happened to
them? In Manhunt, James Swanson tells the following tale: “Davey [Herold] untied both horses
and led them by the reins to a quicksand morass about a mile from the pine thicket. Quickly, he
shot each one in the head with a pistol or the carbine, and then sank their bodies, still accoutered


with saddles, bits, bridles, stirrups, and all. There they rest in an unmarked grave, their skeletons
undiscovered to this day.”

Here Swanson has acknowledged something that historians agree on: despite one of the world’s
most exhaustive manhunts, no trace of the two horses was ever found. According to the guy who
actually writes the books that Bill O’Reilly puts his name on, “A combined force of seven
hundred Illinois cavalry, six hundred members of the Twenty-second Colored Troops, and one
hundred men from the Sixteenth New York Cavalry Regiment now enter the wilderness of
Maryland’s vast swamps [on April 18, 1865] ... Incredibly, eighty-seven of these brave men will
drown in their painstaking weeklong search for the killers.” No large animal carcasses were
found on that search, or on any other searches. O’Reilly doesn’t mention, by the way, how many
of those eighty-seven alleged drowning deaths involved members of the Twenty-Second Colored
Troops (sorry — I couldn’t resist).

Historians also agree that Booth was far too seriously injured to be of any help to Herold, leaving
Herold solely responsible for disposing of the horses. There are, generally speaking, two versions
of the ‘story of the disappearing horses,’ both of which are laughably absurd. One commonly
told fable holds that Herold led the two horses into quicksand; the other posits that he shot and
buried them. Swanson has essentially weaved a new version of the tall tale by combining the
two.


HUCKLEBERRY, THE HOME OF THOMAS A. JONES.


Some historians just avoid any mention of the disappearing horses trick, probably out of a desire
to not sound like buffoons. But others have no problem with repeating tales that have stood
unchallenged for well over a century despite being easily discredited. Because the reality, dear
readers, is that there is no rational explanation for how two horses and all the gear accompanying
them could have just vanished into thin air. Only in some fantasy world would it be possible for
one man, working alone in fairly primitive conditions and with no tools at his disposal, to dig
graves deep enough to completely conceal two very large animal carcasses without even leaving
mounds for searchers to find. And even if he could somehow dig the holes, how would one man
get those very heavy carcasses into those miraculously excavated graves? And wouldn’t shooting
them be a very risky maneuver, since gunshots tend to attract attention? It seems rather unlikely
then that Herold shot the horses and then buried them both with his bare hands.

Equally preposterous is the claim that Herold led the horses into quicksand and let them sink to
their deaths. Horses can be rather obedient creatures, to be sure, but they certainly aren’t stupid
and they won’t willingly walk into what they would surely perceive as a deathtrap. And how


exactly would someone go about leading them into quicksand? Wouldn’t that require that the
person doing the leading would have to walk out into the quicksand ahead of the horses? Those
are rather moot points though given that Wikipedia describes quicksand as “harmless,” and notes
that “People falling into (and, unrealistically, being submerged in) quicksand or a similar
substance is a trope of adventure fiction, notably in movies.”

It doesn’t actually happen, you see, in real life. But that hasn’t stopped mainstream historians and
academics from promoting such nonsense for decades.

As previously noted, Swanson has combined the two versions of the ‘disappearing horses’ fable.
No graves needed to be dug because the bodies were disposed of in quicksand, though horse-
swallowing quicksand pits only exist in movies and TV shows from the 1960s — and in
bestsellers that begin with the words, “This story is true.” And in this particular version of the
fable, Herold didn’t have to lead the horses into the mythical quicksand, he just led them fo it.
But what Swanson leaves out is an explanation of how Herold single-handedly drug or pushed
those half-ton horse carcasses into a fictional quicksand pit. The only way that could actually
happen is in a cartoon.

In any event, after allegedly spending five long days lounging in a Maryland pine thicket, our
antiheroes supposedly emerged to attempt a crossing of the Potomac River in a boat supplied by
local fisherman Henry Rowland. Their first attempt though failed when the ‘pair that couldn’t
row straight’ supposedly paddled the wrong direction and ended up in Nanjemoy Creek, still on
the Maryland side of the Potomac. Not to worry though — they went to a farm owned by
Peregrine Davis and operated by his son-in-law, John Hughes, who happily put his life on the
line by feeding and sheltering the fugitives.

The next night, April 21, Booth and Herold chose not to attempt a second crossing of the
Potomac, for reasons never explained by historians. It had been a full week since the
assassination and the most wanted men in America had failed to put much distance at all between
themselves and Washington, but they apparently weren’t in any hurry.


ae Leh sss SSS
erry and her home
The dynamic duo allegedly made a second attempt the next night and successfully navigated into
Machodoc Creek, near the home of Elizabeth Quesenberry. They arrived at Quesenberry’s home
at around 1:00 PM on April 23. The lady of the house promptly sent for Thomas Harbin, who
was reportedly Thomas Jones’ brother-in-law. Harbin arrived at about 3:00 PM with horses and
two associates, William Bryant and Joseph Baden. The five men then rode to the home of Dr.
Richard Stuart, who was apparently related in some way to General Robert E. Lee.


Thomas Harbin


Dr. Richard Stuart
Stuart directed the party, which arrived at around 8:00 PM, to the cabin of a freed slave by the
name of William Lucas — because, you know, freed slaves were highly motivated to assist
Lincoln’s alleged assassin. From there, Booth and Herold were supposedly transported by son
Charley Lucas to Port Conway hidden under a load of straw in a wagon. In Port Conway, the
fugitive pair hooked up with three Confederate soldiers by the names of Mortimer Ruggles,
Absalom Bainbridge and William Jett, who by some accounts had been under the command of
notorious Confederate intelligence operative John S. Mosby (Mosby, by the way, would soon
enthusiastically campaign for and serve in the cabinet of Ulysses S. Grant, the man who had
defeated his supposedly beloved Confederacy).

Booth, Herold, Ruggles, Jett and Bainbridge, along with a few horses, purportedly took a ferry
across the Rappahannock River. At approximately 3:00 PM on April 24, 1865, they arrived at the
Garrett home. The gravely injured, or not so gravely injured, John Wilkes Booth stayed at the
home while Herold rode on to Bowling Green with his new friends. Booth spent the night with


one of the Garrett sons while Herold and Bainbridge slept at the home of Joseph and Elizabeth
Clarke. Herold returned the next day with Ruggles and Bainbridge, though Jett stayed behind in
Bowling Green, from where he would soon lead a posse to the Garrett farm.


es fre ">
7 * te ‘-
~- : a < |
> a
+ ’
. . r Al Ss
*
*


Ruggles


Bainbridge (both circa 1890)


7


Be al


” >
’ :
= — &. ant


° =

\/=
=

ees


$2 . ee
bh) Ee end
Jett


Booth and Herold spent the next night, April 25, supposedly locked in the Garretts’ tobacco barn,
making them easy prey for the posse that would soon arrive. The Reverend Richard Garrett,
however, who was just eleven at the time of the assassination, would later note that the barn
actually had double doors on all four sides and large windows in the upper story. William H.
Garrett would add that some of those doors and windows fastened on the inside. There was,
therefore, no way to actually lock the fugitives inside, another unfortunate fact that has been
swept aside by historians.

The posse that would allegedly end the life of John Wilkes Booth arrived at the Garrett home at
around 2:00 AM on April 26, 1865. A few hours later, Booth, or someone playing the part of
Booth, had been shot. In due time, Dr. Richard Stuart, William Bryant, Elizabeth Quesenberry,
Samuel Cox, Thomas Jones, the Garrett sons, and various others were arrested and taken to the
Old Capital Prison. Curiously though, they were all freed without being charged. All but Dr.
Mudd.


“DAVID. HEROLD
REMAINED HIDDEN FROM APRIL "
TO 21,1865 IN A NEARBY PINE
THICKET, WHILE UNION TROOPS
SEARCHED FOR THEM. THOMAS A.
JONES BROUGHT THEM FOOD AND
THE REWSPAPERS.


| CHARLES county
- eM WAR aoe COMMISSION


eens.
Sign commemorating fictional historical events

Meanwhile, as Booth and Herold were following their convoluted path to the Garrett farm, a

massive manhunt spearheaded by Edwin Stanton was underway. We shall pick up there on the

next outing.


Before resuming where we left off, I need to tack on some info here that should have been
included in earlier installments. First off, there were, as it turns out, at least three additional
suspicious deaths that followed closely on the heels of the Lincoln assassination, so let’s take a
quick look at those. And as I’m sure it will be recalled, these deaths are in addition to all the
other curious deaths and confinements that have previously been discussed.

First up for review is Colonel Levi C. Turner, who was appointed Assistant Judge Advocate for
the Army on August 5, 1862, which positioned him to be second-in-command to Judge Advocate
Holt during the farcical ‘trial of the conspirators.’ The colonel also worked closely with
notorious NDP chief Lafayette Baker during and after the Civil War to investigate suspected
subversive activities. Turner died of unstated causes on March 13, 1867, less than two years after
Lincoln was slain and about sixteen months before Baker himself turned up dead.

Also up for review is our old friend Silas Cobb, the guy who was in charge of guarding the Navy
Yard Bridge and enforcing the curfew on the night of the assassination. Cobb was the
accommodating gent who allegedly allowed both Booth and Herold to escape from Washington
and then failed to offer any reasonable explanation for his actions, and of course suffered no


repercussions for those actions. Cobb turned up dead in November 1867, two-and-a-half years
after Lincoln was shot. According to reports, he was the victim of a drowning accident.
Finally we have Henri Beaumont de Sainte-Marie, the chap who was credited with tipping off
authorities to the whereabouts of John Surratt, ultimately leading to Surratt’s arrest, extradition,
and failed prosecution. De Sainte-Marie died at the relatively young age of forty-one while still
awaiting a claims court decision on the hefty reward promised for information leading to
Surratt’s capture.

ck ok cK ook ck ook ck ook ck ook cK ook ck ook OK ook ok ok OK ook CK Ook CK OOK Ck Ook Ok
I also discussed in a previous post the fact that former British First Lady Cherie Blair is a
descendant of the Booth clan, thereby demonstrating that the Booth family has continued to
wield political power into the modern era. What I didn’t know at the time was that another
member of the Booth dynasty wielded considerable power on this side of the Atlantic right up
until her death at the infamous Watergate Apartments on October 9, 1987.
She was hiding right in plain sight, disguised only by the “e” that her branch of the family had
added to the Booth name to mask the association. That wielder of power was none other than
Clare Boothe Luce, who, along with her husband Henry Luce — a Skull and Bonesman who
became a publishing magnate, launching such influential magazines as Time, Life, Fortune,
and Sports Illustrated — was a longtime asset of the Central Intelligence Agency.
Boothe was born on March 10, 1903 to unmarried parents who lived a shadowy life and moved
around a lot. Her mother was known to use at least three aliases and her father used at least two.
Clare briefly flirted with being an actress before embarking on a career as a journalist, war
correspondent, politician and diplomat. Curiously, another woman born in 1903 and also known
as Claire Luce also became an actress, creating a good deal of confusion after Clare Boothe
became Clare Luce.


Clare Boothe Luce


Clare Boothe Luce had the distinction of being the first American woman named to a key
diplomatic post, serving as the US Ambassador to Italy from 1953 to 1956. In 1959, she very
briefly served as the US Ambassador to Brazil before resigning. From 1943 to 1947, she had
served in the House of Representatives, representing Connecticut. During that time, she served
on the House Military Affairs Committee, because she naturally knew a lot about military affairs.
During the 1960s, her and her husband busied themselves with sponsoring anti-Castro groups
seeking to return Cuba to its former status as a US puppet-state. In 1973, she was appointed to
the President’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board, because she obviously also knew a lot
about foreign intelligence. In 1983, she was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom. Boothe
Luce was also a Dame of Malta.
It is a strange world indeed when well over a century after the first acknowledged assassination
of a sitting US president (historians don’t generally have much to say about the untimely deaths
of William Harrison, who served for just one month, or Zachary Taylor, who served for some
sixteen months), members of the alleged assassin’s family were still wielding considerable
political power on both sides of the Atlantic. Last time I checked, there weren’t any members of
the Guiteau, Czolgosz, Oswald or Sirhan families occupying such positions of power.
And now, we return to our regularly scheduled programming ....

kook cK ok ck ook Kok ok ok ok ok ok ok Kok CK Ok cK Ok CK Ok CK Ok Ck OK OK
While Booth and Herold were supposedly taking their time getting from Washington to Garrett’s
farm (traveling a distance of less than 100 miles in a week-and-a-half), the largest manhunt in the
young nation’s history was underway, coordinated by our old friend, Secretary of War Edwin
Stanton. From the outset, Stanton’s goal seemed to be to avoid actually apprehending John
Wilkes Booth and some of the other alleged conspirators.
Stanton had considerable manpower at his disposal, including idle US military forces in
Washington, the Metropolitan Police, Lafayette Baker’s detective force, US Cavalry forces, and
provost marshals. Working closely with Stanton were Metro Police Superintendent A.C.
Richards, Washington Provost Marshall Major James O’ Beirne, and General Christopher
Columbus Augur, commander of US military forces in Washington. To say that Stanton
misappropriated the available manpower would be a rather charitable assessment.


A.C. Richards
According to Bill O’Reilly’s error-filled bestseller, Killing Lincoln, there were three routes
leading out of Washington into Virginia — the Georgetown Aqueduct, Long Bridge, and
Benning’s Bridge — and just one, the Navy Yard Bridge, leading into Maryland. The


Confederacy-friendly path into Maryland was by far the most likely route for an assassin to take,
so it naturally was completely ignored.

The first troops to find themselves accidentally on the correct route were led by a David Dana.
Dana just happened to be the brother of Assistant Secretary of War Charles Dana, who served
directly under Stanton and who decided that the patrol’s presence on the trail of the alleged
assassins was pointless and instead sent his brother’s troops on a wild goose chase. Major
O’Beirne also found himself accidentally on the right trail, so he of course was recalled to
Washington.

As previously mentioned, Stanton’s first dispatch after the shooting of Lincoln was not written
until 1:30 AM and was not sent until 2:15 AM, about four hours after the shot was fired. That
dispatch made no mention of John Wilkes Booth, despite the fact that numerous witnesses
supposedly (but not actually) immediately identified Booth as the assailant. Booth’s name didn’t
appear in a telegram until 4:15 AM, conveniently too late to make the morning papers. A
telegram sent to the police chiefs of northern cities contained no mention of the name Booth.
Initial press reports, based on information leaked by Stanton himself, identified John Surratt as
the perpetrator of the fictional attack on the Seward family. When it later became known that
Surratt was nowhere near Washington at the time of the attack, Lewis Powell/Paine, who bore no
physical resemblance whatsoever to John Surratt, was substituted in as the perpetrator of the
alleged assassination attempt.


=


Christopher Columbus Augur


James O Beirne


The first telegram dispatched by the War Department was a curiously worded message to
General Grant, which read: “The President was assassinated tonight at Ford’s Theatre at 10:30
tonight & cannot live. The wound is a pistol shot through the head. Secretary Seward & his son
Frederick, were also assassinated at their residence & are in a dangerous condition.” One would
think that it would go without saying that someone who had been “assassinated” would be in “a
dangerous condition.” Luckily though, neither of the Sewards were actually assassinated,
although news of their ‘deaths’ quickly circulated around Washington.

One of the earliest actions taken by investigators was raiding the room at the Kirkwood Hotel
allegedly rented by George Atzerodt for the purpose of assassinating Andrew Johnson.
According to Guttridge and Neff, writing in Dark Union, “The room was registered as Atzerodt’s
but had not been slept in. The Kirkwood’s day clerk, who had entered Room 126 earlier that
morning, found nothing and said so. His testimony was ignored.” When detectives entered that
very same empty and unused room, they allegedly uncovered a wealth of evidence.

Supposedly recovered from the room were a bankbook issued to John Wilkes Booth, a loaded
revolver, three boxes of pistol cartridges, a map of the southern states, a Bowie knife, and a
handkerchief with Booth’s mother’s name embroidered on it. Booth’s room at the National


Hotel, Room 228, was similarly raided with additional evidence supposedly recovered, including
a business card containing John Surratt’s name and a letter from Samuel Arnold conveniently
implicating both he and McLaughlin, despite the fact that Arnold and McLaughlin, like Surratt,
were nowhere near Washington at the time of the assassination.

“Wanted” posters issued by the War Department were wildly, and probably deliberately,
inaccurate. John Surratt’s and David Herold’s names were both spelled incorrectly, the photo of
Herold was of him as a schoolboy, which clearly wasn’t an accurate representation of how he
looked circa 1865, and the photo of Surratt wasn’t John Surratt at all. In a blatant act of historical
revisionism, corrected posters were issued much later. One widely circulated poster that was
issued after Lewis Paine was already in custody inexplicably offered a reward for Paine and
contained a richly detailed 160-word description of the already incarcerated suspect, along with a
mere 42- word description of ~ guy who was still at large, John Wilkes Booth.


Wilt We pal Sethe apprehension of David ©. aro anetiner of Booths secomplins
Original “Wanted” poster


War Department, Washington, April 20, 1865,


$100,000 REWARD!
THE MURDERER


Of our late beloved President, Abraham Lincoln,
IS STILL AT LARGE


$50,000 REWARD


WE ye pee ap sew


$29,000 REWARD


WHE cy paad fee the spprebersien of jobs 6. Sucrat, one of Boots’ Acconpiices


$29,000 REWARD


th br pe fr 62 sapien af Deved ( Barall, one of Booths hess open


EDWIN M. STANTON, Secretary of War


Revised “Wanted” posters
The first alleged conspirator to be arrested was the hapless Ned Spangler, who was taken into
custody at Ford’s Theatre on the night of the assassination. Samuel Arnold and Michael
McLaughlin, implicated through what appears to have been planted evidence, were arrested on
April 17, 1865, the former at Fort Monroe and the latter in Baltimore. Later that night, Mary
Surratt and Lewis Powell were both arrested at Surratt’s boardinghouse. George Adzerodt was
taken into custody in the early morning hours of April 20 in Maryland, following — by one
account — a tip from his police detective brother. Dr. Mudd was arrested on April 24, four days
after Captain William Wood, a close associate of Stanton and the warden of the Old Capitol
Prison, had begun watching his home.
Why authorities drug their feet for several days before arresting Mudd even while rounding up
some 2,000 other suspects who ultimately were not charged is another of the many unanswered
questions surrounding the Lincoln assassination and its aftermath. In any event, that left just two
of the alleged conspirators at large, David Herold and John Wilkes Booth. Finding them was
going to require a specially assembled team — a team that would uncannily know just where to
go.
The elite posse was assembled by NDP chief Lafayette Baker on April 24. The group thereafter
all but made a beeline to the area around Garrett’s farm. How they knew to go there is a question
not often addressed by historians. For the record, Baker claimed that he was tipped off by “an old


Negro,” but said person was never identified and he or she never stepped forward to collect the
substantial reward offered. A House Committee noted that, “upon what information Colonel
Baker proceeded in sending out the expedition ... is in no manner disclosed or intimated in his
official report.”

An 1867 Minority Report of the Judiciary Committee of the House of Representatives offered
what were, by today’s standards, shockingly frank assessments of Baker’s character, such as,
“Although examined on oath, time and again, and on various occasions, it is doubtful whether he
[Baker] has in any one thing told the truth even by accident,” and “there can be no doubt that of
his many previous outrages, entitling him to unenviable immortality, he has added that of willful
and deliberate perjury; and we are glad to know that no one member of the committee deems any
statement made by him as worthy of the slightest credit. What a blush of shame will tinge the
cheek of the American student in future ages, when he reads that this miserable wretch for years
held, as it were, in the hollow of his hand, the liberties of the American people.”

The posse assembled by Baker was led by his cousin, Lt. Luther Baker, and Lt. Col. Everton
Conger, who had served as an aide to Lafayette Baker. Both had returned to civilian life and
were recruited specifically to lead the mission. They were joined by Lt. Edward Doherty and a
detachment of twenty-five soldiers. After completing the mission, all involved signed quitclaims
and collected a substantial amount of reward money. One of the troopers, as fate would have it,
had met Booth previously; some 33 years later, on April 20, 1898, he issued the following
published statement: “It was not Booth nor did it resemble him ...””, Many Americans had
reached that conclusion years earlier.


Edward Doherty


5 ~
ye


»


’
he.
-
e,
o
a
bud
—


Everton Conger
At the Garrett home, the guy later identified as John Wilkes Booth introduced himself as John
W. Boyd. Herold was introduced as his cousin, David Boyd. During the standoff in the barn with
the pair’s would-be captors, the name “Booth” was never spoken. When Herold surrendered and
exited the barn, leaving his companion behind, he insisted that he did not know the other man,
who he claimed was named Boyd. Boyd/Booth was wearing a Rebel uniform and did not have
on a ring that Booth reportedly always wore.
It was not until he had been shot and lay dying that the suspected assassin was addressed by
Luther Baker as “Booth.” According to Baker’s account, the mortally wounded man “seemed
surprised, opened his eyes wide, and looked about,” as if he too was looking for the elusive John
Wilkes Booth. At 7:15 AM on the morning of April 26, 1865, Booth/Boyd drew his last breath,
some two-and-a-half hours after being shot, allegedly by Boston Corbett.
Mainstream authors and historians have labored long and hard to convince readers that Booth’s
body was positively identified, leaving no doubt in the public mind that justice had been served.
James Swanson, for example, has written in Manhunt that, “On the Montauk, several men who
knew Booth in life, including his doctor and dentist, were summoned aboard the ironclad to
witness him in death. It was all very official. The War Department even issued an elaborate


receipt to the notary who witnessed the testimony. During a careful autopsy ...” The same James
Swanson has also written, in Lincoln’s Assassins, that, “When the assassin’s body was brought
back to Washington, the government took rigorous steps to confirm the identity of the man killed
at Garrett’s farm ... Witnesses who knew Booth in life were summoned to identify him in
death.” William Hanchett, in The Lincoln Murder Conspiracies (his contemptible attempt to
‘debunk’ so-called ‘conspiracy theories’), has claimed that “Booth’s body was identified beyond
any possibility of a mix-up at a coroner’s inquest on April 27, 1865.”

All such proclamations are rather brazen and unconscionable acts of historical revisionism. The
reality is that the body was not autopsied and it was processed in-and-out of Washington in
record time. A mere forty hours passed between the death of the man at Garrett’s farm and the
secret, late night disposal of his body, and that included the time needed to transport the corpse
back to Washington. To this day, that initial burial site remains a mystery and several different
versions of the disposal of the body have been published.

For reasons never explained in the historical record, the body was not transported back to
Washington by the military detachment, but was instead escorted by only three men: Luther
Baker, prisoner Willie Jett, and one unnamed soldier. Before reaching Washington, Jett
somehow managed to, uhmm, ‘escape.’ The body was carried by steamer up the Potomac River,
then transported by tugboat to the Washington Navy Yard and placed aboard the

ironclad Montauk in the dead of night, at 1:45 AM on April 27, 1865, bypassing normal
procedures. Before the day was done, the body would be covertly disposed of. The captain of
the Montauk would later say that he “was not present at either time (arrival or disposal) or I
should have put a stop to it.””, The commandant of the Navy Yard would add that, “The removal


of the body was entirely without my knowledge, an unusual transaction.”
; — a ae ae


Prosecutor John Bingham (left) and Judge Advocate Joseph Holt (center)
Dispatched to the Montauk to oversee the identification of the body were such disreputable
characters as Surgeon General Barnes, Judge Advocate Joseph Holt, prosecutor/persecutor John
Bingham, Stanton underlings Thomas Eckert and Lafayette Baker, and two of Baker’s most
trusted men, Luther Baker and Everton Conger. Edwin Stanton had ordered Lafayette Baker and
Thomas Eckert to personally intercept the boat carrying the body and clandestinely get it aboard
the Montauk.

During the alleged inquest, none of Booth’s peers in the theater community, many of whom were
present in Washington at the time, were brought onboard to ID the body. No members of the
Booth family were enlisted to view the body. None of Booth’s alleged co-conspirators, many of
whom were being held on the very same ship, were allowed to ID the body. According to Dark
Union, “thirteen people were permitted to view the body. All but the war photographer
Alexander Gardner, his assistant, and a hotel clerk were connected with the War Department.” If
we’re being honest here, that should read, “all but possibly the hotel clerk were connected with
the War Department.”

Even within the government’s handpicked and limited cast of witnesses, there was disagreement
as to whether the body was that of Booth. Dr. John Frederick May, who had previously seen
Booth as a patient, noted that “there is no resemblance in that corpse to Booth, nor can I believe
it to be him.” May added that the corpse “looks to me much older, and in appearance much more
freckled than he was. I do not recollect that he was at all freckled.” Dr. May would later write
that the corpse’s “right limb was greatly contused, and perfectly black from a fracture of one of
the long bones.” Surgeon General Barnes’ report to Stanton, however, held that it was “the left
leg and foot” that were injured and “encased in an appliance of splints and bandages,” thus
clouding the waters even on such straightforward issues as which of the corpse’s legs was
injured.


Dr. John Frederick May
After the hasty identification charade, and without anyone who was actually close to Booth in
life having seen the body, and without any public display of the body, and without any
photographs of the body that would ever see the light of day, the corpse was quickly disposed of
by either Lafayette Baker and Thomas Eckert, or Lafayette and Luther Baker, depending upon
who is telling the tale. Following the announcement that the body had been disappeared, shouts
of “hoax!” rocked Washington, with many convinced that Booth hadn’t been captured or killed
and was still free.
On July 28, 1866, Senator Garrett Davis of Kentucky voiced his doubts about the identification
of Booth: “I have never seen any satisfactory evidence that Booth was killed.” Senator Reverdy
Johnson of Maryland, who had played a role in the mock trial, came back with: “I submit to my
friend from Kentucky that there are some things that we must take judicial notice of, just as well
as that Julius Caesar is dead.”
Davis though remained decidedly unconvinced: “I would rather have better testimony of the fact.
I want it proved that Booth was in that barn. I cannot conceive, if he was in the barn, why he was
not taken alive. I have never seen anybody, or the evidence of anybody, that identified Booth
after he is said to have been killed. Why so much secrecy about it? ... There is a mystery and a


most inexplicable mystery to my mind about the whole affair ... [Booth] could have been
captured just as well alive as dead. It would have been much more satisfactory to have brought
him up here alive and to have inquired of him to reveal the whole transaction ... [or] bring his
body up here ... let all who had seen him playing, all who associated with him on the stage or in
the green room or at the taverns and other public places, have had access to his body to have
identified it.”


Senator Reverdy Johnson


Senator Garrett Davis
There was no way the powers-that-be were going to allow that to happen, of course, since the
body clearly wasn’t that of John Wilkes Booth. Had it been, the government surely would have
taken the actions necessary to convince a skeptical public. But such actions weren’t really
necessary in 1865, just as they aren’t today. The omnipotent ones can tell us, for example, that
Osama bin Laden was killed and his body promptly disposed of — and the majority of us will
accept it as the gospel truth.
And those malcontents who choose not to accept a proclamation that lacks any objective proof?
Well, they don’t really matter. Just as the voices of reason didn’t really matter 150 years ago.
