A Motion Picture Production Company


FLY


G L E


September 30, 1992
Dear Mr. Weisberg,

My name is Sean Mansfield. I am a St. Louis-based Motion Picture Producer/Director making a
documentary on the Assassination Research Movement. The focus is on the researchers of the
murders of John Kennedy, Martin Luther King, and Robert Kennedy. Rather than attempt to make a
definitive film about the specifics of the crimes. I am making a documentary about the people who
have kept these issues an active concern. It is the story of what has happened along the way to those
who search for Truth.

The format will be a sixty to ninety minute documentary produced with broadcast quality
equipment. I’m looking for interviews telling of experiences and opinions related to your
investigation of these events. All questions will be simple and broad-based relating to your
experiences. We want stories about social and personal pressures related to your involvement,
stories about media exposure, publishing and lecture tales, opinions about the direction of
investigation, theories of events and conversations of conspiracy. I am confident this will make an
engaging documentary. People are interested in the development of thought and realization of a
movement that has overcome fearsome obstacles to bring about a legitimate historical statement of
the times.


My production partner, Keith W. Preston, and I believe it is necessary to change the public's
perception of the Research Community. They need to shed the media's spin on researchers as
"buffs", "theorists", "Paranoids", and "revisionista's". We want to show the real and "unreal"
trials and tribulations of those who pursued this lonely quest. The public needs to know of the
unselfish search and sacrifices of the researchers. They need to see private citizens engaged in a
"nobility of work" to find the murderers of a President. Your pursuit of the felons responsible for
these crimes is proof that the effort of one can affect the future of many. We all must shine a bright
light on the past to illuminate the future. Now is the time to share that light.

We are very interested in what you have to say about these issues and we would like to interview
you. We will begin our project at the ASK Symposium in Dallas on October 22-25 1 992.

We will be contacting you to arrange a time to talk during the symposium weekend or you are
welcome to call me collect at the number listed below. You can also contact either of us at the Hyatt
Regency Hotel at Reunion Square in Dallas Oct 21-26.


"Democracy cannot be ignorant and free"
Thomas Jefferson


Very Truly,

•Sfcyvw-


Sean Mansfield

wJkR ,TS
f-T/o wen A sPc^-id w\y itJi©e<3~>-ri(\j ta/£W7S


P. O. Box 297


Clarksville, Missouri 63336


314-242-3134


FLYING EAGLE


A MOTION PICTURE PRODUCTION COMPANY


KEITH W. PRESTON *

PRODUCER/RESEARCHER


P.0. BOX 297 OFFICE 314/242-3134

CLARKSVILLE. MISSOURI 63336 HOME 31 4/394-1504


FLYING EAGLE

A MOTION PICTURE PRODUCTION COMPANY


S. R. O. MANSFIELD

PRODUCER/DIRECTOR


P.O. BOX 297

CLARKSVILLE MISSOURI 63336


314/242-3134
