FD-302 (Rev. 1-25-60) 
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION 
Date December 4, 1963 
On December 3, 1963, Mr. l^WRENC]^.\rFYRWS «as 
Interviewed at his place of business, the^Ero Mteufa^turine 
Company, 714 West Monroe Street, Chicago, Illinofs, by 
BAs RICHARD B. LEE and GEORGE H. PARFET. MEYERS advimed that 
be is employed as Bales Manager of the Sporting Goods Division 
of this firm and resides at 3950 North Lake Shore Drive, 
Chicago. Illinois, with his wife and two children. 
Mr. MEYERS advised that during the course of his 
business contacts he has been required to make frequent trips 
to Dallas, Texas, over the past several years. On one occasion 
approximately five years ago be met JACK RUBY at RUBY's night 
club, and since that time he has visited in RUBY's night club 
on numerous occasions. 
advised that on November 20, 1963, be flew to 
Dallas, Texas, where on the night of the 20th he stayed at 
the Raaiada Motel and checked into the Cabana Motel on tbs 
morning of November 21, 1963. He stated he pursued his 
normal business affairs that date and in the evening following 
dinner he went to JACK RUBY's Carousel Club. Mr. MEYERS 
stated that on this trip to Dallas he was accompanied by 
Miss JEAN WEST who he had known casually as a resident of 
20 East Delaware Street, Chicago, Illinois. He described ^ 
11188 VEST 88 8 "x*8lh6r duBb^ bul 8ccomB04l8Hn^ bro8d.** 
further pointed out that his association with Miss WEST is 
not known to members of his family or to his business 
associates. When ho and Miss WEST arrived at the Carousel 
Club he introduced her to the owner, JACK RUBY, and RUBY 
Joined them at their table, buying Miss WEST two champagne 
cocktails. He stated that during the course of their stay 
at the club on that evening the conversation revolved 
primarily around show personalities, the acts currently 
appearing at the club and other items of topical interest.

--- PAGE BREAK ---eir stay 
at the club on that evening the conversation revolved 
primarily around show personalities, the acts currently 
appearing at the club and other items of topical interest.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CG 44-645 
2 
He advised that be and Mias WEST remained at the Carousel Club 
for approximately one hour, returning to tbelr motel at about 
11:00 p.B. Mr. METERS stated while at the Carousel Club he 
had invited RUBY to Join him at the Cabana Hotel for a drink 
with him and his brother, EDWARD MEYER, and EDWARD'S wife, who 
were attending a convention in Dallas. He said that shortly 
thereafter JACK RUBY came to the motel where he was introduced 
to bis brother and his wife. RUBY remained at the aK>tel for 
only a few minutes before he left, saying that be had to return 
to his club. 
Mr. MEYERS stated that his next contact with JACK 
RUBY was at approximately 10:30 p.m., Saturday, November 23, 
1963, when RUBY telephoned him at the Cabana Motel. He 
said that at this time RUBY seemed greatly dlstrubed over 
the President *s assassination, and that this feeling was 
compounded by the fact that, according to RUBY, the Colony Club 
and the Theatre Lounge, which are operated by ABE and BARNEY 
WEINSTEIN, were remaining open for business in spite of the 
fact that all other clubs had closed out of respect for the 
President. MEYERS said that RUBY asked "what do you think of 
this awful thing?"and "I've got to do something about this." 
MEYERS stated that although he did not give it any thought at 
the time he does not now know upon reflection whether RUBY was 
referring to the WEINSTEIN brothers clubs reauilnlng open or . . 
whether he was referring to the assassination of President 
KENNEDY. At this time JACK RUBY invited MEYERS to Join him for 
a cup of coffee, but MEYERS declined the invitation and In 
return invited RUBY to coate to the motel to talk., RUBY In turn 
declined the invitation and at that time it was agreed that 
they would meet the following evening for dinner. The 
conversation en||od on this note and MEYERS has not been in . 
further contact with JACK RUBY. 
Mr. MEYERS stated that on Sunday, November 24, 1963, 
he drove to Me Kinney, Texas, where a factory of his firm 
Is located and then continued on to Sherman, Texas, where lie 
intended to play golf. He said that while en route he had 
the car radio on and heard the news that RUBY had killed LEE 
HARVEY OSWALD in the Dallas Police Station. MEYERS stated ., Texas, where lie 
intended to play golf. He said that while en route he had 
the car radio on and heard the news that RUBY had killed LEE 
HARVEY OSWALD in the Dallas Police Station. MEYERS stated .

--- PAGE BREAK ---intended to play golf. He said that while en route he had 
the car radio on and heard the news that RUBY had killed LEE 
HARVEY OSWALD in the Dallas Police Station. MEYERS stated .

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CG 44-645 
3 
that hlB reaction was one of shock and disbelief that HUBT 
could actually have been Involved in such a deed. 
MEYERS stated that upon his return to Dallas be 
debated whether or not to contact the Dallas Police concerning 
his recent association with RUBY, but decided that in the light 
of the apparent hectic activities then ensuing at the police 
Ifkation it would be better if he did not do so. MEYERS also 7 
stated that he aiade no effort to cogitact RUBY. 
MEYERS stated that his observations and associations 
with RUBY over the past five years have culminated in some 
rather definite ideas as to RUBY's personality. He stated 
that he regards RUBY as a person who is well aware of his 
lack of formal education and who, by association with individuals 
who are well-educated and/or well-respected, tries to inflate 
bis own position. MEYERS explained that on many occasions RUBY 
would 'drop names of well-known entertainers, managers, and 
agents, or would make a point of being seen in the company of 
a public official or respected member of the community. He 
seemingly felt that by engaging in these activities he would 
himself, gain stature and importance. He stated that RUBY 
has always impressed him as a gregarious individual who 
genuinely liked to be with people and in order to promote 
this need and to encourage business at his club would pass out 
drink cards freely to any group with which he came In contact. 
He stated that although he, MEYERS, was never introduced to 
any police officers in Dallas RUBY on many occasions would 
identify various Individuals in the club as being members of 
the Dallas Police Department. He stated that through past 
conversations with RUBY he Is of the impression that RUBY 
was well-known to moat of the members of the Dallas Police 
Department. 
MEYERS continued that he does not consider RUBY to 
be an emotionally stable person and that RUDY has always been 
very emphatic concerning his likes and dislikes. He stated that 
RUBY seldom. If ever, takes a middle of the road attitude, 
but would rather have a strong leaning toward one or the 
other extreme. MEYERS advised that he feels JACK RUBY wouldlikes. He stated that 
RUBY seldom. If ever, takes a middle of the road attitude, 
but would rather have a strong leaning toward one or the 
other extreme. MEYERS advised that he feels JACK RUBY would

--- PAGE BREAK ---t 
RUBY seldom. If ever, takes a middle of the road attitude, 
but would rather have a strong leaning toward one or the 
other extreme. MEYERS advised that he feels JACK RUBY would

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CG 44-645 
4 
usually act on the spur of the Boment. being quick to either 
had^aA« regard he connented that JACK BDBY 
^d seeTOd rather perturbed on his last three or lour visits 
‘‘I® troubles to METBRS regarding 
clubs that were In competition to HUBY's. Specificallv 
loSld ^ smeteur nights wherein girls with no experience 
would try out as strippers In the night clube. 
but that th^f^*^*^*** ***** *“<* stopped this practice 
operated by the WEINSTEIN brothers had 
TOntinued to do this and that be had hoped he coAld get the 
union managemcntB to change their rule and allow this 
continue. Regarding ROBY being -quick to llghf 
he said u. r.^., be did not nean physically, inasmuch as he 
had never seen JACK RUBY In a physical light, but was 
referring to RUBY's quick and firm convictions. 
He stated that be had never seen RUBY with a gun 
but on one occasion when RUBY had closed the club. MEYERS 
accompanied him to his automobile where he placed the nights 
proceeds In the trunk of the car. Something was said at the 
time which gave MEYERS the Improssion that RUBY sometimes 
maintained a gun in the trunk of his car because of the sums 
Of money that be was required to remove from the club. 
... ^ Hogarding hin general association with RUBY be 
knowledge RUBY drank very little, was a 
•health nut" and had a deep interest in physical fitness. 
K! regard he at one time had obtained a set of 
barbells lor RUBY's personal use. He continued that be did 
not know of any close friends or associates ol RUBYfs but 
mentioned that he had met GEORGE SENATOR In RUBY's pl.^ce of 
occasions. Ho advised he does not know 
If SENATOR had any official connection with the club or not. 
btated that he can place no credence In the newspaper 
queries that RUBY had any connection or acquaintance 
whatsoever with LEE HARVEY OSWALD or any Chicago hoodlums. 
He stated that regarding the latter he is sure that knowing 
MEYERS was from Chicago he would have at soaie time or anotheror acquaintance 
whatsoever with LEE HARVEY OSWALD or any Chicago hoodlums. 
He stated that regarding the latter he is sure that knowing 
MEYERS was from Chicago he would have at soaie time or another

--- PAGE BREAK ---

<1- 
CG 44-645 
5 
drop^d the nane of aoMeone angaged In underworld activities 
in tho Chicago area In hopes of enhancing his own level of 
although 
know anything about JACK HDBY's political affiliations 
BY has never given hla any reason whatsoever to think that he 
has any communistic tendencies or interests. 
said that he had formed the opinion that BUBY 
shot IJEE HARVEY OSWALD for one of two reasons, "that HDBY 
the morld of vermin in shooting 
elected himself executioner because ^ 
of his deep sympathy for the President's family."