R-Maf.Coaray
-mr.Galg
CT：
-1og
售r.9uiv
3.Mr.Trotter
Than ls the lnveatigation into the. aasassinatlon of
Laartin Luther Klng.Jr..
h'
Bemmdugon ntoys placed by New Scoand Yard as a reBult ol
informntion urnished by the FBl,Jaaeg Far Ray was arrested at the
Londom Meternatlonu Airport, London, England,today,8/8/oo,2t
11:l a m London time (o:l's a, m. Washington, D. C., time).
Ray waa bravgling under a. Canadlan pass port lagued tn the
nano of Hamon CeorgeSneydAt the time ofhs arrest hehad two
Canndilnn pas8ports under thl name.One had been lssued at Ottawa on
44/osand the otherhad bcenLssued by theCanadian Embassy at
Llabos, Portugal, oa S/16/o8. Ray obtained a 8eccnd passport by
elalmdng thmt Hn orlginal paasport had been destroyed..
Ray at tba dme of the arrest was carrying uu his hilp pocket
a fuby Loaded revolver. He le being detained by Engllsh authorities for
carryinaconcealedweapon andfor enteringthe countrywlthillegal
documentatton (the paasport). Ray ls to be arraigned in court in London
on Monday,@/10/ou,at 13y a. m, Lordon Hme.Ray cannot be
lntorvlewed byFBI personne! before his arralgnment.Subsequent to
the arraignrment ho can bo 1rterviewed only H he consentn to submitting
to such an iterview.
Tho LegalAtachen London has advised that Ray's identity han
beon conflrmed through f!gerprinty
:Sel.
REC.
161D
The Whlte Bouse, the Depart cient cf State, Secret Service and
apprehenelon ol Ray. Also, Public Sa'ety Director, Frank Hollo man,
o Memphls, Tennessee,was personally informed that Ftay had been
ENCLOSURA
Enclosureg
PERX REC UNT(: 1=)
7 9.CLmvea(z)
CONTINUED-OVER

--- PAGE BREAK ---Also, Public Sa'ety Director, Frank Hollo man,
o Memphls, Tennessee,was personally informed that Ftay had been
ENCLOSURA
Enclosureg
PERX REC UNT(: 1=)
7 9.CLmvea(z)
CONTINUED-OVER

--- PAGE BREAK ---

orelendedanawtTocoatoaaLontlo
Mashgany a Faingon Aynng Koypt Conedan Mornled Poico
Lapoan Ccer Pantr'tnr eavized R wnd pothted out to he Dopartmei
ante mn oarc Salo othag Dapartnent Phageatradtlon proccedinga
wouBnve to be LafladR kn oar'understanding hat the Unlawful
Paght an Avoid Cordinemen cRarge as wel s Che Chvl Righta - Conspracy
eharfd mre mof extradilable oflensesTho murder charge which l
outstandin agaanet Ray based on theLrilctment In Tennessee Ls an
avomua loraxtradltloa
.
om akdn caro at ll: a,m.,ater  bad been cleared with both the Deputy
Atoorney Generalandwlth Clifl Sesalons,theDepartmentofJustlc
Informatlon CMllcez.Prlor to that the release had been read to and
appurovet by the Legat in London and the SACs at Atlanta,Memphis and
Btrmdnghann.The Latter SACs were advlaed it could be released to the
localprene at ll:ss a,m.Extremely wide press coverage has been given
to tho preaa release,both on radlo,television and in newspapers.Attached
o/s/oa inme ol the Washington "Evening Star."
ACTBONS
.1°
Yowwll bekeptadvlseddpertinent developmentsin this
em
OVER

--- PAGE BREAK ---eaa release,both on radlo,television and in newspapers.Attached
o/s/oa inme ol the Washington "Evening Star."
ACTBONS
.1°
Yowwll bekeptadvlseddpertinent developmentsin this
em
OVER

--- PAGE BREAK ---

mpyrortigateky o p.aFa Me otnca were hua wlteKnsfetan
Bnk Lintenbana and Khe Deguty Atorney Generat Warron Chrlstogher
wrrnTee Axtorpey Generak nirdt congrata Laled the PBl and stated tha
w ug the kreatest news hs hiad ever hearaBe next went Into a long
eong and dance on the abaolute neceasity of security and tne avoidance ol
onadon al civl rlghts of tne subject, James Earl Ray. The Attorne]
Jouuoeiod yaoSy ino po Areni er upae suo guopsenb ou pager yuuamdy
Mho. mn Londbn and I told Mm' we Mad abaohyre Catth and confdenc + De these meal
otmervlse we would not hare aasigned lem there.He stated he thought w
should send additlonal men to London to aaalat In thls case.I told hin
I tbougin this was both foollsh and unneceasary. Ho asked me about
LegalAttacheMinnich'sbackgroundand I providedthleInformatlonfor
him.He asked me if the FBl had a repreaentative In the same cell block
vio the subjeci. I told nim we did not. and thnt furthermore, Inasmuch as
this man was under British cugtody,we could not even talk to the prlsoner
unlnse he, the prlaonor, agreed to interrogatlon. Tha Attorney General
asted M we had a man next to the coll block.I told him we did not and tha
ho maust realize that this man was under British custody and, therefore,
Dot tha responsibiityof American authorities.The Attorney General
stated howould feel better l heknew the exact provlsions under which
lecurity the prlsoner was belng malntained.I made n comment.
The Attorney Ganeral asked me X I thought It was necessary to
somda Departmentalrepresentaflve to London.I told him I tbought ts
Wag completely unnecessary lf the reprcsentative would be going for the
parpone ofattemptingto look Into FBI activitles.The Attorney General
legalactiviuen in connectlon witn the extradltlon of the subject.Headded
thaa the Departmentalrepreaentative would also check with the Britiah
autborites to make certain there was ample securlty. Furthermore, to
make certaln that the prisoner's civil rlghts were being protected.
TheAttorneyGeneral askedmewhomrI thoughtshould beresponsible
lorbrlngingthepriaonerbacktotheUnitedStateaI toldhimIprevlously
dlncussed tiis with the Director and that tre Director was agreeable to the
FBI escorting the prlaoner back to the United States. He asked bow many
mon would do thln. Itold him we wouii utillze three very capable men. He
stated ha thought we needed moro.I tola him I dlsagreed and that three men.
V.
CONTM:UED-OVERUnited States. He asked bow many
mon would do thln. Itold him we wouii utillze three very capable men. He
stated ha thought we needed moro.I tola him I dlsagreed and that three men.
V.
CONTM:UED-OVER

--- PAGE BREAK ---sked bow many
mon would do thln. Itold him we wouii utillze three very capable men. He
stated ha thought we needed moro.I tola him I dlsagreed and that three men.
V.
CONTM:UED-OVER

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5
wout .oullcheo,
Thaaoknel Gonefraleea
Bhoult Liad aaoiary bnad poasly nan
pan
thntmaximu n becurity coulig be affordes.Ths Attorney Generat agrecd
Be heh called GoveTnor Bulord Suangioh n Tenneasde and specificaty
aoked Mim to expedite ext sallton proceedinga by Immediately making 8
requost ha Lhe Presdient of the Undted St ates so that the White House in
turi coukt forward thls requeas to Me Bxe Bome Secretary. The
Atorney General almo told Gove rnor Kliurngtoa thet he would personaly
leal butter it Federal omlcern meanfngtha FBn would escort theprisoner
back to Lbs Ualled Statea.Governor mllington 2greed to all terms and
mtated that be wouk compy wlla Gawlahen of Che Federal Gorernmea
Yn hts no ztter.
The Attorney General next turned to the Deputy Attorney General
and aaked Mim  Me thought a Departmental representatlve should be sent
to Bngland.The Deputy Attorney General replied,without qestion, "
Thm Atiorney Ceneral next aaced the entire grcup whom they thought should
be BogtHevertured tae perronal opinlon that t should eitner beVinson
or Pollnch, Therr Was no comment. The Artorney General then stated
hmt Vinron shouldl go and should leave tomdg rk, June 8, 1968. He aaked
that Vsoon be aced in touch with onr Legal Artache.I told the
Attorney General that sendng Vinson Was ha own business,however,I
would Hke bo make absolutely certain that.nson did nothing to upset the
very ercellent relatlonship betwcen the FBl and Scotland Yard.I stated
thatWinson under no circum stances should attempt to push Scotland Yard
aroand by insistding on di!erent types of security.The Attorney General
lognl actlvttlee.Tho Attorney General then told Lindenbaum to have
Beweral Burean ol Prtsons oflclals go to Memphis early Monday,
Juna 10, 1968, for the purpose of taking a look at the county Jail in Memphis
over to the stzte authorltles.(Thns, of course,ls none o! the Attorney
General'sbusinesa inasmuch ae once the prlsoner ls turned over to tho
mtatehein strictly thestate' responelbility.)
Upon leavng,the Attorney Genera! told me that he would llke
toedt down with mewithinthenextseveral days and completelygo over
rmatter and that these repora, plue the preas release of today, covered all
necessary detalla. He made no comment other than to commend the FBI
once again and to say that hard work pald ofl.
CONTNUED-OVERter and that these repora, plue the preas release of today, covered all
necessary detalla. He made no comment other than to commend the FBI
once again and to say that hard work pald ofl.
CONTNUED-OVER

--- PAGE BREAK ---

o braye usloer docR o Cr Daney
Lerok Me rnreaBpchay Agetr lpenToor
be assigned
isnpprdamantely  yeer uele tal i a encelenghyadcal shap
resyond
AaFakhrarpan Yiotrue n M carTany assigned to the Generat
oeusratwe Yiviatoi here ak FBg HenduartersBe has an etcellent
le th veatYhe Durme tor approves thtsrecommendatlon,
a Bonve
Caaa Bn can p tceed'to Londoa, BigYand, ogon Instructlone.
1!1.11
tuate显 ams adviaing Xegal Aetache Mtimmich thls afte rnoon,pune S, 196s
eat wte he shouao'conlar wus Bassis Mtoreey GenerarVncon ha y
miab mot beoenedaround byYlaaul or allow Tinson bo upoet any
delheste reialons thatwe have wlth Lnw enforcoment authorities in England.