12/17/67
Phrough Alberto Fowler, who ie hospitali.ed with infeotious hopatitisg
I yeoterdaylocated Douglas Lothbvidge (unlisted phone, 866-7308; 3142 State St。
Drive), Bay of Pigs voteran, former Castro associate and oeficial. Until recently
Lethdridge worked for theconpany. Fio present enployer is Bonnett's. He and his
wife drove to the notel at my invitation cnd dined withne. noi/ing thoy wore
coning,↓ invited in Alcook to j in us.We chatted aftor dinner in jy room and
taped it.We wanderod end,I think, sot the opportuniy to orploro his baokgiound
with whatIknow aboutit.Ian confidenthe will be as cnoperative ashe can be
 cosse fT4aad pue 4soT uT, etogeq ATazed *otaTosod fan froA uT dTeu TtTn puo
did,hen Mizg. Ann Lothbridgo joined us and I took thon to the ber foz a night-
cap (we perted conpany 2 a.m.), he agreed to enlist othors of hio foxner colleagues
He has efaooinating,inside gtory of tho origin and opoonorohip o?
ous dn snd faqog *snouy autg 4ou (y Aqqcg) sot, 3o Aog ou xooq 0:uostuog seuAo
oud.Joog0predcoluoouyopuegeonoozmogoaorg3sn:ouosfouo
o father emigrated to Cuba fron touiaville (1 recall Aiberto identi-
fying the father as a Canadian),began famming.next to Fidel Cactro's father.leth.
andoastro kmew each othez woll.L.had anunbor ofinportantpogta,portly booauco
he isalinguiot (Snglish, Spanish,French, Portugse, @to.) and, appasently. paztly
He is apilot.He has interesting stories about Caatro.lois otatoless ond somehet
apprehonsivo dbout it. Although he has applied foz Uscitinonohip, he soono not to
uthorities whenhedefected.
He plans a bok.while there no bthingo in it with uhich I might
Aprdea pre c0gou 07u 04oduoo o4 *47 047an og utu pesernooue ATauo240 1 *e91s0s7p
Cirole Branoh)inllachington.While makingnit olear I couldnot givo him any
guarantoes,Itoldhim thore vere lome things I.might bo ablo to do to help hin and
offered to.I so intend,if he takeg me up.
He isan exporton the attenptg to ascassinate Castro but knowsnothing
oftheCaantananoono。
He io tall,treighteowward,articulate,quite intelligont,I en
confidont seriou9 and orhonorableintent andwortiy of tiuet.Thozo aso mony ingo
hocannotsay beoause of ai1 oath under thenstional-ceourity aot.Thoze are many
things ho oan ooymndhe io fanilio:with people,cots,plano, ovonto, oto。orableintent andwortiy of tiuet.Thozo aso mony ingo
hocannotsay beoause of ai1 oath under thenstional-ceourity aot.Thoze are many
things ho oan ooymndhe io fanilio:with people,cots,plano, ovonto, oto。

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Obvioudly, he has the best connection with the Cuban groups, wit
which he has had actualexperience.
indentify the sourses of funds from 夏
which payments were made,by account humber.Heisbn our side,having decided inde=
pendently that the official account of the assassination wasimpossible. Hqgawe
us quite a disertationon the organization that was requiredlto pull it off, on
the kindspf weapons that would have been required,
,of/thenumberof reallyexpert
marksmen required ( notless than three and possibla/more).
eq ueo au aaatIeq I :Snog mowY  4ee o4 nof asernooue FTauorzs I
   eu o aa u  4  s r u g  m pe
atrongly and favorably."
Louis has the tapes。
There are several small things Ihave asked of him that'Z will be
in touch withJim
n Alcockabout (I also introduced himxto Louis Ivon, who happened.
chool:o Bates (cozrect proncunciation,Par-mrz,with an S sound,es gene
pronowicea it).Bartes ie said to keve floga for the compery in tho Cergo.
Dindneinmiap
mifusY lhau,blno,lmar.