Bence


pean


=


gee


SES
=e


es oS
Sa ie.


epee eats


Sasi


St es


Bah rage


NM 2-f3 2
74003, = coy MADRID Ardnjuez at


1931
MM, Sociatist Spain = Agarchist
= _ Spain
||||| Catholic-Conservative Spain


ry ville ey Granada


JULY, 193
\ Ai
ae


(\ — = 20 Nazi Transports


Wel 8
MAS QUEIRAD IS
IN SPAIN


CHARLES FOLTZ, Jr. /#/0-


HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY BOSTON
The Riverside Press Cambridge
1948 aris PERKIN
Pie afORIAL Lipp A
AMSBURG BRap


GAN
. v
NTUCKy


All rights reserved including the right to reproduce
this book or parts thereof in any form


YB-257/


| hei Oe Pobtind tnd GreLteronent


_—


G
7 The Riverside Press
Cambridge - Massachusetts
Printed in the U.S.A.


And after all, what is a lie? "Tis but
The truth in masquerade.


Don Juan, Canto XI, Stanza 37


IN ACKNOWLEDGMENT:


To FRANCES IRELAND,
who made the book possible;


To CHIP,


who understood;


To JO,


who was interested;


To FRIENDS IN SPAIN AND AMERICA,
who contributed so much.


| pia iaaaamacaeaaa iia aia:


CONTENTS

DRAMATIS PERSONAE . . . 2 « e@ e« Xi
1, THE SPANISH THEATER. . . . 2. « © 2
2, PEOPLE’S PRELUDE . . . . . . « « 22
3. THE STAGE IS SET . . . 2. 2 2 «© © 36
4. A NEW MASK— THE FALANGE. . . . . 60
5. A PROGRAM BECOMES A POGROM .. . 88
6. PLAYERS ARE PAID. . . . . . . «112


7. THE ANGELS’ SHARE. . . . 2. «© « « 140
8. FRANCO TAKES THE LEAD. . . . . . 170
9. SEEM A SAINT— PLAY THE DEVIL . . . 196


10. OLD ACTORS — NEW LINES o 6 2 @ 6 222


ll. BACKSTAGE . . . 2. 2 « 6 6 et 287
12. SECOND ACT CURTAIN . . . 2. . « « 276
13. INTERMISSION . . . «© « «@ - « + 304


14, ACT WI—AS YOU LIKE IT . . . . . . 325


NOTES, SOURCES, AND BIBLIOGRAPHY . - 341
INDEX . . 1 1 te 1 6 ee Ut wt 363


DRAMATIS PERSONAE


ALBA, DUKE OF: The head of Spain’s most famous house who
also bears the British title of Duke of Berwick and the British
name Fitz-James Stuart. The oligarchy’s ambassador to
London, 1989-45.


ARANDA, GENERAL ANTONIO: Commander of the besieged
garrison of Oviedo during the Civil War, later head of the
General Staff College of the Army, currently without an
assignment, a “Republican.”


ARRESE MAGRA, JOSE LUIS: A Falangist strongly influenced
by the clergy, successor to Ramén Serrano Sujier as leader of
the Falange with the title of Secretary General, 1942-45, still a
member of the Falange National Council in 1948.


AZNAR ZUBIGARAY, MANUEL: A Basque Nationalist first,
then a Monarchist, then a Republican, then a Falangist, and
now a Monarchist again. In 1989, the Falange press director
in Barcelona and Madrid; 1940-45, the régime’s leading jour-
nalist with a position similar to Virgilio Gayda in Fascist Italy;
1945-48, Counselor of Embassy with the rank of Minister in
Washington.


BERNHARDT, JOHANNES: A German clerk in Spanish Mo-
rocco, leader of German Nazis resident in Morocco, interme-
diary between the Army and the Germans during the Civil
War, head of the German Government’s commercial and
economic warfare operations in Spain during the World War,
still living in Spain.


xii DRAMATIS PERSONAE


BILBAO Y EGUIA, ESTEBAN: A Carlist who joined the
Falange in 1937, Minister of Justice in 1939, President of the
Cortes after 1942.


CALVO SOTELO, JOSE: Finance Minister under the Primo de
Rivera dictatorship, leader of a militant Monarchist group
under the Republic who applied for membership in the
Falange, but was rejected by Falangists. His assassination by
Leftists on July 18, 1936, led the Army to set the final date
for revolt on July 18.


CARLOS VIII: Son of Dojia Blanca, sister of Don Carlos VII.
His claim to the Spanish throne is denied by most Carlists,
but promoted by Falangists. He is living at State expense in
Barcelona.


CEDA (Confederacién Espafiola de Derechos Auténomos): A
bloc of Rightist parties under the Republic led by Gil Robles
which crumbled after its defeat in the February, 1936, elec-
tions.


FALANGE ESPANOLA: The Falange founded by José An-
tonio Primo de Rivera, October, 1933, to March, 1934. A
Fascist-type party promoting social revolution.


FALANGE ESPANOLA Y DE LAS J.O.N.S.: The Falange
united with the JONS (which see) from March, 1934, to
April 19, 1937.


FALANGE ESPANOLA Y TRADICIONALISTA Y DE LAS
J.O.N.S.: The Falange as operated by the oligarchy, a State
party with a monopoly on political and social organization,
control of the press and of the State economy, but itself con-
trolled by the oligarchy.


FALANGE EXTERIOR: Overseas organization of the Falange.


FAUPEL, WILHELM: German Ambassador to Spain, 1936 to
1938.


DRAMATIS PERSONAE xiii
FRANCO BAHAMONDE, FRANCISCO PAULINO HER-
MENEGILDO TEODULO: Born in 1892, married, with one
daughter, a professional soldier who became the youngest
general in the Spanish Army under Alfonso XIII, and, after
October, 1936, Generalissimo of the Army, head of the Gov-
ernment, and, de facto, Chief of State.


FRANCO BAHAMONDE, NICOLAS: Francisco Franco’s elder
brother, a professional sailor who abandoned the Navy for
business during the Republic, became his brother’s personal
secretary from 1936 to 1938 in Salamanca and was thereafter
appointed Spanish Ambassador in Portugal.


FRANCO BAHAMONDE, RAMON: Francisco Franco’s younger
brother, pilot of the Ne Plus Ultra in the first Madrid-Buenos
Aires flight, a leader of Left-Wing groups under the Republic,


who died mysteriously in territory under his brother’s com-
mand in 1988.


GIL ROBLES, JOSE MARIA: A lawyer and professional poli-

tician, advocate of the corporative state and champion of the
Right-Wing Parties under the Republic, War Minister in 1935,
resident in Portugal since 1936, due first to his rivalry with


Serrano Sufier and now to his post as adviser to Don Juan in
Lisbon.


HEDILLA, MANUEL: Falangist leader in Santander who be-
came temporary leader of the Falange after the Civil War
began until April, 1987. Chief of the Dockworkers Syndicate


in Santander in 1948 after seven years of exile in the Canary
Islands.


HOARE, SIR SAMUEL (VISCOUNT TEMPLEWOOD): Born

1880, many times Minister in Conservative cabinets in Britain,
co-author of the Hoare-Laval plan for peace in Ethiopia,
British Ambassador to Spain from 1940 to 1945, now a mem-
ber of the British House of Lords.


xiv DRAMATIS PERSONAE


JONS (Las Juntas de Ofensiva Nacional Sindicalista): Fore-
runner of the Falange, organized in March, 1931, which gave
the Falange its program in the merger of March, 1934.


JORDANA, COUNT FRANCISCO G. JORDANA Y SOUSA:
A professional soldier, Foreign Minister in the Burgos Junta
of generals in 1936, and successor to Serrano Sufier as Foreign
Minister in 1942. Died in office in 1944.


JUAN, DON: Third son of Alfonso XIII, born in 1913, a cadet
in the British Navy after his father fled Spain, tried to volun-
teer in General Mola’s army in 1936, took up the claim to
Spain’s throne on his father’s death in 1941, lived first in
Switzerland, then in Portugal. Don Juan is married to Maria
de las Mercedes of Bourbon-Sicily, a cousin. They have two
sons and two daughters.


KINDELAN DUANY, LIEUTENANT GENERAL ALFREDO:
A professional soldier who, as senior ranking general of the
Army, presided over the meeting of generals which elected
Franco Generalissimo in October, 1939. Now Monarchist
leader in the Army.


LEDESMA Y RAMOS, RAMIRO: Founder of the JONS, who
wrote its program, tried to divide the Falange after a break
with José Antonio, and was killed in a revolt in the Madrid
prison early in the Civil War.


LEQUERICA, JOSE FELIX DE: A wealthy Basque, Ambassa-
dor to France in 1940, transmitted Marshal Pétain’s request
for an armistice through Madrid to the Germans and served as
Foreign Minister for a year in 1944-45.


MADRID-ALCALA, BISHOP OF, LEOPOLD EVJO GARAY:
A member of the National Council of the Falange, of the
Council of Hispanidad, and of the Hispano-German Associ-
ation.


DRAMATIS PERSONAE xv


MARCH ORDINAS, JUAN: A wealthy merchant born in the
Balearics who supported the oligarchy in the Civil War and
now is a Monarchist.


MOLA, GENERAL EMILIO: Commander of the Army in Spain
during the Civil War, killed in an airplane accident in 1987.


MUNOZ-GRANDES, LIEUTENANT GENERAL AGUSTIN:
A professional soldier, Commander of the Blue Legion, and a
member of the Falange National Council.


ORGAZ YOLDI, LIEUTENANT GENERAL LUIS: A profes-
sional soldier, High Commissioner of Morocco from 1941 to
1944, and a member of the Hispano-German Association.


PRIMATE OF SPAIN, ENRIQUE, CARDINAL ARCHBISHOP
OF TOLEDO, PLA Y DENIEL: An obscure bishop until 1936
when he lent his palace in Salamanca to Franco as his military
headquarters and persuaded the other leaders of the Spanish
clergy to issue a collective pastoral in praise of the rebels. As
Franco's candidate for Primate he was approved by the
Vatican after a delay of several years during which the Toledo
diocese was vacant.


PRIMO DE RIVERA, JOSE ANTONIO: Son of the dictator,
born April 24, 1908, a deputy under the Republic, founder of
the Falange Espafola, eventually sole chief of Falange Es-
pafiola y de las JONS, tried and sentenced to death by a
Republican court for complicity in the revolt, executed No-
vember 20, 1936, and now buried before the altar of the
monastery-church of E] Escorial, above the mausoleum where
Spain’s kings are buried.


PRIMO DE RIVERA, GENERAL MIGUEL: A professional
Soldier, dictator of Spain under the monarchy of Alfonso XIII
trom 1923 to January, 1930; died in Paris in March, 1980.


xvi DRAMATIS PERSONAE


PRIMO DE RIVERA, MIGUEL: Brother of José Antonio, Min-
ister of Agriculture from 1939 to 1945, Marqués de Estella,
a title acquired by his paternal grandfather, also a general.


SANJURJO, GENERAL JOSE: A professional soldier who won
the nickname “Lion of the Riff’ in Moroccan battles. He led
an unsuccessful revolt against the Republic in 1932, was jailed
and exiled to Portugal where he directed the 1936 plot for an
Army rising. He was to have been the Army’s Generalissimo
and Dictator of Spain, but he was killed when the plane
taking him to Spain crashed on an airfield near Lisbon in
July, 1936.


SEGURA, PEDRO, CARDINAL ARCHBISHOP OF SEVILLA:
Chosen Primate of Spain by Alfonso XIII, Cardinal Segura de-
nounced the Republic and fled into exile. He was succeeded
as Primate by Cardinal Goma and returned to Spain as the
Civil War began. He is a Monarchist.


SERRANO SUNER, RAMON: A lawyer, a classmate of José
Antonio Primo in Madrid University, a deputy in the Repub-
lican Cortes, and leader of the Youth Movement of Gil Robles’
party until 1936. He was married to a sister of Francisco
Franco’s wife. He reorganized the Falange in 1937 under his
leadership and became first Minister of the Interior and then
Minister of Foreign Affairs. He was dismissed from the Gov-
ernment in September, 1942, but remained a member of the
Falange National Council in 1948.


VARELA, LIEUTENANT GENERAL JOSE ENRIQUE: A pro-
fessional soldier in active command of troops during the Civil
War, War Minister from 1940 to September, 1942, and from
1945 to 1948 High Commissioner of Spanish Morocco.


Q


THE SPANISH THEATER


ALMOST ANY AFTERNOON OR EVENING, Don Anastasio can be
found at his usual table in the sidewalk café. His bright eyes
seldom leave the passing throng, but he is not looking for
anyone in particular. He is just watching for members of his
Family, the Family of the privileged few who rule Spain.

Don Anastasio, a businessman, is of no great importance
by himself, but he is one of the poorer members of the oli-
garchy which has ruled Spain for centuries. In the fields
and the factories, workers look at Don Anastasio’s paunch
and white shirt and call him, first, “Sefior,” then, “Don Anas-
tasio,” but never “Oyé, tu”—the Spanish equivalent of
“Hey, pal.”

To listen to Don Anastasio, one might suppose that he
had rather a low opinion of the noblemen, churchmen, mer-
chants, and soldiers who rule Spain. Don Anastasio’s rela-
tionship to all these groups might best be described as pure-
ly personal. Those who are his friends are very fine people
indeed — people who are different. He has a healthy respect
for wealth and arms because they mean power. He is the
first to denounce the enchufe system, but the first to use it.

The word enchufe literally means the plug by which any
electrical appliance is connected to a power system. In
Spain it has a far more inclusive meaning: in English slang
we would translate it as “drag” or “pull.” The people Don

1


THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Anastasio knows consider all Spain and all human relations
within Spain as a power system. Only a few thousand
Spaniards among millions have the proper enchufe. These
few can plug in on almost anything through the power sys-
tem. They can get in touch with the president of a great
bank, an industrialist who can sell at a discount, a general
of the Army who can get a young man out of military serv-
ice, a bishop who can move a young priest to a better parish,
the owner of a big hotel who can find a room anywhere, the
professor in a university who can help in getting a scholar-
ship, the manager of a bullring who knows where seats can
be found, the owner of a great estate where the hunting is
good. Men like Don Anastasio pride themselves in the Fam-
ily membership which gives them the proper enchufe.

One member of the Family never directly approaches
another with a proposition. He must first find the proper
enchufe. He telephones friends who know the right people.
By this method Don Anastasio and his friends slip things
through the customs, get jobs for relatives, obtain contracts,
get telephones installed, have an enemy put in jail or a
friend released, eliminate formalities blocking a wedding,
find a girl for a visiting friend —in fact, they can get any-
thing done. Plug in with the proper enchufe and the world
is yours.

There is nothing unique in this. It happens the world
over, particularly in Latin countries where personal relation-
ship means much and the rules often mean very little. No-
where in Europe, however, is the enchufe system developed
to such a high degree as among the members of the Spanish
Family.

At times enchufe becomes a barrier to progress and effi-
ciency. Many simple things can get done in Spain without
an enchufe, but members of the privileged few prefer to
use it even when it isn’t necessary.


THE SPANISH THEATER 3


Anyone, for example, can telephone the Madrid Observa-
tory and get the exact time of day from the person who
answers the telephone. Don Anastasio knew that. Once,
when we were lunching together, he wanted the exact time.
It must have been a matter of great importance, for Don
Anastasio normally has no respect whatsoever for time. In
any event, he first telephoned a friend to get the name of
the director of the Observatory. Then he called the Observa-
tory, asked for the director, identified himself as a “friend of
Don Fulano,” and got the information. This complicated
procedure identified Don Anastasio as one of the privileged
few.

I met Don Anastasio, my composite Spanish friend, at his
usual café on Madrid’s Alcala one night. He had visited his
office late in the morning, had gone to a bad bullfight in the
afternoon, had worked in his office through the evening, and
now was topping off a good dinner with coffee and a glass of
anis. Don Anastasio offered me his counsel.

“You will never be able to understand Spain, for we are
not a normal people. Breakfast at ten. Nobody who is any-
body at the office before noon. Lunch from two to four
with two hours to recover. Work from six to ten in the eve-
ning and dinner, probably connected with business, dragged
out over coffee and drinks until two in the morning.”

“But most people do not live that way, Don Anastasio.”

“All Spaniards who can afford it live that way. Those who
can do so, but do not, are mad. How else can one live in a
country like this? In Madrid we have air from the Guadar-
rama Mountains which will not blow out a candle, but snuffs
out human lives with sickness of the lungs. Our whole land
is full of robbers in uniform and beggars in rags. Every man .
Over sixteen and unburied is “Your Excellency.’

“Our customs make liars of us all. In every letter we
write we call ourselves every man’s ‘humble servant’ and


4 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


offer to ‘kiss his feet, a most unsanitary act which none of
us would dream of doing. In our language we can say
nothing so magnificently that it takes a lifetime to be sure
that we have said nothing. We produce plans of genius
which we never carry out.”

A small boy dove under the sidewalk table to rescue a
cigarette stub. He also trod on Don Anastasio’s toe, which
reminded him to request alms for the love of God. He men-
tioned the sick mother with a baby at her breast and the
father who gave his life for the Glorious Movement. He got
a coin and went away. Don Anastasio’s roving eye landed
blankly on the face of a street peddler and moved away —
too late.

“You foreigners here are condemned to living in the Span-
ish abnormal,” said my friend, as the peddler advanced
upon him. The peddlers in Madrid offer their box in one
hand while holding open the lid with the other. The pros-
pective customer is thus warned that only a purchase will
spare his nose when the box snaps shut. Don Anastasio ig-
nored the box.

“Fortunately, as a foreigner, you belong to that class of
bloated lords of creation who have money. Yours could be
a life of leisure. You could fish trout in the mountains, visit
the fair in Sevilla, go to bullfights, sit in cafés and listen to
people like me. That is the sensible way for you to live, but
you foreigners do not understand how to live. You suffer
from the delusion that you like to work.

“We Spaniards have few pleasures. We have our women
who are tenacious and beautiful, clinging as leeches, though
much more pleasant to play with. For our bellies there is
wine and almonds and fruit and suckling pig and little eels.
For our minds there is the eternal puzzle of our own char-
acter.”

“Excuse me, Sefior, would you like to examine some razor


THE SPANISH THEATER 5


blades of very fine quality, or perhaps it may be that you
desire some shoestrings?”

“Yet because we are Spaniards and are thus condemned
to love our country, you must not believe that we fall into
the error of loving each other. We do not. When we have
trouble with our foreign affairs, we blame the Government,
though in our hearts we know that this trouble is due to the
fact that the rest of the world does not have the good for-
tune to be Spanish.”

“I also have some excellent hand soap which cannot be
obtained in the stores because the shameless authorities pre-
fer to sell only that soap which is manufactured by one of
their number —— ”

“We, the inhabitants of this country, have a tremendous
advantage over the foreigners who live here. We know what
to expect from our countrymen. If we drive at high speed
along our mountain roads, it is not because we do not know
that somebody has probably left a steamroller around the
next curve. We would not be in the least surprised to smash
into a steamroller and die. It would be lamentable, of
course, but we are not afraid of the lamentable. We expect
the unexpected and would be bored to tears in a well-
ordered world where we could be sure there were no steam-
rollers around the curve —— ”

“I see, Senior, that your shoes are beautifully shined, but
the laces are very old and you should buy some new laces.”

“We are a people much given to staring at other people.
We mean it as a compliment, but you foreigners cannot un-
derstand that. We are also a people with whom it is neces-
sary to be patient. That is most disconcerting, I know, be-
cause we are impatient ourselves. That is the source of
much of our political trouble. If the Government is impa-
tient with the people, particularly with the nice people,
then the country becomes angry and the Government is


6 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


overthrown. If the Government patiently tries to lead the
people, then the people become bored and impatient and
the Government is overthrown.”

“Would the Senor be interested ——”

“Go away.”

“There is no reason for the Sefior to speak like that —I
have done nothing.”

“Will you go away, or shall I call a policeman?”

“There is no policeman near, Sefior.”

“Go away. I do not wish to buy your wares.”

“Then if the Sefior does not wish to buy, certainly he will
not refuse charity. I have a family to support and many
bellies to fill and all are as empty as mine.”

“Listen to him. That, too, is something to remember. We
Spaniards are all more honest than other men. The beggar
who says God will repay you thereby wipes his slate clean
and owes you no gratitude. Both of you should believe that
God will repay you; the beggar knows that you think you
should believe that God will repay you. Therefore, he takes
your money and considers it no debt while you write it on
the books for the Day of Judgment. What you give to the
beggar does not create any bond between you and the beg-
gar. Give alms regularly to such a beggar and pass him one
day without doing so. He will then curse you far more
violently than if you never gave him alms at all.

“You will not be able to understand this country until you
realize that its entire population, mentally, materially, and
politically, is sharply divided. In other countries the ex-
tremes are connected by the masses in the center, the men
with a medium education and a medium wit and a medium
income, but in Spain such people are rare. We are brilliant
like me or stupid like everybody else. All that connects the
few and the mass is self-interest. I want somebody to haul
the garbage and this man wants my money.”


THE SPANISH THEATER 7


“I go now, Seiior,” said the peddler, snapping his box
shut a centimeter from Don Anastasio’s nose. “I go, but may
God pity your miserly soul and remind you when next we
meet that you refused a man bread for his belly.”

Don Anastasio looked after the peddler reflectively.

“He is a liar, of course. He is not a hungry man. But I
shall buy a trifle from him when next we meet. After all,
we cannot run this country forever.”


When Don Anastasio said “we,” he was not referring to
Francisco Franco and the Falange. Don Anastasio was no
Falangist. He hated the Falange. He would tell you so,
loudly and in no uncertain terms. The policeman in the
dirty raincoat, who always sat in the corner of the café try-
ing to look like an ordinary citizen, could hear Don Anas-
tasio say what he thought of Francisco Franco and the
Falange quite clearly, but he never did anything about it.
Once, when a visiting American heard Don Anastasio talk
like that, he decided there was free speech in Spain. I took
him down to a workers’ café in Madrid’s suburbs where
some of my friends who also did not like Francisco Franco
and the Falange could show him their scars and tell him
what happened to workers who got the idea that there was
free speech in Spain.

My American friend had a curious idea about Spain which
was shared by too many people outside Spain. This is what
he thought had happened since July, 1936.

A general named Francisco Franco, he said, had revolted
against a Communist Government called the Republic.
Franco won. He set up a Fascist State which he ran with the
help of a Fascist Party called the Falange. Right-thinking
Spaniards, when the World War ended, began to plot to get
rid of Francisco Franco, just another dictator, to make room
for a monarchy. It was a slow process, because Franco was


8 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


stubborn. It had to be a slow process, for if the people had
their way, Spain would turn Communist and Russia would
control the Strait of Gibraltar and North Africa, thus turn-
ing the Mediterranean into a Red Sea and preparing the
way for Communism in all the Spanish Americas including
Nicaragua.

This is the masquerade. There are a lot of things wrong
with it. For the moment we shall confine ourselves to the
idea that Franco and the Falange became the masters of
Spain.

The fact is that Franco and the Falange were never the
masters of Spain, any more than the resident manager and
his overseers are the masters of the Duke of Alba’s estate in
Andalucia, any more than the resident manager and the
British engineers and clerks at Rio Tinto are the owners of
the copper mines. Franco and the Falange were only the
managers, not the masters, of Spain.

The masters of Spain have always been the people to
whom Don Anastasio referred only as “we.” Don Anastasio
would have explained that “we” meant simply la gente.
This word, in the dictionaries, means only “the people,” just
like the word el pueblo. In Spain, however, there is an im-
portant difference. The feminine noun la gente means, by
usage, the gentry, the nice people, while the masculine noun
el pueblo means the mass, the ordinary people. La gente,
not el pueblo, are the real masters of Spain.

Managers of Spain have been changed frequently through
the centuries. Sometimes the managers were kings. When
the kings were too weak to manage Spain, noblemen,
churchmen, merchants, or soldiers did the job for them.

The masters of Spain are the members of an oligarchy,
a comparative few who have so distributed power among
themselves as to insure permanent control of the State.

Spain’s oligarchy is old, so old that its members behave


THE SPANISH THEATER 9


toward one another like members of the same family. Inter-
marriage within the oligarchy through the centuries has
woven its leaders close together, so close that one who
knows Spain well is inclined to think of the oligarchy as
“the Spanish Family.” I shall refer to the oligarchy in this
book, at times, as “the Family.”

The top laver of the Family numbers no more than five
thousand persons. Practically all of these are to be found
in the lists of the Anuario Espajiol del Gran Mundo, Spain’s
social register; within the hierarchy of the Spanish clergy;
on the boards of directors of Spain’s larger corporations; or
among the professional officers of the armed forces.

The permanent membership of the oligarchy covers the
nobility, the clergy and the religious orders, the big business-
men and industrialists and the professional soldiers, together
with a considerable portion of the upper middle class. This
membership takes in some five hundred thousand men,
women, and children, roughly two per cent of Spain’s pop-
ulation.

As long as Spain’s oligarchy, this Spanish Family, holds
political or economic power, its membership may be ex-
panded to cover fifteen per cent of the population. In addi-
tion, through long practice, the Family has learned how to
capture the allegiance, by threat, by use of economic power,
or by sheer swindling, of a good third of the population.

The oligarchy is Spanish, as Spanish as the land itself.
These few owe their control of Spain to the events of four
hundred and fifty years ago when the country first was
united.

Spain, which appears such a neat geographical unit on the
map of the world, is in reality a land cut off from neighbor-
ing continents and divided internally. Spain lies south of
the Pyrenees, the mountains where Europe seems to end,
and north of the Atlas Mountains at the tip of Africa. The


a


10 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


country is neither completely European nor completely
African.

Spain’s provinces, facing the Atlantic, the Pyrenees, the
Mediterranean, and the Portuguese frontier, are divided
from each other and from the center of the Peninsula by
wide rivers and mountain walls. High and dry in the center
rises the great plateau of Castile. To look into Spain is to
look at Castile; to rule Spain one must first rule Castile.

Men lived in the Spanish caves thirty thousand years ago.
Among the earliest racial stocks of the Peninsula were
Iberians, later the Celts, and the mysterious Basques, whose
origin has never been satisfactorily explained. Later, the
Phoenicians, Carthaginians, and the Greeks traded here and
left traces of their respective civilizations in seaport towns.
The Romans made Spain almost a partner in their empire.
From Rome, the Spaniards received the Latin language,
Roman law and order, finally Christianity. To Rome, Spain
sent the Emperors Trajan, Hadrian, Marcus Aurelius, and
Theodosius the Great, literary men like Seneca and Quin-
tilian as well as grain, gold, and soldiers.

After the Barbarian invasions of the fourth and fifth cen-
turies, the Goths ruled Spain for three hundred years, grow-
ing so fat and lazy that they fell an easy prey to the Mos-
lems. Legend has it that the first Arabs were called across
the Strait of Gibraltar by an irate nobleman who sought to
avenge the rape of his daughter by a lecherous Gothic king
of southern Spain. In any event, the Arabs swept through
the whole of Spain, leaving only a handful of Visigothic war-
riors in the mountains of the Asturias in the extreme North.

The rule of the Arab and the Moor over most of Spain
lasted nearly five centuries. The Moor built his empire on
tolerance. Agriculture was left to the Christians; small farms
flourished; a Christian peasantry prospered. While the rest
of Europe painfully struggled to bring an ordered society


THE SPANISH THEATER ll


out of the anarchy of the early feudal period, enlightened
monarchs in Moslem Spain ruled courts which became cen-
ters of learning.

The tiny island of Visigothic Christians in the North ex-
panded slowly into Christian kingdoms, sometimes united
against the Moor, more often divided against each other.
Christian robber barons, small feudal lords like Ruy Diaz,
El Cid Campeador, became soldiers of fortune who served
Moor and Christian alike; their exploits were celebrated in
a series of great ballads. Christian crusades in the thirteenth
century expelled the Moor from all save the southern King-
dom of Granada, but Christian quarrels left the Moors in
Granada for two centuries more. Granada was to be the
prize for the first ruler to unite Christian Spaniards.

The “Catholic Monarchs” seized this prize.

Ferdinand of Aragén was a shrewd man, the ruler of a
smallish kingdom which began at the southern slopes of the
Pyrenees and ended at the mountains of Castile. His ambi-
tion was boundless; his methods were varied. Europe called
him “the Aragonese fox.” Machiavelli, clever and unscrup-
ulous political analyst that he was, wrote of Ferdinand as
“a model prince.”

In 1469, Ferdinand of Aragén was married to Isabella of
Castile, an oval-faced and determined princess, energetic
and intelligent. Though deeply religious, Isabella was never
dominated by the clergy. Isabella ascended the united
throne of Castile and Ledén in 1474; Ferdinand succeeded to
the throne of Aragén in 1479. Together the Catholic Mon-
archs set out to create a nation. Machiavelli pointed out
that the royal power of the Catholic Monarchs was extended
by drawing the Spanish peoples into common enterprises
greater than their own quarrels. They urged warring Chris-
tians to unite against the Moors of Granada.

When the Kingdom of Granada fell in 1492, the Catholic


——


12 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Monarchs were ready with another Christian crusade. In
Granada they signed the edict for the expulsion of the Jews.
About one hundred fifty thousand Jews were forced to leave
Spain while fifty thousand remained to try to embrace their
monarchs’ faith to the satisfaction of the Holy Office of the
Inquisition. By the time the anti-Semitic crusade began to
die down for want of raw material, the New World had be-
come an enormous field for adventure, conquest, and the
acquisition of great wealth. Armed with this wealth, the
Catholic Monarchs and their heirs for one hundred years
kept Spain united in an effort to conquer the known world.

In this golden century the Spanish oligarchy was born.
It was a close association of noblemen, churchmen, mer-
chants, and soldiers who were to rule Spain for many years,
even into the age when men harnessed atomic energy.

The oligarchy was fostered and cleverly controlled by the
Crown. The Catholic Monarchs found the power of the
nobles, acquired during centuries of warfare against the
Moor, challenging the power of the Crown. Aided by the
merchants, banded together in a confederation of chartered
towns, and by the clergy, Isabella created the Holy Brother-
hood, a body of soldiers which united Castile under a strong
central government. The castles of the nobles who resisted
were razed; those who capitulated prospered as the servants
of the Crown.

This done, the Catholic Monarchs bent the clergy and the
chartered towns to their will. Noblemen, churchmen, mer-
chants, and soldiers learned that they could prosper so long
as they remained united. Through three great reigns the
Crown remained strong.

Isabella died in 1504 and Ferdinand in 1516. Their
daughter had married a Hapsburg. The son of this marriage
was heir to the Crown of Spain.

Charles I of Spain became Charles V of the Holy Roman


THE SPANISH THEATER 13


Empire. He belongs to Europe, but under his rule Spaniards
and their empire in the Americas were used to fight for
Charles in Africa, Italy, Germany, and the Low Countries.
Wisely, at his death, Charles divided Spain from the Holy
Roman Empire.

Philip II, son of Charles, inherited the Spanish Crown
and its conquests abroad and in Europe. He was a Spanish
king. He established his capital in Madrid; with the help of
the Inquisition, he united the country under a crushing
despotism, and made it the heart of a centralized empire.

Through these reigns, while Spanish ships ruled the seas
and Spanish armies almost conquered Europe, the Spanish
Church was virtually nationalized. It is important, almost
vital, to understand this development.

Through the latter part of the fifteenth and the early part
of the sixteenth centuries, the Spanish clergy, dominated by
the Crown, was almost always at odds with the Papacy at
Rome. Spain’s clergy wanted to marry; Spaniards in gen-
eral were disgusted with the luxury and corruption of the
Papal courts of that period; all Spaniards have always con-
sidered themselves far superior to Italians. The Crown en-
couraged the movement away from Rome. It became so
strong that Spain’s clergy proposed to deprive the Papacy of
its temporal powers, so strong that the Spanish Church
seemed on the verge of breaking openly with Rome. Only
Spain’s reaction to the Protestant schism kept the Spanish
Church allied with, though by no means subordinate to,
Rome.

A Spanish army under Charles V sacked Papal Rome, and
Pope Paul IV lost a war to Philip of Spain. Toledo, not
Rome, became the seat of the Spanish Church. The Span-
ish Crown held the right to name the Primate and other
archbishops and bishops up to the time that Alfonso XIII
left his throne in 1931. Even Francisco Franco, not of royal


14 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


blood, claimed the right to name the clerical hierarchy and
finally compromised on a scheme to share this power with
the Pope.

During the golden century the Crown put the Spanish
Church to good use. The clergy declared its wars abroad to
be sacred wars; voyages of conquest to the Americas were
missions undertaken in the name, not of Rome, but of the
Spanish Catholic Faith. Philip II’s mission of removing the
Protestant Queen Elizabeth from her throne was undertaken
as a crusade on behalf of the Catholic world which had its
holy of holies in Toledo, not in Rome.

All Philip’s schemes, from marriage to murder, however,
failed to eliminate Elizabeth. England’s raiders seized
Philip’s treasure ships from the Americas; England was the
champion of Protestants in the Low Countries, then under
Spain’s rule. Philip's determination to destroy Protestant
England marked the end of Spain’s golden century.

The forests of Spain were stripped of their finest timbers
for the construction of the greatest fleet the world had ever
known. A daring raid into the port of Cadiz by one of Eng-
land’s captains, Francis Drake, delayed completion of the
Invincible Armada for a year, but in 1589 a force of one
hundred and twenty-nine ships, sixty-five of which were over
seven hundred tons, set sail for the English Channel. This
fleet was to drive England’s eighty ships out of the Channel,
thus preparing the way for invasion. The armies of Spain
and her Catholic allies waited in the Channel ports of the
Continent.

Violent storms struck the Armada before it reached the
Channel. England’s captains — Drake, Hawkins, Frobisher,
and many more — outmaneuvered and outfought the Span-
iards. More storms scattered the Armada. Only fifty-four
ships returned to Spanish ports.

Philip’s dream was shattered. Spain’s trade with the


THE SPANISH THEATER 18


Americas and the world was henceforth at the mercy of
England’s raiders. The golden age of Spain had ended.

There is a clear parallel between Spain’s great century
and the years which many Germans still consider their gol-
den decade. The Rhineland was Hitler's Kingdom of Gra-
nada. Hitler took Austria as the Catholic Monarchs took
Portugal. The Gestapo was Hitler’s Inquisition, and the per-
secution of the Jews was as popular and lucrative in Ger-
many as it had been in Spain four hundred and fifty years
before. Ferdinand would have approved of Hitler’s plan of
prolonging the Spanish Civil War to keep the world’s atten-
tion from Germany’s preparations for conquest. Hitler,
like the Catholic Monarchs, used foreign ventures to keep
German minds off their short rations and limited liberties at
home. He sent his Nazi missionaries abroad to prepare the
way for his armies and sought his wealth in the Ukraine as
the rulers of Spain’s golden age sought theirs in the New
World. The Germans’ Invincible Armada sailed against Eng-
land by air, but was defeated.

Philip II died in 1598. Spain then sank into that long
decline which brought the nation to the point best de-
scribed by a Spaniard, José Ortega y Gasset, more than
three centuries later: “Spain went on wasting away. Today
we are not so much a people as a cloud of dust that was left
hovering in the air when a great people went galloping
down the highroad of history.”

By the end of the nineteenth century, little was left of the
great empire created in the golden era save a united Spain
and the noblemen, churchmen, merchants, and soldiers who
had learned how to survive as an oligarchy.

Less than a century after the reign of Philip IT, one
Charles II wore the crown of Spain on his empty head. His
father and mother were uncle and niece; his countrymen
charitably called him “The Bewitched.” Under Charles II,


16 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Spain had no voice whatever in European affairs, nor was
she even her own master. The spirit of the conquerors had
vanished. Half of Spain considered itself gentry and did no
work. The other half was too undernourished and too igno-
rant to do much work. The country teemed with bandits
and thousands of provincial and municipal customs agents
who were frequently worse than bandits. Garbage and dead
animals rotted in the streets. Whole towns were depopu-
lated. The nation which had risen to glory with twelve mil-
lion inhabitants under the Catholic Monarchs now had but
six million. Rich fields lay unworked and devoured by
weeds. Pests swept over the country and a hungry rabble
clamored for bread before the royal palace. The young no-
bility led lives of debauchery; the old nobility squeezed
their starving peasants. The clergy, like the nobility, lived
off the poor and religion had become dark superstition.
French, English, and Dutch raiders pillaged Spain’s col-
onies at will.

Once, in the eighteenth century, the power of the oli-
garchy was challenged by a Bourbon king, Charles III. He
banished the Jesuits, divided some of the great estates into
small farms, and did his best to abolish the Inquisition.
After his death the Crown was weak. The oligarchy rose
again, brought back the Jesuits, took back their estates, and
Spain wasted away again.

Once, in the nineteenth century, Spain's people united
with the oligarchy, or a part of it, to drive Napoleon Bona-
parte’s brother, Joseph, out of Spain. Spaniards of all classes
helped the British under Wellington, but when the French
were gone the European Powers put a weak Bourbon, Fer-
dinand VII, back on his throne. When Ferdinand died in
1833 the oligarchy itself was divided in civil war.

On the surface the Carlist wars were fought between one
faction of the nobility which sought to place Ferdinand’s


THE SPANISH THEATER 17


brother, Don Carlos, on the throne, and another faction
which preferred Ferdinand’s daughter, Queen Isabella II.
In fact, these wars were fought between the churchmen
and the soldiers. Each sought to make his own candidate
the manager of Spain for the oligarchy. The people of Spain
had nothing to say in all this, but were inclined to support
the Army which was liberal only in contrast to the clergy.
In the end the Army won, but the Carlist movement remains
strong to this day among the peasants of Navarre.

In the twentieth century the oligarchy of noblemen,
churchmen, merchants, and soldiers became conscious of
the fact that a new wind was blowing through Spain. The
humiliating defeat of her armed forces by the United States
in 1898 had left Spain only a few shreds of empire in Africa.
Spain’s ruling clique had worked for Germany in the First
World War. Shortly thereafter the warriors of the oligarchy
had lost a great battle in Africa to the wild tribesmen of the
Riff.

Spaniards, no longer united by a common enterprise
greater than their own domestic difficulties, discovered the
root of their troubles at home. They saw that Alfonso XIII,
by no means the worst of the Bourbon kings, was dominated
by the oligarchy around him. They tried to strike at the
oligarchy.

Churches had been burned in Spain long before Karl
Marx wrote of the proletariat; now they burned again.
Spanish Anarchists had led the landless peasants to the
manor houses of the nobility before there was a Third In-
ternational; now the peasants clamored more loudly for
land. Workers in the factories which served the merchants
had quit their jobs to cry for bread long before Russia
sought control of world labor; now they struck again.

For a time the oligarchy tried to stem this tide of popular
violence with an Army dictatorship. General Miguel Primo


18 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


de Rivera was called to bulwark the throne. In 1923, Alfonso
XIII replaced the constitutional monarchy with the military
dictatorship. Primo de Rivera was popular at the beginning
when, with the help of France, he succeeded in bringing an
end to the war in Morocco. He was unpopular at the end,
both with the people and with the oligarchy, because he


, jailed the liberals and finally quarreled even with the clergy,


his chief supporters.

Primo de Rivera’s Government fell in January, 1930. The
dictator fled to Paris, where he died within seven weeks.
Two temporary governments, one under a general, the sec-
ond under an admiral, tried to prepare the way for a return
to constitutional rule under the monarchy. It was too late.
The crowds which filled the streets when they knew that
Primo de Rivera had fled did not shout against the dictator,
but against the Crown which had permitted the dictator to
come in. “Down with the King!” they cried.

By April, 1931, Spain seethed with Republican enthusi-
asm. There were local revolts at Jaca in the Pyrenees and in
one of the airports near Madrid, both led by Army officers
who wanted a republic. Both revolts were put down easily.
Two officers who led the Jaca revolt were tried before a
military court and shot. They became martyrs of the Re-
public.

In addition, six distinguished members of a Republican
revolutionary committee were arrested for issuing a mani-
festo. They were tried, but released because the prosecu-
tion was unable to prove the legality of the Primo de Rivera
dictatorship itself.

The first step in the oligarchy’s attempt to get back to a
constitutional monarchy was to be the municipal elections
of April 12, 1931. National issues were not officially in-
volved, but the candidates fell automatically into two
groups — for the monarchy or for the Republic. The real


THE SPANISH THEATER 19


power in the Government at this time was a veteran poli-
tician of the oligarchy, Count Romanones, a nobleman by
birth, a merchant by inclination, and a politician because it
was good for his business. His great estates supplied wheat
to his big bakery in Madrid where he held a virtual monop-
oly on the sale of bread. He led the landowners in their
fight against the importation of cheap Argentine wheat into
Spain. The Count’s motor company supplied trucks for the
Army. In Morocco, the Army protected the Count’s Riff
iron mines.

When I knew the Count, he was gouty and deaf, but still
belligerent and outspoken. “Franco is running Spain,” he
said in 1941, “because we like him.” Ten years earlier, in
April, 1931, this honesty of speech served the oligarchy and
Alfonso XIII well.

The results of the municipal elections showed that all the
capitals of Spain’s fifty provinces save one, Cadiz, had voted
for men pledged to oppose the monarchy. It was a land-
slide. The elections were held on a Sunday. There were no
newspapers until Monday evening because Spanish pub-
lishers and their employees take their day of rest seriously.
On Tuesday, when the results were known, all Spain looked
to the royal palace. Would the King go?

Count Romanones, followed by the majority of the cab-
inet, advised Alfonso to accept the ultimatum of the Repub-
lican leaders and leave Madrid “before nightfall.” Roma-
nones had consulted the leader of the Army, General José
Sanjurjo, then commander of the Civil Guard. Sanjurjo
would not promise to support the monarchy. Confronted
with this bad news, Don Alfonso announced dramatically:
“I do not wish a single drop of blood to be shed for me!” He
left the palace by a private exit before sundown, drove to
Cartagena, and boarded a cruiser which took him to Mar-
seille.


20 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Count Romanones, General Sanjurjo, and other leaders of
the oligarchy involved were motivated by a number of con-
siderations. Chief among them was the fact that none of
the leaders of the oligarchy believed the Republic would
last long enough to challenge their economic control of
Spain. In addition, Don Alfonso had not abdicated, but had
only suspended “the exercise of royal power” pending the
parliamentary elections which were to come in June. The
oligarchy’s political machine, particularly in the country
districts which the landowners swung as they liked, was in-
tact. Finally, Romanones was secure in the conviction that
the oligarchy in the face of opposition would become more
united than,ever before. If the Republican leaders sought
to crush the economic power of the oligarchy — there was
always the Army.

As Alfonso motored to Cartagena on that April night, his
Queen and his children waited inside the palace. El pueblo


gathered in the vast plaza before the palace. There were
few guards to protect Alfonso’s family, but protection was
not necessary. Neither the Queen, nor her children, nor
even the King himself, mattered to the crowd. Their cries
shook the evening air and thundered over the plains toward
the mountains, but they cried life, not death.

“Vival” they shouted. “Viva la Reptblic!”


2


PEOPLE’S PRELUDE


APRIL, 1931, MARKED AN IMPORTANT DATE — the triumph of
the majority over the minority which had always ruled
Spain. There was to be a republic. It remained only to be
decided what kind of a republic Spain was to have.

The parliamentary elections of June resulted in a land-
slide in favor of a republican form of government. Three
hundred and sixty-five deputies of the Constitutional Cortes
had voted for a republic. Only fifty were openly anti-Re-
publican. Of these, only one, old Count Romanones, pro-
claimed himself to be a Monarchist.

Not a single Communist had been elected. The parties
favoring a republic fell into three groups — Right-Wing Re-
publicans with 100 deputies, Left-Wing Republicans with
150, and the Socialists with 115. The Left-Wing Republican
parties, largely composed of liberals of the lower middle
class held the balance of power. Chief among the leaders
of these parties was Manuel Azaiia.

Azajia, squat and froglike, was respected by the Cortes as
a sincere and intelligent champion of the Republic. Born in
Alcala de Henares, orphaned at an early age, Azafia was left
enough money by his middle-class parents to enable him to
study law at the Augustinian College of the Escorial. Per-
haps there, perhaps earlier in his ecclesiastically dominated
home town, he had acquired the conviction that the Spanish

21


22 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


clergy bore the principal responsibility for Spain’s plight.

Azafia earned more from writing than from the law. His
most successful book was a translation of George Borrow’s
The Bible in Spain. His headquarters in Madrid was the
Atenéo, a literary and political club later known as “the
birthplace of the Republic.” Azaiia was its president.

Two other leaders of the Republicans were outstanding.

Niceto Alcalé Zamora, the first Premier and first President
of the Republic, was a lawyer and landowner of the South,
a respectable and moderate Catholic. He was by no means
an intellectual giant, but the founders of the Republic chose
him as their leader because he represented what they im-
agined Spaniards would consider “safe.”

Alejandro Lerroux was a common politician and an op-
portunist. Once he led a violently anti-clerical party in Bar-
celona, but, as he accumulated wealth in politics, he had
grown more conservative.

Each of these three had a duty to perform. Alcala
Zamora was the guarantee that the Republic would be mod-
erate. Lerroux could defend the Republic with all the tricks
and twists of gutter politics so well understood by the oli-
garchy, now in the opposition. Azajia was the intellectual
father of the Republic, the man who dominated the Consti-
tutional Cortes.

The Constitution of 1981 was a model document. The
rights it accorded compared favorably with those enjoyed
by the peoples of the most advanced states of Europe. By
no means as radical as its opening statement indicated —
“Spain is a democratic Republic of workers of all classes” —
it was, nevertheless, a radical document for a nation which
had never known democracy.

All power was vested in a single legislative body elected
by the people. No upper house checked the will of the


“people's Cortes.” The executive was weak.


PEOPLE’S PRELUDE 23


The women of Spain were given the vote which France
still denied its women. The Spanish clergy, whose influence
over Spanish women was great, was more than delighted.

The debate over Article 26 of the Constitution almost
wrecked the Republic. This article concerned the relation-
ship between Church and State. A legal commission set up
by the Provisional Government had proposed that the
Church be given the status of a special corporation, author-
ized to operate its own schools and to supply teachers of
religion to State schools. Under Azajia’s leadership, the
majority of the Cortes rejected the report as too lenient.
This was not surprising.

The Spanish clergy had made a political mistake under-
standable only when we remember that they belong to the
political oligarchy. During the elections of 1931, clerical
leaders had used their press and their pulpits to denounce
the Republicans as Communists. Communists they were
not, but they became anti-clerical. In addition, the Cardinal
Primate of Spain, Pedro Segura, had published a militant
pastoral against the Republic two weeks after its proclama-
tion, months before anyone knew what kind of republic it
was to be. It seemed to them to choose between a mon-
archy with the clergy or the Republic without the clergy.
They chose. Crowds marched in Madrid and in Andalucia,
burning churches.

All this had already happened before the Constitutional
Cortes took up Article 26. The people of Spain had left no
doubt that they desired a republic; the Republican leaders
could afford to be generous with the clergy. Instead, Azafia
played into the hands of the churchmen he hated by mak-
ing martyrs of them in the eyes of many Catholic Spaniards
who might otherwise have been won to the Republic. He
also made a political mistake. He allowed Article 26 to
come to a vote after long and violent debate.


24 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


The State’s special grants to the clergy, amounting to
about five million dollars, were to be abolished within two
years. The Jesuits were to be dissolved and their property
confiscated for the nation. All other monastic and religious
orders were allowed to function, but were banned from
teaching and were required to pay taxes as did secular cor-
porations.

Few of the Republic’s acts were more popular among the
people of Spain than the dissolution of the Society of Jesus.
Many members of the Family despised the Jesuits but feared
them. They were never seen in the homes of the poor, but
haunted the homes of the rich and moved in the upper
stratosphere of the Family. Many European countries had
banned the Jesuits; Spain had expelled them five times, be-
ginning in 1767. They had existed legally in Spain for
eighty-eight years and had been in exile eighty-two years,
but had retained their enormous properties through limited
companies and through non-Jesuit “straw men.”

Popular though the dissolution of the Society of Jesus may
have been, it accomplished little. Like the oligarchy itself,
the Jesuits of Spain are concerned about their future only
when their enemies attempt to seize their great wealth. Only
the Jesuit leaders know the extent of this wealth. In 1912,
Joaquin Aguilera, Secretary of the Manufacturers’ Associ-
ation of Catalonia, placed it as high as “one third of the cap-
ital wealth of Spain.” This may have been an exaggeration,
but the Jesuits themselves admit that the Republic had not
even scratched the surface when, in 1932, it confiscated
$43,000,000 worth of property listed in the name of the
Society or its members. All save this fraction of the wealth
controlled by twenty-two thousand Jesuits was in the hands
of obscure notaries and other “straw men,” many of whom
vote the controlling shares of stock in Spain’s largest indus-
tries, banks, and transport companies. This property, pro-


PEOPLE’S PRELUDE 25


tected by laws which the Republic did not choose to break,
still is in Jesuit hands, together with much more, acquired
as their share of the loot of the Civil War.

When the dissolution order became effective, the Jesuits
simply donned secular clothes and vanished into obscure
offices in their corporations. They paid their usual visits to
the homes of the wealthy and took their usual tribute. Hav-
ing been dissolved, they could no longer be considered a
religious order, but they continued to tutor the sons of the
wealthy.

The ban on teaching by the clergy shocked many Span-
iards. About four hundred thousand children received their
education, however bad, in the clergy’s schools. The State
had neither the schools nor the trained teachers to take on
this job overnight.

Perhaps the gravest political error made by Azafia was
the decision to suppress the State subsidies to the parish
priests. Neither the Jesuits nor the other clerical leaders
who were the real enemies of the “people's Government”
had any need of the tiny sums paid them by the State.
Those who suffered were the simple priests in poor country
parishes. The State subsidies were of the greatest impor-
tance to them. Some of them were genuinely liberal and
had voted for the Republic in the hope that the new régime
could improve the lot of their parishioners. Some were
eager to liberalize the clergy itself. Loss of the subsidies
meant the loss of their only regular income. Thus was the
“proletariat” of the clergy lost to the Republic, but won for
the oligarchy.

The vote on Article 26 should have served as a warning
to Azajia. Fully half the deputies were voluntarily absent
or did not vote. As the result was announced — 178 in favor
and 59 opposed — the entire delegation of deputies from the
Catholic Basque provinces walked out in protest. Premier


26 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Alcal4 Zamora resigned — he felt that this Constitution no
longer protected the moderates he represented. Later he
agreed to become the first President of the Republic in the
hope that the anti-clerical character of the Constitution
could be altered.

It was too late. : Ignoring the storm warnings the Cortes
accepted the law for the fact. They assumed they had sep-
arated Church from State and had destroyed the power of
the clergy with a stroke of the pen. Playing into the hands
of the anti-clerical faction, against clerical opposition, they
passed law after law.

Civil marriage alone was recognized as legal in a coun-
try in which before the Republic only religious ceremonies
were binding. Divorce, previously a luxury reserved for the
wealthy who could afford a trip to Paris for “dissolution” of
their marriage in that diocese, was made possible for any
man and wife who, after two years of wedded life, decided
they no longer cared to be married. Religious burial was
prohibited unless the deceased had specified it in his will.
This was an unjust law in a Catholic land where only the
wealthy made wills and where poor widows, who now had a
vote, took comfort in Church funerals.

The Republic was thus crippled at birth by its extreme
anti-clerical stand. It had begun to satisfy Catalan and
Basque desires for autonomy. It was making a slow start on
agrarian reform, the fundamental problem of Spanish econ-
omy. On the religious question, however, the Republic had
gone too far, too quickly. Spanish Catholics had been asked
to leap overnight from the reactionary traditional Cathol-
icism of Old Spain to an anti-clerical secularism. What the
Republican leaders had done, in effect, was to reach into
the darkness of the oligarchy’s caves of reaction, seize the
Spanish people by the scruff of their necks, and deposit
them blinking in the middle of Times Square.


PEOPLE’S PRELUDE 27


The Constitutional Assembly had built a house too small,
too exclusive for everyone who desired a republic. Perhaps
half the people, perhaps a little more, found the Constitu-
tion satisfactory. Many of the others, confused and fright-
ened by the sweeping changes it imposed, looked for safety
in traditional forms. For these the oligarchy was ready.

On December 9, 1931, the Constitutional Cortes approved
the Constivution. After that date three different groups suc-
cessively held the reins of leadership.

The first group was left-of-center. In October of 1932,
General José Sanjurjo and a group of Monarchists tried to
oust this government. The people, though disturbed by the
leftward trend of the Republic, had no intention, however,
of overthrowing the Republic itself. The Government
gained prestige by easily suppressing the revolt. But the
people were concerned by the anti-clerical trend of the Re-
public, the slow progress of agrarian reform, and the move-
ment of the Socialists toward the extreme Left. As a result,
in the election of 1933, the Left-Wing Republican parties
were virtually annihilated, the Socialists lost more than half
their deputies, and the Right-Wing parties boosted their
strength from 42 to 207 deputies.

The second group that took over, although disguised as
merely right-of-center, was in fact a return toward gov-
ernment by the Spanish Family. The oligarchy had altered
its tactics to take advantage of the dissatisfaction of many
Republicans. It set up parties which masqueraded as “Re-
publican,” but which were, in fact, devoted to reaction and
a return to political rule by oligarchy. Chief among these
parties was one sponsored by the Jesuits and led by José
Maria Gil Robles.

Gil Robles was, and still is, a shrewd politician. The son
of a law professor, he graduated with honors from the cler-
ical university at Salamanca and became a protégé of Angel


as


28 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


and Francisco Herrera, the editor and the business man-
ager respectively, of the Jesuit-owned Madrid daily, El
Debate. The Herreras, aware of the approaching end of the
Primo de Rivera dictatorship, had trained Gil Robles to be
the leader of the clerical party in a republic.

A wealthy marriage gave Gil Robles the funds to travel in
Europe. He studied Fascist methods in Rome. He was a
spectator at a Nazi Party Congress in Nuremberg. In Brit-
ain, letters from prominent members of the Spanish olli-
garchy gave him introductions to influential Conservatives
and to firms in the City which had investments in Spain.

When the Republic was formed, Gil Robles appeared in
the Cortes as a deputy from a district known to be con-
trolled by the oligarchy. He became the leader of a new
party, Accién Popular, which the clergy urged the faithful
to support. Around this party and its pudgy, dynamic
leader, all the other parties of the oligarchy tended to unite.
Soon Gil Robles headed a political alliance called the CEDA
(Confederacién Espafiola de Derechos Auténomos). The
CEDA aimed at infiltration. Outwardly, the CEDA ac-
cepted the Republic, but wanted to change its anti-clerical
laws. This group made huge gains in the elections of 1933.

The President of the Republic, Alcala Zamora, although
he also desired abolition of the anti-clerical laws, was a sin-
cere champion of a republican form of government. He did
not trust Gil Robles. He chose premiers like Lerroux from
the parties of the Center, ignoring Gil Robles’ claim to the
right to head the Government. Nevertheless, Gil Robles’
followers obtained control of many key ministries, including
the War Ministry. The forces of the oligarchy, masquerad-
ing as Republicans, were moving toward control.

Within a few months many of the reforms begun by the
Left-Wing Republicans were destroyed or shelved. Peasants
were evicted from large estates on which they had been


PEOPLE’S PRELUDE 29


settled. The funds available for State education were cut;
the liquidation of clerical schools was suspended. Monarch-
ists and Army officers involved in the 1982 revolt against
the Republic were given full amnesty. Even General San-
jurjo himself was released to live in exile in Portugal.

Sanjurjo was the senior ranking General of the Spanish
Army, the leader of the professional corps of officers. The
collapse of his revolt in 1932 made it unwise for the oli-
garchy to seek his advice publicly. Accordingly the Gil
Robles group picked another general, Francisco Franco, to
advise them in the management of the War Ministry.

Franco, a capable soldier of unquestioned courage, was
an Army man to his fingertips. His father had been an offi-
cer in the paymaster’s corps of the Navy, in a lucrative post
usually reserved for the Spanish Navy’s best politicians. His
mother was the daughter of a Galician merchant. Nicolas
Franco, the eldest son, went to the Naval Academy, but the
destruction of the Spanish Fleet in 1898 closed the Academy
for the years when Francisco and his younger brother,
Ramon, planned to attend it. They left a clerical school in
E] Ferrol, a naval base of northwestern Spain, and entered
the Infantry Academy at Toledo.

When Franco was graduated next to last in his class, his
father’s influence got him transferred to the Army garrison
in El Ferrol. Army orders called the young lieutenant to
Morocco in 1915.

Moors and Spaniards had been fighting in Morocco since
1905. Morocco had become the Army’s training ground, a
land of sudden death or swift promotions for young officers.
The Moors and Berbers were guerrilla sharpshooters; their
preferred targets were Spanish officers.

Many Spanish officers died, but Franco, assigned to the
command of Moorish mercenaries, escaped death to win
swift promotion. In 1916, a Riff sharpshooter wounded


30 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Franco so seriously that his parents were summoned from
the mainland, but he survived. On convalescent duty at
Oviedo in Asturias he wooed Carmen Polo, the attractive
daughter of a wealthy family. Carmen was willing, but her
parents sent the young captain away.

The Army command in Madrid then faced a serious prob-
lem. An energetic but unpredictable officer, Lieutenant
Colonel José Millan Astray, had gone over the heads of the
Army leaders to persuade Alfonso XIII that Spain should
have a Foreign Legion like the French. Alfonso agreed.
The generals in Madrid, seeking a young officer to keep an
eye on Millan Astray for them, picked Franco. He was
placed in command of the First Battalion of the Legion in
Africa while Millan Astray went swashbuckling about the
Peninsula, drumming up volunteers.

The Spanish “Foreign Legion” has always been about
ninety-eight per cent Spanish. Pay is low and foreigners do
not like to serve under Spanish officers. Spaniards, however,
are convinced that no foreigner can be as brave as they, so
the Legion became popular. Franco, promptly nicknamed
“Baby-Face” by his men, liked his command. By his per-
sonal courage he won the grudging admiration of the men
of the Legion; by his cold discipline he inspired fear.

Shortly after he took command of the First Battalion,
there was a near mutiny in protest against the food. Angry
soldiers smashed beds and barracks. Franco called assem-
bly. The legionnaires fell in line carrying their mess tins
filled with the thin stew which had caused the trouble. As
Franco walked along the line, one legionnaire thrust for-
ward his mess tin. Some of the contents, perhaps intention-
ally, perhaps in error, splashed on Franco’s uniform.

“Do you expect us to fight on filth like this, Major?”

Franco brushed off his uniform. He ordered the captain
in command of the mess that day to bring him a plate of


PEOPLE’S PRELUDE 31


stew. He tasted it. He placed the captain under arrest and
ordered a new meal prepared. When it had been served
and the legionnaires had eaten it, Franco again called assem-
bly. He walked down the line, picked out the soldier who
had spilled the stew on his uniform, selected a firing squad
and had the soldier shot.

In another army in another land such a tale might be
considered ninety per cent invention. I have heard officers
who served under Franco in the First Battalion tell it and
I am convinced that the essential facts as presented are cor-
rect. By such methods Franco became the darling of his
fellow officers. Somehow he remained alive in frequent
combats while other officers, not so eager to lead under fire,
died from shots which might have come from their own men.

Millan Astray took most of the credit for the organization
of the Foreign Legion, but Franco got his chance following
the disaster of Anual in 1921. Alfonso XIII, hoping for a
victory in Morocco to offset the growing unpopularity of
the war on the Peninsula, had ordered an incapable general
to assemble a strong force and drive into the interior. Abd-
el-Krim’s tribesmen cut off the general's supply line and
slaughtered thousands of Spaniards at a place called Anual.
Troops had to be rushed from Ceuta by sea to defend the
port of Melilla against the victorious Moors.

The scandal rocked the throne. The Army searched des-
perately for heroes to take the minds of the nation off the
disaster. They picked on Franco, who led the First Bat-
talion of the Foreign Legion in the defense of Melilla. He
was awarded the Medalla Militar; the Monarchist press
praised him to the skies. He came home a lieutenant colonel,
to marry Carmen Polo. Alfonso XIII sponsored the match.
Millan Astray was given a new post; Franco was placed in
command of the Foreign Legion, and became a power
among the younger officers in Morocco.


32 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Dictator Primo de Rivera, called to bulwark the shaky
monarchy, decided to withdraw from the interior of Mo-
rocco, holding only the cities of the coast. Leaders of the
Army in Morocco, including Franco, protested. Franco
wrote a book explaining how easy it would be to crush Abd-
el-Krim’s forces with a landing at Alhucemas, a section of
the Moroccan coast previously left to the Moors. Fortunate-
ly for Franco, Abd-el-Krim’s unruly tribesmen attacked
French garrisons. Spain gained an ally determined to put
an end to Moorish resistance.

The Alhucemas plan was approved. French warships pro-
tected a landing of Spanish troops, led by Franco and his
legionnaires. The campaign was a success. Franco won new
laurels as the hero of a victory-starved nation.

At thirty-three, Franco became the “youngest general in
Europe.” He was assigned to organize and direct a General
Military Academy, incorporating cadets of all arms into a
single school. While he was there, his brother, Ramén
Franco, became Spain’s outstanding air hero by flying the
South Atlantic with three other officers of the Air Army in
the Plus Ultra.

Impulsive Ramén and cautious Francisco did not get on
well together. Francisco was shocked when Raméon par-
ticipated in a revolt against the monarchy in December,
1930, with an opportunist general, Gonzalo Queipo de
Llano. Ramén went to jail, but was soon released to be-
come a hero of the Republic which dissolved Francisco’s
Military Academy. Caution served Francisco in good stead
when he refused to join General Sanjurjo’s ill-timed revolt
against the Republic in 1932. The Left-Wing Republican
Government, suspecting that Francisco’s loyalty was due
rather to caution than to any love for the régime, exiled him
to the command of the Balearic Islands. Francisco’s turn
came again, however, when the Right-Wing Republican


PEOPLE’S PRELUDE 33


Government, influenced by José Maria Gil Robles, came to
power in 1933.

Gil Robles and the oligarchy were so eager to undo the
work of the Left-Wing Republic that they forgot the people
of Spain. If they had confined themselves to the anti-cler-
ical laws, if they had not tried to sabotage the land and
educational reforms of the preceding régime, they might
have gained popular support. As it was, the Left-Wing par-
ties had difficulty restraining their irate followers. The
Army learned that miners and ironworkers in Asturias, with
a long record of union solidarity, were gathering arms. The
Army scheduled summer maneuvers in the mountains be-
tween Asturias and the province of Leén. The War Min-
ister, a Gil Robles man, went to the Balearic Islands to con-
fer with Franco; Franco acted as his aide during the maneu-
vers in August of 1934. When the maneuvers ended, Franco
went to Madrid “on leave,” to wait.

On October 5, 1934, the Left-Wing rebellion began. In
Barcelona, the rebels had little support and were soon under
arrest; in Madrid, there was some fighting, but order was
easily restored; in Asturias alone the people united behind
Left-Wing leaders. Asturian Left-Wing parties, from Com-
munists to Left-Wing Republicans, had pooled their forces
in Europe’s first “Popular Front.” But Francisco Franco
moved into the War Ministry to take command of opera-
tions he had planned. The law was with him; the Asturians
were revolting against the legally constituted government
of the Spanish Republic.

Within two days, a suspiciously short time for a ship to
load troops and travel from Spanish Morocco to the Bay of
Biscay, a boatload of Moors and Foreign Legionnaires were
landed in Asturias. On Franco's orders they were brought
to the Peninsula to fight Spaniards for the first time in mod-
ern history. The Moors, mercenaries despised by their own


34 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


people, burned and looted. The legionnaires, trained in
African wars, were little better. Additional columns of
troops moved on Asturias from Leén, across the mountains
where the Army had held its maneuvers.

It was all over in a few days of bitter and violent fight-
ing. There was cruelty on both sides during the battle. The
Army took its revenge in cruel repression when resistance
ended. Stories of torture which shocked Europe did not
shock Spaniards half so much as the fact that the Govern-
ment had used Moors and African legionnaires to kill As-
turians.

The Left Wing had rebelled; the Right Wing had won.
Gil Robles became Minister of War, but President Alcala
Zamora and the Spanish people now trusted him less than
ever. Governments rose and fell with such rapidity that a
general, called to Madrid by a new Premier to be Minister
of War, was arrested when he arrived by another general,
the War Minister chosen by the next Premier, for deserting
his post. The unfortunate general left prison in a few days
to become Minister of War after all — for a few weeks.

Franco was chosen by Gil Robles to be Chief of Staff of
the Army. It was Franco who rebuilt the Army of the oli-
garchy which the first Republican Government had tried to
destroy. The people of Spain were demanding elections.
There would be elections. Gil Robles was confident that,
with the oligarchy’s money and his political machine, he
could capture a majority, but if he failed, it would be up to
the Army to act.

Gil Robles failed. The Spanish people had seen through
his masquerade. The Government’s own returns for the elec-
tion of February 16, 1936, gave 258 deputies to the parties
of the Left, 62 deputies to the Center, and only 152 deputies
to the Right.

Leadership of the Republic from February 16, 1936 until


PEOPLE’S PRELUDE 35


the Civil War passed into the hands of a left-of-center
group.

For five months Spain watched its Republicans slip to-
ward political extremes. The Communists, who elected only
one deputy in 1933, got sixteen in 1936 and grew thereafter.
The Socialists split, with the majority following Francisco
Largo Caballero toward the extreme Left. Gil Robles’ party
was a wreck; the oligarchy knew it could not recapture the
Republic legally. A small Fascist-type party, the Falange,
gained adherents on the Right.

Between the extremes was Azafia, striving to manage the
Republic as Premier. Alcala Zamora, however, had made
many mistakes, most of them political, which led many re-
publicans to fear that their President was too much influ-
enced by the Clergy, too close to the oligarchy through the
Clergy. By an overwhelming majority of the Cortes, Alcala
Zamora was forced out of office. Reluctantly Azafia ac-
cepted the presidency of the Republic in the hope of
strengthening the moderates. But Azaiia had made the pres-
idency weak by Constitution; Azafia had insisted on the
anticlerical provisions of the Constitution which had forced
so many republicans into the arms of the oligarchy. Now
the affairs of the Republic slipped out of Azajia’s control.
From the Presidency he could brake the rush toward the
extreme left a little, but he could not lead the Republic back
toward the moderate center.

The Spanish people were confused. About 3,800,000
Spaniards had voted for parties of the Right which followed
Gil Robles, but few of these intended by this action to vote
against a republican form of government. About 4,800,000
Spaniards had voted for parties of the Center and the Left,
but only a minority of these wanted a Marxist government
of Left-Wing Socialists. Tempers rose throughout Spain.
The people were divided and disappointed.

It was then that the Army closed in for the kill.


3


THE STAGE IS SET


THE ARMY OF SPAIN believes it has the exclusive right to
“pronounce” on any régime or any government. By “pro-
nounce’ is meant the power to pass judgment on the com-
petence of a government to govern and, if necessary, to
overthrow that government by force. To anyone outside the
Army, or outside the oligarchy of which the Army is a part,
this might appear to be rebellion. Those who are members
of the Spanish Family, however, know that the Army is
merely exercising the authority of the oligarchy over those
who would “rebel” against it.

When members of the Family speak of “the Army,” or
“the Clergy,” they do not refer to the soldiers in the ranks
or the priest in his country parish. They mean the graduates
of the Military Academies and those few soldiers who at-
tain a commissioned rank without an Academy appoint-
ment, and the leaders of the clerical hierarchy, from the
priests of wealthy parishes to the Jesuits and the Primate of
Spain. Spaniards speaking of the Catholic Church in a
world sense always refer to “the Church of Rome.” Sim-
ilarly, they refer to “the whole Army, including the soldiers.”

The top officers of the Spanish Army are the lieutenant
generals. Once they were captain generals, but now this is
a job, not a rank, given to officers commanding a military
region. Usually there are eleven lieutenant generals in ac-
tive service. They rule the Army.

36


THE STAGE IS SET 37


Little independent political thinking goes on in the Army.
To discourage it completely, the Army frequently has cre-
ated officers’ associations. As the Republic came into power
in 1931, such an association was set up which excluded
those few officers who were favorable to the new govern-
ment. It was called the Unidn Militar Espafola. Its leaders,
of course, were the lieutenant generals.

Whenever the Family is in power, these generals are let
strictly alone to do as they like with the armed forces and
to take the graft they feel is their due. When the Family is
not in power, it is up to the lieutenant generals (or those
who would be lieutenant generals under a Family régime)
to reciprocate and make ready to “pronounce” to restore the
oligarchy.

Most leaders of the Army realized that the Republic had
too strong a following among the people to be challenged.
In 1932, however, a few of the more foolish Monarchists
somehow managed to persuade Lieutenant General José
Sanjurjo, senior ranking general of the Army and “Lion of
the Riff,” to help them stage a revolt. Sanjurjo consulted
his fellow generals only at the last minute; all declined to
join him. The revolt collapsed; Sanjurjo was arrested. The
Republican leaders were delighted with their easy victory.
The revolt justified clipping the Army’s wings. They did
not, however, clip enough — perhaps because even then they
feared that the extreme Left might try to take over if the
Army were not on hand to prevent it.

Under the Army reform bill, prepared by Azafia, the offi-
cers were given a choice. They could take the oath of alle-
giance to the Republic, or they could retire on the full pay
due their rank. Many retired, but most remained in service.
No officer of the Army who took the oath considered it truly
binding, for the Army recognized no authority higher than
its own.


38 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Between 1934 and February, 1936, the Family’s own “Re-
publican” parties seemed on the verge of taking over the
Republic. The Army, gradually recovering its power, guard-
ed these Family groups against the danger of revolt from
the extreme Left. Only after February, 1936, did the Army
settle down to the serious business of plotting the destruc-
tion of the Republic itself.

A lot of nonsense has been written about the origins of
the Spanish Civil War. Using obscure incidents, writers
with an axe to grind have set out to show that it was started
by Hitler and Mussolini as a deep-dyed Axis plot. This is
pure fiction, clear to any serious student of the activities of
the Spanish Family during the Republic.

In fact, no “Axis” existed until the Civil War was well
under way in Spain. Germany and Italy, from 1931 to 1936,
were far from bosom companions. They frequently ap-
peared as rivals in Austria and in the Balkans. Prior to the
Spanish Civil War there is little evidence of any serious col-
laboration between the Spanish Family and the two total-
itarian régimes which finally came to their rescue. The rea-
son for this is that the oligarchy never dreamed that it
would be in need of rescue. Several incidents, however,
showed that help could be found here when and if the Fam-
ily needed it.

In 1982, the little clique of Monarchists who persuaded
General Sanjurjo to revolt against the Republic succeeded
in buying a few arms in Italy. These arms were landed by
an Italian freighter in Algeciras, near Gibraltar, some weeks
before the revolt. They were left in bond with the customs
in crates labeled “rayon.” But the rebels did not take Alge-
ciras. The Italian Government realized that the crates of
“rayon” would eventually be examined, so an Italian banker,
resident in Spain, was delegated to bribe the customs guards
and get the “rayon” back aboard another Italian freighter.


THE STAGE IS SET 39


He succeeded, but a Socialist member of the Spanish cab-
inet learned of the incident. Italy’s Ambassador was polite-
ly and privately warned that his Government was to stay
out of Spanish politics.

Again, in 1934, a group of Spanish Monarchists went to
Rome to seek arms on their own account. Mussolini agreed
to supply them in the event of revolt from the extreme Left.
The arms were never delivered because the Army crushed
the Leftist revolt in Asturias with its own resources.

That same year, Carlist noblemen and clerical leaders of
Navarre, believing their plans for a clerical monarchy might
have some chance of success in the turbulent years ahead,
sent fifty young Carlists to Italy. With Fascist approval,
these youths were trained in the use of Italian arms. A con-
tract for the purchase of five hundred rifles was signed after
the training period, and the Carlists went back to their
mountains. These arms were not sent to Spain because the
Army, jealously guarding its rights, did not approve the
agreement.

General Sanjurjo, after Gil Robles obtained his release,
went into exile in Portugal. He never sought help from any-
one outside Spain. He was top ranking general of the Army;
he had complete confidence in his eventual return to Spain
as the head of an Army dictatorship. German arms manu-
facturers courted him as a potential customer. Sanjurjo vis-
ited Germany, not to ask for help, but to examine what the
Germans had for sale. American oil salesmen sought him
out as a possible client in his villa at Estoril, near Lisbon.
He was respectfully consulted by representatives of British
companies controlling copper, iron, shipping, and public-
utility interests in Spain. But neither Germany nor Italy nor
the United States nor Britain can be blamed for starting the
Civil War in Spain.

The revolt of the Spanish Army against the legally con-


40 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


stituted régime, the Republican Government, was planned
and begun by the Army alone with the Family's approval.
So jealously did the generals guard their ancient right to
“pronounce,” so confident were they of speedy success, that
even those civilian groups which could help the Army fight
knew little of its elaborate plans until the uprising itself
took place. The oligarchy knew that the Army was planning
a revolt, but that was all. The churchmen, the noblemen,
and the businessmen of the Family could only wait and
gossip. Fighting was the business of the soldiers of the
Family.

General Sanjurjo, who directed the plot from Portugal,
set three different dates for the uprising, but postponed
each one. Planning began right after the February election
of 1986. By March the plans were well enough advanced to
set a date, April 25. Early in April the general charged with
leading the revolt in Madrid (admittedly a suicidal job) de-
clined the honor and another was appointed to head the up-
rising in May. By May that general too preferred discretion
to valor, and a third was appointed as the revolt was post-
poned until June. In June there seemed a possibility that
the Army might better wait to put down a Leftist revolt, but
the revolt did not come. The final date was set for “some
propitious day between the tenth and the twentieth of July.”
Then one of the few civilians who enjoyed the confidence
of the generals, José Calvo Sotelo, contributed to their plot
by getting himself assassinated.

Assassinations in those spring and summer days of 1936
were frequent, more frequent than Republicans now like to
admit, although less frequent than the oligarchy now claims.
The extremes of Left and Right were busily sabotaging a
republic which satisfied neither.

Retaliation was the order of the day. One chain of retali-
ations led to the assassination of a moderate Republican


THE STAGE IS SET 41


judge who had sentenced a Family extremist to prison for
slaying a Socialist newsboy. Another chain led up to Calvo
Sotelo’s death.

Young hoodlums of the Spanish Family, Monarchists and
their allies, got into a street fight with young hoodlums of
the Family rivals, Communists and Left-Wing Socialists.
Shots were exchanged and a Monarchist died. His funeral
procession became a demonstration against the Government.
Republican policemen trying to restore order were more
severe with Monarchists than with their fellow Republicans.

As a result a captain of the Assault Guard who was known
to be a Socialist was shot. That night a group of Assault
Guards in uniform called at the house of Calvo Sotelo, leader
of the Monarchist minority, ordered him to get into an As-
sault Guard car, and dumped his bullet-riddled body at the
Madrid cemetery a few hours later.

The country was shocked at the slaying of so prominent
aman. Calvo Sotelo had led the attack on the extreme Left
in the Cortes. It was he who summed up the disorders of
forty-three days of that chaotic period —74 dead; 345
wounded; 168 churches, clubs, and monasteries burned;
eleven general strikes and many street brawls. After an in-
flammatory speech by Calvo Sotelo in the Cortes on June
16, 1936, a Communist woman deputy, Dolores Ibarruri,
called “La Pasionaria,” shouted, “That is your last speech!”
When Leftists sought a victim to avenge the slaying of the
police captain, Calvo Sotelo was their choice.

The Monarchist leader’s body was discovered in the cem-
etery early in the morning of July 18. This was the incident
the Army had been awaiting. On the night of July 17, offi-
cers of the garrison of Melilla in Spanish Morocco shot sev-
eral of their number who were loyal to the Republic. By
July 18, all of Spanish Morocco, “the Army’s parade
ground,” was in open revolt against the Republic. In the


42 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


next two days most of the officers in the larger cities of Spain
had declared for the Army against the Republic they had
sworn to defend.

Too late the moderates were called to rescue the Repub-
lic. José Sanchez Guerra, a liberal Monarchist until Alfonso
XIII left the country, and then a conservative Republican,
telephoned rebel generals with President Azajia’s permis-
sion to offer them posts in a new Government. Leftist lead-
ers, learning of this effort, threatened to revolt if such a cab-
inet were formed. Their threats were not necessary.

The generals were so confident of success that they took
S4nchez Guerra’s offers as nothing but an admission of the
weakness of the Republic. They declined, haughtily. Ma-
drid and all Spain would be theirs in a matter of days. They
were in no mood to deal with politicians outside the Fam-
ily circle.

The Army suffered a rude awakening a few days later.
The generals found it incredible, but it was true. The Ma-
drid politicians were resisting! The people were resisting!
In flagrant violation of all the rules of Spain, the Madrid
Government was giving arms to the people. The Army,
properly horrified that the “rabble” should be permitted to
“pronounce,” took stock of their position and found it des-
perate.

Officers were plentiful. The great majority of the twelve
thousand officers and eighty-five generals on the Army’s ac-
tive list were ready to fight the Republic. So were most of
the ten thousand officers and four hundred and fifty generals
on the retired lists — but what good were officers without
men?

There was a shortage of men. Such was the spirit of Spain
in July, 1936, that few of the fifty thousand conscript sol-
diers on the Spanish Peninsula who could make a free
choice followed their officers in revolt. The thirty-five thou-


THE STAGE IS SET 43


sand men of the Civil Guard, professional soldiers used as
rural policemen, were scattered through the countryside in
small patrols. The Republican Government, well aware that
the Civil Guard preferred the disciplined authority of the
Army to a democracy, called some patrols into the cities
where they were incorporated into units of the well-armed
Assault Guard, a force of trouble-shooters created by the
Republic.

The supply of arms was short. In many garrisons the am-
munition was locked up and Republicans held the keys. The
Army had few tanks and little technical and engineering
equipment. Few military planes were fit to fly, much less
fight. Most of these few were in control of the air Army, the
only portion of the armed forces which was almost unan-
imously in favor of the Republic.

There were men and arms in Morocco, the Army’s only
stronghold. Garrisons in revolt in Southern Spain held three
isolated cities and a tiny bridgehead at Sevilla and Cadiz.
Galicia, in the extreme Northwest, had precarious links with
regions of Old Castile and Navarre, where Carlist peasants
helped the military. Zaragoza was held by a small garrison
preparing to meet the attack of Republican forces from Bar-
celona. The revolt had failed in Barcelona, Madrid, Bilbao,
and Valencia, the four principal cities of Spain. The great
majority of Spain’s people were arming in Republican ter-
ritory.

The generals had tried to carry out their original plan of
a swift attack on Madrid, but could not. General Emilio
Mola, commander of the rebellion within Spain, sent col-
umns of Carlist volunteers out from Navarre to seize the
mountain passes leading to Madrid from the north. The
passes were taken and held. Then the jubilant Carlists,
awaiting reinforcements to move down to the capital itself
through the gathering forces of volunteer militiamen who


44 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


halted the advance by bitter resistance, received only a
blunt message from Mola:


NOT ONE SHOT MORE I HAVE ONLY TWENTY-SIX
THOUSAND CARTRIDGES FOR THE WHOLE NORTHERN
ARMY


This message, reported by Mola’s aide and biographer,
showed the desperate plight of the Army’s revolt within
Spain. In addition, General Sanjurjo, who was to have been
the dictator of the military government, was killed in a
mysterious plane crash near Lisbon as he was leaving Por-
tugal to meet Mola in Burgos. Another general, Manuel
Goded, second choice to Sanjurjo as chief, had been cap-
tured by the Republicans in Barcelona. Franco was isolated
in Morocco.

After the February elections, Franco, though again
pledging his loyalty to the Republic, had been sent to the
Canary Islands as commander of the forces in those lush
possessions of Spain off the African coast. Republican offi-
cers kept an eye on him; he was not to move without orders
from Madrid. A group of wealthy Spaniards in London,
however, chartered a British plane which took two men,
including a former Scotland Yard officer, and two English
girls to the Canaries as “tourists.” It was this plane which
Franco used to reach Morocco on July 19, when the Moroc-
can “protectorate” was held securely by the Army.

In Morocco, Franco commanded a well-equipped force of
professional troops and could draw on thousands of Moroc-
can tribesmen willing to sell their services for the prospect
of looting Spain. Between this force and the coasts of Spain
were only a few miles of water, but the Army had lost the
Navy. Franco’s troops could not reach the mainland.

The officers of the Spanish Navy tried to revolt against
the Republic, but they failed. Sailors refused to obey or-


THE STAGE IS SET 45


ders. They arrested their officers or threw them overboard,
tore down the red-and-gold standards of Monarchist Spain
which the officers had raised, and put back the Republican
colors. Republican warships patrolled the Strait.

There was little time. Republican forces were already
headed south from Madrid. The rebels’ hold on a tiny
bridgehead at Sevilla and Cadiz was precarious. A group
of Foreign Legionnaires was ferried across the Strait on a
destroyer whose crew seized the ship for the Republic and
put to sea as soon as the legionnaires landed at Cadiz. The
newcomers just managed to turn the tide of a violent battle
in which the citizens of Cadiz, the great majority of whom
were Republicans, almost defeated the Army garrison. It
was several days before men could be spared at Cadiz to
reinforce the garrison in Sevilla.

The man who held Sevilla for the Army was General
Gonzalo Queipo de Llano. He was in command of two
thousand troops, but felt he could count on only a few hun-
dred among them. Most of these were kept busy trying to
crush the resistance of Socialists in the workers’ quarter of
the city. About fifty soldiers, changing their uniforms fre-
quently in Army warehouses to confuse the people of Se-
villa, dashed about the city while Queipo boasted loudly on
the radio that he could hold “all of Southern Spain” against
all comers. So well did Queipo talk that the field and fac-
tory workers around Sevilla found it difficult to decide
whether Queipo was holding Sevilla for the Republic, for
the Army, or for himself. As a result, they stayed at home
waiting, but they would not wait long.

Mola, in the North, sent a message to Franco through Lis-
bon. The Army, said Mola, could not hope for success un-
less it had planes to protect its ground forces and ammuni-
tion for its guns. His biographer reports that General Mola
was writing an order calling the Carlists back from the


46 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


mountain passes and preparing to meet eventual defeat,
when the following message arrived from Africa:


WE ARE MASTERS OF THE STRAIT ALL IS WELL
FRANCO


This message was inspired by the arrival in Spanish Mo-
rocco on July 28, 1936, of thirty Junkers transport planes.
That is why Johannes Bernhardt, a Nazi whom the Berlin
radio announced was the Ausland Deutscher who had done
the most for his Fatherland in 1942, is still a happy and pros-
perous resident of Spain. For Johannes Bernhardt was in-
strumental in saving the Family from certain defeat, a de-
feat which might have altered the whole course of the
global war just ended.

Bernhardt was a little man until Hitler came to power in
1934. He was only a clerk in the offices of Wilmer Brothers,
a German export firm established in Spanish Morocco. He
soon became the first member of the National Socialist Party
among the several hundred Germans resident in Spanish
Morocco, all of whom then regarded the Nazis as a little
mad. When Hitler took over Germany, Bernhardt was con-
sidered sane enough to be made the Nazi leader in North
Africa. Wilmer Brothers also made Bernhardt the manager
of their Tetuan branch and approved his marriage to one of
the Wilmer daughters.

Bernhardt served his new in-laws well. He made friends
among the officers of the Spanish Army in Morocco. He
knew more about the plans for revolt than many Spaniards
on the mainland. In June, he approached the local leaders
of the Army plot with the suggestion that Wilmer Brothers
would be glad to supply Junkers planes on credit if the
Army needed them. This proposal was relayed to Sanjurjo
in Portugal.

Sanjurjo, however, rejected Bernhardt’s offer. The Army


THE STAGE IS SET 47


needed no help from foreigners. This was a Spanish affair
and could easily be handled by the Spanish Army. Bern-
hardt, who thought differently, flew to Berlin in June and
talked to the Junkers company officials. They told him to
see Goering. Goering sent him back to Spanish Morocco to
wait. German officials told me later what followed.

When Franco arrived in Tetuan, military capital of Span-
ish Morocco, on Sunday, July 19, Bernhardt was at the air-
port. The German there gave Franco a personal letter of
greeting from Adolf Hitler. The letter expressed sympathy
with Franco's efforts to save Spaniards from themselves.
Bernhardt was able to add that a Deutsche Lufthansa trans-
port plane, detached from the regular Berlin—Lisbon serv-
ice, was already in Spanish Morocco at Franco’s disposition
should he care to send a reply to the Fuehrer.

The German plane waited for two days. Franco exam-
ined the position of the rebel forces on the Peninsula; peered
through his binoculars at the Republican warships patrolling
the Strait; inspected the few planes at his disposal; read the
messages from Peninsular commanders and made his de-
cision. On July 21, Bernhardt, the German consul at Tan-
gier, and two officers of Franco’s staff boarded the German
plane and took off for Berlin. The Spaniards carried cre-
dentials from Franco and bank drafts on the London ac-
counts of rich members of the Family. Bernhardt bore
Franco's letter to Hitler. The German consul at Tangier
carried a report on the military importance of Tangier and
Spanish Morocco to Germany in the event of war between
Germany and Great Britain. As a result, Hitler sent thirty
troop transport planes, complete with Luftwaffe crews, to
Spanish Morocco.

On the night of July 28, the date that Mola received
Franco’s message, these German planes were unloading
Spanish Foreign Legionnaires on the Sevilla airport. By the


48 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


next day stores of arms and munitions were on their way to
Mola.

Events now moved swiftly. Fascist Italy, eager to main-
tain her position in the Mediterranean, was not far behind
the Germans. As usual, the Italians were not so efficient.
On July 30, three Savoia trimotored bomber-transports were
forced down by strong headwinds and lack of fuel at three
different French airfields in Algeria. The flyers wore Fascist
Party uniforms, but proudly identified themselves as regu-
lar officers in the Italian Air Force. They told the French
authorities that they were part of a group sent to “volun-
teer” in the Spanish rebel army. The press of the free world
published what they said.

In Paris, where I was then stationed as Associated Press
correspondent, we wondered what the British and the
French planned to do about this open intervention in the
Spanish conflict. What the democracies did was to form
that remarkable organization called the Non-Intervention
Committee. Under heavy pressure from London, Léon
Blum’s French Socialist Government reluctantly proposed
the Non-Intervention Agreement and the British enthusi-
astically accepted it. After some palaver, Nazi Germany
and Fascist Italy also put their signatures to an agreement
to refrain from intervening in Spain, an agreement which
all the signers knew had been violated, was being violated,
and would continue to be violated by the totalitarian states.

So encouraged, Germany and Italy increased their aid
to the Spanish Family, which needed it. In mid-August, a
Nazi fighter squadron escorted a fleet of transports carrying
Luftwaffe ground personnel across the Pyrenees to Sevilla.
An Italian squadron of fighter planes based in Sardinia
helped the Army fight off the Catalan force sent to take
back the island of Mallorca for the Republic. The Italian
Fascist “Dragoons of Death” under Arconovaldo Bonacorsi


THE STAGE IS SET 49


lived up to their name by executing two thousand Spanish
Republican men, women, and children in Palma, capital of
Mallorca, in two days.

Early in September the chief of German Military Intelli-
gence, Admiral Canaris, and the Italian, General Mario
Roatta, conferred with Franco in Caceres. Three more com-
panies of fully equipped, technical troops and additional
arms went to Spain from Germany and Italy, a token of the
thousands of German and Italian troops which were to come.

When, on October 21, 1936, Franco’s headquarters at Sal-
amanca was able to announce “the siege of Madrid has be-
gun,” it seemed a propitious time for another announcement.

The date of the formation of the Rome—Berlin Axis was
October 25, 1936.

The siege of Madrid changed to the assault on Madrid in
November. It is now known from the testimony of German
officers that Hitler deliberately prolonged the Spanish Civil
War in order to draw the attention of the democracies from
German preparations for war in Europe. This explains why
Franco’s German advisers insisted that Madrid be stormed
in frontal attacks instead of accepting the Spanish Army’s
original plan for a safer flank attack from the mountain
passes on the north, taken for just such a purpose by Mola.
The Army generals agreed to the German plan because they
then realized that their eventual success depended upon
German and Italian help. Beggars could not be choosers.

The Spanish Family found themselves playing the strange
réle of beggars because the people of Spain fought like
demons. Each kilometer post, each house, each clump of
trees between Talavera de la Reina and Madrid cost a bit-
ter fight. A professional army pressed relentlessly on to the
gates of the capital, but even there the appearance of the
first two thousand foreign volunteers of the International
Brigade sufficed to revive the spirit of Spaniards who


50 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


thought the world had left them to their fate. The first as-
sault of the Foreign Legion and the Moors against the city
itself was hurled back on November 8. Thrilled by their un-
expected victory, the people of Madrid strengthened their
barricades and waited for the next attack. The world heard
their cry, “They will not pass,” and wondered.

German and Italian planes struck at the thin line of sup-
ply linking Madrid with the rest of Republican Spain. Ger-
man transport planes brought up more troops from Africa
and Portugal’s dictator, Antonio Salazar, sent more arms to
the Spanish Family. More artillery than the Republic pos-
sessed in all of Spain pounded away at the home-made bar-
ricades. The final thrust came on the night of November 17.
At dawn the next morning, the Family's Moorish mercen-
aries were on the boulevards of Madrid and in the plaza
before the royal palace, but they were dead Moors. Madrid
resounded with the triumphant cries of citizen soldiers,
“They will not pass!”

Again the Family was in desperate straits. Again Ger-
many and Italy came through with just enough help to en-
able the Family to take the initiative, but not enough to
enable them to win the war.

General Sperrle, called “Sefior Sanders” in Spain to up-
hold the fiction of non-intervention, came to take command
of the Condor Legion of the Luftwaffe. More than twenty-
five thousand selected Luftwaffe airmen, ground personnel,
and Wehrmacht communications specialists came to Spain.
They were non-commissioned officers when they began com-
bat training in Spain, but were war-wise officers for Ger-
many’s army when it was time to take Poland. Ships like
the Deutschland and a score of submarines found Spanish
targets good for practice. The German press boasted little
of Germany’s activities in Spain, but Germany’s aid to the
Spanish Family was an open secret.


THE STAGE IS SET 51


The Italians were more specific. The Roman Fascist week-
ly, Forze Armate, reported the record of four months. From
December, 1936, to April, 1937, 100,000 Italian soldiers,
4370 motor vehicles, 40,000 tons of war material, and 750
pieces of artillery were transported from Italy to Spain.
There were 5318 Italian bombing operations in Spain car-
ried out by 5099 military airmen; 14,858 wounded were
taken back to Italy. Forze Armate does not mention it, but
some 10,000 Italians never went home. They died in Spain.

The Portuguese are managed by a shrewd dictator who
does not boast of the help he gave to the Spanish Family.
Salazar was never convinced that the Germans were going
to win the war. He knew, however, that it would be diffi-
cult to run his own tight little dictatorship with a Spanish
Republican neighbor by his side, so he did what he could for
the Spanish Family. Portugal’s help got the Family past one
of the many barriers in their path — Badajoz, a city on the
Portuguese frontier. Selected units of the Portuguese Army
— all “volunteers,” of course — crossed the border to help
the Spanish Army crush Republican resistance in Extrema-
dura and to prevent the people of Badajoz from cutting the
lines of communication of the column of Moors and Foreign
Legionnaires who pressed on toward Toledo and Madrid.
Arms lent Franco by Salazar helped the Spanish Family
through the first year of the Civil War.

The democracies helped too. They helped first of all with
the Non-Intervention Agreement, that formal treaty cal-
culated to enable France and Britain to ignore German and
Italian aid to the Family while they refused arms to the Re-
public. The United States was not a party to non-interven-
tion. The State Department took refuge in its own arms
embargo passed in January, 1937, which excluded neither
trucks nor liquid fuel. The Spanish Family was getting all
the planes and other equipment it needed from Germany


52 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


and Italy, but neither could supply the gasoline and motor
transport vital to the Army. The United States saw to that.

Two of the leading American motor companies sold the
Family régime thousands of trucks for their troops. Some
were driven from American-owned assembly plants in Ant-
werp to the Irun frontier post. They were of great impor-
tance to a small army with a lot of territory to cover. Fre-
quently, in 1937, I saw new American trucks carrying Italian
troops to the front during the campaign against the Basques,
those Catholic enemies so embarrassing to the Spanish oli-
garchy.

An American oi] company took a long gamble on a Fam-
ily victory early in the war by supplying great quantities of
aviation gasoline, ordinary gasoline, and motor oil on credit.
It was a successful business venture. The German planes
which bombed Guernica, the first blitzed city of history; the
Italian planes which mowed down hundreds of refugees on
the road to Mataro beyond Barcelona; the Axis air power
which smashed the resistance of weary Republican forces on
a dozen fronts — all of these planes were powered by Amer-
ican fuel. The Family won the war and paid its bills in for-
eign exchange supplied by the Duke of Alba and his fellow
aristocrats in London. The Germans and Italians obtained
the flying know-how which enabled them to take many
American lives before World War IT ended. Knowing this,
it is easy to understand why I found it difficult to suppress
a shudder when José Maria Doussinague, Under-Secretary
of the Family’s Foreign Ministry, told me in 1945, when the
Family was shifting its policy toward the victors in the Sec-
ond World War: “You must understand that we do not hate
the United States. Without American petroleum and Amer-
ican trucks and American credits we could never have won
the Civil War!”

It must be remembered, of course, that the Republic also


THE STAGE IS SET 53


received aid from abroad. About forty thousand foreigners,
including three thousand Americans, eventually reached the
Republican side of Spain. The first group of International
Brigade volunteers — for volunteers they were! — were taken
from all political parties, but many of those who went to
Spain later were Communists or fellow travelers. American,
French, and British oil companies sold liquid fuel to the Re-
public too. Russia sent military and other technical experts
to Republican Spain, although no more than five hundred
Russians were in Spain at one time and the total for the
whole Civil War period was under six thousand. There is,
however, a vast difference between the aid given to the Re-
public and the aid given to the Spanish Family.

First of all, the Republic represented the free choice of
the people of Spain. The Madrid Government was elected
by democratic methods, whatever the Government's faults.
The Republic had no aid from abroad in July, 1936, that
crucial month when Germany and Italy rescued the Spanish
Family from certain defeat. German bombers were active
in Southern Spain in August before André Malraux, the
French writer and flyer, formed his “Foreign Legion of the
Air” for Republican Spain. Italian “whippet” tanks, piloted
by soldiers of the Italian Army, fought on the Madrid front
for a month before the International Brigade appeared in
the barricades. Germany and Italy, not Russia, were the
first to intervene in Spain. The Republic sought help from
Russia only when the democracies refused to help Spain’s
democracy.

The war fought in Spain was a modern war. Two armies
of Spaniards, brave men and intelligent men, were fighting
on the battle-scarred soil of Western Europe where Na-
poleon’s armies first met Wellington. The Spanish oligarchy,
backed by the Axis and its modern weapons, were fighting
the Spanish people who believed modern democracy was


54 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


worth a war, but who could get help only from Soviet
Russia.

Out of this war came modern phrases like “the fifth col-
umn.” Mola coined that phrase to describe the sympathizers
of the Spanish Family in Madrid who were preparing to aid
the four Army columns marching on the capital by rising
against the Republic from within. In this war, Germany
tested the men, the tactics, and even the weapons which
enabled the Nazis to fight a combine of the greatest powers
in the world.

The men included General Sperrle, commander of the
Condor Legion in Spain. He was called back to Berlin in
1938 to apply what he had learned in Spain to the conquest
of Czechoslovakia. The Czechs and Slovaks fell without a
fight, victims of a deal at Munich, but Sperrle proved his
worth to the Nazis in Poland, the Low Countries, and else-
where. His planes left Spanish villages in ruins to blitz War-


saw, Rotterdam, and Britain’s cities. The men under his
command in Spain became officers who conquered the Con-
tinent.


German tacticians found the Spanish Army admirably
suited to their purpose. It was small; it was disciplined; it
was motorized in American trucks and protected by an um-
brella of Axis aviation. Its offensives were planned in Ber-
lin and were mapped out on blackboards in the German
Army's War College even before the militiamen of the Re-
publican armies met the attack.

In the Basque country the Germans blitzed their first
town. Guernica was “Coventried” as thoroughly as Coven-
try itself while the people of that English town were taking
only a passing interest in the headlines about an obscure
Basque town. I did not see the bombing of Guernica, but I
walked through the still smoldering ruins shortly thereafter.
My guide, an Army press officer, told me that the Basques


eo an nee Sb =


MAEM PFAHING HACAN PPAAT YY 3/99
pie obvi. ba Maes j Ea hy :
THE STAGE 1s SET 55


had wantonly burned their “holy city” as they retreated.
That same night I sat over my coffee and brandy in a café
at Vittoria listening to young German airmen boasting of
how they had leveled the town on Sperrle’s orders. This
was the birthday of the “blitz,” April 26, 1937.

Spaniards were the first to meet those swift stabs of small
motorized units through outer defenses, units which sped
far beyond their line of supply, wrecking communications
and spreading confusion inside enemy territory. These tac-
tics, planned by Germans, were followed in Aragén and
Catalonia in 1987 and 1938. They are familiar now, but
then they were new.

The same tactics used to pulverize the lines of powers
which stood against the Germans in Europe were first em-
ployed in Spain. German bombers and German artillery
blasted the first holes in the Basque “Iron Ring,” that chain
of home-made forts around the outer defenses of the prov-
ince of Vizcaya. A two-mile section of this line was smashed
twice because the Spaniards refused to move after the first
bombing and shelling. Wave after wave of German bomb-
ers were followed by Italian fighters which strafed the
blasted earth with machine-gun fire. I watched them do it.
When the Carlist infantry finally climbed the hill and plant-
ed the Family’s red-and-gold flag on its crest, not a shot was
fired, for no Basques were left alive in those two miles.
Through that gap, the divisions of Spaniards, Moors, and
Italians poured, fanned out, and pushed on to Bilbao.

In Spain too the Germans practiced their tactics of send-
ing planes beyond their troops to sow confusion and panic
among refugees already on the roads. As the columns of
Spaniards and Italians neared Barcelona, Catalan refugees
by the hundreds of thousands fled along the seacoast road to
Mataro and beyond toward the French frontier.

The road was a ribbon of white along the Mediterranean


56 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


coast. There was no place to hide. German planes skimmed
fifty feet above the highway, spraying their helpless and
screaming targets with machine-gun bullets. Thousands
died.

The tragedy of the road to Mataro is not one of the hor-
ror tales which can never be traced back to their origin.
Other American correspondents traveled the road with the
refugees. I saw the wounds of those who survived. I saw
babies in clothing stained with the blood of their dead
mothers. I talked to scores who walked the road to Mataro.

The weapons tested in Spain were quite new. It was in
Spain that the first Messerschmidt fighters met the Russian-
built copies of the American Curtiss. The Russian planes
proved superior, so the Germans developed a new Messer-
schmidt which led their attacks in Europe.

A proud German artilleryman told me, as his batteries of
88-millimeter guns smashed the Basque fortifications in
1937: “These guns could roll unopposed through the cap-
itals of Europe.” Two years later I saw the same field guns,
anti-tank and anti-aircraft guns installed on the German
side of the Rhine.

Equipment used by German combat engineers to cross
the Ebro River in Aragon in 1938 was the same equipment
which later enabled them to bridge the Vistula in Poland,
the Maas in Belgium, the Meuse in France, and the Dnieper
and the Don in Russia.

It is easy for those who did not see the Spanish Civil War
to forget the chain of events which led through World War
II. They are inclined to forget that there is still a victory to
be won in Spain. I remember three nights which mark the
way for me.

The first was a night on the border between France and
Spain. I sat beside a campfire in the woods, talking to de-
feated men, exhausted women, and frightened children who


THE STAGE IS SET 57


had fled out of Catalonia. Around us, in the foothills of the
Pyrenees, there were hundreds of little campfires like our
own, lighting the hungry faces of those who had fled. In
the morning the families would be divided. They would
be taken to concentration camps in Southern France. The
Spanish Civil War was not yet ended, nor had World War
II officially begun. It was January, 1989.

The second was a night on the border between Switzer-
land and France near Basel. The German columns were
driving through Verdun. There were hundreds of little
campfires in the foothills of the Jura, lighting hungry faces,
Spanish faces, the same I had seen in the Pyrenees. The
French collapse had driven them out of the munitions fac-
tories of Alsace where they worked. The next day they
moved south, refugees again. The Vichy French tried to
round them up and put them in concentration camps, but
this time they were hard to find. It was the summer of 1940.

The third was a night in 1944 when I crossed the Bidas-
soa River where it joins the Bay of Biscay. My companions
were two Basques, fishermen by day, smugglers and Basque
patriots by night. Spanish armed guards patrolled the Span-
ish shore with orders to shoot anyone leaving Spain. Span-
ish Republicans were eager to go to France to help fight
the Germans. Frenchmen patrolled the opposite shore, well
hidden in the shadows, with orders to shoot anyone leaving
France. Germans and French collaborationists were trying
to escape to Spain before it was too late. I crossed the river
to see if the Germans were really leaving.

They were. From a smuggler’s cottage in the wooded hills
between Hendaye and Biarritz we watched the German
trucks speed along the highways. We heard the Maquisards
fire on them. Before dawn broke there were little campfires
in the hills where Maquisards, no longer underground, made
their camp. We approached one group and found — yes, the


58 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


same Spaniards. The same who had fled into France in
1938, the same who had camped beside the Swiss frontier
in 1940, were among the victors at last in 1944. They fought
Germans with American and British arms parachuted down
to them by night.

“If we had been able to buy arms like these in 1936,” one
of the Spaniards told me, “you might have had less trouble
now. God grant that we may have such weapons to win
back the Republic in Spain.”

Even the Spanish Family recognized the appeal in this
word “Republic.” The Army, though it planned only a mil-
itary dictatorship, was careful to conceal its intentions as
the Civil War began in 1936. Almost all the early proclama-
tions by the generals referred to their desire “to establish
order within the Republic.” Francisco Franco concluded his
first manifesto in Morocco with the phrase, “Viva la Re-
ptblica!”

It soon became apparent to the generals, however, that
few Republicans were misled by their lip service to the Re-
public. Moreover, the mass rising of the people in defense
of the Republic made the Army reluctant to accept the re-
sponsibilities of governing even if they won the victory. The
Spanish oligarchy as a whole agreed that there would have
to be a period of bloody repression after victory in order to
crush the spirit of liberty, now so strongly entrenched in
the hearts of the people. All elements of the Spanish Fam-
ily wanted this killing to be thorough, but none wanted to
accept the responsibility for directing the job. Even at this
early stage it was realized that, sooner or later, some branch
of the oligarchy must be ready, after the killing was done,
to turn an innocent mask to the world, though its hands
were stained with blood.

There was another problem, too. The Family’s allies had
to be satisfied. Among the Germans and Italians who came


THE STAGE IS SET 59


to Spain were many ardent National Socialists and Fascists
shocked by the reactionary ideas of the greater part of the
Family. They reported back to Hitler and Mussolini, both
of whom urged the Family to adopt the “Fascist revolution.”

Something had to be done. The Family rose to the occa-
sion, for the Family is clever. It is clever enough to have
captured the Falange.


a


A NEW MASK —-THE FALANGE


THE FALANGE was born of Italian Fascism, acquired a Nazi
tinge through its first leader, became both Spanish and rev-
olutionary under its second leader, and never amounted to
much until the Spanish oligarchy captured it and used it as
a mask.

This is how it happened.

The ideas of Fascism were not new to Spaniards. The
Spanish monarchy, particularly under rulers such as Philip
II, frequently had a “Fascist” tone — authoritarian, absolute,
traditionalistic. The Spanish Family, ever since the days of
its founders, has ruled by forcing the majority to do the will
of the minority.

Before Benito Mussolini left the Italian Socialist Party, a
Carlist philosopher named Juan Vazquez de Mella proposed
a system of government which had much in common with
Fascism. Under his plan Spain was to have only one party,
the Carlists. This party was to govern Spain through a cor-
porative assembly whose members would have the powers
of veto, thereby limiting the Crown and the Government to
the business of administration. The aristocracy could con-
tinue to manage the rural districts and the middle-class mer-
chants would hold power in the cities. The clergy would
handle both education and censorship.

VAzquez de Mella proposed this system of government

60


A NEW MASK — THE FALANGE 61


early in the First World War, but the Spanish oligarchy then
was quite content to rule through Alfonso XIII. Only when
the dictatorship of General Primo de Rivera began to fall to
pieces did some members of the oligarchy begin to think
seriously of other forms of government.

Several Spaniards tried to start movements based on Ital-
ian Fascism. One of these was a nerve specialist in Valen-
cia, Doctor José Maria Albifiana, whose followers were the
first to use the Fascist salute in Spain. But the first real
Spanish Fascist was Ernesto Giménez Caballero.

Giménez Caballero talked of Fascism to a few young
friends in Madrid cafés during 1930, but he was not a leader.
The first to join his group who showed any qualities of lead-
ership was Ramiro Ledesma Ramos.

Under Ledesma’s leadership, these young men formed a
political party. They published the program of their party
in the first number of a periodical called La Conquista del
Estado — “The Conquest of the State” — which appeared on
March 14, 1931. This program set forth the essentials of
Spanish Fascist doctrine —a crusade against Marxism, in-
tense nationalism, an empire policy, division of the big es-
tates, and the enforced enrollment of all workers in syndi-
cates managed by the State. One paragraph in this mani-
festo was particularly interesting:

“The first clear conception of our social and technical civ-
ilization was the Marxist.”

This new party was given the formidable name of Las
Juntas de Ofensiva Nacional-Sindicalista, literally, “The
Councils of the National-Syndicalist Offensive.” This name
soon was reduced to its initials — the “JONS,” which Span-
iards pronounce “hawnce.” The Spanish philosopher,
Miguel Unamuno, called it “that offensive of retarded men-
talities.”

This is the cradle of Spanish Fascism, the system which


62 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


remained after Fascism and Nazism were no more. The
JONS at the beginning had only eleven members. Meet the
founders:

Ramiro Ledesma, the leader, was the son of a provincial
schoolteacher in Zamora. Young Ledesma worked his way
through Madrid University by sorting letters in Madrid’s
Post Office at night. He left the university in 1931 and made
a living by contributing articles translated from the Ger-
man to Madrid newspapers and magazines. He also wrote
a novel, The Seal of Death, which died unnoticed on the
bookstands. Machiavelli, Nietzsche, and Adolf Hitler were
Ledesma’s idols; he combed his hair over the right side of
his forehead to show his admiration for the German Fueh-
rer. He was twenty-five years old when he founded the
JONS.

Giménez Caballero was in his late thirties. He was a bad
poet and parlor intellectual who fancied himself in later
years as “Spain’s Gabriele d’Annunzio.” A Socialist at first,
he had married an Italian girl and visited Tuscany, her
native province, where he met many Fascists. When he re-
turned to Spain, he supported what he called “the battle
against Nordism.” The “Nordics” included North Ameri-
cans, Englishmen, and Germans, not excluding Hitler. The
Russians alone shared the mission of the Mediterranean and
Catholic peoples, the mission of bringing about a social rev-
olution. Giménez Caballero was sometimes a little con-
fused about his Nordism, but, to please him, Ledesma had
to incorporate much of Italian Fascism in a program he
would have preferred to make pure German Nazism.

Juan Aparicio came to the group with Ledesma. As
Ledesma hoped to be Spain’s Hitler, so Aparicio hoped to
become Spain’s Goebbels. Alone of these few founders,
Aparicio attained his goal. He was an egg-headed little
man, previously attracted to Communism, sincerely interest-


A NEW MASK — THE FALANGE 63


ed in social revolution until the power he eventually at-
tained obscured his vision. As the Spanish Family's press
chief he acquired ludicrous Napoleonic airs.

Ricardo de Jaspe Santoma soon quit the JONS to join
Manuel Azajia’s group of liberal Republicans.

Antonio Bermudez Cafete was a hack writer and per-
petually poor street reporter for the powerful clerical daily,
El Debate.

Francisco Matéos, a former Communist, had wandered
all over Europe as a draftsman. He later returned to the
Communists.

Antonio Riafio was a football player who quit the group
to join a semi-Fascist “Spanish Front” which soon collapsed.

Alejandro Raimundez left the JONS to join the moderate
Republican Radical Party led by Alejandro Lerroux.

Miguel Souto Villas was an Anarchist who stayed with
the JONS only long enough to help Ledesma draft its syn-
dical program.

Roberto Escribiano Ortega was a Monarchist and went
back to the Monarchists.

Ramon Iglesias Parra was finally put safely away in an
asylum for lunatics.

The foundation of Spain’s State Party was laid by a Span-
ish Nazi, a Spanish Fascist with deep sympathy for the Mus-
solini régime, two moderate Republican anti-clericals, two
Clerical Party men and a Monarchist, one Communist, and
a fellow traveler, one Anarchist and one lunatic, all Span-
ish. There are people who say this remains a fair cross-sec-
tion of the Falange. In any event, the JONS program
showed the influence of all eleven signers, not excluding the
lunatic fringe. It was different, and for this reason it at-
tracted small contributions from the Family’s men of money.

There is always money in Spain for a new political move-
ment. The Family’s rich men have political agents on the


64 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


lookout for new organizations of all kinds. Practically all of
them, revolutionary or reactionary, get contributions. It is a
form of political life insurance. The JONS got small con-
tributions from Family members like Juan March, the Mal-
lorcan financier; José Felix de Lequerica, the gourmet who
became Spain’s Foreign Minister; Antonio Goicoechea,
Monarchist leader and subsequently Governor of the Bank
of Spain; and from the Urquijo banking clan who made lots
of money after the Civil War. Each contributed only a
little, but that little, together with contributions from the
German and Italian Embassies, enabled the JONS to survive.
The clergy contributed too, but in a different way.

The JONS was at first anti-clerical. When angry mobs
burned down the Jesuit monastery across the street from
the offices of La Conquista del Estado, its staff hung out of
the open window and cheered, much to the disgust of the
two Catholic members. The JONS was not interested in the
clergy, so the clergy became interested in the JONS.

A party called the “Castilian Council of Hispanic Action”
was founded with Jesuit money and backing in Valladolid.
Its leader was a twenty-six-year-old, Jesuit-educated orator
named Onésimo Redondo who had studied in Germany. The
new party copied the Nazis’ salute, program, and all, but
it was also pro-clerical. Some months after its founding,
Onésimo met Ledesma and suggested that the two parties
combine. Ledesma wanted at least one provincial branch,
so the JONS paid the price by revising its program. It con-
tained only one new phrase —a proclamation of “the high-
est respect for the Catholic tradition of our race.” Thus was
the anti-clerical JONS made safe for the clerical Nazis of
Valladolid.

Most of the symbolism taken over by the Family's régime
after the Civil War came right out of the JONS, a strange
mixture of emblems. It adopted the red-and-black flag of


A NEW MASK — THE FALANGE 65


Spanish Anarchism; its seal was the yoke-and-arrows emblem
of Ferdinand and Isabella. A Republican professor at the
University of Granada, Fernando de los Rios, once sketched
the yoke and five arrows on his blackboard, saying: “If a
Fascist Party is ever organized in Spain, this should be their
symbol.” Juan Aparicio, who sat in that class, remembered
his lesson. It was a proper symbol indeed for the JONS, the
Falange, and the Spanish oligarchy. For the oligarchy shot
the arrows into the heart of the dying Republic and placed
the yoke over the shoulders of the Spanish people. That
came later.

The JONS never had many members. Jesuit protection
enabled Onésimo Redondo’s group to recruit about three
hundred members in the Valladolid area, but the JONS in
Madrid was near death several times. Its worst enemy was
ridicule.

Madrid’s laughter almost killed the JONS in 1932 when
the police announced that they had rounded up the entire
membership of the JONS — all forty-two of them. Despond-
ently most of the forty-two went to jail for disturbing the
peace, but in jail they made new converts. One was Father
Gafo, a priest who had organized clerical labor syndicates
in Northern Spain. The others were Anarchists.

Spanish Anarchism is a fascinating development. No-
where in the world did the philosophy preached by Michael
Bakunin, a Russian aristocrat, take deeper root than in
Spain. Spanish Anarchists believe that the basic error of
all government and theology is the assumption that man is
fundamentally wicked. They do not believe that man is
perfect, but they think man is naturally good enough to live
in a free society. To demonstrate this he must free himself
from all authority, including the authority of the State and
the Church. When this is done, man can freely organize a
really free collectivist society, in which public opinion alone


66 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


is the policeman. His right to liberty would be earned by
his work. This is the creed that came to Spain in 1868 and
rolled like thunder through the oppressed land.

In the simplicity and idealism of Anarchism lies its
strength and its weakness. Anarchism has no paid organ-
izers, no bureaucracy, and no permanent headquarters.
Spain’s Anarchists won control of a great labor organization,
the Confederacién Nacional del Trabajo (National Confed-
eration of Labor), which had no dues and no national secre-
triat. Strikes could be local or national; it all depended on
the workers of each locality.

Spanish Governments trying to crush this movement
found themselves chasing a will-o-the-wisp, because An-
archism is not an organization, but a mere voluntary associ-
ation. Even when the police caught Anarchists, they could
do little with them. For the true Spanish Anarchist is a
simple soul with little fear of death who neither drinks nor
smokes nor is interested in material things. He is anti-cler-
ical because he believes the Spanish clergy has twisted the
social teachings of the Catholic Church into a snare of false
promises to capture the masses. He hates the authority of
Communism as much as he hates the authority of Fascism.

Many a Spaniard, looking back on centuries of misgovern-
ment, reaches the conclusion that all he can do with his
poor nation is to tear down its existing society and build
anew on the basic virtues of its people. That is Spanish
Anarchism.

The JONS founder, Ramiro Ledesma, tried to incorpo-
rate Anarchist phraseology and syndical organization into
his totalitarian program. Thanks to this foresight and to
contacts made in prison, the JONS in 1932 won the support
of the Secretary of the CNT union of Madrid with about
one hundred Anarchist workers. It was a big prize for the
JONS, but the organization still needed a leader.


A NEW MASK — THE FALANGE 67


Ledesma, with his Hitler haircut and pompous manners,
was a ludicrous figure. Giménez Caballero was a tempera-
mental poet. Onésimo Redondo stood too close to the Jesuits
to be accepted by Spanish workers. This ruling triumvirate
of the JONS debated a long time before choosing a leader.
This was not surprising.

José Antonio Primo de Rivera did not at first appear to
be the man the JONS was looking for. He was an aristocrat,
the cultured, well-traveled, and carefully educated son of
General Miguel Primo de Rivera. His father, as dictator,
had served the Spanish Family well by prolonging the life
of the monarchy beyond its time. José Antonio adored his
father. When Don Miguel fled Spain and died in Paris after
several exhausting weeks of shuttling between confessionals
and brothels, his son was shocked at the Spanish oligarchy’s
ingratitude. Instead of praising Don Miguel for extending
their rule, the leaders of the Spanish Family blamed him
for bringing it to an end. So the dictator’s son entered pol-
itics to defend his father.

He ran as a candidate for election to the Republican
Cortes in a Madrid by-election on a remarkable ticket —
“Give me a seat in the Cortes from which I can defend the
memory of my father.” He lost, but the 28,000 votes given
him against 56,000 for the Socialist and 6000 for the Com-
munist showed that the name Primo de Rivera was still a
drawing card.

Young Primo de Rivera was not just another member of
the Spanish Family, nor even just another Spanish Fascist.
He sincerely believed in social revolution. He wanted this
revolution to be guided by the Spanish Right rather than
directed by the Marxist Left. His title, Marques de Estella,
and his father’s position in the Army made him a member
of the Family by birth, but his hate of the Family ran deep.

In the spring of 1933, an incident occurred which led the


68 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Family to try to buy off young Primo. The police seized
some forty thousand copies of the first issue of a new mag-
azine called El Fascio. The magazine did not appear again.
On the front page were spaces for three large pictures, head-
ed from left to right “GERMany,” “Spatn,” and “Iraty.” Hit-
ler and Mussolini glowered from the Jeft and right, but the
center panel was empty. Presumably it was to be filled by
the picture of one of the contributors to the magazine. These
included the JONS leaders, in addition to a publisher named
Juan Pujol, and Julio Ruiz de Alda, a flyer who had won
distinction as the navigator on the plane Plus Ultra which
Ramon Franco had piloted to Buenos Aires from Madrid.

In this magazine was an article signed “E,” easily recog-
nized as the work of the Marqués de Estella, José Antonio
Primo de Rivera. The writer admitted that his father’s dic-
tatorship was only “a temporary remedy.” What Spain
needed, he wrote, was “the full and final conquest of the
State, not for a few years, but forever.”

Such an idea appealed to the Spanish Family. The lead-
ers of the oligarchy decided it would be wise to enlist young
Primo as one of their own. They offered him a candidacy
from Cadiz, a “sate” constituency controlled by the oli-
garchy. José Antonio accepted. The elections were to be
held at the end of October, 1933. Early in that month, José
Antonio went to Rome to see Mussolini.

The Duce had received José Antonio once before, but
then only for a moment as one of a group of Spanish uni-
versity students touring Italy. This time José Antonio talked
alone with Mussolini for thirty minutes. Mussolini was prob-
ably too shrewd to suggest Italian support for a Spanish
Fascist Party. Certainly José Antonio was too proud to
make such a proposal. The Spaniard was thinking of found-
ing a Spanish variety of Fascism and had gone to Rome to
see the founder of the Italian original — that was all. It was


A NEW MASK — THE FALANGE 69


his last meeting with the Duce. When he went to Rome
again in 1934, young Primo was more interested in his
blonde mistress than in politics.

After his reteurn to Madrid in 1933, he joined forces with
Julio Ruiz de Alda and Alfonso Garcia Valdecasas, a mouse-
like deputy nominally an independent but actually Jesuit-
dominated. These three formed a new party, “the Spanish
Syndical Movement.” Ruiz de Alda had the inspiration of
renaming it Falange Espajola, “Spanish Phalanx.”

The term was well chosen. The initials F.E. spell the
Spanish word for “faith.” The members would be called
Falangistas (Fa-lan-he’-stas), and the party simply Falange
(Fa-lan’-hay).

Although the speeches by the three founders were not
particularly brilliant, the meeting in the Comédia Theater
in Madrid on October 29, 1983, marks the official date of
the founding of the Falange. The new party soon had two
deputies in the Cortes, for Valdecasas retained his seat,
while José Antonio won the Cadiz election.

José Antonio during his electioneering learned a lot about
the political methods of the oligarchy. He wrote his private
papers in English. In fact he wrote an unfinished novel in
English about this political campaign entitled The Anarcho-
Carranzists. It has to do with Ramén de Carranza, the Mar-
qués de Soto Hermoso, the Spanish Family's political boss
in Andalucia. José Antonio was fascinated to discover that
the Marqués paid off many Anarchist leaders in his district
to keep their followers away from the polls on election day.
Consequently he guaranteed a comfortable Family majority
over Left-Wing candidates.

The new deputy first distinguished himself in the Cortes
by leaping over three benches to punch the nose of the mod-
erate Socialist leader, Indalecio Prieto, who, he thought, had
insulted his father. This misunderstanding led to a strange


70 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


friendship between the veteran Socialist and the Falange
leader. Prieto had no use for the Falange, but he recog-
nized young Primo as a potential rebel from the Family and
frequently defended him, publicly and privately.

Union between the Falange and the JONS was inevitable.
José Antonio was aggressive, imaginative, and the bearer of
a famous name. His movement lacked a program. The
JONS had a program, but lacked a leader. Ramiro Ledesma
held out as long as he could, for he distrusted young Primo
whom he thought a political dilettante. José Antonio, how-
ever, had organized a small but active group skilled in street
fighting with young Communists and Socialists. Soon
Ledesma could no longer prevent union. Falange and JONS
were united early in 1934 under the tremendous official
name of Falange Espajola de las Juntas de Ofensiva Na-
cional Sindicalista. Everybody called it simply “the Fa-
lange.”

The first meeting of the new organization was held in
Valladolid on March 4, 1934. A triumvirate, composed of
José Antonio, Ramiro Ledesma, and Ruiz de Alda, headed
the group. Special membership cards were issued for the
founders. Ledesma got Card Number One and José An-
tonio got Card Number Two. Jesuit-dominated Onésimo
Redondo and Garcia Valdecasas were content with lesser
positions, but they left their stamp on the Falange program.

Ledesma wrote the twenty-seven-point program approved
by José Antonio with few alterations. As José Antonio and
Ledesma interpreted these points, most were revolutionary.
They sounded revolutionary to the Spanish Family too, but
José Antonio never lived to put them into practice.

The character of José Antonio set the tone of the Falange
during the last two years of the Republic. Because of his
influence the Falange became a fanatically national organ-
ization. Small, but well organized, it refused all offers of


A NEW MASK — THE FALANGE 71


financial assistance from the Germans, the Italians, and even
the Portuguese. There was no lack of money. The Falange
spent one hundred and fifty thousand pesetas in its first
three months compared to the JONS’ annual budget of
twelve thousand pesetas. Wealthy members of the Family
contributed sizable sums on the theory that, if there had to
be a revolution, it should at least come from the Right. They
also were interested in encouraging the street battles which
added to the troubles of the Republic.

José Antonio visited Germany in 1934, but what he saw
there only increased his dislike for the Germans as a people,
German as a language, and National Socialism as a model
for Falangism. He neither saw nor asked to see Adolf Hit-
ler. In September of 1935, he attended the Fascist Congress
at Montreux to meet his European counterparts — Léon De-
grelle of Belgium, Sir Oswald Mosley of Britain, Prince
Starhemberg of Austria, and Corneliu Codreanu of Romania.
When he was asked to join these others in a Fascist Inter-
national, the young Spaniard refused. “Our cause,” he ex-
plained to his followers on his return, “is Spanish, not inter-
national.”

Spaniards showed little more enthusiasm for the Falange
than they had shown for the old JONS. José Antonio him-
self claimed no more than fifty thousand members on the
eve of the February, 1936, elections. The real number of
Falange militants was probably closer to five thousand.

What the Falangists lacked in membership they tried to
make up in activity. They seldom refused a street fight.
José Antonio himself was the target for a bomb which killed
two innocent bystanders in a crowd listening to him speak.
Another time a shower of bullets sprayed the automobile
in which he was riding. On the first occasion, he finished
his speech. On the second, he jumped out of his automobile,
caught the Socialist gunman, and handed him over to the


72 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


police. His courage served him well in the inevitable battle
over Falange leadership.

When José Antonio rose to position as top man, Ledesma
stepped down with poor grace. José Antonio made him
chief of the Falange syndicates; but differences between
them grew. Ledesma wanted big mass meetings in the
cities, but José Antonio, realizing the Falange could not hope
to draw the great crowds mobilized by the major parties,
concentrated on little meetings in the provinces, designed
to win a few Falangists in each area. Ledesma wanted José
Antonio to use his father’s Army connections to stir up a re-
volt, but young Primo knew that the Spanish Family dis-
trusted him and that the Army could not be hurried by any
outsider.

When the break came, Ledesma persuaded the two hun-
dred and fifty workers of the Falange syndical organization
to support him. He portrayed José Antonio as a rich young
man incapable of understanding a real workers’ movement.
He reckoned without his rival’s courage.

Alone and unarmed, José Antonio walked into the Falange
syndical headquarters, where Ledesma met with his tough
workers, most of whom were armed. Jeers and curses greet-
ed him, but he shouted them down.

“Perhaps I'll leave this place dead,” he said. “But I know
you well enough to believe that, before you kill this sefiorito,
you will listen to him.”

Dramatics carried the day. Less than a dozen workers re-
mained with Ledesma. Most of the old JONS groups fol-
lowed José Antonio. The young leader had satisfied them
that he was not a Family stooge, but a real revolutionary.
If more were needed to complete the break between José
Antonio and the Spanish Family, it came in 1935 when a
titled young aristocrat quit the Falange. In a public letter
this malcontent said the Falange was full of “undesirable


ie


A NEW MASK — THE FALANGE 73
Marxists.” José Antonio replied with another public letter.


The undesirable element which has infiltrated into the
Falange is not “a legion of illiterates from the Marxist
camp.” The former Marxists in the Falange have behaved
themselves perfectly. They brought with them that deep
sense of totalitarian discipline which is taught in Marxist
circles. The real evil was a group, not a legion, of cultivated
people of family who are beyond the reach of any political
ideal in the darkest social depths of human life. These ele-
ments, revolutionists for hire, are those who had to leave the
Falange, not to establish unity of thought, which has always
been maintained among us, but for hygienic purposes.


This was the last straw for most members of the oligarchy.
If the Marqués de Estella, José Antonio Primo de Rivera,
chose to draw certain elements into the Family sphere, that
was tolerable and even laudable. But in comparing such
riffraff favorably with the nice people of the Spanish Fam-
ily, he was betraying his class. Nobody was surprised when,
in 1936, the Family did not ask José Antonio to run again as
their candidate from Cadiz. José Antonio ran as an inde-
pendent simply to divide the Family’s vote and help to de-
feat the candidates of the oligarchy. He lost. His only sat-
istaction was that the Anarchists accepted the oligarchy’s
money, but voted, electing Left-Wing candidates.

It must be remembered, however, that the main enemies
of the revolutionary Falange were the Communist and So-
cialist Parties. For this reason the Falangists even planned
a revolt against the Republic in 1935 when the Left-Wing
Parties were gathering strength for the coming elections.

The plan for a revolt led by the Falange was born of the
sort of dramatic situation which Spaniards love. José An-
tonio was deeply involved in a love affair with a young lady
of wealth who had turned him down for another. Shortly
thereafter he summoned a secret meeting of the National


74 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Council of the Falange in the Parador de Gredos, a luxurious
inn high in the mountains west of Madrid. The Council
members arrived at the inn on the eve of the session to find
that the girl who had refused José Antonio was spending her
wedding night there. José Antonio sat silently with his Fa-
langists in the common dining hall close to the bridal table.

Early next morning the Falangists gathered in the pine
woods below the inn. There the leader, previously consid-
ered “too conservative” by many of his followers, suddenly
announced that he had been promised “ten thousand sol-
diers and a general.” He proposed a Falangist “march on
Madrid” which would start from the Portuguese border and
sweep into the capital on a wave of revolutionary enthusi-
asm.

The announcement was greeted with wild shouts of ap-
proval. Fortunately for the Falange, Raimundo Fernandez
Cuesta, older and more experienced than José Antonio’s
friends, succeeded in convincing the meeting that the plan
was suicidal. The country, in that summer of 1935, was
more Republican than ever. The Center-Right Government
feared a popular revolution led by the Left. Action by the
Falange at that time could only have strengthened the Left.

Reluctantly the National Council agreed on a compro-
mise. José Antonio, led to realize that a blasted romance
was not reason enough to blast the Falange too, was given
formal authority to “compromise the Falange in an insur-
rection, provided always that it be to gain revolutionary
and National Syndicalist ends.”

The following February, the people of Spain voted left-
of-center. The powerful combination of Rightist parties led
by Gil Robles was defeated and fell to pieces. The Falange
had not participated in the elections because “only twenty
per cent of our militants were of voting age,” but after Gil
Robles’ defeat thousands of his disgusted followers turned
to José Antonio.


A NEW MASK — THE FALANGE 75


The Falange claimed “seventy thousand new applica-
tions for membership” that spring. It is possible that there
were as many as ten thousand new members. It is probable
that, on the eve of the Army’s rebellion, the Falange had
some twenty thousand members scattered throughout Spain.
But it lost its leader.

On February 27, just after the elections, Republican po-
lice searched the Falange headquarters and found arms. On
March 14, 1936, José Antonio was arrested and jailed on a
minor charge. During the months preceding the Army’s up-
rising he was tried on three separate charges, all minor.
There undoubtedly would have been a fourth charge to
keep him in jail had it been necessary.

José Antonio, kept first in the Model Prison at Madrid
and then moved to a prison in Alicante, on the Mediter-
ranean, was a dead man when the Civil War began. He
knew it. Even before the Army revolted, he had lost con-
trol of the Falange. Most of his lieutenants were in jail and
all sorts of schemers were at work. José Antonio had lost
touch with day-to-day political developments. The inter-
view he gave to Jay Allen of the London News Chronicle,
in his Alicante prison cell proves it:


ALLEN: What would you think if I were to tell you that
I believe General Franco’s movement has left its channel,
whatever that may have been, and is now nothing more than
Old Spain fighting for lost privileges?

Josr Antonio: I know nothing about it, but I don’t be-
lieve it’s true. If it is, it is a mistake.

Auten: And if you were told that your boys are fighting
in the service of the landlords?

Jose Antonio: I'd say you were wrong. If all they are
doing is simply putting the clock back, then they are mis-
taken. They cannot subdue Spain. I defend something dif-
ferent, something positive.


16 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


This may have been true. But when José Antonio died
before a Republican firing squad in Alicante on the morn-
ing of November 20, 1936, the revolutionary Falange he
sponsored died with him.

Immediately before the Army uprising, provincial Falan-
gist leaders received so many conflicting instructions from
persons purporting to speak for José Antonio that anarchy
reigned. In many cities Falange leaders promised Army offi-
cers their help when the uprising began. When the time
came to deliver, few Falangists appeared. Some were
frightened; some were cautious; some did not support the
Army revolt because they knew that it was certainly not
designed to foster a national syndicalist revolution.

Then came the deluge of new Falangists. The Valladolid
Falange was that active Jesuit-sponsored group of fanatics
led by Onésimo Redondo. Onésimo himself was killed fight-
ing in the Alto de Leén Pass between Valladolid and Ma-
drid, but his branch of the Falange grew to enormous pro-
portions early in the Civil War. The newcomers were the
first of the millions who were to seek refuge within the
brotherhood of the yoke and arrows.

What happened was that Republicans, trapped in Na-
tionalist territory, had to find a place to hide. There was
little choice.

The Gil Robles Party had disintegrated after the elections.
Its leader chose to remain in Portugal to raise money for the
Spanish Family’s cause. The Monarchist Party, Renovacidn
Espanola, was a weak and exclusive society of the sons of
aristocrats. The Carlist organization, the Requetés, a band
of fighting fanatics, tolerated no ex-Republicans among their
number. There was no place to hide in the Family’s Spain
save in the Falange.

In six months the Falange became a headless monster of
a party. Many Anarchists joined it; Communists and So-


A NEW MASK — THE FALANGE 17


cialists tore up their membership cards and signed up with
the Falange for safety. Opportunists by the thousands
flocked to its banners seeking the graft that would certainly
come to the Falange as it grew. In February, 1937, I saw
how it grew in Malaga.

One lone Spanish column participated in the campaign
against Malaga. American, British, and French war corre-
spondents were supposed to stay with this column as it
drove east along the coast. Some of us eluded press offi-
cers to go inland. There we found columns of Italian troops
converging on the chaotic, undefended city. We saw the
dead lying before the walls of each village as we followed
the troops. There were the fortunate dead who had been
captured and shot quickly by the Italians. There were the
mangled bodies of Spaniards who had the misfortune to be
captured by Spaniards. Malaga fell almost without re-
sistance.

Inside the city, we caught glimpses of Italian and Span-
ish Army execution squads reducing Malaga’s hungry pop-
ulation. We were bundled back to the luxury of the Maria
Cristina Hotel in Algeciras, opposite Gibraltar. We were
taken to Malaga once again to see the “Victory Parade”
through the city’s forlorn streets and then we were advised
to go north to Salamanca again. I remained behind to see
how the Family would integrate Malaga with the new
régime. It was worth seeing.

A line of men in tattered clothes moved all day long into
the building on Malaga’s main square which now was Fa-
lange headquarters. They were applicants for membership.
Some still wore the tattered khaki of the Republican militia.
All lifted their hands in frightened Falangist salutes as I
passed them — all but one.

He pattered after me on bare feet. I turned up a side
Street and stepped into a doorway where he could whisper


78 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


to me safely. He was a moderate Socialist who had studied
at the Sorbonne in Paris.

“You are joining the Falange?” I asked

“Of course. It’s the Falange — or that.”

He nodded at the courthouse across the street. I went
there when we parted. Just inside the door stood a group
of women peeking into one of the chambers. I peeked too.

The day before, chaperoned by press officers, we had
listened to a “trial” staged for our benefit in that same court-
room. This “trial” was quite different. Three military judges
were giving death sentences for rebellion to as many pris-
oners as could be crowded into the courtroom at one time.
The prisoners were neither asked nor permitted to give
testimony. They stood helplessly under the muzzles of
Army guns and heard their fate. Then they shuffled out a
side door as the women beside me sobbed.

“Count them,” one of the “judges” told a court attendant.
Moments later, while a new batch was filing into the court-
room, we heard a rattle of machine-gun fire, a few screams,
the spats of revolvers giving the coup de grdce. The bodies
were stacked in the shade of a wall in the courthouse patio
until evening when the women could claim their dead.

So the Falange grew. By spring of 1937 it was obviously
the strongest of the parties in the Family's Spain. It still
lacked a head. Gangs of Falangists fought Carlists in the
streets of the northern cities. Army officers placed in com-
mand of Falange units died from shots in the back, and soon
the Army refused to accept Falangist volunteers for any-
thing except labor behind the lines. Falangists swaggered
through the streets of the Family's Spain talking openly of
“our Fascist State.” Something had to be done. It was done
in Salamanca, the strange capital of a strange régime, where
I watched the Family take over the Falange.

Every attic room in Salamanca was packed. Even the


A NEW MASK — THE FALANGE 79


near-by towns swarmed with newcomers who traveled daily
into Salamanca to tend to their own little intrigues. The
Bishop of Salamanca, Enrique Pla y Deniel, had lent his
palace to Francisco Franco for his military headquarters.
The lieutenant generals of the Army had elected Franco
their Generalissimo and the Family had made him the chief
of their Provisional Government. Where Franco was, that
was the fountainhead of influence.

By day the curio shops in the arcades of the lovely Plaza
Mayor did the best business they had ever known. German
soldiers and Italian officers bought cheap Spanish jewelry,
castanets, and stocks of brightly colored shawls sold at
twice the normal price. Postal clerks obligingly placed
Nationalist surcharges on Republican postage stamps for
German stamp collectors. Several houses were comman-
deered by the Condor Legion for prostitutes brought from
Germany and reserved for Germans. The Italians had to
content themselves with the professionals who swarmed to
Salamanca from every city in Western and Southern Spain.
The monasteries of Salamanca, usually more than ample for
the local monks and chance visitors, were packed with eccle-
siastics come to play politics for vacant posts. Shooting
feuds between Carlists and Falangists in the outskirts of
Salamanca kept the citizenry home after dark.

The Grand Hotel on the market square was the night-
time headquarters for politics, intrigue, and bedroom farces.
The Japanese Mission charged the Germans, who practically
ran the hotel, with stealing their papers. A Spanish colonel
caught an Italian captain in bed with his wife, shot the
Romeo, and enlisted the services of a German diplomat to
carry the body down the service stairs. On the way down,
they met an Italian agent who believed the pair had slain
his colleague for political reasons and raised a fearful row.

A bearded Romanian prince turned up with greetings to


80 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


the Falange from the Iron Guard. He also claimed the
bodies of two Romanian volunteers who had died gloriously
fighting for the New Spain, but no one could find the dead
heroes. Finally two bodies were produced and buried under
the Romanian flag, though everybody, save the Prince, knew
that the dead were Spanish Socialists executed early in the
war.

Evening meals in the hotel’s ornate dining room were
enlivened by the presence of General José Millan Astray,
founder of the Spanish Foreign Legion and a fit candidate
for any madhouse. When the spirit moved him he would
order everybody in the room, foreign diplomats included, to
rise and sing Legionario, the hymn of the Legion. He kept
time with his pistol, which sometimes went off. When he
felt like it, he would make everybody sing three other Span-
ish songs which the Family had declared were national an-
thems. On one memorable evening for almost an hour he
kept everyone standing with arm upraised while he led
them in the four Spanish anthems, the Nazi and Fascist
Party songs, and the German, Italian, and Portuguese na-
tional anthems.

In Salamanca, once a dignified university city, the district
bosses of the Falange met in the late summer of 1936.
Among them were men who had led no more than a score of
Falangists in July, but now were the leaders of tens of thou-
sands of new converts. Each was accompanied by body-
guards; each was ready to accept orders from José Antonio,
but from none other. A tough sailor and dockworker from
Santander, Manuel Hedilla, became the leader of a tempo-
rary National Council. Together, the Falangists sought out
Franco and the Germans, asking their help in obtaining
José Antonio’s release from his Republican prison.

Diplomacy failed. The Republicans were not interested
in exchanging José Antonio for any prisoners the oligarchy


A NEW MASK — THE FALANGE 81


held. Two Falangist leaders, carrying a million pesetas in
Republican bills no longer good in territory held by the oli-
garchy, went to Alicante on a German torpedo boat in Sep-
tember, 1936. They were smuggled ashore to the offices of
the German consulate. There they negotiated with an
Anarchist leader who had a plan for raiding the prison and
liberating José Antonio. Republican police learned of the
plot. The Falangists escaped aboard the German pocket
battleship, Graf Spee.

José Antonio was executed on November 20, 1936. The
oligarchy’s Government found it convenient to pretend that
they did not believe him dead. Not until November 16,
1938, two years later, did the Government issue a decree
admitting his death and authorizing Masses to be said for
him. Long before that time Ramodn Serrano Sujfier had
helped the Spanish Family capture the Falange and make
it their own.

Serrano Sufer was an ambitious schemer and opportunist.
He had attached himself to José Antonio in the Law School
of Madrid University when the elder Primo de Rivera was
Captain General of Barcelona. Serrano Sufier’s father was
a provincial lawyer, a comparative nobody, while José An-
tonio’s connections within the inner circles of the Family
gave him access to people of importance. After their grad-
uation, General Primo de Rivera, then dictator, gave Ser-
rano Sufier an appointment as State’s Attorney in Zaragoza.

The ambitious young lawyer spent his week-ends in
Oviedo. There he found Zita Polo y Martinez Valdes, the
handsome younger sister of Carmen, Franco’s wife, recov-
ering from a blasted romance with an Army officer. Zita’s
family was wealthy; the sisters were inseparable; Franco
then was the youngest general in the Spanish Army with a
promising career before him. Serrano Suiier, a handsome
man whose hair was prematurely white, wooed Zita and


82 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


won her. Through Zita he met Gil Robles and, in 1934,
was elected to the Cortes as the Gil Robles candidate from
Zaragoza.

Serrano Suiier planned his career well. The university
gave him an enchufe or contact with the dictator's son; mar-
riage won him wealth and social position in addition to
another contact with the Army; Gil Robles gave him con-
tacts with the hierarchy of the clergy. To prepare for the
possibility that the Republic might be successful, Serrano
Sufer also became a member of the Atenéo, intellectual
headquarters of the liberal Republicans.

Gil Robles, impressed by Serrano Sufier’s contacts with
university life, made him the leader of the youth movement
of the CEDA. It was typical of Serrano Suiier that even
while his young followers were fighting Falangists in the
streets of Madrid their leader carefully maintained his con-
tact with José Antonio, frequently hinting that he would
eventually take the whole CEDA youth organization into
the Falange. This he did only when the elections of Febru-
ary, 1936, cost him his seat in the Cortes and wrecked Gil
Robles’ organization. Even then Serrano Suiier himself did
not join the Falange.

After the elections, José Antonio went to jail and Franco
was exiled to the Canaries. During that period Serrano
Sufier occasionally visited José Antonio in prison as his per-
sonal Jawyer and wrote his brother-in-law long letters filled
with Madrid gossip. If one could believe a biography which
Serrano Surier had one of his aides write for him under the
revealing title of “Serrano Sufier in the Falange,” the law-
yer was the go-between for Franco and José Antonio. It is
difficult to accept this. None of José Antonio’s voluminous
writings suggest such a connection, while Franco appar-
ently was not sufficiently close to his brother-in-law to warn
him of the date of the Army’s uprising.


A NEW MASK — THE FALANGE 83


Serrano Sufier was trapped in Madrid as the Army re-
belled. Republican police arrested him, not as a member of
the Falange, which indeed he was not, but as a follower of
Gil Robles. Again the young lawyer's marriage served him
well. The lovely Zita knew Belarmino Tomas, a Socialist
leader in Asturias. Thanks to Zita’s intervention, Serrano
Sufier was transferred from prison to a private hospital at
Tomas’ request. From the hospital he escaped to France
and thence went directly to Salamanca to see his brother-
in-law.

The political situation in the oligarchy’s Spain was ideal
for a man of Serrano Sufier’s background and love of in-
trigue. It was clear, early in 1937, that only one of the civil-
ian groups in Family territory had any political future.

The Carlists, who contributed nearly fifty thousand su-
perb fighters to the Army, were exhausting themselves in
war. Their Pretender was a childless octogenarian, the last
of his line. His death would leave the Carlists divided among
nine possible successors. Chief among these successors was
Juan, the son and heir of Alfonso XIII, but there was a tiny
faction of Carlists who followed some sort of crab-grass
genealogy to arrive at the conclusion that King Carol of
Romania should sit on the throne of Spain.

The Alfonso XIII Monarchists were a battered lot of do-
nothings who were badly divided. Some wanted Alfonso;
some wanted Juan. Some wanted an absolute monarchy;
others wanted a constitutional monarchy. Few of them
cared enough for the Crown to fight for it. All of them were
quite willing to accept any régime in which the oligarchy
would be supreme.

The Falange alone had the masses. Its leadership was
divided; its members still talked of José Antonio as El Au-
sente — “The Absent One”; but there were not enough dark
blue shirts in Spain to provide the uniforms for its new


—EEE SS


84 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


members. Serrano Sufier, who knew the Falange well, con-
vinced the leaders of the oligarchy that it should be taken
over as their instrument of government. Then he went to
work.

Hedilla, temporary leader of the Falange, was not bril-
liant; in fact he was virtually illiterate. When I once asked
him to explain a point in the Falange program he replied:
“I do not bother with such things; I am a man of action!”
Some of the other district leaders of the Falange were also
“men of action.” It was easy enough for Serrano Suiier,
working carefully behind the scenes, to set one faction off
against another.

Everyone in the Grand Hotel during the spring of 1937
knew of the contest for leadership within the Falange. The
chambermaid who cleaned my room brought me daily re-
ports of developments which lacked few of the details given
me by the Falangist leaders themselves. Apparently every-
one save Hedilla and the Falangist leaders knew that Ser-
rano Sufier was pulling the strings.

Finally, one faction of the Falange, composed mainly of
men who wanted to see José Antonio's idea of revolution
triumph, forced Hedilla out. Serrano Sufier gave Hedilla
the idea that the Army would like to see him wipe out his
opposition. Hedilla mobilized several hundred Falangists
and sent them to storm the barracks held by the opposi-
tion faction on the outskirts of Salamanca. Karl von Hart-
man, a Finnish soldier of fortune working for Hedilla, came
to my room in the Grand Hotel late in the night of April
17, 1987, to tell me what had happened.

“Our crowd,” he said, “was tossing hand grenades in the
windows, but the others were making things pretty hot with
machine-gun fire. Then we heard artillery fire and shells
began falling around us. We thought the Army was with
the others, for none of us had artillery. We began waving


A NEW MASK — THE FALANGE 85


white handkerchiefs. Then we saw that the others in the
barracks were waving their handkerchiefs too. The Army
came down from the hills and arrested the whole lot of us,
both our boys and the men in the barracks.”

The struggle for the Falange leadership was over, but
Serrano Suiier still toyed with Hedilla. He let Hedilla call
another meeting of the Falange National Council. It was a
dramatic affair. The district bosses sat at a table facing an
open coffin in which one of their number, killed in the fight-
ing, lay flanked by crucifixes and flickering candles. This
meeting, the last session of the directorate of Falange Es-
pantiola y de las Juntas de Ofensiva Nacional-Sindicalista,
ended abruptly when a soldier appeared with a message
from the Army command. It told them to go home and wait
for Franco to speak to the nation by radio on Sunday, the
next day.

What they heard on April 19, 1937, was a speech by
Franco introducing a decree written by Serrano Sufier. The
speech was vague, but the decree was thorough.

The Falange and the Carlists were combined into a single
State party. Another word was added to the Falange’s
enormous name to cover the Carlist “Traditionalists.” The
new party became Falange Espariola y Tradicionalista y de
las Juntas de Ofensiva Nacional-Sindicalista. Spaniards still
called it simply “the Falange,” but it was quite a different
organization from José Antonio’s Falange. All other polit-
ical parties were banned.

The leader of the new Falange was to be the Chief of
State, Franco, with the title of “Caudillo.” This was a title
new to the Falange, a Spanish equivalent of the word
“Fuehrer.” José Antonio, who disliked the Germans, had
been called only Jefe, the equivalent of “Chief.”

The real manager of the new State party was to be the
boss of its Junta Politica, or board of directors. The deluded


86 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Hedilla still thought this job was reserved for him, but when
he claimed it he was arrested with fifty-five other Falangists.
Most of them were not heard from again until 1942 when
they were released with the understanding that they would
stay out of politics. Hedilla today is a dockworker in San-
tander, no longer a Falangist. Few people in Salamanca
were surprised to learn that Serrano Suiier, virtually un-
known to Falangists a month previously, was head of the
Junta Politica.

The old National Council of the Falange, through which
José Antonio had consulted his aides, was maintained as a
rubber-stamp “advisory” body. Its first fifty members were
appointed by Franco. They met for the first time on Decem-
ber 2, 1937, in the monastery de las Huelgas in Burgos.
Falangist “Old Shirts,” members of the Falange before the
Civil War began, were a helpless minority. The majority
were members of the Spanish Family — noblemen, church-
men, big businessmen, and professional soldiers. Cardinal
Goma, then Primate of Spain, administered the oath of the
new Office of “Caudillo” to Franco. The German and Italian
Ambassadors, pleased to see Spain following the path of the
Nazis and the Fascists, were guests of honor.

Thus was born the new Falange. Its program, its symbols
and its organization were the same as those of the revolu-
tionary Falange of José Antonio. In the old Falange were
men who, like José Antonio, believed that Spain needed a
revolution to attain land reform, better wages for its work-
ers, and a more equitable distribution of wealth. They pro-
posed that this revolution be directed by a small party of
élite capable of imposing authority, but their ends were
revolutionary, though totalitarian. The new Falange was
neither revolutionary, nor Nazi, nor Fascist, nor anything
save a mask to be worn by the Spanish Family. After April,
1937, everything done by the Falange was directed and


A NEW MASK — THE FALANGE


87
supported by the oligarchy of noblemen, churchmen, finan-
ciers, and soldiers who ran Spain. After April, 1937, the


program of the revolutionary Falange was carried out — in
the Spanish Family's way.


|


5


A PROGRAM BECOMES A POGROM


THE FAMILY approved the program which Ramiro Ledesma
drew up for the revolutionary Falange without a single im-
portant change. It became the program of the Spanish
State. The Family, indeed, was very glad to have it. None
of them would think of a better one. It suited their pur-
poses admirably.

The Falange “Old Shirts” were more than pleased. Didn't
the program justify their existence? Now they could accept
with a clear conscience the well-paid jobs the Family offered
them. Both Ledesma and José Antonio were dead. No one
remained to affirm that the original aim of the Falange was
to destroy the Family, not to help it. Even José Antonio’s
pious sister, Pilar Primo de Rivera, and his fun-loving
brother, Miguel Primo de Rivera, supported the new Fa-
lange. Pilar became the head of its women’s auxiliary.
Miguel was first a provincial governor, then Minister of
Agriculture.

The Falange program also pleased the Germans and the
Italians. Spain now was in line with the new totalitarian
Europe. The Germans would have preferred to deal with
someone other than Serrano Sufier, whom they knew to be
more pro-Italian than pro-German. He soon proved, how-
ever, that he was completely co-operative. Eventually the
German Ambassador, General Faupel, had to admit that

88


A PROGRAM BECOMES A POGROM 89


his own candidate for Falange leadership, General José
Moscardo, hero of the siege of the Alcazar of Toledo, was
too stupid for the job.

The Family itself was delighted with the new arrange-
ment. Members of the oligarchy who read the Falange pro-
gram for the first time, expressed concern about some of the
outwardly “revolutionary” aspects. They were reassured that
noblemen, churchmen, big businessmen, and soldiers of the
oligarchy dominated the Junta Politica and the National
Council of the Falange. The Family owned the Falange;
they would determine how its program was to be executed.

The last point of the twenty-seven-point program out-
lawed alliances in the Falange’s “conquest of the State.”
Since the Falange now was allied with the oligarchy, this
point was dropped. The rest of the program, which Le-
desma had written and José Antonio had approved, was
adopted word for word.

Never has there been a more perfect example of a revo-
lutionary program twisted to serve reactionaries. “The
twenty-six points” remain the keystone of the Family’s “New
Spain.”

Here is the program.

The Twenty-Six Points of Falange Espajola y
Tradicionalista y de las J.O.N.S.
Nation, Unity, Empire
(1) We believe in the supreme reality of Spain. To
strengthen it, raise it up and make it great is the urgent, col-
lective task of all Spaniards. The interests of individuals,


groups and classes must necessarily be subjugated to this
end.


Substitute the word “oligarchy” for the word “Spain,” and
this is an accurate summary of the aims of the régime which
has ruled Spain since the Civil War.


90 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


(2) Spain is a unit of destiny within the universe. All
conspiracy against its unity is to be repelled. All separatism
is a crime we will not pardon.

The existing Constitution, in so far as it incites to disunity,
attacks Spain's unity of destiny. For that reason we demand
its violent destruction.


On these points, José Antonio and the Spanish Family
agreed. Both were opposed to Catalan and Basque separ-
atism. Both were determined to have a united Spain.

Separatism is, in fact, little more than a protest against
bad management in Castile. The Basques have their own
language, literature, and customs, completely different from
the Spanish. Catalans speak a different language; they are
closer to the Spaniard than to the Frenchman or the Italian.
Both Catalan and Basque are efficient and industrious, both
are weary of paying tribute to Castile and getting nothing
but bad government in return. Catalonia, however, is de-
pendent on Spain’s markets for her factories. The Basque
provinces, divided between Spain and France, have given
Spain some of her finest writers, artists, and businessmen.

Demands for autonomy could easily be satisfied by just
taxation and freedom for local government, customs, and
language, but that is not the Family’s way. When the Civil
War ended, the Basque and Catalan languages were banned.
Navarre and Alava, Carlist provinces which supported the
oligarchy, were given regional rights, but Basque and Cat-
alan autonomy was crushed.


(8) We desire Empire. We contend that the historic ful-
filment of Spain is Empire. We ask a pre-eminent place in
Europe for Spain. We will tolerate neither international
isolation nor foreign intervention.

We desire the unification of culture, economic interests,
and power with the countries of Hispanic-America. Spain
claims that her position as the spiritual axis of the Hispanic


A PROGRAM BECOMES A POGROM 91


world justifies a pre-eminent position in universal enter-
prises.


The oligarchy naturally desired empire. The Moorish
remnant of Spain’s empire provided the manpower for the
Family’s conquest of Spain. The oligarchy, however, owed
its victory principally to the intervention of the foreign pow-
ers which enabled them to take their troops from Africa
across the Strait to the mainland.

Since the defeat of Germany, members of the oligarchy
protest that they do not desire to intervene in the Spanish
Americas economically or politically. During the war, how-
ever, they deliberately gave the Germans full control of
their policy of Hispanidad in the hope that a German vic-
tory would make the oligarchy’s Spain the overseer of the
Spanish Americas.


(4) Our armed forces — on land, on sea, and in the air —
must be as capable and numerous as may be necessary to
secure Spain's rightful world leadership and complete inde-
pendence. We will restore to the land, sea, and air armies
all the dignity which they deserve, and we will see to it that
a military sense of life, cast in their image, will permeate
all Spanish activities.


After the Civil War, the Army was less concerned about
seeking “world leadership” than about keeping Spain under
the oligarchy’s thumb. Militarism goes hand in hand with
any régime dominated by the Family. Children in Spain
now are taught that might is right and that right is might.
The Army alone gets nearly half of the State budget; op-
portunities for graft within the Army are enormous.


(5) Spain will again seek its glory and wealth on the sea
lanes. Spain aspires to be a great maritime power, both to
protect her from danger and to encourage her commerce.

We demand equality for the Motherland in air fleets and
air routes.


92 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


The Navy and Air Ministries have their share of privilege.
The new Air Ministry headquarters on the outskirts of Ma-
drid has more floor space than all the primary schools in
the capital, but the Air Army has less than one hundred
planes fit to take the air. The magnificent Naval Academy,
recently completed at Marin in Galicia, provides more offi-
cers than Spain would need for a fleet ten times its present
size. Naval officers who have never been to sea and air-
men who have never flown rise swiftly in rank, for all are
members of the Family. Admirals and air force generals
can be counted by the score.


State, Individual, Liberty

(6) Our state will be a totalitarian instrument in the serv-
ice of the integrity of the Motherland. All Spaniards will
participate in it through their family, municipal, and syndi-
cal functions. No one will participate through political
parties. The system of political parties with all its conse-
quences — inorganic suffrage, representation by bands fight-
ing each other, and parliaments of the known type — will be
relentlessly abolished.


The beauty of the Falange as an instrument for Family
government is that it is not a political party, but a “totak-
tarian instrument.” The citizen can participate in govern-
ment only through the Falange. Inside the Falange jobs are
carefully earmarked for those who are friends of the oli-
garchy.


(7) Human dignity, the integrity of man and his liberty
are eternal and intangible values.

But he is only truly free who forms part of a strong and
free nation.

No one has the right to use his liberty against the union,
the strength, and the liberty of the Motherland. Rigorous
discipline will prevent all attempt to poison and disunite
Spaniards or to move them against the destiny of the
Motherland.


A PROGRAM BECOMES A POGROM 93


Here is the legal excuse, if the Family’s “law” can be
given that name, for the greatest repression Spain has
known since the days of the Inquisition. Indeed the inquis-
itors of the Middle Ages might well turn green with envy
at the bloody record of their descendants. Both in method
and in sheer number of victims the Family inquisitors of the
oligarchy from 1936 to the present day have surpassed the
work of the founding fathers.

Torquemada knew not the wonders of electricity nor the
excruciating pain it could give when applied to the tender-
est portions of a naked body bound to steel springs. Such
refined tortures have been used in the prisons of the Puerta
del Sol in Madrid. Torquemada also would have appreci-
ated the agonies of the human body when the digestive
system is filled with liquid cement. That is the way prison-
ers of the Falange died in Valencia in 1939.

The Chief Inquisitor of Spain’s “Golden Century” was no
student of economics. He might not have understood the
economic repression which for many years forced thousands
of the Family’s enemies to die in the midst of plenty. He
would, however, have appreciated the story of the man who
survived the concentration camp of Albatera-Catral.

This camp was located in a dried salt marsh below sea
level, twenty-five miles from Alicante. Toward the end of
the war those totalitarian rivals of the Family, the Com-
munists, had interned four hundred Fascists in that place
after their trial and conviction for sabotaging the Republic’s
war effort. To that place the Family sent twenty-five thou-
sand men of Republican Spain who had surrendered their
arms at Alicante. They arrived in closed cattlecars on the
night of April 8, 1989. One of them has described his expe-
riences in these terms:


Suddenly the door slid open. We stumbled out into the
blinding daylight. A lieutenant, a sergeant, and two soldiers


———


THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


appeared at our car. They seized five men from among our
number, took them fifty meters away, and shot them. The
lieutenant returned.

“Reds! He who tries to escape now knows what awaits
him.”

Behind the barbed wire they beat us each day until they
were tired. There was no water and our thirst under the
burning sun was horrible.

On the second day people came to look us over. They
were wealthy farmers and businessmen, aristocrats and
priests, men and women. Each day a dozen times between
sundown and sunset we would stand in long lines as these
blood-seekers inspected us.

They came from miles away, sometimes from the farthest
corners of Spain. All of them said they were seeking those
who had killed their relatives. Almost all had visited many
other camps before they reached ours. None ever left our
camp empty-handed, for if they failed to recognize a face,
they would pick one or two or ten of us as substitutes.

When they decided on their victim, they would call a
guard to hold the man. Then they would wait until the
victim was bound hand and foot. Then some would grind
lighted cigarettes into his flesh and beat him. They would
go to the salt flats beyond the camp to see their victims shot.

A few bolted into the machine guns rather than wait. It
was better to die that way. But seven thousand of us were
killed at the orders of the visitors. Three thousand died in
other ways. Within the first two months our twenty-five
thousand had dwindled to fifteen thousand, and still no-
body had bothered to take our names.

One day the Moors replaced our Falangist guards. The
officers ordered them to fire into our barracks without warn-
ing one afternoon to show how hard they were. Fourteen
of us were killed and forty wounded. Almost all the wound-
ed died, for there were no doctors and no medicine.

We called the place of punishment “the well of death.”
It was a seepage well six feet wide and nine feet deep,


A PROGRAM BECOMES A POGROM 95


with perhaps three feet of salt water in the bottom. They
would beat us and throw us in and put a wooden cover,
weighted with stones, over the mouth of the well. Few sur-
vived “the well of death.”

For offenses such as being late at assembly they would
put us in the place we called “the griddle.” It was a cage
about five meters square in an open field behind barbed
wire. Nobody was allowed to approach the man inside. He
would lie there on the salt earth under the sun for days
without food or water, begging the guard to shoot him.

Later, when things were organized, they made us watch
the executions. If they had but known how it strengthened
our will to hear those dying men cry “Viva la Reptblic!”
just before the shots were fired, they would have kept exe-
cutions secret. But they were stupid. They wanted us to
make a break so that they could mow us down with machine
guns. After each execution the priest would tell us of the
Government’s great mercy... .


It is terrible, but true, that the men who wrote in honesty
such things as these, things confirmed by fellow prisoners
and even by guards at the camp, cannot yet be named. The
oligarchy still rules Spain.

When the war was over, the Family had a golden oppor-
tunity to win the support of the people they had conquered.
The Spanish people were exhausted and their hates were
spent. They had certainly suffered far more than the Fam-
ily had suffered. They expected the whip, but they hoped

| beyond hope for the mercy the Family promised as the war
drew to an end. This opportunity the Family deliberately
scorned.

The executions began in 1936 on the first day of the rising
in Africa. I met a Spanish officer in Tangier who told how
he led a squad of soldiers around Ceuta on the night of July
19, 19386, “avenging my brother.” His brother, a Regular
Army officer, had been killed in action fighting Leftists in


Nee a ee
oo ———


96 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Asturias in 1934. My officer obtained his revenge by shoot-
ing the members of an Asturian club in Ceuta. Were they
the men who had killed his brother? No; few of them had
been to Asturias in years. They were all just “Reds with
blood on their hands.”

From Ceuta in 1936 to Albatera in 1939, the wartime ex-
ecutions continued. Sometimes thousands died, as at Bada-
joz and Valladolid in 1936. Sometimes there were only hun-
dreds shot as in Talavera la Real and Talavera de la Reina
in 1987. How many died in the Spanish War and after?

Those killed in action or under the bombs probably did
not exceed 400,000. General Bermudez de Castro, the Army
spokesman, set the Family’s casualties at 77,000 killed and
750,000 wounded. Republican casualties in action were
more than four times as great, for they were the amateur
soldiers who lost the war.

Franco himself, as the war ended, estimated the total
“assassinated by the Reds” at 500,000, but even the Family
was quick to admit that this was excessive. The Monarchist
ABC, a Family newspaper, set the number executed “by the
Reds” at 100,000 “plus 13 bishops, 5235 priests, and 2669
nuns.” It is probable that 75,000 would cover all persons
killed with or without trial in Republican territory. This
estimate includes the thousands of Socialists, Communists,
Anarchists, and Republicans killed fighting each other in the
final civil wars within the civil war which so weakened the
Republicans.

The usual proportion of “reprisal” executions on the Fam-
ily side of Spain was ten to one. There were plenty of exe-
cutions which were not reprisals. I consider an estimate of
four hundred thousand extremely low to cover those exe-
cuted in territory governed by the oligarchy during the Civil
War. An Army officer who agreed with me that this figure


A PROGRAM BECOMES A POGROM 97


was too low seemed surprised when I asked why so many
“Reds” were executed.

“It was natural,” he said. “There were so many Reds.”

For those who died nameless, like the men of Albatera
after the war was over, one hundred thousand would be a
conservative figure indeed. These vengeance killings of men
identified only as “Reds” went on until 1941, not only in
Albatera, but in all the crowded prisons and concentration
camps of Spain. In Andalucia the sons of ranchers held
week-end “vengeance” parties in the pitifully poor rural vil-
lages which had unwisely voted for the Republic in 1936.
No one will ever know how many thousands died in such
Family parties. Whole families, whole villages, were wiped
out. The landowners finally complained that their labor
supply was being seriously endangered.

In June, 1944, the Ministry of Justice “revised” its rec-
ords. “Revision,” in this case, meant destruction. At that
time, however, figures on the number of identified persons
who had been executed or had “died in prison” from April,
1939, to the end of June, 1944, were made available to sev-
eral officials. One of these told me privately that there were
“about 190,000.” Another gave me a figure on a scrap of
paper — 192,684!

The Ministry of Justice had nothing to do with recording
the executions or deaths of prisoners held by the Falange,
the Ministry of the Interior, or the Army, Navy, and Air
Army. All of these also have the power of life and death.

No man can give an accurate count of the Spaniards
killed in the Civil War nor can any man give the exact num-
ber of those executed since the war. I found no Spaniard in
Spain whose word I trusted, however, who would deny that
many more Spaniards had been executed after the war than
had died in action during it. My estimates would run some-


thing like this:


98 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Killed in action on both sides .......0.....00.00..5 400,000
Executed by the Left during the war .............. 75,000
Executed by the oligarchy during the war. ....... 400,000
Post-war executions, informal ...........0.000.... 0... 100,000
Post-war executions, formal ....................:0008 400,000

Total dead to 1947 oo... ccccceteeseeeteeeee 1,375,000


Estimates like these make it easier to understand why
there is so much hate in Spain. There are millions of Span-
iards who understand the feeling which prompted the pro-
prietor of a filling station I knew to paste another picture
behind the portrait of Franco which is displayed by law in
all Spanish business places. The second picture, clipped
from a foreign newspaper, showed the body of Benito Mus-
solini swinging crazily upside down from the roof of an
Italian filling station. This photograph was neatly labeled
with a businesslike phrase:

“We guarantee service!”


(8) The National-Syndicalist State will permit all private
initiative compatible with the collective interests and will
even protect and stimulate beneficial private initiative.


Juan March is an old man now, but he was never more
successful than in these last years of his life. World War II
made him one of the world’s richest men. He is unique in
that he fought and bought his way into the Family. Once
within the mystic circle, he became more of a Family man
than even the Urquijo banking family or the Duke of Alba
himself.

The beak-nosed, egg-headed peasant’s son taught himself
to read and write when an errand boy in a merchant’s office
at Palma de Mallorca. He quit his job to become a
smuggler.

At first, March had only a share in a little schooner that
smuggled tobacco to Spain from Morocco. Soon he owned


A PROGRAM BECOMES A POGROM 99


the schooner and bought a dozen others. Next, he bought
his own cigarette factory in Morocco. By 1914, he owned
such a large fleet in the Mediterranean that he could afford
to let some of his ships engage in nothing but legal business.
He bought into many businesses in Spain, in Africa, and
abroad. He was very rich when he took his first big gamble.
He bet everything he had that the British would win the
First World War. He took their credit, lent them his ships,
smuggled their goods, worked night and day for them — all
for a price. By 1918 he was the richest man in Spain, for
most of the other members of the Family had bet on the
Germans,

March became so rich that, when Dictator Miguel Primo
de Rivera refused him the Moroccan tobacco monopoly, he
flooded the zone with his own smuggled cigarettes, under-
selling the State until Primo surrendered. Today, he still has
the Moroccan tobacco monopoly.

The shrewd Socialist leader, Indalecio Prieto, once said:
“Break March or he will break the Republic.” The Republic
sent March to jail for bribery after a trial in the Cortes, of
which he was a member. One day, both March and the
warden of his prison appeared in Gibraltar. The warden
was rich and March was free.

The Republic seized some of his property during the Civil
War, but a grateful oligarchy gave it all back again. March
lent the Family money in the Civil War when they badly
needed it. When the war ended, Franco winked at March’s
deals even when a company controlled by March hijacked a
whole trainload full of petroleum from Romania, sent to oil-
thirsty Spain by the Germans.

March also did well for himself in World War II. He
made money from both sides, of course, but he again bet
most of his fortune on a British victory. Now he is probably
the richest man in Europe.


100 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Somebody once asked March what he liked to do better
than make money.

“Make money make money,” was his reply.

There is only one March in Spain. No country has room
for more than one like him, but there are many other great
Spanish fortunes. All of them, of course, are Family for-
tunes. All of them, naturally, are “compatible with the col-
lective interest” of Family government.


Economy, Labor, Class Struggle


(9) We conceive of Spain in the economic field as a
gigantic syndicate of producers. We will organize Spanish
Society corporatively through a system of vertical syndicates
through the branches of production in the service of national
economic integrity.

Spanish society now is so organized. The Falange syn-
dicates, though the Falange itself may be dissolved, will still
control a network of official graft which makes even the
graft of Italian Fascism look like very small potatoes.

As the first European country to have done with war,
Spain was also the first to develop the black market. In
Spain it is called estraperlo. The term comes from the
names of Straus and Perlo, two foreigners who wanted a
gambling concession in San Sebastian and gave Republican
officials gold watches to get it. When the scandal was un-
covered, estraperlo became the accepted term for Govern-
ment graft.

When the black market came into being at the War's end,
Spaniards realistically called it estraperlo, recognizing that
it could not exist without official graft in the Falange syn-
dicates which control all trade and distribution. Estraperlo
is illegal for the masses, but quite legal for the wealthy. Any
Government official will tell anyone with money, foreigner
or Spaniard, where to get what he wants estraperlo, whether


A PROGRAM BECOMES A POGROM 101


it be a sack of sugar or a thousand tons of olive oil for ex-
port. Even the ultra-conservative Swiss Government had to
buy olive oil for its people in Spain estraperlo.


(10) We repudiate the capitalist system, which ignores
the popular necessities, dehumanizes private property, and
agglomerates the workers into formless masses, encouraging
misery and desperation. Our spiritual and national convic-
tions also repudiate Marxism. We will determine the posi-
tion of the working classes, today led astray by Marxism, by
requiring their direct participation in the great task of the
National State.

Since the Family won the war, the workers of Spain have
been allowed to “participate” in two ways only — mass
demonstrations and “selections.”

Whenever the Family régime decided a demonstration of
popular enthusiasm was in order, the workers’ syndicates
were mobilized. Through the public press the syndicated
workers — which means all workers — were informed that
their presence was required at this or that demonstration.
Workers who did not turn up lost their ration cards and per-
haps their jobs as well.

In the summer of 1945, the syndicated workers of Madrid
were mobilized to appear in a “spontaneous” demonstration
before the royal palace — then called the “national palace.”
The day was hot. There was no shade for the seventy thou-
sand men who stood patiently in the huge square. They
waited for two hours before E] Caudillo appeared on his
balcony and the Falangists began the applause. Franco pro-
claimed that he was conscious of his great responsibilities to
the nation and worked “day and night for its welfare.”

As he paused for breath, a voice boomed out from the
crowd:

“But at least you can sit down!”

A titter of laughter spread. Franco designated the spot


102 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


from which the interruption had come and then proceeded
with his speech. Armed guards closed in with submachine
guns at the ready. Everyone pretended to ignore the scuffle
at the side of the square where police were dragging off
several dozen men. Ten were sent to a concentration camp
for terms of several months and two were not heard from
again.

The “selections,” at which the workers’ presence is also
required, are now called “elections.” One “candidate” to
each minor syndical post is appointed by the Government.
Each worker is then given a ballot to mark. If there is a
choice between Government candidates, which is rarely the
case, it is usually to determine which of them shall be the
local chairman. Even in Soviet Russia a worker can indicate
disapproval of the régime by leaving his ballot blank, but in
Spain the press announced that “a blank ballot shall be con-
sidered a vote for the candidate polling the greatest num-
ber of votes.”

(11) The National Syndicalist State will not cruelly pre-
vent the economic struggles between men, nor will it watch
impassively the domination of the weakest class by the
strongest. Our régime will make the struggle of classes com-
pletely impossible, for all those who co-operate in produc-
tion will constitute within it a single organic unit. We cen-
sure and will impede at all costs the abuses of one partial
interest against another and we also repudiate anarchy in
the field of labor.


In the Family’s Spain the struggle of the classes is indeed
literally impossible. The Falange sees to it that the Family’s
rule is never challenged.

(12) The first duty of wealth —and so our State affirms
—is to improve the conditions of those who constitute the
people. It is not tolerable that enormous masses live miser-
ably while a few enjoy all luxuries.


A PROGRAM BECOMES A POGROM 103


In the summer of 1941, my wife and I frequently dined
in the gardens of the Ritz. It was the nearest place to my
office in Madrid where one could get a meal after ten in the
evening. Legally restaurants are closed at that time.

That summer, butter, meat, and sweets could be had only
on the black market. The officially rationed bread was yel-
low and filled with bits of straw. Men were dying of hunger
throughout the country. The American Red Cross was
trying to distribute several million dollars’ worth of food to
the starving. But that summer at the Ritz we could eat
whatever we desired from the black market. The dining
tables in the garden were packed. Cabinet Ministers dined
there frequently. Every night Serrano Sufier dined at his
accustomed table, sometimes alone, sometimes with his wife
or his mistresses. He was served black-market food; he
bought black-market American cigarettes at three dollars a
pack. When we told our friends of the Spanish Family that
such lawbreaking by lawmakers seemed strange to us, we
were told time and again:

“But the law is for the masses, not for decent people. Life
would be impossible here if we were expected to obey the
laws.”


(13) The State will recognize private property as the
licit means for the accomplishment of individual, family,
and social ends, and will protect it against the abuses of big
financial interests, speculators, and moneylenders.


The private property owned by the oligarchy was well
respected. The private property of Spaniards who were
known to have voted Republican before the Civil War was
subject to confiscation, unless it was protected by a member
of the oligarchy. Property which belonged to “Reds” was
redistributed. Some went to the State, but most became the
private property of members of the oligarchy.


104 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


(14) We will defend the tendency toward the national-
ization of banking services, and, through the Corporations
[State Syndicates], the great public services.


Banking services have not been nationalized. Too many
Family stockholders objected. Most railroad companies
were nationalized, but only after Family financiers were
given ample warning to unload stock. No municipal street-
car lines were nationalized, for they were owned either by
Family bankers or by British, French, and Belgian interests
represented by Family bankers.


(15) All Spaniards have the right to work. Public agencies
will necessarily sustain those who are forcibly unemployed.
While the new total structure is being built, we will main-
tain and intensify all the advantages to the worker offered
by the existing social laws.


The revolutionary Falangists who wrote this program
here pay their respects to the social legislation of the Re-
public. The Family Falange was bound by no such scruples.
Little of the Republican social legislation was retained. The
new régime wrote its own laws which, on paper, sounded
almost as good as the Republican laws, but never were put
into practice.

No non-Falangist worker, for example, would ever admit
to being unemployed. Those who were stupid enough to
do so were incorporated into labor battalions and sent to
live in camps far from their families. During World War IJ,
many who registered as unemployed were sent to Germany
to work.


(16) It is the duty of all healthy Spaniards to work. The
National Syndicalist State will not give the least considera-
tion to those who do nothing and aspire to live as guests at
the costs of the efforts of others.


A PROGRAM BECOMES A POGROM 105


This portion of the revolutionary Falange’s program was
aimed specifically at the Family and its indolent, aristocratic
drones. These same drones used this portion of the State
program to demand a dawn-to-dark work day from their
tenant farmers and a ten-hour day of underground work
from their miners. The sons of the oligarchy work only if
they feel so inclined, which is rare.


Land


(17) The standard of living in the country — Spain's per-
manent living space — must be raised at all cost. To that
end we undertake to execute the economic and social reform
of agriculture without delay.


According to the Family’s own official statistics, the aver-
age farm laborer in Spain gets slightly over sixty cents a
day. Most Spanish farm labor is seasonal, owing to special-
ization on the big estates which hire such labor. The rest of
the year the farm laborer gets nothing.


(18) We will enrich agricultural production by the fol-
lowing methods:

Assuring a minimum wage to all workers of the soil;

Requiring that a great part of the wealth now absorbed
by the city in payment for intellectual and commercial serv-
ices be returned to the countryside to equip it properly;

Organizing a true national farm credit, which, by lending
money to the field worker at a low interest with the guar-
antee of his possessions and his crops, will redeem him from
usury and the political bosses.

Spreading the teaching of agriculture and livestock breed-
ing;

Detaas the use of lands with a view to their maxi-
mum production and the market possibilities;

Reorganizing the land-lease policy as the protector of
agriculture and cattle raising;

Speeding up hydraulic works and reorganizing the units


106 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


of cultivation to eliminate all wasted land on big estates, as
well as on uneconomical small holdings, to increase the
yield.


The farm laborer is bound to the land by old debts to his
landlord, debts which his “minimum wage” never enables
him to pay. Such debtors cannot hope for State loans.
These are usually reserved for Falangist farmers or for the
farm laborers on big estates, whose Family owners would
like their Government to finance the sale of their land.

No effort has been made to strike at the heart of the land
problem. There are two sides to the problem — the areas of
small holdings and long leases as in Galicia, where fam-
ilies try to earn a living on tiny farms tied up in a compli-
cated feudal system of land rents and the areas of large
holdings and short leases where absentee landlords are
kings. Galicia’s peasants have sought a solution in emigra-
tion under previous régimes, but few Gallegos can get per-
mission to emigrate now. The peasants of the landowners’
regions in central and southern Spain are daily sinking
deeper into abysmal poverty. Salvador de Madariaga, quot-
ing the figures of the comparatively prosperous period be-
fore the Civil War, found that of the 1,026,412 landowners
paying taxes in one third of the national territory, only
178,846 had an income above one peseta a day, while less
than 20,000 had incomes above eight pesetas (currently
eighty cents) a day. The Government after the Civil War
gave no Statistics of this kind, but Government statisticians
told me freely that conditions today are “certainly no better.”


(19) We will socialize agriculture by the following methods:
Redistributing arable lands to establish family holdings
and stimulate the syndication of workers;
Transferring those human masses exhausted by farming
sterile lands to new arable lands, thus redeeming them from
the misery in which they now live.


A PROGRAM BECOMES A POGROM 107


There is a pine-covered hill on the highway north of Ma-
drid near the village of San Sebastian de los Reyes. From
this hill one can see many miles of land stretching across a
wide valley. It is still possible to discern the lines of fields
on this land, but nothing grows there now save weeds. They
grow in such profusion that the land is obviously fertile.

For many generations this land supported one hundred
and eighty farm families. In 1942, the landlord discovered
that he was making only an eight per cent return on the
money needed to operate these farms. Since the oligarchy
was in power, much more than this could be made in the
city. So all of the families were evicted. The land now is
used only for hunting when the owner brings out a party
of friends from Madrid. The farm families? They live in
caves elsewhere.

This has happened all over Spain in recent years. The
press gives no attention to such matters, but has much to
say of the work of the Institute of Colonization. This organ-
ization, designed to carry out agrarian reform, completed
what was proclaimed as its most important work in five
years in 1945. This, according to the oligarchy’s press, is
what happened:

The Duke of Medinaceli wanted to sell a portion of his
estates. The farm families who had lived on these lands for
many generations wanted to stay there. The Institute
stepped in with an arrangement whereby the State gave the
Duke one million dollars for his land and “sold” it to the
farmers. To pay for the interest on the State loan, the farm-
ers were to give a portion of their crops to the Institute.
If they made any money, they could also pay the Institute
what they owed, thereby acquiring the land.

The fact is that few “share-croppers” on Spanish estates
are able to catch up with their payments, whether it is called
the landlord’s “share” or just “interest.” So the Duke of


108 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Medinaceli got his money when estates were hard to sell
while the Institute created a job for a Falangist overseer.
The “share-croppers” simply got a new landlord.


(20) We will undertake a tireless campaign of reforesta-
tion and of increasing the national livestock, with severe
penalties for those who oppose it, even calling upon the tem-
porary obligatory mobilization of all Spanish youths for this
historic task of reconstruction of the Motherland’s wealth.


The idea was good. The Family did not object as long as
Falangist youths were putting seedlings in Family proper-
ties. But the program called for additional grants for seed-
lings from the Ministry of Agriculture and this money was
needed for graft in other ministries. The program bogged
down after two years of earnest efforts.


(21) The State may expropriate without indemnification
any lands which have been acquired or used illegally.


José Antonio planned this point to trap landowners who
refused to comply with the social legislation of the new
régime. But the Family's Falange used it to take away from
the farm laborers those lands which they acquired legally
or illegally in the slow division of estates under the Repub-
lic. In many cases landowners who had already accepted
payment for their lands from the Republic got the land back
again as a gift from their Government.


(22) The National Syndicalist State will give special at-
tention to the reconstruction of the communal lands of
towns.


The communal lands thus “reconstructed” were taken
over by local Falangist syndicates and run for the profit of
the Falange and the Family leaders of the vicinity.


A PROGRAM BECOMES A POGROM 109


National Education, Religion


(23) It is the essential mission of the State, through a
rigorous disciplining of education, to achieve a strong and
united national spirit and to instill the joy and pride of
Motherland in the soul of future generations.

All males will receive a pre-military education which will
prepare them for the honor of joining the National and Pop-
ular Army of Spain.

Sometimes embarrassing honesty creeps into the normally
undependable Statistical Annual published by the Spanish
Government. For some reason this book in 1945 contained
a chart with graph line showing the number of students
graduated from State normal schools in Spain. The line
rises slowly during the years of the monarchy and the dic-
tatorship of Primo de Rivera, soars to an all-time high dur-
ing the years of the Republic, and vanishes, never to return,
at the bottom of the graph after the first year of the Fam-
ily’s régime following the Civil War. The reason: No State
normal schools for training teachers exist in the Family’s
Spain.

Examinations for State teaching jobs are a joke. Winning
candidates are designated before the examinations are held.
Teachers in State schools are political appointees. Many
have no education beyond the primary grades. After the
Civil War, examinations were waived for all applicants who
were officers in the Army during the Civil War. In 1944,
Spaniards who had served in the Blue Legion, which fought
the Russians in German uniforms, were offered teaching
posts without examination. Some of these were utilized as
teachers for “pre-military training” in high schools, but most
now hold posts as primary-school teachers.

(24) Culture will be organized in such a way that ne
talent shall be neglected for economic reasons. All those
who merit it will have easy access to higher studies.


—


110 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


The Family’s Spain is today the one civilized country of
the Western world which does not have obligatory primary
education. The clergy and the Falange search for talent to
improve their own ranks, but most schools are reserved for
the sons and the servants of the oligarchy.

(25) Our Movement will incorporate the Catholic spirit,
which has glorious traditions and is predominant in Spain,
into the national reconstruction.

Church and State will agree upon their respective powers
without permitting interference or any activity which im-
pairs the dignity of the State or the national integrity.


The Falange sees to political education. The Spanish .
clergy sees to religious education. Fortunate is the Spanish
child who manages to learn how to read and write. Illiteracy
is reduced only in Government statistics.

I have seen primary schools for more than a hundred chil-
dren with only one book in the entire building. It was the
teacher’s text, a third-grade “encyclopedia.” Frequently, as
a newspaperman, I sought an interview with the Minister
of Education, Ibafiez Martin, a lay representative of the
clergy, but always without success. His immediate aides
explained he was “so busy.” They also explained that the
schools lacked books because the Ministry of Education
had little money in its budget and couldn't find the paper
to print them. After this particular talk at the Ministry of
Education, I strolled into a bookstore next door. It was
packed with books translated from the German and Italian.
It also was featuring a five-volume luxury edition on bull-
fighting, a series approved by the Falange and the clergy to
sell at thirty dollars per volume.


National Revolution


(26) Falange Espafiola Tradicionalista y de las J.O.N.S.
desires a new order, outlined in the above-mentioned prin-


A PROGRAM BECOMES A POGROM Nl


ciples. To implant it, against the opposition of the existing
order, it aspires to revolution. It prefers the direct, ardent,
and combative method. Life is militant and must be lived
with a stainless spirit of service and sacrifice.


José Antonio’s “new order” was only a dream. The Fam-
ily’s “new order” meant the old order; not revolution, but
reaction. Wearing the Falange mask, the Family staged a
noisy masquerade, drowning out off-stage cries of “Viva la
Republica!” from the lips of dying men.


PLAYERS ARE PAID


GENTLEMEN do not quarrel over winnings. In Spain, the
noblemen, warriors, churchmen, and big businessmen in the
Family’s ranks all claim to be gentlemen. Indeed, there has
been a minimum of quarreling over the spoils of Spain. The
reason for this is fear.

The Family had won a decisive victory in the Civil War,
still the winners were uneasy. The end of the war witnessed
a virtual stampede to avoid the responsibilities of victory.
The post-war slaughter in which hundreds of thousands of
Republicans perished had been approved by all members of
the Family, but none wanted the blood on his hands. The
ghost of the Republic, the memory of the thousands who
cried “Viva!” outside the gates of a palace from which a
king had fled — such visions haunted the Family.

Happily, the Falange had been set up to take the respon-
sibilities. When the world asked who had done these things,
the Family could point at the Falange. That was the solu-
tion. Nevertheless, fear remained. It was fear which kept
each member of the Family from seeking to seize another
member’s share of the spoils of war. It is this fear which
keeps the Family united today.

The Family agreed to a man that Spain and its people
belonged to them. Many of the people had died by the
Family's sword; some had managed to escape into exile.

112


PLAYERS ARE PAID 113


Those who remained became slaves of the Family. The
Army, the police force, and the Falange, which together
absorb about eighty per cent of the national budget, are
maintained to keep them in slavery, to exact from them the
tribute necessary to finance the masquerade.

The members of the Family see no wrong in this. In their
eyes, Spain and its people are theirs by right of heritage
from the Catholic Monarchs of 1492. Should they decide
that Spain should be governed by a king, a dictator, or a
constitution — that is their affair. They consider govern-
ment a form of management chosen by the owners of the
property concerned. If the owners feel that their property
is being mismanaged, that their profits are too low, they
simply change managers.

The Family viewed the Civil War in this light. Republi-
can Governments did not manage Spain and its people prop-
erly. So the Family took it back. The new managers would
see to it that the profits would be distributed exclusively
among the members of the Family, not squandered in un-
necessary expenditures for the people.

The well-organized Family oligarchy looks after the dis-
tribution of profits. A few hundred men at the top, who
know each other well, form a pool of manpower for key posi-
tions. They are numerous enough so that the cabinet, the
command of the armed forces, the ecclesiastical hierarchy,
and even the directorates of the main banks and corpora-
tions can be shifted about without going outside the Family.

These few have the rest of the Family well in hand. Strict
discipline prevails within the Army and the clergy. The
Council of Grandees of Spain holds the whip- -hand over the
lesser nobility — the 97 dukes, 1310 marquises, and about
3000 counts, viscounts, and barons. Among the businessmen
Don Dinero (Mr. Money) dictates from the financial heights
of the great banks of Madrid, Barcelona, and Bilbao.


114 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


From the top to the bottom of the Family oligarchy run
blood relationships which cut across occupational lines. The
principal branches of the Family usually intermarry. Only
those of great wealth and influence can afford to go outside
the charmed circle. As a result, rare is the Government offi-
cial who does not claim kinship, however distant, with a
priest, a nobleman, or a soldier; rarer still is the rising Army
officer who does not have some relative among the mer-
chants. Spain’s Envoy to Paris at the end of the Second
World War professed in private to be anti-clerical, but the
French knew him to be the favorite nephew of the Cardinal
Archbishop of Toledo, Primate of Spain.

These blood ties can be traced most easily through Spain’s
landed aristocracy. Spain is primarily an agricultural na-
tion; ownership of the land by noblemen and a considerable
portion of the upper middle class is the economic founda-
tion of the Family oligarchy. Accordingly, it is from the
land that the Family draws its first profits after its victories.

Most large estates have been held through royal grant by
the nobility since feudal times. The valley lands of Anda-
lucia, among the richest in Spain, were given to those feudal
lords who accompanied Ferdinand, King of Castile, when
he took Sevilla from the Moors in 1248. Similar royal grants
are behind the estates of noblemen all over Spain.

Middle-class ownership of the land is of more recent date.
During the Carlist wars of the last century most of the vast
holdings of the Church were seized and sold by the State
or auctioned off by the clergy itself. The buyers were the
merchants of the Family oligarchy, middle-class families
eager for the security and social position which go with pos-
session of land in Spain.

Maldistribution of the land, the latifundia system of enor-
mous estates, is without question the greatest curse of Spain.
The physical hunger of the Spanish people goes back to


PLAYERS ARE PAID 115


land hunger. Nearly seventy per cent of the Spanish people
live on the land, but most of it is owned by landlords who
feel little or no obligation toward the millions who work
their property.

Nearly half the land which has been surveyed in Spain,
covering the central and southern portions of the Peninsula,
was owned by some ten thousand families before the Civil
War. Now the number of families may be smaller, but the
amount of land they own has increased. Statistics of 1932,
the last of any value, show that four per cent of the popu-
lation holds more than sixty per cent of the land of Spain.
More important still is the fact that the land of the big
estates includes some of the best soil in the country.

In Spain, just as there is no middle class in society, so
there is no middle way in agriculture. On one end of the
scale, we have the enormous, all-devouring latifundia. On
the other, the tiny, divided and subdivided peasant hold-
ings, too small to support a family. Statistics taken by both
Family and Republican Governments from landowners in
Castile and in Northern Spain show that a great majority of
these small landholders have a daily income of less than
twenty cents a day at the present rate of exchange.

The problem is further complicated by systems of land
tenure involving endless legal squabbles between owner,
lease-holder, tenant and sub-tenant. A middle-class mer-
chant of my acquaintance holds the right to cut cork from
the trees on a vast estate in Extremadura. Another family
in Sevilla has the right to till the land between the trees. A
third family owns the trees themselves. All pay nominal
fees to the owners of the land, who are about six in number.
My friend’s right to cut cork is hereditary and will probably
be divided between two families at his death. He, inci-
dentally, had never seen his trees, much less the thousands
of peasants who cut the cork.


116 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Spanish landlords, absentee or not, are notoriously reac-
tionary. One of their number, the Count of Aguilera y
Yepes, owner of estates in Salamanca Province, was assigned
to guide English-speaking correspondents on tours to the
battle front during the Civil War. The Count, who spoke
excellent English, had his own theory about the origins of
the war.

“Sewers!” growled the Count. “Sewers caused all our
troubles. The masses in this country are not like your Amer-
icans, nor even like the British. They are slave stock. They
are good for nothing but slaves and only when they are used
as slaves are they happy.

“But we, the decent people, made the mistake of giving
them modern housing in the cities where we have our fac-
tories. We put sewers in these cities, sewers which extend
right down to the workers’ quarters. Not content with the
work of God, we thus interfere with His will. The result is
that the slave stock increases. Had we no sewers in Madrid,
Barcelona, and Bilbao, all these Red leaders would have
died in their infancy instead of exciting the rabble and caus-
ing good Spanish blood to flow.

“When the war is over, we should destroy the sewers. The
perfect birth control for Spain is the birth control God in-
tended us to have. Sewers are a luxury to be reserved for
those who deserve them, the leaders of Spain, not the slave
stock.”

The Count was in earnest, dead earnest. One British cor-
respondent, who thought the contrary, laughed in the
Count’s face. Shortly thereafter that newspaperman was
asked to leave the Family’s Spain. He was, the Count ex-
plained, “a dangerous Red.”

Few landowners were as honest as the Count, but they
were honest enough about that part of the program of the
“new State” dedicated to land reform. Time and again I


PLAYERS ARE PAID 117


sat with my colleagues of the British press on the café ter-
races of Salamanca, Burgos, or Sevilla during the Civil War
listening to idle noblemen explain that “these Falangist
fanatics” were not to be permitted to carry out their “attack
on the sanctity of private property.”

The reason for their frankness to British correspondents
is the fact that Britain is the Family’s banker. Most of the
wealthy members of the Family keep large sterling accounts
in London, in case of trouble in Spain. British investments
in Spain are enormous, ranging from streetcar systems and
shipyards to the heavy industry of Bilbao. Spanish noble-
men are placed under the care of English “nannies” and
many wealthy Spaniards are educated in Britain’s best
Catholic schools. They think of John Bull as the Conserva-
tive Party clubman, the City banker and stockbroker, the
idle aristocrat.

During the Civil War no member of the Family dreamed
that a Socialist Government could possibly win an election
in Britain. They were inclined to consider Britain’s leaders
as participants in an oligarchy similar to their own. For that
reason they were eager to convince British correspondents
that there was not the slightest taint of revolution about the
movement they were sponsoring, the fiery speeches of Falan-
gists notwithstanding.

As for the American correspondents, they had plenty of
money. Therefore, in the view of the members of the Fam-
ily, they must also be representative of the American oli-
garchy — the Morgans and Wall Street. It was strange for
the Americans to find the Moscow Communist’s view of
their country shared by the reactionary oligarchy of Spain.
The result, however, was that none save the dullest corre-
spondents placed any credence in the public proclamations
of reforms with which the Family’s Government wooed the
people of Spain during the Civil War.


118 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


We were told in detail how the oligarchy succeeded in
sabotaging the efforts of the Republic to bring about a more
equitable division of the land. We learned how landowners
sold part of their holdings to Socialist co-operatives and to
the Republican Government, confident that sooner or later,
when the Family took possession of Spain again, they would
get the lands back. It was explained to us how the Repub-
lic had driven the price of meat down to world price levels
by permitting imports from the Argentine, and how the
Family had contrived to raise prices by banning imports
again in 1934.

Those interested in seeing how the marriage of Falangists
and landowners was working out could do so by visiting the
country. My first trip into the farm country during the Civil
War was in 1937, just after the capture of the Falange Party
directorate by the Family.

I went to the rich farmlands of the Guadalquivir to check
on rumors of a “disciplinary” action taken in that area as a
result of the assassination by unknown persons of a Civil
Guard. At Ecija, a small town in the river valley, I saw an
open ditch containing upwards of one hundred and fifty
bodies. These, I was told, were all “Reds,” farm workers
who confessed to the heinous crime of voting Socialist in the
1936 elections. They had been shot the day before as a
lesson to the “Reds” to prevent them from killing another
Civil Guard.

Everywhere I found the landlords in complete accord
with the fiery Falangists who had been denouncing them so
violently a few months before, during the days of the Re-
public. Town and village governments were all in the hands
of the Falangists, but they were answerable to the local
cacique, or political boss, usually a landowner.

All the Falangists were most co-operative in my quest for
information. I had but to mention the name of the noble-


PLAYERS ARE PAID 119


man who was to be my host in Jerez de la Frontera; I had
only to show the press card accrediting me to the “National
Armies” as a war correspondent. I was then free to examine
the municipal records in which Falangist officials would
show me how lands seized by the peasantry, or purchased
before the war by their co-operatives, had been returned
promptly to the feudal owners. “Justice” was being done.

Occasionally I found Falangists, whose ideals had been
shattered by the reactionary methods of Family govern-
ment. They told me (even at that early date) of communal
lands, the property of the villages for centuries, which had
been handed over to the big landowners. The reason; every-
body in the village was “Red.”

My host during that visit to Andalucia was a moderate
among noblemen. He lived in a manor house which was
the social center of the vineyard owners of the district.
From their fields came much of the wine sent to the Anglo-
Spanish bodegas at Jerez, home of Spanish “sherry.” When
I mentioned the executions which had taken place in the
near-by village that week, those gathered at the manor
house explained that they were necessary “to maintain or-
der.” After his guests had left, my host told me that he was
not in agreement with their view.

“We are destroying our birthright,” he told me earnestly.
“We are killing for political reasons men who are incapable
of understanding politics. Who will tend our vines when
we have killed so many?”

But the Spanish people are prolific. Scientific birth con-
trol is unknown. The clergy and the Family encourage big
families; the land labor system leaves a large portion of the
population unemployed for most of the year. After the Civil
War ended, the Family Government copied the Fascist and
Nazi examples of giving prizes for large families. Population
increases have already wiped out the losses of the Civil War.


120 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Spain, with one-sixth the population of the United States,
had five times more killed during the Civil War than the
United States in all theaters of the Second World War. In
Spain, hunger and disease followed the Civil War and took
more lives. Despite such losses, the 1940 census showed an
increase of 2,200,000 over 1930. Since 1940, the population
increase has been almost 2,000,000, now giving Spain about
27,700,000 inhabitants.

The landowners of Spain have no difficulty in finding
plenty of workers for their fields. Prices of farm produce
have soared on the black market through which landowners
with the proper enchufe sell most of their output. Small
farmers and share-croppers must sell their produce at offi-
cial prices to the co-operative stores of the Army, the mon-
asteries and convents, and large industrial enterprises.

What the owners choose to do with their land is no con-
cern of the Family Governments. Laws requiring that land
be kept in production have not been applied to any land-
owner. Such laws are for the landowner to use against the
share-cropper.

Hunting preserves and wild-bull ranches owned by mem-
bers of the Family now occupy lands on which thousands of
farm families lived and grew their crops before the Civil
War. Every autumn the privileged, including Franco him-
self, go hunting small game on preserves within fifty miles
of Madrid. These preserves once contributed vegetables
and meat to the capital's markets. Ranchlands, devoted to
raising wild cattle for the bull ring, occupy nearly ten times
the area they did during the time of the Republic. Bull-
fighting is very popular among the members of the Family.

This misuse of land is bad enough, but what is most
shocking is the dog-in-the-manger attitude of hundreds of
owners of big estates who will neither work their own prop-
erty nor let it be worked by others. In 1941, when Spaniards


PLAYERS ARE PAID 121


were dying by thousands of all the diseases which accom-
pany starvation, when typhus was spreading through the
countryside and the cities, units of the Civil Guard drove
hungry peasants from lands in Andalucia and Extremadura.
The proprietors were making too much money in city busi-
ness to bother with their country lands. Graciously, some
landowners permitted peasants to remain in villages on such
estates, though they could not work the land. One day the
owner might want to return to farming, so he would not
send away his human farm machinery. Also, he might one
day need his peasants’ votes.

Never has the power of the cacique, the political boss who
organizes the inhabitants of a rural region for his patron,
been greater than in the Family’s Spain today. There has
been no election since the Civil War ended which required
the cacique, usually a landowner, to demonstrate his ability
to control the vote. He has, however, had other oppor-
tunities to show his power.

When Franco toured Andalucia in 1948, the local caciques
kept farm laborers and their families working for days with-
out pay erecting fantastic triumphal arches along the Chief
of State’s route — arches at every crossroad, arches at every
lane leading to a village or a country estate. Every hundred
yards along hundreds of miles of highway the words:
“FRANco! Franco! Franco! Savior oF Spar!” were painted
on the macadam surface of the road by gangs of farm labor-
ers forced to work to show their “patriotism.”

For hours before the official cortége sped by, tens of thou-
sands of farm workers, men, women, and children, stood
waiting by the roadside carrying Falangist and Spanish
flags. All had been ordered out by the cacique, all had
been “screened” by local Falangists and searched for weap-
ons by the Civil Guardsmen stationed on the highways. As
Franco’s armored car sped down the road, they cheered him


eee


|
\p
1

N
i |


122 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


obediently. Then they turned and trudged back to their
villages where armed Falangists stood guard over stockades
filled with men suspected of having sufficient courage to do
something about the “Savior of Spain.”

One day, perhaps quite soon, the landowners of central
and southern Spain will call on their caciques to deliver the
vote. It will be done. Any candidate of the Family’s choice,
be he Franco, Don Juan of Bourbon, Gil Robles, or even an
officer of the despised Civil Guard, will be sure to get a tre-
mendous majority of the rural vote. Until the power of the
cacique is smashed in the country, and the power of the
Falangist block bosses are broken in the cities, Spain can
have no free elections. Meanwhile, the landowners will con-
tinue to draw their profits from the “slave stock” of the
country.

The size of these profits may be judged even by the casual
visitor to Spain who observes the sefiorito in the cities. José
Antonio Primo de Rivera defined seforito as “the final deca-
dence of the word ‘Sefior”” The word means “little Mr.”
and may refer to any idle male of wealth from eighteen to
eighty. All that is required to qualify as a sefiorito is a taste
tor good food, good wine, bad women, bullfights, café gos-
sip, and the income to purchase all those things.

In Spain today the seforitos fill the bars of the smart
hotels, lounge in the chairs before Chicoté’s Café in Madrid,
or fill up front-row seats at bullfights where they will pay
as much as two hundred dollars to be seen watching the
work of a famous matador. A true seforito will smoke
nothing but American cigarettes, for which he pays up to
three dollars and a half a pack, and professes to prefer Brit-
ish “vis-kee,” at forty dollars a bottle, to Spain’s own ex-
cellent brandy at three dollars.

At a time when Spain’s hunger was so great that the
American Red Cross was spending millions of dollars on


PLAYERS ARE PAID 123


relief; when France had fallen under the German onslaught;
when Britons were dying by the thousands under German
bombs, my wife went shopping on Madrid’s Gran Via.
Grocery stores on the Gran Via sold anything to anybody
without ration tickets — price was the only barrier. On one
counter my wife noted hundreds of cans of Romanian caviar.
The price was fifty dollars per can.

“Better buy some now,” said a clerk. “They'll all be gone
by sundown.”

They were. The sefioritos bought them. To meet this de-
mand, two enterprising merchants began producing domes-
tic caviar in the marshes of the Guadalquivir. Tinplate
could not be found for cheap foods, which spoiled as people
starved, but there was plenty of tinplate for domestic caviar,
sold at a price only slightly below that of the imported
article. The seforitos sent tins of caviar to their friends to
make sure they would be invited to the proper parties.

And what parties! Through all the winters of World War
II, Madrid was the gayest town in Europe for those who
could pay the price of social obligations to the Family. The
masses were hungry; the jails were full; executions took
place nightly in the cemetery near the Barcelona road, but
in the salons of the Family everyone enjoyed himself. When
Madrid became too warm in the summer, San Sebasti4n was
the social headquarters. In the spring of 1943, the most
spectacular party of the season took place in Sevilla.

On the night following the pomp and ceremony of Sevilla’s
Holy Week, the Duke of Alba and Berwick, first Grandee of
Spain, presented his daughter to Spanish society. The Duke,
who now prefers to be known as a Monarchist, was then
Generalissimo Franco’s Ambassador to London, where he
dutifully carried out the orders of the pro-Axis Foreign Min-
ister, Serrano Sufier. As an Ambassador, the Duke escaped
Many taxes in Spain, which, considering the Duke’s huge
estates, was no small consideration.


124 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Alba invited two thousand guests to the ball in his palace
at Sevilla. More than three thousand were present. Invita-
tions, priced at one hundred and fifty dollars each on the
black market, were peddled by the servants of those who
could not attend. Many members of the Family who were
not invited risked being challenged at the gate in order to
be seen among the invited guests.

The palace and its gardens were huge, but barely large
enough to contain the guests. White tie and tails were the
proper dress for most men, but many appeared in uniforms.
Some wore Sevilla’s traditional dress — tight Andaluz trous-
ers with bolero jackets. Their bejeweled women wore gowns
from Paris, smuggled across the Pyrenees at enormous cost
or brought to Spain in diplomatic pouches.

Guests strolled along stone walks between lighted pools
and flower gardens, or crowded around block-long buffets
in several patios. There was dancing to be done in the ball-
rooms, or better dancing to be watched in the garden where
families of gypsies entertained the guests. Hurdy-gurdies
thumped away in garden nooks. Chefs served oily churros —
string fritters made in deep fat —from great caldrons by
the palace walls, Serrano Suiier’s former mistress, the wife
of a South American Ambassador, did a flamenco dance in
one of the rooms for her new love, the Ambassador of
another South American country. There were a number of
foreigners, most of them from Allied or neutral legations,
with a small sprinkling of foreign businessmen.

I found one of the latter staring at the magnificent bou-
gainvillaea hanging from a corner of the central patio over
a throng of guests. He was a motion-picture director from
Hollywood who planned to spend some of his company’s
blocked pesetas by producing a film in Spain.

“What do you call that stuff?” he asked, nodding at the
flowers. “I'd like to do a scene like this one day.”


PLAYERS ARE PAID 123


“Don't,” counseled a British diplomat. “It’s too Holly-
wood!”

It was “too Hollywood”; it seemed a scene from another
century. Beyond the palace walls there was singing in the
streets and a party at every corner, for the Duke had con-
tributed free wine to all the cafés in the neighborhood. The
press also reported that the Duke had distributed “very
large gifts in cash, clothing, and food” to the farm laborers
on his vast estates throughout Spain in honor of his daugh-
ter’s début.

Maria del Rosario Cayetana Fitz-James Stuart Silva Falcé
y Gurtubay, Marquésa de San Vicente del Barco, was an at-
tractive straw-haired girl of seventeen. Most of her guests
saw her only as she accompanied her father on a brief in-
spection tour of the party. There was no receiving line.
“I don’t know half these people,” the Duke explained, “and
the other half I know too well.”

Those whom the Duke knew too well were the other
members of the Family hierarchy, his fellow actors in the
masquerade. Most of them were Army officers, for the
Army now is an important part of Family society.

An old saying in Spain fits the Family perfectly. “The
King rules, his clergy directs, his merchants profit, but the
Army pronounces.”

At the Duke’s ball that night were three officers of the
Army, each of whom looked forward to the day when they
might be called to “pronounce.” They were Lieutenant
General Alfredo Kindelan, Lieutenant General José Enrique
Varela, and General Antonio Aranda. Each represented a
different group of officers within the Army. Any one of
these groups could be called to “pronounce” for a different
type of Government by the oligarchy.

This does not mean that these three were Franco’s rivals
—far from it. Kindelan presided over the meeting of the


126 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


generals which chose Franco as their leader during the
Civil War. Varela is one of Franco’s few personal friends.
Aranda, though he now pretends to be at odds with the
whole régime, hears nothing of importance which does not
reach the Pardo Palace, Franco’s residence outside Madrid.
Each of these three is only playing the part assigned to him
by the Army in the Family's masquerade.

Kindelan is a Monarchist, British-style. Like the Duke of
Alba he talks ardently of “our King,” meaning Don Juan,
son of the late Alfonso XHII. For years he has given his
British Tory friends, like Sir Samuel Hoare, now Lord Tem-
plewood, the impression that he awaits only the proper
moment to lead the Army in rebellion against Franco and
the Falange. The British admit Kindelan is far from bril-
liant; they concede that he has missed many occasions which
seemed propitious for an Army ultimatum to Franco, but
they live in hope.

As Monarchists go, Kindelan is quite sincere. Like most
Monarchists in Spain he feels that loyalty to the Army and
the oligarchy comes before loyalty to his King. Don Juan
will recover his throne, certainly, but only when the Family
feels that the moment has come to change the scenery for a
monarchy.

Varela is an intelligent soldier respected by his fellow offi-
cers. He is cruel, he is reactionary, but he is also an able
administrator who tried to remain neutral in foreign affairs
during World War II. Like his wealthy Basque wife he is
deeply religious. His civilian support comes from the Carl-
ists of Navarre.

Varela’s job is to lead that faction of the Army which con-
siders the Falange an expensive luxury to be tolerated only
as long as the Germans had to be placated. Needless to say,
this faction has grown tremendously since V-E Day, 1945.
Varela’s stand was taken long before this date. In 1942 sey-


PLAYERS ARE PAID 127


eral Falangists in Bilbao tried to kill him with a bomb. Cur-
rently, Varela serves his good friend Franco as High Com-
missioner of Morocco, richest plum in the Army after Fran-
co’s own job.

Aranda plays a strange part in the masquerade. His job
is to lead that element of the Army which believes the Fam-
ily must one day govern Spain with some sort of republic.
He has several “stand-ins” for his job who may substitute for
him, notably a former Foreign Minister, General Juan Beig-
beder. At present, however, Aranda is the Army’s leading
“Republican.”

Both Varela and Kindelan are gentlemen to the manner
born, but Aranda is not. He comes from an Army family,
he did most of his service in Morocco, and he delights in
telling unprintable stories of Moroccan morals. His rise to
his present position in the Family’s masquerade is typical
of Family tactics.

After the bloody repression of the Asturian rebellion
against the Right-Wing Republican Government of 1934,
Aranda, himself an Asturian, was sent to rule the province
under martial law. Mass executions had already been car-
ried out by his predecessor. Aranda’s job was to keep
Asturias quiet by diplomacy and tact. He succeeded so well
that, when Spain swung to the Left again in the 1936 elec-
tions, Austurian leaders did not demand his removal. The
Madrid Government considered him to be one of the gen-
erals who would be loyal to the Republic. That was their
error.

As the Army rose in revolt, Aranda delayed in choosing
sides. The reasons for his delay were obvious — Asturias
was unanimously pro-Republican. Miners by the thousands
swarmed into Oviedo, armed with dynamite and guns hid-
den since 1934. Aranda, whose garrison was heavily out-
numbered by the miners, pretended to be loyal. He con-


128 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


ferred with the local Republican leaders, even gave arms to
a few miners from his garrison supplies.

He persuaded the Asturians to send fifteen hundred
armed miners to Madrid “to help our comrades,” but he
routed them through Valladolid, which he knew to be in
rebel hands. Of this force, eight hundred and fifty were
slaughtered by Army machine guns in the square of one
town; the rest were asleep when Army artillery at point-
blank range ripped into their railway coaches. Few sur-
vived. By the time these few returned to Asturias, Aranda
was leading his garrison against the Republic.

When the Army lifted the siege of Oviedo, early in the
war, Aranda became the Family’s hero. Its press praised
him to the skies; he was given innumerable decorations and
had his choice of many good commands. Not until 1943 was
he suddenly relieved of his command and left without as-
signment — the public sign of Army displeasure.

It began to be whispered about by other members of the
Family that Aranda was really a Republican, a “Red.” It
was said that he had been forced to revolt in 1936 by other
officers of the garrison, who kept him under guard through-
out the siege.

This, of course, was nonsense. Had it been thus, Aranda
would simply have vanished after the siege had been lifted.
Instead, Franco himself had decorated Aranda with the
Laureada de San Fernando, highest honor in the Spanish
Army. For seven years Aranda was a hero.

He was suddenly placed in official disgrace so that he
might step into a réle the Family had forgotten to fill, a part
now essential to the masquerade. By 1943 the dullest Span-
iard realized that Germany might lose the war, that the vic-
torious democracies might demand a return of the Republic
in Spain. The Army had a Monarchist general in Kindelan,
an anti-Fascist general in Varela, but they lacked a Repub-
lican general. Aranda was their man.


PLAYERS ARE PAID 129


Aranda is not a very good actor. True Republicans, in
Spain and out of it, distrust him. One summer day in 1944,
for example, when I was with an official of the United
States Embassy visiting San Sebastian, Aranda bellowed at
us in Spanish from the opposite side of a crowded hotel
lobby.

“Hello, my friends — what news of our comrades in Amer-
ica?”

“What comrades?” asked the American diplomat, hon-
estly bewildered.

“The Republicans, of course,” boomed Aranda, and he
named a few Spanish exiles then in the United States. Every-
one within a hundred feet heard him.

In those days any Spaniard expressing such sentiments
publicly, general or no general, was inviting disaster. Even
members of the Family are expected to be reasonably dis-
creet in public places. No other Army officers, particularly
those whom I know to be honestly sympathetic to the Re-
public, would have dared to call the exiles anything but
“Reds” in a hotel lobby. Certainly none would have dared
to call them “our comrades” — even jokingly.

Despite such clumsy methods, Aranda is serving his pur-
pose. A number of Republicans who approached him now
are in jail. Three defendants, in an elaborate trial staged
for the benefit of foreign correspondents in a military court
at Madrid in January, 1947, linked him publicly with a
“plot” to overthrow the Franco régime. Defense lawyers in
the military trial tried to get Aranda as a witness, but the
court announced that, “for reasons unknown,” he would not
appear. The General was “punished” for his part in the
affair by two months of exile to Palma, capital of the lovely
Mediterranean island of Mallorca. Such “punishment” for
a supposed plot to overthrow the Government is calculated
to add to Aranda’s prestige as a Republican, should the
Family ever need a republic.


130 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


For such post-war favors to the Family, as well as for the
military victory against the people of Spain, the Army is
well paid. Aranda, even in Mallorcan “exile,” has always
drawn the full pay due his rank. In addition, his private
fortune has increased. Other officers are equally well pro-
vided for. Jobs are secure, promotion is swift, prestige is
great, and there are unlimited opportunities for graft in the
Family’s Army.

Retirement before the maximum age for service now is
rare in the Spanish Army, for the higher officers can do as
much or as little as they like. There are active military com-
mands in Spanish Morocco, where officers have no civilian
authorities to worry them. There are pleasant commands in
the Balearic and the Canary Islands. Those who like travel
can get assignments on missions abroad, usually to Argen-
tina. Those who love displays of power are given command
of the military prisons, where tens of thousands whose
names do not appear on the records of the Ministry of Jus-
tice, still are confined.

Promotion has come so fast that Spain now has more
generals in active service than her neighbor, France. Never
has the Army had more prestige within the Family. There
is a heavy sprinkling of uniforms at every social event.
School children are taught the glories of militarism from
the first grades through the university. The newspapers
compete eagerly for large cash awards to those which best
portray “the military spirit of Spain and the achievements
of our glorious Army.”

Money pours in from all sides to win the favor of the gen-
erals, colonels, majors, and even captains. Army families
buy extra rations of food at official prices in Army stores.
Conscripts are kept busy building private houses, hunting
lodges, and other buildings for the generals and their friends
with Army material. I have yet to meet a successful busi-


PLAYERS ARE PAID 131


nessman in Spain who does not have one or more Army offi-
cers on his payroll. I have met few high Army officers who
did not have businessmen as “partners.”

General Andrés Saliquet, for example, is the owner of a
large soap factory on the main road from Madrid to the
Portuguese frontier. For several years after the Civil War,
when other soap factories were closed for lack of fats, Gen-
eral Saliquet’s factory operated at capacity, selling its out-
put on the black market. Later, when other soaps began to
appear on the market, General Saliquet’s factory alone ob-
tained authorization to manufacture laundry soap in the
handy and familiar two-pound bars.

The Army, well aware of its good fortune, is carefully
preparing to protect what it has. When the Civil War be-
gan, many non-commissioned officers proved to be Republi-
cans. The new non-commissioned officers, most of them
selected from volunteers for the oligarchy’s Army, now live
apart from civilians in magnificent apartment barracks with
their wives and children. They are given special uniforms,
similar to commissioned officers from caps to leather boots.
The Army has learned that it is good business to make the
non-coms feel like officers, not like plain soldiers.

The Army also has learned that it is good business to be
friends with the clergy. Anti-clericalism, once rife in the
Army, now is virtually dead among its officers. A partner-
ship has replaced the rivalry of the Carlist wars.

The power of the Spanish clergy is great. Unfortunately
for Spain and for the future of the Spanish Church, the posi-
tion which the clergy now occupies is one of a master, not
a champion, of the people.

It has not always been thus. Missionaries returning to
Spain from the Americas during the period of colonization
brought with them lessons learned from the state socialism
of the Incas in Peru and from the communal society which


132 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


the Jesuits established in Paraguay. Bulwarked by the great
clerical universities of the sixteenth century, the monks of
that period took up the cause of the people with energy and
enthusiasm. European travelers, shocked at the abysmal
poverty and pagan superstitions of the Spanish masses, were
amazed at their intellectual freedom. Monks led the people
in revolts against taxation, and were their champions against
the oligarchy.

That was long ago. The one characteristic which the con-
temporary Spanish clergy retains from those early days is
independence from the Vatican. The clergy has long ceased
to be the champion of the poor. Even in the Carlist wars of
the last century, when the Church lost most of its lands,
priests sided with the reaction.

Today freedom-loving Spaniards count most of the clergy
as their enemies, not their champions. Wealth and power
are concentrated in the hands of the Jesuits, who seldom
come in contact with the masses. What the people do see all
too clearly is that priests, who condemned the Republic for
its injustices, condone the greater injustices of the oli-
garchy’s régime.

The Roman Catholic Church allied itself with the Span-
ish Republic in 1931. Although the Spanish clergy fought
the agrarian and educational reforms of the Republic, the
Vatican counseled moderation. Owing to Rome’s efforts,
the Spanish Episcopate published a letter in December,
1931, after the passage of the Constitution. Two paragraphs
of this letter should be better known:


The Church, as custodian of the most exact and noble
conception of political sovereignty, derived from God, the
origin and foundation of all authority, never fails to incul-
cate due respect and obedience for the legal Government,
even in times when its officials and representatives abuse
and misuse their power to the injury of the Church itself,


PLAYERS ARE PAID 133


To assist by our own actions in the destruction of the
social order, in the hope that out of such a catastrophe
might be born a better condition of things, would be a
blameworthy attitude and one whose fatal consequences
would make it almost treason both to our Religion and to
our native land.


It soon became clear that the Spanish Episcopate had
published such a letter only to please the Vatican. The Papal
Nuncio, Monsignor Tedeschini, who was largely responsible
for persuading the Bishops to take this step, was shortly
thereafter appointed a cardinal by the Holy See. Niceto
Alcala Zamora, then President of the Republic, was to have
placed the Cardinal’s hat on the Nuncio’s head in the pres-
ence of all the deputies to the Cortes. The deputies of the
Right, however, refused to attend on the grounds that the
Nuncio was “too liberal.”

From the day the Civil War began, the clergy sided with
the Army and the rest of the oligarchy. Few Spaniards were
surprised. On July 10, 1937, however, the Spanish Episco-
pate published another collective pastoral, this time siding
officially with the Army and the oligarchy. “Today,” said
the Bishops, “there is no other hope of obtaining justice and
peace and the good to be derived from these than the tri-
umph of the National Movement.” The letter condemned
the Republic as “most cruel,” “barbarous,” “anti-Spanish,”
and, “above all, anti-Christian.”

This letter became the basis for a flood of propaganda
throughout the world. Catholics were asked to contribute
to the “Holy War.” Priests by the score were sent abroad
to describe the horrors of “Red Spain” and the virtues of the
oligarchy’s Spain. Spanish missions in the Americas became
outposts of propaganda. To this day the press controlled by
the clergy in Spain, as well as the rest of the oligarchy’s
press, refers to the Civil War as “our Glorious Crusade.” In


ee


134 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


return for such support, the clergy was given more power
in the new State than it had enjoyed for generations.

Clerical powers of censorship, limited even under the
monarchy to clerical publications, were extended to cover
the secular press. The Falange, which officially controlled
censorship, was ordered to bow to clerical objections to any
book, newspaper, or other publications. On the other hand,
all clerical publications were exempt from Falange censor-
ship. Hence, the blame for the failure of the Spanish Church
to say a single word in condemnation of Nazi persecution
of Polish and German Catholics falls squarely on the shoul-
ders of the clergy. They were free to say what they liked,
but they did not choose to condemn the ally of the Spanish
oligarchy.

State subsidies to the clergy were restored and increased.
All lands which had belonged to the clergy prior to 1931
were restored. The clergy also received lands belonging to
Republicans which had not been the property of the Church
for generations.

After the Civil War the clergy chose the Minister of Edu-
cation for all cabinets. All weddings performed by civil
authorities were declared null and void; all divorces were
declared illegal. Bishops like those in Valencia and San
Sebastian, who decided that women should wear bathing
costumes reaching to their knees, were backed up by police.
The pomp, pageantry, and medieval superstition of the
Spanish clergy at its worst were restored to Spain.

Among the clergy were a few who did not understand the
Family’s arrangement with the Falange. Pedro, Cardinal
Segura, was one of these. Alfonso XIII had named Segura
Bishop, Archbishop, and finally Primate of Spain. Segura
remained a Monarchist who hoped to place the crown on
the head of Alfonso’s son, Juan, in the Cathedral of Sevilla.
He distrusted the Falange. Distrust eventually flamed into
open warfare.


PLAYERS ARE PAID 135


The Family, including the leaders of the clergy excepting
Segura, had decided that José Antonio Primo de Rivera, as
a martyr, might serve the Family’s purposes even though
he had refused to serve them when alive. With the Fam-
ily’s approval, the Falange ordered the phrase “Josz AN-
TONIO Primo DE Rivera — PresenTe!” painted on the walls
of all the churches in Spain. This was done in 1938. Segura
alone refused to let the churches in his diocese comply. He
was no longer Primate, but he was supreme in his diocese.

For two years the Falange failed to take up the challenge.
Then, one night in 1940, a gang of Falangists painted the
words “Franco! Franco! Franco! Jost ANTONIO PRIMO DE
RIVERA — PRESENTE!” on the walls of Segura’s own palace.
They thought Franco’s name would protect the name of
their martyr, but they underestimated Segura.

The old Cardinal telephoned the Civil Governor of Se-
villa, leader of the provincial Falange, and informed him
that he would be excommunicated unless the words were
removed from the wall within forty-eight hours. Terrified,
the Governor called Madrid. First the Primate of Spain,
Cardinal Goma, then the Papal Nuncio, and finally Franco
himself, called Segura asking him to withdraw the threat
of excommunication. It would not look well, they explained
—the Falange was supposed to be Catholic. Segura was
adamant.

Franco eventually stopped pleading and ordered Segura
to cancel the threat of excommunication or leave Spain.
Segura, once ejected from Spain by the Republic for his
loyalty to the Crown, began packing his bags. A police
guard was thrown around the palace to prevent the irate
citizens of Sevilla, most of whom backed their Cardinal
against the Falange, from removing the inscription them-
selves. Finally an order came to the Cardinal direct from
Pope Pius XII. Only then did Segura agree to compromise.


136 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


The name of José Antonio was placed on the wall of the
Sagrario Church, together with a list of those citizens of
Sevilla who had died on the victorious side of the war. The
inscription then was removed from the palace wall.

Segura had the last word. He published a pastoral which
none save a Spanish Cardinal would have dared to issue. He
told Sevilla exactly what had happened, even published the
text of his letter excommunicating the civil Governor,
though without the Cardinal’s signature. He explained that
he had bowed only to the decision of the Pope in Rome,
and concluded with these daring words: “.. . for which His
Holiness shall answer before the Throne of God.”

Most of the clergy, of course, co-operated whole-heart-
edly with the Family. The Archbishop of Madrid — Alcala,
Leopoldo Eijo y Garay, for example, became a member of
the political Junta of the Falange and saluted stiff-armed
as Hitler did.

Only a single Spanish Bishop, Fidel of Calahorra, even
meritioned the encyclical of Pius XI of March 14, 1937,
which condemned Nazi action against German Catholics.
The Bishop of Calahorra’s reference to it was in 1942, five
years later, but so obedient was the clergy to the pro-Nazi
policy of the régime that it was even then considered a
daring act.

As the Army has prepared for any change of manage-
ment within the oligarchy, so is the clergy ready for what
may come. There is a candidate for each form of govern-
ment which the Family may choose.

The Primate of Spain named after the Civil War was
Enrique Pla y Deniel. When Franco led his armies from
Morocco toward Madrid, he sought a headquarters which
would be safe from Republican bombs. Pla y Deniel, then
Bishop of Salamanca, offered Franco his own episcopal pal-
ace, so close to the Cathedral that no bomb could hit the


PLAYERS ARE PAID 137


Generalissimo’s headquarters without damaging the church.
Two years later, when the oligarchy finally reached an
agreement with the Vatican on the method of filling the
vacancies in the Spanish clergy, Franco’s first choice for
Archbishop of Toledo and Primate of Spain was Pla y
Deniel.

Cardinal Segura would be leader of the clergy under a
monarchy. The Bishop of Calahorra could lead the clergy
under any liberal régime, particularly under a “limited” re-
public guided by the oligarchy. Should Spain become free
of the Family's rule, however, the leadership of what would
then be left of the clergy would go to a small but persistent
group whose spiritual home is not Toledo, but the Vatican.

Young priests and monks, many of whom have traveled
abroad, now are trying to bring into Spain the compara-
tively liberal spirit of the Vatican. Their main hope lies in a
Papal encyclical on labor, published in 1891 by Leo XIII.
This encyclical is famous in all countries save Spain, where
the clergy’s reactionary leaders feel that it reads like a Com-
munist document.

The hope of the Spanish Church, however, now lies with
this small group of young men. Some of them are Republi-
cans. It is possible that, with their help, Spain may one day
be both free and Catholic, but that is for tomorrow.

The businessmen are profiting handsomely from Family
arrangements.

The corporate wealth of Spain (like the land) now is
owned by fewer Spaniards than ever before. Valentin Ruiz
Senén, a lawyer for the Jesuits, is back as president of the
Madrid streetcar company, the Duro Felguera metallurgical
works, the Santillana and Alberche power group. Moreover,
he appears as director on the boards of several companies
in which the Jesuits had no interests before the Civil War.
Don Estanislao de Urquijo, head of the Urquijo Bank, and


cee aneiiememnen a ee


138 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


his cousin, José Maria de Oriol y Urquijo, control scores of
corporations. The Catalan, Francisco Cambo, now resident
in Buenos Aires, is represented in Spain by his aide, Juan
Ventosa, who manages a large portion of Catalan industry.
The Basque, Pablo Garnica, sits on the boards of many cor-
porations as the delegate of the few bankers who control
Bilbao industry.

Family favors enabled the businessmen of the oligarchy
to extract wealth from almost everything they touched.
Transport alone was a gold mine.

After the Civil War more than thirty per cent of the roll-
ing stock on Spain’s railroads was a total loss and another
twenty per cent was listed as “damaged beyond repair.”
Freight cars in this category were sold to merchants of the
Family as junk, repaired, and rented to the railroads at fan-
tastic prices. I know the owner of five freight cars who
divided a clear profit of 1,750,000 pesetas in two years with
his partner, a general who enabled him to buy the cars and
had them repaired in the Army workshops.

Some businessmen grumbled a little over taxes and the
graft which had to be paid to the Falange. But on the
whole, big business and the bankers were happy. This they
demonstrated in September, 1939, by oversubscribing a
2,000,000,000-peseta issue of three-year, three per cent
Treasury bonds with a total of 5,500,000,000 pesetas. Rais-
ing money for a Family Government was not difficult, for
the merchants recognized a good investment when they saw
it.

However, they discreetly invested much of their profits
abroad. The black-market value of the peseta, which fluc-
tuated between twenty-five and thirty-five to the dollar (the
official rate was eleven pesetas), was maintained by the
Family’s anxiety to exchange their pesetas into dollars,
pounds, or Swiss francs. For big business, like the other


PLAYERS ARE PAID 139


groups in the Family, feared that a reckoning with the peo-
ple of Spain was still to come. This fear, throughout the
years of World War II, drew the oligarchy toward Germany
and Italy, the “angels” who financed the masquerade.


|


THE ANGELS’ SHARE


WHEN THE CIVIL WAR ENDED on April 1, 1939, Spain’s foreign
policy was clearly mapped out.

Germany, Italy, and Portugal, the “angels” who had spon-
sored the victors, were to share in the profits.

Britain, France, and the United States, who had made
victory possible by their “non-intervention,” were scorned
as decadent powers. Spain would cast her lot with the
strong, with the totalitarian states.

Russia was the enemy. According to the Family, Russia
was responsible for all the ills which Spain had suffered.

These basic principles explain the oligarchy’s subsequent
political maneuvers.

Spain owed debts — both for material and moral support
— to Germany, Italy, and Portugal. Only Portugal refrained
from driving a hard bargain. Antonio Salazar was satisfied
that the oligarchy’s police state would divert attention from
his own dictatorship. He considered that repayment enough
for the arms and “volunteer force” he had made available to
the Family in 1936.

Germany and Italy expected a good deal more than mere
repayment of the money due them — $100,000,000 due Ger-
many and $263,000,000 in lire due Italy. They had rendered
aid which the Family could not pay in cash alone.

Germany and Italy had rescued the Family from certain

140


THE ANGELS’ SHARE 141


defeat by sending their planes to bridge the Strait of Gib-
raltar in July and August, 1936. Again and again during the
Civil War German and Italian aid turned the tide of battle
against the Republic. There were the “blood debts” —
10,000 casualties among 100,000 Italians sent to Spain; sev-
eral hundred dead of the 30,000 non-commissioned officers
of the German Army trained in Spain. Hitler spoke truth-
fully to the last contingent of his Condor Legion when they
returned to Berlin from Spain in the spring of 1939: “All
General Franco's victories were obtained with the help of
German volunteers.”

Such debts had to be paid. But it was evident to the
Family that they would get much more out of their prop-
erty, Spain, if they could remain as long as possible in a posi-
tion to use gentlemanly blackmail against Britain, France,
and the United States. They did not want to risk their share
of the spoils of a possible Axis victory, but they could make
the Axis a partner in the pleasant game of accepting gifts
from the democracies. This they were able to do through-
out the Second World War, thanks in part to the conflicting
interests of the “angels,” Germany and Italy, and in part to
the policies of appeasement adopted by the democracies.

Foreign policy responsibility was neatly divided by the
oligarchy at the beginning of their rule. Colonel Juan Beig-
beder, an Army man of no particular importance, sat in the
Foreign Ministry to receive the tribute of the democracies
and hear their complaints. Ramon Serrano Sufier, Minister
of the Interior who also managed the Falange, listened to
what Germany and Italy wanted and saw that they got it.

Beigbeder began collecting soon after British and French
recognition of the new régime on February 27, 1939.

The Spanish Family realized the French were prepared
to eat humble pie in the hope of securing their Pyrenees
frontier in the world war to come. Certain groups in France


142 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


had tried to support the Spanish Republic, though Britain
overruled this. The forty thousand members of the Inter-
national Brigade, largely recruited by Communist parties
outside Spain, had reached the Civil War battlegrounds
through France and many were French. Only by a virtual
surrender to the Family's demands were the French able to
persuade Madrid to accept recognition.

Philippe Pétain, Marshal of France, was chosen to ap-
pease the Family, since the Quai d'Orsay remembered that
Francisco Franco had been one of Pétain’s students at the
French War College many years before. Franco kept his
aged professor waiting a week to present his credentials.
Then he told the Marshal, appearing in the réle of penitent
for the sins of his countrymen, that Spain could maintain
relations with France only if the French worked hard for
forgiveness.

The Marshal complied. France handed over $40,000,000
in gold deposited at Mont de Marsan by the Spanish Re-
public in 1931, as well as $300,000,000 worth of gold, silver,
and securities deposited in La Rochelle by the fugitive
Basque Government. Spanish warships, which had been
taken to Bizerte in Tunisia by their Republican crews, were
sent to Spain again while the angry sailors were silenced in
French Moroccan internment camps. Spain’s bill for live-
stock and other property taken to France by the fleeing Re-
publicans was paid. An official of the French Foreign Office
told me in Paris: “The Marshal would give the Spaniards all
of Morocco, too, if we would let him.”

Britain fared better at first. Sir Maurice Peterson was a
career diplomat sent to do a job he detested. London's
orders were to scramble for the Family’s favors, but Sir
Maurice could not bring himself to scramble. He was not
popular with the British residents in Spain, for most of them
represented British investments in the country and were sol-


THE ANGELS’ SHARE 143


idly in favor of appeasement. Sir Maurice followed his or-
ders with such obvious distaste that the members of the
Family were quite in awe of him until they learned that the
British Government was far more eager to please them than
the attitude of His Majesty's Ambassador led them to sup-
ose.
i One such demonstration of Britain’s interest brought Paul
Van Zeeland, Belgium’s former Foreign Minister, to Madrid.
He offered the Family a $500,000,000 “reconstruction loan”
to be handled through the Mendelssohn Bank of Amster-
dam. The interest rate was to be low. The catch was that
the Mendelssohn group was associated with banks in Paris
and London and could therefore consider Spain a safe in-
vestment only if it planned to be neutral in the coming war.

The Family was definitely interested, but the Germans
objected. They did not expect to need Spain as a belligerent
ally; they planned to use Spain as a “neutral” ally. They
did not, however, intend to let Britain feel safe in Gibraltar.
The oligarchy was told that if Spain expected to share in
the spoils when the British and French empires were di-
vided, they must waive the loan. The way Franco put it to
Van Zeeland was — “Spain’s honor is not for sale.”

The United States followed closely after France and Brit-
ain in this curious rush to the Spanish Family's side. The
last United States Ambassador to the Republic, Claude Bow-
ers, had warned his Government that their arms embargo
was only a means of helping the wrong side, but his advice
was ignored. The next Ambassador to Spain, a Virginia gen-
tleman and an able diplomat, the late Alexander W. Wed-
dell, was able to confirm Bowers’ opinion. Weddell found
it no easy task to accept the Family's insults while offering
them appeasement.

Largest of the United States interests in Spain was the
International Telephone and Telegraph Company property.


144 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Through a contract granted by Dictator Miguel Primo de
Rivera, I. T. & T. owned and operated Spain’s telephone
system which it made one of the best in Europe. Madrid’s
tallest building, an eighteen-story “skyscraper,” was built
by I. T. & T. as its headquarters, thereby leading Spaniards
to talk of “the shadow of United States capital over Spain’s
capital.”

When the Family’s armies finally occupied Madrid,
I. T. & T. representatives were barred from entering their
property. Spaniards ran the business. Falangists threatened
to nationalize the telephone system.

Appeasement began. An Import-Export Bank credit of
$18,500,000 enabled Spain to buy enough American and
Brazilian cotton to keep her Family-owned textile mills in
Catalonia running for a year. It did not lead to the release
of the I. T. & T. property. Spanish inefficiency, not appease-
ment, was responsible for Americans being recalled eighteen
months later to unsnarl the tangle made by Spanish man-
agement.

The world had little time to watch Spain in August and
September of 1939, when the war begun in Spain spread
beyond the Pyrenees. For this reason it is generally forgot-
ten what Spain did when the Germano-Soviet pact was an-
nounced on August 23.

At that time the Spanish Family learned that Germany,
“our glorious ally in the Christian crusade against the god-
less Muscovites,” now was allied with Russia. This did not
alter their policy toward Germany.

The Spanish press forgot that Russia was the root of all
evil. Germany’s demolition of Warsaw was hailed as a tri-
umph of modern warfare. Catholic Poland was urged to
capitulate. Like an echo from Berlin, Franco's voice begged
Britain and France to “localize the conflict” and “keep the
peace.” The democracies, having already “localized” Aus-


THE ANGELS’ SHARE 145


tria, Albania, Spain, and Czechoslovakia, were beginning to
learn what the word meant. They disregarded the Spanish
Family’s advice, but they hurried to appease its régime.

Britain presented Spain with a $10,000,000 credit. France
permitted Spain’s trade with Germany to pass through
French territory via Italy. The United States Maritime
Commission gave Spain a bargain —two 12,000-ton ships
for $650,000 each. Although the names of the ships were
changed, it was still somewhat of a blow for Americans to
watch the former President Wilson and President Lincoln
running Germany's errands between Spain and the Spanish
Americas throughout the war.

Germany’s requests were handled through Serrano Suiier,
the Generalissimo’s white-haired brother-in-law. Two im-
portant, but dangerous, réles had to be filled in the Family’s
masquerade at this time and Serrano Suiier took both of
them. He did so because he liked power and because he
thought he could beat the Family at its own game. In this
he failed.

One réle was for a man on whom the Spanish people
could concentrate the fierce hate born of repression, hate
which might otherwise be turned on the whole oligarchy.
First to fill this part was a military sadist, General Martinez
Anido, whose love of torturing others was famed throughout
Spain. When he died in bed in 1938, his Ministry of Public
Order was taken over by the Minister of the Interior, Ser-
rano Sufier. The aides of the unlamented Martinez Anido
were informed that there was to be no change of policy.
They carried on as before, though they found that their new
chief did not care to watch the tortures, beatings, and final
executions of his victims. Martinez Anido liked to see what
he was doing. Serrano Sufier was a man of finer sensibilities;
he preferred not to look.

The second réle was for a man who could handle jobs for


146 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


the Axis which might not be compatible with Spain’s neu-
trality. This was not to be a permanent part in the masque-
rade, but it was convenient to have such a character on the
stage as long as the outcome of the World War was uncer-
tain or as long as Spain was more useful to the Axis as a
friendly “neutral” than as a co-belligerent. Thus, if the de-
mocracies unexpectedly won the war, the oligarchy could
oust this man, charging him with the responsibilities of their
pro-Axis policy. If the Axis appeared certain to win, he
would be dropped so that the world could see that his pol-
icy was indeed the policy of the oligarchy.

In this last réle, Serrano Sufier served both the Germans
and the oligarchy well. The press, the Falange, the police
and the provincial governments throughout Spain were
under his management. His Falangists served in all minis-
tries save the military offices. Nothing he undertook could
have been done without the complicity of the Family, but
the Family could, and did, blame everything on him. He
saw to it that the “angels,” Germany and Italy, got their
share of the profits of the Family's victory in Spain. It was
a large share.

The Spanish press became the servant of the Axis. Manuel
Aznar, a shrewd journalist who became to Spain what Vir-
gilio Gayda was to Fascist Italy, was assigned to “purge”
the newspapermen of Barcelona and Madrid of all “Red”
elements. Those who were left when Aznar had done his
work took orders in all press matters from the Falange.
News from abroad was distributed only by “EFE,” a news
agency created at Serrano Sufier’s order, and its associate,
the German “Transocean” agency.

The result of such control was that the Spanish press
never published a word of criticism of Germany from 1939
to the end of the war in Europe. Spain’s press cheered the
Germans as bombs blasted the cities and villages of Britain,


THE ANGELS’ SHARE 147


but suddenly discovered that bombing was “inhuman” when
traffic began moving the other way. Newspapers owned by
the clergy, the merchants, and the high officers of the Army
were not the slaves, but the willing accomplices, of the Fa-
lange in this policy. Not even the newspapers of Germany
itself, nor of Italy, were as enthusiastic about the Axis and
all its works as was the Spanish press.

Such was the press attitude toward Germany that it sick-
ened even the Germans. Hans Lazar, the capable Armenian
who served the Germans as press attaché, urged the Falange
on several occasions to be “more temperate” in its praise.
In the days before Pearl Harbor, the German newspaper
correspondents in Madrid invented the following report of
a telephone conversation between Mussolini and Hitler:

Mussolini: “And how is the war going, Adolf?”

Hitler: “Ah, magnificently. Russia is about to capitulate
and Britain is asking for peace. The United States now
wants to know if she can keep Manhattan Island. Yes,
everything is going very well — though of course not as well
as the Spanish press reports.”

Fortunately for the United States, this same enthusiasm
for carrying praise beyond the realm of reason was applied
to the program of the Hispanidad Council. This helped de-
stroy General Faupel’s dream.

General Wilhelm Faupel was a heavy-browed, big-eared
Prussian of the old Imperial school who liked to have for-
eigners call him “Von Faupel,” though “Von” he had none.
After serving his Kaiser on the Western Front, he went to
South America to pursue his military career. He was suc-
cessively Military Counselor to the Inspector General of the
Argentine Army, Adviser to the General Staff of the Bra-
zilian Army, and finally Inspector General of the Peruvian
Army. By 1935 he was head of the Ibero-American Insti-
tute in Berlin, created to extend German influence through-
out Latin America.


148 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


For this purpose, he was named Germany’s first Ambassa-
dor to the Family’s Spain, late in 1936. His plan was to use
Spain’s influence in Latin America as a German instrument
against the United States.

Faupel’s idea was not new to the Family. During the First
World War, Vazquéz Mella, a prominent Carlist member of
the oligarchy, proposed a similar scheme. In 1915 he wrote
that Germany, a Continental power, should use Spain to ex-
tend her influence to the Americas. He concluded: “We
now must form the Spanish United States of South America
against the Saxon United States of the North!”

Nearly twenty-five years later, the Spanish Family carried
this policy one step farther. They handed over to the Ger-
mans Spain’s cultural interests in the Americas.

First of the overseas organs to be utilized by Faupel was,
of course, the Spanish diplomatic service. The aid which
Spanish diplomats could give the Germans was limited. For
this reason the organization of Falange abroad, called Fa-
lange Exterior, was extended throughout the Americas
where Spain’s diplomats were instructed to give Falangist
agents full support.

Falange Exterior was founded in Milan, Italy, in 1935 as
a social club for Spanish followers of José Antonio Primo de
Rivera. After 1936 it became the chief source of agents for
the Germans in Spanish-speaking countries.

Membership in the overseas Falange was never very
large. Cuba’s Falangists claimed twenty-five thousand mem-
bers before they were liquidated by the Cuban Government,
but probably were no more than five thousand. Falangists
in Mexico counted only fifteen hundred, and there were but
eight hundred in six chapters in Central America. Even the
Argentine, closest friend of the Family’s Spain, had but one
thousand Falangists. The importance of Falange Exterior
to the Germans was that each of its members, though they


THE ANGELS’ SHARE 149


numbered no more than twenty thousand in all the Ameri-
cas, was a potential German agent.

The South Americans had the good sense to recognize the
Falange Exterior for what it was. The organization and the
native Fascist parties it created soon were dissolved in most
countries. The Germans needed another Spanish organiza-
tion which would be less suspect, an organization which
was not directly tied to the Falange, but could continue its
work. The answer was the Hispanidad Council.

The Hispanidad Council was created formally in October,
1941, just a few days after Franco talked to Hitler on the
frontier between France and Spain. Serrano Sufier was the
first president of the Council. Its Chancellor, Manuel
Halcon, a Sevilla lawyer, had previously gone to Berlin to
confer with Faupel, back at his old job of running the Ibero-
American Institute. The rest of the Council read like a ros-
ter of the leading Germanophiles.

Hispanidad is a coined word meaning the brotherhood of
Spanish-speaking peoples. As an organization, its agents
abroad were all those Spaniards and South Americans who
were on good terms with the oligarchy in Madrid. Only a
few of the Spanish clergy’s missionaries abroad, among
them the Capuchin monks of Barranquilla in Colombia and
the Franciscans in Ecuador, served Falange Exterior, but all
worked for Hispanidad.

Within Spain, the Hispanidad Council was heavily sub-
sidized by the State. In the Americas, it might have been
difficult to trace the connection between Hispanidad and
Germany, but within Spain the connection was obvious. To
reach the Americas with subsidized radio programs, the
Hispanidad Council used a powerful radio station which the
Germans originally built for the “EFE” agency. Construc-
tion was begun immediately on a more powerful station at
Arganda, near Madrid, which is an exact duplicate of Radio


150 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Leipzig and now is used by “Radio Nacional” for its broad-
casts to the Americas.

The decree creating the Hispanidad Council liquidated
all other organizations engaged in promoting “good rela-
tions” with the Americas save one —“Falange Exterior.”
What portions of the organization of the Falange abroad
managed to survive the wrath of American democracies
withered and died after the attack on Pearl Harbor. After
Pearl Harbor only the Hispanidad Council was publicly
active.

Antonio Meneses, a deputy under the monarchy, a civil
governor under the elder Primo de Rivera, and a wealthy
publisher in Madrid during the Republic, was typical of His-
panidad agents. He was the director of an international
news agency called Prensa Mundial. He lived in Buenos
Aires, but his agency was active in Madrid, Rome, Paris, and
Berlin. I had occasion to check on the Madrid operations
of the agency. Its transmission expenses were paid by the
Falange, its office rent was paid by the Hispanidad Council,
and the salaries of its staff were paid by Hans Lazar, press
attaché of the German Embassy in Madrid.

Prensa Mundial began to collapse in 1944, together with
Germany. Its Madrid office managers coolly appeared at
the British and American Embassies to offer the services of
their agency for a price. About the same time Meneses him-
self appeared in Lisbon, where he tried to interest the
United States Embassy press attaché in a book he had writ-
ten. It was an autobiography entitled I Tried to Be Friends
with the Germans.

Germany lacked no friends in Spain, particularly after the
collapse of France in the summer of 1940. Events moved
swiftly that summer in Spain as in Europe. Pétain left Ma-
drid to play a new réle at Vichy; Sir Samuel Hoare, now
Lord Templewood, rushed to Spain bearing more appease-
ment.


THE ANGELS’ SHARE 151


Sir Samuel, aptly described by one of his own countrymen
as “the descendant of a long line of maiden aunts,” is with-
out doubt one of the world’s greatest appeasers. He not only
seized many opportunities to appease Spaniards while he
blocked occasional efforts of the Americans to adopt a
“tough policy” toward Spain, but he also took a trip back to
London in each one of his years in Spain to appease the vot-
ers of the district he represented in Parliament. On one of
these trips a Labour Party newspaper caught a beautiful
photograph of Sir Samuel. He was stepping off a train from
the airport, just back from Madrid, and over his head was
a large sign: “IS THIS TRIP REALLY NECESSARY?”

The Falange staged a noisy greeting for Sir Samuel in
front of the British Embassy on the day he was scheduled
to arrive. Students and Government employees, dismissed
for the day to shout “Gibraltar is Spanish!” at the Embassy
gate, learned to their disappointment that Sir Samuel had
not yet arrived — his plane had been delayed in Lisbon.

When he reached Madrid, Franco kept him waiting with
his credentials in hand for nearly ten days. During that
period, while British troops died on the beaches of Dunkirk,
Franco signed decrees awarding the Grand Collar of Yoke
and Arrows to Von Ribbentrop of Germany and Ettore
Mutti of Italy. Two days after Sir Samuel presented his cre-
dentials, Italy joined the war.

Spain’s position was not immediately clarified. The Ger-
mans, busy with the conquest of France, had little time to
decide what Spain should do. Finally, on June 13, the Ger-
man press reported that Spain might “consider it necessary”
to seize the International Zone of Tangier. That same day
it was announced in Madrid that Spain had abandoned
“neutrality” for “non-belligerency.” Next day two Spanish
divisions marched into Tangier “in the name of the Sultan
of Morocco,” who was not consulted.


152 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


“Tangier today; Gibraltar tomorrow,” chanted the Falan-
gists demonstrating in the streets. Germany’s new Ambas-
sador to Spain, Eberhard von Stohrer, made them a speech
from the balcony of the German Embassy. “Spain’s de-
mands will be granted,” he said.

Across the Pyrenees in France, old Marshal Pétain asked
the Spanish Ambassador, José Felix de Lequerica, to trans-
mit his request for an armistice to the Germans.

France had fallen.

The Spanish Family was overjoyed. They had played
their parts well, they thought. Only Juan March, the Mal-
lorcan smuggler become financier, still believed that Britain
could win and still invested his fortune in a British victory.
Almost all the other members of the oligarchy looked for-
ward to the day when the rich French portion of Morocco
would be theirs. Britain, it was agreed, would not last long.

Franco’s radio address to the nation on July 17 is now
omitted from the official collections of his speeches. Spain’s
duty, he declared, was to hold Gibraltar and extend her rule
over African territory. “Two million Spanish soldiers are
ready to face anybody in support of Spain’s rights,” he said.
On the next day, at a military parade to which he had in-

vited the diplomatic corps, he forced Sir Samuel Hoare to
leave by having his own staff officers on the reviewing stand
lead cheers of “Gibraltar is ours!”

These were not just words, not merely idle threats made
by the oligarchy to please the Germans. Berlin was too
practical for that. In the report of the sub-committee on the
Spanish Question to the Security Council of the United Na-
tions there is testimony from German Army officers who
dealt with the Spaniards. They tell of practical plans. The
“Isabella-Felix” plan for the capture of Gibraltar was de-
veloped as the common enterprise of the German and Span-

ish General Staffs in July, 1940. It was to be executed as a


THE ANGELS’ SHARE 153


part of the “Sea Lion” plan for the capture of the British
Isles. The importance which the Germans ascribed to this
operation may be judged from the fact that Admiral Canaris,
Chief of the German Military Intelligence, planned it in
person and made frequent visits in that connection to the
country home of his friend, Air Minister General Juan
Vigon.

Maps and reports on Gibraltar’s defenses were sent to
Germany by the Spanish General Staff, along with samples
of the rock on which the fortress was built. A Spanish Army
division under General Asensio rehearsed the storming of
Gibraltar near Algeciras. Across the Pyrenees near Bordeaux
the First German Jaeger Division was being trained for the
assault. Across the Strait, the Family had built up its Army
in Morocco from the normal strength of thirty thousand
men to a total of one hundred thousand. Operation “Isa-
bella-Felix” also included campaigns to seize the rest of
Morocco and a part of Algeria from France.

What happened to these plans? The answer lies in two
paragraphs from the joint statement of Lieutenant General
Guenther Krappe, former German Military Attaché in Ma-
drid, and Colonel Hans Renner, former Military Attaché in
Tangier, made following their capture in Germany. The
statement is incorporated in the report of the United Nations
sub-committee of June, 1946:


That the Isabella-Felix plan was not put into practice
was in no way due to Spain’s unwillingness to take part in
it. It was due to Hitler’s refusal in 1940 to carry out the
“Sea Lion” plan to occupy Britain, on account of his plans to
attack the Soviet Union. We were informed to this effect
by appropriate officials in Germany. Thus the head of the
OKW (Military) Attaché Branch told Renner, in the autumn
of 1940, that, in view of the fact that preparations had start-
ed for war against the Soviet Union, the Spanish plan could


154 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


not be carried out. Thenceforth, he added, Spain’s open
entry into the war was undesirable for Germany. Spain,
under the mask of neutrality, was more useful to Germany.

In October, 1941, Von Stohrer, German Ambassador in
Madrid, told Krappe, when the latter assumed his duties in
Madrid, that the Gibraltar operation was no longer urgent,
that Spain was protected by her neutrality and was more
useful thus for German strategy, and that if Spain were to
come into the war, Germany would be unable to supply her
with grain and fuel. Stohrer also noted that Spain furnished
Germany a safe exit from the blockade ring. When Renner
was appointed Military Attaché in Tangier, he was received,
in February, 1942, by State Secretary of the German For-
eign Ministry von Weizsaecker, who told him that a quiet
Spain and North Africa were at that time in the interests of
Germany. Weizsaecker emphasized that it was necessary
to keep Spain from coming out into the open in any way,
as that would be incompatible with German interests: “We
are receiving from Spain important support for our conduct
of the war. We must not lose it on any account.”


Just what “important support” Spain gave is evident in
the same statement.

“Throughout the whole war,” the German officers wrote,
“Spain was conducting active espionage work jointly with
Germany against Britain and America.”

They explain that the Spanish General Staff kept them
regularly informed of all news of a military nature received
from the Spanish military attachés abroad, particularly those
in Britain.

General Luis Orgaz, High Commissioner of Spanish
Morocco, was very helpful. With his co-operation the Ger-
mans set up six observation posts along the coast between
Melilla and Tangier. These posts were manned by four hun-
dred German.sailors and Spanish employees and contained


THE ANGELS’ SHARE 155


thermic-ray apparatus permitting naval observation by night
and in fog. Of this service, the German officers reported:


The assistance rendered to the German Intelligence Serv-
ice in organizing, maintaining, and manning these observa-
tion posts made it possible for the German Command to
have exact information about the number, type, and course
of British and United States ships the moment they entered
the Mediterranean, and to dispatch the necessary naval and
air units against them in good time.

For example, in the summer of 1943 they were able to
attack a British convoy off Oran and to sink a large number
of ships with a total displacement of fifty thousand tons. In-
formation about the approaching convoy was received from
the observation post stationed in the Spanish lighthouse on
Cape Sparte. General Orgaz, who organized the observa-
tion post, had supplied it with a radio station which was
used for transmitting information about the approaching
convoys.


How many American and British troops died in the waters
off Gibraltar? The Spanish oligarchy was responsible for
their deaths. Nor was this all.

The Spanish Navy, whose officers were almost exclusively
Monarchists, many of them members of the aristocracy and
all of them members of the Family, placed its facilities at
the disposal of the German Navy. Following the end of the
war in Europe, German naval officers reported case after
case of German submarines operating in the Atlantic and
German blockade-runners from South America which were
repaired, supplied, and refueled in the Canary Islands and
at Vigo, with the knowledge and assistance of Spanish
authorities.

The Spanish Air Ministry, under General Vigén, turned
Over to the Germans for inspection British and American
planes forced down in Spain or Spanish Morocco. Even after


156 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


March, 1948, when the oligarchy finally agreed to ban the
crossing of the Strait by German nationals, the German Mil-
itary Attaché in Madrid flew to Tangier in General Orgaz’
express plane, dressed in the uniform of a Spanish officer.

Spain gave enormous economic help to Germany through-
out the war. In 1948, 39.2 per cent of all Spain’s exports went
to Germany while 30 per cent went to German industries in
occupied countries. Heavy guns and gun barrels from the
Basque factories; rifle cartridges from Valencia’s powder
mills; plane and submarine motors from the Hispano-Suiza
plant in Barcelona; boots for the German Army from the
Balearic Islands; uniforms and blankets from the Catalan
textile mills; olive oil from Andalucia — all this and more
went to Germany for its war machine. More important,
forty per cent of Germany’s supply of tungsten, vital for the
manufacture of armor-piercing shells, came from Spain.
Johannes Bernhardt, who helped “rescue” the Family in
1936, and who now is living on his Valencia estates, shipped
sixty thousand tons of high-grade Basque iron ore to the
German-occupied ports of Bayonne and Bordeaux each year.
I learned that at least one of Bernhardt’s convoys was
guided by a Spanish naval patrol boat.

In addition, the United States Blue Book on Argentina
reports how Spain arranged a three-way deal whereby Spain
would send arms to Argentina which were replaced by Ger-
man arms for Spain, while Argentina would send meat and
tallow to Spanish firms which would forward them to Ger-
many.

In September, 1940, Serrano Sufier, still only the Minister
of the Interior and the head of the Falange, set out for Ber-
lin with a large delegation of Spanish trade experts and
newspaper editors. Before he crossed the French frontier,
he made a brief speech explaining: “From this moment on,
we share Europe’s fate!” In Berlin, however, he found the


THE ANGELS’ SHARE 157


Germans surprisingly indifferent to Spain’s desire to share
their fate. It appeared that Hitler was interested in obtain-
ing French collaboration against the United Nations. More
would be said about the matter when the Fuehrer talked
with Franco in October.

Serrano Sufier went to Rome, where he and Count Ciano
complained about their German master’s failure to realize
the importance of the Mediterranean and about the surpris-
ing British resistance to air attacks. When Serrano Sufer
returned to Madrid, he was greeted by one of the many
“cultural” visitors Germany was sending to Spain, a German
military band which marched down the Alcala playing the
Horst Wessel.

The Family had decided there was no further use in
maintaining a pro-British Foreign Minister. Beigbeder had
obtained another ten million dollar credit from Britain, this
time to cover the purchase of Portuguese colonial products.
It was obvious to the Family, however, that Britain, now
fighting for her life, could not refuse appeasement to Spain,
no matter who was Foreign Minister.

Serrano Suiier took Beigbeder’s job on October 17, 1941.
Thereafter, diplomats who called on the Foreign Minister
walked up stone stairs lined with armed blue shirts of the
Falange militia, who saluted them with upraised palm.

The chief reason for Beigbeder’s dismissal at this time was
that Heinrich Himmler was due in Spain within two days to
prepare for Hitler’s talk with Franco and to inspect the Ger-
man police system in Spain. Serrano Suiier, in his capacity
as police boss, Falange leader, and Foreign Minister, was
Himmler’s host. The visitor had a long talk with Franco and
signed a new “police agreement,” the terms of which were
not made public. He also had long talks with prominent
leaders of the Family, including Leopoldo Efjo y Garay,
Bishop of Madrid-Alcalé, a member of the Falange Junta


158 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Politica, and proud owner of a limousine given him by Adolf
Hitler. As Himmler left Spain, Arriba sent him off with this
editorial comment: “In men like Heinrich Himmler, strong
states reach their zenith.”

The meeting between Hitler and Franco which Himmler
was preparing took place on the French side of the Inter-
national Bridge at Hendaye on October 23, 1940. The posi-
tions of the men who met at that time is worth examination.

Hitler had decided against the execution of “Operation
Sea Lion” in that year. Preparations to invade Britain,
which had begun along the North Sea, Channel, and At-
lantic coasts of the Continent, were at a standstill. Britain
had taken the worst pounding that the Luftwaffe could give
and was still resisting. Hitler was thinking of Russia, which
was to be invaded the next summer. He planned to draw
France into the anti-British coalition and had just talked to
Pétain. Pétain agreed to collaborate, provided France could
keep its fleet and its North African possessions. Hitler had
agreed. This agreement conditioned Hitler’s conversation
with Franco.

Franco and the oligarchy which he represented were will-
ing to go to war if the Germans desired it. Should Spain be-
come a belligerent, however, she would need about six hun-
dred thousand tons of grain annually in addition to gasoline
and petroleum supplies. The oligarchy also wanted Ger-
many’s authorization to go ahead with the North African
portion of “Operation Isabella-Felix,” the seizure of French
Morocco and Oran.

The real business between the two men was done with
only an interpreter present. Germans and Spaniards who
attended the two leaders agree that the conversation fol-
lowed these general lines:

Hitler asked Franco if Spain would permit the passage of
German troops to attack Gibraltar without compensation


THE ANGELS’ SHARE 159


and economic support. According to an affidavit by Lieu-
tenant General Karl Warlimont, a German officer involved
in Germany's relations with Spain since 1936, Franco re-
fused. He said Spain could not sustain herself economically
in war. He declared that Spain would prefer to wait until
the “Isabella-Felix” plan for the occupation of Morocco and
Algeria by Spain could be carried out.

Hitler said Germany was not then prepared to give Spain
either petroleum or food. He also reported that the need
for French collaboration at that time was too great to per-
mit the cession of Morocco and Oran to the Spaniards. The
discussion then turned to Germano-Spanish co-operation
within the framework of Spain’s “non-belligerency.”

All sources agree that the meeting concluded in an atmos-
phere of complete cordiality. Hitler did not pound the
table. Von Ribbentrop telephoned Ciano from Hendaye
that night to say that Hitler “is, on the whole, satisfied with
the results achieved.” Nothing which followed suggested
that the Hitler-Franco talk had done anything but strength-
en the bonds between the Family and their leading foreign
stockholder.

In Madrid, on the very day of the Hendaye meeting, Sir
Samuel Hoare hit a new high in his record of appeasement.
He solemnly presented the Spanish clergy, in the person of
a priest from Valladolid, “a precious collection of sacred
ornaments of wrought silver.” The note which the British
Embassy sent to the Spanish press on the subject added
that Sir Samuel presented the gift “in the name of the Duke
of Wellington.”

The United States and Spain made more valuable offer-
ings of appeasement when Spain remained “non-belligerent”
after the Hendaye meeting. Britain released Spanish funds
blocked in London to permit purchases within the sterling
area. The United States Treasury found seven hundred


160 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


thousand dollars were due “the Spanish Republic” as a five
per cent premium on silver sold during the Civil War. This
sum was sent to Madrid on the day that the whole Spanish
cabinet was the guest of the German Ambassador at the
Nazi film Victory in the West.

The American Red Cross also made a brief experiment in
charity in the bitter-cold winter of 1940-41. Police perse-
cutions of the masses continued through a period of starva-
tion when official graft made millions from the black mar-
ket and drained Spain’s food warehouses of rationed stocks
intended for the poor. Men became outlaws for want of
bread. When members of the Family went hunting on their
country estates, they had to take along armed escorts of the
Civil Guard to protect them from the men of the moun-
tains. Typhus killed thousands of the poor; hunger and
tuberculosis took many more.

Through this winter the American Red Cross distributed
$4,000,000 worth of food. Spain accepted the gift only on
condition that most of it be handled by Auxilio Social, the
State charity organization managed by the Falange. As a re-
sult, much of the canned milk and flour was diverted to the
black market at prices far out of the poor man’s reach. The
Red Cross received no public thanks, and the United States
continued to be attacked in the Spanish press. The oligarchy
seemed far more appreciative of the gifts that Germany sent
them from Occupied France — former Republicans deported
to Spain where certain death awaited them.

Among the Republicans captured by the Germans and
sent back to Spain was Luis Companys, President of the
autonomous Catalan Government. He was “tried” in secret
at Montjuich Castle above Barcelona. He died before a fir-
ing squad on October 15, 1940. Many others were deported
to Spain as Germany’s “blood gifts” to the oligarchy.

Nothing gratified the Spanish Family more, however, than
the attack on Russia of June 22, 1941.


THE ANGELS’ SHARE 161


For nearly two years the oligarchy had been striving to
explain why they remained pro-German despite Germany’s
alliance with Soviet Russia. Through those years the press
had studiously avoided attacking Soviet Russia or even men-
tioning the German alliance with Russia. Now, at last, the
lid was off.

Again Madrid queried Berlin. Was Spain to enter the
war at last? Definitely not, replied Berlin. Hitler had no
desire to open his Pyrenees flank to invasion through a weak
and belligerent Spain at the very moment when he had un-
dertaken the conquest of Russia. The oligarchy again sighed
with relief and settled down to be further “appeased.” At
the same time the Spanish General Staff received instruc-
tions from Berlin to form a division of Spaniards for service
on the Russian front. General Carlos Asensio, then Chief of
Staff, was instructed to produce seventeen thousand men
organized in three infantry regiments, one artillery regi-
ment, one detachment of heavy artillery, one battalion of
sappers, and one signal battalion. The division was to be
known as the “Spanish Legion of Volunteers.”

Obviously a single Spanish division would be of no great
importance to the Germans in such a gigantic undertaking
as the conquest of Russia. But a contribution from Spain
fitted into their plans for the Nazi unification of Europe.
Hitler dreamed of an anti-Communist crusade in which all
Europe should participate, a European victory led by Ger-
man arms. German propagandists were pounding home the
theme of “Our new continental Europe” in every European
country they could reach.

The responsibility for raising the Spanish Legion of Vol-
unteers was given to the Army. Serrano Sufier, however,
seized the opportunity to show the brotherhood of the Fa-
lange and the Nazis.

On June 23, the Falange worked all night long preparing


162 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


for the morrow’s “spontaneous” demonstrations. In the
morning, all classes were suspended at the universities; all
Government, provincial, and municipal offices were closed.
In Madrid, a city in which the only big business is Govern-
ment, tens of thousands of Falangists gathered before the
Falange National Headquarters on the Alcala. A banner
bearing the yoke-and-arrows symbol covered the front of the
six-story building. Just underneath, the huge sign over the
German Tourist Office read simply “GERMANY.”

Serrano Sufier appeared on the balcony framed fittingly
by “Germany” and the yoke and arrows.

“Russia is guilty!” he shrieked.

The crowd took up the cry. They swept off with a police
escort to the British Embassy. They hurled stones through
the windows and shouted invectives.

“Death to Britain! Gibraltar is ours! Long live Germany!”

Sir Samuel Hoare, the story goes, was called to the tele-
phone. Serrano Sufier’s chief of police asked him with ex-
aggerated deference if he would like more police for his
protection.

“No,” said Sir Samuel dryly, as the stones crashed through
the windows of his study, “no more police are necessary. But
you need send no more students.”

Thereupon Sir Samuel Hoare donned his diplomatic uni-
form, summoned all the officers of his staff, and gave them a
brief lecture, concluding, “Remember, you are British!”
Then he led a motorcade of diplomatic limousines to Ser-
rano Sufier’s private apartment. There he read the Caudillo’s
brother-in-law a strong note demanding prompt apologies
and repair of the damage done to the Embassy. He got both
the apologies and the glaziers.

On the same day Britain suspended navicerts for Spanish
tankers bringing petroleum from the Americas. Spaniards
wondered whether Britain was at last to change its policy
of appeasement.


THE ANGELS’ SHARE 163


Within the week, however, Sir Samuel called on Franco
at the Pardo Palace outside Madrid to “outline the possibil-
ities of British and American economic aid to Spain.” Ser-
rano Sufier’s aides told me that Franco replied that he would
consider such assistance only if no political strings were at-
tached. Apparently Sir Samuel accepted these conditions,
for an agreement was reached whereby Spain was to get
enough navicerts for gasoline to cover her domestic needs.
Manuel Mora Figuerroa, Vice Secretary of the Falange, said
in a public speech, on which the British declined to com-
ment, that “we got more than four times what we expected.”

Meanwhile, the Falange had picked up the “Legion of
Volunteers” and was literally running away with it. Falan-
gists called it the “Blue Legion” to identify it with the color
of their shirts—so dark a blue as to be close to Fascist
Italy’s black.

It soon became evident that the Falange was more eager
to promote the Blue Legion than they were to join it. Of a
total of about twenty-eight thousand Spaniards who went in
two shifts to Germany for service with the Legion, only
about eight thousand were Falangists. Serrano Sujfier per-
sonally ordered all Falangist leaders, national and provin-
cial, to volunteer for the Legion unless their work at home
was “absolutely necessary to the nation.” Of those few Fa-
langist leaders who did volunteer, a number withdrew, dis-
covering that their work at home was more important than
they had at first realized.

The Army supplied the bulk of the Legion. Orders went
to all garrisons, suggesting that the commanders obtain a
“maximum” of volunteers. The commanders’ interest in pro-
motions inspired all sorts of schemes calculated to make
home-loving conscripts or peace-loving professional soldiers
go to Russia.

In Valencia, the troops were assembled and informed that


164 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


all those who did not care to volunteer for the Blue Legion
were to report to the colonel’s office for an investigation into
their political background. In Sevilla and many other gar-
risons the soldiers first heard of their patriotic sacrifice at
assembly when the commander’s letter, reporting that his en-
tire garrison had volunteered “as one man,” was read to
them. In Guadalajara, a captain ordered “all those among
you who are not Spanish patriots, take one step forward.”
None did, and the company was congratulated on having
volunteered for the Legion.

From this enormous pool of “volunteers,” comprising prac-
tically every Spanish soldier outside the infirmaries, the Gen-
eral Staff selected units the Germans wanted. Their recep-
tion in Germany did little to improve relations between the
Germans and the Spanish people.

Elaborate demonstrations accompanied the departure of
the first group of Legionnaires trom Madrid. These first
two thousand, many of them true volunteers, had been care-
fully deloused, tested for venereal diseases, and provided
with brand-new uniforms. As soon as they crossed the bor-
der into Occupied France, they were herded into German
delousing stations, given V.D. tests which eliminated sev-
eral hundred, and dressed in German uniforms bearing a
shoulder patch with the Spanish national colors and the
word “Espafia.” German soldiers, forbidden to fraternize,
kept them on the troop trains as they went through occupied
France. At the German border they were met by a small
German band bearing a banner proclaiming “WELCOME TO
Our SpanisH ALLtEs.” The band promptly burst into music
which was instantly recognized as the Himno de Riego,
national anthem of the Spanish Republic.

In German training camps, the Spaniards gave Latin
pinches to girls who served their mess and flew into Latin
rages when the Prussian officers lectured them for it. Pills


THE ANGELS’ SHARE 165


which calmed the amorous urges of the German soldiers had
no effect on the Spaniards. In Poland, contraceptives were
issued to the Spaniards by some German office which as-
sumed that Polish women supplied German troops would
also be available for the Spaniards. Somebody in Berlin
decided the Spaniards were to have no women. Much to
the horror of the Germans, seventeen hundred Spanish
troops paraded before a German general at their first dress
appearance in Poland with contraceptives inflated and tied
to the ends of their guns.

Spaniards of the Legion were at first much impressed by
German military organization. After a few months of fight-
ing on the Russian Front beside German units, the Span-
iards were disgusted by the German soldier's inability to
fight without the support of his organization. Spaniards ex-
pected to do without supplies, expected to have their re-
placements arrive weeks late or not at all, expected to have
shells for an 88 turn up for a 75. The Germans did not.

In Spain, the Legionnaires were official heroes. Franco
sent them a million pesetas’ worth of brandy and tobacco.
Bishops blessed them and bankers contributed to the cause.
Valencia’s orange-growers sent hundreds of tons of oranges
to the Legion and businessmen were fined for failing to con-
tribute to the fund. Legionnaires were publicly promised
first call on Government jobs. They got them too. In many
cities of Spain uniformed traffic policemen still wear the
emblem of the Legion on the sleeves of their uniforms.

The Falange took a particular delight in obtaining sup-
port for the Blue Legion from its enemies. The Spanish
Red Cross, which depended on voluntary contributions, was
ordered to cease collecting funds in Spain because it com-
peted with —and was far more popular than — Falange’s
own Auvxilio Social organization. Madrid’s daily, Arriba, ex-
plained: “Behind the Red Cross, the Masonic-Jewish-Lib-


166 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


eral-Theosophical devil laughs in the service of England.”
A few days after this comment was published, the Spanish
Red Cross was ordered to send its ambulances and trained
personnel to serve the Blue Legion on the Russian Front.

As a token of Spain’s brotherhood with the Axis, the Blue
Legion may have been important, but to Germany it was of
no great consequence. More important to the Germans were
the thirty thousand Spanish workers which they demanded
and obtained. Again the leaders of the Family were pleased
to oblige. Jobless Republicans who might otherwise have
made trouble were sent off to Germany. Curiously enough,
this episode backfired on the Family, for Spaniards found
the Germans better masters than their own countrymen.
Many of the workers sent out of Spain by force remained
in Germany voluntarily. Some of these, to whom I talked,
explained: “If I must work for a Fascist, then at least may
it be a foreign Fascist who knows that even slaves work
better when they are well treated!”

The levy was by no means limited to the jobless. Again
the Family demonstrated its ability to make the enemies of
Germany contribute to the German cause. Germany de-
manded a percentage of skilled workers. They were found,
not in industries operated by prominent members of the
Family, but in Britain’s copper mines at Rio Tinto and her
steel works in Bilbao as well as in the tiny workshops oper-
ated by independent craftsmen.

If the oligarchy needed anything more to make their
“non-belligerent” bliss complete, it was the entry of the
United States into the war. Franco, obedient to the German
will, had done what he could to keep the Americans out of
the war. He expressed not only his own conviction, but that
of the majority of the Family, when he said, in June, 1941:

The die has been cast. On our fields the first battles were
fought and won [in the Civil War]. Nobody can say better
than we that Europe has no ambitions in America. War be-


THE ANGELS’ SHARE 167


tween the two continents is impossible. .. .

The war on our continent is decided. . . . The Allies
planned the war badly and lost it. All the peoples of Con-
tinental Europe recognize that including France herself....

A war between the continents would be a new war which
would only prolong the agony. It is criminal madness to
say that the entry of a third power into war at this time
could change its course.

This advice, however, was coupled with insults to the
United States, the “third power” concerned:


Nations like individuals are made evil by gold. Look
at the exchange of fifty old destroyers for various shreds of
an Empire.


When, on December 7, 1941, America entered the war,
the reaction of the Family followed the line laid down by
Franco. It was too late to save Britain; Spain’s allies would
still conquer. The Family also enjoyed the prospect of fat
profits from United States dollars which now would be
added to the British pounds spent in economic warfare on
the Iberian Peninsula. In addition, Spain could now appeal
to her “daughters” of the Americas to join her in “non-bellig-
erency” against the Colossus of the North, and could begin
to serve Germany as a rival of the United States south of the
Rio Grande.

Fortunately for the United States, the attack at Pearl Har-
bor meant the death, not the triumph, of Hispanidad. Save
for the Argentine, the Americas chose to side with the
United States. It soon became apparent, even to the Span-
iards, that the Argentine preferred its own oligarchy to
Spain’s Family. Henceforth Spain and the Argentine might
be allies, might even follow the same course in many fields,
but Argentina would not be led. The Family accepted ap-
peasement from the United States, for which it returned
nothing but insults.


168 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


The Spanish press howled with glee as the Japanese con-
quered the Philippines, Spain’s own colony before the dis-
aster of 1898. Until Germany was on the verge of defeat in
Europe, the press made no mention of the Japanese persecu-
tion of Philippine Catholics.

“God be praised!” said Madrid’s evening newspaper, In-
formaciones, as Manila fell to the Japanese. The publisher
was a member of the Hispanidad Council. A few weeks
later he published an article on Japanese valor entitled
“The Japanese are the Spaniards of Asia.”

All the Spanish press followed the same course. Japanese
claims of tremendous naval victories were given huge head-
lines; Washington’s reports of the same “victories,” if they
were published at all, were buried on inside pages. The
American Ambassador’s official protests against Government
communiqués saying little damage was done to Spanish
property in the Philippines were ignored.

In Vichy, the Spanish Ambassador, José Félix de Leque-
rica, gave a banquet in honor of the Japanese diplomats to
celebrate the fall of Manila. On the eve of victory in Europe
the same Lequerica became Foreign Minister, billed as an
enthusiastic supporter of the United States.

Enthusiasm for Germany reached new heights. Serrano
Sufier had gone to Berlin to renew the anti-Komintern Pact
in November. On February 14, 1942, Franco himself made
it clear how the Family stood. He had gone to Sevilla on a
mission which pleased the Germans. He met Portugal's dic-
tator, Antonio Oliveira Salazar, and sought to persuade him
that it would be wise to abandon Portugal’s alliance with
Britain before it was too Jate. Salazar left Sevilla uncon-
vinced.

Spain had sent only a “token division” of the Blue Legion
to the Russian front because the Germans were not really in
need of troops. “But if there were a moment of danger,”


THE ANGELS’ SHARE 169


said Franco on February 14, 1942, “if the road to Berlin
were open, not a single division of Spanish volunteers would
go, but a million Spaniards would offer their services.”

All this was music to the ears of Serrano Sufier. He failed
to realize that the more the Family was convinced of a Ger-
man victory, the closer he came to his own end. Sufier had
reached his zenith that day in November, 1941, when he sat
in the eagle’s nest at Berchtesgaden dreaming of a rosy fu-
ture. In this future, Germany and Italy would divide Europe
and Africa. Spain would be back on the road to the empire
of Isabella’s day in the Americas as the agent of the Axis.
Serrano Sufier would be the master of Spain for the Axis,
perhaps unloved by his own people, perhaps dependent on
the Axis, but certainly the master of the Family.

Serrano Sujier, the poor player, was deceived by his own
part in the Spanish masquerade. While he dreamed and
strutted, the scene-shifters of the Family were preparing for
the last scene of Act I. In this scene, Serrano Sufier would
play no part.


ae ——=


= eee


FRANCO TAKES THE LEAD


THE LAST SCENE Of Act I in the Family's masquerade opened
when Ramon Serrano Sufier was dismissed on September 4,
1942. Serrano Sufier was not dropped because he was too
pro-Axis. His policy in that respect reflected the majority
opinion of the Family. He was dropped because he was too
ambitious, because he made the mistake of assuming that he
was indispensable to the Family. He forgot that no man is
indispensable to an oligarchy. In addition, he had made too
many enemies within the Family.

A quarrel over Alfred Rosenberg’s Myth of the Twentieth
Century climaxed a series of conflicts in which Serrano
Sufier opposed the leaders of the clergy. The Germans had
obtained Sufier’s permission to publish, in a cheap Spanish
edition, a translation of Rosenberg’s book, which was anti-
Catholic as well as anti-Jewish. They hoped thus to win
support for the Nazis from anti-clerical Spaniards outside
the oligarchy in addition to those within the Family's fold
who were pro-Nazi for other reasons. The clergy, eager to
co-operate with the Germans in most matters, drew the line
at this book, a direct challenge to their power. The Bishops
and Cardinal Segura asked the Archbishop of Toledo, Pri-
mate of Spain, to take action. The Archbishop instructed
Franco to tell Serrano Sufier that the book was not to be
published. The ban held. Serrano Sufier went on the
clergy’s blacklist.

170


FRANCO TAKES THE LEAD 171


The businessmen were beginning to feel Serrano Sufier’s
power through the Falange’s “vertical syndicates.” These
were copies of the Fascist corporations. Through them the
Falange directed the distribution of all raw materials. In-
dustrialists who opposed Serrano Sufier found it difficult to
get the material to keep their factories running.

The Army, whose officers included a number who co-
operated with the Falange, although most did not, was par-
ticularly concerned about Serrano Sufier’s power. The Fa-
lange Militia, in theory a branch of the Army, was growing
very independent. Serrano Sufier saw to it that it got the
best of the arms which Germany sent to Spain. Café brawls
between Falangists and Army officers were frequent.

Serrano Suiier’s greatest enemy was his own arrogance,
It blinded him to the coming storm. I saw him frequently
through the winter and spring of 1941-42, sometimes at offi-
cial functions and on other occasions in restaurants and
night clubs around Madrid. No longer playing the “umble”
Uriah Heep, seeking to curry the Family’s favor, he was en-
joying his power. He appeared publicly with a series of mis-
tresses. He pressed unwanted advances on the wives and
daughters of State officials. He dabbled openly in graft.
Not until it was too late did he realize that José Luis Arrese,
whom he had chosen as Secretary General of the Falange,
and José Antonio Girén, a courageous Falangist and Min-
ister of Labor, were joining with the Family to “get” him.

Arrese was an “Old Shirt” of the Valladolid Falange. He
was Jesuit-educated; his brother was a Jesuit priest. It was
his sincere conviction that a German victory would enable
the Falange to bring about a Nazi “revolution” with help
from the clergy. He shared with Girén, also a Falangist
fanatic and equally sincere, a conviction that Serrano Sufier
was prepared to sacrifice Falange ideals to his own ambition.

Working together, these forces of the Family launched a


172 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


new attack on Serrano Sufier. In March, 1942, the profes-
sional diplomats of the Foreign Ministry, who hated Ser-
rano Sufier as only his underlings could hate him, succeeded
in getting sufficient evidence against his secretary, Ximeénez
de Sandoval, to have him ousted from the Ministry and the
Falange for sexual perversion. In April, Carlists, who re-
fused to co-operate with the Falange, distributed under-
ground leaflets showing how Serrano Suiier had got $500,000
in legal salaries and allowances from the State with many
millions more in graft. By June, Serrano Sufer sought to in-
crease his weakening strength with the Family by taking a
European tour. It was not a success.

From Rome, Serrano Sufier wired Arrese, who controlled
the press in his absence, that he expected to have an audi-
ence with the Pope. Arrese conferred with clerical leaders
in Madrid, then gave the news tremendous headlines, com-
plete with the date and hour of the scheduled interview.
His Holiness developed a slight cold. For three days Ser-
rano Sufier waited, fuming. When finally he was granted an
audience, the Spanish press had little space for him. They
were packed with two important speeches — one by Arrese,
another by Girén.

Sabotage of this type continued. On Sunday, July 25, an
incident involving Serrano Sujfier’s own hotheads provided
the pretext the Family was waiting for. Four Falangists
tossed a hand grenade into the Sanctuary of Begojia at Bil-
bao, where Carlists were holding a religious service. Nearly
a hundred were wounded, three of them mortally. The af-
fair would have been of little importance had not one of
those who escaped injury been General José Enrique Varela,
the War Minister. He demanded action. An inquiry dis-
closed that the bomb-throwers were intimates of José Luna,
Vice Secretary of the Falange and Serrano Sujier’s bosom
companion.


FRANCO TAKES THE LEAD 173


Varela rallied all branches of the Family to demand Ser-
rano Suiier’s resignation. Franco, particularly shocked by
reports of his brother-in-law’s love-life, agreed to drop him
if Berlin were willing. Discreet inquiries were made, not
through Eberhard von Stohrer, German Ambassador to
Madrid and Serrano Sufier’s close friend, but through the
Spanish Military Attaché at Berlin. Von Ribbentrop, who
had no particular love for Serrano Sufier, gave his approval,
provided there were adequate guarantees that Spain’s policy
would not change.

The guarantees were given. The curtain fell on Ramén
Serrano Sufer.

Serrano Sufier’s departure was so arranged as to show
the Germans they need have no fear. General Varela was
replaced in the War Ministry by a leader of the Army’s pro-
German group, General Carlos Asensio. There was a new
Minister of the Interior, Blas Pérez, best known previously
for his seven-volume translation of German Civil law, who
kept the Spanish police at Himmler’s disposal. Franco him-
self became Falange Chief with Arrese as his executive offi-
cer. Count Jordana, a general who had managed foreign
affairs in the first Burgos cabinet of 1937 and was quite ac-
ceptable to the Germans as a man who would obey Franco’s
orders, took the Foreign Ministry. The Berlin weekly, Das
Reich, published the following note September 15, 1942:

Franco’s decision to change his Minister of Foreign Af-
fairs becomes clear now that General Jordana guarantees
Spain’s foreign policy will be the same as it was during and
since the Civil War. Count Jordana has proved himself to
be the faithful interpreter of the line of conduct desired by
the Chief of State.

Serrano Sufier lost both jobs and prestige, but much of
his influence remained. He opened a law office in Madrid
where he soon was making a large income as a “fixer” with


174 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


influence in all Ministries. The service he did the Family
in capturing the Falange for its use was indeed a great serv-
ice — even though he did try to make the Falange his own.
None of the Family blamed him for trying.

Serrano Sufier left the Family a curious reminder that
even he could get appeasement from the democracies, Just
after the shift in the Government, twenty-eight Packard
limousines arrived from the United States. They had been
ordered by the Government before Pearl Harbor, but were
released only after Serrano Sufier asked the new American
Ambassador, Carlton J. H. Hayes, to get them over.

With Serrano Sufer out, his brother-in-law, Francisco
Franco, stepped forward to take the leading part in the
masquerade. The Generalissimo of the Civil War, hitherto
represented as “the knightly Savior of Spain,” too “saintly”
for the dirty business of practical politics, now assumed
personal direction of the Falange and the Government. He
took over Serrano Sufier’s job as head of the Junta Politica
of the Falange. Ministers, who had previously reported to
Serrano Sufier as unofficial Prime Minister of the Spanish
Government, now were directly responsible to Franco. The
leaders of the oligarchy, who had formerly transmitted their
desires to Serrano Sufer, now took them to Franco. The
German and Italian Ambassadors, who had been accus-
tomed to telephone Serrano Sufier at the Foreign Ministry,
now went over the head of Count Jordana, the new Foreign
Minister, to take their business direct to the Pardo Palace.

Members of the oligarchy found Franco an immense im-
provement over Serrano Sufier as the manager of Spain for
the Family. Franco was cautious and shrewd, but, above
all, he knew his place. Never once has Franco attempted
to oppose the will of the majority of the oligarchy. He has
never attempted to be a dictator in the sense that Hitler and
Mussolini were dictators.


FRANCO TAKES THE LEAD 175


Diplomats who had dealings with Franco on major mat-
ters found him slow to come to a decision. The delay was
usually because Franco first consulted the leaders of all
branches of the oligarchy to ascertain the majority opinion.
This opinion he invariably carried out.

When individual members of the oligarchy went. to
Franco to suggest a change in policy or offer a criticism, he
rarely gave them a direct reply. If, finally, he called them
to the Pardo Palace again to say, “You are wrong,” the critics
could be sure that this was the majority decision of the
noblemen, churchmen, businessmen, and soldiers of the oli-
garchy.

The German and Italian Governments were not dis-
pleased to see such a man take over the day-to-day direction
of Spain’s affairs. In Berlin, as in Rome, it was realized that
the Spanish oligarchy as a whole stood to profit by an Axis
victory which would strengthen their grip on Spain. There
was no fear that the Spanish Government would pull away
from the Axis as long as there was a chance that the Axis
might win the war. In addition, Franco was a soldier, cold,
courageous, and unaffected by humanitarian principles
which neither the Spanish Army nor the Nazis permitted to
block their way to victory. As a soldier, Franco had a better
understanding than Serrano Suiier of the Axis needs. As an
officer, Franco would see to it that his orders were carried
out.

Franco had not expected, when the Civil War began, to
reach so quickly the top post of manager for the Family.
He stood fourth in line among the Army hierarchy which
plotted the uprising. This is how he rose to power:

Immediately after the elections of February, 1936, Franco
was ousted as Chief of the General Staff of the Army. The
Republic placed him in command of the Canary Islands, an
“exile” post. Before he left Madrid, however, he met with


176 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


General Emilio Mola, just called to the capital from Moroc-
co, and Colonel José Enrique Varela in the home of a
Monarchist deputy to the Cortes. There the three officers
agreed that they would sponsor an Army revolt if any one
of three developments occurred. These developments, ac-
cording to the book Mola, by José Maria Iribarren, pub-
lished with Franco’s approval in 1938, but banned within
the year because its author told too much, were the follow-
ing:
(1) If President Alcalé Zamora called Largo Caballero
[leader of the Socialist Left] to form a government.
(2) If the country is given over to anarchy.
(8) If some movement of popular protest or of general
indignation is launched which could be utilized as an excuse
to lead the troops into action.


It is clear from such facts as these that the assassination
of Calvo Sotelo was an “excuse” and nothing more for a plot
to revolt against the legally constituted Republican Gov-
ernment, a plot which had reached a high stage of develop-
ment by the time Franco and Mola met in February, 1936.
President Alcal4 Zamora had a perfect right to ask Largo
Caballero to form a cabinet, although he did not. Only the
President and his Government were qualified to decide
when the country reached such a state of “anarchy” that
the Army was to be called out to restore order. Finally,
under the terms of the Mola-Franco pact, the Army could
seize upon almost any excuse to lead the troops into action.

This agreement was made known to General Sanjurjo in
Portugal who transmitted it as a general order to the leaders
of the Unidn Militar Espariola, the Army club which fos-
tered the plot. Sanjurjc, the leader of the Army, received
Franco into the inner circle of the plot only reluctantly, for
he still resented Franco's failure to join the 1932 revolt.
Franco, however, was recognized as an able officer whose


FRANCO TAKES THE LEAD 177


prestige was great in the Foreign Legion and among the
officers in Spanish Morocco. In addition, he had friends
among the officers who still held positions of trust in the
General Staff of the Army as it was reorganized by the new
Republican Government.

As the revolt began, two of Franco’s superiors in the plot
vanished. General Sanjurjo died in a plane crash en route
to Mola’s headquarters in Burgos. General Manuel Goded,
former Chief of the General Staff, was captured and exe-
cuted by Republican forces when his attempt to take over
in Barcelona failed. That left General Mola as the supreme
commander of the revolt in Spain. Mola, however, was not
an ambitious man. He was quick to recognize that Franco’s
negotiations with Germany and Italy had saved the Army
from certain defeat. He saw that only continued support
trom the Axis Powers could assure an Army victory in the
Civil War. Mola liked neither the Germans nor the Italians,
but he wanted to win.

Franco did not directly challenge Mola as the Civil War
developed. He simply concentrated on the drive of his own
forces northward after German and Italian planes took his
Army across the Strait from Morocco. He sent Mola arms
and planes; he frequently asked Mola’s advice.

When, on September 21, 1936, the leading officers of the
Army met at the Salamanca airport, Franco's stock was high.
Thanks to his friendship with the Germans, the generals met
in a German-built bombproof shelter, protected by German
anti-aircraft batteries manned by German troops. Everyone
present, including the Monarchist chairman, General Al-
fredo Kindelan, agreed that it was too early to think of
bringing a king back to Spain. The discussion of future plans
lasted four hours. At the end of that time, Mola proposed
Franco as the logical candidate for Generalisimo of the Army
and head of a military government. Colonel Martinez Fuset,


178 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Franco’s shrewd political and juridical counselor, was
charged with drafting a decree to this end. When, on Sep-
tember 30, 1936, the decree was published, one small phrase
had been added. Below is the text of the decree, with the
phrase in question in italics:

Article 1. In execution of the agreement adopted by the
Committee of National Defense, the Most Excellent Sefior,
General of Division Don Francisco Franco Bahamonde, is
named Chief of the Government of the Spanish State and
will assume all the powers of the new State.

Article 2. He also is named Generalissimo of the National
Forces of Land, Sea, and Air and is given the post of Gen-
eral in Chief of the Armies of Operation.


The title “Chief of the Government” is not synonymous
in Spanish nor in any other language with the title “Chief
of State.” The Chief of the Government is a premier like
the British or French premiers. Only the Chief of State, like
the British King or the French President, could “assume all
the powers of the new State.” This post in Spain was to
have been reserved for a king. That was certainly the inten-
tion of the Monarchist generals, several of whom protested
about the matter. Martinez Fuset explained that it was “an
error of phraseology.” With the main attack on Madrid
about to begin, the generals were not inclined to argue the
matter. By the time civil government was formed toward
the end of the Civil War, neither the generals nor the other
leaders of the oligarchy cared much what Franco called
himself so long as he followed their desires. Thus, under the
law, Franco remained “Chief of the Government,” but he
signed himself as, and took the powers of, a Chief of State.

Until 1942, however, Franco remained in the back-
ground. Serrano Suiier, the man who had succeeded in cap-
turing the Falange for the oligarchy, did the actual govern-
ing. Few people saw Franco before 1942.


FRANCO TAKES THE LEAD 179


My first meeting with Franco was in 1937 in the Bishop’s
palace at Salamanca, where, in company with the corre-
spondent of the London Times, I was granted what was
somewhat erroneously called an “interview.” All the inter-
views which Franco gave until 1946 followed the same pat-
tern. We submitted questions in writing; Franco read them
and indicated which could be answered and in what way;
Franco's aides wrote out the answers and Franco approved
the final draft. Then we were summoned into the Presence.

He gave us a damp hand, bade us be seated, and asked
one question — How did we like Spain? We said we found
it a very interesting country. Then we got a ten-minute lec-
ture on the evil end to which our respective countries would
come for not severing relations with the “Reds.” At the end
of this lecture, Franco rose, handed us copies of the ques-
tions he had chosen to answer, gave us his hand again — and
the “interview” was ended. It had consumed perhaps
twelve minutes — no more.

I saw Franco many times after that at public and semi-
public ceremonies, but I had no more “interviews.” Until
1944 he was not interested in granting more audiences like
these to the American and British press. After 1944 I was
not among the favored few chosen to be received, in part
because my reports from Spain after the lifting of censor-
ship on foreign correspondents were not to the régime’s
liking.

As the Civil War ended, Franco and his wife and daugh-
ter moved into the palace of El Pardo in the village of the
same name a few miles from Madrid. The former royal
hunting lodge was rebuilt to their taste. The family lived
simply and quietly, entertaining little.

Francisco Franco’s father, who died in 1943, would not
live at the Pardo, but maintained a small apartment in Ma-
drid. He is said to have visited Franco only once. One of


180 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Franco’s aides then on duty at the Pardo told me the old
man remained in his son’s study for about twenty minutes
and then emerged in a rage, growling for all to hear:
“Stupid, still stupid like a burro!”

When the old man died at eighty-six, his body was rushed
to the Pardo where it lay in state. The press intimated that
he had been living at the Pardo with his son. Several
coaches loaded with flowers followed the hearse in an elab-
orate funeral procession across Madrid to the city’s main
cemetery. Outstanding among them was a huge floral swas-
tika inscribed, “With sympathy, from Adolf Hitler.”

The quarrel between Francisco and his father was said to
be connected with Francisco’s brother, Ramén Franco, al-
ways his father’s favorite. Ramén had been an independent
deputy, voting with the Left-Wing Socialists in the Spanish
Cortes of 1933, but he was stationed in the oligarchy’s ter-
ritory when the Civil War began. Although he still remained
Spain’s leading air hero, as pilot of the Madrid—Buenos Aires
flight, his name was never mentioned in the oligarchy’s press
until the brief announcement of his death in 1938.

This announcement said that Ramon had been killed
when “his plane” fell into the sea off Palma de Mallorca.
One inferred that he had been a pilot for the Army of the
oligarchy, but it was common knowledge that he had re-
fused a commission in his brother’s Air Army. Early in the
war he had been transferred to forced residence in the
Balearic Islands, and was, for a time at least, under a heavy
guard. The rumor was that he had taken an unarmed train-
ing plane from an Air Army field in an attempt to escape to
Republican territory, but had been shot down by planes of
the oligarchy’s Air Army before he reached the mainland.

The surviving member of the anti-Francisco branch of
the Franco family is Pilar, Francisco’s sister. She is happily
married and lives in Asturias. She occasionally makes


FRANCO TAKES THE LEAD 181


stormy raids on the Pardo to scold her brother for some-
thing. It’s a Madrid joke that the high walls and guards
around the Pardo are designed to keep Doja Pilar out.

Nicolas Franco was his brother’s personal aide during
the Civil War and soon thereafter was named Ambassador
to Portugal. He visits Madrid frequently and has made a
large fortune in black-market operations in the peseta,
which can be had at from one half to one third the official
rate in the Portuguese capital.

Franco's wife, Carmen Polo, remains the attractive and
deeply religious Asturian who likes her position as Spain’s
First Lady. She is frequently seen at public ceremonies.
Both Sefiora Franco and her daughter are dressed by Bal-
enciaga, the Basque couturier of Madrid and Paris.

Franco’s daughter, Carmencita, had an elaborate début
at El Pardo Palace in 1944, when she was eighteen. She is
an attractive, dark-haired girl whom Madrid society would
like to see married to Cristébal Colén, the Duke of Veragua,
now head of the house of Columbus and a cadet at Spain’s
Naval Academy. When I last saw them in 1945, neither
Carmencita nor Crist6bal seemed to share this interest.

The head of the Franco family has come to regard himself
as something of a cross between a Tammany ward boss and
Joan of Arc. He does not look the part. He stands about five
feet six inches in his stocking feet, although he usually
wears boots with lift heels. He was quite slim when I first
met him in Salamanca in 1937; but now he wears a corset
to reduce his girth. His nose is long and aquiline; his eyes
are black; his hair has set behind the domed horizon of his
round skull. His features have a definite Mediterranean, al-
most Levantine, cast. Smile wrinkles at the corners of his
eyes have deepened in recent years.

His physical condition is good. He takes regular morning
rides, usually alone, on one of several horses in the Pardo


ee EEE


182 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


stables. The strength of his right arm must be great, for
he has saluted Fascio-Nazi style for hours at a time during
official ceremonies and parades. When pleased by what he
is saluting, his elbow stiffens, but usually he gives the bent-
elbow version, like a grocer patting boxes of breakfast food
into place on a shelf. Usually his manner and movements in
public seem carefully calculated, somewhat stiff and defi-
nitely pompous.

Listening comes far more naturally to him than speaking,
though he fancies himself as an orator. His voice is high-
pitched and somewhat screechy; his delivery is stiff. He
reads all his speeches and seldom bothers to look up. When
he does look up, waiting for applause, he looks high over the
heads of his listeners. In direct conversation he is delib-
erate. A silence of seconds frequently precedes his answer
to a speaker’s question. Sometimes there will be no answer
at all. He has no small talk.

Details of any kind fascinate him. At cabinet meetings
(which usually last throughout the afternoons and late eve-
nings of five days) important matters are quickly approved,
minor matters take hours of discussion. All Ministers have
to be present whether their work is concerned or not.
Miguel Primo de Rivera, Minister of Agriculture for many
years, fell asleep at several sessions while Franco questioned
other Ministers on details. Each time he awoke to face a
stony silence as Franco stared at him coldly. The discussions
were resumed without comment.

The cabinet, despite these lengthy sessions, is a rubber-
stamp body. On important matters, Franco always con-
sults the real leaders of the Family oligarchy — the Primate
and the Bishops for the clergy; the Urquijos and other bank-
ers for the industrialists and businessmen; the lieutenant
generals for the Army; and a small group of aristocrats for
the noblemen.


FRANCO TAKES THE LEAD 183


Franco has never lost sight of the fact that he governs
only by consent of the Family. When members of the oli-
garchy question or oppose his decisions, he first ascertains
whether they are in the minority. If they are, he ignores
them; if they persist, mild punishments are meted out to
them. I have never heard of a general, a clerical leader, a
Spaniard of wealth, or an aristocrat being shot or even sen-
tenced to prison. The worst punishment for them is “exile”
to the Balearic Islands or some other pleasant place.

The men around Franco are, like Franco himself, repre-
sentatives of the oligarchy. There are few strong men
among them. Fray Justo Pérez de Urbel, the Franco fam-
ily’s confessor and national chaplain of the Falange, was not
a “Grey Eminence,” as some writers outside Spain suggested,
but simply the representative of the clergy on Franco's staff,
the liaison man between the hierarchy and the Pardo Palace.
General Francisco Franco Salgado-Araujo, cousin of the
Generalissimo Francisco Franco Bahamonde, was only the
Generalissimo’s private secretary, nothing more.

The Army’s liaison man with Franco is the chief of his
military secretariat. The nearest thing to a strong man be-
hind Franco in the Pardo Palace was Lieutenant General
Agustin Mufioz Grande, who held this post after his return
from the command of the Blue Legion. Mufioz Grande, an
able officer with no great respect for the Family, soon was
transferred to an active command at his own request, and
was succeeded by the dull-witted Lieutenant General José
Moscardo, hero of the siege of the Alcazar of Toledo and an
ardent Falangist.

The only other man worthy of note on the Generalissimo’s
personal staff was Julio Mufioz de Aguilar, chief of Franco's
civil secretariat, a glorified clerk of good family who served
as Franco’s liaison man with the industrialists and the nobil-


ity.


184 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Franco likes his job. He never travels incognito; he
loves the ceremony which surrounds his every move.
When he enters a church, it is always under a baldachin
of honor and always he sits beside the high altar. Few Span-
ish kings were ever surrounded with more pomp than
Franco; many monarchs have done with less. All the towns,
cities, and provinces of Spain have been encouraged to pre-
sent him with gold medals, jeweled daggers, and gold
swords — he must have hundreds of them. He is honest in
the sense that he has no great personal fortune in cash or
securities; nobody has ever charged him seriously with tak-
ing a share of the graft which riddles his régime.

His personal life in the Pardo Palace was simple. The
Pardo library is small; its private motion-picture theater is
large. Most of the films shown in Madrid were sent to the
Pardo for a preview by Franco and his family. In hunting
season he usually went off to the estates of friends to shoot
small game. Once each year the Gredos Inn was uncere-
moniously emptied of its paying guests while Franco took
the place over for several days of hunting the rare wild goat
of those mountains.

Within the Pardo Palace, Franco was one of the most
closely guarded rulers in the world. An inner circle of palace
guards, all sharpshooters wearing civilian clothes, remained
within sight of all visitors. The “Caudillo’s Guard,” tall,
strapping veterans of the Civil War who wear red berets
with gold tassels, guarded the palace doors and accom-
panied Franco on all his travels outside Madrid. Several
hundred Moors, chosen for their horsemanship and shooting
ability, patrolled the gardens of the Pardo in gorgeous uni-
forms. Modern barracks outside the palace gates were occu-
pied by the best-paid Regular Army troops in Spain, a full
division of them. Pillboxes were built into the hills and
knolls around the Pardo whose broad hunting grounds con-


FRANCO TAKES THE LEAD 185


cealed a small airfield. Franco had no taste for flying after,
first, Sanjurjo and then Mola died in plane accidents, but
he was prepared to fly if necessary.

There have been several attempts on Franco’s life, but he
has never been injured. There have also been a number of
“accidents.” In December, 1943, for example, young An-
tonio Ayerbe Sales, cycling with a group of teen-agers along
the Manzanares River, coasted down to the main highway
near the Pardo just as Franco and his escort motored to-
ward the palace from Madrid. The youth lost control of
his bicycle and it veered toward Franco’s car. A burst of
gunfire hit him from an escort car before he was within
twenty feet of the Generalissimo’s car. Franco did not stop.
The boy’s family was called to identify his bullet-ridden
body at the morgue.

Franco was pleased to take over the new responsibilities
which Serrano Sufier’s dismissal had left him. By 1942 he
had acquired a taste for praise which would have sickened
other men. As his duties brought him back into the public
eye, the Spanish press lauded him in terms which seemed
close to ridicule to those who did not know how much of
this sort of thing Franco can take.

Ernesto Giménez Caballero, a founder of the JONS and
a follower of José Antonio who found it profitable to stay
with the Family’s Falange, set the pace as early as 1938
with a little pamphlet entitled Francisco Franco. It con-
tained few facts about Franco’s life, but it compared him
favorably with such persons as Saint George, Saint Michael,
Hitler, and Mussolini. The chapter headings include these:


Victory has but one name — FRANCO!
Totalitarian State has but one name — FRANCO!
FRANCO — Supreme and Unique Institution.


Franco’s Smile.


|
fr


186 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


A sample of this last chapter reads as follows:


Franco’s smile has in it something of the mantle of the
Virgin thrown over the sinners. It is both paternal and
maternal. True, Franco has moments of infinite gravity and
bitter sadness, but that is our fault.


This man, called “semi-divine” by biographies which he
approved, was worldly enough to follow the events of the
Second World War with a keen appreciation of the strategic
positions of his own country and its possessions. Myron Tay-
lor, returning to Washington from his special mission to the
Vatican late in September, told Ambassador Hayes that he
was deeply concerned about Franco's “apparent sympathy
with Fascism and swallowing of Nazi propaganda,” as Hayes
reports in his Wartime Mission in Spain. Franco, in his
usual high-handed manner, had canceled the plane which
Mr. Taylor was to take from Madrid to Lisbon and had
called the American to the Pardo Palace for a talk of an
hour and a half. Mr. Taylor and the Ambassador were
seated facing Franco’s desk behind which were three auto-
graphed photographs, the Pope’s in the middle, Hitler's on
the right, and Mussolini’s on the left.

There was no change in Spain’s foreign policy under
Franco. It remained so pro-Axis that there seemed to be
plenty of ground for the constant rumors that the United
States and Britain were contemplating the invasion of Spain
as the best means of striking at the Continent. On Novem-
ber 2, 1942, Hayes informed the Spanish Government that
the United States had no intention of infringing on the sov-
ereignty of Spain or of its “possessions or islands or protec-
torates.” These assurances were given at Spain’s request.

This request was inspired by information concerning part
of the plans for the invasion of North Africa which the Mil-
itary Intelligence section of the Spanish Army had acquired


rr


FRANCO TAKES THE LEAD 187


when a British plane, Gibraltar-bound from London, had
crashed near Algeciras in Spanish territory. The information
was promptly passed on to the Germans. Apparently the
Germans did not take it seriously, but the Spaniards did.
As a result of their request, President Roosevelt sent Franco,
through Hayes, a personal pledge that Spain’s sovereignty
would be respected.

Just before 2 a.m. on November 8, 1942, Hayes called on
the Foreign Minister Count Jordana, in company with the
Spanish-speaking counselor of Embassy, Willard Beaulac.
The Americans had received a message: “Thunderbird
Sunday November 8, 2 a.M., Spanish time.” They asked to
talk to Franco immediately, but he was off on a week-end
hunting trip. Because of Jordana’s extreme agitation, Hayes
decided to have Beaulac translate President Roosevelt’s let-
ter for the Spaniard. Jordana’s expression changed imme-
diately from “one of intense anxiety” to “one of intense re-
lief,” Hayes reported, as he heard the announcement of the
Allied landings in North Africa and the President’s assur-
ances that Spain’s territory would not be attacked. “Ah,” he
said, “so Spain is not involved!”

Hayes talked with Franco at the Pardo that Sunday after-
noon and returned to the United States Embassy to send the
code word “Jelly” to Washington. Hayes’ message did not
refer to the attitude of the Spanish Government toward the
African landings, but was simply a code word reporting de-
livery to Franco of President Roosevelt's message. Spain’s
foreign policy, however, had still not changed. Spain was
still pro-Axis, and Franco, a military man, knew how to get
the most out of the 150,000 troops he had kept in Spanish
Morocco.

Germany’s position in France at that time was exceed-
ingly weak. Troops and equipment had been withdrawn
from the west to be sent to the Russian Front and the Bal-


188 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


kans. The picture of a powerful German army poised on the
Pyrenees frontier of France with a host of airborne units of
the Luftwaffe waiting to support a Spanish attack on the
Allied flank in Morocco is completely false. How false it is
may be seen by a brief examination of the facts.

Three days after the Allied landing in French Africa, the
Germans took over the so-called “Unoccupied Zone” of
France. The forces available for this purpose were so few
that Berlin and Rome were honestly concerned about the
danger of French resistance. There was no resistance. The
“motorcycle invasion” was successful. For months the im-
portant rail center of Toulouse in Southern France was held
by only a few hundred second-line troops. The German gar-
rison which held Perpignan, a strategic town near the Span-
ish frontier, from November to March, totaled fifty-four
men.

Even in January, Hitler was unable to spare armored
forces promised the Italians and General Rommel in Tu-
nisia — what had he available for Spain in November?

As Berlin fell, I had a Spanish friend ask the German
Military Attaché in Madrid if his Government had requested
Spain to permit the passage of German troops to Gibraltar
and Tangier after the United States landing in Africa.

“What German troops?” was his reply. “Do you think we
were such fools as to ask for the passage of troops we did
not have? No. We let the Spaniards do our work.”

The Spaniards did it. They did it with a military threat as
effective as a battle. The Germans and Franco both knew
that elementary military precautions would force the Amer-
icans to guard their flank against attack from Spanish Moroc-
co with some troops. It was Franco’s task to rattle the saber
so that the Americans would be forced to immobilize as
many troops as possible on this flank, thus weakening the
assault on Tunisia. Franco carried out this task with his
usual thoroughness,


FRANCO TAKES THE LEAD 189


Lieutenant General Luis Org4z, the same pro-German
officer who had set up the observation posts from which
Germans watched Allied ships passing the Strait of Gib-
raltar, was in command of Spanish Morocco. He ordered his
150,000 troops on the alert and sent the best of them to gar-
risons on the frontier of Spanish Morocco “as a precaution-
ary measure.” No such “precautionary measure” had been
taken on the Pyrenees frontier when the Germans invaded
France in 1940. In fact only a thin line of Spanish customs
guards with no troops at all faced the Germans in Novem-
ber of 1942, while the cream of 150,000 troops were sent to
face the Americans in Morocco.

This was only the beginning. From early November to
the middle of January, the crucial period of the Allied inva-
sion of North Africa, Franco rattled the saber as loudly as
he could.

On November 18, Franco authorized the Army, Navy,
and Air Ministries to order a partial mobilization if they
considered it necessary. A week later, four classes were
called to the colors, reporting November 29. A few days
later, this order was altered to prolong the state of alarm by
summoning each class of conscripts on different dates. Out
of the first class called, thirty thousand conscripts went to
join the troops in North Africa.

At the end of November, Franco appointed a new Na-
tional Council for the Falange. Prominent among old mem-
bers reappointed to this rubber-stamp body was Ramén
Serrano Sufier, presumably thus held in reserve.

Lest all these warnings that Spain, like Italy in 1940, was
preparing to go to war be missed by the commanders of
American forces then striving to get a foothold in North
Africa, Franco made three speeches. It must not be for-
gotten that the man who spoke was the Generalissimo of a
nation with 750,000 troops under arms and more being mob-


—* ee


=<


ee eS


—— a


190 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


ilized. It was a totalitarian state on the flank of French
North Africa where the United States military force was
still comparatively small.

All Franco’s speeches were given huge headlines in the
Spanish, German, and Italian press. The first speech, on
December 3, 1942, included these remarks:


I deny the existence of peace! When times are tranquil,
when peace reposes in our nation, when we think we enjoy
an apparent sensation of calm, that is when the tempests are
forming which will break upon the nations.


Next day a heavily armored Mercedes-Benz limousine
arrived at the Pardo Palace, a gift to Franco on his fiftieth
birthday. With it came Hitler’s greetings, couched in the
familiar “os” form. Franco replied in the same terms:


Many thanks to you and to the German people for your
greetings today, and I thank you for your best wishes for
our future and myself. May your arms triumph in the glori-
ous undertaking of freeing Europe from the Bolshevik terror.


That evening Franco spiked reports that the Falange was
to be dissolved now that Ramon Serrano Sufier was no
longer its leader.

“I believe in Spain because I believe in the Falange,” he
told Falangist leaders who came with birthday greetings.

The third speech was made to the new Falange National
Council on December 7, 1942:


We are actors in a new era. The old liberal world dies,
victim of the cancer of its own errors. ...

The genius of Mussolini turned . . . to a Fascist solution ...

Later, Germany procuced a new solution for the popular
unrest with National Socialism, which, subject to the pecu-
liarities of the race, united the national with the social for
the second time in Europe. ...

These are not separated movements, but facets of the


FRANCO TAKES THE LEAD 191


same general movement of rebellion in the civilized masses
of the world.

The presence of the youth of Spain in this enterprise is
a new aspect of the general movement of the youth of
Europe, who began their Holy Rebellion twenty-five years
ALO. 6-5

When war ends and demobilization takes place, then will
come the moment of accounting, of executing promises, and,
despite all the plans, the historic destiny of our era will be
determined — either the barbaric formula of Bolshevik
totalitarianism or the patriotic and spiritual formula offered
by Spain or any other Fascist people... .”


The italics are mine. At this point in the masquerade,
Spain was Fascist. Count Ciano, as reported in The Ciano
Diaries, writes:

Franco spoke in very friendly terms about the Axis.
Mussolini sent him congratulations through our Ambassador,
but he “does not intend to move a finger to accelerate [note
the choice of words] the intervention of Spain in the war,
because it would be more of a hindrance than a help.”


Thus did the Spanish oligarchy fight a battle with a mil-
itary threat. No capable commander, preparing to attack a
German and Italian army in Tunisia, could ignore the mob-
ilization, the belligerent speeches, and the unfriendly atti-
tude of the Spanish Government. Consequently, American,
British, and Free French troops died in Tunisia because a
considerable part of the United States Fifth Army, with ma-
terial and equipment needed in Tunisia, was immobilized on
the frontiers of Spanish Morocco.

American policy toward Spain in the spring of 1943 was
conditioned by military expediency. Every effort was made
to meet Franco’s belligerent speeches with the olive branch.
In December of 1942, an agreement had been drawn up in
Washington which permitted Spain to buy 541,000 tons of


192 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


petroleum products annually. This, Ambassador Hayes
stated before the American Chamber of Commerce in Bar-
celona, meant that the quantity of gasoline made available
to Spanish motorists “is considerably larger than the present
distribution per car to people along the Atlantic seaboard
of the United States itself.”

In exchange for such favors, the United States and Brit-
ain got little. Allied airmen who crossed the Pyrenees from
Hitler’s Europe were permitted to continue on their way,
thanks largely to the officers of the Spanish Air Army who
were much impressed by American aviation. Refugees, in-
cluding stateless Poles and German Jews, were permitted to
leave Spain as well, partly because the oligarchy had no in-
tention of feeding them and partly because the Germans
found such traffic useful to their own spies.

In March, 1948, the first meeting was held of the so-called
Cortes, in reality a faithful copy of the Nazi Reichstag,
whose president had visited Spain to explain that such a
body was useful as a sounding board in a totalitarian state.
Franco, who had named most of its members, drove up in
the Mercedes-Benz which Hitler had given him and strode
through a forest of Falangist salutes to take his chair of
honor. The members of this Cortes included the most prom-
inent members of the oligarchy — old Count Romanones,
the Primate of Spain, two Archbishops, the financier Juan
Ventosa, a number of generals, and a host of the “new Fa-
langists.”

Nothing had changed in the Family’s Spain. The British
Ambassador, Sir Samuel Hoare, apparently did not realize
this. As a veteran member of the reactionary wing of the
Conservative Party and a personal friend of many of Spain’s
titled nobility, Sir Samuel was convinced that he might help
bring about a change. Throughout his stay in Spain, Sir
Samuel eagerly strove to further what he fondly believed


FRANCO TAKES THE LEAD 193


was a Monarchist “plot” to overthrow Franco. In this spring
of 1943 the Family put on a little sideshow for Sir Samuel’s
benefit.

To keep the masquerade alive, ready for a shift of scenery
to meet any development, the Family always has maintained
a sort of “loyal Opposition.” This “Opposition” is carefully
prepared to suit any taste from the absolute Monarchists of
the Carlist variety, like Esteban Bilbao, currently President
of the Cortes, to a seedy group of fake “Communists” and
“Anarchists” who use Falange facilities to print violent
pamphlets against the Government. The Communist and
Anarchist pamphlets are not designed for general distribu-
tion, but are quite handy as evidence that the choice for
Spain is only “Franco for Communism and Anarchy.”

The so-called “Monarchists” of the Don Juan variety are
particularly active pamphleteers. One gentleman in a club
writes a letter to another gentleman in a club saying that
the second gentleman is a “traitor to his King.” Friends dis-
tribute copies among other members of the Family. The
Government is criticized. It is all very exciting. I have doz-
ens of such letters in my files calling for Franco's resigna-
tion, condemning one or all of his Ministers, urging the re-
turn of the monarchy or a “decent Republic.” None of the
authors were ever jailed or even arrested. They are prom-
inent members of the Family. But let a bootblack be caught
with a copy of a mild Socialist manifesto and — pouf! — he
vanishes.

José Maria Gil Robles, former leader of the CEDA group
of Rightist Republican Parties, resident in Lisbon waiting to
be called in to take his part in the masquerade, decided
after the United States landing in Africa that he was a
Monarchist after all. He wrote to Don Juan, then resident
in Switzerland, advising him that this was a good time to
address a letter to Franco criticizing his policy, internal and


194 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


foreign. He suggested the general outline of the letter. Don
Juan wrote.

Franco replied to Don Juan near the end of April, saying
that he had accomplished a good deal and eventually hoped
to restore the monarchy — but not yet. Both letters were
circulated by the usual method among members of the Fam-
ily. Sir Samuel Hoare, much excited, was kept posted about
developments by his Spanish friends, all English-speaking
members of the Family.

Another letter then was drafted by the “Monarchists” for
signature by members of the Cortes, theoretically exempt
from arrest. In most polite terms it told Franco that he was
a fine fellow, but that the time had come to suggest an
“early” return of the monarchy. The Duke of Alba in Lon-
don signed this letter after much debate. It was also signed
by Juan Ventosa, Catalan financier and representative of the
CHADE utility interests in Barcelona, who was also interest-
ed in pleasing the British. Lieutenant General Miguel Ponte,
then in command of the Andalucian military zone, signed;
so did Antonio Goicoechea, Governor of the Bank of Spain.
Old Count Romanones, veteran premier of the monarchy,
refused to sign and called the letter a “silly parlor game.”
He was right, but it kept the British Embassy interested and
also amused the Family.

When Franco received the letter, it contained about twen-
ty-five signatures. Franco promptly consulted various mem-
bers of the Family. Was this serious, he asked them, or was
this just politics and business? With the answer in hand,
Franco summoned the National Council of the Falange, dis-
missed six members who had signed the letter, and prepared
for his regular speech to the nation on July 17. Sir Samuel
Hoare sat in the diplomatic galleries to hear him.

The Opposition, said Franco, represented only “insignifi-
cant groups among the masses of the Spanish people.” “The


FRANCO TAKES THE LEAD 195


only just and true solution of Spain’s problems is the Fa-
lange.” Referring to wealthy men like Juan Ventosa, he said
“only through us were they able to preserve their patrimony.”

He had a word for Sir Samuel too. The monarchy “should
never serve as the tool of foreign propaganda.” And, for
good measure, “the liberal capitalist system” had disap-
peared forever; Bolshevism was the enemy, together with
its first cousins, liberalism and Freemasonry. There were
cheers which turned into the usual chant of “FRAN-co —
Fran-co — Fran-co!” That was that.

Goicoechea remained the Governor of the Bank of Spain.
Miguel Ponte kept his Andalucian command. Ventosa con-
tinued to make money. The Duke of Alba served Franco
and the Falange in London as willingly as ever. The Falan-
gists dismissed from the National Council kept their State
jobs and suffered no other punishment. Sir Samuel alone
was disappointed, for even Don Juan and Gil Robles knew
it was all a game — just a word for the record to establish
continuity should the Spanish Family one day desire a shift
in scenery.

It was not long after this time — in fact it was only ten
days after Franco spoke — that the Spanish Family received
news which made its members wonder if they had not been
too hasty in declaring eternal love for the Axis. It happened
on July 25, 1943.

The fall of Fascism in Italy shook the Spanish oligarchy
to its foundations.


SEEM A SAINT-PLAY THE DEVIL


WHEN AN ALA LITORIA PLANE arrived in Madrid from Rome,
on July 27, 1943, the Associated Press obtained from an Ital-
ian passenger the first complete report of the Fascist Grand
Council meetings and Mussolini’s arrest. The Spanish cen-
sorship stopped no part of the story. We of the Associated
Press were honored by a telephone call from the office of
the Secretary General of the Falange, José Luis Arrese.
Would we be kind enough to inform the Secretary General
of developments in Italy? We obliged. In fact, it gave us
real pleasure.

The collapse of the Fascist State made a tremendous im-
pression in Spain. Censorship had so minimized the trou-
bles within Italy that even leading members of the Spanish
Family were surprised. In the prisons, poor men who were
simple enough to believe that because Italy’s Fascist State
had fallen, Spain’s Family State was about to fall too, were
shot for their excessive optimism. In the streets, the open
enthusiasm of the masses brought a new wave of arrests.
Within the Falange, blue shirts waited to see what the Fam-
ily would do with them now that the black shirts had gone.

“Keep calm!” shrieked Arriba, organ of the Falange. “The
fall of Mussolini is only the symbol of a defeated people.
What power, what institution, can today resist defeat? The
name of Mussolini shall not die with the sound of his voice!”

196


SEEM A SAINT — PLAY THE DEVIL 197


In such emergencies as these, Franco’s caution served the
Family well. It was now obvious to the oligarchy that two
steps had to be taken. Foreign policy was to be adjusted to
meet the possibility of Allied victory. Domestic policy had
to be altered to hide the fact that Falangism was but a poor
copy of Italy’s fascism, now disclosed as a sink of corrup-
tion. Thanks to Franco’s slow caution, to the swift action
of the Germans in plugging up the gap left by the Italians,
and to the surprisingly moderate “suggestions” which the
United States and Britain made to Spain, these adjustments
and alterations were carried out with little or no discomfort
for the members of the oligarchy. The masquerade was still
successful.

The German Ambassador, then Hans Heinrich Dieckhoff,
former Ambassador to Washington, was first to call at the
Pardo Palace after Mussolini’s fall. He thanked Franco for
services rendered, informed him that Germany was taking
over the defense of Italy, and told him that Spain, not Italy,
would play a major réle in the Mediterranean when Ger-
many’s victory was complete. This victory, he assured Fran-
co, was secure owing to the new weapons being developed
by Germany.

Four days after Mussolini fell, Ambassador Hayes went to
the Pardo Palace. He found Franco still much impressed
by Germany’s strength, but willing to admit that the Allies
now were taking the initiative. Hayes asked that the Span-
ish policy of “non-belligerency” be abandoned for one of
neutrality; suggested that this neutrality be practiced by all
offices of the Government, including the Falange and the
press; and urged that the Spanish Blue Legion be with-
drawn from the Russian Front.

This was the first objection to the Blue Legion ever raised
officially by either the United States or Britain. Hayes acted
in this regard without instructions from Washington. In the


198 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


course of his talk with Franco on this point, Hayes said that
Spain was “an American even more than a European coun-
try.” Franco eagerly agreed and promised to give his
“earnest attention” to the questions Hayes had raised.

Hayes’ protests did bring some improvement in the tone
of the Spanish press. It still was far from neutral; it never
even approached neutrality until the war ended. In 1943,
however, the Spanish press did publish some United States
and British war communiqués.

Little publicity was given to Hayes’ talk with Franco. In
part this was because the Spaniards did not desire it, but
Hayes himself decided to keep silent in the hope of obtain-
ing better results. He did, however, report fully on his talks
to Sir Samuel Hoare, who was planning his annual trip to
London.

In August, the British Embassy's press chief announced
that Sir Samuel was to have a talk with Franco which would
be of great importance. Franco was then vacationing in
Galicia, but, impressed by the urgency of the interview, he
ordered a plane to fly the British Ambassador to his summer
home. Hoare saw Franco on August 20.

Sir Samuel reports that “the main points of my talk, the
Falange, non-belligerency, and the Blue Division, touched
the three most sensitive points in the Franco armor.” These
points, already probed by Hayes, were apparently not suf-
ficiently explored by Sir Samuel to impress either Franco or
his interpreter, the Baron de las Torres. Franco, in fact, told
the Baron that he was “pleasantly surprised” by Sir Samuel’s
comments on Hispano-British relations.

Immediately after Sir Samuel’s return flight to Madrid,
the British Embassy announced that the important points of
Spain’s relations with the United Nations had been dis-
cussed, With his way thus prepared, Sir Samuel left by air
for London. There he let it be known that he had been


SEEM A SAINT — PLAY THE DEVIL 199


“tough” with Franco. So amazed was the Caudillo to hear
this that he had his Government’s Embassy in Washington
issue a communiqué saying that his talk with the British
Ambassador had been “most friendly.” It took a cabinet
statement in the House of Commons and a Foreign Office
statement to the press to convince the Spanish Family that
Britain was not particularly happy about the state of His-
pano-British relations.

By that time the Family was convinced that, happy or
not, Britain and the United States were quite prepared to
accept the Spanish masquerade for the time being at least.
Orders for the withdrawal of the Blue Legion, approved by
the Superior War Council after Franco's talk with Hayes,
were pigeonholed. Still under military orders to keep Spain
quiet, the British Foreign Office and our State Department
continued to appease Spain in return for very small favors.
The leaders of the Family, much relieved, turned to the
business of shoring up Falange ideology, somewhat wobbly
since the collapse of the Fascist model.

In Italy, ex-Fascists were seen on the streets of Rome
with forty-pound weights tied to their wrists to keep them
from saluting Fascist-style. The Family shuddered, but con-
tinued to salute in the same style which, the press explained,
was “historically Spanish.” Columns and columns of news-
print were devoted to explaining that “the Falange is abso-
lutely Spanish and any resemblance to any other régime,
living or dead, is purely coincidental.”

Fortunately for the Family, the Falange “got religion”
and the clergy came to its rescue.

No sinner converted at a revival meeting in the moun-
tains of the United States ever got religion more violently
or enthusiastically than did the Falange in the late summer
of 1943. Before that date Falangist “Old Shirts” were fre-
quently anti-clerical. Only the power of the clergy in the


200 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


oligarchy and the presence of numerous bishops as Falan-
gist leaders kept this trend from breaking through in pub-
lic. The official date of the conversion was August 22.

For a week the Falange prepared for its first official pil-
grimage. District leaders of the Falange competed with
each other to arouse the religious zeal of their followers.
The goal of the pilgrimage was the picturesque town of
Santiago de Compostela where the remains of the Apostle
James (Iago) are said to be buried. In the Middle Ages,
when Santiago was a pilgrimage center for all Europe, the
Gallegos saw some strange sights, but few could have been
stranger than the Falangist pilgrimage of 1943.

Orders for the pilgrims were published in the press. Falan-
gists on their way to Santiago were instructed to “mingle
with the people in the fields and tell them of our crusade.”
In towns along the Falangist line of march, local authorities
rounded up citizens to listen to bareheaded Blue Shirts tell
of their work “For God and for Spain.” Falangists who
could not join the pilgrimage were instructed to “visit the
sick and do good deeds.” On the morning of the appointed
day, thousands of the new faithful gathered on the outskirts
of Santiago de Compostela. Some had come on foot, some
on horseback; most had traveled from Barcelona, Valencia,
Sevilla, and Madrid by train and bus.

Silencing the cheers with upraised hand, Franco emerged
from his Mercedes-Benz to take a pilgrim’s staff in hand.
Monks from one of Santiago’s many monasteries carried a
canopy over Franco’s head to shield him from the sun as
the procession moved toward the Cathedral. Just behind
Franco walked Arrese, Secretary General of the party, and
other Falangist Ministers. The Falangist rank and file were
both bareheaded and barefooted in the tradition of pilgrims.
Franco and his Ministers kept their shoes on.

Inside the Cathedral, Franco went to the high altar and


SEEM A SAINT — PLAY THE DEVIL 201


took his place in a chair placed beside it. A high mass was
celebrated, the Bishop presiding. At its end, Arrese, now
barefoot, knelt before the high altar and made the following
speech:


Santiago, Patron of Spain, here prostrated at your feet is
the Falange, to beg you in this decisive hour for the unity,
the greatness, and the liberty of Spain. This demonstration
of the Catholic faith of the Falange has brought you the
enthusiasm of youth in the true Spanish tradition. Sefior
Santiago, this youth is not bashfully pious. As it came to
you barefooted and with its head exposed to the hot August
sun, it did not try to pass unseen to excuse itself in the eyes
of those who might consider religion as something for con-
vents and tonsured monks. This youth took life as you
preached it, and, from the first fighting squads who left
their homes to fight on the streets to those who today are
consumed by fire in the snows of Russia, they know that
the military and the religious way is the true way to under-
stand Spain. With a prayer on their lips they fought to the
the death against the enemies of God and the Motherland.

Half-monk and half-soldier is what José Antonio taught
us to be. Today, with red berets and dark blue uniforms,
we come to pray for our Caudillo, for the destinies of Spain
and for our Faith. We want life to make us hard and leave
us no rest until we have achieved a Christian and a happy
Fatherland.

Accept, Sefior Santiago, the fervent prayers of Falangists
who come before you to renew their triple profession of
faith:

We believe in God!

We believe in Spain!

We believe in Franco!


Details of the Santiago pilgrimage, including the above
prayer, were published in all Spanish newspapers. From
that day onward, no religious ceremony, however small, was


202 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


complete without a delegation of Falangists. After that day,
the marriage of the Falange and the clergy, with the clergy
as senior partner, became official.

This is the formula which the Spanish Family found to
protect it from the charge that Spain was merely “Fascist.”
This is the formula which Franco put into a single sentence,
soon repeated by the entire régime, published widely in the
press, quoted constantly on the radio and painted on the
walls along the highways and byways of the Family's Spain:

“We seek the union of the national with the social under
the emblem of the spiritual,” said Franco, not once, but
many times from 1943 to 1947.

The phrase is worth analysis. The “national” united with
the “social” derives from German National Socialism. Late
in 1943, however, the Spanish oligarchy was aware that a
shift from Fascism to Nazism might prove to be a leap from
the frying-pan into the fire.

For this reason, Spain’s “National Socialism” was placed
“under the emblem of the spiritual” — in other words, under
the protection of the Spanish clergy. The Roman Church
did not approve of German National Socialism, in fact, the
Roman Church condemned it. Spain’s clergy, however, co-
operated with the Nazis on most occasions and spoke no ill
of them until they were no more. Inasmuch as Spain’s clergy
had helped the rest of the Spanish oligarchy capture the
Falange for its own use, the Spanish clergy saw nothing
wrong with Spanish National Socialism. Spain, in fact, had
a number of Falangist bishops who marched in Falangist
parades, saluted with stiff arms and sat in the high councils
of the party.

In theory, the sudden conversion of the Falange was quite
sound. Point 25 of the Falange’s twenty-six points declares
that the Falange “will incorporate the Catholic spirit . . .
into the national reconstruction.” The twenty-six points and


SEEM A SAINT — PLAY THE DEVIL 203


Falange history up to August 22, 1948, however, did not
suggest that the Falangists were “half-monk and half-sol-
dier.” Soon men in Madrid’s cafés were whispering a new
joke: “The Government and the Falange have lost Mussolini
and soon are to lose Hitler, and then there will be nobody
left to lead them but God!”

Spaniards, in fact, did not take the conversion of the Fa-
lange too seriously. Other developments which fitted into the
Spanish masquerade were taken with similar laughter or
disinterest by the people. When the Minister of Justice
drew huge headlines in the Spanish press by announcing
that the Fuero de los Espafioles, or “Spanish Bill of Rights,”
would soon be forthcoming, nobody got excited, least of all
the prison population. A decree was issued authorizing
members of the Falangist “Old Shirt” organization to carry
arms if they considered it necessary. They did.

The Falange was “dominated by a strange fatalism and
premonition of defeat” in the late summer and fall of 1943.
The Falangist Labor Minister, José Antonio Girén, who sel-
dom hesitated to speak such truths, said so. “People seem
to think of the Falange as a kind of new barbarism forcing
people to live eternally in torture,” he declared. “They look
on the Falange as a sort of hair shirt which martyrizes lib-
erty and happiness. It is difficult to fight for we do not know
with whom nor against whom. . . .

The Falange found itself shadow-boxing. Its membership
of three million dwindled away to one million after the fall
of Fascism. Those who remained were bitter and belligerent.

Falangists of the Youth Front were summoned to Madrid
from all the provinces on October 1, 1943, to participate in
a new annual holiday — “Day of the Caudillo.” To honor
Franco the youth organization changed its name to “The
Franco Youth,” like the Hitler Youth, which sent them
greetings and a delegation of husky young Nazis. In theory


204 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


the Spanish organization included only youths from eight
to eighteen, but in fact many of those who paraded the
streets of Madrid singing Spanish words to German Nazi
songs were dark-jowled Falangists in their late thirties. All
wore khaki shorts, dark blue shirts, and carried daggers at
their sides. Their official organ, Mastil, gave them this bit
of advice:

If someone looks on us with disdain or hates us, then, in
the name of God and the Caudillo, attack him. Should any-
body criticize — even if his criticism is in the underhanded
Versailles style — break his head. After that, make a report
in writing. But let the written report always follow the
medical report.

It was in his speech to these totalitarian Boy Scouts that
Franco chose to make his first reference to Spain’s “vig-
ilant neutrality.” The new phrase was buried deep in the
text of his speech. The press censorship issued strict orders
that no newspaper pull out the phrase for a headline — but
there it was for the record.

A few days later, Spaniards learned why this particular
moment had been chosen to refer to “neutrality” instead of
the old policy of “non-belligerency.” The Portuguese Gov-
ernment announced that Britain had established a base in
the Azores. Spain, loosely allied with Portugal in the “Ibe-
rian Bloc,” had been informed. There was a time — just be-
fore the landing of United States troops in Africa — when
the Falange had offered to help Portugal defend the Azores,
but that was at Germany’s behest. Now neither the Ger-
mans nor Spain could do much about the Azores. Hence the
policy of “vigilant neutrality.”

It soon developed, however, that Spain was more “vig-
ilant” than “neutral.” Dockworkers in London found time
bombs mixed with the oranges which British ships had
brought from Valencia. Eden announced in the House of


SEEM A SAINT — PLAY THE DEVIL 205


Commons that Spain had a scheme for withdrawing the
Blue Legion while leaving “volunteers” to help the Ger-
mans. Armed Falangist toughs broke into the British vice-
consulate in Zaragoza. Two other Falangists were caught
at sabotage in Gibraltar. Then, while the British lion roared
its anger, the Spanish Foreign Ministry ruffled the feathers
of the American eagle.

In October, 1943, a note of congratulations conveying
“the most sincere sentiments,” not only “of the Generalis-
simo, the Government, and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,”
but also of “the Spanish people,” was sent to the Jap-spon-
sored Philippine Government of José P. Laurel.

The resulting uproar in the United States sent Hayes to
the Spanish Foreign Ministry. There he learned that such a
message had indeed been sent. Washington, cold to the
“explanations and assurances” of the Spanish Ambassador
that Spain in no way intended to recognize the Laurel
régime with this message, decided to try for a show-down
with Spain. But Washington arrived too late with too little.

What the State Department wanted was an embargo on
wolframite, the mineral from which tungsten is extracted.
Tungsten is the salt and pepper of steel used in war, vital
to armor-piercing shells and certain machine tools. Early
in the war, the core of German shells was made of tungsten
steel; later, as Germany's stocks of wolfram decreased, only
the shell tips contained tungsten.

Main source of wolfram in Europe was first Portugal and
then Spain. Before the war, neither country exported much
wolfram; twenty dollars a ton was a good price. After war
began, speculators boosted the price to one hundred dollars
a ton, but little was exported. German stocks were large,
and additional supplies came through Russia. In 1941, when
Germany invaded Russia, the purchase of three hundred
and fifty tons of Spanish wolfram by German agents sent


206 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


prices up. The attack on Pearl Harbor, with the closing of
Far-Eastern sources, was the real beginning of the wolfram
boom.

British interests controlled most of Portugal’s production
and a little of that of Spain. Competition for the rest be-
came the keystone of economic warfare on the Iberian
Peninsula.

The struggle for wolfram was fantastic. By 1943, the price
had soared to $27,000 a ton in Spain and even higher in
Portugal. A good portion of the $160,000,000 which the
United States and Britain pumped into Spain from 1948 to
1944 to keep goods out of German hands went for wolfram
or the purchase of wolfram mines. In both Portugal and
Spain there were “wolfram millionaires.” Needless to say,
the Spanish Family saw to it that their members got the
bulk of the profits. But there was profit enough for some
poor men too.

Woltram is a surface ore. Farmers of Galicia and Leén
soon discovered that the black stones which occasionally
turned up in their fields were worth about thirteen dollars
a pound. Field hands who seldom earned that much a
month and small farmers who thought themselves lucky to
get thirteen dollars a week soon quit their fields to look for
wolfram. Tons of it came out of stone walls built for cen-
turies. Scores of new mines, real or “salted,” were discov-
ered each week.

First the Spanish, then the Portuguese Government,
sought to control the wolfram industry, but it was hopeless.
Smuggling wolfram was one of the most lucrative jobs the
border people had ever undertaken. Spanish and Portu-
guese customs officials grew rich. Countless tales of smug-
gling ingenuity came out of the wolfram boom. Few were
more amusing than the tale told of Calabor in Spain and
Portelo in Portugal, two hamlets separated by only a mile or
so at the northeastern corner of Portugal.


—


SEEM A SAINT — PLAY THE DEVIL 207


The customs agents of Spain and Portugal demanded
bribes so high that the townsfolk of both the Spanish and
Portuguese villages were smuggling wolfram without trying
bribery. Many were caught; the fines were large. Business
was dull, but profits had been large. Everybody looked for-
ward eagerly to the fiesta to be held on the day of the
patron saint of the Portuguese town of Portelo to which, by
tradition, the citizens of Calabor were invited.

The big day came. Customs guards carefully searched
all Spaniards who crossed the border, for the wolfram mar-
ket was free in Portugal and controlled in Spain. They
found little wolfram. At sundown they closed the border
station and went to join the merrymaking in Portelo.

Wine flowed freely. By midnight a Portuguese of Portelo
had insulted a Spaniard from Calabor. There was a fight;
it became a free-for-all of Spaniards versus Portuguese.
Portuguese and Spanish police succeeded in herding the vis-
iting Spaniards back to their side of the frontier, but the
angry Portuguese pursued them, shouting and throwing
stones. Once across the border, the infuriated Spaniards of
Calabor retaliated, hurling stones at the Portuguese. The
battle raged nearly two hours before patriotic rage was
spent. It was then that the Spanish guards noticed that the
Portuguese of Portelo were busily gathering up the missiles
hurled by the Spaniards. About fifty thousand dollars worth
of wolfram ore had crossed the frontier that night, duty free.

To put an end to this expensive struggle for wolfram,
Washington planned to use the Laurel incident. An earlier
triumph might have shown Washington the way to do it.

From the beginning of the World War in 1989 it was evi-
dent that oil from the United States was reaching Germany
through Spain. By June, 1940, Spain was receiving three
times as much fuel oil and nine times as much lubricating
oil from the United States as in the last half of 1939. At Brit-


208 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


ain’s request, the United States Government obtained the
Spanish Government’s reluctant agreement to a plan which
gave Spain enough petroleum for restricted domestic needs
plus a stockpile expected to last two and one-half months.
Exports of fuel oil, gasoline and lubricating oil from the
United States to Spain dropped from 2,680,000 barrels in
the first half of 1940 to 1,325,000 barrels in the second half.

In the spring of 1948, the United States, by the simple
method of refusing to deliver aviation gasoline, forced Spain
to buy up German-held stock in the Spanish Iberia Airlines,
which has the monopoly on domestic air transportation.
Iberia’s planes were grounded; only Germany’s Lufthansa
and Italy’s Ala Litoria were able to carry traffic on the Bar-
celona-Lisbon—-Madrid route by using their own precious
gasoline. Within four months the Spanish surrendered. The
Germans handed over their. stock in Iberia and American
aviation gasoline was loaded aboard Spanish tankers in the
Caribbean again.

The Laurel incident, fortified by an embargo on the 541,-
000 tons annual quota of petroleum granted Spain, might
have pulled the trick. Instead, Washington asked Hayes to
get a complete embargo on wolfram exports from Spain
with no mention of a petroleum embargo and with little
effort to get Britain’s co-operation.

Naturally, the effort failed. The Family did not plan to
give up their profitable business in wolfram for a single tel-
egram. Madrid refused. Count Jordana told Hayes that
Spanish “public opinion” felt the United States “was taking
unfair advantage of a trivial episode and might be entertain-
ing sinister intentions toward Spain.” The United States
finally accepted Spain’s “explanations” of the Laurel mes-
sage without even learning which of the many pro-German
officials at the Foreign Ministry had sent it. What was more
important, the Germans continued to buy Spain’s wolfram.


SEEM A SAINT — PLAY THE DEVIL 209


Economic warfare for wolfram reached its height about
this time. British Embassy estimates for 1943 were 3035
tons of Spanish wolfram for the Allies and 1309 tons for the
Germans. Private estimates placed the German haul at
about 2400 tons. This was a great deal, for a little tungsten
hardens a lot of steel. In the winter of 1943, the Germans
and the Spanish Family arranged a swap which virtually
forced the Allies to apply the petroleum embargo they had
failed to attempt a few months earlier.

The Spanish Family wanted to get the Blue Legion out of
Russia. The “blood debt” to Germany had been paid, in-
deed overpaid, and the continued presence of the Blue
Legion in Russia was obviously incompatible with Spain’s
avowed policy of “neutrality.” The Spanish Army also
wanted more and better arms. If Germany won the vic-
tories, the Spanish Army might have a chance to grab Gib-
raltar and part of Algeria. If the United Nations won, the
Spanish people might be hard to handle.

Germany wanted more credit to buy wolfram. Germany’s
war purchases in Spain far exceeded the one hundred mil-
lion dollars which the Family owed Germany on the Civil
War debt.

The deal then arranged gave the Spanish Army large
quantities of German and captured Russian arms, outmoded
for power warfare, but good enough to use against unarmed
Spaniards. Spain also received some wheat and barley from
the Ukraine and Romania and some seed potatoes from Ger-
many itself. In addition, the Family got permission to with-
draw the Blue Legion, no great loss to the Germans. In re-
turn, Germany received four hundred million pesetas —
forty million dollars at the official rate —to use for buying
wolfram in Spain.

The whole balance of the wolfram market was upset.
Germany, now equipped for a price war, got large quantities


210 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


of the mineral across the border in January, 1944. Even the
official export figures for Germany leaped from sixty tons in
December to three hundred tons in January. German smug-
gling across the Pyrenees was encouraged by the Spaniards.

Washington and London demanded action. Hayes and
Hoare recommended that a sort of “secret embargo” be ap-
plied to exports of petroleum to Spain, the theory being that
publicity would only arouse the “pride of the Spanish peo-
ple.” Spanish tankers en route to the Caribbean area would
simply be refused petroleum.

Naturally enough, the “secret” did not last long. An
American news agency hinted that an embargo was being
applied; the British Broadcasting Company spread the news
around the world in many languages. Secretary of State
Cordell Hull in Washington and Foreign Secretary Anthony
Eden in London both confirmed the BBC report and stated
what the Allies wanted from Spain.

“Spanish pride” is one of the oligarchy’s best weapons. It
can be turned on and off at will. Throughout the war and
even to this day the Spanish Family piously warns all who
deal with Spain that they must not criticize nor ask too
much, for they will only defeat their own purposes by arous-
ing “Spanish pride.” When manifestations of injured pride
are required, the Family will stage monster demonstrations.
In Madrid, that city of more than a million whose only busi-
ness is government, woe betide the petty official who does
not appear accompanied by his cousins and dependents at
the scheduled hour to show his “Spanish pride.”

There is, of course, a real “Spanish pride.” It is the pride
of poor men who starved to death rather than wear Falan-
gist uniforms or beg at the doors of the Falangist Auxilio
Social for a crust of bread. It is the pride of men who died
against the walls of the cemetery in the suburbs of Madrid,
screaming, “Viva la Republica!” though only a firing squad


SEEM A SAINT — PLAY THE DEVIL 211


could hear them. It is the pride of a people, long oppressed,
who are never defeated.

The Family's pride is a different thing. The immediate
reaction of the Family to the publicity concerning the em-
bargo was not “injured pride.” What happened was that the
Spanish cabinet belatedly issued a communiqué saying that
the country’s policy now was one of “strict neutrality” —
presumably a little better than “vigilant neutrality.” What
also happened was that Count Jordana produced a plan for
limiting the sale of wolfram to Germany. This plan, quite
acceptable to the British Ambassador, was not acceptable to
Washington nor, consequently, to London. Nor were two
other Spanish proposals, each conceding a little more, put
forward on February 21 and March 11, 1944.

Rejection of the first offer led the Spanish oligarchy to
take dramatic steps designed to show how dangerous it was
to insult “Spanish pride.” Private driving was banned — ex-
ceptions being made, of course, for those members of the
Family who could afford gasogenos, the expensive charcoal-
burning attachments which the British called “gasogenes.”
Liquid fuel supplies to industry and agriculture were heav-
ily cut — except, of course, for Family industrialists and
landowners who could find a way of getting liquid fuel from
the Spanish Army’s big stocks. The Government published
decrees granting subsidies to gasogene factories, all of which
were owned by members of the oligarchy. The Government
also sent a bill to the rubber-stamp Cortes calling for the
construction of liquid-fuel factories at a cost of two hundred
million dollars. The Germans promised these factories
would be built with the help of German engineers — within
a few years.

Such sound and fury were echoed by the Spanish press.
No press in the world has less claim to “pride” than the
newspapers of the Spanish oligarchy. They groveled in


|
|


212 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


sickening subservience to the Germans. They cheered in a
frenzy as bombs dropped on Guernica, Warsaw, Rotterdam,
London, and Chungking; they expressed humanitarian hor-
ror at bombs dropped on Berlin and Tokio. They applauded
as Poland, France, Greece, and the Philippines were crushed
by the invader; they did not applaud the liberation. They
rattled old skeletons of the thousands of members of the
Family assassinated by the Republicans in the Civil War to
drown out the sound of firing squads killing hundreds of
thousands in revenge. But in the spring of 1944, the “Span-
ish pride” represented by such a press was aroused.

“Why is Spain not getting petroleum?” wailed Arriba and
the rest of Spain’s newspapers. “What do they want of us?”

Full statements from London and Washington saying ex-
actly what was wanted were not published in Spain. Soon
the wails changed to cries of injured “honor.” Spain’s
heroes, from Pelayo the Goth and Santiago to the modern
knight in shining armor, Francisco Franco, were trotted out
to aid “the Spanish people” against this “attack on the good
name of Spain.”

A fiery Spanish Admiral in the last century had taken his
few ships out of a Peruvian port to do battle with a superior
British and Dutch fleet, saying, “Better honor without ships
than ships without honor.” In 1944, the Falange sent bands
of their students into the streets with banners proclaiming,
“Better gasogenes with honor than gasoline without honor.”
The best show of all was reserved for April Fool’s Day, anni-
versary of the occupation of Madrid in the Civil War.

Each year on April 1 the Army puts on a big military dis-
play in Madrid. Normally it is designed to show the people
of Madrid how useless it would be to revolt against their
masters. But in 1944, the parade was prepared to show
United States and British diplomats how Spain was pre-
pared “to defend its honor” — without gasoline if necessary.


SEEM A SAINT — PLAY THE DEVIL 213


Gasogenes, as most of Europe learned in the war years,
are very complex and contrary contraptions. They look like
large hot-water boilers. Some are trundled behind the
vehicle on a two-wheeled trailer; most are attached to the
rear of the vehicle itself like some strange iron parasite.
Things frequently go wrong. The driver usually carries an
assistant to help him get out and stoke the charcoal fire.
Fortunately, the driver can always use what gasoline he has
simply by shutting off, from his dashboard, the gasogene
fuel and switching over to liquid fuel. This was a device
which members of the Family found quite useful when Sun-
day driving was banned for all save automobiles equipped
with gasogenes. The Army also found it useful on April 1.

Early that morning, my wife and I were awakened by a
great rumbling in the street below our rooftop Hat opposite
the Retiro Park. From the terraces we beheld a line of
strange-looking vehicles which proved to be small Italian
Fiat tanks of the Spanish Army — powered by gasogenes at-
tached to the rear of each. Some were chugging bravely up
the street toward the starting-point of the parade; others
were stranded by the wayside.

Down in the street I joined a group of interested bystand-
ers watching a tank crew stoke up their gasogene. The sol-
diers made no attempt to hide their scorn. They said it was
a mad business trying to drive a cookstove from the inside.
They also made bitter comments about the probable vul-
nerability of “The First Company of Gasogene Tanks”
against any enemy equipped with a garden hose.

We went to the parade with great expectations. Appar-
ently, however, some wise commander decided not to risk
sending the “First Company of Gasogene Tanks” through
the gantlet of reviewing stands. The censors were also in-
structed not to permit any reference to this curious experi-
ment.


214 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Franco arrived at his hero-sized reviewing stand to receive
his usual accolade of applause. He had abandoned Hitler’s
Mercedes-Benz for one of the Packards which Serrano
Sumner had wheedled out of the Americans — and the Pack-
ard trailed a shiny new gasogene. True, mechanically
minded observers soon noted that the gasogene was not
functioning and that the Packard ran smoothly on gasoline,
but this was not mentioned too loudly. Police scattered
through the crowds saw to that.

All vehicles in the parade, even the power trucks pulling
artillery, had gasogene attachments. Few, if any, moved on
gasogene power, but some of the gasogenes were trailing
noxious fumes peculiar to the contraptions as proof that the
fires were lit.

There was another snub to the democracies in the parade.
Months previously, Arrese had suggested to Franco in a pub-
lic speech that the pro-German Falange Militia might be
dissolved as a separate unit. Franco agreed that it was a
good idea, leading some United States and British corre-
spondents in Spain to report the promise as the act. But at
the parade of 1944, several battalions of Falange Militia,
wearing the insignia of the Blue Legion on their sleeves and
sporting a large number of German iron crosses on their
chests, swung past Franco and on to the diplomatic stands.
There they ostentatiously saluted the German Ambassador
and his staff, all of whom rose to acknowledge the tribute
while the American and British delegations studiously con-
sulted their programs.

It became obvious, early in this first attempt of the Allies
to “get tough” with Spain, that the British were by no means
as eager as the Americans to get a complete wolfram em-
bargo. Much of the effect of the withholding of petroleum
supplies was lost because officials of the British Embassy,
from Sir Samuel down, made no effort to hide from their


SEEM A SAINT — PLAY THE DEVIL 215


Spanish friends their belief that the Americans were making
a mistake which they, as allies, were forced to support. By
some strange error, the United States Embassy also chose
to announce in March, 1944, that the United States would
participate officially in the International Samples Fair at
Barcelona in June. Since the “international” aspect of such
fairs under the Family Government had previously been
furnished by the Axis Powers, the American gesture was
hardly calculated to indicate dissatisfaction with Spain’s
attitude.

A spirit of “This hurts us more than it hurts you” seemed
to dominate the attitude of American and British diplomats
during the petroleum embargo. There was too much friend-
ly talk to Spanish officials and other members of the Family
about “our public opinion at home, you know — terribly un-
informed, must be satisfied somehow!” The American diplo-
mats kept all save one Embassy car off the streets and
walked to their offices to avoid hurting Spanish feelings.
The British drove all their cars everywhere, which Spaniards
took to mean that they disapproved of the embargo.

At the end of April, Washington finally gave in to the
British plea to “compromise.” For some strange reason, the
British appeared to believe that “Spanish pride” might lead
the Family to turn over all its wolfram to the Germans —
and this at the very time when the United Nations were
winning the war! Thus, just as the well-to-do of Spain really
began to feel the pinch of the embargo, it was dropped.

Under the new agreement, Germany was to get a total
of forty tons of wolfram a month after May I, since the
three hundred tons officially exported in January plus the
quantities smuggled across the Pyrenees more than compen-
sated for her losses during that time. The forty-ton allow-
ance was a reduction of one third in Germany’s 1942 exports
—on paper. The agreement also contained a promise by


es


|


216 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


the Spaniards to do something they could not do even when
they tried —stop the smuggling. Minor concessions were
made to the Allies, such as the closing of the German Con-
sulate in Tangier, the release of Italian merchant ships in-
terned in Spanish ports, and the opening of negotiations to
free Italian warships held in the Balearics. There were also
curious provisions requiring the Spaniards to oust German
agents from Spanish Morocco and expel Axis espionage and
sabotage agents from Spanish territory. Needless to say,
most German agents continued to operate throughout Span-
ish territory until war ended with the collaboration of the
Falange.

In exchange for these concessions, the Americans and
British agreed to resume petroleum shipments on the same
basis as in 1943. Both the American and British Embassies
explained away a clause whereby the two powers agreed
“to consider means of increasing their trade with Spain.”
They said it was only designed to “save the face” of the
Spanish Government and meant nothing. Developments
ay otherwise.

efore the Rhine was crossed, the British spent large sums
in Spain for onions, sardines, oranges, and many other items.
United States purchases of Spanish wines and brandies in-
creased, The United States Commercial Corporation quit
buying wolfram, but was replaced by another purchasing
mission. The United States Army not only bought food in
Spain, but also sent buyers into the country to pick up curios
for the “P.X.” stores for troops in Europe. United States
and Brazilian cotton was supplied for Catalonia’s textile
mills; the United States Army bought the output. When
landing rights for United States commercial planes, request-
ed in 1943, were finally granted in September, 1944, Amer-
ican engineers helped rebuild Spanish airports and the Span-
ish Air Army got American bulldozers.


SEEM A SAINT — PLAY THE DEVIL 217


The Spanish Family considered the 1943 wolfram-petro-
leum agreement a real victory, as indeed it was. Both Swe-
den and Turkey had agreed to shut off all exports of chrome
and molybdenum to Germany, thereby drawing German
criticism. No German newspaper criticized Spain for the
agreement that came out of the wolfram crisis. In Washing-
ton, Secretary Hull announced that the settlement fell short
of American demands because of British pressure for a com-
promise. This was true.

For the Spanish Family, the settlement was reached at a
proper time. The wealthy had plenty of gasoline to drive
their cars on their vacations as summer began. Italian war-
ships in the Balearics were not released until January, 1945.
The withdrawal of the Blue Legion, begun late in 1948, was
not completed until the summer of 1944. The returning sol-
diers were greeted as official heroes and given first call on
official jobs. They had seen real action in Russia; casualties
were believed to be about eight thousand.

Slowly, reluctantly, the Spanish Family began to prepare
for the possibility that the United States and Britain might
win the war. Hispanidad, moreover, had begun to backfire.
Latin America was almost unanimously anti-Axis and whole-
heartedly anti-Japanese. When even the Argentines said
they did not like the Japanese régime, Arriba suddenly dis-
covered that Spanish missionaries in the Philippines were
not well treated by the Japanese. The Germans, however,
were not pleased, so the anti-Japanese idea was dropped
until the Germans themselves had surrendered. Then, after
V-E Day, the Spanish Government dramatically broke rela-
tions with Japan. At that date, neither the Japanese nor the
United States cared much.

Sir Samuel Hoare’s continued interest in the return of the
Spanish monarchy gave the Family a continuous source of
amusement. There was a “Monarchist plot” in every café,


——


—


218 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


where members of the Family loudly discussed the advan-
tages and disadvantages of Don Juan as king while the po-
lice sat beside them watching for those who might suggest
a real republic. Everybody wrote letters — even the Army
leaders.

All but two of the lieutenant generals signed a letter to
Franco which Kindelan prepared for their signature. It was
a strange letter. The generals praised Franco to the skies,
swore eternal loyalty to him, and asked politely if he did
not think it might be time to bring back the monarchy, leav-
ing him a hundred ways to say he did not. Each of the gen-
erals then scurried individually to the Pardo Palace to ex-
plain to Franco that he really preferred the present Govern-
ment to anything else. All of them were much relieved
when, on November 7, 1943, the War Minister, General
Carlos Asensio, called them together to say that Franco ap-
preciated their letter, but did not yet believe the time was
ripe for a restoration. In this letter, as in all letters concern-
ing the monarchy, Franco described himself as a “Monarch-
ist.”

Even the Falangists, scorned by Don Juan, found a way
to call themselves Monarchists. They resurrected another
claimant to the Spanish throne — “Don Carlos VIII.”

Legally “Don Carlos VIII,” an engaging young man who
spoke only French and Italian when the Falange brought
him to Spain, hasn’t a leg to stand on. The original split be-
tween the Carlists and the other Monarchists was over the
question of succession to the throne. The Carlists argued
that the Crown should pass only through the male line. The
last Carlist pretender able to wear the Crown under these
conditions was Alfonso Carlos. He died in Vienna during
the Spanish Civil War, leaving no heir. Most Carlists ac-
cordingly agreed that the line was ended and now are will-
ing to accept any descendant of Alfonso XIII who will give
them the clerical monarchy they desire.


SEEM A SAINT — PLAY THE DEVIL 219


The Falange’s “king” is the son of Dofia Blanca, a niece
of Alfonso Carlos, who married an Italian nobleman. “Don
Carlos VIII” earned his living as an automobile salesman
on the Riviera until war drove him back to Italy. There the
Falange rescued him from poverty, brought him to Barce-
lona, and sent a few hundred ex-Carlists who had joined
the Falange to pay their respects.

The Falangist plan was to provide the Family with a will-
ing “Regent” for a Falangist monarchy. “Don Carlos VIII”
had “audiences” in Barcelona as late as 1946, but no one
took him very seriously, least of all himself. He told an
American friend who called on him in Barcelona that he
was more interested in obtaining the agency for a good
American automobile in Cannes than in his chances of rul-
ing Spain.

Intrigue of this kind within the Family had little meaning
for most Spaniards. What really shocked the nation was a
speech made by Winston Churchill on May 25, 1944, which
still is not properly understood in Spain.

Churchill praised the Madrid régime for failing to follow
Italy into the war in 1940, and for not actively interfering
with the North African landings. He continued:


As I am here today speaking kindly words about Spain,
let me add that I hope she will be a strong influence for the
peace of the Mediterranean after the war. Internal political
problems in Spain are a matter for the Spaniards them-
selves. It is not for us to meddle in such affairs, that is, the
Government... .

Well, I say we speak the same words to the Spaniards in
the hour of our strength as we did in the hour of our weak-
ness. I look forward to increasingly good relations with
Spain, and to an extremely fertile trade between Spain and
this country, which will, I trust, grow even during the war
and will extend after the peace.


220 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


This speech so amazed official Spain that the evening
press was not permitted to publish a word of it. The Fam-
ily, particularly the Falange, was first incredulous, then sus-
picious, next jubilant, and finally simply bewildered. By
midnight, gangs of Falangists were sent to the streets of
Madrid with cans of black paint to place Churchill’s words
of praise beside those pat phrases by José Antonio and Fran-
cisco Franco which cover the walls of Spain’s streets and
highroads in the best Fascist tradition. As I left my office
for my home late that night, I met a crowd of Falangists
painting out one of Franco’s quotations — something about
the decadent liberal systems — to put up this substitute:


INTERNAL POLITICAL PROBLEMS IN SPAIN ARE A
MATTER FOR THE SPANIARDS THEMSELVES.
CHURCHILL


This was in Spanish, of course, so that the people of Spain
could read it in the morning, even if they could not under-
stand it. The controlled press carried the same quotation in
huge headlines; the Falangist radio quoted Churchill as it
usually quoted Franco, Hitler, and José Antonio. The Ma-
drid daily YA, organ of the clergy, proclaimed: “The Falan-
gist régime of Francisco Franco is on the march, and even
those who doubted its chances of overcoming the great ob-
stacles in its path now are convinced of its formidable polit-
ical power.” In other words, the oligarchy thought it had
fooled Britain with the Spanish masquerade.

Churchill, a Conservative, was not without sympathy for
the oligarchy, but he had no love for their wartime policy.
Another day’s reflection convinced the oligarchy of this and
left Spain simply bewildered. The Churchill quotations
were taken off the walls of Madrid and out of the press be-
cause the Germans protested. Even the Germans, however,
were not certain of the real reason behind Churchill's state-
ment.


SEEM A SAINT — PLAY THE DEVIL 221


They understood it thirteen days later, for then the Allies
landed in Normandy. Churchill had spoken to warn the
Spanish oligarchy to observe a strict neutrality on this occa-
sion. The Allied command wanted no movement of Spanish
troops to the Pyrenees frontier where they could threaten
the flank of the Allied troops in France as they had so suc-
cessfully done in Africa.

When, in the early days of the fighting in Normandy, the
tide of battle seemed to be going against the Allies, Franco’s
military aides told this story of their Caudillo. They said
he was in the Sierra de Gredos hunting mountain goat when
news of the landings reached the Spanish Army’s monitor-
ing station in Madrid. It was flashed to the portable radio
receiver set up in the Gredos inn, but Franco’s overnight
hunting camp was established in the “lost lake” region of
the Sierra six thousand feet above sea level and twenty miles
by horseback from the inn. A mounted courier carrying the
message found Franco and his aides perched on a rocky
ledge waiting for goats.

Franco, his eye on the goat trails below him, asked the
courier:

“What does the message concern?”

“It concerns the Allied invasion of Normandy, Your Ex-
cellency!”

Franco waved the courier away.

“It is of no importance. The Germans wait for them as I
wait for the goats. They will not remain in France.”

The Family agreed with Franco. Only when the Allies not
only remained in Normandy, but drove the Germans out of
France did the Spanish oligarchy realize that events were
making the lines of their masquerade a little old-fashioned.
The Falange had religion, but that was not enough. The
actors of the masquerade would have to be given new lines.


OLD ACTORS—NEW LINES


THE HEAT OF THE SUMMER had descended upon Madrid and
Barcelona. In the South, hungry field workers watched the
olives grow, waiting for work in their crumbling, sunbaked
villages. In Castile, peasants tended the ripening fields of
grain within sight of the empty castles of their landlords. By
the blue sea of the resort towns in the North, the Family
lolled in idleness. It was 1944.

On the surface, nothing had changed in San Sebastian,
the oligarchy’s summer capital. Smart clubs and cafés were
packed with the gente, all there to see and be seen. There
were weeks of yacht-racing and horse-racing, bullfights,
cocktail parties, formal dinners and dancing. Moét-Chan-
don champagne, imported by the Germans, was sold by the
truckload at seventy-five dollars a bottle. Ladies had no
trouble finding American nylon stockings, smuggled in from
Lisbon, at thirty-five dollars a pair. The morality laws of
the clergy, so strictly applied by policemen patrolling the
public beaches, were forgotten on the private beaches
where the Count could swim in shorts and the Countess
could show all of a shapely leg.

Madrid’s diplomatic corps was under the pleasant obliga-
tion of going to San Sebastian each summer because the
Spanish Foreign Ministry moved its headquarters to the
North. Franco would go to his summer home in Galicia in

222


OLD ACTORS — NEW LINES 223


July; there would be no cabinet meetings until September.
General Torr, the British Embassy Military Attaché, rented
a villa near San Sebastian and imported British horses which
took prizes at the races. The Japanese Minister went to the
bullfights in San Sebastian in a broad-brimmed Cordoba hat
to show how Spanish he felt. Fritz von Bibra, representative
of Heinrich Himmler and counselor of the German Embassy,
strutted about arm in arm with Hans Lazar, Paul Josef
Goebbels’ representative and press attaché. They made a
strange pair — von Bibra, a tall, blond Prussian, Lazar, a fat
and swarthy Armenian. Together they had just succeeded
in obtaining the recall of Hans Heinrich Dieckhoff, former
German Ambassador to the United States, whom they con-
sidered insufficiently Nazi. Now they were running German
affairs in Spain to suit themselves.

There was plenty of amusing gossip. A gust of wind hit
the diplomatic beach one day and lifted the Romanian Min-
ister’s dressing tent from its base, disclosing the wife of a
neutral diplomat, fortunately alone, standing stark naked
on this bit of Axis soil. A careless messenger delivered
scarce tickets to the season’s best bullfight, addressed to
Fritz von Bibra by a supposedly pro-British general of the
Spanish Army, to a British diplomat, who sent the horrified
general a terse note of thanks and went to the bullfight.
Picnicking members of the Spanish aristocracy surprised a
Spanish duchess in a haymow with a San Sebastian police-
man. Such matters consumed the hours while, across the
sand flats of near-by Fuenterrabia, Spaniards in exile helped
the French underground kill Germans.

Count Jordana, the Foreign Minister, died suddenly in
August. He was mourned both by Allied diplomats, who
liked him personally, and by German diplomats, who knew
that he always obeyed Franco's orders whether he liked
them or not. His death was timely for the oligarchy, for


224 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


they had been wondering what to do about their Ambassa-
dor in Vichy, José Felix de Lequerica, who had acted as in-
termediary for Marshal Pétain’s request for an armistice in
1940. He would not be liked by the Free French, but it still
was uncertain whether the Allies would succeed in liberat-
ing France. If they failed, the Germans would accuse the
Spaniards of deserting Vichy France too soon. So the suc-
cessor to Count Jordana became José Felix de Lequerica.

Lequerica was an able opportunist, a man of wealth, a
gourmet, a good mixer, and a friend of the Urquijo banking
group. Like Juan March, he had contributed small sums to
José Antonio Primo de Rivera’s Falange, as a form of polit-
ical insurance. Unlike Juan March, he had guessed that the
Axis would win the war, and had given the Japanese diplo-
mats at Vichy an enormous banquet to celebrate their cap-
ture of Manila. Now he was eager to please the United
States and Britain.

He reached Spain safely from Vichy, but all his baggage,
including his decorations, his silverware, and his Spanish
mistress, were captured by the French Maquis. Under Brit-
ish pressure, the Free French returned the property of the
man who had transmitted Pétain’s armistice request to Hit-
ler. Even his mistress eventually reached San Sebastian safe
and sound.

Franco ordered Lequerica to placate the Americans. This
he set out to do by emphasizing that “our foreign policy has
nothing to do with our domestic policy.” He adopted Am-
bassador Hayes’ own phrase—“Spain is an American
nation.”

Franco personally undertook to placate the British. Still
under the spell of Churchill’s speech in May, Franco sent
the Duke of Alba, his Ambassador in London, a long letter
which was to be transmitted to the British Premier. He re-
called that Churchill had served in the Spanish Army in


OLD ACTORS — NEW LINES 225


Cuba in 1895. He praised Anglo-Spanish friendship, citing
Churchill’s speech in the House of Commons. He noted that
the United States was destined to become “the most power-
ful nation in the universe,” and he informed Churchill that
nobody could trust Russia. Then he proceeded along these
lines:


Once Germany is destroyed, England will have only one
country left in Europe toward which she may turn — Spain.
The French and Italian defeats and the internal decay of
these countries will probably not permit any solid structure
to be built upon them for many years to come. ... What we
deduce from this is clear — reciprocal friendship between
England and Spain is desirable. I have no hesitation in say-
ing so, and this need will be the more imperative, the
greater the destruction inflicted on the German nation.


Franco then complained of the attitude of the British
press toward Spain and of the activities of British agents in
Spain. They “have a deplorable effect in our relationships”
because they “come into contact with the more sensitive
and lively organisms of the nation, such as the Army, the
police, and the Falange with its three million members.” He
urged that Churchill cultivate Spain’s friendship. He did
not mention the place, but he hinted broadly that Gibraltar
would be a welcome and proper gift.

Churchill received this letter in October and replied in
the same month. He recalled German influence in Spain,
the Spanish Blue Division in Russia, Franco’s own con-
temptuous references to Britain, and the seizure of Tangier.
He said Britain’s policy was “firmly based” on the Anglo-
Soviet treaty of 1942 and said Anglo-Russian collaboration
would be “permanent.” He continued:


... it is out of the question for His Majesty’s Government
to support Spanish aspirations to participate in the future


226 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


peace settlements. Neither do I think it likely that Spain
will be invited to join the future world organization.


Franco was not doing so well. Such, however, was the
confidence of the Family that their masquerade would be
successful in the end that Churchill’s letter was considered
only a political gesture to prepare for the general elections
which were to come in Britain. This view was encouraged
by many British residents in Spain.

As it became obvious that France was being liberated,
the Family also sought to curry favor with Paris. The Fa-
lange publicly offered the French Red Cross, in the person
of Monsignor Boyer Mas, Red Cross representative in Spain
and an official of the Free French diplomatic mission, sev-
eral carloads of foodstuffs to be sent to the hungry French
across the Pyrenees. The French priest indignantly refused
it. Not only the Spaniards have pride. Monsignor Boyer
Mas then sent a letter of explanation to his Minister, only
recently appointed to Madrid. One long sentence warrants
reporting:


One must have lived in Spain for the first three years of
this war; one must have read the insults to France in the
the daily press; have heard the shouts glorifying the Nazis
and Hitler; have leafed through the speeches of Francisco
Franco; have undergone the threats of the Falange and of
their Government representatives; have received the order,
naturally refused, to hang the flags from the Church of San
Luts de los Franceses [the French Embassy chapel in Ma-
drid] on the day of the fall of Paris; have experienced the
sorrow of seeing friends forced to shun loyal Frenchmen;
one must have experienced all these things to understand
and judge the actions of those of us who serve Free Fight-
ing France and, trying to aid Frenchmen who escaped the
oppressor, Spain’s friend, and who find themselves deprived
of their national rights in Spain because the German Em-
bassy wills it.


OLD ACTORS — NEW LINES 227


Toward the end of 1944, Sir Samuel Hoare, now Lord
Templewood, and thus “kicked upstairs” from the House of
Commons to the House of Lords, terminated his mission in
Spain. He has written a book on his Spanish experiences,
titled Complacent Dictator, published in 1947, in which he
denounces brutalities and stupidities of the Franco régime
and expresses hopes for an early restoration of a constitu-
tional monarchy.

His host, an able diplomat frequently mentioned as a pos-
sible successor to Salazar, realized that Sir Samuel was un-
der the impression that he spoke to real Monarchists. The
Portuguese Ambassador, who knew better, went immedi-
ately to the telephone and told Franco of Hoare’s comments.
He told Franco that he neither had prior knowledge of
Hoare’s comments nor intended to associate himself with
them. Before the party ended, four of the “Monarchists”
had called the Pardo Palace only to discover that their host
had reached Franco first.

Carlton Hayes, the American Ambassador, also left Spain
in January, 1945, to return to his post as Professor of History
in Columbia University. On his return, Hayes wrote a re-
port of his mission in the form of a book which suggested
that the American “good neighbor” policy apply to Spain.
The oligarchy’s press lauded Hayes to the skies, giving wide
publicity to his suggestion, but the idea was too much for
Washington to swallow.

Norman Armour, who succeeded Hayes, had been in the
country only a short time when the State Department took a
step unparalleled in United States diplomatic history. Pres-
ident Roosevelt’s letter of instructions to Armour were made
public. The President said in part:

As you know, it is not our practice in normal circum-
stances to interfere in the internal affairs of other countries
unless there exists a threat to international peace. The form


228 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


of government in Spain and the policies pursued by that
government are quite properly the concern of the Spanish
people. I should be lacking in candor, however, if I did
not tell you that I can see no place in the community of
nations for governments founded on fascist principles.

We all have the most friendly feeling for the Spanish
people and we are anxious to see a development of cordial
relations with them. There are many things which we could
and normally would be glad to do in economic and other
fields to demonstrate that friendship. The initiation of such
measures is out of the question at this time, however, when
American sentiment is so profoundly opposed to the present
régime in power in Spain.


The Americanization of Spanish foreign policy under
Lequerica’s tutelage was quite remarkable. The Council of
Hispanidad was broadened to take in the United States.
Representatives of the United States Embassy went with
Latin-American diplomats on Hispanidad tours of Anda-
lucia organized by the Spanish Foreign Ministry. Spain’s
newspapers searched so busily for items linking Spain and
the United States that they came up with some curious ad-
ditions to history.

A lengthy press dispatch from Alicante, a town on the
Mediterranean, announced that George Washington, father
of the United States, had been born aboard a British ship
in Alicante Harbor in 1796. About ten days later, the news-
papers published another article admitting that the George
Washington who was best known in the United States had
been born somewhat earlier somewhere else. It was ex-
plained, however, that Alicante’s “George Washington” was
nevertheless a fine fellow, for he was “a Hispanofile who
wrote books about his travels in Spain.”

Just before Armour arrived, the largest American prop-
erty in Spain was sold to the Spanish in a fascinating com-


OLD ACTORS — NEW LINES 229


bination of shrewd business, diplomacy, and_ political
“know-how.” Colonel Sosthenes Behn, head of the Interna-
tional Telephone and Telegraph Company, rode the wave
of pro-American enthusiasm into an $83,000,000 deal in-
volving the sale of the Spanish Telephone Company, an
I. T. & T. subsidiary.

The negotiations were long and complex. At least eight
official notes of the American Embassy were involved. The
United States Commercial Attaché in Spain followed for
Washington each move in the bargaining. Negotiations
were speeded by the appearance in Spain of mysterious pro-
moters representing, they said, American interests which
would like to help modernize Spain’s railways — if, of course,
the Spanish régime proved its good will and credit stand-
ing by giving I. T. & T. a good price.

Many members of the oligarchy were involved in the
negotiations. Lequerica advised the Government to buy.
Manuel Aznar, once the Falange’s “Gayda,” but now such a
good friend of the United States and Britain that Lequerica
sent him to Washington, with the rank of Minister and as
counselor of the Spanish Embassy, represented the Urquijo
Bank in the bargaining.

When agreement was reached in March, 1945, the finan-
cial arrangements proved to be fairly simple. A total of
$31,000,000, representing accumulated earnings which the
I. T. & T. had not been able to get out of Spain, were paid
to the American company in cash. Another part of the
agreement provided for the sale of the majority interest of
I. T. & T. in exchange for $50,000,000 in Spanish Treasury
dollar bonds to be amortized, at four per cent interest,
within fifteen years.

The method by which this $50,000,000, plus interest, is to
be liquidated also was carefully planned in the agreement.
The American company was to get a minimum of $2,000,000


230 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


in | per year — the interest on the principal. If twenty per cent

i of Spain’s dollar income in any one year, including United

f States Government purchases in Spain, exceeded the $2,000,-

| 000 minimum, I. T. & T. was to get the difference for amor-

tization. In other words, the greater Spain’s trade with the

United States, or the greater United States purchases in

Spain, the sooner I. T. & T. gets its money.

These provisions were approved by Washington. The
contract was signed. The mysterious promoters so inter-
ested in Spain’s railways vanished overnight.

The oligarchy’s interest in American public opinion had
increased rapidly since Fascism fell in Italy. When I re-
turned to Spain in 1941, the work of American and British
foreign correspondents was so difficult that only the news
associations attempted to keep permanent correspondents
in the country. Our dispatches were whittled down to little
more than reports on bullfights for South American papers,
lengthy quotations from pro-German editorials, and dull
accounts of the promises the régime was constantly making
to the people about its plans for the morrow. Our mail, per-
sonal and otherwise, was seldom delivered. Police agents
pried into our offices and our homes. Provincial correspon-
dents were afraid to work for us; our Spanish friends who
| were not members of the oligarchy were reluctant to be seen
with us in public.

Not until the Fascist State crumbled in Italy were we per-
mitted to transmit what news of the war we were able to
glean from persons who reached Spain from the war areas.
At that time, however, I obtained authorization to make reg-
ular weekly news broadcasts from Spain for the National
Broadcasting Company. I was required to make these
broadcasts from the studios of the Falangist radio station
where censors saw to it that I did not deviate from the cen-
sored manuscript. For years, of course, the German and


OLD ACTORS — NEW LINES 231


Italian correspondents in Spain had been broadcasting to
their countries with no censorship restrictions, just as they
sent their news dispatches without censorship. As a censor
explained when I commented on the injustice of this system,
“But we have no need to censor them — we agree with every-
thing they say.”

One evening, when my wife went with me to the studios
for my weekly broadcast to the National Broadcasting Com-
pany, we found the place full of Blue Legionnaires whose
breasts glittered with German decorations. They had pre-
pared a reception for us. They buzzed in and out of the
studio and the control room while connections were being
made with New York. They placed a copy of Signal, the
German propaganda publication, atop the studio piano be-
fore us. The microphone was placed beside the glass win-
dow of the control room, but two pages torn from Signal
obscured my view of the engineer co-ordinating transmis-
sion with NBC. The pages thus displayed for our particular
benefit were pasted to the control-room side of the window,
where a dozen Blue Legionnaires sat watching us. These
pages were filled with photographs purporting to show how
“American gangsters” flying over Rome had dropped foun-
tain pens filled with mustard gas into the streets, thus at-
tracting curious Roman children who were horribly burned.

Once again, as on so many occasions, I wished ardently
that I were one of Hollywood’s brilliant free-lance foreign
correspondents. I would then have punched the studio di-
rector in the nose, hurled the microphone through the con-
trol-room window, and fought my way, wife on arm, to the
door, driving hard for the French frontier that night. What
news America gets out of totalitarian countries, however, is
gathered by less spectacular employees of the great news
agencies who take the insults as they come in order to re-
port what facts they can from within the walls of censor-


'


- <= £ = see


232 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


ship. This is as true in Madrid as in Moscow or in pre-war
Fascist Rome and Nazi Germany. Foreign correspondents
gloriously ejected from such countries usually are the corre-
spondents of individual newspapers which can count on the
press associations to “backstop” them, not the press associ-
ation correspondents who must remain, insults or no insults.

We swallowed our rage. I read my heavily censored
broadcast to NBC and left the studio with my wife, ac-
knowledging the Falangist salutes of the Legionnaires with
what I hope was a sinister sneer.

We had grown quite accustomed to incidents such as
these in the Family’s Spain. This time, however, a surprise
awaited us. Three days later, I was called to the Falange
press directorate and offered “the Party’s apologies” for the
incident. I replied that I had grown accustomed to every-
thing save apologies. I said they were not necessary, for I
was well aware of the Party’s anti-American policy. The
press chief explained that the Party was not anti-American
and that the studio director had been “severely punished”
for giving that impression. I asked whether I could report
the change in the Party's attitude and was told, with some
irritation, that the Party had not changed —it had never
been anti-American. When I left Spain in 1946, the studio
director in question had become the chief of the Govern-
ment’s radio network, Radio Nacional. He now pretends to
be a great friend of the Americans.

It took the Spanish press directorate a long time to realize
what damage they were doing to Spain’s influence in South
America by permitting the German correspondents to send
their dispatches without censorship. German news agency
services to Latin America always were many hours ahead of
American and British news agencies. As a result, experi-
enced editors in Latin America soon realized that the Ger-
mans enjoyed privileges not given to others. Throughout


OLD ACTORS — NEW LINES 233


the world dispatches bearing the dateline “Madrid” became
classified with those sent from Berlin and Rome. In addi-
tion, the censorship added to this impression by permitting
American and British correspondents to send lengthy quo-
tations from the editorials of the Spanish press, which were
frequently more violently anti-American and anti-British
than the newspapers of Berlin and Rome.

The result of such control over news from inside Spain
was that the world lost all confidence in news bearing a
Madrid dateline. Editors throughout the world spiked dis-
patches from Madrid concerning important developments
and used dispatches concerning the same events from Lon-
don where writers quoted “dispatches from Spain” or, more
frequently, “travelers from Spain.” Some of the London
material was accurate, but much was rumor picked up from
Spanish exiles. Finally, the Spanish authorities decided that
nothing quite as bad could be said about Spain from the
inside as was being said about Spain from the outside.
Lequerica, the Foreign Minister, called the correspondents
of the United Nations in April, 1945, and told us that we
were no longer subject to Spanish censorship. We were,
however, to be “held responsible.”

The moment was well chosen. The Spanish EFE Agency,
with the support of the Foreign Ministry, had signed a con-
tract for the delivery to the Spanish press of the news serv-
ices of the American United Press. Old news was no news
at all in these last months of the World War. Germany
was being conquered; huge armies were smashing toward
Berlin; there was progress in the Pacific. Nobody was in-
terested in Spain then. Dispatches from the Associated
Press and from other American and British correspondents
who told what had been going on behind the wall of censor-
ship in Spain were crowded out of the world’s newspapers.

Certainly one of the happiest words I heard in Spain were


\!
’
"
i

ls


234 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


those pronounced by a lugubrious press censor on that first
night of liberty. I asked him where we were to take our
telegrams, previously sent to the radio stations by the cen-
sorship.

“Don't ask me,” he growled. “I’ve been suppressed!”

Our good fortune was not immediately shared by the
Spanish press. Censorship of the Spanish newspapers re-
mained heavy. Not only were the newspapers still forced to
publish editorials written by Falangist censors, but even the
advertising was censored. A bewildered publisher who
sought the reason for the sudden censoring of an advertise-
ment for hair tonic which his paper had carried for years
was informed that the Falange press chief, Juan Aparicio,
who was quite bald, had tried the lotion without success.

When censorship of the Spanish press was finally eased,
however, it made little difference in editorial policy. There
is not a single newspaper or magazine in Spain which is not
owned and edited by members of the Spanish oligarchy. It
was not censorship, for example, which led the Madrid eve-
ning newspaper, Informaciones, to comment on Roosevelt's
death: “May God forgive him!” Nor was it censorship which
led El Espafiol to emerge with the classic comment, so typi-
cal of the Family: “The world these days seems to be judg-
ing Spain with more frivolity than Spain judges the world!”

As the war ended in Europe, there was more news of the
world published, but little more news about what was hap-
pening in the Family’s Spain. No Spanish newspaper, for
example, mentioned the arrival of Pierre Laval, who
dropped into Barcelona’s airport from a German plane from
Northern Italy, seeking asylum.

Laval was quite shocked to discover that Spain had be-
come an “organic democracy” since he had been in Vichy.
Wasn't Lequerica still Minister of Foreign Affairs and
wasn’t Franco still Chief of State? Yes, replied the Governor


OLD ACTORS — NEW LINES 235


of Barcelona, but Lequérica was not particularly delighted
to hear from his old friend. In fact Lequerica regretted
very much that he would have to intern Pierre Laval.
Things had changed.

I stood at the gates of Montjuich Fortress, two thousand
feet above Barcelona Harbor, as Laval was driven through
them in the Governor’s limousine. In this fortress prison
the Family’s monarchy had tortured anti-clericals and had
executed the Anarchist educator, Francisco Ferrer. In its
dungeons, the Family’s Falange had slain Republican pris-
oners by the thousands. Under the wall facing the moat,
the Family’s Army had executed Luis Companys, President
of Catalonia, who had been sent to Spain to die by the Ger-
mans with Laval’s approval. Laval, however, found Mont-
juich a pleasant place.

The Vichy Premier lived in a new bungalow erected
within the walls of Montjuich as a home for the commander
of the military prison. A truckload of furniture was brought
up from the bridal suite of the Ritz Hotel, Barcelona’s best,
to make Laval comfortable. The same Ritz waiter who had
accompanied Heinrich Himmler during his visit in Spain
attended Laval and served him with his choice of Ritz food
and Ritz wine.

Only in Tokio could V-E Day have passed with the same
indifference as in Spain. Paul Kennedy of the New York
Times and I were in Barcelona. We scoured the town look-
ing for Spaniards with whom we could celebrate — we found
none. Three men who insisted that we drink with them
“to our victory” proved to be French collaborationists inter-
ested in knowing Americans. In the workers’ quarters men
whispered their congratulations, for the police were every-
where.

In Madrid there was no more enthusiasm. Louis Nevin of
the Associated Press telephoned me from Madrid to read
me the editorial in the evening newspaper Informaciones.


236 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


No victory was ever received with such coldness [wrote
the editor with the permission of the censorship]. The
world waits for a new captain of Europe to arise and re-
place Hitler, that simply colossal human personage who
fought to save Europe from Communism without stopping
to ascertain whether Europe was worth it or not.


On May 7, one day before the official celebration of V-E
Day, the Spanish Government “broke relations” with Ger-
many. The last of the “angels” had vanished. The Spanish
masquerade now was to be supported, not by the rivalry of
enemies in the Second World War, but by the rivalry of
those whom the Family hope will be enemies in the Third
World War.


Wn


BACKSTAGE


THE CHANGES OF SCENERY in the masquerade had little effect
backstage. Non-belligerency or neutrality, Fascist F alange
or clerical Falange, dictatorship or “organic democracy” —
none of these changed the way of life of the Spanish people.
Such words are used only to impress those watching the
masquerade. As officials of the Government so frequently
explained to foreign correspondents, “our foreign policy has
nothing to do with our domestic policy.”

Foreign criticism of Spain’s domestic policy by non-Span-
iards frequently makes the Family lose its collective temper.
Once, when criticism of Spain’s régime abroad was partic-
ularly violent, Franco himself, rising to his toes and clench-
ing his fists with exasperation, screeched:

“We are what we are, and what we want to be concerns
Spaniards alone!”

He spoke in the old Senate building to leaders of the Fa-
lange National Syndicates in January, 1944. Foreign corre-
spondents were permitted to sit in the galleries on that oc-
casion.

What the pompous and complacent Caudillo said on that
day, he said in all sincerity. The Family does not under-
stand why anyone outside Spain should be in the least con-
cerned about the fate of the Spanish people so long as they
are ruled by Spaniards. When Franco says, “What we want

237


238 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


to be concerns Spaniards alone,” he does not mean that it
concerns all Spaniards. Franco does not consult the people
of Spain to find out what “we want to be.” He consults only
their masters, the Family. These, in his earlier speeches, he
called “the good Spaniards.”

Other members of the Family speak the same way. The
world was much impressed at one time because Don Juan,
son of Alfonso XIII, promised a “legislative assembly, elect-
ed by the nation.” Monarchist members of the Family unan-
imously applauded until some of them had a horrible
thought. Could it be really possible that their Don Juan
might be referring to democratic elections in which all
Spaniards participate? To correct this erroneous impression,
the Monarchists within Spain issued a bulletin, published
with Don Juan’s approval. It explained that Don Juan re-
ferred “not to the sovereignty of the people, which always
ends in Communism, but to an Assembly elected by the
natural organs of the nation — family, municipality, and
corporation.”

Thus, no matter what form the Family’s régime may as-
sume, its treatment of the Spanish people never changes. It
always means repression. This repression may be physical,
by police rule and execution. It may be economic repres-
sion, applied by keeping prices high above wages. It may
be educational repression, exercised by keeping the people
of the poor in ignorance. Spain, under the Family’s rule, has
known all types of repression.

Many promises are made in Spain today, but they are all
made for effect and seldom have any concrete result. Classic
among them is the Fuero de los Espajioles, the “Spanish
Bill of Rights.”

For a year the Spanish press talked of the preparation of
the Fuero. So much publicity was made about it that many
foreigners in Spain believed the Bill of Rights would at least


BACKSTAGE 239
look like the real thing. The Family had nothing to lose,


for Spanish law means nothing unless the Government
chooses to enforce it. But when the Bill of Rights finally
was published in 1945, a few days before the end of the
war in Europe, we found that the “jokers” were there for all
to see.

The Fuero guarantees liberty of speech and of assembly.
Spaniards may live where they like within the country and
may write what they choose by mail. Citizens may require
the Government to show cause why a man taken to prison
should not be released. The jokers?

No Spaniard may use any of the rights thus accorded “to
challenge” the authority or the works of the régime. The
Bill itself gives the Government the power to suspend any
or all of these rights whenever it sees fit. Moreover, before
these rights become law, the Cortes must take up each one
of them and “provide the necessary legislation.” This the
Cortes has not yet done.

Such laws as these are of no interest to the Spanish peo-
ple. They have learned long since to judge the policies of
their rulers by their acts, not by their words. They may feel
somewhat safer from sudden death by execution than dur-
ing the blood purges of 1939, 1940, and 1941, but they
realize that the Family is quite prepared to resume the
blood-letting should the people show signs of rebellion.
They also know that the Family's definition of “liberty” has
little in common with the word as used outside Spain.

As late as 1940, officials of Auxilio Social, the Falange
charity organization, told representatives of the American
Friends Society that there were still five hundred thousand
persons in the Spanish prisons. Executions kept reducing
this number until about 1942, but new arrests kept the
prison population at a high level.

All prisoners were theoretically able to obtain freedom


240 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


through a complicated system directed by the Patronato de
Nuestra Senora de la Merced. In fact, the “Office of Our
Lady of Mercy,” clerical only in name, was primarily inter-
ested in making a good income for its Falangist employees
by farming out prison labor to privileged industrialists.

Early in 1943, before the fall of Mussolini, the Director
General of Prisons announced that three hundred thousand
Spaniards were being allowed to “redeem themselves” in the
prisons under his management. The goal toward which
these prisoners were working was that of “conditional lib-
erty.” To reach this goal, the prisoners had only “to obtain
certificates of good moral and political conduct from the
municipal authorities, the Civil Guard, and the Falange of
their place of residence both before and during the Glorious
Movement.”

Prisoners who could accomplish this miracle found “condi-
tional liberty” a mixed blessing. Men thus released from
prison were not permitted to follow their former trade or
profession without special authorization from the police.
They were required to live at least two hundred and fifty
miles away from their original place of residence. They
must also report to the police each week. They could be
arrested and jailed at any time without the formality of new
charges.

This system was adopted for economic rather than for
political reasons. After the Civil War, Spain needed labor —
to till the fields, to rebuild roads, to work in factories. Labor
was short while the jails were full. In addition, food and
lodging for half a million prisoners in a country of twenty-
six million people cost the State money which its leaders
preferred to use for other purposes. Prisoners on “condi-
tional liberty” had to shift for themselves. They were will-
ing to work for next to nothing.

Proudly, on September 30, 1943, the cabinet announced


BACKSTAGE 241


that “conditional liberty” was to be given to all political pris-
oners Over seventy years of age. When I inquired as to the
status of one Spaniard of seventy-eight who remained in
prison after the publication of this law, I was informed that
he had been a Freemason and was therefore a “special case.”
The authorities told me he would soon be released, but
death released him before they got around to it.

The Falange Secretary General, José Luis Arrese, ex-
plained the new prison policy in an interview published in
Arriba on December 29, 1943.


Every solution achieved by blood has two stages — de-
structive, consisting of the elimination of obstacles and the
clearing of the road, and constructive, in which leadership,
free of insuperable obstacles, escapes happily toward its
final goal. The first stage has kept us busy until today. Now
the repressive stage of the régime has ended and the con-
structive stage begins.


In line with the new policy, American and British corre-
spondents in Spain were invited to go on an official tour of
inspection of prisoners in the Madrid area. It was an inter-
esting tour.

At Yeserias, a small prison within the city, we found the
inmates engaged in the most delightful occupations. In the
prison yard two prisoners were playing a game of tennis, a
sport which never was popular among the people. The
rackets they used were new; the balls were spotless; the net
was snow-white and the markings of the court were still wet.
We “surprised” a class of inmates attending a lecture given
them by another inmate on Shakespeare. The room was
freshly painted; the desks bore the name of a neighborhood
school. We tasted the prison food and found it good, so
good that we were tempted to believe a prison cook when
he stated loudly, “No worker in Spain eats better than we


242 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


do” — particularly when he added in a whisper —“... on
the day of your visit.”

At Carabanchel, a prison still under construction on the
outskirts of Madrid, we were shown plans for the com-
pleted building. The prison commander explained that we
might find the prison “a little crowded,” because the five
thousand inmates then were living in a wing of the prison
designed to accommodate only three hundred. “But soon,”
he added, “Carabanchel will be the finest prison in the
world.”

Upon our return from the prison tour, several of us found
that an eight-page report had been delivered to our offices
in our absence. It was signed only: “One who today at Car-
abanchel Prison saluted you with the Fascist palm while
crying ‘Live the Republic!’ in his heart!” The report told us
of events at Carabanchel during the forty-eight hours pre-
ceding our visit. About one thousand prisoners had been
beaten and thrown into the prison cellars where they lay
silent under the clubs and blackjacks of prison guards while
we toured the prison. Among these prisoners were two
Spaniards who, when they were freed a year later, came to
my Office to tell me of their experience.

The Minister of Justice, Eduardo Aunos, announced early
in 1944 that Spain’s “prison problem” was to be liquidated
by the end of the year.

At this time I was given a unique opportunity to see what
“liquidation” meant. I was involved in an accident, in which
my car hit a motorcyclist. Under Spanish law, no party to an
accident may be released until the person injured is able to
give a policeman his version of the affair. The motorcyclist,
son of a prominent member of the Family, had a broken
leg and was being given morphine in the hospital to which
I had taken him. He could not be questioned until the next
morning.


BACKSTAGE 243


When I reported to the police after the accident, they ex-
plained that I might be free to go home “if the Embassy in-
tervened.” I declined Embassy protection and spent a com-
fortable night on a bench in an office of the “Palace of
Justice.” Next morning, in company with a Spaniard in-
volved in a similar case, I was taken to the cells below the
palace by a guard who explained that we would be there
“only an hour or so” until an officer could obtain the state-
ments of the injured men involved.

As the cell door banged shut behind us, I introduced my-
self to the seven men and two women who were already
there. The leader of this group was a stocky peasant whose
prison pallor spoke of years of confinement. He was the
former mayor of Quintanar del Rey, a little town in Cuenca
Province. The others were members of the town council
“elected by the free vote of the people of Quintanar del
Rey in 1985.” The mayor asked why I was in prison. I ex-
plained. My fellow prisoners expressed their sympathy. At
that point the guards reappeared and escorted the prisoners
from Quintanar del Rey off to a military court. My other
companion, a Spanish taxi-driver, was released to meet his
lawyer. A talkative prison guard kept me company.

The former mayor of Quintanar del Rey was not a bad
fellow, said the guard, but he had bad luck. It appears that
the young Army lieutenant who “liberated” Quintanar del
Rey as the Civil War ended in 1939 found the town quite
quiet. The mayor was a Socialist. The agricultural laborers
of the region were all “Reds” because they were interested
in land reform. But the mayor was a decent Red, as you
will see.

The Army lieutenant told the mayor to keep his job until
more troops arrived. Some Falangists came into town in a
truck from the Valencia road, found the school teacher, who
was a Red, and shot him. When the school teacher’s wife,


244 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


mad with grief, clawed a Falangist’s face, she was shot too.
People in the village began to gather up pitchforks and
clubs, and the young lieutenant was desperate. He appealed
to the mayor. The mayor told the people there had been
enough bloodshed and sent them home. The lieutenant
ordered the Falangists out of town.

When the troops came, a lot of Reds were shot, but the
young lieutenant was grateful for the mayor's help. He said
that the mayor and his council should not be shot. He even
had them sent to a special jail until their trial, about a year
later. Thanks to his testimony, all of them were found
guiltless and were to be permitted to live freely in another
part of Spain as soon as the official papers came through.

Unfortunately, the papers did not come through. Nobody
knew what had happened to the papers; nobody could find
the record of their first trial. Now they were to be tried
again. The young lieutenant could not be found. Also, a
delegation of Falangists from Quintanar del Rey had come
to Madrid to say that these Reds were dangerous and should
be shot. This would undoubtedly be done. It was unfor-
tunate.

My cell mates returned, just as the guard finished his story.
They were grave, but they first asked whether I had re-
ceived news of my own case. Themselves? One of their
number, a woman, was to be spared. The others were all to
die. The mayor was to die within forty-eight hours by the
garrote, the screw that breaks the neck.

They did not seem concerned. Death to them was a re-
lease from an unpleasant life. Two of their number had al-
ready died, they said. One had heard that his sons had been
shot, so he turned his face to the wall and died. Another
had been beaten to death by a guard in Porlier Prison. The
former mayor said they all had expected to die before this.
It was better to know now when death was to come instead
of waiting every night for the inevitable firing squad.


BACKSTAGE 245


They wanted to know about America and the United
Nations. They knew much of the war news; it traveled fast
in the prisons. None of them was a Communist, but all were
interested in Russia’s progress.

“They fight well, the Russians,” said the mayor, “but you
Americans fight well too. It is good for Spain that you and
the British are allied with the Russians. Thus, when you
win, Spain need not turn from Fascism to Communism.
Spain can choose her own democracy.”

When the guards came to tell me that the injured man
had confirmed my version of the accident, leaving me free
to go, I shook hands with the men of Quintanar del Rey.
Their case, I was told by the officials of the Palace of Jus-
tice, was a military case. Army friends, asked to investigate,
at first said there was no such case. Then they reported
that the “sentences have been executed.” I should not wor-
ry. They were all Reds and liars. Justice had been done.
The records? — there were none.

The papers piled high in my own case as the insurance
companies fought it out. When, a year later, there was a
trial in which three black-robed judges cleared me of all re-
sponsibility, I could not help wondering about a system
which could show the world a mass of documents involving
a motor accident and a broken leg, but not a scrap of paper
in a case involving the executions of seven men from Quin-
tanar del Rey.

In the executions which followed the Civil War, the Fam-
ily was seeking to destroy the spirit of the Spanish people.
Many members of the oligarchy were convinced that this
could be done. “Rid of a few thousand Red leaders and ter-
rorists,” they told me during the Civil War, “Spain will be-
come a Christian country again.” They spoke later of
“purging the race.” But somehow the spirit of a free Spain
lived on.


246 : THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


The Family’s police and troops never have been able to
crush bands of “Republicans,” some little more than bandits,
who roam the mountains of Spain from the Cantabrian
Range, facing the Bay of Biscay, to the Sierra Nevada in the
Mediterranean. Asturias is still under military rule. The
real stronghold of the spirit of a free Spain, however, is not
in the mountains, but in the minds of Spaniards.

The Spanish underground was originally composed of two
shadowy organizations, “Republican Aid” and “Red Aid.”
Both raised funds among the poor to help the political pris-
oners; both were riddled with racketeers and police inform-
ers. “Republican Aid” almost melted away for lack of lead-
ership. “Red Aid,” backed by Communists, gained few sup-
porters. These groups were defensive, not offensive, but
both suffered from the Communist label.

The fact is that Spaniards do not make good Communists.
Anarchism, a simple, emotional, and individual faith in a
free society, gained hundreds of thousands of followers, but
Communism, after fifteen years of existence in Spain, had
only three thousand members and twenty thousand sympa-
thizers before February, 1936.

The trend to Communism did not begin until the Civil
War had begun. It had two phases.

The first resulted naturally from the people’s anger when
the Army revolted against the Republic. Angry men sought
aggressive, disciplined leaders who they could be sure
would not betray them to the Family. The Communists
offered this fighting leadership. A few days after the Civil
War began, the combined Socialist-Communist Youth, in
which Socialists were in the majority, went over to the Com-
munist Party. But this was not enough. The Communists
were still a minority, a small minority, among Socialists and
other enemies of the Family.

The second phase began as it became evident to the peo-


BACKSTAGE 247


ple of Spain that neither Republican France, nor Britain, nor
the far-away United States would sell them arms to fight
against the Family's forces, already on the Peninsula thanks
to German and Italian planes. Men eager for arms found
Russia their only source of supply. Men eager for help saw
only the International Brigade, organized by the Com-
munist International; they saw only Russian planes and Rus-
sian tanks and a few Russian officers. More Spaniards turned
to Communist leadership in the hope of help from Russia.
But Communists were still in the minority.

Slowly, reluctantly, the Socialists surrendered ground to
the Communists, hoping thus to win the battle for the Re-
public. Not until April 5, 1938, did Doctor Juan Negrin, per-
haps no Communist, but certainly a Communist ally, suc-
ceed in ousting the Socialist leader, Indalécio Prieto, from
the War Ministry. Not until August 16, 1938, was Negrin
able to bend the Republican President, Manuel Azajia, to
his will.

It became evident that Russia was not fighting to win in
Spain. The battlefield was not to Russia’s advantage; it was
far from Russia; it was closer to Germany and Italy. The
Nazis sent the Spanish Family only enough arms to keep
them going, so that the Civil War might provide headlines
to divert attention from German preparations; and the Rus-
sians were saving their strength to fight for their lives on the
home front.

Reaction against the Communists set in slowly, but snow-
balled at the end. Republican Madrid, in her dying hour,
gave the Communists a lesson of hate.

At the beginning of March, 1939, food supplies in Madrid
were short. The people of the city, who had made Madrid
a symbol of heroism and resistance, knew that the end was
near. Catalonia was in the hands of the Family’s armies.
Arms were in short supply; no more arms were coming from


Sa SS ee eee oe


248 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


the Russians. The surrender of Munich had shown the weak-
ness of France and Britain and the strength of the Nazis.
Artillerymen in Cartagena who wanted to surrender drove
the Republican fleet out to sea. The Communists and
Negrin were determined to fight on; they planned to replace
Colonel Sigismundo Casado, popular head of the Republi-
can Central Army, who counseled surrender.

Casado formed the Madrid Defense Council. It included
representatives of every political group except the Com-
munists. Among its members were General José Miaja,
famed as the defender of Madrid early in the war, and Doc-
tor Julian Besteiro, a moderate Socialist professor of logic,
who stayed through the siege and the surrender when flight
for him was easy. Anarchists were also represented. All of
these decided upon a “negotiated but honorable surrender.”

The army corps on the Madrid front was Communist. At
Negrin’s orders they turned back on the capital, leaving only
a few men to face the Family’s Army. The Communists had
the best arms of the Republican forces, but again an armed
force reckoned without the people of Madrid. The people
fought Communists to win the right to surrender to the oli-
garchy.

There were five days of bitter warfare within the capital.
Thousands died. At the end, a C.N.T.-Anarchist army corps
fought its way into the city to crush Communist resistance.
The last building to fall was the Communist headquarters
opposite the Independence Arch. There the Anarchists’
forces found huge stores of foodstuffs which they dragged
out of the building to be distributed among the hungry peo-
ple of Madrid. It will be a long time before Madrid forgets
the food the Communists hid away, a long time before they
forget the last battle in their city.

When finally the Family’s Army came into Madrid for a
surrender which was neither “negotiated nor honorable,” it


BACKSTAGE 249


found a city full of hate for the Communists, a people ready
to hail the conquerors as liberators. The oligarchy had an-
nounced by radio that “only those guilty of war crimes”
would be punished. It was not so.

Besteiro, beloved of all Madrid, died broken and exhaust-
ed after a year of imprisonment in a jail from which the
Family released him only when it was obvious that death
was near. Executions disposed of thousands, tens of thou-
sands, who were never charged with “war crimes.”

Despite the hate of the Family, their Army and their Fa-
langists, the hate of the Communists survives, deep in the
heart of Spain. It would be hard to say which the people
of Spain hate most — the Communists or the Family. If ever
a people were prepared by blood to choose something which
is neither dictatorship of the Right nor dictatorship of the
Left, it is the people of Spain.

This became clear as the Communists strove to organize
an underground against the Family from 1942 until 1944.
Money, the support of a foreign power, even Falangist tol-
erance, were not enough to enable the Communists to win
over the people of Spain.

The attitude of the Falangists toward the Communists is
strange and important. After the fall of Fascism in Italy, the
Family redoubled their efforts to convince the world that
Spain’s only choice lay between Franco and the Falange on
the one hand and the Communists and Russia on the other.
From this period in the summer of 1942 on to the present,
the Family’s police have developed a curious inability to ar-
rest true Communists, while they successfully crack the
skulls of countless Socialists, Anarchists, and plain Republi-
cans whom they call Communists.

Late in 1942, the Communists formed an underground
which they called the Junta Suprema de Unién Nacional —
the “Supreme Council of National Union.” It was an at-


250 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


tempt to enlist all Republicans under the Communist ban-
ner, but it failed. In the autumn of 1943, the pamphlets pro-
duced by this organization began to increase in number to
such a degree as to arouse the suspicions of the dullest ob-
servers. Many rumors concerning their origin were current
in Madrid. One day, wandering through the halls of the
Vice Secretariat of Press and Propaganda of the Falange,
seeking a censor, I discovered a room full of fiery anti-
Franco pamphlets. They were fresh from the Falange
printing presses. The signature was that of the Junta Su-
prema de Unidn Nacional. Not long afterward I received
‘ this pamphlet by ordinary mail. I also received the under-
i ground publications of the Anarchists, the Socialists, the
:* C.N.T., and the U.G.T., but none of these were printed with
the same type face and on the same paper as that used in
Arriba, organ of the Falange.

The Family knows Spanish Communism is so weak that it
must be nursed along to survive. For the Communists are
essential to the Family’s masquerade. When the villain dies,
the play is near its end. Were the true weakness of the
Spanish Communists known to the world, then what excuse
could the Spanish Family offer for failing to turn the gov-
ernment back to the people of Spain?

During my five years in Spain — from 1941 to 1945—TI
traveled the length and breadth of the country. I speak the
language; I like the people; I had no difficulty talking to
them. I met scores of Socialists, many Republicans, many
Anarchists. I met only two men who were Communists.
One of these had been a Communist deputy in the Cortes.
He told me, “Our party dies from the unwanted friendship
of the Falange.”

The gunmen of the Falange Service of Information and
Investigation, under the command of a twenty-eight-year-
old sadist named David Jato Miranda, were not interested in


a


J
’
*
#


iH


BACKSTAGE 251


crushing Communism. They sought to break up the real
threat to the Family, the group formed in October, 1944,
under the name of the Alianza Nacional de Fuerzas Demo-
craticas — the “National Alliance of Democratic Forces.”

The Alliance, persecuted at every turn, is in truth the real
underground of Spain. Within its ranks are united Socialists,
Anarchists, and Republicans of many shades. In 1945, many
of its leaders were arrested by a neat bit of forgery and po-
lice work staged by an agent in the Family’s pay, Luis Al-
faro. Nevertheless, the Alliance grew. Late in 1946, the
Communists themselves were forced to admit defeat and ac-
cept the Alianza. The Junta Suprema was dissolved. The
Communists now are but a tiny and powerless minority
within the Alianza. Leadership of the Alianza is securely
held by non-Communists.

Straight through the period when the Family was busily
engaged in altering its masquerade so that its Government
might appear to be an “organic democracy,” police raids and
beatings continued. On Christmas Eve, 1944, while Carmen
Franco was being presented to society at a ball in the Pardo
Palace, some twenty-five moderate Republicans were seized
in their homes and jailed. Among those arrested were sev-
eral prominent liberals with good Family connections, like
Doctor Gregorio Marajién, a society physician who was one
of the founders of the Republic. Now he has made his peace
with the oligarchy. Doctor Marafién thwarted the raiders
by telephoning to guests at the Pardo. Life is quite exciting
for the doctor. He had one pro-German son active in the
Falange Exterior while his daughter was married to the Brit-
ish Embassy press attaché in Madrid.

Arrests and executions in the Family’s Spain are one-
sided affairs. From 1939 to 1945 I heard of a few Falangists
killed in brawls with Army officers and of a few who shot
each other, but no Falangists were killed by enemies of the


252 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


régime. Falange’s first “martyrs” after the Civil War were a
fanatical young Falangist named David Lara Martinez, po-
litical boss of the workers’ district of Cuatro Caminos, and
a Falangist porter who happened to be present when Lara
Martinez was cornered by persons who I am convinced are
still unknown. These two were assassinated in February,
1945.

The Falange made the most of the occasion. The Gov-
ernment communiqué announcing the murder of the two
Falangists was followed by another announcing that “six-
} teen Communist terrorists” had been executed. Foreign cor-
| ‘ respondents were encouraged to use the word “reprisal.” All


SSS 5


Stina
—-


Falangist jobholders in Madrid and vicinity were mobilized
for the funeral procession of the “martyrs,” which was
turned into a violent demonstration. There were the usual
cries of “Death to Russia!” “Death to Britain!” and the usual
“Vivas!” for Germany. Spectators who did not lift their
hands high enough in the Falangist salute to please the
marchers were beaten on the spot or were taken off by the
police to be beaten in jail. Through the night and for days
thereafter, armed Falangists swaggered through industrial
quarters beating and arresting workers. No more com-
muniqués were issued, but more victims were executed.
Later that month I managed to attend the trial of eleven
| “Reds” charged with the murder of the Falangists. Every-
I} body was heard but the prisoners, ten men and one woman.
} Their hollow cheeks and dulled eyes gave proof enough that
they had signed “confessions.” It was a military trial, and
the officer charged with the defense took exactly ten min-
| utes of the court’s valuable time in asking for a thirty-year
prison sentence of two men and freedom for the woman. “A
| strong State can afford to be merciful,” he said. Apparently
| this State was not strong enough, for all the men were sen-
tenced to death and the woman went to prison.


BACKSTAGE 253


I asked a Falangist sitting beside me at the “trial” if the
defendants were to be allowed to speak in their own de-
fense. He looked amazed. This was before the period when
the Family “staged” its trials more carefully for the benefit
of the foreign press. “Of course not,” he said, “what could
they say to defend themselves?” What indeed?

I went back to my office that night to write a dispatch on
the trial which I knew would find no space in the free press,
then concerned with the deathblow to Germany. I found a
small item of Spanish news typical of so many I had seen
during my stay in Spain. The official EFE agency reported
from Zaragoza that a thirty-four-year-old Spanish Socialist
named Marcelino Santa Barbara, white-haired, deaf, and
nearly blind, was hauled out of a dry well in which he had
hidden for nearly nine years. He had surrendered to the
police on the advice of relatives who had supplied him with
food during that time. They had been impressed by the
Government’s decision to abolish the Court of Political Re-
sponsibilities.

I telephoned our correspondent in Zaragoza to find out
what the police were doing with him. They refused to say.
But the announced decision to abolish the Court did not be-
come law for six months. And six months after that I found
judges of the Court still trying cases of Civil War prisoners.

It is difficult for Americans to understand the power of
the Spanish oligarchy over its property, the Spanish people.
It is difficult, because most foreigners in Spain, and certain-
ly all foreign travelers in Spain, enjoy the privileged posi-
tion of members of the Family.

Few foreigners, for example, had occasion to visit that all-
powerful personage, the Falangist jefe de bloque, who to-
day does not wear his Falangist uniform, but still is chief of
the block in which he lives. No Spaniard save the members
of the Family, who have their kitchenmaids do the neces-


254 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


sary, can obtain the vital food card until he personally faces
the Falangist block chief. A word from this man, usually an
ignorant member of the Falangist rank and file, can send
men to prison and to death.

The porter or the owner of each house is required to re-
port to his block chief on all callers, their identity and their
business. The famous serefios of Spain — night watchmen
paid by the city who hold the keys to the outer doors of all
houses — are required to report each morning to the block
chief.

One may judge both the power and the mentality of these
block bosses and their leaders, the district bosses, from the
following order which I copied textually. It was posted be-
side the elevator in an apartment house at Calle Maldonado
14, an ordinary, upper middle-class district of Madrid. The
date was September 20, 1944.


ARRIBA ESPANA!!! ARRIBA ESPANA ! 1}
VIVA EL CAUDILLO !!!
Comrades, Chiefs of the House:


All comrades:

I speak to all of you and particularly to the Chiefs of the
house. The summer ends, the season of depression and also
of weariness. Shake off the yoke of laziness and renew the
life of toil. But it must be effective toil for God and for
Spain!

Spain needs you and the Falange calls you. You do not
satisfy us merely by executing your normal duties. You
must advance the teachings of the truths of the Falange.
You must lead those who are in good faith out of error and
unmask the thick-headed persons in whose hearts live evil,
hypocrisy, sophisms, deceit, and false praise. They care not
whether they ruin Spain and humanity so long as they tri-
umph and can dispose of lives and money.

Forward, comrades. Prudently, but with energy and


BACKSTAGE 255


character, you should hold your post and fight all excesses,
attack when you are attacked, defend the high honor of
Spain, and God will reward you for it.

You can be apostles of Christ, for he who defends Spain
defends its religion and its sublime spirit. These values are
the only saviors of Christian civilization—the only ones
which lead to Social Justice and bring peace and happiness
to peoples.

Comrades, Chiefs of the house, each week you must give
me a report of the arrival and departure of persons in your
house — that is, those who come from the outside, from
whence they come, their political and religious affiliations,
and those who leave and where they go, whether out of
Madrid or within Madrid. You must also report all those
who blaspheme or work against the National Syndicalist
régime and those who spread rumors which attack the secu-
rity of the State. Be always vigilant; our superiors expect
your best work....


There was more of this— much more. In the workers’
quarters the block chief was usually less wordy, but the in-
formation he sought was the same. In a cheap apartment
house of Cuatro Caminos, a porter showed me this note
from the block boss:

Comrades, Chiefs of the house:


All persons suspected of entertaining Red ideas must be
reported to me at once. We have been negligent in this block
in weeding out the Reds, whether they call themselves Com-
munists, Socialists, liberals, Republicans, or even if they
profess to have no political beliefs. Those who are not with
us are against us. Forward, for the Caudillo, for the Fa-
lange, for Spain!

Francisco AROCA
Jefe de Bloque


Little men such as these, together with the police in the
market-places and the mayors of the villages, constantly


5 SS


256 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


watched and hunted their quarry through the masses. Most
of those who wore the blue shirt of Fascism were armed; in
fact, most of those in the Family employ have arms. Not
long after the fall of Italian Fascism, tens of thousands of
sheets labeled “Confidential” were distributed by the Fa-
lange, mailed anonymously to their enemies or delivered by
Falangist police at the homes of silent workers. The text
was headed Para Ti, Jovencito, and it began:


For you, young fellow, who senselessly dream of over-
throwing the Falange ...

For you, rebellious worker, who dream of impossible
Marxism in Spain...

For you, respectable Seifior, who can eat, smoke, and live
well because Falange has pulled your chestnuts out of the
fire...

For you, the Boninis and Badoglios of Spain...

HAVE YOU THOUGHT WHAT THE FALANGE WOULD BE IN THE
OpposITIoN?


In the event of a coup d’état, said the sheet, “within half
’ an hour one hundred armed and determined centuria would
j be on the streets of Madrid.” A Falangist centuria contains
¢ one hundred men. These ten thousand Falangists would
/ rally the Falangists of Madrid. Similar risings would take
it place all over Spain. “Have you thought,” said the pam-
phlet, “of the effect of a Falangist centuria shooting its way

into a meeting of the Conservative Party?”

But there was no danger of such a coup d état — unless
it were engineered by the Family. Owing apparently to the
incredible ignorance of exiled Republicans as to the true
state of affairs in Spain, this was not clearly understood
until late in September end October of 1944. Then there
was a show-down.

I was not in the Aran Valley that autumn, when a few
hundred, perhaps several thousand, Spanish Republicans


Sem ae


SBA SS SERS Bee


—_ — |


BACKSTAGE 257


who had helped the French underground fight the Germans
tried to destroy the Family’s régime like the house of cards
they believed it to be; but I was on the receiving end of the
amazing propaganda pumped into Spain from Radio Toul-
ouse. I sat in the Puerta del Sol, Madrid’s Times Square,
sipping my coffee with thousands of Spaniards at a time
when, as Radio Toulouse explained, “masses of demonstrat-
ors against the Fascist régime had to be dispersed by the
machine-gun fire of Franco's police” in the Puerta del Sol.
Multiply such nonsense by months of daily broadcasts, con-
cerning every region of Spain, and it is easy to understand
why Spaniards at that time and now have little confidence
in the Republican exiles.

The Aran Valley, a pocket in the Pyrenees containing per-
haps a dozen small villages, was “occupied” by the Spanish
Maquis of France, armed with United States and British
equipment given them to fight Germans. The valley was
held for more than a month. For the record, no churches
were burned, no homes were looted, only two or three Fa-
langists vanished. But it is probable that this little opera-
tion in the Aran Valley set back the return of the Republic
by months, perhaps a year, perhaps longer. What irre-
sponsible propaganda from Radio Toulouse had done to de-
stroy the confidence of the people in the exiles was multi-
plied many times by these raids.

The Family, of course, seized the opportunity to move its
troops from Morocco up to the Pyrenees border, which, as
long as the Germans were there, was virtually unprotected.
Lieutenant General José Moscardo, who went North to di-
rect the Army’s operations against the Aran Valley, was al-
most captured by the “invaders.” There was fighting, with
perhaps two hundred casualties on both sides. An unre-
corded number of Republicans were captured and shot.
They withdrew from the valley when forty thousand troops


= ee Fey


+ =<


258 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


began moving against them. There was no revolt within
Spain.

For one thing, the people lacked confidence in those who
led the so-called “liberation.” Spaniards within Spain had
suffered long enough from the Family's dictatorship and
oligarchy; they did not plan to risk their lives to replace it
by.a Communist dictatorship and oligarchy. What is more
important, even had they chosen to revolt, they lacked the
arms and the economic means to undertake such an action.

Repression in Spain is not limited to police action. Eco-
nomic repression is a very real thing, carefully planned,
carefully managed, and carefully directed. It is not in the
hands of the Falange, but in the hands of business. The busi-
nessmen of the Family took over the job of directing the na-
tion’s economy when the Falange led the State into one of
the most absurd farces ever known in the history of bad gov-
ernment. It happened back in 1989, shortly after the Civil
War ended. The central character was Alberto Elder von
Filek.

Von Filek was an inventor. In Austria he was consid-
ered a swindler. He came to Spain in 1932 and acquired
some aristocratic gentlemen friends who soon were jailed in
connection with the Sanjurjo revolt against the Republic.
Von Filek went with them to jail. The Republican authori-
ties found his morals so queer that they kept him in jail until
the Civil War ended. His friends then rescued him as a
“political prisoner,” established him in business to exploit
his “inventions,” and gave him the proper introductions.

On December 7, 1939, a decree was published over Fran-
co’s signature declaring the activities of “Filek and Com-
pany” to be of national interest. This meant that the Aus-
trian and his associates had first call on all materials made
available to civilian industry. Soon another decree, also
signed by Franco, gave Von Filek the right to obtain even
those materials reserved for the Army.


BACKSTAGE 259


Not until February 8, 1940, was the press authorized to
reveal what Von Filek was doing. An article by the official
EFE Agency was distributed to the newspapers with the
Government’s “Must Publish” order on it. That evening the
headlines proclaimed:


WITHIN EIGHT MONTHS SPAIN WILL ATTAIN
COMPLETE INDEPENDENCE IN LIQUID FUEL!


Von Filek was engaged in turning the muddy waters of
the Jarama River, a small creek near Madrid, into gasoline.
The inventor had discovered that the Jarama contained
water of the same quality as an obscure river in Austria, a
country whose Government had so foolishly ignored Von
Filek’s amazing invention. Now Von Filek was taking Span-
ish citizenship. His adopted land, which he dearly loved,
would soon be getting two hundred and fifty thousand gal-
lons of gasoline a day out of the Jarama River and would
revolutionize the world market by exporting five hundred
thousand gallons daily within a year, later, millions of gal-
lons daily.

The press explained that Von Filek’s gasoline had been
tested with great care. The fleet of trucks which brought
fish to Madrid from the Bay of Biscay had been operating
for six months on fuel which was seventy-five per cent
water. Franco himself had been using the fuel in his auto-
mobiles. Luis Alarcén de la Lastra, a Falangist then Minister
of Industry and Commerce, was praised for his vision in ob-
taining this marvel for Spain.

The Von Filek factory on the banks of the Jarama was to
be enlarged on land expropriated for the purpose by the
Government. Within five months Spain would have no need
to import petroleum, for vast subterranean depositories soon
to be completed would hold the fuel.

Von Filek’s “gasoline” was “seventy-five per cent distilled


260 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


water, twenty per cent juices and ferments of plants, and
five per cent of other elements, the identity of which is natu-
rally a secret.” The result was far superior to natural petro-
leum. High-test aviation gasoline was a “simple by-product.”
The full production of the factory would be handed over to
the State petroleum monopoly, CAMPSA, at a price well
under the world market price. It was colossal.

“The inventor, Alberto Elder von Filek, an Austrian by
birth, is Spanish at heart,” gushed EFE. “He suffered mar-
tyrdom and persecution in the chekas and jails of Red Ma-
drid. The Reds tried to persuade him to collaborate with
them in their war industry, but they never succeeded.”

Petroleum-wise members of the Spanish Family read the
press reports with amazement. Among them was Demétrio
Carceller, the ambitious and realistic head of the CEPSA
petroleum company which did the overseas purchasing for
the Government monopoly. He sped to the Pardo Palace
for a talk with Franco.

Carceller would never tell me what happened at the
Pardo that day. But the factory on the Jarama was aban-
. doned; Carceller succeeded Alarcon as Minister of Industry

, and Commerce, and the press made no further mention of

: Von Filek or his project. Although Madrid gossips heard
FF that Von Filek had been shot, I met the little Austrian five
it years later in the concentration camp at Nanclares de la Oca,
of which he was, and presumably still is, an inmate. He was
rather proud of his hoax.

It was the Falange which had sponsored Von Filek. This
was not their only wild venture into the field of State eco-
nomics. In the early years of the régime, the Spanish State
poured hundreds of millions of pesetas into industries cre-
ated to give Spain “economic independence.” A State-spon-
sored automobile factory, after a year’s operation, produced
a a shaky vehicle mounted on four bicycle wheels and


pews


=


SSA SS Frese Y


BACKSTAGE 261


equipped with a small auxiliary motor to help the two occu-
pants get up hills. Otherwise it was propelled by foot ped-
als. It was to be the Spanish “Volkswagon,” the mass-pro-
duced “people’s car,” but the only one I ever saw was a
model tested in the Retiro Park of Madrid. It went down
hills beautifully, even traveled on the level by foot propul-
sion as fast as any bicycle, but the inventor and his passen-
ger, an Army general, could not get it up the hill again.
The Army itself set up two plane factories, one for bomb-
ers and another for fighters, which got big State subsidies,
though not a plane was ever produced. State subsidized
companies were established to produce trucks, radio receiv-
ers and transmitters, washing machines, and a dozen other
things, but they never got into production. Eventually the
businessmen of the Family decided the Falange had done
enough harm with its Fascist-type schemes for “economic
autarchy.” Slowly but surely the industrialists took over the
economic policies of the State, leaving the Falangists in con-
trol of distribution and rationing, a tremendous source of
graft, but depriving them of the power to subsidize industry.
By the end of 1947, all these Falangist enterprises were
pooled in a gigantic corporation called the Instituto Na-
cional de Industria. INI, formed in 1941, spent more than
$90,000,000 in its first six years of life — about nine times
the amount spent by the Ministry of Agriculture each year.
Grouped within INI are the Iberia airlines, the naval ship-
yards, a State-owned shipbuilding firm, the moribund svn-
thetic fuel industry, the equally moribund automobile and
plane industry, and several other Falangist ventures. INI
gets income from shares of stock in lead mines and in syn-
thetic fiber, farm machinery, ball-bearing, radio, and vari-
ous metallurgical plants acquired by the State in devious
ways. Some are former German shares. Others, like shares
in the Italian-owned rayon factories, are part payment for


SSS) Fes ben


=~ Ses


262 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


concessions to Nazis and Fascists instrumental in obtaining
Axis aid for Franco. President of INI is the Minister of In-
dustry and Commerce. Its employees are largely former
Falangists.

The result of the alliance between Falangists and big
business is a highly organized system of economic repression
which has proved to be the strongest weapon of the oli-
garchy against the masses. This is the way it works:

At the beginning of 1948, the cost-of-living index based
on 100 in 1986 had risen to 650. The index of wages, also
based on 100 in 1936, stood at 140. That’s the story in a
nutshell.

The complete story of economic repression cannot be
found in official statistics, which are completely unreliable.
No Spaniard can live on the tiny trickle of food he gets on
his official ration card at official prices. Few Spaniards are
paid wages at the official standards. All Government statistics,
however, are based on the official levels of prices and wages.
Even in 1944, when I made an exhaustive study of price-
wage relationships in Spain for the Associated Press, I found
that the official index for the cost of living stood at 325,
while wages were at 131.

Here are the Government’s own figures for the “nominal
maximum” wages per day in 1944:


Miners $1.07 Carpenters $1.02
Tron workers 1.15 Painters 1.35
Textile workers 0.97 Shoemakers 0.88
Glass workers 1.17 Tailors 0.97
Masons 1.05 Farm laborers 0.82


Checking these figures with employers in Madrid, I found
that all were twenty per cent too high, save in the case of
farm laborers. In Castile, farm workers got about sixty cents
a day; in Jaen Province they got thirty cents a day, The


BACKSTAGE 263


average annual wage was far below these figures, for work
throughout the farm country of Spain is seasonal.

Three years later, in December, 1947, industrial wages
had risen slightly, but prices had soared to new heights. A
skilled worker in Barcelona’s textile mills, for example, could
take home as much as $1.70 a day, but most of the food for
his family had to be found on the free markets. Eggs sold
at three dollars a dozen. Meat cost $2.30 a pound; fish was
eighty cents a pound; dried beans were sixty cents a pound.

In addition, from six to ten per cent of the worker’s wages
goes into various schemes for social security, all of which
are managed by the State or by the Falange. Employers also
are expected to contribute sums equivalent to about thirty
per cent of each worker’s base pay to the social security
plans. At present, the law provides for various subsidies to
workers with families, for old-age pensions and for health
insurance. Most of these schemes are managed by the Na-
tional Insurance Institute, a Government office which co-
operates with Spanish insurance companies and maintains a
nation-wide organization of its own.

According to the Institute itself, all Spanish workers with
an annual income under nine thousand pesetas (about nine
hundred dollars) get free hospital treatment, free medicine,
and free milk up to sixty per cent of their ration. A worker
gets two dollars per month for each child in his family. Old-
age pensions give their recipients five dollars per month. In-
stitute statistics indicate that some three million Spanish
families get such State subsidies, averaging about eleven
dollars per year per family.

Franco's enthusiasm for social insurance has encouraged
the Institute officials to build up a fabulous structure. Dur-
ing my residence in Spain I tried unsuccessfully to obtain
accurate figures on income and expenditure, but the officials
of the Institute declined to give them. Late in 1947, how-


264 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


ever, the metallurgical syndicate of New Castile, which does
not compare to Catalonia or Vizcaya as an industrial center,
published an annual report of a workers “benefit” society
sponsored by the Institute. A total of seventeen million
pesetas had been collected from metal workers, but only
one million pesetas had been paid out in benefits.

Workers throughout Spain view the Institute and its
countless schemes for insurance as only another form of eco-
nomic repression. Under the law, for example, an unmar-
ried metal worker with no dependents is required to con-
tribute from fifteen to twenty-five per cent of his salary, de-
pending on the region in which he works, to the Institute.
The same worker receives no benefits unless he is disabled
or passes the age of sixty. For disability he gets half his pay
for a maximum of three months.

Few Spaniards doubt that the National Insurance Insti-
tute will prove to be an empty cupboard should the oli-
garchy’s government give way to a régime elected by the
people. Until that time workers will continue to pay com-
pulsory assessments. Only a fraction of their money will be
returned to those workers who can convince the Institute
that they are “deserving.”

Spaniards look back to the days of the Civil War as days
of comparative prosperity. Never during the Civil War
were poor Spaniards forced to eat biscuits as indigestible as
those passed off for bread in 1941. Never, until the Family
came back to rule, did Spaniards go for so many years with-
out good olive oil, the base of Spanish cooking. But oil
pressed from the olives of Spain was exported by the Family
landowners, first to Germany and now to the United States
and Britain. Good oil can be purchased by those who can
afford it at $4.50 a quart on the black market. Bad oil can
rarely be had at the official price of $1.10.

The months of late winter and early spring are months


BACKSTAGE 265


of horror and hunger for Spain’s city poor. Rations are an-
nounced with the usual regularity by the press, but store
shelves, even in Madrid, where conditions are best, are all
too frequently bare of the basic foods — vegetables, dried
beans, and fish — which the poor can afford. The “starving
years” were those of 1941 and 1942, but thousands still die
of hunger each year in Spain.

The Family, however, has suffered little or not at all.
Poorest paid of the Family’s members are the Government
employees, but they get their share in graft and in privi-
leges at Government stores. There they can buy anything
they need at official prices which are but a fiction to other
Spaniards. The middle-class members of the Family find
places for their sons in the clergy, the Army, or the Govern-
ment, and derive comfortable incomes as merchants or “gen-
tlemen farmers.” At the top of the Family’s ladder there are
so many ways of making so much money that scores of res-
taurants in Madrid alone are packed with customers paying
an average of twelve dollars for their luncheons.

Foreigners enjoy the same privileges in Spain as the mem-
bers of the Family — provided, of course, they can pay their
way. This is made easy by the exchange regulations.
Throughout the Second World War, when most of the for-
eigners in Spain were directly or indirectly connected with
diplomatic missions, the peseta ranged from 22 to 32 for
each dollar in Lisbon or Tangier as compared to 10.95 to
the dollar at the official rate. All the diplomats, including
the Americans and the British, exchanged their money at
the Lisbon rate, or made even more lucrative arrangements
on the black money market within Spain. Members of the
Spanish Family were permitted to make frequent trips to
Tangier or Lisbon to take advantage of this rate.

Late in 1946, the Family created a “tourist peseta” rate
of 16.44 to the dollar. There were few tourists, but mem-


266 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


bers of the oligarchy found the new rate useful. By 1948,
the free rate of the peseta had fallen to 40 to the dollar in
Lisbon.

The Family is proud of its housing program. Much has
been done on model villages by the National Housing Insti-
tute; some excellent reconstruction work has been com-
pleted by the Office of Devastated Regions. Under a sys-
tem of State “adoption,” many villages and towns destroyed
by war have been totally rebuilt; new houses handed over to
lower middle-class owners on long mortgage plans, and old
houses remodeled under similar schemes. The show place
of Spain is University City in Madrid, a shambles after the
Civil War, but now almost entirely rebuilt. Near the big
cities and on the main roads of Spain there are numbers of
model towns, all constructed around elaborate churches and
municipal buildings, all architecturally attractive inside and
out.

These homes are distributed only to those Spaniards who
have the proper connections with the Family. War veterans
who fought on the oligarchy’s side of the Civil War have
first call. Moreover, the model villages are not always what
they seem.

My wife and I visited Titulcia in 1945. We went there
several times. In fact, we got to know it so well that the ap-
parently magnificent new town took on a different aspect.
A third of Titulcia had been smashed in the Civil War. A
third of the population moved into the caves in the hill
overlooking the little town, thirty miles south of Madrid.
Architects of the National Institute of Housing came to
Titulcia and decided to make it a model village. The two
thirds of the town which was still standing was razed. Those
of the owners who were politically in position to ask
the State for compensation received it. Everybody moved
away or lived in the caves until the model town was com-


pleted.


BACKSTAGE 267


It is a lovely town, a neat row of mission-style homes
with patios and airy rooms. It is forbidden to build houses
of any other style, thereby conserving the architectural unity
of the place. The new houses are more expensive, of course,
than the houses destroyed. Home-owners in the old village
are home-renters now, with the State as the landlord. The
new town unfortunately has room for only one quarter of
the population which lived there before the war. That is
why three quarters of the people of Titulcia now live in the
caves above the town or in shacks tucked away in the hills
where their unsightliness need not disturb the visitor.

Spain’s housing strikingly illustrates the maldistribution
of wealth. It is not a new problem. The castle on the hill
has always looked down on the hovels of the plain, but never
in modern times has Spain’s housing picture been worse
than at present.

Primo de Rivera is remembered by those who approved
of his régime as the man who built Spain’s fine roads.
Franco is to be remembered by those who liked his manage-
ment as the man who gave Spain model villages. This
model housing program is an attempt by the Family to win
over a minority in the low-income group to sympathy for
the oligarchy, thus destroying the unity of the working
classes.

Titulcia is an example of these tactics. The people who
live in the model houses are inclined to be in favor of the
régime — at least in public places. The poor who lost their
homes, and now live in the caves, are opposed to the régime.
The same is true in the cities.

I know a Madrid mechanic who earns the comparatively
good salary of sixteen pesetas a day — about $1.50. He has
just married and now is living with his bride in a single un-
furnished room of a tenement without plumbing. For this
he pays the equivalent of twelve dollars a month.


+ 2 eee ee


ee


268 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Another mechanic in the same garage earns the same
wages, but he is an official of the Falange syndicates and is
also a member of the Party. For eight dollars a month he
rents one of the four-room modern flats built by the National
Housing Institute for the syndicates. He also buys all his
food at official prices in Falange co-operatives, thus cutting
his food costs down about fifty per cent.

The roof of the tenement in which my non-Falangist
friend lives began to leak. The tenement owner sought to
repair it, but could not find the raw materials: they were
going into the construction of new houses for a development
being financed by the syndicates for their Falangist mem-
bers. It was also impossible for the tenement owner to find
coal on the official market. So the non-Falangist mechanic
shivered and went hungry in his single room while the Fa-
langist mechanic managed very well in the warmth and
comfort of his four-room flat.

The big businessmen of the Family co-operate with the
Falange to keep the Spanish people in economic slavery.
The clergy works with the Falange to keep the people in
ignorance. From the primary schools through the universi-
ties, Spain’s educational system is bankrupt. Deliberately,
methodically, the Family set out to destroy the system of
mass education which was permitted to develop under the
monarchy and grew swiftly under the Republic. They have
been eminently successful.

Clerical and political domination of education in Spain
(which had been eliminated during the Republic) was re-


* sumed as the Civil War ended. It was intensified when the


Falange “got religion” in 1943. Both the Falange and the
clergy are determined to drive liberal and anti-clerical ideas
out of the minds of Spain’s youth by limiting educational
opportunities to an “elite” chosen from the Family, while
leaving the masses in ignorance.


BACKSTAGE 269


At all levels of education there are two systems — clerical
schools and State schools. All clerical schools have one or
more Falangists to teach physical education and politics. All
State schools have a priest to teach religion and allied sub-
jects. There have been only two Ministers of Education
since the Civil War ended. Both of them, Pedro Sainz Rod-
riguez and José Ibafiez Martin, were equally acceptable to
the clergy and the Falange. Both were Falangists and both
belonged to Accidén Catdélica, which, in Spain, is the clergy’s
civilian arm for politics, business, and all secular activities.

There is no shortage of school buildings in Spain; the Re-
public saw to that. There is, however, a desperate shortage
of teachers. The vast majority of Spain’s teachers were Re-
publicans. Some escaped abroad, some buried their identi-
ties by taking up other work in other parts of the country,
but most were shot or imprisoned. The way the Family met
this shortage was to abolish all the normal schools in Spain
and to publish a decree in 1940 which provided that regular
and provisional officers in the Civil War Army could be ap-
pointed to fill teaching vacancies. It was necessary that they
should know how to read and write. There were no other
educational requirements.

As a result of this decree, four thousand officers doffed
their uniforms to become school teachers. Many State jobs
which paid more than school teaching were open to them,
so only the least gifted took teaching jobs. Temporary sec-
ond lieutenants of Moorish troops whose education permits
them to do little more than sign their names and read mil-
itary orders may now be found in country schools where
most Spaniards get all their education. There were still
shortages of teachers when the Blue Legion came back to
Spain, so teaching jobs were handed over to plain soldiers
who had served the Family by fighting as allies of the Ger-


mans.


270 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


The place the Family gives to education may be judged
by the figures of the 1946 budgets of the State. The armed
forces and the police account for more than fifty-nine per
cent of the combined ordinary and extraordinary budgets.
The Ministry of Education’s share was almost seven per
cent.

There is not much money for books. A total of 200,000
pesetas ($19,000) was spent by the Ministry of Education
in 1945 for the purchase of books and bookbinding in the
thirteen universities of Spain. Of this total, the University
of Madrid got 52,000 pesetas ($4750) for books and book-
binding for all its libraries — medical, legal, engineering,
philosophy and letters, and veterinary. In the same year the
Government's central garage in Madrid, where official auto-
mobiles are stored and repaired, spent 70,000 pesetas
($6400) “for books, documents, printed forms, bindings, and
publications in general.”

In the primary schools, the students use only one book for
each grade. It is called an Enciclopedia. It is up to the
parents to buy these books, although a few are distributed
to the favorites by the Falange and the clergy. In the work-
ers’ suburbs of Barcelona, where a Falangist civil governor,
unique in Spain, took an interest in education, there is an
average of one Enciclopedia for every three children. Most
rural schools I have visited have but one book — the teach-
er’s.

Here is what the Nueva Enciclopedia Escolar, now in use
in all State schools, has to say of the Republic and the Civil
War:


(8) The National Movement — The Spanish Army and the
popular militias, on July 18, 1936, began a national move-
ment directed by the illustrious General Franco against the
Masons and Marxists who seized power first by treachery
and then by violence. It resulted in the glorious triumph of


BACKSTAGE 271


the colors of the New Spain, over which, as Chief of State,
presides the Generalissimo Franco, the same who led our
heroic Army and the national militias to victory.


Here’s what the 1945 Primeras Lecturas, or First Reader,
now standard in all State schools, says about Spain, the
country whose Government says it is democratic. The italics
are in the text.


Spain is a totalitarian country, ruled by our Caudillo, and
its laws are based on National Syndicalist doctrines. Gov-
ernments are totalitarian when all the power resides only in
one person, on whom falls the maximum authority and also
the maximum responsibility.

Spain is at present a totalitarian country. The existing
laws by which it is ruled were inspired by José Antonio, the
founder of the Falange, who was assassinated by the Reds.

The Chief of the Spanish State is our Caudillo, the ever-
victorious General Franco, whom we should all ask God to
enlighten in the direction of the Government of the Mother-
land.


Students of all primary grades get religious and political
instruction every school day. They are required to mem-
orize such quotations from Franco's speeches as: “Spain is
God's favorite nation,” or “I believe in Spain because I be-
lieve in the Falange.” Such things as arithmetic, writing,
and grammar usually are taught only three times a week.

Spain, in 1948, is the only country of Western Europe
in which primary education is not obligatory. This is merely
an oversight. The Republican laws governing education
were dropped; the 1906 law of the monarchy, which de-
clared primary education to be obligatory, but conveniently
failed to mention at what ages this obligation was to begin
and end, was not immediately made law again. As a result,
Spain’s Ministry of Education has one less law to ignore.


272 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


There are a number of model schools in Barcelona, Ma-
drid, and other large cities which are shown to visitors.
Many country schools, however, are opened only a few days
annually — at least once to register new students at the be-
ginning of the year and once again at the year’s end to give
the students their “certificates” of graduation. Such are the
methods behind the régime’s official statistics — 4,000,000
school-children and 52,300 teachers in 44,300 schools as
compared to the 1986 Republican figures of 4,766,315 chil-
dren and 47,900 teachers in 42,741 schools. These statistics
are but a false front screening a deliberate plan to keep the
masses in ignorance, which is one of the most shocking as-
pects of the oligarchy’s rule.

Secondary education is in large part private. In Madrid,
for example, there are but three secondary schools worthy
of the name — one Jesuit, one of the Marists, and a third,
“Ramiro de Maeztu,” the best secondary school of the Span-
ish State. A poor man’s son stands very slim chances of
reaching one of these three schools. The Jesuits offer a num-
ber of scholarships, but most of these go to young men pre-
paring for the priesthood (or to a very few whom the Jesuits
believe are better fitted to civil life). Scholarships to Ramiro
de Maeztu are mainly political. The Marists, rebels of the
clergy, would like to have more poor students, but the Fam-
ily holds their pursestrings.

The universities of Spain, once among the greatest of
Europe, fell into intellectual poverty long ago. The depths
they have now reached may be judged by the fact that the
chair of ancient languages, once held by the philosopher
Miguel Unamuno, now is occupied by Antonio Tovar, whom
Serrano Sufier appointed chief censor and who said Span-
iards should go to bullfights rather than read, “because
Spain lacks good writers and all that is now available are
translations of bad works by Jewish authors.” As late as


BACKSTAGE 273


1944, Tovar was still contributing flaming pro-Nazi articles
to the Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung.

Americans have tried the Spanish universities to their sor-
row. One young American university student came to Spain
in 1941 to complete his studies in Spanish literature at the
University of Salamanca. He quit in disgust when he was
asked to join the teaching staff because “there is little we
can teach you.”

The Family’s Spain is poor enough educationally, but the
university system tends to impoverish it further. A univer-
sity professor gets as much as twenty-five hundred dollars a
year, but for a fifth of that sum or less he hires a substitute
to do the lecturing, frequently a “purified” Republican. The
professor appears at the university only for official cere-
monies. The substitute may, and usually does, also hire a
substitute. Mary Elizabeth Hayes, daughter of the former
Ambassador to Spain, took several courses in Spanish lit-
erature at the University of Madrid in the 1943-44 season.
She saw the professor scheduled to give the course just
twice. The rest of the time the class listened to the lectures
of a substitute, or the substitute’s substitute.

All students at Spanish universities, except foreigners, are
required to be members of the Falange-directed Spanish
“students’ syndicate.” Falangist student militia are given
powers of arrest and police by Government decree. “Polit-
ical” courses are required for all students in all years. Classes
are suspended by Government order whenever crowds for
official demonstrations are needed.

No libraries were functioning in Spain’s large cities in
1941 — even the National Library in Madrid was limited to
those holding special passes issued by the Falange. Few of
Spain’s fifty provincial capitals have reopened the libraries
founded by the Republic or the monarchy. They were
closed as centers of “Red liberalism”; they remain closed.


274 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


In the National Library at Madrid, my wife, a trained
librarian, was amazed to discover that most books still were
classified by size — big books here, little books there. A small
staff now is struggling with reclassification; but at the pres-
ent rate the job will take many years. Smaller libraries
throughout Spain still follow the “size” classification.

Sevilla has one of the finest collections of documents of
the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries in the world, gold mines
of the history of the American nations as well as of the his-
tory of Spain. But the classification begun by Republican
authorities was abandoned and has been resumed only re-
cently. Vast bales of documents and records lie untouched
in the halls of the Archives of the Indies. Foreign and Span-
ish investigators are constantly making “discoveries.” Each
is announced proudly in the Spanish newspapers. The press
evidently does not realize that such “discoveries” are pos-
sible only because valuable documents have been long
neglected by the Government. This neglect, alas, is not
characteristic of the Franco régime alone.

The Family once felt secure enough to encourage litera-
ture and art. It no longer does. The great writers and artists
of contemporary Spain are dead or in exile; no new writers
and artists are taking their place.

Jacinto Benavente, the dramatist who brought Spain a
Nobel prize, told a group of friends at a café table in Zara-
goza that the Falange was “a group of silly young men for
whom the Government buys blue shirts and pistols.” For
this indiscretion Spain’s newspapers and theaters were for-
bidden to mention Benavente’s name for two years, though
his plays, written under censorship and only mediocre pot-
boilers, appeared every season.

Pio Baroja, one of the literary “generation of 98,” wrote
little after the Civil War, but censorship killed much of that
little. Azorin, another writer of the same generation, lent


BACKSTAGE 275


his pen to the Falangist press, but never approached his
earlier brilliance. José Maria Sert, the muralist, traveled be-
tween Paris and his Barcelona studios. Mariano Benlliure,
the octogenarian sculptor, lived quietly in his studios teach-
ing a few students, but producing little. Before his death,
Ignacio Zuloaga rolled up a huge income with commissions
from the Government, including a portrait of Franco. All
these artists belong to a pre-Franco past. Young writers
and artists are few. The Family’s own opinion of the arts
and education in general explains why.

El Espanol, the weekly which echoes official opinion in
Spain, called Cervantes “not a great author, but a madman.”
The old founder of the Foreign Legion, General Millan
Astray, echoed the sentiments of many a member of the
Spanish Family when he cried, in 1939, “Death to intelli-
gence!” The best expression of the Family’s attitude toward
education came from the Marqués de Lozoya, Director Gen-
eral of Fine Arts in the Ministry of Education, professor at
the University of Valencia, member of the Academy of Fine
Arts and of History and also of the Council of Hispanidad.
In a speech accurately reported in the Family’s press on
February 3, 1938, he said:


All the misfortunes of Spain come from the stupid desire
of the Governments to teach Spaniards to read. Teaching a
man to read is only to oblige him to assume a position
which will cause misfortune for himself and for his mother-
land.


Such is the poison eating at the heart of Spain.


———


12


SECOND ACT CURTAIN


THE WAR IN EUROPE WAS ENDED; victory in the Pacific was in
sight. The Spanish people began to hope. Their masters,
the members of the oligarchy, were ill at ease. They met in
the ranch houses of the South, in the board rooms of Bilbao’s
banks, and in the business offices of Barcelona. Generals
and bishops talked things over in Madrid. Franco received
an increasing number of callers at the Pardo Palace.

The question was this: Was it time for a new act in the
masquerade?

Some thought so. Juan March, his fortune swollen by war-
time profits, wanted a monarchy to please the British on
whose victory he had gambled and won. Cardinal Segura
and many of the nobility also wanted a monarchy. Their
ideas of the government-to-be varied widely. They ranged
from Carlist dreams of an absolutism guided by the clergy
to Gil Robles’ plan for a constitutional monarchy. Gil Robles,
who remained in Portugal in order to support the pretense
of opposition to Franco, maintained that the Family’s polit-
ical machine and the Family’s armed forces could make the
Cortes safe against those who desired a free republic.

The majority of the oligarchy preferred to keep Franco as
the manager of their fortunes as long as possible. Franco
had done well; on this all agreed. On other matters, the
minority went along with the majority. Family ties always
are stronger than Family rivalries.

276


SECOND ACT CURTAIN 277


All members of the Family believed, however, that the
time to choose a new manager for their property was not far
distant. It did not seem possible that the United Nations
would long tolerate a Spanish Government which had done
its best to defeat them. German documents in the posses-
sion of the victors would confirm the facts.

For this very reason it seemed wise that Franco should
remain as “Chief of State” until all the evidence against his
Government and the Spanish Family was on the record. In
the meantime, Franco could undertake the gradual “purge”
of the country, could liquidate the concentration camps, and
could cover up the corruption of the oligarchy. The longer
Franco remained, the more intense foreign criticism of
“Franco and the Falange” would become. The oligarchy
would be forgotten. Its members could then stage a com-
edy of “opposition to Franco” when the time came to choose
a new manager for a new régime.

If the victor nations insisted that Spain change its régime,
the Falange could be “liquidated.” Should this prove in-
sufficient, Franco himself could retire to his home in Galicia.
Perhaps a grateful monarch would give him the title he
yearned for — “Duke of Victory.” Certainly a grateful Army
would insist that he retain the rank of “Generalisimo, Savior
of Spain,” so that he could return to lead them once again
in case of popular uprisings.

The reasoning behind the plan to keep Franco was sound.
Anyone who followed the Caudillo would appear small in
stature; the absence of a “Communist revolution” would ex-
plode the Family's prize argument. Had the Generalissimo
stepped down as the war ended, had a new general or gen-
erals been put in his place, or had Don Juan himself re-
turned as king, those interested in Spain might no longer be
taken in by the masquerade. They might examine more
closely the records of officials who had previously hidden


wee et = ee oe eS OF


278 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


behind Franco. They might discover that Spain was an oli-
garchy and the Caudillo was only a manager.

There was another consideration — Russia. The Family
as a unit hoped and prayed that the United States and Brit-
ain would soon be at war with Russia. Publicly and private-
ly, as Germany began to retreat on two fronts, all the
spokesmen of the Family’s Spain urged the United Nations
to make common cause with Germany against Soviet Rus-
sia. This idea proved so unpopular that they soon dropped
the warmongering line. But today the Family are doing all
they can to encourage a new war. Obviously in such a war
the Family’s Spain would line up with the United States
and the West, but not as a fighting ally. In the event of a
West-East war, Spain could tell the United States and Brit-
ain that “the first battle against Communism was fought and
won in Spain” —just as Franco told Hitler that “the first
battle for our New Europe was fought and won in Spain.”

The tactics, then, were clear. Slowly and cautiously,
Franco was to make a show of bringing Spain into line with
the victor Powers. It was a difficult process.

Twice in April, 1945, the French, British, and American
representatives in Madrid formally protested to the Spanish
Government against the supplying by Spanish ships of Ger-
man forces still holding a pocket at the mouth of the
Gironde. Each time Franco expressed the Government's re-
grets and promised to put a stop to the supply ships. But
the Spaniards halted the flow of supplies only after this
group of Germans had surrendered. Thus, a fortnight be-
fore the end of the war in Europe, Spain still was aiding
Germany.

On the eve of V-E Day, Spain “broke relations” with Ger-
many. A week later, on May 14, 1945, the foreign press was
invited to a special session of the Cortes which was to ap-
prove the severance of Spain’s relations with Japan.


SECOND ACT CURTAIN


Esteban Bilbao, President of the Cortes and the Family’s
favorite orator, chose the occasion to give one of the orations
for which he was famous. He beat his breast, sobbed and

lifted his arms to the sky. Spain, he said, “is always free of

hates and ambitions; she desires only to work in peace with
freedom to work out her own destiny.” Spain was also
blessed with a régime which had a “true democratic spirit.”

The Cortes thundered with applause; only a few of the

| most die-hard Falangists gave the Falangist salute. “You
| see,” whispered the press officer at my shoulder, “your vic-
| tory against Japan is desired by all of us.” My attention,
| however, was riveted on the next speaker to take the plat-
| form. He was Carlos Pinilla, the Under-Secretary of Labor.
What Pinilla said was of no importance, but he wore a

| Falange uniform. On his sleeve was the emblem of the Blue


279


Division, and on his chest was the ribbon of the German
Iron Cross. When I expressed amazement that a member of

| the Spanish cabinet should thus flaunt the decoration of a
defeated nation with which his country had broken rela-
tions, the press officer sighed.

“Ah, Carlos,” he sighed. “You do not trust us!”

Those few Americans and British residents of Spain who
did trust the oligarchy’s promises were sadly disillusioned
by subsequent events. The régime continued to help the
Nazis even after V-E Day.

In March, 1945, the Spanish Government warned the
German Embassy that, in the event of a German defeat, the
Spanish Government would be required under international
law to block all German assets in Spain. The German Em-
bassy accordingly notified all their nationals to consult with
the Embassy’s financial experts and with Spanish bankers
to take the necessary precautions. When, on May 5, 1945,
the Government finally acted on the repeated requests of
the United States and Britain and blocked German assets,
the cupboard was practically bare.


Sets = t ores


=


———= =


280 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


The American State Department estimated the amount of
German official funds hidden by transfer to private persons
at about $1,250,000. A Spanish banker who frequently
handled German accounts told me that the funds so hidden
were closer to $10,000,000. The Germans had such ample
warning that most of these funds were virtually impossible
to trace. German Government property, presumably more
easily watched, also vanished.

By May 7, 1945, when the Spanish Government notified
the Germans that all their official property must be surren-
dered to Spanish custodianship within twenty-four hours,
much had already been moved out of the German Embassy
and its seventeen annexes. More was still to go. Falangist
volunteers turned up to help move files, typewriters, and
office equipment out of the Barcelona Consulate. In Ma-
drid the Embassy mobilized the private cars of all German
residents and hired trucks to cart away material. At least
one truckload of documents and papers went to Falange
headquarters.

At the end of the twenty-four-hour period the Spanish
authorities, after constant needling, informed American and
British officials that all German official buildings had been
“sealed.” All these buildings were supposedly “guarded” by
the Spanish police. But when the Spanish Government, a
month later, began to surrender them to the Allied Control
Council, the German Embassy was virtually bare. There
were some large portraits of Hitler, a collection of photo-
graphs of Hitler and Franco shaking hands and beaming at
each other, some battered office furniture, and a consider-
able amount of radio transmitting equipment. There were
also several cases of German medals which were to have
been distributed to Spaniards who had served in the Blue
Legion.

The doors of many German offices scattered through Ma-


SECOND ACT CURTAIN 281


drid had not been sealed, but simply locked. The keys were
in the possession of the Service of Information and Investi-
gation of the Falange, a police organization which had al-
ways served the Germans well. Spanish police admitted
that Falangists frequently visited the properties while they
were “under seal,” but the police chief insisted that nothing
had been taken away because “our agents were on watch
day and night.” One of the items found to have been smug-
gled through this vigilant guard was a flat-bed press weigh-
ing twelve tons.

In Barcelona, the Civil Governor refused to surrender the
Brown House, a luxurious club used by Nazi Germans and
their Falangist friends. The Governor said the Brown House
was a Spanish stock corporation. Fortunately, American
consular officials found the controlling shares of stock among
some papers left behind in the German Consulate, so the
Allies became majority stockholders in the Brown House.
Minority stockholders of record were all Falangist officials,
none of whom turned up at the meeting which liquidated
the Brown House.

During the war the Nazi Government had taken over sev-
eral long-established German schools in Spain and had
opened nearly fifty new schools throughout the country.
These institutions, subsidized by Berlin, offered a Nazi-style
education to the sons and daughters of prominent members
of the oligarchy. The clergy approved, for Spanish priests
were hired to give religious instruction. Among those en-
rolled as students were the children of several Ministers of
the Spanish cabinet and of a number of generals in the
Army. After school hours many of the boys marched proudly
home in military formation wearing the Nazi swastika be-
side the Falange yoke and arrows on the sleeves of their
“Franco Youth” uniforms.

The Spanish Government fought hard to keep these


sea = & eee


282 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


schools open as “private cultural centers,” but Norman Ar-
mour, then the American Ambassador to Spain, insisted that
all be closed. Most of the German teachers quickly found
jobs in private schools run by the clergy or the State. All of
these teachers had been “approved” by the Nazi Foreign
Ministry; most were sent to Spain during the war. The
great majority of them are still in Spain teaching Spanish
children.

German industrial and business property in Spain, which
the United States Foreign Economic Administration cau-
tiously valued at $200,000,000, proved to be so well hidden
that estimates made late in 1945 were scaled down to $95,-
000,000. The United States memorandum of May 17, 1946,
however, said there might be “a large amount of hidden
property of which the United States Government is not in-
formed.” Few private estimates of such hidden property
were below $300,000,000.

It took a year for the Spanish Government to block the
transactions of three hundred and thirty German-controlled
companies in Spain. Many privately owned German com-
panies in Spain are operating freely today. Most of these
are in the electrical equipment, chemical, pharmaceutical,
mining, machinery, and machine-tool industries, all of
which are of interest to any power looking ahead to the
eventual restoration of war industries. German chemists,
engineers, and other technicians sent to increase the Span-
ish contribution to the Axis war industry are still living and
working in the country.

Nobody knows how many Germans are still in Spain.
The American Government, apparently accepting the statis-
tics of the Spanish Government, sets the number at “from
ten thousand to twelve thousand.” The Polish representa-
tive at the United Nations, supported by the Spanish Re-
publican Government-in-Exile, said that Spain “is harboring


SECOND ACT CURTAIN 283


approximately one hundred thousand Vichy French militia
and Germans.” The American figure is too low and the
Polish estimate is much too high. Chances are that the num-
ber of Germans now in Spain is about twenty-five thousand,
of whom ten thousand are residents of long standing.

Even the Spanish Government lacks accurate figures on
the German population. Throughout the Second World War
any man who could flash any kind of German passport or
military paper could cross Spain’s frontier in either direc-
tion with no formalities whatsoever. In August, 1944, at
Irun, I personally saw scores of Germans entering and leav-
ing Spain as they chose while border officials made no record
of their passage.

Spanish officials admitted they had no means whatsoever
of checking on air travelers between Spain and the rest of
Europe. There are hundreds of estates owned by pro-Nazi
members of the Spanish oligarchy within a hundred miles of
the Pyrenees frontier where small planes could make land-
ings without the knowledge of any Spanish official. Many
of the regular airports in Spain were under the control of
former members of the Blue Legion who flatly refused to
give United States and British officials any records of traffic.
When the New York office of the Associated Press told me
that the Russian Marshal Zhukov had suggested that Hitler
might be living in Spain, I replied with a radiogram which
must have sounded flip, but was the absolute truth:


I DO NOT KNOW WHETHER HITLER IS IN SPAIN OR NOT
STOP HE COULD BE STOP IF HE IS HE FEELS QUITE SAFE


Any missing Nazi leader of prominence might even now
be safely tucked away in Spain. To understand this, one
has only to examine the case of Léon Degrelle, the Rexist
leader and “Quisling” of Belgium.

Degrelle and a group of German pilots flew in from Nor-


284 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


way as Berlin was falling. They barely reached Spain; their
plane crashed for lack of fuel on the beach directly in front
of the American Consulate at San Sebastian. Degrelle, who
suffered a broken leg in the crash, might certainly have van-
ished as completely as the Nazi leader Martin Borman had
it not been for the fact that the American Consul was among
those who heard him identify himself. As a result, the Span-
ish authorities placed him “under arrest” in a private room
of the Army’s hospital for officers in San Sebastian. There
he remained for more than a year.

The Belgian Government demanded that Degrelle be sur-
rendered as a war criminal, but the Spanish Government,
which had sent so many anti-Nazis to their death at the re-
quest of the Germans, refused. Belgium, following the lead
set by the United States and Britain, meanwhile negotiated
a trade treaty with Spain. Eventually, in the summer of
1946, representatives of the American and British press in
San Sebastidn were told that Degrelle was to be ordered to
leave Spain, presumably via the French frontier where a del-
egation of Belgian police was ready to receive him.

While the press waited to interview Degrelle in a San
Sebastian hotel, he was formally released from the military
hospital and turned over to the police. What happened then
was somewhat confusing, but Degrelle never kept his date
with the press. Belgium’s Number One war criminal simply
vanished into thin air. The Spanish authorities made a great
show of combing the country for him, but he could not be
found.

The Friends’ Service Committee, financed by the Amer-
ican Quakers, have plenty of evidence in their files that the
treatment accorded foreigners in Spain depended exclusive-
ly on their political beliefs. David Blickenstaff, now execu-
tive secretary to Trygve Lie, Secretary General of the United
Nations, was in charge of the Friends’ Service Committee


SECOND ACT CURTAIN 285


work in Spain and personally rescued dozens of anti-Nazi
Europeans. Many anti-Nazi Germans and other refugees
were handed over to Nazi officials and spirited into German-
occupied France before Blickenstaff could intervene. One
of the chief allies of the Quakers in making such rescues was
the Papal Nuncio, who put pressure on officials of the Span-
ish Government through the Spanish clergy, normally un-
willing to intervene in such cases.

Perhaps the most striking illustration of how Germans
were treated in Spain as the war ended is provided by the
contrasting cases of Johannes Bernhardt and Johann Gauger.
Both these men were German-borm Protestants, both were
born in 1900, but there the similarity ends.

Bernhardt, as stated in a previous chapter, is the Nazi
who flew from Morocco to Berlin in 1936 and obtained the
German planes which enabled Franco to get his troops across
the Strait of Gibraltar. He prospered during the Civil War
to such an extent that, when the Second World War began,
Berlin made him president of the official German trading
company in Spain, the Sociedad Financiera Industrial, called
“SOFINDUS.” He was of such service to Berlin in this work
that he was publicly praised on the Berlin radio in 1944 as
the Ausland Deutscher who had done the most for his father-
land. On December 22, 1944, ten evergreen trees cut in the
Black Forest were flown to Madrid in a special Deutsche
Lufthansa plane. One tree went to the Pardo Palace as Hit-
ler's gift to Franco. Another was Goering’s gift to Bern-
hardt.

Bernhardt now lives happily in Spain. He has a country
estate near Valencia, a town house in Madrid, and a new
American automobile. His many friends within the Spanish
oligarchy, whom he still entertains lavishly, have promised
him that he will never be forced to leave Spain. These
friends include Franco himself, the “Monarchist” General
Kindelan, and the “Republican” General Aranda.


286 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


The other German, Johann Gauger, is the son of a Prot-
estant preacher in Bavaria. While Bernhardt was busily
organizing a Nazi group among the German residents of
North Africa, Gauger and his two brothers were jailed by
the Nazis for publishing the anti-Nazi sermons of Protestant
pastors. One brother died in prison, but Johann lived to be
released from prison in 1945 for service in the German
Army. When his unit was transferred to Southern France,
he escaped across the Pyrenees into Spain, where he sur-
rendered to the Spanish police as a “stateless” anti-Nazi.

Gauger was sent to the forced-labor camp of Nanclares
de la Oca, near Vittoria in Northern Spain, where he and
his anti-Nazi companions slaved in a stone quarry from
dawn till dark. When I visited this camp with a group of
foreign correspondents, Gauger was in the infirmary with a
broken leg, his body still bearing the marks of beatings
given him by Spanish guards who forced him to give the
Nazi salute.

Owing to the interest of American and British newspaper-
men in the case, Gauger and his companions were trans-
ferred to prisons where they were not required to do hard
labor. Spanish officials also promised us that Gauger and
the other anti-Nazis would be permitted to return to Ger-
many as soon as the Allied authorities could accept such
repatriates. In the meantime they were to stay in prison.

“Obviously, we cannot let men like Gauger go free in
Spain,” a Government official told me. “His political views
are not in accord with those of the Spanish Government.”
The political views retained by Bernhardt, whose home in
Madrid is filled with signed photographs of Hitler, Goering,
and other Nazi leaders now dead, are quite acceptable in
Spain today.

The Spanish Government’s own political views, as the war
ended in 1945, were somewhat vague, except for one point:


SECOND ACT CURTAIN 287


The régime wanted to scramble aboard the United States-
British bandwagon in foreign affairs while clinging to a
totalitarian domestic policy.

Foreign Minister Lequerica told me with a perfectly
straight face, as Germany was falling, that Spain considered
the anti-Komintern Pact to be a “dead document.” Spain
had signed the Pact in the beginning, he said, only “to de-
fend our motherland against Communism.” It had been re-
newed by Spain year after year “for the same reason.” Spain
now considered the pact dead, because she felt well pre-
pared to defend herself alone against the Communists.

A remarkable interview that Franco gave to A. L. Brad-
ford of the United Press, on the condition that it was not to
be published inside Spain, illustrates the contradiction be-
tween foreign and domestic policy, between the stand taken
by Spain at home and Spain abroad. Bradford’s own intro-
ductory remarks to the interview, such as “Spain is without
question a notable example of tranquillity and progress” and
“Franco’s main interest is to improve the social condition of
the masses,” were given huge headlines in the Spanish press.
Although the Spanish press also published lengthy dispatches
from other countries, notably Argentina, reporting the “fav-
orable reaction” to Franco’s statements, not one word of
what Franco said has yet been published in Spain.

The reason for this curious omission was that Franco had
made lengthy statements to Bradford about the “liberties”
which Spaniards enjoyed, the “elections” which soon were to
be held in Spain, and the “equality and justice” of the ré-
gime. The interview was designed only for foreign con-
sumption. It was too patently false for release inside Spain.

Franco’s tone to the Spanish people was quite different.
“We fight God’s battles,” he told them. “That is why some
people attack us from abroad. We should forgive them, for
it is not the same to live in a society in which all are bap-


288 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


tized as to live in parts of the world which suffer the mis-
fortune that only the minority, or only a certain percentage
of the population, profess the true religion.”

This kind of sanctimonious nonsense, peddled abroad by
Spanish missionaries and by the Jesuits, was a matter of real
concern to the Vatican. Few Catholics outside Spain real-
ized that Rome did not consider Franco its favorite son, but
had, in fact, quarreled with him — not once, but many times.
One quarrel over the method of naming the hierarchy of
the Spanish Church kept most of the bishoprics in Catholic
Spain vacant for three years after the Civil War. The lead-
ers of the Spanish clergy had instructed Franco to insist
upon the old royal prerogative to share in the appointment
of high officials of the Church, thus limiting clerical leader-
ship to the oligarchy’s candidates. Ever since 1939 the Ma-
drid régime has been engaged without success in attempts
to negotiate a Concordat with the Vatican. The Papacy is
not eager to enter into an agreement which would leave the
Spanish Church in the permanent control of the oligarchy.

An Italian aide of the Papal Nuncio in Madrid has de-
scribed the attitude of the Spanish oligarchy toward the
Holy See in these terms:


They are our champions in the hour of their greatest need,
but, when they believe themselves strong, no unbeliever is
as deaf to the just teachings of Rome as the Spanish clergy.


Thus it was that in the summer of 1945, to meet the ur-
gent pleas of the rest of the oligarchy, the Spanish clergy
decided to give its public blessing to the Franco manage-
ment by contributing a Minister of Foreign Affairs to the
cabinet. At the same time the Falange was warned that its
part in the masquerade might soon be reduced or even en-
tirely eliminated.

Party Secretary José Luis Arrese summoned the leaders of


SECOND ACT CURTAIN 289


the Falange from all parts of Spain to meet in the forest be-
low the Gredos Inn, where José Antonio Primo de Rivera
had first proposed that the Falange rebel against the Repub-
lic. What Arrese told the Falange leaders on June 16, 1945,
was not designed for publication. By some error, however,
the text of his speech appeared in the Falangist Youth
weekly, Juventud. This issue was confiscated by the police,
but I laid hands on one of a few copies that had already
been sold.


Falange itself is not the final aim of Falangists [said
Arrese], but only a means to achieve the National Syndi-
calist doctrine. Our final purpose is the conquest of the
State. This we are to attain'through the National Syndi-
cates. Through the Syndicates we can make our doctrine
permanent.


Arrese was warning his followers that a shift in policy
might necessitate that the Falange might have to “go under-
ground.” Though the Falange itself might even be “dis-
solved” as a party, it would continue to function within the
National Syndicates, the only form of labor organization al-
lowed to exist in the Family’s Spain.

A letter sent to Party militants after the Gredos meeting
explained the Falange view of world affairs:


The outcome of the war is not against our cause, in fact
it will contribute to speeding our progress. Capitalism and
Marxism, now trained in the war against Fascism, will fight
each other very soon. From their encounter, if we turn their
power to our advantage, will come the victory of our
National Syndicalism.


This letter reached Falangists on the eve of a cabinet
shake-up on July 21. Arrese was dropped from the Govern-
ment; the Secretary General of the Falange was no longer
to be automatically a member of the cabinet. José Antonio


290 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Girén, ardent Falangist Minister of Labor, kept his job and
Raimundo Fernandez Cuesta, José Antonio Primo de Ri-
vera’s old friend, became Minister of Justice. The Falangist
character of the cabinet was not changed; it was simply
diluted by the appointment of Alberto Martin Artajo, a
Catholic lay leader, as Foreign Minister. From this point on
the Spanish clergy began to take its share of the responsi-
bilities of government under the oligarchy to which it had
always belonged.

Consider the case of Angel Herrera. From 1911 to 1933,
Angel Herrera had been the guiding genius of El Debate,
the leading conservative newspaper of Spain, which was
published by the clergy through Editorial Catélica. While
Angel’s brother, Francisco, managed the business affairs of
Editorial Catdlica, Angel became the clergy’s leading civil-
ian tactician. It was Angel who trained Gil Robles on the
staff of his paper and picked him for a political career. In
1938, Angel left El Debate to become the head of Accidn
Catélica, the better to mobilize the political strength of this
organization behind the Gil Robles parties. After the elec-
tions of February, 1936, when Gil Robles’ parties were
smashed, Angel Herrera went to Fribourg in Switzerland,
took the vows and became a monk, withdrawing from polit-
ical life in Spain. As the Civil War ended, Francisco Her-
rera reappeared as one of the clergy’s business representa-
tives, but Angel remained in Switzerland.

When Martin Artajo, one of Angel Herrera’s aides on El
Debate, joined the cabinet, the monk suddenly returned to
Spain. He was a frequent visitor to the Foreign Ministry;
he traveled on special missions to the United States. In July,
1947, Angel Herrera was consecrated Bishop of Malaga, one
of the wealthier dioceses in Spain, but he spent much of his
time in Madrid where he became the clergy’s “Grey
Eminence.”


SECOND ACT CURTAIN 291


Martin Artajo himself was known in Spain and out of it
only as the managing director of Accién Catdélica, an organ-
ization similar in name only to “Catholic Action” groups the
world over. In the United States, as in Britain, France, and
many other countries, “Catholic Action” is a non-political
organization of Catholic laymen. In Spain, Accién Catédlica
is the political arm of the Spanish clergy.

The task Martin Artajo accepted was difficult. Mexico
had rejected the Spanish régime’s efforts to establish friend-
ly relations, broken since the Civil War. Guatemala and
Panama had just severed relations with Spain; Cuba’s House
of Representatives had adopted a resolution urging the
Spanish people to oust the régime.

Such signs of trouble ahead did not unduly concern the
oligarchy. They planned to let Franco weather the storm
as long as he could. Then another Family régime would
take his place.

To prepare the way for such a shift, Franco made a
speech at the time of the cabinet shake-up. He told Span-
iards he had been considering “the question of my succes-
sion” and declared that he, Franco, had been a Monarchist
“for the last nine years.” He had reached the conclusion
that Spain should have “a strong and flexible monarchy,
within the institutions of our new State.”

Don Juan, in reply, said that he would not return to the
throne as “front man” for the Falange. The Monarchists of
Spain applauded. Franco then told the Monarchists that he
would undertake the “transition,” which, of course, would
be long. The Monarchists applauded again. Don Juan,
though privately content to wait while Franco and the Fam-
ily prepared for his coming, ordered all Monarchists to
“cease collaborating” with the régime.

Few “Monarchists” obeyed their King. Even the Duke
of Alba clung to his post as Ambassador to Britain for


292 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


months thereafter. Antonio Goicoechea, theoretically the
leader of the Monarchist movement, flatly refused to resign
as Governor of the Bank of Spain. Don Juan did not insist.
The Family showed no signs of panic as the criticism from
abroad grew more violent. When the San Francisco Con-
ference barred from membership in the United Nations ré-
gimes “established by Axis aid,” the Spanish Foreign Min-
istry announced that this did not concern Spain. The Big
Three, meeting at Potsdam, decided to be more specific:


The three Governments feel bound, however, to make it
clear that they for their part would not favor any applica-
tion for membership put forward by the present Spanish
Government, which, having been founded with the support
of the Axis Powers, does not, in view of its origin, its nature,
its record, and its close association with the aggressor States,
possess the qualifications necessary to justify such member-
ship.

The Spanish press published the full text of the Potsdam
communiqué, except for the above paragraph. Thus the
newspaper readers of Spain who did not listen to the British
Broadcasting Company's excellent news programs in Span-
ish were somewhat mystified by a Government communiqué
in the same newspapers which declared:


Spain rejects those clauses of the Potsdam communiqué
which concern her as both arbitrary and unjust. Spain
neither begs a place at international conferences nor would
accept any place which was not in proportion to her history,
population, and service to peace and culture.


“Why!” gasped a newcomer to the Family’s Spain, “they're
thumbing their noses at the United Nations!”

It was true. Few Americans in Spain thought the Family
could get away with it, but that was in 1945. Two years
later, we were not so sure. .


SECOND ACT CURTAIN 293


The Family was much less concerned with the statements
of the United Nations and with the declarations of the Big
Three than with the attitude of the Governments of Britain
and the United States. Toward other nations the Spanish
Government was indifferent, indeed arrogant. When the
French Government, for example, stated clearly that the
Family’s Spain was no friend of the new France, the Falan-
gist weekly Juventud replied in these terms:

You French are at the bottom of a well. If we look down
the well, it is only with the Christian intention of throwing
you a rescuing rope. But if you dare answer us with insults,
then we will throw you the other end of the rope too. Then
you can tie a knot in the latest style around your delicate
neck.

The Family's attitude toward Britain and the United
States was quite different. Members of the oligarchy think
of Britain and the United States in terms of the counting
houses of the City and of the brokerage offices of Wall
Street, of Allied Chemical and the International Telephone
and Telegraph Company, of Shell and Standard Oil. The
Spanish oligarchy identifies Britain with the Conservative
Party, America with the Morgan banking interests. For this
reason, the victory of the British Labor Party in the elec-
tions of 1945 was quite a shock. Today, however, they are
convinced that even the Labor Government is their friend.

“Britain is still Britain,” a prominent Spanish publisher
told me. “Of course, we do not expect quite the same treat-
ment from the Labour Party that we got from the Conserva-
tive Party. We may eventually have to change our Govern-
ment. We know the Labour Party must appease the igno-
rant rank and file; we understand why they attack us pub-
licly. But the leaders of the Labour Party will not push us
too far. They still want to keep their economic Gibraltars
in Spain. They still need our friendship against Russia. Of


294 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


course, they are anxious to see us make friends with the peo-
ple who count in the United States. This we will do.”

Keystone of the Family’s campaign to win over “the peo-
ple who count” in the United States was the old familiar
battlecry: “If we do not rule Spain, the Russians will!”

José Maria Lojendio, an able professor of international
law, and other Western-minded Spaniards, were sent on lec-
ture tours to American colleges and universities. Spanish
lecturers who paid their own traveling expenses were wel-
come on many campuses.

Manuel Aznar, who no longer wore his Falangist blue
shirt and no longer liked to be called the “Virgilio Gayda of
Spain,” became the darling of dinner parties given by a part
of Washington’s conservatives. Aznar, a shrewd and enter-
taining conversationalist, also kept in touch with New York
bankers interested in Spain’s future. He reported direct to
Franco, though listed as “minister counselor” of the Spanish
Embassy under Ambassador Cardenas.

Father Molina, a suave Franciscan monk who was a fre-
quent visitor at the American Embassy when Ambassador
Hayes was in Madrid, also turned up in Washington as a
student at Catholic University. I was hardly surprised to
meet him in the audience of a church auditorium in Wash-
ington, for the speaker, a Jesuit priest, needed coaching.
The Jesuit, an American who had never been to Spain and
spoke no Spanish, was giving a lecture on the Spanish prob-
lem. He described Franco as the “champion of the Church,
a crusader against Communism.” Father Molina told me
that “many of our friends from Spain are here in your coun-
try helping Americans to understand Spain.”

The oligarchy’s technique within Spain was to try to con-
vince Spaniards that they could expect no help against the
Family from the outside. The Family's press reports of the
United States and British scenes give the impression that the


SECOND ACT CURTAIN 295


people of both countries are not only friendly with the
Franco régime, but practically allied with it. The papers
quote lengthy editorials from the Brooklyn Tablet so fre-
quently that Spaniards may be excused for believing that
weekly to be one of the greatest of America’s daily news-
papers. So much space is given to the remarks of Conserv-
ative members of Britain’s House of Commons that many
Spaniards think Churchill is still Premier.

When President Truman said, “None of us likes Franco
or his Government,” the Spanish press did not report his re-
mark, but when two Alabamans trying to sell cotton turned
up in Barcelona, the newspapers gave huge headlines to
their enthusiastic praise of Spain’s natural beauties. Each
United States and British purchase in Spain, each item im-
ported from those two countries, was so carefully tabulated
in the press that Spaniards could get the impression that
London and Washington were virtually competing for
Spain’s favor in world trade.

These efforts to falsify the position of the United States
and Britain did not go unanswered. Spanish-language broad-
casts from American and British radio stations attempted to
tell Spaniards of the true state of public opinion in both
countries in respect to the régime. The difficulty is that few
Spaniards who are not members of the oligarchy can afford
radios.

During the war, the news bulletins of the American and
British Embassies in Madrid supplied reports of war devel-
opments to many poor Spaniards. Up until the summer of
1945, however, official policy prevented the editors from
publishing anything about Spanish affairs. After that time,
these bulletins included comments of American and British
leaders on Spanish internal politics.

With Ambassador Armour’s approval, Emmet Hughes, an
American Catholic and the director of the operations of the


296 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Office of War Information in Spain, wrote a vitriolic edi-
torial on the attitude of the Spanish press. He called it “The
Heirs and Successors of Doctor Goebbels.” He noted that
the Spanish press unanimously opposed the principles for
which the United Nations had fought the war and sought
by all means to provoke war between the victor States.
More than one hundred thousand copies were distributed,
a greater circulation than any Spanish newspaper.

Shortly thereafter, J. B. M. Jeffries, one of Britain’s fore-
most journalists and also a Catholic, published in the Brit-
ish bulletin an equally bitter commentary on Spanish neu-
trality. The Spanish Government, he observed, would never
have been permitted to criticize the Germans through the
Spanish newspapers if the Axis had won the war. “Only
thanks to a United Nations’ victory,” he said, “is the press
able to misquote the heads of victor States, ignore their offi-
cial statements about Spain, and attack American corre-
spondents.”

This last reference was to a strange incident in which I
was the target of the Government’s wrath.

For a régime busily trying to cover up its wartime in-
volvement with the Axis, it was frequently embarrassing to
have among the foreign correspondents one American who
had watched German and Italian troops fighting in Spain
during the Civil War. I had declined “to take a rest” in a
lovely villa at Formentor in the Balearic Islands, the same
islands which the Government had refused to let me visit
from 1941 to 1943, when Italian submarines were reported
to be refueling there. I had also declined, with thanks, the
offer of a valuable still life by the Basque artist Zuloaga as
a token of the esteem of the Government's press officer. In
addition, I could hardly be condemned as “an enemy of the
Spanish people,” since the oligarchy’s press in the past had
frequently quoted me on the natural beauties of Spain and


SECOND ACT CURTAIN 297


the charm of her people. The authorities, however, did not


like my dispatches on the emptiness of the promises which
the régime made to the people.

The dispatch which the oligarchy finally chose to chal-
lenge was a report about conditions in the Spanish concen-
tration and labor camp of Nanclares de la Oca. I wrote:


Flogging, insufficient food, forced labor, and Fascist
salutes are still the order of the day in the heavily guarded
Nanclares de la Oca concentration camp.

In this camp one hundred foreigners and eight hundred
Spaniards, about half of whom are political prisoners and
the remainder criminals and perverts, all live under terrible
sanitary conditions.


The source of the article which followed was the signed
report of a courageous representative of American Catholic
Charities in Spain, Miss Mary Louise Breen. Miss Breen, in
whose integrity I had complete confidence, had visited the
camp in question and was permitted to talk to the prisoners
by a sympathetic guard in the absence of the camp com-
mander. Naturally, I did not identify my source, for Miss
Breen was still working in Spain.

For a week after my dispatch had been published in the
United States and in South America by newspapers receiv-
ing the service of the Associated Press, there was no official
reaction. The Foreign Minister, Sefior Lequerica, then asked
if I would visit the camp, “where conditions should now be
better.” I agreed.

The “visit” proved to be a guided tour for all foreign cor-
respondents in Spain. After the hour scheduled for our de-
parture on the overnight trip to Nanclares de la Oca in Gov-
ernment limousines, the Government issued a communiqué
denouncing my report as “a stupid campaign of lies designed
to influence the satisfactory state of Spain’s relations


was 2 i


298 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


abroad.” The camp was described as “a health resort” with
“modern sanitary equipment” where the prisoners “enjoyed
many privileges.” Next morning all the newspapers in
Spain — except the newspaper in Burgos where our group
of correspondents spent the night — published editorials on
the order of the Falange press chief portraying me as a
shameless and truthless defamer of Spain. The Madrid daily,
Informaciones, called me “an agent of a political organiza-
tion” — character unspecified but presumably Communist.

We were fully prepared to find the prisoners of Nanclares
de la Oca “eating off gold plates,” as Paul Kennedy of the
New York Times put it. They were not. As a prison in the
oligarchy’s Spain, Nanclares de la Oca was not bad, but it
was not a place to show non-Spaniards. Notes slipped to us
surreptitiously by prisoners told us where to look for hidden
victims of beatings by guards, gave us the names of prison-
ers who had died, and provided us with statistics on the
political prisoners. Then, when we had talked to a few
prisoners, the camp commander, a former Foreign Legion
lieutenant, roared at us: “I know what they told you! They
said they were beaten — yes — they were beaten and they'll
be beaten again tonight!”

This was a ridiculous scene. The commander put armed
guards at the door and told us that unless I signed a state-
ment which he had dictated proclaiming Nanclares to be a
model prison, we all could spend the night “and many more
nights” in the camp. The oligarchy’s little plot exploded.

When we returned to Madrid, I radioed the Associated
Press:


As I said a week ago — “Flegging, insufficient food, forced
labor, and Fascist salutes are still the order of the day at
Nanclares de la Oca.” I have a correction to make. Con-
ditions are worse than I believed. ...


Re


SECOND ACT CURTAIN 299


My eye-witness report, fully confirmed by the dispatches
of my colleagues of the American, British, and French press,
was completely ignored by the Spanish press. Not another
word was published by the press about Nanclares de la Oca,
although all newspapers, like Vanguardia of Barcelona, had
said: “Soon the truth about Nanclares de la Oca will be
spread around the world because most of the foreign journal-
ists are gentlemen of honor!”

Blandly ignoring most of the evidence we had obtained
at Nanclares de la Oca, the Director General of Public
Security insisted that there were no political prisoners in the
camp. When we asked him why certain men were in the
camp, he explained that they were not political prisoners,
they were charged with “disturbing the public order.” Short-
ly after our visit, however, the camp commander of Nan-
clares de la Oca was dismissed, not because conditions were
bad, but because he had failed to put on a satisfactory show
for us.

My restoration to official tolerance was rapid and amus-
ing. I was asked to speak at the Falange school of journal-
ism where all young newspapermen seeking jobs on Spanish
publications are given their political education. I declined.
Radio Nacional, a State-controlled chain of stations run by
the Falange, invited me to broadcast. My refusal led them
to suggest that I give the same lecture on the freedom of
the press in the United States which I had given to a group
of Spanish publishers and Government officials under the
auspices of the United States Embassy. Again I refused.
Radio Madrid, a station operated independently of the Fa-
langist chain, asked me to inaugurate a series of interviews
with foreign correspondents in Spain. To this I agreed, for
Radio Madrid then was striving to attain some independ-
ence from Government control, and was co-operating with
the United States Embassy radio expert, Robert S. Kieve.


300 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Censorship refused to permit any mention of the Nanclares
incident on the radio or in the press.

Through the United States and British broadcasts in Span-
ish, however, the Government’s silence was explained. Many
doors were opened to me which previously had been closed
to all foreigners. Republicans by the score wrote me, giv-
ing detailed reports of other prisons in Spain which made
Nanclares look like the model prison the Government
claimed it to be. Socialists and Anarchists made rendezvous
with me in country inns and cafés in the workers’ quarters
of Madrid to tell me of their activities. Republicans, includ-
ing a university professor then working as a ragpicker, in-
vited me to their homes.

The Nanclares incident was not without its seamy side.
The Minister of the Interior, who found an occasion to apol-
ogize to me personally, explained that the Government's
“error” in the Nanclares case was due in part to the fact that
an American newspaperman then visiting Spain for business
purposes had participated in the drafting of the com-
muniqué denouncing me. In the end, however, regular cor-
respondents in Spain profited by the affair. The Govern-
ment took more care in handling the foreign press. The
police agent who checked my movements for a week after
the Nanclares incident was withdrawn.

The Family's propaganda campaign shifted. The new
tack was: “Perhaps we are not perfect, but Communism is
much worse and there is no middle way.”

At the end of 1945, I asked for home leave, long overdue,
and a new assignment in my own country after eleven years
in Europe. The Spanish authorities chose that occasion to
show the foreign press that neither I nor my press associa-
tion was on their “black list.” They wanted to meet my suc-
cessor, Alburn West, under the best possible circumstances.
They also wanted an opportunity to show their new regard


SECOND ACT CURTAIN 301


for the whole Anglo-American press. Accordingly they sent
me an engraved invitation:


THE SUB-SECRETARY OF POPULAR EDUCATION
SALUTES


Mr. Charles Foltz, Jr., Director of the Associated Press
in Spain, and has the honor to invite him to lunch on
Thursday, September 20, at 2 in the afternoon at the
Journalists’ Club of Jaime Balmes, Calle del Pinar, 5.
Gabriel Arias-Salgado y de Cubas offers you on this
occasion the testimony of his most distinguished con-
sideration.


The invitations received by my colleagues of the press
explained that the luncheon was to be given in my honor.
Many such banquets had been held for German, Italian,
Portuguese, Argentine, Romanian, Hungarian, Croat, Slo-
vak, and Japanese newspapermen, but this was the first at
which the guest of honor was to be a representative of the
press of the United Nations.

Neither I nor my colleagues had ever heard of the
“Journalists’ Club of Jaime Balmes.” We found it to be a
luxurious mansion with cork floors, fine furniture, and mod-
ern plumbing. There was a bar downstairs and another
upstairs with free drinks for all comers. There was a read-
ing room whose tables were filled with the latest American
and British magazines; there was a library whose shelves
were bare because the censorship had not yet caught up
with the times and was not permitting the importation of
American and British books.

Our hosts explained to their mystified guests that they
had chosen this occasion to inaugurate the “Journalists’
Club of Jaime Balmes.” To answer our questions the host
had to ask his secretary to identify Jaime Balmes, an obscure
philosopher of the nineteenth century. We were told that


=e Sse


302 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


this mansion was to be a club for American and British
newspapermen in Spain which they hoped we would use
frequently. There was no charge; bar bills and telephone
bills would be paid by the State. What had the building
housed before? Everyone was rather vague.

It was an interesting luncheon. I sat to the right of the
sub-secretary, an earnest and disarmingly frank clerical Fa-
langist who had once told me that the Spanish press would
be interested in obtaining the services of the Associated
Press, “if your organization can help us abroad.” Across the
table was Juan Aparicio, one of the founders of the old
JONS, predecessor of the Falange, who was still Press Direc-
tor, a wealthy editor in his own right and a man with great
respect for his own ability. He liked to be called “the Span-
ish Goebbels” while the Nazis were winning the war. To
my right was Eugenio Montes, a mediocre writer then in
charge of the Spanish Institute in Lisbon. He was consid-
ered the leading intellectual of the Falangist Party.

Montes sought to dominate the conversation by the fa-
miliar method of shocking his listeners into an argument. It
was indeed a pity, he said, that Germany had lost the war,
for now Europe could choose only between the ignorant
dollar imperialism of the United States and the intelligent
but equally imperialistic theories of the Communists. When
the Americans and their satellites, the British, had done
with looting Europe, he said, they would come crawling to
Spain for help against the Bolsheviks. Fortunately for the
Americans, Spain would help. A bootblack on the Puerta
del Sol knew more of the world than our men of State. Did
not we, who knew Spain, agree with him?

No, I said, we did not, but we were surprised to find a
Falangist who was not afraid to repeat now what the whole
Falange had written for years until we started winning the
war. My host looked worried. Aparicio hastened to say


al


SECOND ACT CURTAIN 303


”


that Montes “is a writer, an artist, and must be excused.
So Montes and I exchanged insults happily through the
luncheon which concluded with both Montes and Aparicio
proclaiming themselves to be “Christian Communists,”
whose “spiritual home is in the Cathedral of Toledo.” We
rose to drink toasts. The Spanish officials drank “To an
anti-Communist America — may she win the next war.” I
drank “To the people of Spain — may they be free.”

Back in my office I still puzzled over the Instituto Jaime
Balmes. I consulted the Madrid telephone directory which
lists its subscribers not only by name, but by street address.
There was no Instituto Jaime Balmes, but I found two tele-
phones listed under the Calle del Pinar, 5. The subscriber
given at that address for April of 1945 was the Asociacidn
Hispano-Germano.

Our files revealed that the last banquet given by the His-
pano-German Association at the Calle del Pinar, 5, was in
honor of General Wilhelm Faupel of Berlin, the first Nazi
Ambassador to the Family’s Spain and the sponsor of His-
panidad. This banquet had been held in February, 1945.

It was indeed a proper farewell to the Family’s stage,
then being set for the curtain of Act II.


S=Se3s*


13


INTERMISSION


HERE ARE SOME MEN OF GOOD WILL among the members of
the Family.

I know priests who preach the tolerant faith of Rome
rather than the reactionary Catholicism of Toledo, but none
of them expect to become bishops while the Family rules
Spain. They only hope to survive the whirlwind of anti-
clericalism which they expect to result from the present pol-
icies. In these priests lies the hope of Roman Catholicism in
Spain. One day they may join laymen in forming liberal
Catholic movements such as those which have emerged as
powerful forces in France and Italy. In Spain today there
is little chance that such movements can be formed, for
every child’s catechism defines liberalism as “a most grievous
sin against faith” and forbids Catholics to read liberal news-
papers unless it be to keep up with the quotations on the
stock exchanges.

I know officers of the Army who believe that the armed
forces should serve rather than enslave the people. They
do not expect to become generals in the Family's Army.
They offer hope, however, that a young element in the Army
may eventually strive to bring democracy to the Spanish
people.

There is a marquis in Spain who believes that titled aris-
tocrats inherit a responsibility to their people along with the

304


|


INTERMISSION 305


lands on which these people live. He is devoting his life
and his exceptional talent as a photographer, a director, and
a script writer to producing educational films for the Min-
istry of Agriculture. These films are designed to show land-
owners that it is good business and good life insurance to
help their “slave stock” earn a decent living from the land.
The marquis is not rich in worldly goods. He hopes that
one day a Spanish Government will make more use of his
ideas.

I know a Falangist, Antonio Correa Veglisén, who hon-
estly believed that the social reforms preached by José An-
tonio Primo de Rivera could be practiced under a Family
Government. He became the efficient, able, and honest Civil
Governor of Barcelona Province, but he was too honest to
court the Americans and British when they emerged as the
victors of the World War. As a result he was removed from
office in 1945.

Such men of good will are a small minority in the Family.
There are also, of course, members of the oligarchy who
depart from the policy of the oligarchy in pursuit of their
own self-interest. Juan March placed his bets on Great Brit-
ain; Franco himself sought to prolong his job as Family
Manager. In general, however, the vast majority have but
one concern and one loyalty: with keeping a firm grip on
Spain. It was this concern and this loyalty which led the
Family to look toward Don Juan, third son of Alfonso XIII,
when the World War ended.

Serrano Sufier played the leading part in the Family’s
masquerade after the Civil War ended, played it until he
began to suffer from the delusion that he was the Family’s
leader. That was Act I.

Francisco Franco stepped into the lead when the Family
still was convinced that the Axis would win the war. When
the United Nations won, the Family still clung to Franco in


306 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


the hope that war between the United States and Russia
would rescue his régime. That was Act IT.

From the first days of the Civil War, the head of the ex-
iled House of Bourbon was looked upon as the logical suc-
cessor to the leading rdéle in the masquerade if Spain were
forced to turn to the democracies for support. That might
be Act III, but the Family was in no hurry.

After all, the masquerade thus far had been fairly suc-
cessful. World criticism of the régime was concentrated on
Franco and the Falange while the oligarchy behind them
both was but dimly seen. The Family could wait to trot out
its new star, Don Juan, until forced to do so. For should
Don Juan fail there was nothing but a republic under Gil
Robles. A fake republic was dangerously close to a real
republic.

The Family decided to wait. From their point of view
it was a wise decision. Spain, forgotten during the World
War, became an issue of the peace. Franco bore the brunt
of the post-war attack; Don Juan profited; the F amily felt
safe.

Through 1945 and the early months of 1946 Bolivia and
Bulgaria broke relations with Madrid. Norway, France, Bel-
gium, and Cuba passed resolutions denouncing “Franco and
the Falange.” The British Foreign Minister Ernest Bevin
told the House of Commons: “We detest the Franco ré-
gime!” Britain protested to Madrid when nine Spanish
Socialists were executed, although Britain had remained
silent since 1939 while tens of thousands of Socialists and
Republicans had perished. In March, 1946, the United
States, France, and Britain issued a joint denunciation of
the “Franco régime.”

To meet such criticism, the régime encouraged certain
meaningless activities. Monarchists resumed their elaborate
plots, letters to Franco and “underground” manifestoes were
multiplied.


—_——


INTERMISSION 307


The press was given “freedom with responsibility.” This
meant that editors could publish what they liked so long as
they were prepared to prove that it was to the régime’s ad-
vantage,

All save about seventy thousand Civil War prisoners were
released on “conditional liberty” after at least seven years
in prison on the charge of “rebellion.” Who, indeed, had
rebelled?

American press correspondents were invited to visit Spain.
Interviews with Franco awaited them. A few, who looked
too deeply into Spanish life, like Sidney Wise, who wrote
for the Saturday Evening Post, and the Catholic liberal,
Doctor Francis McMahon, representing the New York Post,
were forbidden to send messages abroad and were forced to
leave the country.

After several false starts, the United Nations held a full-
dress inquiry into the origin, development, and present
character of the Spanish régime. Poland began the action.
The Poles declared that “Franco Spain” was a threat to
world peace. German Nazi scientists, said the Poles, were
engaged in atomic research, protected by the Spanish Gov-
ernment, and working in Spanish laboratories.

This charge, of course, was absurd. Spain could not even
produce a tractor or a radio receiver; she had no laboratories
capable of undertaking atomic research. Poland, firmly in
Russia's grip, was following the dictates of Moscow. In ad-
dition, Polish Catholics, who remembered how the Spanish
clergy had applauded the Nazi invasion and had received
the loot of Polish churches, were delighted to support the
attack on the Spanish oligarchy.

For nearly a year the United Nations mountain labored.
A subcommittee recommended that all members of the
organization break relations with Spain, but the resolution
which finally emerged from the Assembly concluded as
follows:


308 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


(c) Incontrovertible documentary evidence establishes
that Franco was a guilty party, with Hitler and Mussolini,
' in the conspiracy to wage war against those countries which


\ eventually in the course of the World War became banded

4 together as the United Nations. It was part of the conspir-

im acy that Franco’s full belligerency should be postponed
until a time to be mutually agreed upon.

if Convinced that the Franco Fascist Government of Spain,

|


which was imposed by force upon the Spanish people with

the aid of the Axis Powers in the war, does not represent

the Spanish people, and by its continued control of Spain is

making impossible the participation of the Spanish people
with the peoples of the United Nations in international
affairs;

Recommends that the Franco Government of Spain be
debarred from membership in international agencies estab-
lished by, or brought into relationship with, the United
Nations, and from participation in conference or other activ-
ities which may be arranged by the United Nations or by
these agencies, until a new and acceptable government is

formed in Spain.
t The General Assembly further,

Desiring to secure the participation of all peace-loving
peoples, including the people of Spain, in the community
of ations,

Recommends that if, within a reasonable time, the polit-
ical conditions enumerated above are not realized, the Secu-
rity Council consider adequate measures to be taken in
order to remedy the situation and,

Recommends that all members of the United Nations im-
mediately recall from Madrid their Ambassadors and Min-
isters Plenipotentiary accredited there.


The weakness of this resolution is self-evident. The
United States already had withdrawn its Ambassador to
Spain many months before. Britain’s Ambassador, Sir Vic-
tor Mallet, served only as a figurehead for a large staff of


INTERMISSION 309


professional diplomats and economic experts who remained
in Spain after Sir Victor had gone. Russia had no represen-
tatives in Spain. The Argentine had none either, but
promptly sent an Ambassador to Madrid to show her defi-
ance of the United States.

There is nothing new in the fact that the United Nations
are divided on the Spanish question. Although Catholic
Poland and France want action to oust the Spanish oli-
garchy, many American and British Catholics support Fran-
co. Commercial interests in both English-speaking countries
encourage Washington and London to shiver at the thought
of Communism in Spain. Even the Spanish Americas are
divided on what to do about Spain. Argentina is the Span-
ish oligarchy’s main ally.

There is no need to look far for the common interests bind-
ing the Governments of Spain and Argentina in the “Madrid-
Buenos Aires Axis.” When the Second World War began,
the Argentine oligarchy, like its Spanish cousin, was pro-
German. Spanish and Argentine financial interests inter-
lock closely. After the war, General Juan D. Perén won
the sympathy of many Argentine voters by appearing as the
country’s champion against the United States, the “Colossus
of the North.” Argentine pride did the rest. Thus, when
the United States Government half-heartedly condemned
the Spanish régime, it was not only good business, but good
politics for the Argentine Government to rush to the defense
of the Spanish oligarchy, which also was led by a military
man.

“If Washington advised the other nations to vote against
the Devil,” an Argentine diplomat told me in Madrid, “any
Government in Buenos Aires would seek an alliance with
the Devil — and that despite the fact that we all know God
is Argentinel”

To greet the new Argentine Ambassador, Pedro Radio,


310 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


the Madrid Government staged an elaborate demonstration.
It was, of course, “spontaneous.” The orders sent to all Fa-
langists said so in large print. Thousands of Government
employees appeared beneath Sefior Radio's balcony at the
Hotel Ritz to chant “Franco —Perén! Franco — Perén!”
until the Ambassador appeared to speak to them.

“We must work together,” said Sefior Radio, “for the eco-
nomic reconstruction of Spain and the grandeur and destiny
of Argentinal”

To the “economic reconstruction of Spain,” the Argentine
has contributed the largest foreign loan in its history. Just
after the United States authorized the release of $700,000,-
000 worth of Argentine gold frozen during the war in New
York, the Argentine Government granted Spain a revolving
credit of $87,000,000 and authorized the sale of a $100,000,-
000 bond issue on the Argentine market.

On previous occasions the Argentine had given large
credits for wheat and meat to be paid for with arms and
ammunition from Spanish factories and ships to be built in
Spanish yards — many of the latter British-owned. The loan
negotiated in 1946, however, was particularly appreciated
by the Family. For it was then that economic, not political,
troubles were forcing a change of policy.

Spain, the goose that laid the Spanish Family’s golden
eggs, was sick. Most of the gold had gone to swell the pri-
vate accounts of the governing classes. Too little had gone
for food for the goose.

This is what has happened to a country whose rulers buy
American limousines and nylon stockings for a few instead
of Chilean nitrate and United States farm machinery for the
land on which they live:

During the years from 1931 to 1935, an average of 11,260,-
000 acres were sown in wheat each year. Wheat production
in the same period averaged 160,348,000 bushels, making


INTERMISSION 311


Spain virtually self-sufficient. After the Civil War, the coun-
try’s requirements under rationing were set at about 128,-
600,000 bushels, but land sown in wheat dropped sharply
to 9,625,000 acres in 1947 when production was about 100
million bushels. Rations were cut to a dark biscuit weighing
four ounces; the rich bought white bread at $1.15 a loaf.

Each year under the Family’s rule more land has been
given over to the raising of wild bulls for the ring and to
hunting estates for landowners who found it easier to make
money with the Government’s friendship in the cities. Each
winter the Family’s press promised bumper crops for the
summer to come. Each summer the same press blamed the
weather for food shortages resulting from the greed of Fam-
ily landowners. Workers could buy no meat; the bread they
ate was of poorer quality than the bread they had consumed
in the darkest days of the Civil War.

These conditions did not immediately worry most mem-
bers of the Family. They had a cushion of wealth. Through
the summers from 1939 to the present it has been impossible
to get hotel reservations in the smart resorts of the Bay of
Biscay and the Mediterranean’s Costa Brava without mak-
ing applications in mid-winter. When gasoline sold on the
black market at from $3.20 to $5 a gallon, thousands of pri-
vate cars carried Family members thousands of miles on
pleasure trips through Spain’s highways and byways.

Fantastic sums were spent by the Family to get American
automobiles. Officials in the American Embassy at Madrid,
from departing ambassadors to clerks, found plenty of buy-
ers for the automobiles they brought to Spain during the
war under diplomatic privileges. A 1942 Buick sold for
$35,000; a 1941 Ford brought $25,000. These prices are fig-
ured at the official rate of the peseta, but even at the black-
market rate enjoyed by diplomats the Buick sold well at
$17,500 and the Ford brought $12,500.


312 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


By 1947, the profits which enabled Spaniards to pay such
prices as these for their luxuries began to dwindle alarm-
ingly. Anglo-Spanish wine merchants of Jerez had made
huge sums by selling their sherry and brandy to the United
States and Britain during the war, but as France again be-
gan sending her wines and brandies abroad, Spanish brands
became a glut on the market. For want of exports, the in-
dustrialists of the oligarchy could not buy machinery and
raw materials for their factories. Throughout the world
many buyers found Spain’s wares too high in price.

In the United States, the International Telephone and
Telegraph Company, which, as previously noted here, is get-
ting paid for the Spanish telephone system at a rate depend-
ent on dollars which Spain earns abroad, did what it could
to promote trade. In Britain, the companies owning Span-
ish utility and mining shares sought to boost Spain’s trade
and promote loans to Spain, but with little success.

Business failures began to increase. The workingman
showed a dangerous spirit of rebellion. There were “sit-
down” strikes in Barcelona’s textile mills. A general strike
of twenty-five thousand Basque workers, ardent supporters
of their exiled leaders, paralyzed Basque industry for forty-
eight hours in the spring of 1947. Power restrictions through-
out the country, at first blamed by the Government on the
lack of rainfall, continued after heavy rains because the
power companies had taken out profits in dividends rather
than buying needed equipment.

The Family realized that Spain needed more credit in the
dollar and sterling areas. Britain’s Labor Government
quietly signed a clearing agreement with Madrid calculated
to improve Anglo-Spanish trade. The United States bought
Spanish cork and other goods for an average of $4,400,000
a month during 1946. But this was not enough.

When President Truman asked Congress to approve the


INTERMISSION 313


expenditure of $400,000,000 to bolster Greece and Turkey
against Russian pressure, no Government in Europe praised
his action with more enthusiasm than the Family’s Govern-
ment in Madrid. At last the United States was to use her
dollars to fight the Russians in Europe. Long editorials in the
Spanish press hailed President Truman as they had once
hailed Adolf Hitler. A new champion had taken the field
against the Communist monster! Spain’s rulers, “the first to
rise against Communism,” praised the Americans and
offered them Spain’s aid. If, in return, the Americans chose
to aid Spain. .

It was obvious to all members of the Family that the
United States could not extend credits and loans to a Span-
ish Government which Washington had publicly condemned
as Fascist. Clearly the time had come to change Spain’s
Government — but how?

It was improbable that the mere substitution of another
general for Francisco Franco would be sufficient for the
Americans. There were, therefore, but two possibilities —
the monarchy or a republic.

Ever since the Spanish Civil War began, Don Juan had
been groomed for such a moment as this. He had waited
long and obediently; he was acceptable to Britain; the
United States did not oppose him. The people of Spain, if
asked to make a choice between Franco and Juan as the
Family’s manager, would undoubtedly choose Juan as long
as there was no opportunity to state their preference for a
republic. The people, like the Family, knew that their re-
public had been born under Alfonso XIII.

It is unfair to condemn a king without trial, but there is
little indication that Juan would be other than a convenient
“front man” for the oligarchy. His career so far has been
carefully managed by Family representatives; he has shown
no signs of bolting.


314 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


General Juan Vigon, for many years the Air Minister in
Franco’s cabinet, was the officer charged with supervising
the education of Alfonso XIII’s third son during the mon-
archy. His responsibilities were shared by a Jesuit priest,
and by the Queen Mother, a granddaughter of Britain’s
Queen Victoria.

When the monarchy fell in 1931, Don Juan was enrolled
as a cadet in the Spanish Naval Academy near Cadiz. A
Spanish destroyer took him to Gibraltar. A few months later,
he was a cadet in the British Navy. Under the Union Jack
the Spanish Prince covered about fifty thousand sea miles,
most of them in Indian waters, and acquired tattoos on his
forearm which pleased his father, but shocked the Queen
Mother. By 1935 he was “on leave” from the British Navy,
doing the European resorts with his father. Bourbon match-
makers found him a cousin, Maria de las Mercedes de Bour-
bon-Sicily, for a bride. As the Spanish Republic foundered,
Don Juan took up residence in Lausanne, Switzerland.

A few weeks after the Civil War began in Spain, Don
Juan rushed to the French resort town of St. Jean de Luz,
just across the border from Spain. Young noblemen, who
had fled to France from San Sebastian at the first sign of
trouble, gathered around him. One night Don Juan slipped
across the frontier with a group of friends and appeared at
Vitoria, safe in rebel hands. He wore the red beret of the
Carlists, the blue shirt of the Falangists, and an Army jacket.
He sent a messenger to General Emilio Mola, commander of
the northern forces, to report that the Prince of Asturias,
heir to the throne of Spain, desired to volunteer as a soldier
in the Army.

Mola was annoyed. His main source of volunteers was
the Carlists who were by no means united on the question
of the Spanish succession. The Army plot which preceded
the rebellion called for a military directorate, not a mon-


INTERMISSION 315


archy. The Germans, who had promised to aid the rebels,
would not be pleased with a movement to place a Bourbon
with a reserve commission in the British N avy on the throne
of Spain. Mola ordered Juan to go back to France. Juan
obeyed.

The young Prince told French newspapermen that the
forces led by Mola and Franco were engaged in “a true
Christian crusade.” He praised the Army, he praised the
Carlists, he praised the Falange. From Lausanne he wrote
Franco twice, begging for a commission in the land or sea
forces. Franco, after consulting with leading members of
the Family, refused. In 1937, a delegation of noblemen and
Army officers went to Lausanne to tell Alfonso XIII and
Don Juan of their plans. I talked to members of this dele-
gation.

The agreement made in Lausanne was that Don Juan,
not his father, would be recalled to rule in Spain “at the
proper moment.” The royal lands and properties were to be
restored to the Bourbon family. It was then that a young
diplomat from the Foreign Ministry and a colonel from
Franco's staff were assigned to act as Don Juan’s aides,
which they remain today.

Alfonso XIII died in Rome in 1941. His first son, Alfonso,
had died a victim of hemophilia, the blood disease called
“the curse of the Bourbons,” after surrendering his rights
to the throne. The second son of Alfonso XIII, Don Jaime,
was a deaf mute who renounced his claim to the succession.
Don Juan, the head of the Spanish Bourbons, issued a brief
manifesto establishing his rights to rule in Spain and re-
mained in Lausanne, waiting.

Not until the armies of the Axis were chased out of North
Africa did the Family’s advisers let Juan declare his posi-
tion on world and Spanish politics. From 1943 to 1946,
when Juan moved to Lisbon via London, these manifestoes


316 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


were increasingly frequent. The first of them praised Fran-
co, but, as the criticism of Franco and his régime from the
United States and Britain grew in volume, Juan’s mani-
festoes turned into denunciations.

By 1947, the Family was engaged in staging a remark-
able sideshow. Don Juan in Lisbon and Franco in Madrid
were trying to act as bitter enemies. Yet, while Don Juan
denounced Franco, his civil and military aides still were
those appointed by the Madrid Government; and while
Franco ignored Don Juan personally, he was busily en-
gaged in preparing the Spanish stage for a return of the
monarchy.

Finally, while the American Congress was debating anti-
Communist loans to Greece and Turkey, Franco took a step
which showed the Family’s choice. On April 1, the world
read of Franco's decree declaring Spain to be a monarchy.

The decree was heavily loaded with conditions. When
Franco died or quit, a regency council, consisting of prom-
inent members of the oligarchy, were to decide on the Span-
ish succession. The successor to Franco must be “a person
of royal blood,” a male over thirty years of age, Spanish,
and a Catholic. He must also swear to uphold the “funda-
mental laws” of the Franco régime.

These laws were enumerated. They included the “Span-
ish Bill of Rights,” still awaiting completion by the Cortes,
and the Bill of Labor Rights, the document which gives the
Falange a monopoly over all labor organizations in Spain.

Don Juan knew of the text of this decree long before its
publication. It had been approved by Franco's cabinet
which included a number of Monarchists; it had been draft-
ed with the full knowledge and agreement of the leading
figures of the régime. Even foreign newspapermen in Spain
had advance knowledge of the decree.

Nevertheless, the absurd game continued. Don Juan sol-


|


INTERMISSION 317


emnly met with his advisers, including Gil Robles, in Lisbon.
Nearly a week later, which was ample time for foreign
newspapermen to gather in Lisbon, Don Juan issued his
reply to the Franco decree in the form of a proclamation to
the Spanish people. It was “a complete and uncompromis-
ing refusal to consider the restoration of the throne to Don
Juan through Generalissimo Franco or to recognize the lat-
ter’s right to determine the succession.” (The New York
Times.) Don Juan said that “present world hostility to us
arises chiefly from Franco's presence as Head of State.” In
other words, with Franco gone, the oligarchy would be ac-
ceptable to everyone — except the Spanish people.

It was a long proclamation. Its authors, José Maria Gil
Robles and Pedro Saenz Rodriguez, were able politicians.
They knew, as the leaders of the Family in Madrid knew,
that the description of Franco’s successor as stated in his
decree also fitted another candidate for the Spanish throne,
“Don Carlos VIII,” who was living on the Government’s
money in Barcelona.

This former automobile salesman could not be taken seri-
ously by Spaniards as a claimant to the throne; but he was
“of royal blood,” he was over thirty years of age, he was
Catholic, and he had become a Spanish citizen. Was it not
possible that Franco could eventually name “Don Carlos”
as his successor? To be sure, the handsome pretender could
not last long — even the majority of the Carlists scoffed at
his claim to their support. But, whether he lasted one day,
one month, or one year, “Don Carlos VIII” would provide
an answer to the problem of how Don Juan was to return to
the throne of the Bourbons without seeming to take his
royal mantle from the hands of Francisco Franco.

It was a wild plan, but it was indeed a plan. If carried
into execution, it would add credence to the fiction that
Franco had no use for Don Juan, that Franco was indeed


>-=—s =


318 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Spain’s dictator, desperately seeking a monarch of his own
choosing. “Don Carlos VIII” could accept Franco's “funda-
mental laws.” Then, if necessary, he could surrender the
throne to his distant cousin, Don Juan. Once on the throne,
Don Juan could sweep aside the Franco legislation to show
the world that he was an independent monarch.

A distinguished member of the Cortes once told me that
it was the Family’s plan to let the Cortes make a gesture of
real power as soon as it was decided to drop Franco. What
better gesture could be found than to have the Cortes reject
“Don Carlos VIII” and call for Don Juan to take the throne
of his forefathers?

Such schemes as these were born of fear. The Family was
afraid that a Bourbon king might be less useful for their
purposes than Franco. Franco, reserved and secretive, a
military man of no mean ability, at least gave the appear-
ance of a dictator with a mind of his own. Don Juan was
less impressive. With Don Juan as king, the world might
look behind the throne to see the same oligarchy as that
which had backed Franco. In that event, the United States
might conclude that the people of Spain were not yet free,
might insist on elections which would send the kind of
Cortes to Madrid which even the astute Gil Robles could
not manage.

Until such a time, Spain would have to be content with
the kind of “plebiscite” which the Family arranged as a
means of obtaining the “nation’s approval” of Franco's law
of succession. In July, 1947, Spaniards went obediently to
the polls where they were required to vote “Yes” or “No” on
the law of succession, with full knowledge that the police
would check on all votes. The Cardinal Primate urged all
Spanish Catholics to vote “Yes.” Some two million
Spaniards, stripped of their political rights for the crime of
defending the legally constituted Government eleven years


INTERMISSION 319


before, did not vote, but that did not matter. In any pleb-
iscite which permitted officials at each polling place to burn
the ballots after the count, there would be no doubt that
the Government would win. The result of the July, 1947,
plebiscite was 12,628,983 “Yes” votes, 643,500 “No” votes,
295,208 blank ballots, and 25,669 ballots nullified — or so
the Government announced.

Even had this particular plebiscite been free and unfet-
tered, however, the people of Spain probably would have
voted “Yes.” For the régime itself was not at stake; a “No”
vote might have discouraged the Family from bringing in
a monarchy which could be weaker than Franco’s régime.
Had the plebiscite been held to settle the question of what
régime the Spaniards desired, the results would have been
quite different.

After years of residence in Spain, it is my conviction that
the great majority of the people of that country desire a re-
publican form of government. This does not mean that a
majority desire the Republican Constitution of 1931. The
Spanish people have learned much about the dangers and
virtues of democratic government after five years of a repub-
lic, two years and nine months of civil war, and more than
eight years of dictatorship. This is one of the reasons why
the Spanish “Government-in-Exile” is not very popular in
Spain.

I found little enthusiasm, much distrust, and not a little
hatred for the exiled leaders. For the Communists and their
fellow travelers, notably the former Premier, Doctor Juan
Negrin, there is little but open hate or deep distrust. To
many of the other exiled leaders, the Spanish people are
completely indifferent. In the Basque provinces, José An-
tonio Aguirre, last President of the autonomous Basque
State, is a hero. Indalecio Prieto, the Right-Wing Socialist
leader, is perhaps the only one of the exiles with a follow-


320 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


ing in many parts of the country. Both men are Basques.

The Basques, an ethnic mystery among the peoples of
Europe, are not Spanish’ by race, although they have lived
on the Peninsula longer than other peoples. Ardent Catholics,
their Catholicism is the universal faith of the Church of
Rome rather than the nationalistic Catholicism of the
Church of Toledo. They are an upright, hard-working,
hard-drinking people living on both sides of the Pyrenees,
in France as well as in Spain. They were free men when
Europe was in feudal slavery; they won a treaty from Brit-
ain in which the principle of the freedom of the seas was
first established. Basque love of labor and economy made
Bilbao the seat of heavy industry and banking capital of
Spain; the Basques joined forces with the Nationalists
against the Family when the Civil War began.

In 1938, treachery and Axis arms leveled the “iron ring”
of defense around Bilbao. Basque priests were shot with
the knowledge of the Spanish clergy; Basque priests still
languish in Spanish jails for the “crime” of having remained
with their flocks against the hierarchy’s orders. Falangists
from Madrid, officeholders from Castile, brutal and ignorant
Civil Guard soldiers from Galicia took over the Basque prov-
inces and tried to stamp out the last vestige of Basque free-
dom and the Basque language.

They did not succeed. Through the years of the Family’s
rule, Basque messengers crossed the frontiers on smugglers’
trails in constant communication with Basque exiles. In
1947, when the Falangist organizer of Cuba, Genaro Riestra,
was Civil Governor of Vizcaya Province, the Basques tied
up industry with a strike involving twenty-five thousand
workers. No people in Spain hate the Spanish Family more
than do the Basques, no people in Spain are more devoted
to their own clergy than the Basques, who have little save
scorn for the priests sent them from Madrid at the order of


INTERMISSION 321


the Spanish clergy. In the countryside, in the villages and
towns of the Basque country I found that Aguirre’s popu-
larity amounted to adulation.

Prieto is admired principally because he led the minority
wing of the Socialist Party which opposed the Communists.
Almost alone at the end, Prieto never ceased to oppose
Communist efforts to take complete control of the Spanish
Republic during the Civil War. Not until the latter part of
1938 was Negrin, spurred by the Communists, able to shake
Prieto out of the Republican War Ministry.

Negrin is justly or unjustly considered by most Spaniards
to have been the willing tool of the Communists during the
Civil War. Few Spaniards will forgive or forget the Com-
munist drive for power at a time when the rest of Spain’s
people were fighting shoulder to shoulder to preserve their
republic.

There is the matter of Spain’s gold, a story which the
Family's propagandists have told again and again in the
Spanish press. Salvador de Madariaga, historian and writer,
as well as many another who sympathized with the Repub-
lic, confirms it. This is what happened when Negrin was
Minister of Finance.

On October 25, 1936, 510,000,000 grams of gold, worth
approximately $300,000,000 and representing more than
two thirds of the Bank of Spain’s reserves, were loaded
aboard a ship at Cartagena. Four officials of the Bank of
Spain, in whose custody the gold was placed, thought they
were taking it to France. When they finally landed, it was
at Odessa.

The gold reached Moscow with its Spanish guardians on
November 6, 1986. Two years later, the Spaniards were in-
formed that Russian officials still were counting the gold,
most of which was in sovereigns. The Spaniards were per-
mitted to leave Russia, but by different routes. One was


322 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


sent to Stockholm, one to Washington, a third to Buenos
Aires, and the fourth to Mexico. “It was then,” says Mada-
riaga, “that Russia suddenly became the second largest ex-
porter of gold in the world.”

Negrin may argue that the gold was sent to Moscow in
payment for arms received and to cover future purchases,
but Spaniards ask why it was not deposited in France,
Switzerland, Belgium, or the Netherlands where the ac-
counting could be controlled. Certainly when the war
ended, a comfortable balance must have remained to Spain’s
credit. As it is, neither Negrin nor the Russians have volun-
teered to say how much of this gold is still owed to Spain.

Negrin was the last Premier of the Republic. He proposed
to continue resistance when the people of Spain wanted
peace. He gave the orders which turned the Communist
army corps against the people of Madrid. Negrin is not pop-
ular in Spain, but, fortunately for the Exile Government,
Negrin is Premier no longer.

Manuel Azaiia, President of the Republic, resigned when
Britain and France recognized the Family's Government
early in 1939. Azafia died in 1940, but Negrin continued to
regard himself as head of the Republican Government.
Under Negrin’s leadership, still influenced by the Commun-
ists, a Spanish refugee relief organization called SERE was
organized, but soon the survivors of the Cortes abroad or-
ganized another relief group called JARE. JARE, as the
Spanish Liberation Committee, sent delegates to the San
Francisco Conference of the United Nations.

In August, 1945, a bare quorum of the Spanish Republi-
can Cortes met in Mexico City. The Mexican Government
declared the building in which they assembled to be Span-
ish soil. This Cortes chose Diego Martinez Barrio, who pre-
viously had been President of the Cortes in Spain, as the
new Provisional President of the Republic. Negrin, thus


INTERMISSION 323


forced to recognize Martinez Barrio’s authority, tendered his
resignation as Premier. Doctor José Giral was chosen to
form a new cabinet.

The Government thus created contained representatives
of all the parties which had won the February, 1936, elec-
tions. Gradually, impressed by American and British reluc-
tance to take strong steps to overthrow the Madrid régime,
the Giral Government leaned more heavily on the resistance
within Spain.

Two powerful labor organizations are the core of this re-
sistance. UGT (Unidn General de Trabajadores) is led by
Socialists who do not like the Communists, CNT (Confed-
eracién Nacional del Trabajo), whose leadership before and
during the Civil War was almost exclusively Anarchist, now
has shifted away from the Anarchists, but has their support.
Both labor organizations have better underground groups
within Spain than any political party.

At the request of these two groups, Giral quit as Premier
to make way for a cabinet which would be more representa-
tive of the resistance within Spain. Cipriano Mera, one of
the leaders of the 1939 rebellion against Negrin, came out of
Spain at the head of a CNT resistance delegation to meet
the exiles in Toulouse. Moderate premiers, first Rodolfo
Llopis and then Alvaro Albornoz, followed Giral as the
nominal leaders of the Government-in-exile. Prieto, how-
ever, remained the strongest of the exiles.

Prieto sought an anti-Communist union of Republicans
and Monarchists for a “caretaker government” acceptable
to the democracies and the Vatican. British Foreign Secre-
tary Ernest Bevin received Prieto and Gil Robles in London
during October, 1947.

While Gil Robles talked glibly of “union against Franco,”
however, he and other Monarchist leaders were negotiating
with the Spanish régime. As fellow-members of the oli-


|


324 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


garchy, the Monarchists suggested that Franco retire volun-
tarily or that the oligarchy stage a palace revolt to please
world opinion. Thus, Don Juan could obtain the throne with
the oligarchy’s political machinery intact, ready to get out
the vote. Such a plan appeals more to the Monarchists than
an alliance with exiles who may insist on free elections in
Spain.

The Spanish exiles are pitifully weak. Inside Spain the
organized resistance is also weak. Present-day Spain is a
police state. The Army guards the arms in its possession
jealously. When a rifle is lost in a conscript regiment, the
military police go to work and some unfortunate may be
shot. Sooner or later, however, the people of Spain will find
the way to escape the Family’s rule.

How soon the Spanish people may enjoy self-rule de-
pends on the United States, Great Britain, and France. If
they stand idly by, the Spanish people may look elsewhere
for support.

“Non-intervention” still means what it did in 1936 — in-
tervention for the other side. In 1936, Germany profited
from the so-called “non-intervention” in Spain. At present
those who are benefiting are the Communists and Russia.


Ud


ACT III—AS YOU LIKE IT


“WHERE ARE THE FRIENDS OF THE PEOPLE OF SPAIN?”

The man was close to tears; I wondered whether I should
have come. This was no Communist leader, protected by
his own gunmen and sometimes by Falangist gunmen too.
This was no Anarchist. This man was no underground
worker. He was an ordinary citizen whose political range
scarcely extended beyond the block of tenements in which
he lived. He was a bookbinder who did not even own his
own shop, but worked for another. Before the Civil War he
had a little business of his own, but when the Nationalists
revolted, he closed it to defend the Republic from behind
the barricades.

Because he was a little man of no particular importance,
the Falangists released him on “conditional liberty” after
four years of prison. He was crippled with arthritis. Two
sons had perished in the Civil War, one machine-gunned
from a German plane, the other executed by the National-
ists. While he was in prison his wife had died of hunger and
tuberculosis.

This man had risked his liberty to seek me out, to ask me
to his home. When I came, he apologized for presuming
that what he had to say was important enough to waste my
time. His apologies embarrassed me, for he, not I, ran the
risk.

325


326 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


“Where are the friends of the people of Spain?

“I say we are trapped, trapped with no hope of escape.
For every Falangist there are one hundred Republicans; for
every Monarchist there are one thousand Republicans; for
every Communist there are ten thousand Republicans. For
all of that, we are trapped. Why? I will tell you why.

“The Falangists had many friends, powerful friends, the
Germans, the Italians, the Japanese. Defeated? Perhaps.
May God will it so! But the Falangists are not defeated.
They are only taking off their shirts. In the syndicate to
which I belong the Falangists still are the little dictators.
We must give the Fascist salute when we go to meetings.
Spain is the only country in the world where this salute of
slavery is required. Perhaps tomorrow they will tell us we
need no longer salute thus. Perhaps tomorrow we will
awaken to find that we are a monarchy with a Bourbon in
the palace. It will not matter. A Falangist will still be
running my syndicate.

“The Communists have friends too. The Communist
Party is strong in France, though France is still free. Russia
is the strongest power in the world save for the United
States. The Communists do not hate the Falangists too
much — you know that. Good Communists make good Fa-
langists because they have discipline — remember? José An-
tonio said that. It also works the other way. Good Falan-
gists will make good Communists. But through all these
years with Franco on our backs there still are not twenty
thousand Communists in the whole of Spain, in jail or out
of it.

“The Monarchists, the bankers, and the big businessmen all
have useful allies. Talk to the men in your country who sold
oil and trucks to Franco, talk to the men of Wall Street and
the City who have invested in Spain, listen to the mission-
aries we send abroad and their friends in religious Orders.


ACT Ill — AS YOU LIKE IT 327


They are all Monarchists now. Franco himself is a Mon-
archist, and he has friends enough abroad to keep him in
power. But where are the friends of the people of Spain
who are neither Falangist, nor Communist, nor Monarchist?

“You say they are in the United States, in Britain, and in
France. That may be true. Your people sympathize. They
are passive allies. They permit their Governments to listen
to Franco and all his friends, claiming that unless they stay
in power there will be Communism in Spain. Washington
and London are willing to have Franco or a Bourbon rule
Spain against the will of the people because they fear that
the people are Communists.

“Your Government still has an embassy in Spain. Many
Americans are employed there. Do they all believe we are
Communists? Tell me, you who have lived among us. Do
you believe that a people which has fought as we have
fought, even on our knees close to death, would surrender
to those whom we know to be our enemies as soon as we are
given our liberty? Do you believe that the Spanish people
who fought the Fascists until they could fight no more, but
turned to fight anew and conquer the Communists who had
betrayed them —do you believe that these people would
surrender their Spain to Moscow?

“No. You do not think so.”

I did not think so. I thought it would be a matter of
months before the United Nations or the Government of
the United States, together with the Labor Government of
Great Britain, would put an end to the shame of Spain.

I went back to the United States and listened to the de-
bates in the United Nations at New York and at Lake Suc-
cess. They had a familiar ring, these debates. I had watched
the League of Nations dying of discussion in Geneva. I had
heard debates like these before — sterile, though filled with
impressive words. Here was no peoples’ parliament. Here


328 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


were the Governments again, represented in many cases by
the same men I had seen in Geneva.

There was no hope for Spain in the United Nations, for
the nations were not yet united.

I went to Washington. At the State Department there
were more questions than answers.

“Why should we be concerned about Spain? We have
Russia in Germany, Russia in Poland, Russia in Austria, Rus-
sia on the frontiers of Greece, Russia in Iran, Russia in
China. Perhaps Franco is a Fascist, perhaps Don Juan is a
friend of Fascists, but at least they are not Communists.
Why should we be concerned about Spain?”

We should be concerned about Spain because this coun-
try belongs neither only to Europe, nor to Africa, nor to the
Americas, but to the world.

Spain is Roman and Mediterranean. Jews who speak the
tongue of Cervantes circle the rim of the Mediterranean
from Asia Minor to Algiers and Marseille. The people of
old Phoenicia live today in Valencia.

Spain is African. She has been deeply influenced by
Islamic civilization. The Alhambra of Granada and the
Mosque at Cordoba are wonders of the world; the Moors
left more than architectural monuments. The music of
Southern Spain is African and Islamic, not European and
Christian. “Scratch the Spaniard and find a Moor” is not an
empty phrase; Spaniards are the living link between the
peoples of Europe and Africa.

Spain is American. The Argentine or Bolivian with a bit
of Spanish blood looks to Madrid with pride of descent; the
Colombian, Cuban, and Mexican wonder impatiently at the
old ways of their mother country. The fact remains that the
vast majority of the people south of the Rio Grande are
linked to Spain by bonds of blood and culture which will
always keep them interested in Spanish affairs.


ACT HI— AS YOU LIKE IT 329


In Asia, the Philippines bear the imprint of Spanish civil-
ization. Spanish missions constitute cultural islands through-
out the Orient.

The Spanish problem, strategically as well as intellectu-
ally, is a world problem. The land which dominates the
western entrance to the Mediterranean still is important to
sea power. Air power brings the well-protected flying fields
of the Spanish mainland close to North America via the
Azores, to South America via Africa.

“Exactly!” say the military men of the Western Powers.
“For strategic reasons we prefer your Spanish F amily to the
Communists. Why should we encourage the return of a re-
public which would open the door to Communism and to
Russia?”

Such logic, followed to its natural conclusion, would sug-
gest that the United States and Britain might both be
stronger against Russia if Fascist Governments ruled in
Washington and in London. The fact is, however, that
Americans and Britons make poor Fascists and poor Com-
munists. So do Spaniards.

The danger of Communism does exist in Spain. An in-
telligent people are impatiently seeking liberty. Because
they are intelligent, they would prefer to find liberty through
those countries which now enjoy it. If they see that the
democracies refuse them help, if, despite publicly expressed
distaste, the democracies tolerate the Family régime, then
Spain’s people may turn reluctantly toward Communism.

Existing bitterness may one day turn to desperation. At
present there is a real hatred of Communism in Spain; to-
morrow it may be weakened by the growing disgust with
democratic doctrine without democratic action.

The free world must not again underestimate its rivals.
The Communists gained swiftly in underground organiza-


330 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


tions in France, in Yugoslavia, in fact everywhere in Occu-
pied Europe. Shall we encourage the growth of a Com-
munist underground in Spain?

The Spanish oligarchy indeed seeks to be the ally, not the
enemy, of democracies. Franco himself has said that his
Spain would side “with the nations of the West against Com-
munism.” Don Juan, while condemning “foreign interven-
tion in Spain,” is eager for the support of the United States
and Britain. The Family wants the Western world to tol-
erate, even protect, its Government, not only against Com-
munism, but against democratic movements within Spain.

At the end of the Second World War, the Madrid Gov-
ernment agreed to permit American military planes carrying
troops to fly over Spanish territory or to land in Spain if
mecessary. This was to permit a speedy evacuation of Amer-
ican forces from Europe. In exchange, United States Army
technicians helped the Spanish Air Army expand its air
fields with equipment purchased from American surplus
stores. This agreement was still in effect in 1948. The Span-
ish oligarchy is quite prepared to permit American troops
to land in Spain in the event of a war between the United
States and Russia.

Military policy makers in Washington are, of course,
pleased with this arrangement. Such considerations led the
American delegation to the United Nations Assembly to
block further action by the United Nations against the Span-
ish régime in November, 1947. Since then, the movement to
accept the Spanish oligarchy’s régime as a member of polite
democratic society has grown rapidly.

The French Government, early in 1948, reopened its fron-
tiers with Spain, thus ending a one-nation boycott which
hurt France more than Spain. The Spanish oligarchy, confi-
dent that it soon would be getting American dollars through


ACT IIT— AS YOU LIKE IT 331


the Marshall Plan, picked an emissary to seek private credits
in New York. The man chosen was the Count of Fontanar,
Francisco de Borja Carvajal, whose wife is an Urquijo and
who represents the banking family which prospered while
the Spanish oligarchy was doing business with Nazi Ger-
many.

Toleration of the Spanish oligarchy plays into the hands
of Russian policy. International Communism has few weap-
ons to use against democracy which can resist the power of
a free press. The Politburo in Moscow is aware of this. The
masters of Moscow also realize that one of the most useful
of the weapons in their hands is Spain.

It was not out of charity that Soviet Russia gave aid to
the Spanish Republic after the Axis Powers made it possible
for the Spanish Family to fight the Republic. The reasons
behind Russia’s help to Madrid had little to do with the
strategic value of Spain itself. Lenin once said that Mexico
and Spain would be the first to join the Soviet Union with
a Communist régime, but time proved Lenin wrong. Lenin’s
successor learned in 1936, in 1939, and now, that Spaniards
hate Moscow’s Communism only a little less than they hate
the Family’s oligarchy. The Spanish Republic had no diplo-
matic relations with the Soviet Union until it began to fight
for its life. Today’s Communists, however, have learned that
the Spanish people in slavery make far better propaganda
for their cause than the Spanish people free.

Most of the free world recognizes that a grave injustice
has been done to the people of Spain. Since July of 1936,
the leaders of Communism throughout the world have cap-
italized on that injustice. While the democracies pursued a
policy of “non-intervention” during the Civil War, of “ap-
peasement” during the Second World War, and of “tolera-
tion” at present, the Communists won countless sympa-
thizers.


332 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


They have done this by linking their own cause with the
cause of the Spanish people outside Spain. They have spon-
sored rallies in many countries “against Franco” and “for
the Spanish people.” They have raised and still are raising
millions of dollars in contributions for the “Spanish cause”
— dollars which go only to Communists or their sympa-
thizers. Communists play on the sympathy of world labor
for Spanish labor; strikes, begun to boycott Spanish ships in
European ports, end as Communist membership drives.

Within Spain the people are well aware of Russia’s aims.
They learned through bitter experience that the Communists
are interested only in promoting the Communist cause.
Even the Spanish “Government-in-Exile” stands further to
the political right than most of the Governments of Western
Europe.

“What do we want in Spain?” American and British offi-
cials say: “We know what we don't want, but we are not
agreed on what we do.”

The reason why neither the American nor the British Gov-
ernments can say what they want in Spain is that they have
not yet made a clear statement as to what they do not want
in Spain. They have declared their dislike for “Franco and
the Falange” — true. How it delights the Spanish oligarchy
to hear such phrases as that, taken directly from the lines of
their own masquerade! If Franco and the Falange are all
that the United States and Britain do not want in Spain,
how long will it take the democracies to decide that they do
not like the Family Government which stands behind Fran-
co and the Falange? Judging by past practice, it will take
years.

It may be true, as some writers frequently predict, that
the “collapse of the Franco régime” lies just around the
corer. It seems more likely, however, that the “Franco
régime” will fall only to make way for another of the oli-


ACT III — AS YOU LIKE IT 333


garchy’s régimes, another act in the masquerade. Already
the oligarchy has profited by a Government which outlasted
the Republic and survived the colossal mistake of choosing
the wrong side in a World War.

In my opinion, the United States and Britain should de-
clare that they are opposed to any régime in Spain which is
not desired by the Spanish people. The question is not how
to replace “Franco and his Government,” but how to oust
the Spanish oligarchy. Governments may be appointed by
any régime, but the régime itself holds power. To smash
dictatorship by oligarchy, the régime, not just the Govern-
ment, must be changed according to the will of the people.

There are but two ways for the people of any country to
declare their will. One is by revolution and force of arms.
There has been bloodshed enough in Spain; the world and
the Spaniards agree to that. The other way is by the free
exercise of their vote.

There are, of course, certain prerequisites for free elec-
tions. To exercise the right to vote freely, the voter must be
protected by certain basic liberties. Three will do — free-
dom of speech and press, freedom of assembly, and free-
dom to require Government to show cause for its arrests.
For freedoms such as these the democracies fought the Sec-
ond World War.

In Spain, these three freedoms are enjoyed only by mem-
bers of the Spanish oligarchy. Were they granted to the
Spanish people under a régime capable of maintaining
order, free elections would soon be held.

American and British officials who tolerate the present
régime in Spain state that they believe their Governments
should not favor one régime against another. This, they say
truthfully, would be “interference in the internal affairs of
Spain.” It is curious that these same officials are not in the
least concerned about their Government’s interference in


334 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


the internal affairs of other countries scattered across the
face of the globe.

Both Franco and Don Juan, speaking for the Family, have
said that “the internal affairs of Spain are matters for Span-
iards themselves to decide.” This is not the whole truth.
The internal affairs of Spain are matters for all Spaniards
to decide.

At present the great majority of the Spaniards have no
real voice in their own government. This may also be true
in Yugoslavia, Bulgaria, Romania, Poland, and other coun-
tries which lie within the Russian sphere of influence. Spain,
however, is not within the Soviet sphere today. As the lead-
ers of the Spanish oligarchy themselves so loudly proclaim,
“Spain is in the Western world.”

In the minds of many leaders of the American State De-
partment and the British Foreign Office there is a strange
confusion between the words “liberation” and “interven-
tion” when Spanish affairs are discussed. France was “liber-
ated” from the Vichy régime, placed in power by German
support. Norway was “liberated” from her Quisling Gov-
ernment, set up with German support. Spain, however, is
not to receive American and British help to be “liberated”
from the oligarchy’s régime, which took power with the help
of German arms, because that would be “intervention.”

The question now facing the democratic Governments of
the West is how to “liberate” Spain so that her people may
be free, so that all Spaniards may be free to decide their
internal affairs.

Not so long ago it would have been an easy matter to
deal with the Spanish problem. When the Spanish Civil
War began in 1986, prompt diplomatic action by Britain,
the United States, and France would have forced Germany
and Italy to abandon their military aid to the oligarchy’s
Army. In that event the Spanish Republic could have de-


ACT III~— AS YOU LIKE IT 335


feated the forces of the oligarchy without Russia’s help. In-
stead, however, the United States, Britain, and France re-
fused to sell arms to the Government they recognized as
legal. Sumner Welles, Under Secretary of State during this
period, has said this decision by the United States “consti-
tutes the greatest error in the foreign policy of this country
during the past twelve years.”

Through the Second World War military considerations
led the United States and Britain to appease the Spanish
oligarchy. When Berlin fell, however, the democracies
failed to break relations with Spain.

As matters now stand, there still are many ways of liber-
ating Spain without the use of arms. Here is one way:

The United States and Britain could break diplomatic re-
lations with the Madrid régime. Since there always is a
great deal of “buck-passing” between Washington and Lon-
don, let us say that the United States should take this in-
itiative. The United Nations should be informed and should
be asked to urge its member States to do likewise. The Rus-
sians could not object; France and most of the other United
Nations would follow suit.

Through the United Nations or, if delaying tactics by
Russia or the Argentine made essential speed impossible, as
a unilateral action with the suggestion that other United
Nations conform, the United States or Britain or both
should then set a schedule for future steps. At fixed dates
the scheduled United States, British, and French commer-
cial airlines now serving Spain might be halted; committees
might be established to list Spanish Government and private
assets abroad; studies could be undertaken to ascertain what
economic sanctions could be taken against the Spanish oli-
garchy which would least affect the Spanish people.

Spanish-language broadcasts on United States and British
stations beamed to Spain, so effective during the Second
World War, should be utilized to interpret these steps to


336 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


Spaniards. It should be clearly stated that the nations con-
cerned were intervening in order to enable the Spanish peo-
ple to declare through free elections what type of régime
they desired — the present State, a constitutional monarchy,
or a republic.

It is my profound conviction that the present régime is
so close to economic collapse for want of foreign exchange
that a clean break in diplomatic relations with nothing more
than a study of economic sanctions by the democratic Pow-
ers would be sufficient to lead the Family to negotiate for a
provisional government.

There are other ways of obtaining a change in Spain,
ways which require less initiative by the United States Gov-
ernment and may therefore be more acceptable.

For example, the billions of dollars now flowing to Europe
may be used not only to block the spread of Communism,
but also to crush the anti-democratic régime in Spain. If
Washington is not willing to help the democratic enemies of
the Spanish oligarchy, let it at least refrain from helping the
oligarchy.

Spain need only be kept outside the Marshall Plan and
trade with Spain need only be discouraged, not banned.
Such a policy would warn off private investors. It would be
acceptable to Western Europe, for all of the governments of
the Marshall Plan countries, with the sole exception of
Portugal, have publicly denounced the Spanish régime.

Claims against the Spanish Government, now pigeon-
holed, could be pressed. The British Government is with-
holding a bill for damage done to British property during
the Spanish Civil War which totals millions of pounds.
France should demand the return of French property
handed over to the Spaniards by the Vichy régime on the
order of the Germans. Other countries have similar claims.

World trade with Spain, already small due to the high


ACT III— AS YOU LIKE IT 337


prices of Spanish goods, would dwindle still more. Europe
can do without Spain’s exports, but the Spanish oligarchy is
not prepared to go without imports from the rest of the
world. Spanish businessmen, losing their profits, already are
talking of a change. Noblemen are ready for a monarchy.
The clergy is concerned because Spaniards are turning their
backs on the Church. And the Army may be ready to “pro-
nounce” again, this time, if necessary, for something like
democracy.

It must be remembered that the Spanish Army, the corps
of professional officers, is the Family’s strongest and also its
weakest branch. It is the strongest branch because no up-
heaval within Spain could succeed without the backing of a
part or all of the Army, and because the most difficult prob-
lem for any provisional government would be the task of
maintaining order. The Army is also the weakest branch of
the Family because the generals know that sooner or later
one of them will take the first step toward another régime.
No general wants to be the last to take this step.

The part which the Army is to play in a provisional ré-
gime must be determined by direct negotiations between
Spaniards. The objective of foreign pressure should be to
convince the generals, and the oligarchy which stands be-
hind them, that the time has come to undertake such nego-
tiations.

The generals would enter negotiations with considerable
bargaining power. They would seek to keep Foreign Legion-
naires, Moorish troops, and other Regular soldiers on the
Peninsula during the period of provisional government. The
Republicans, on the other hand, would want these troops
sent to Africa, leaving conscript troops under Regular Army
officers to keep order in European Spain.

Among the generals there are other possible leaders of a
move away from the “Franco-Falange” combination in ad-


338 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


dition to the “Monarchist” Kindelan, the militarist Varela
and the “Republican” Aranda. Unfortunately for the Re-
publicans the lieutenant general who is most seriously and
earnestly interested in social reform and in the democratic
processes is one whom they could not accept — Lieutenant
General Agustin Mufioz Grandes. This officer, one of the
tew who is popular among conscript troops, became a Fa-
langist in the hope of attaining social reform through this
route, but was assigned to the command of the Blue Legion
against the Russians. Though he returned after a year’s
service to warn the Army, as early as December, 1942, that
Germany could not defeat Russia owing in part to United
States arms, Mufioz Grandes could hardly be the sole leader
of a provisional military government.

There are pitfalls, many of them, in all of the possible
courses toward solution of the Spanish problem. One of
these pitfalls lies in the suggestion of Giménez Fernandez,
a former Minister of Agriculture under the Republic, who
lives in Spain because he was a member of the Gil Robles
party. In his favor it must be said that he was one of the
few members of the Gil Robles group who spoke openly for
real agrarian reform.

Giménez Fernandez suggests a provisional government,
representing all sectors of opinion from Monarchism to
Communism. This government is to have a maximum life
of one year. Its representatives in the provinces are to be
persons who held official posts prior to the Civil War. He
proposes that such a government call for a plebiscite to de-
termine by universal suffrage whether the Spanish people
desire a republic with the Constitution of 1931 or a mon-
archy with the Constitution of 1876 and Don Juan as king.

On the surface, this solution may appear sound to many.
It is unsound, heavily weighted in favor of the Family. First
and foremost, the persons still in Spain who held official


ACT III— AS YOU LIKE IT 339


positions before 1936 are almost all Rightists appointed by
the 1934 to 1936 Governments, or by the Governments of
the monarchy. Any election managed by these officials
would be a landslide for the monarchy.

More important, however, is this: The issue in Spain is
not one between the Monarchy of 1876 and the Republic of
1931, but between a new monarchy and a new republic.
Spain should not be offered a choice between two constitu-
tions, both of which failed to provide sufficient elasticity
for a stable régime. Spain should be offered a choice be-
tween two régimes under either of which Spaniards could
write their own constitution through their elected repre-
sentatives.

The first act of any provisional régime should be to decree
amnesty for the three hundred thousand Spanish exiles and
some seventy thousand political prisoners. A provisional
board of examiners could examine the so-called “criminal”
charges pending against some exiles, although most of these
charges are based on political ground.

Free assembly, free speech, and a habeas corpus should
be established by decree. In the interests of public order
the Provisional Government should have authority to ban
street parades and demonstrations and to arrest all citizens
carrying arms. The Provisional Government should also
utilize all means of propaganda for a non-partisan campaign
to get out the vote.

The first vote should be a plebiscite to determine whether
the Spanish people desire a constitutional monarchy or a
republic. The second vote should be an election of members
to a Constitutional Cortes. From this Cortes should be
drawn the membership of the second Provisional Govern-
ment. Adoption of a constitution would be the beginning
of a permanent régime.

What now is lacking to start the Spanish people toward


340 THE MASQUERADE IN SPAIN


freedom is not the way, but the will. It seems to be easier
for the American and British Governments to drift; easier
to condemn “Franco and the Falange” with words, postpon-
ing action; easier to watch the Spanish masquerade, ready to
applaud when the oligarchy chooses to lift the curtain on
Act III. The democratic Governments seem to fear that gov-
ernment of the people, by the people, and for the people,

‘ the type of government for which their people fought and
won the Second World War, is not strong enough to stand
on its own feet in Spain. This may be true, but it is certain
that a Spanish régime based on the sovereignty of the peo-
ple will sooner or later prove stronger than any oligarchy
with its masquerade of dictatorships, monarchies, and “cru-
sades” against Communism.

There are other Spains. What happens in Spain will show
anti-democratic forces the world over what they can and
cannot do. If the United States does not face the issue in
Spain, it will find the same issue arising throughout the
world. It is up to the free peoples and their Governments
to face the question which struck to my heart and my head
when a little man, weeping unashamed in his Madrid garret,
cried to me:


“Where are the friends of the people of Spain?”


THE END


NOTES, SOURCES, AND BIBLIOGRAPHY


IN THE FOLLOWING CHAPTER-BY-CHAPTER NOTES reference is made
to books published in Spain which were not previously available
in the United States. Those books marked with an asterisk are
part of a collection which I made in Spain during the Civil War
and after. Many now are banned by the régime, for its policy
has changed many times since 1987 when the first books in de-
fense of the oligarchy were published in Seville, Cadiz, Sala-
manca, Burgos, and San Sebastian. This collection, comprising
more than a hundred volumes in addition to various pamphlets,
magazines, and newspapers, has been contributed to the Library
of Congress at Washington. Representatives of the Library, ac-
tive in Spain for more than a year, have acquired a vast store
of material on the history of the Civil War, the origin and devel-
opment of the Falange, the intricate history of the Carlist move-
ment, the organization of the Spanish clergy, and many docu-
ments and volumes which are examples of militarism, Fascism,
National Socialism, and other totalitarian creeds preserved in the
Spanish vivarium under the rule of the oligarchy.

Most of the material used in this book is the product of direct
reporting within the oligarchy’s Spain. It was my good fortune
to witness the birth of the Spanish oligarchy’s “new régime” dur-
ing the Civil War as a war correspondent for the Associated
Press. Knowledge of the origins of the régime, gained from per-
sonal contact with the noblemen, churchmen, businessmen, and
soldiers of the oligarchy at a time when many of them doubted
that their cause would triumph, was of great value in observing
341


342 NOTES, SOURCES, AND BIBLIOGRAPHY


the development of the Spanish régime after the Civil War. In
addition, many years of foreign correspondence for the Associ-
ated Press in other countries of Europe have been useful in seek-
ing to estimate the importance of Spain in world affairs.

After 1941, when I returned to Spain, the oligarchy was doing
its best to prevent any word of the writings of Spanish exiles
and of foreign observers of Spain from penetrating into the coun-
try. Through the facilities of the United States and British Em-
bassies in Madrid, foreign correspondents were able to escape
this vacuum and keep up with the books and articles on Spain
written outside the country. Censorship on outgoing copy, how-
ever, continued to the end of the Second World War, and even
now continues in the form of threats and pressures familiar to
all correspondents working in totalitarian countries of Left or
Right. It is for this reason that some of the events reported in
this book, although readily available within Spain, were not
previously reported to the outside world.


Cuapter 1. THe SpANisH THEATER


Among the many fine books on Spain the best, in my opinion,
are two written a century ago, both of which are classics of
English literature. One is George Borrow’s The Bible in Spain,
first published in 1842, a year after his The Zincali, An Account
of the Gypsies of Spain. The other is Gatherings from Spain by
Richard Ford, a friend and contemporary of Borrow’s. All three
books are available in the reprints of Everyman’s Library, E. P.
Dutton and Company, New York, although I know of no mod-
ern edition of another fascinating book by Ford, The Handbook
for Travelers in Spain. These four books, like Théophile Gau-
tier’s Voyage en Espagne, are as valuable to students of the
Spanish countryside and the character of Spaniards as any mod-
ern volume and are far better written than most.

Washington Irving’s Conquest of Granada and Tales of the
Alhambra give a fascinating picture of Spain under the last of
the Moorish kings. Prescott’s Ferdinand and Isabella is the
classic covering the reign of the Catholic Monarchs, but I also


|
|


NOTES, SOURCES, AND BIBLIOGRAPHY 343


have used a version of the same reign by a member of the oli-
garchy — Los Reyes Catélicos, José Maria Doussinague, Madrid,
1945 — the better to appreciate the debt owed the Catholic Mon-
archs by their modern heirs.

There are many histories of Spain in English, French, German
and Spanish. In writing this book I have relied chiefly on the
following:

Spain, A Short History, H. D. Sedgwick, Boston, 1937; a bright,
readable volume.

A History of Spain, C. E. Chapman, New York, 1925.

The Rise of the Spanish Empire in the Old World and the
New, R. B. Merriman, New York, 1922; an able and scholarly
work covering Spain’s “golden era.” .

* Historia de Espafia, Marcelino Menéndez Pelayo, Cultura
Espafiola, Madrid, 1941 (4th edition, prologue by Jorge Vigén);
the account of Spain’s past which has won the approval of the
oligarchy.

La Historia de Espafia Contada con Sencillez, José Maria
Peman, Cadiz, 1940; a well-told and simple account of Spanish
history by a poet-politician of the oligarchy whose book is de-
signed for school-children and is filled with propaganda.

For the events of the nineteenth century and the period im-
mediately preceding the fall of the monarchy, I found two books
invaluable. One is Spain, Jonathan Cape, New York, 1942, by
Salvador de Madariaga, briefly Minister of Education under the
Republic and now a Fellow of Exeter College, Oxford. The other
is The Spanish Labyrinth, Cambridge University Press, 19438, by
Gerald Brennan, an English resident of Spain who returned to
London during the Spanish Civil War to complete his shrewd
analysis of the problems of modern Spain. Madariaga’s history
is penetrating; Brennan’s work contains an able examination of
the agrarian question and an interesting report of the origins and
development of the Anarchists and Anarcho-Syndicalists. Both
books contain valuable bibliographies.

For studies of the Spanish character I found the following
books of interest — Havelock Ellis’s The Soul of Spain; José
Ortega y Gasset’s Invertebrate Spain; Madariaga’s Englishmen,


\


344 NOTES, SOURCES, AND BIBLIOGRAPHY


Frenchmen, Spaniards, and Miguel Unamuno’s En Torno al
Casticismo.


Craprer 2. Preopie’s PRELUDE


E. Allison Peers, Professor of Spanish in the University of
Liverpool and editor of the valuable Bulletin of Spanish Studies,
is the author of The Spanish Tragedy, 1930-36, Methuen and
Company, Limited, London, 1936, which may serve as a guide to
events under the Republic. The works of Madariaga and Bren-
nan, previously cited, also are able reports of the period. The
files of the London Times contain the best day-by-day account of
events which I was able to find.

Much of the biographical material on Francisco Franco which
was published during and after the Spanish Civil War must be
combed carefully for propaganda of Left or Right. Any one of
Franco's classmates at the Infantry Academy, for example, can
report that he was next-to-last in the class, but in Toledo they
say that Franco was at the head of his class — and the records are
missing. The material to which I had access includes the fol-
lowing:

® Marruecos, Diario de una Bandera, Commandante Franco,
Editorial Pueyo, Madrid, 1922; Franco’s own account of the
record of his battalion of the Foreign Legion. This is his only
book.

Franco, Joaquin Arraras, Libreria Internacional, San Sebastian,
1938, also published as Francisco Franco: The Times and the
Man, Milwaukee, 1938. The official biography until 1943.

®* Francisco Franco, Ernesto Giménez Caballero, Salamanca,
1988, cited in Chapter VIII, is valueless for factual material, but
is evidence of the Franco cult.

General Franco, Emilio Diez, Sevilla, 1940, contains some bio-
graphical data omitted from other biographies.

* Francisco Franco, Fernando de Valdesoto, Aguado, Madrid,
1943, the official biography, edited by Franco, which devotes
only six of 396 pages to Franco's first twenty years.


NOTES, SOURCES, AND BIBLIOGRAPHY 345


CuaptTer 3. Tue STAGE 1s SET


There is material on the Army plot in the following books:

° Preparacién y Desarrollo del Alzamiento Nacional, F elipe
Bertran Giiell, Libreria Santarén, Valladolid, 1939, is a report of
unusual detail concerning the development of the plot which led
to the Civil War. The author gives names, dates, and places of
numerous meetings of those interested in overthrowing the Re-
public. These meetings began in June, 1931, but the first com-
plete plan of the military, the text of which is given, was dated
April, 1936. This book was banned within a few days of its
publication.

* Mola, Datos para una Biografia y para la Historia del Alza-
miento Nacional, José Maria Iribarren, Libreria General, Zara-
goza, 1938, is a biography of the general who commanded the
Army on the Spanish mainland by Mola’s secretary. This book
was also banned promptly because, among other indiscretions,
it properly identifies Mola as the chief of the rising in Spain.

La Verdad Sobre La Guerra Espaiiola, Doctor V. Carro,
Tipografia Comercial, Zamora, 1938.

El Movimiento Nacional, Liebana y Orizana, Imprenta Vi-
cente, Valladolid, 1938.

* Requetes en Navarra antes del Alzamiento, Jaime del Burgo,
Editorial Espafiola, San Sebastian, 1939, places the military prep-
arations of the Carlists before the Civil War in the proper per-
spective, complete with photostatic copies of military documents.

The following books are useful for account of events preced-
ing the Civil War and for an interpretation of developments
within the Republic during the early days of the war:

The Spanish Cockpit, Frank Borkenau, London, 1987; an ex-
cellent analysis of the forces in conflict which emphasizes the
division between “the upper classes” and “the people.”

Life and Death of the Spanish Republic, Henry Buckley, Lon-
don, 1940; a report of events by a liberal correspondent.

The Civil War in Spain, Frank Jellineck, London, 1938; a re-
port by a British sympathizer of the Left which contains much
interesting material.


346 NOTES, SOURCES, AND BIBLIOGRAPHY


What is lacking in the story of the Spanish Civil War is an
able report of the war by a British sympathizer of the oligarchy.
The following are propaganda books, short in facts:

The Spanish Arena, William Foss and Cecil Gerahty, Right
Book Club, London, 1937.

The March of a Nation, Harold G. Cardozo, London, 1937.

Spanish Rehearsal, Arnold Lunn, London, 1938; the author
spent several weeks in Spain and does not speak Spanish.

The Spanish books cited hereafter contain less propaganda
than most books by the English-language apologists of the
régime:

* Historia Militar de la Guerra de Espafa, Manuel Aznar,
Madrid, 1940; the official report of military operations by the
régime’s most able journalist.

® Operaciones Militares de la Guerra de Espafia, Luis Maria
de Lojendio, Barcelona, 1940; a more superficial report by a
clerical Monarchist.

* 18 de Julio, Guzman de Alfarache, FE, Sevilla, 1939; a report
of the rising in Sevilla which destroys the myth that Queipo de
Llano took the city “with a few dozen soldiers.”

* Galicia en Guerra, Luis Moure-Mariiio, Ediciones Espajiolas,
Madrid, 1939; an account of the rising in Galicia temporarily
authorized, which gives, among other interesting data, the text
of Franco’s birth certificate.

° Memorias de Un Azul, Ricardo Gutiérrez, Salamanca, 1939;
a Falangist account of the Civil War in its early stages, banned
because it attempts to give the Falange credit for much of the
Army’s work.

* Historia de la Revolucién Espafiola, Alfonso G. de la
Huguera y Velazquez y Luis Molins Correa, Cadiz, 1940.

* El Sur de Espafia en la Reconquista de Madrid, Sanchez del
Arco, Sevilla, 1987.

* Rutas de la Victoria, Felipe Bertran Gill, Barcelona, 1939;
no more successful than the volume by the same author pre-
viously cited. This book was banned because the author reports
that “of fifteen hundred Falangists in Sevilla” only fifteen turned
up to fight when the Civil War began.


NOTES, SOURCES, AND BIBLIOGRAPHY 347


° Aire, Tierra y Mar, J. Garcia Mercadal, Zaragoza, 1939.

° La Guerra de Reconquista Espafiola y el Criminal Comu-
nismo, Enrique Esperabé de Arteaga, Madrid, 1939. This book
contains not only a history of 365 pages, but also 300 pages of
obituaries, with photographs, of well-to-do members of the oli-
garchy who were killed in action.

° El Alzamiento, La Revolucién y El Terror en Barcelona,
Francisco Lacruz, Barcelona, 1943; how the Army lost and finally
recaptured Barcelona, with a propaganda account of Republi-
can rule during the Civil War.

* Mallorca Salvada, Major Norman Bray, Palma de Mallorca,
1987; a British resident of Mallorca gives an account of the Civil
War in the island which was utilized by the oligarchy’s propa-
ganda services abroad.

° Guerra en el Aire, Joaquin Garcia Morato, prologue by
Franco, Editora Nacional, Madrid, 1940; the flight record of the
Army’s Civil War ace which fixes the dates when German and
Italian planes were in use in Spain.

* Estampas y Reportajes de Retaguardia, Juan de Cordoba,
Ediciones Espajiolas, Sevilla, 1938; a little information and much
propaganda about life on the Republican side of the Civil War
as seen by observers of the oligarchy, living underground.

* Un “Faccioso” Cien por Cien, Manuel Goded, Zaragoza,
1939; an account of the early days of the Civil War in Barcelona
and the Balearics by the son of General Goded, executed by the
Republic after his failure to capture Barcelona for the oligarchy.

* Los Sucesos de Espafia Vistos por un Diplomatico, Aurelio
Nujiez Morgado, Buenos Aires, 1941; an account of the early
part of the Civil War by the former Chilean Ambassador in
Madrid who gave many members of the oligarchy asylum in his
embassy. Though one-sided in its sympathy for the oligarchy,
the book contains an interesting statement by the philosopher,
Miguel Unamuno, issued on November 1, 1936, in Salamanca.

“The truth is that we are on the verge of an international war
on our national territory,” wrote the philosopher, who at first
had condemned the Republic, but now was disturbed by the
sight of German troops and Spanish Falangists marching past


348 NOTES, SOURCES, AND BIBLIOGRAPHY


his university. “What a sad thing it would be if, in place of a
barbaric Bolshevik régime, anti-social and inhuman, another
régime would appear which was just as barbaric, anti-social, and
inhuman. Neither one nor the other (Fascism nor Communism),
for, at the bottom, they are one and the same” (pp. 168-170).

Unamuno died before the Civil War ended.

"La Tragedia Espanola en el Mar, Mauricio de Oliveira,
Cadiz, 1937-38, 4 volumes; the work of a Portuguese newspaper-
man written for publication under Spanish and Portuguese cen-
sorship, but containing valuable material on the collaboration
between Spanish Nationalist warships and German and Italian
fleet units.

® El Crucero Canarias, Proa a la Victoria, Alvaro Fuentes,
Espasa-Calpe, Madrid, 1940.

* Pdginas de Gloria de la Marina Nacional Espafiola, Francisco
Vallés Collantes, Cadiz, 1938.

For an account of the participation of Italian troops in the
Spanish Civil War these may be consulted:

La Guerra Civile in Spagna, General Francesco Belforte, In-
stituto per gli Studi di Politica Internazionale, Milan, 1938-39,
4 volumes, of which the last two, covering the Italian campaigns,
are particularly useful.

Las Tropas Flechas Negras en la Guerra de Espayia, Sandro
Piazzoni, Editorial Juventud, Barcelona, 1941; a translation into
Spanish of an approved Italian work.

For the Catholic clergy’s view of the Civil War the following
books are useful:

* El Resurgir de Espana, P. Juan Rey Carrera, S.J., Editorial
Espafiola, San Sebastian, 1938; a Spanish Jesuit reports on the
alliance of the clergy and the Army, supporting the oligarchy
with ample quotations from Vazquez de Mella and Menéndez y
Pelayo.

Guerra Santa, A. de Castro Albarran, Prologue by Cardinal
Goma, Primate of Spain, Burgos, 1938; with the approval of the
chief of the Spanish clergy, the author sets out to show that the
Civil War is “a holy war.”

* El Glorioso Movimiento de Espafia, Maria del Pilar Ibafiez


NOTES, SOURCES, AND BIBLIOGRAPHY 349


de Opacua, Madrid, 1941; a history of the plot and the Civil War
published by a religious order with clerical approval which de-
scribes the new State as “national, totalitarian, and corporative.”

* El Mundo Catélico y la Carta Colectiva del Episcopado
Espanol, Burgos, 1938; a report of world reaction to the support
given the oligarchy by the Spanish Episcopate.

* El Derecho al Alzamiento, A. de Castro Albarran, Salamanca,
1941; a clerical writer, basing his argument mainly on clerical
authorities, defends the thesis that the Army’s rebellion was com-
pletely justifiable under clerical and civil law.


Cuapter 4, A New Mask — THE FALANGE


For the material in this chapter I am particularly indebted to
several “Old Shirt” members of the Falange before the Civil War
who gave me access to documents in private libraries. Public
libraries in Spain now are stocked only with the heavily censored
current accounts of Falange “history.”

Since the Falange pretends to unite all of the Family’s polit-
ical movements, and since Falangist strength after the Civil War
began came chiefly from Monarchist, Carlist, and similar groups,
the following books have been consulted:

* Obras Completas de Don Juan Vazquez de Mella y Fanjul,
Imprenta Subirana, Barcelona, 1985; the best source for a study
of the works of the Asturian Carlist leader of the period preced-
ing and following the First World War whom many believe to be
the forerunner of Mussolini in Fascist thought. So well did
Vazquez de Mella, who died in 1928, define modern Fascism
from 1910 to 1918 that the Falangist censorship not only ap-
proved the publication of one selection of his works, * Mella,
Guidn de Espafia, Editorial Espafiola, San Sebastian, 1939, but
also published a volume of their own, Los Tres Dogmas Nacio-
nales, Madrid, 1941, and distributed quotations from his works
in many pamphlets.

* Defensa de la Hispanidad, Ramiro de Maeztu, first published
in Madrid, April, 1934, republished in a fourth edition, Cultura
Espafiola, Madrid, 1941. This last edition contains a valuable


350 NOTES, SOURCES, AND BIBLIOGRAPHY


preface by Eugenio Vegas Latapie, reporting Maeztu’s close
association with José Antonio and other Falangist leaders in the
period preceding the Civil War. Vazquez de Mella, not Maeztu,
might best be credited with the idea of Hispanidad, for it was
Vazquez de Mella who suggested that Spain lead the Spanish-
speaking world as the ally of Germany, the master of Europe.
Maeztu, however, gets the credit for his “Defense” of Hispa-
nidad. Maeztu, whose mother and wife were English, lived fif-
teen years in Britain. He wrote a book in praise of the Nazis
entitled Hitler y el Nacional-Socialismo, Madrid, 1935, and was
killed in Madrid during the Cvil War.

* El Estado Nuevo, Victor Pradera, Madrid, 1934, republished
by Cultura Espajiola, Madrid, in 1941; the work of a Carlist
whose “New State” follows the pattern first set by Vazquez de
Mella.

* Accién Espafiola, Burgos, 1937; an anthology of contribu-
tions to a periodical of the same name which first appeared in
December, 1941, and served as a vehicle for the anti-Republican
writings of Carlists like Pradera, Monarchists like Calvo Sotelo
and Maeztu, and Falangists like Eugenio Montes and Giménez
Caballero. An excellent source book to study the unification of
the ideologies of the Spanish oligarchy with those of the Fascists
and Nazis.

For the story of the Carlists, in addition to the Jaime del Burgo
book previously cited, the following are important:

* Historia del Carlismo, Rom4n Oyarzun, Ediciones FE, Bil-
bao, 1939; a well-detailed history up to the death of “the last
Carlist King, September 29, 1936” (pp. 584-85), now banned be-
cause the oligarchy has found a new Carlist pretender, “Carlos
VII.”

* Boinas Rojas en Austria, Ignacio Romero Raizabal, Burgos,
1936; an account of Carlists in exile.

* Veteranos de la Causa, Jaime del Burgo, Editorial Espafiola,
San Sebastian, 1939; an account designed to glorify the cruel
and fanatical Carlist guerrillas of the nineteenth century.

* El Pensamiento Carlista, Artes Graficas, Buenos Aires, 1940;
an interesting booklet published in Argentina, but designed only


NOTES, SOURCES, AND BIBLIOGRAPHY 351


for underground circulation within Spain. It condemns the
Carlists of the “Accién Espafiola” group, opposes the return of
Don Juan as King of Spain, and denounces the Serrano Sufier
Falange.

* La Verdad del Tradicionalismo, J. E. Casariego, Madrid,
1940; an account of Carlism by a Carlist newspaper editor who,
like Esteban Bilbao, Minister of Justice who writes a prologue,
joined the Falange in 1937 and is considered a traitor by the
mass of the Carlists, followers of Manuel Fal Conde, anti-Falan-
gist advocate of a clerical corporative state.

For the history of the JONS and the Falange, the following
are the best published sources:

El Fascismo en Espajia, Roberto Lanzas, Madrid, 1935. This
is the rarest source book on the Falange, for it was banned by
both the Republic and by the oligarchy. Its author is Ramiro
Ledesma, founder of the JONS. The book was written after
Ledesma’s break with José Antonio; it tells not only of the origin
of the JONS and the fusion with the Falange, but of the battles
of personalities and ideologies within the Party before the Civil
War. I know of only two copies in Spain; there may be a few
more in other private libraries.

La Conquista del Estado, the periodical, was published for
six months in 1931 by the JONS group. There are a few com-
plete collections in private libraries. Juan Aparicio, as chief of
the Falange press directorate, published a collection of articles
from the periodical under the title * La Conquista del Estado,
FE, Madrid, 1939, which contains a prologue of historical in-
terest.

* Ramiro Ledesma, Educacién Popular, Madrid, 1941, is an
incomplete biography of the founder by Juan Aparicio, although
published anonymously.

El Fascio, the magazine, appeared only once on March 16,
1933. It was banned by the Republic. Plans to issue facsimile
copies were wrecked by the oligarchy’s censorship which con-
sidered the content too Fascist in character to be published
while Spain was accepting appeasement from the democracies.

F.E., Arriba, and No Importa, successively the weeklies issued


352 NOTES, SOURCES, AND BIBLIOGRAPHY


by the Falange, also are rare, but the Falange has issued fac-
simile collections: * Arriba, Ediciones Fe, 1942, and ° F.E., Edi-
tora Nacional, 1948, both in Madrid.

* Facismo, Catolicismo, Monarquia, Marqués de la Eliseda,
Madrid, 1985; another attack on the Falange, but this time on an
ideological plane by the Monarchist who quit the Falange in
November, 1934, calling it a hideout for Marxists. The Marqués,
at that time a deputy in the Cortes, writes of “Catholic Fascism”
which he says may best be obtained under a monarchy.

* Historia de la Falange Espajiola de las J.O.N.S., Francisco
Bravo, Ediciones Fe, Madrid, 1940; a history of the Falange by
a Falangist.

* Anecdotario de las J.O.N.S., Guillén Salaya, Yugo y Flechas,
San Sebastid4n, 1938. An important account of the JONS up to
the fusion with the Falange by a former Anarchist Syndicalist.

* Vieja Guardia, Gumersindo Montes Agudo, Aguilar, Madrid,
1989; a Valladolid Falangist, aide to Onésimo Redondo, writes a
book containing a number of photographs of the early meetings
of the Falange with enough interesting material to have the book
banned by the post-war Falange.

* Hay Que Hacer la Revolucién Hispdnica, Ramiro Ledesma
Ramos, Editora Albero, Madrid, 1931, a curious booklet by the
founder of the JONS addressed to Ramén Franco and signed by
the eleven original “Jonsistas.” It is a bid for the support of the
brother of Francisco Franco, a bid which Ramén refused, to
move instead toward the Marxist Left and his death.

* Hacia la Historia de la Falange, Sancho Davila and Julién
Pemartin, Jerez Industrial, 1988; an account of the Falange up
to the Civil War.

* Los Secretos de la Falange, Giménez Caballero, Editorial
Yunque, Barcelona, 1939; one of a score of books by the same
author, containing few facts but much Fascist philosophy.

For the life and thoughts of José Antonio Primo de Rivera,
together with much history of the Falange, the best source book
is * José Antonio (Biografia Apasionada), Felipe Ximénez de
Sandoval, prologue by Ramén Serrano Sufier. The author, Ser-
rano Suiier’s private secretary in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,


NOTES, SOURCES, AND BIBLIOGRAPHY 353


was ousted from the Ministry and the Party on moral charges
before Serrano Sufier himself was dismissed from the Govern-
ment. His book, though designed to show Serrano Suiier’s close
friendship with José Antonio, inadvertently gives away many
Falange secrets and was therefore banned a few months after its
publication. Others, less detailed, include:

* José Antonio, el Hombre, el Jefe, el Camarada, Francisco
Bravo, Ediciones Espajiolas, 1939.

José Antonio ante la Justicia Roja, Francisco Bravo, Madrid,
1941; a highly censored account of the trial of José Antonio.

Dolor y Memoria de Espaiia en el Segundo Aniversario de la
Muerte de José Antonio, Wenceslao Piqueras, Ediciones Jerar-
quia, 1939.

* Obras Completas de José Antonio Primo de Rivera, edited
by the National Press and Propaganda Delegation of the Fa-
lange, Madrid, 1942, an 899-page anthology of all the founder’s
speeches and writings.

For the history and a study of the Falange’s “National Syndi-
calism”:

* La Revolucién Social del Nacional-Sindicalismo, José Luis
Arrese, Madrid, 1943, an attempt by the man who became Sec-
retary General of the Falange to show the difference between
Falangist National Syndicalism and Italian Fascist Corpora-
tivism. It is to be noted that this book, virtually alone of Falange
publications, bears the official seal of approval of the clergy, for
Arrese came from the Valladolid or Jesuit branch of the Falange.
The first edition was published in Malaga in 1940.

* Historia del Sindicalismo Espajiol, Guillén Salaya, Editora
Nacional, Madrid, 1941, in which the father of Falangist syndi-
calism pays tribute to the Anarchists from whom the Falange
copied the words, if not the spirit, of some of their own syndical
ideology.

* Revista de la Organizacidn y Accion Sindical, Bilbao, 1939,
published under the auspices of the Ministry of Organization
and Syndical Action which was abolished in later cabinets. The
second issue of this review pays full tribute to the Italian Fascist
labor organization.


354 NOTES, SOURCES, AND BIBLIOGRAPHY


* La Lucha de Clases, Antonio Urbina, Editora Nacional, Bar-
celona, 1939; °Principios Basicos y Estructura de la Organiza-
cién Sindical, Ramén Pedret de Falgés, Huesca, 1941, and other
pamphlets, edited by the Falange at the order of the syndicates,
are available to illustrate various versions of Falangist syndical-
ism.


CuHapter 5. A ProcramM BECOMES A PoGROM


There are a number of Falangist publications giving the offi-
cial text of the Twenty-Six Points, but there is no official transla-
tion into English. Unofficial translations are numerous and bad.
The text followed in this chapter is my own translation from the
text as given in * Fundamentos del Nuevo Estado, Editora
Nacional, Madrid, 1941; a useful volume which also gives the
texts of the statutes of the Falange, various decrees concerning
the basic organization of the State, and the Fuero del Trabajo,
or “Worker's Bill of Rights.”

In connection with the sixth point, referring to the State as
a “totalitarian instrument,” the word “totalitarian” was dropped
in official descriptions of the Spanish State only after the end of
World War II. Most schoolbooks now in use, however, still refer
to Spain as “totalitarian.”

All statistical material called “official,” unless otherwise indi-
cated, comes from the 1945 edition of the Anuario Estadistico de
Espafia, Direccién General de Estadistica, Ministerio de Trabajo,
published in 1946, Statistics for the period before the Civil War,
unless otherwise stated, are taken from official publications of
the year 19382.

The details of repression are, of course, not published in any
book approved by the régime. Through a number of the books
already cited, however, there are references like the following,
which is to be found in * Porque Fuimos a la Guerra (“Why We
Went to War”), José Juanes, Avila, 1937. Speaking of the unex-
pected resistance in Badajoz, capital of Extremadura near the
Portuguese frontier, where news of a massacre by the Spanish
Foreign Legion, backed by “volunteers” from Dictator Salazar’s


NOTES, SOURCES, AND BIBLIOGRAPHY 355


Portuguese Army, caused considerable controversy in 1936, the
author, a clerical writer, says on page 184:

“Together with the Marxist militiamen a number of cara-
bineros [frontier police] and civil guardsmen [rural police],
whose leaders from the beginning were in open opposition to
the Movement [the revolt], joined the resistance. All of them
were justly executed when the troops entered the city together
with some civilian elements who joined the Red forces.”

This book, purchased openly in a Salamanca bookstore in
1937, was banned in the same year, for the oligarchy’s Govern-
ment was bitterly denying that there had been mass executions
in Badajoz. Other books were banned for minor indiscretions —
such as mentioning, for example, that the heroes of the siege of
the Alcazar of Toledo were not young cadets of the Infantry
Academy, which was closed for the summer when the Civil War
began, but hardened professional soldiers of the Civil Guard
whose wives and children were kept inside the Alcazar to guard
against desertions.


CuHaptTer 6. PLAYERS ARE Pap


The nearest thing to a list of the leaders of the Spanish oli-
garchy in existence is the Anuario Espafiol del Gran Mundo, José
Aubin Rieu-Vernet, Editorial Ciencia y Cultura, Madrid. I have
used the edition of 1948, but there are later editions. This “social
register,” though a little weak on the names of the leaders of the
clergy, lists all the major officials of the national, provincial, and
local governments, the directors of private clubs and societies,
the members of the boards of directors of all the larger indus-
trial, public utility, banking and insurance firms of Spain. Some
ten thousand names are listed among the members of Spanish
society.

Throughout this book, material concerning day-to-day events
has been gathered from the dispatches of the Associated Press or
from the files of the London Times. Official texts cited come
from the Boletin Oficial del Estado, or, in the case of texts con-
cerning the Falange, from the Boletin del Movimiento, official
organ of the Falange published since May, 1937.


356 NOTES, SOURCES, AND BIBLIOGRAPHY


In addition I have utilized a volume called ° Legislacién del
Movimiento, compiled and published by the Instituto de Estu-
dios Politicos, Madrid, 1945, a well-organized and handy guide
to Falange legislation. I have also utilized material contained in
the Revista de Estudios Politicos, a review of the oligarchy’s
political ideas published by the Institute since January, 1941.
The Institute of Political Studies, subsidized by the Government,
was first headed by Alfonso Garcia Valdecasas, co-founder of
Falange Espafiola with José Antonio and Ruiz de Alda. Later,
when Garcia Valdecasas was ousted from the Falange as a
“monarchist,” the Institute was placed under the direction of
Fernando Maria Castiella. The files of the Revista de Estudios
Politicos now are available at the Library of Congress, Wash-
ington.

Biographical material on General Varela and others mentioned
in this and later chapters may be found in * Caudillo Profetas y
Soldados, by Felipe Bertran Giiell, as well as in books previously
cited. In addition to the Mola biography by Iribarren, previously
cited, there is another — ° Mola, Carlos de la Valgoma, Editorial
Pace, Madrid, 1941 — containing a little useful material on the
generals. Scraps of biographical data may also be gleaned from
* Heroes y Gestas de la Cruzada, Tomas Prieto, Ediciones Tor-
mes, Madrid, 1942.


Cuapter 7. THE ANGELS’ SHARE


The report of the United Nations’ subcommittee on the Span-
ish question of June, 1946, contains much valuable information
on the Spanish régime in addition to the Krappe-Renner state-
ment cited in this chapter. General accusations made by the
Polish representative on this committee need to be taken with
more than a grain of salt.

All quotations from Franco’s speeches are taken from Palabras
del Caudillo, April 19, 1987, to December 7, 1942, Ediciones de
la Vicesecretaria de Educacién Popular, Madrid, 1943. My
copy, bound in leather and gold, was given me by the Director
of the Falange Service of Information and Investigation — the
secret police—on whom I called in 1944. Quotations from


i
i
a


NOTES, SOURCES, AND BIBLIOGRAPHY 357


Franco speeches since 1942 are taken from the Madrid daily,
Arriba, organ of the F alange.

An insight to the oligarchy’s foreign policy may be obtained
from the following sources:

* Espafia ante Francia, Hans Juretschke, Prologue by An-
tonio Tovar, Ediciones FE, Madrid, 1940; a German writer states
how Spaniards should view Frenchmen while Tovar, who now
occupies the chair in the University of Salamanca left vacant by
the great philosopher, Miguel Unamuno, says the German ex-
presses “what any Spaniard feels.”

* Despierta Inglaterra, Giménez Caballero, Ediciones Toledo,
1943; Spain’s “first Fascist” advises Great Britain to wake up and
join Germany against Russia, scorning the capitalists of the
United States and joining Spain in a program of “Europe for the
Europeans.”

* Reivindicaciones de Espaiia, José Maria Areilza and Fer-
nando Maria Castiella, Instituto de Estudios Politicos, Madrid,
1941; the official statement of Spain’s territorial demands, virtu-
ally all of which were at the expense of France save for Gibral-
tar and a slice of British Nigeria. This book sets possession of
the whole of Morocco and the Oran section of Algeria with Gib-
raltar as Spain’s minimum demands, while staking out claims to
French Somaliland and Aden at the southern entrance to the Red
Sea as well as the whole of Tonkin in Indo-China. This book
was published at State expense by two men who now are
“Monarchists,” Areilza, who sought Washington’s approval of
his candidacy to the post of Ambassador to the United States in
1945, and Castiella, a professor of international law who now
backs Don Juan’s bid for the throne.

* El Momento de Espafia en Marruecos, Enrique Arques, Ma-
drid, 1942; another official publication claiming all of Morocco
for Spain.

* Marruecos, Tomas Garcia Figueras, Barcelona, 1939; an
earlier book, published before France fell, therefore claiming
only Tangier and a part of Morocco for Spain.

* La Mision Africana de Espafia, J. Cordero Torres, Madrid,
1941.


358 NOTES, SOURCES, AND BIBLIOGRAPHY


® Marruecos Andaluz, Rodolfo Gil Benumeya, Madrid, 1942;
another official publication supporting the thesis that Morocco is
in fact only a part of Andalucia, Spain's southern province.

* El Estrecho de Gibraltar, “Hispanus,” Instituto de Estudios
Politicos, 1941; one of many books claiming Gibraltar for Spain.

* Cambio de Estructura del Derecho Internacional, Doctor
Carl Schmitt, Madrid, 1943; text of a lecture by a professor of
the University of Berlin before the Institute of Political Studies
in Madrid on the new (Nazi) International Law.

* Puntos Cardinales de la Politica Internacional Espafiola, Ca-
milio Barcia Trelles, Ediciones FE, 1939; a summary of Spain’s
policy toward North Africa; Spain’s claims to the Philippines;
Spain’s right to the leadership of Spanish-speaking America in
opposition to the United States; and Spain’s friendship with Ger-
many and Italy in Europe.

* Espatia ante la Guerra del Mundo, J. E. Casariego, Madrid,
1940; Spain and the “new Order in Europe.”

* Espafia ante la Esfinge, Lieutenant General Alfredo Kinde-
lan, Plus-Ultra, Madrid, 1943; an anti-United States book by a
pro-British “Monarchist” general.


Cuapter 8. FRANCO TAKES THE LEAD


For the early career and activities of Serrano Sufier there is
little reliable material available in published form within Spain.

* Serrano Sufier en la Falange, A. Alcazar de Velasco, Edi-
ciones Patria, Barcelona-Madrid, 1941. This purports to be a
biography, but is in fact an attempt by one of Serrano Sufier’s
paid employees to link his patron with José Antonio as closely
as possible. The book suggests that Serrano Sufier was always a
Falangist, even while working as Gil Robles’ aide.

Two collections of Serrano Sufier’s speeches have been pub-
lished: * De la Victoria a la Postguerra, Ediciones FE, Madrid,
1941, and * Siete Discursos, Ediciones FE, Valladolid, 1938.
More accurate versions of these and other speeches, however,
may be had in files of the Spanish press.

For an accurate account of Serrano Sufier’s influence in Spain


NOTES, SOURCES, AND BIBLIOGRAPHY 359


during the period immediately following the Civil War, there
is Appeasement’s Child, Thomas J. Hamilton, Alfred A. Knopf,
New York, 1943. In Complacent Dictator, Sir Samuel Hoare,
Viscount Templewood, Alfred A. Knopf, New York, 1947, the
former British Ambassador reports on his experiences in Spain
which include a number involving Serrano Sufier. Wartime Mis-
sion in Spain, Carlton J. H. Hayes, The Macmillan Company,
New York, 1945, which is cited in this chapter, is devoted largely,
as the title indicates, to Mr. Hayes’ mission as United States Am-
bassador from March, 1942, to March, 1945.

Report from Spain, Emmet John Hughes, Henry Holt and
Company, New York, 1947, is an excellent report and analysis of
the Spanish régime by a Catholic writer who lived in Madrid
from 1942 to 1944,


CHAPTER 9. SEEM A SAINT — PLay THE Devi


The Falange organ Arriba for August 24, 1943, as well as the
Hoja del Lunes of August 23, 1943, carry the text of Arrese’s
speech of offering to Santiago at the pilgrimage city. In this and
later chapters most of the events may be confirmed by press re-
ports in the Madrid newspapers. These papers include:

ABC, a morning paper, nominally the organ of the Monarch-
ists, published by the Marqués de Luca de Tena. Until quite
recently ABC was the prisoner of the Falange, forced to publish
what the Falange dictated. Gil Robles, in 1944, brought suit
against the Marqués for such an article and the Marqués passed
the burden of responsibility on to the Falange press directorate
with an “open letter” circulated among members of the Family,
but never published. Gil Robles’ suit died in court; it is still
impossible to sue the Government in Spain.

YA, published by Editorial Catélica, the company used by the
clergy to publish its books, magazines, and newspapers. The
same company published El Debate, “the Times of Spain,” be-
fore the Civil War.

Arriba, official organ of the Falange Party, a morning paper.
Its editorials usually were republished verbatim by about fifty


ee a ee


360 NOTES, SOURCES, AND BIBLIOGRAPHY


provincial dailies owned by the Falange. Arriba and the Falange
press got first call on newsprint which was distributed and allo-
cated by the Falange syndicates. The newsprint price to news-
papers not owned by the Falange was more than double the
| price paid by Falangist newspapers.
Pueblo, organ of the Falange syndicates, is an evening news-
| paper of the Falange chain.

Madrid, also an evening newspaper, is edited and nominally
owned by the Pujol brothers who in the past have directed en-
terprises financed by Juan March.

Informaciones, until the end of the war, was nominally owned

by a Chilean-born Germanophile, Victor de la Serna, who made

no secret of the fact that his profits were connected to his close
friendship with the German Embassy.

Barcelona’s largest daily newspapers, La Vanguardia and
Diario de Barcelona, theoretically competitors, are in fact both
owned by a clique of Barcelona bankers and aristocrats headed
by the Conde de Godo.

José Antonio Girén, whose frankness on the public standing of
the Falange is cited in this chapter, would be a remarkable man
in any country. As Labor Minister he was among the country’s
most eligible bachelors, a handsome and intelligent man in his
early thirties who enjoyed much personal popularity among
many non-Falangist workers. Several collections of his speeches
and writings have been published, the best of them being * José
Antonio Girén, Escritos y Discursos, Ediciones de la Vice Secre-
taria de Educacién Popular, Madrid, 1943.


Carter 10. Oxtp Acrors — New LINEs :


The quotations from Franco's letter to Churchill, dated Octo-
ber 18, 1944, and Churchill’s reply to Franco are taken from the
London Times, which carried both letters in full and may also
be found in the appendix to Sir Samuel Hoare’s book, previously |
cited.


no


NOTES, SOURCES, AND BIBLIOGRAPHY 361


CuHaprer 11. BacxsTacE


The schoolbooks examined and quoted in this chapter include
the following:

* Nueva Enciclopedia Escolar, Hijos de Santiago Rodriguez,
Burgos, 1942; a first-grade text still used in most State schools.

* Nueva Enciclopedia Escolar, Grado Segundo, idem, Burgos,
1944; a second-grade text also in current use.

* Primeras Lecturas, Editorial Magisterio Espafiol, 22d edi-
tion, Madrid, 1945; a first reader.

All three of these basic schoolbooks, as well as all others which
I examined in Spain for the elementary grades, proclaimed Spain
to be “a totalitarian state.”


CuaptTer 12. Seconp Act CurtTaIN


For a report on Johannes Bernhardt, see also C. L. Sulzber-
ger’s dispatch in the New York Times for February 14, 1946,
p- 15, col. 3. Sulzberger, who interviewed Bernhardt, found the
German was then co-operating with United States and British
authorities attempting to untangle the affairs of SOFINDUS, the
German holding company of which Bernhardt was the director.

The issue of Juventud, confiscated by police because it con-
tained Arrese’s Gredos speech, bore the date June 20, 1945.


Craprer 13. INTERMISSION


Of the many reports and documents published by the United
Nations which concern Spain the most valuable is the Report of
the Subcommittee on the Spanish Question, United Nations Offi-
cial Records, Hunter College, June, 1946, New York.


INDEX


ABC, Monarchist newspaper, 96

Abd-el-Krim, $1, 32

Accién Catélica, political arm of Spanish
clergy, 269, 290, 291

Accién Espaftola, 350

Accién Popular, clerical party under Re-
public, 28

Agriculture,
105-108

Aguilera, Joaquin, Secretary of Manu-
facturers’ Association of Catalonia, 24

Aguilera y Yepes, Count of, 116

Aguirre, José Antonio, President of
Basque State, 319, 321

Air Army, current state of, 92

Airplanes, test of, in Civil War, 56

Alarcén de la Lastra, Luis, Minister of
Industry and Commerce, 259

Alava, province of, 90

Alba, Duke of, 52, 98, 126, 194, 195;
party for daughter described, 123-125;
Ambassador to Britain, 224, 291

Albatera-Catral, concentration camp at,
938-95

Albifiana, Doctor José Maria, 61

Albornoz, Alvaro, leader of Government-
in-Exile, 328

Alcal& Zamora, Niceto, Premier and
First President of Republic, 22, 26,
28, 34, 35, 1338, 176

Alfaro, Luis, 251

Alfonso XIII, King of Spain, 17, 18, 19-
20, 31; death of, 315

Algeciras, 38

Algeria, seizure of, planned, 153-154,
158, 159

Alhucemas, Spaniards land at, 32

Alianza Nacional de Fuerzas Demo-
erdticas, 251

Allen, Jay, interviews Primo de Rivera,
75

Anarchism, development of, in Spain,
65-66, 193, 246, 323

Anarcho-Carranzists, The (Primo de
Rivera), 69

Anti-Komintern Pact, 168, 287


under Falangist régime,


Anual, disaster of (1921), $1

Anuario Espafiol del Gran Mundo, 9, 355

Aparicio, Juan, Falange press chief, 62—
68, 65, 234, 802-303, 351

Appeasement, British, of Spain, 145,
157, 159, 162-163, 199; American,
148-144, 145, 159-160, 174, 199

Arabs, rule of, in Spain, 10-11

Aran Valley, Republican uprising in,
256-258

Aranda, General Antonio, 125, 126, 127—
180, 285, 388

Areilza, José Marfa, 357

Arganda, radio station at, 149

Argentina, 167; Falangists in, 148;

Jnited States Blue Book on, 156; ally

of Spanish oligarchy, 309-310

Armada, fails in attack on England, 14

Armour, Norman, American Ambassa-
dor to Spain, 227, 282

Army, role of, in Spain, 36-37, 91, 180-
181, 337-888; revolts against Repub-
lican Government, 38, 41-46; as
source of future democracy, 304

Army reform bill, Azafia’s, 37

Arrese, José Luis, Secretary General of
Falange, 171, 172, 178, 196, 214, 353;
speaks at Santiago de Compostela,
200-201; quoted on prison policy, 241;
on National Syndicalism, 288-289

Arriba, Madrid daily, 165, 217; quoted
on fall of Mussolini, 196

Art, 274, 275

Asensio, General Carlos, Spanish Chief
of Staff, 161, 178; plans storming of
Gibraltar, 153

Asociacién Hispano-Germano, 303

Assault Guard, Republican trouble-
shooters, 41, 43

Associated Press, 233

Asturias, $8, 246; Left-Wing rebellion in,
833-34; in Civil War, 127-128

Ateneo, liberal Republican club, 22, 82

Aunos, Eduardo, Minister of Justice, 242

Austria, 15

Automobiles, American, in Spain, 311


363


—=—


364


Augilio Social, Falange State charity
organization, 160, 165, 210, 239

Axis, Rome-Berlin, 38, 49; Spanish sup-
port of, in World War II, 144-147,
148, 151-169, 186, 187-190, 191-192,
278, 279-280

Ayerbe Sales, Antonio, 185

Azafia, Manuel, President of Spanish
Republic, 21-22, 23, 25, 35, 37, 247,
$22

Aznar, Manuel, 146, 346; counselor of
Spanish Embassy at Washington, 229,
994

Agores, British base in, 204

Azorin, 274


Badajoz, in Civil War, 51, 354-355

Bakunin, Michael, 65

Balearic Islands, Franco in command of,
$2, 33

Barcelona, 33, 55; Army revolt fails in,
48

Baroja, Pfo, 274

Basques, 10, 52, 90, 320

Battle against Nordism, 63

Beaulac, Willard, American Embassy
counselor, 187

Behn, Colonel Sosthenes, 229

Beigbeder, General Juan, 127, 141, 157

Belgium, trade treaty with Spain, 284;
denounces Franco and Falange, 306

Benavente, Jacinto, 274

Benlliure, Mariano, 275

Bermiidez Cafiete, Antonio, Spanish
Fascist, 63

Bermiidez de Castro, General, 96

Bernhardt, Johannes, Nazi leader in
North Africa, 46-47, 156, 285, 286

Besteiro, Doctor Julian, 248, 249

Bevin, Ernest, British Foreign Secretary,
324; quoted on Franco régime, 306

Bible in Spain, The (Borrow), 22

Bibra, Fritz von, counselor of German
Embassy, 223

Bilbao, 320; in Civil War, 48, 55

Bilbao, Esteb4n, President of Cortes,
198, 279, 351

Bill of Labor Rights, 316

Black market, Spanish, 100-101, 103,
120, 311


INDEX


Blickenstaff, David, director of Friends’
Service Committee in Spain, 284-285

Blitz, tactics of, in Civil War, 55-56

Block chiefs, 253~255

Blue Book, United States, on Argentina,
156

Blue Legion, 109, 161-162, 163-166, 168,
197-198, 199, 200, 205, 209, 217

Blum, Léon, 48

Bolivia, relations with Spain, 306

Bonacorsi, Arconovaldo, leader of Dra-
goons of Death, 48

Bonaparte, Joseph, King of Spain, 16

Borja Carvajal, Francisco de, Count of
Fontanar, 331

Borman, Martin, Nazi leader, 284

Borrow, George, 22

Bourbon-Sicily, Marfa de las Mercedes
de, wife of Don Juan, 314

Bowers, Claude, United States Ambassa-
dor, 143

Boyer Mas, Monsignor, Red Cross repre-
sentative in Spain, 226

Bradford, A. L., interview with Franco,
287

Breen, Mary Louise, 297

Britain. See Great Britain

Brown House, Nazi club in Barcelona,
281

Bulgaria, relations with Spain, 306

Bullfighting, 120


Cacique, rural political boss, 121-122

C&diz, 14; in Civil War, 43, 45

Calvo Sotelo, José, assassination of, 40—
41, 176

Cambo, Francisco, 188

CAMPSA, State petroleum monopoly,
260

Canaris, Admiral, chief of German Mili-
tary Intelligence, 49, 153

Canary Islands, Franco commands, 175

Carceller, Demetrio, Minister of Indus-
try and Commerce, 260

Carlist wars, 16-17

Carlists, in Army revolt, 43-44; in Civil
War, 45, 55, 88, 314, 315; proposed
government by, 60-61; combined with
Falange to form State party, 85; op-
pose Serrano Sufier, 172


INDEX


Carlos VIII, 218-219, 317-318

Carol, King of Romania, 83

Carranza, Ramén de, 69

Carthaginians, in early Spain, 10

Casado, Colonel Sigismundo, head of
Republican Central Army, 248

Casariego, J. E., Carlist newspaper edi-
tor, 351

Castiella, Fernando Marfa, 356, 357

Castile, 10, 90

Castilian Council of Hispanic Action, 64

Catalonia, separatist movement, 90

Catholic Action, organization of Catholic
laymen, 291

Catholic Monarchs, 11-12

Caudillo, El, Franco’s title as Chief of
State, 85

Caudillo’s Guard, 184

CEDA. See Confederacién Espaftola de
Derechos Auténomos

Celts, in early Spain, 10

Censorship, clerical powers of, 184; of
press, 232-235

Center, Republican, in 1936 election, 34,
85

Central America, Falangists in, 148

CEPSA, petroleum company, 260

Charles I, King of Spain (Charles V of
Holy Roman Empire), 12-13

Charles II (The Bewitched), King of
Spain, 15-16

Charles III, King of Spain, 16

Church, position of, in sixteenth-century
Spain, 18-14; present-day status, $04.
See also Clergy, Roman Catholic
Church, Society of Jesus

Church and State, relationship of, under
Republic, 23-26

Churchill, Winston, speech on Spain,
219-221; rejects Franco’s overtures,
225-226

Ciano, Count, 157, 159; quoted on
Franco, 191

Ctano Diaries, The, 191

Cid Campeador, El, 11

Civil Guard, 48

Civil War, origins of, 88-41; Army re-
volts against Republican Govern-
ment, 41-46; German participation,


365


46-55 passim, 58-59, 140-141; Non-
Intervention Agreement, 48, 51;
Italian participation, 48-49, 51, 58,
58-59, 140-141; siege of Madrid, 49-
50; United States participation, 51-
52; foreign aid to Republic, 52-83;
Russian participation, 538, 140, 144;
as training for World War II, 53-56;
horrors of, 54-56, 77-78, 93-96, 118;
reluctance of Army to accept responsi-
bilities of victory, 58; casualties, 96—
98, 141; Family view of, 112-113;
Portuguese participation, 140; French
participation, 141-142

Class struggle, impossibility of, 102

Clergy, as members of oligarchy, 36,
290; position of, under Falange, 131-
187; bans Myth of the Twentieth Cen-
tury, 170; aids in capturing Falange
for oligarchy, 199-208. See also
Church, Church and State, Roman
Catholic Church

CNT. See Confederacién Nacional del
Trabajo

Codreanu, Corneliu, Romanian Fascist,
71

Colén, Crist6bal, Duke of Veraqua, 181

Commerce. See Trade

Communism, threat of, in Spain, 78, 198,
246-251, 309, 321, $26-327, 329-382

Communist Party in 1931 election, 21;
in 1983 election, 35; in 1936 election, 35

Companys, Luis, President of Catalén
Government, 160, 285

Complacent Dictator (Hoare), 227

Condor Legion, Luftwaffe in Civil War,
50, 54, 79, 141

Confederacién Espafiola de Derechos
Auténomos, clerical political alliance
under Republic, 28, 82

Confederacién Nacional del Trabajo (Na-
tional Confederation of Labor), 66, 328

Conquista del Estado, La (The Conquest
of the State), Spanish Fascist periodi-
cal, 61

Constitution of 1931, 22-27

Corporations. See Syndicates, State

Correa Veglisén, Antonio, Civil Gover-
nor of Barcelona Province, 305


366


Cortes, Constitutional, 21, 22, 27; first
meeting of (1943), 192; Republican,
meets in Mexico City, 322-323

Cost of living, 262-263

Council of Grandees of Spain, 113

Court of Political Responsibilities, aboli-
tion of, 258

Cuba, Falangists in, 148; relations with
Spain, 291; denounces Franco and
Falange, 306

Cuesta, Raimundo Fernéndez, 74


Day of the Caudillo, 203

Debate, El, Jesuit-owned Madrid daily,
28, 63, 290

Degrelle, Léon, Belgian Fascist leader,
71, 283-284

Deutschland, German ship, 50

Dfaz, Ruy (El Cid Campeador), 11

Dieckhoff, Hans Heinrich, German Am-
bassador to Madrid, 197, 223

Divorce, Republic recognizes, 26

Doussinague, José Marfa, Under-Sec-
retary of Foreign Ministry, 52

Dragoons of Death, 48-49

Drake, Sir Francis, 14


Eden, Anthony, 210

Editorial Catédlica, 290

Education, under Falange, 109-110, 268-
278, 275; Nazi schools in Spain, 281-
282

EFE, Falangist news agency, 146, 149,
234

Efjo y Garay, Archbishop of Madrid-
Alcalf, 186, 157-158

Elections, 1931, 21; 1933, 27; 1936, 34,
35, 290

Eliseda, Marqués de la, 352

Elizabeth, Queen of England, 14

Enchufe system, 1-8

England. See Great Britain

Escribiano Ortega, Roberto, 63

Espafiol, El, Spanish weekly, 234, 275

Estella, Marqués de. See Primo de
Rivera, José Antonio

Estraperlo, Government graft, 100-101

Exchange regulations, 265-266

Extremadura, 51


INDEX


Fal Conde, Manuel, 351

Falange, in 1986 election, 35; founding of,
60, 69; unites with JONS, 70-71, 72;
battle over leadership, 72; growth of,
during Civil War, 76-78; becomes
State party, 78, 81, 88-87; National
Council of, 85, 86, 89; program of,
88-111; foreign policy, 141-144; sup-
ports Axis in World War II, 144-147,
148, 151-169, 186, 187-190, 191-192,
278, 279-280; pilgrimage to Santiago
de Compostela, 199-202; membership
dwindles, 203; breaks relations with
Germany, 236; ‘‘martyrs,” 252; eco-
nomic repression under, 258-264; cur-
rent status of, 326. See also JONS,
Oligarchy

Falange Exterior, Falangist organization
abroad, 148-149, 150

Family, Spanish. See Oligarchy

Fascio, El, suppressed Fascist magazine,
68

Fascism, rise of, in Spain, 60-68. See
also Falange, JONS

Fascist Congress, Montreux, 71

Fascist. International, 71

Fascists, in Spanish Civil War, 58

Faupel, General Wilhelm, German Am-
bassador to Spain, 88, 147-148, 149,
308

Ferdinand of Arag6n, King of Spain, 11-
12

Ferdinand VII, King of Spain, 16

Ferndndez Cuesta, Raimundo, Minister
of Justice, 290

Ferrer, Francisco, Anarchist educator,
235

Fidel, Bishop of Calahorra, 186, 187

Fifth Army, United States, 191

Fifth column, 54

Filek, Alberto Elder von, perpetrator of
gasoline hoax, 258-260

Foreign Legion, Spanish, 30; in Asturian
Left-Wing rebellion, 38-34; in Civil
War, 47, 50, 51

Foreign Legion of the Air, 53

Forze Armate, Roman Fascist weekly, 51

France, Non-Intervention Agreement in
Civil War, 48, 51; in Spanish Civil


INDEX


War, 141-142; recognizes Falange,
142, 145; fall of, 152; rejects offer of
Spanish foodstuffs, 226; Spanish atti-
tude toward, 293; denounces Franco and
Falange, 306; relations with Spain, 330

Francisco Franco (Giménez Caballero),
185-186

Franco, Carmencita, daughter of Fran-
cisco Franco, 181, 251

Franco, General Francisco, 8, 14; early
life, 29-30; commands Spanish For-
eign Legion, 30-32; in command of
Balearic Islands, 32, 33; Chief of
Staff of the Army, $8, 34; in Spanish
Civil War, 44, 47, 49, 58; Generalis-
simo and chief of Provisional Govern-
ment, 79; commands Canary Islands,
82, 175; Chief of State, 85, 86, 101-
102, 178, 174-178, 185; tours Anda-
lucfa, 121-122; on Spain’s duty in
World War II, 152; meeting with
Hitler, 158-159; quoted on United
States and World War II, 166-167;
press interviews, 179; family, 179-181;
described, 181-183, 184; personal life,
184-185; speeches quoted, 190-191;
correspondence with Don Juan, 193-
194; talks with Hayes and Hoare,
197-199; visits Santiago de Compo-
stela, 200-201; seeks to placate British,
224-226; foreign and domestic poli-
cies, 237-239, 287-288; remains as
post-war Chief of State, 276-278, 305-
806; quarrels with Rome, 288; upholds
monarchy, 291, 316; relations with
Don Juan, 316-318

Franco, Nicolds, 29, 181

Franco, Ramén, 29; flies South Atlantic,
$2, 68; participates in revolt against
monarchy, 82; death of, 180

Franco Salgado-Araujo, General Fran-
cisco, Franco’s private secretary, 183

Franco Youth, The, 203-204

Free speech, 7

Friends’ Service Committee, 284-285

Fuero de los Espaftoles (Spanish Bill of
Rights), 208, 288-239, 316


Gafo, Father, 65


367


Galicia, in Civil War, 11; land problem,
106

Garcia Valdecasas, Alfonso, 356

Garnica, Pablo, 188

Gasogenes, 211, 212, 213-214

Gasoline, Von Filek hoax, 258-260; black
market, 311. See also Petroleum
products

Gauger, Johann, 285, 286

Gayda, Virgilio, 146

General Military Academy, Franco or-
ganizes and directs, 32

Gente, la, real masters of Spain, 8

Germano-Soviet pact, 144

Germans, Spanish treatment of, at end of
World War II, 288-286

Germany, compared to Spain in golden
age, 15; relations with, prior to Civil
War, 38, 39; participation in Spanish
Civil War, 46-55 passim, 58-59, 140—
141; Spanish aid in World War II,
144-147, 148, 151-169, 186, 187-190,
191-192, 278; Spanish Government
breaks relations with, 236; custodian-
ship of assets in Spain, 279-282

Gestapo, 15

Gibraltar, in World War II, 152-154

Gil Robles, José Maria, Rightist leader,
27-28, 33, 35, 74, 82, 276, 290, $06,
$17, 328, 359; Minister of War, 34;
suggests letter to Franco, 193-194,
195

Giménez Caballero, Ernesto, first Span-
ish Fascist, 61, 62, 67, 185, 357

Giménez Ferndndez, Minister of Agricul-
ture, 338

Giral, Doctor José, leader of Govern-
ment-in-Exile, 823

Girén, José Antonio, Falangist Labor
Minister, 171, 172, 290, 360; quoted on
Falange, 203

Goded, General Manuel, 44, 177, $47

Goering, Hermann, 47

Goicoechea, Antonio, Governor of Bank
of Spain, 64, 194, 195, 292

Gold, shipment of, to Russia, 321-322

Golden age, of Spanish history, 18-15

Gomé, Cardinal, Primate of Spain, 86,
185, 348


368


Goths, rule Spain, 10

Government-in-Exile, Spanish, 319, 322-
324, 332

Graf Spee, German pocket battleship, 81

Granada, Kingdom of, falls to Ferdinand
and Isabella, 11-12

Great Britain, Non-Intervention Agree-
ment in Civil War, 48, 51; Spanish
attitude toward, 117, 293, 294, 295;
recognizes Falange, 142-143; appease-
ment of Spain, 145, 157, 162-163, 159,
199; Germany plans invasion of, 153,
158; Franco undertakes to placate,
224-226; denounces Franco régime,
306; trade with Spain, 312; relations
with Spain, 332-336 passim

Gredos Inn, 184

Greeks, in early Spain, 10

Guadarrama Mountains, 8

Guatemala, relations with Spain, 291

Guernica, bombing of, 52, 54-55


Hadrian, Roman emperor, 10

Halcén, Manuel, Chancellor of Hispani-
dad Council, 149

Hartman, Karl von, 84-85

Hayes, Carlton J. H., American Ambas-
sador at Madrid, 174, 186, 187, 205,
227; quoted on Spanish purchases of
petroleum products, 192; requests
policy of neutrality, 197-198

Hayes, Mary Elizabeth, 273

Hedilla, Manuel, Falangist leader, 80,
84-85, 86

“Heirs and Successors of Doctor
Goebbels, The” (Hughes), 296

Herrera, Angel, Bishop of Malaga, 28,
290

Herrera, Francisco, 28, 290

Himmler, Heinrich, visits Spain, 157~158

Himno de Riego, national anthem of
Spanish Republic, 164

Hispanidad, movement for, 90-91, 217,
308, 350; death of, 167

Hispanidad Council, 147, 149-150, 228

Hitler, Adolf, 190, 283; compared to
Catholic Monarchs, 15; quoted on
Franco’s victories in Civil War, 141;
meeting with Franco, 158-159


INDEX


Hoare, Sir Samuel! (Viscount Temple-
wood), British Ambassador to Spain,
126, 150-151, 152, 159, 162-163, 192-
193, 194, 195, 217, 227; interview with
Franco, 198-199

Holy Brotherhood, 12

Housing, 266-268

Hughes, Emmet, director of Office of
War Information in Spain, 296

Hull, Cordell, 210, 217


I Tried to Be Friends with the Germans
(Meneses), 150

Ibafiez Martin, José, Minister of Educa-
tion, 110, 269

Ibarruri, Dolores (La Pasionaria), 41

Iberia Airlines, 208

Iberian Block, 204

Therians, in early Spain, 10

Ibero-American Institute, 147, 149

Iglesias Parra, Ramén, 63

Informaciones, Madrid evening paper,
168, 234, 298; quoted on V-E Day, 236

INI. See Instituto Nacional de Industria

Inquisition, 12, 18, 15, 16, 93

Institute of Colonization, 107

Instituto Jaime Balmes, 301-302, 308

Instituto Nacional de Industria, Falangist
industrial enterprises, 261-262

International Brigade, in Spanish Civil
War, 49-50, 58, 142, 247

International Samples Fair, Barcelona,
215

International Telephone and Telegraph
Company, 143-144, 229-230, 312

Intervention, liberation and, 334

Iribarren, José Marfa, 176, 345

Tron Ring, Basque, 55

Isabella of Castile, Queen of Spain, 11-12

Isabella II, Queen of Spain, 17

Isabella-Felix, Operation, 153-154, 158,
159

Italy, relations with, before Spanish
Civil War, 88-39; participation in Civil
War, 48-49, 51, 53, 58-59, 140-141;
fall of Fascism, 195; collapse of, 196-
197, 198


Jaca, revolt at, 18


INDEX


Japan, conquest of Philippines, 168;
Spain breaks with, 217, 278

J ARE, Spanish Liberation Committee,
322

Jaspe Santoma, Ricardo de, 63

Jato Mirando, David, 250

Jeffries, J. B. M., attacks Spanish neu-
trality, 296

Jesuits. See Society of Jesus

Jews, expulsion of, from Spain, 12; per-
secution of, 15

JONS. See Juntas de Ofensiva Nacional-
Sindicalista, Las

Jordana, Count, Foreign Minister, 173,
174, 187, 211; quoted on Laurel inci-
dent, 208; death of, 223

Journalists’ Club of Jaime Balmes,
301-302, 303

Juan, Don, Monarchist pretender, 26, 83,
218, 238, 291-292, 305-306, 324, 330;
correspondence with Franco, 193-194,
195; career of, 313-318

Juanes, José, quoted on resistance in
Badajoz, 354-355


Junta Politica, directorate of Falange, |


85, 89, 174
Junta Suprema de Unién Nacional, Com-
munist underground, 249-250, 251
Juntas de Ofensiva Nacional-Sindicalista,
Las (The Councils of the National-
Syndicalist Offensive), 61-66, 185;


unites with Falange, 70-71, 72. See |


also Falange
Juventud, Falangist Youth weekly, 289;
quoted on French, 293


Kennedy, Paul, 235, 298

Kieve, Robert S., United States Embassy
radio expert, 299

Kindelan, Lieutenant General Alfredo,
125-126, 127, 128, 177, 218, 285, 338

Krappe, Lieutenant General Guenther,
German Military Attaché in Madrid,
153, 154


Labor, agricultural, 105-108; organiza-
tions, 323
Labour Party, British, 293


Ar


369


Land, problem of, 105-108, $11; owner-
ship and tenure, 114-122

| Lara Martinez, David, assassination of,
252

Largo Caballero,
leader, 35, 176

Latin America, Oligarchy and, 90-91;
German influence in, 147-150; German
news agency services to, 232-233

Laurel, José P., Spanish message to, 205,
208

Laval, Pierre, internment in Spain, 234-
935

Lazar, Hans, German Embassy press
attaché, 147, 150, 223

Ledesma Ramos, Ramiro, Spanish Fas-
cist leader, 61, 62, 64, 66, 67; writes
Falange program, 70, 88; breaks with
Primo de Rivera, 72; founder of JONS,
$51, 352

Left-Wing Republicans, in 1931 election,
21; in 1933 election, 27; rebellion of,
33-84; in 1936 election, 34

Legion of Volunteers. See Blue Legion

Legionario, hymn of Foreign Legion, 80

Lenin, Nicolay, cited on Mexico and
Spain, 331

Leo XIII, Pope, encyclical on labor, 187

Lequerica, José Felix de, Foreign Minis-
ter, 64, 224, 228, 229, 233, 287; Spanish
Ambassador to France, 152, 168

Lerroux, Alejandro, Republican leader,
22, 28

Libraries, 273-274

Lieutenant generals, role of, in Spanish
army, 36, 37

Literature, 274-275

Llopis, Rodolfo, leader of Government-
in-Exile, 323

Lojendio, José Marfa, 294

Lozoya, Marqués de, Director General of
Fine Arts, 275

Luca de Tena, Marqués de, 359

Luna, José, Vice-Secretary of Falange,
172


Francisco, Socialist


Machiavelli, Niccolé, 11
MeMahon, Doctor Francis, 307
Madariaga, Salvador de, historian and


370


writer, 321, $22, 343; quoted on land
problem, 106

Madrid, established as capital, 18; Army
revolt fails in, 43; siege of, 49-50, 247—
249

Madrid Defense Council, 248

Madrid-Buenos Aires Axis, 309

Maeztu, Ramiro de, 349-350

Malaga, fall of, in Civil War, 77-78

Mallet, Sir Victor, British Ambassador
at Madrid, 308

Mallorca, 48

Malraux, André, forms Foreign Legion of
the Air, 53

Maquis, 57, 224, 257

Marafién, Doctor Gregorio, 251

March Ordinas, Juan, 64, 152, 276, 305;
career of, 98-100

Marcus Aurelius, Roman emperor, 10

Marriage, civil, recognized by Republic,
26

Martin Artajo, Alberto, Foreign Minis-
ter, 290-291

Mart{inez Anido, General, 145

Martinez Barrio, Diego, Provisional
President of Republic, 322-323

Martinez Fuset, Colonel, Franco’s coun-
selor, 177-178

Marxists, in Falange, 73

Mastil, advice to Franco Youth quoted,
204

Mataro, 55, 56

Mateos, Francisco, 63

Medinaceli, Duke of, 107-108

Melilla, defense of, 31, 41

Mendelssohn Bank, Amsterdam, 143

Meneses, Antonio, director of Prensa
Mundial, 150

Mera, Cipriano, 323

Messerschmidt fighting planes, 56

Mexico, Falangists in, 148; relations
with Spain, 291

Miaja, Genera] José, defender of Madrid,
248

Militarism, Spanish, 91. See also Army

Militia, Falange, 171

Millan Astray, Lieutenant Colonel José,
organizer of Spanish Foreign Legion,
$0, 31, 80, 275


INDEX


Mola (Iribarren), 176

Mola, General Emilio, commander in
Army revolt against Republic, 43-44,
45, 47, 48, 49, 54, 176-177, 314-315,
345

Molina, Father, 294

Monarchists, Sanjurjo leads revolt of,
27, 29, 37, 38; side with Oligarchy, 83;
activities of, under Franco, 198, 194--
195, 217-219; Franco upholds, 291;
proposed union with Republicans,
323-324; current status of, 326-
327

Monarchy, fall of (1981), 19-20; post-
war movement for, 276

Montes, Eugenio, 302-303

Montes Agudo, Gumersindo, 352

Moors, rule of, in Spain, 10-11; in As-
turian Left-Wing rebellion, 33-34; in
Spanish Civil War, 50, 51

Mora Figuerroa, Manuel, Vice Secretary
of Falange, 163

Morocco, 18; Spanish war with, 29, 31-
32; Spain plans occupation of, 158-
154, 158, 159

Morocco, Spanish, revolts against Re-
public, 41, 43; in Civil War, 44, 47;
in World War II, 188-189

Moscardo, Lieutenant General José, chief
of Franco’s military secretariat, 89,
183

Mosley, Sir Oswald, British Fascist, 71

Mutfioz de Aguilar, Julio, chief of Franco’s
civil secretariat, 183

Mufioz Grandes, Lieutenant General
Agustin, 183, 338

Mussolini, Benito, 39, 68, 98; arrest of,
196

Mutti, Ettore, 151

Myth of the Twentieth Century (Rosen-
berg), 170


Nanclares de Ja Oca, concentration and
labor camp, 297-299, 300

National Alliance of Democratic Forces,
251

National Broadcasting Company, 230-
232


<i. ni,


a


INDEX


National Confederation of Labor (Con-
federacién Nacional del Trabajo), 66,
323

National Council of the Falange, 85, 86,
89

National Housing Institute, 266, 268°

National Insurance Institute, 263-264

National Socialism, Spanish, 202; Ger-
man, 202

National Socialists, German, in Spanish
Civil War, 59

National Syndicalism, 289

Naval Academy, 92

Navarre, 39, 90; Carlist movement in, 17

Navy, fails in revolt against Republic,
44-45; current state of, 92; in World
War IT, 155

Nazis. See Germany

Negrin, Doctor Juan, 247, 248, 319, 321,
$22, 323

Neutrality, Hayes requests policy of,
197; Spanish version, 204-205; Span-
ish, attacked by Jeffries, 296

Nevin, Louis, 235

News, control of, in Spain, 232-235. See
also Press

Non-intervention, 324

Non-Intervention Agreement, 48, 51

Non-Intervention Committee, Spanish
Civil War, 48

Normandy, Allied invasion, 221

North Africa, in World War II, 187-190,
191

Norway, denounces Franco and Falange,
306

Nueva Enciclopedia Escolar, elementary
text book, 270-271

Niajiez Morgado, Aurelio, Chilean Am-
bassador in Madrid, 247


Office of Devastated Regions, 266

Office of Our Lady of Mercy, 240

Oil. See Petroleum products

Oligarchy, Spanish Family as, 8-9, 12,
15, 16; peasants and workers rise
against, 17-20; moves toward control
of Republic, 27-29, 33, 38; army and
clergy in, 36; considers aftermath of
Civil War, 58; José Antonio Primo de


371


Rivera breaks with, 72-78; captures
Falange, 78, 81, 83-87, 202; tenets and
blood ties, 112-114; repression the key-
note of, 238; attitude toward Holy See,
288; power of, in Spain, 333-334

Operation Isabella-Felix, 153-154, 158,
159

Operation Sea Lion, 153, 158

“Opposition,” maintained by Family,
193, 194

Orgaz, General Luis, High Commissioner
of Spanish Morocco, 154-155, 156, 189

Oriol y Urquijo, José Maria de, 138

Ortega y Gasset, José, quoted on decline
of Spain, 15

Oviedo, 128


Palma, Mallorca, Republicans executed
at, 49

Panam, relations with Spain, 291

Pasionaria, La. See Ibarruri, Dolores

Patronato de Nuestra Seftora dela Merced,
240

Paul IV, Pope, 13

Pérez, Blas, Minister of Interior, 173

Pérez de Urbel, Fray Justo, national
chaplain of Falange, 183

Perén, General Juan D., President of
Argentina, 309

Perpignan, German garrison at, 188

Peseta, exchange rates, 138

Pétain, Marshal Philippe, 150, 152; nego-
tiates French recognition of Falange,
142; agrees to collaborate with Hitler,
158

Peterson, Sir Maurice, British Ambassa-
dor, 142-143

Petroleum products, Spanish purchases
from United States, 191-192; problem
of Spanish supply, 207-217 passim

Philip I, King of Spain, 18, 14, 15, 60

Philippine Islands, Japanese occupation
of, 168

Phoenicians, in early Spain, 10

Pilar, Dofia, sister of Franco, 180-181

Pinilla, Carlos, Under-Secretary of Labor,
279

Pius XI, Pope, 186

Pius XII, Pope, 135


372


Pl y Deniel, Enrique, Primatejof Spain,
79, 136-187

Plebiscite, on Franco’s law of succession,
318-319; suggested, for provisional
government, 338-339

Plus Ultra, flies South Atlantic, 32, 68

Poland, 144; requests investigation of
Spanish régime, 307

Polo, Carmen, wife of Francisco Franco,
30, 31, 81, 181

Polo y Martinez Valdés, Zita, wife of
Serrano Sufier, 81-82, 83

Ponte, Lieutenant General Miguel, 194,
195

Popular Front,
parties form, 33

Population, 119-120; present-day Ger-
man, in Spain, 282-283

Portugal, 15; participation in Spanish
Civil War, 51, 140

Potsdam Conference, bars Spain from
United Nations, 292

Power system. See Enchufe system

Prensa Mundial, international news
agency, 150

President Lincoln, United States ship sold
to Spain, 145

President Wilson, United States ship sold
to Spain, 145

Press, Spanish, 146-147, 198, 210-212,
296; position of British and American
correspondents, 230-232; German news
agency services to Latin America, 232—
233; foreign, 297-308, 307

Prieto, Indalecio, Socialist leader, 69-70,
99, 247, 319, 321, 323

Primeras Lecturas, First Reader, 271%

Primo de Rivera, José Antonio, leader of
Falange, 67-72, 82, 83, 85; breaks with
Ledesma, 72; plans march on Madrid,
73-74; imprisonment and execution,
75-76, 80-81; martyr, 135-136

Primo de Rivera, General Miguel, mili-
tary dictator, 17-18, $2, 61, 99, 144;
death of, 67

Primo de Rivera, Miguel, brother of
José Antonio, 88, 182

Primo de Rivera, Pilar, sister of José
Antonio, 88


Asturian Left-Wing


INDEX


Prisoners, policy regarding, 239-245;
release of, 307

Property, private, under Falange, 103

Provisional Government, requirements
for, in Spain, 338-340

Pujol, Juan, 68

Quakers. See Friends’ Service Com-
mittee

Queipo de Llano, Genera] Gonzalo, 32,
45, 346

Quintanar del Rey, resists Falangists,
243-245

Quintilian, Roman rhetorician, 10


Radio, Pedro, Argentine Ambassador to

| Madrid, 309-310

| Radio Madrid, independent chain, 299

Radio Nacional, Falange chain, 150, 232,
299

Raimindez, Alejandro, 63

| Rationing, 264-265, 311

| Red Aid, underground organization, 246

Red Cross, American, 103, 122, 160;
Spanish, 165-166

Redondo, Onésimo, leader of Castilian
Council of Hispanic Action, 64, 65, 67;
joins Falange, 70; death of, 76

Reforestation, 108

Reich, Das, quoted on Count Jordana,
173

Renner, Colonel Hans, German Military
Attaché in Tangier, 153, 154

Renovacién Espaiiola, Spanish Monarch-
ist Party, 76

Repression, keynote of Family’s régime,
238; economic, under Falange, 258-
264

Republic, formation of, 19-20, 21-22;
constitution of 1931, 22-27; anti-
clerical stand, 23-26; Sanjurjo at-
tempts overthrow, 27; oligarchy moves
toward control, 27-29, 33, 38; Left-
Wing rebellion, 33-34; Army revolts
against, 38, 41-46; foreign aid in Civil
War, 52-53; overthrow of, 176-177;
current desire for, 319; Government-
in-Exile, 319, 322-324. See also Civil
War


INDEX


Republican Aid, underground Organiza-
tion, 246

Republicans, Left-Wing, 21, 27,433-34;
Right-Wing, 21, 27, 34; persecution of,
251; uprising of, in Aran Valley, 256-
258; proposed union with Monarchists,
323-324

Requetés, Carlist political organization, 76

Rhineland, 15

Riafio, Antonio, 63

Ribbentrop, Joachim von, 151, 159, 173

Riestra, Genaro, Falangist organizer of
Cuba, 320

Riff, 17

Right-Wing Republicans, in 1931 elec-
tion, 21; in 1933 election, 27; in 1936
election, 34

Rios, Fernando de los, 65

Roatta, General Mario, 49

Roman Catholic Church, allied with
Spanish Republic, 182-133; quarrels
with Franco, 288. See also Church,
Church and State, Clergy

Romanones, Count, Monarchist leader,
19-20, 21, 192, 194

Romans, in early Spain, 10

Rome, Spaniards sack, 13

Roosevelt, Franklin D., pledges respect
to Spain’s sovereignty, 187; quoted on
present régime in Spain, 227-228

Rosenberg, Alfred, 170

Ruiz de Alda, Julio, co-founder of
Falange, 68, 69, 70 ;

Ruiz Senén, Valentin, 137

Russia, in Spanish Civil War, 53, 140,
144; German attack on, 153-154, 160—
161; Family opposition to, 278; rela-
tions with Spain, 331-332


Saenz Rodriguez, Pedro, 317

Sainz Rodriguez, Pedro, 269

Salamanca, 49; Falangist capital, 78-80,
84; meeting of Army officers at, 177

Salaya, Guillén, father of Falangist syn-
dicalism, 353

Salazar, Antonio, Portuguese dictator,
50, 51, 140

Saliquet, General Andrés, 131


373


San Francisco Conference, bars Spain
from United Nations, 292

San Sebastian, 222

Sanchez Guerra, José, conservative Re-
publican, 42

Sanders, Sefior. See Sperrle, General

Sanjurjo, Lieutenant General José, com-
mander of Civil Guard, 19, 20; leads
unsuccessful revolt against Republic,
27, 29, 37, 38, 176; exile in Portugal,
39, 40, 46; death of, 44, 177

Santiago de Compostela, Falangist pil-
grimage to, 199-202

Sea Lion plan, for capture of British
Isles, 153, 158

Seal of Death, The (Ledesma), 62

Segura, Pedro, Cardinal Archbishop of
Sevilla, 28, 134-136, 187, 170, 276

Seneca, Roman philosopher, 10

Sefiorito, described, 122-123

Separatism, Catalan and Basque, 90

SERE, refugee relief organization, 322

Serna, Victor de la, 360

Serrano Sufier, Ramén, background, 81-
82; heads directorate of Falange, 83-
86, 88, 103, 141; Foreign Minister, 123,
157, 162, 163, 168, 169, 178, 305; aids
Axis in World War II, 145-146, 149;
visits Berlin and Rome, 156-157; dis-
missal, 170-174; reappointed to Fa-
lange National Council, 189

Sert, José Maria, 275

Service of Information and Investigation,
281

Sevilla, in Civil War, 43, 45

Social security, 263-264

Socialists in 1931 election, 21; in 1983
election, 27; in 1936 election, 35; resist
Army in Sevilla, 43; oppose Falange,
73

Sociedad Financiera Industrial, official
German trading company in Spain, 285

Society of Jesus, 27, 132, 137; banished
from Spain, 16; dissolved by Constitu-
tion of 1931, 24-25

SOFINDUS. See Sociedad Financiera
Industrial

South America. See Latin America

Souto Villas, Miguel, 63


374


Soviet Union. See Russia

Spain, Spanish Family, 8-9; geography
and early history, 9-12; golden age of,
13-15; decline of, 15-20; foreign and
domestic policies, 228-230, 237-239,
287-288; custodianship of German
assets, 279-282; present-day German
population, 282-283; as world prob-
lem, 328-329; current issue in, 339

Spanish America. See Latin America

Spanish-American War, 17

Spanish Bill of Rights, 203, 288-239, 316

Spanish Syndical Movement. See Fa-
lange

Spanish Telephone Company, sale of,
229-230

Sperrle, General, commands Condor
Legion in Civil War, 50, 54, 55

Starhemberg, Prince, Austrian Fascist, 71

Statistical Annual, 109

Stohrer, Eberhard von, German Ambas-
sador to Spain, 151, 154, 173

Strikes, 312. See also Labor

Subsidies, suppression of, to parish
priests, 25


Supreme Council of National Union, |


Communist underground, 249-250,
251

Syndicalism, National, 289

Syndicates, 100-102, 104, 171


Tablet, Brooklyn, 295

Tangier, 47; Spain occupies International
Zone, 151-152

Taylor, Myron, quoted on Franco, 186

Teachers, training of, 109

Tedeschini, Monsignor, Papal Nuncio in
Spain, 133

Templewood, Viscount. See Hoare, Sir
Samuel

Theodosius the Great, Roman emperor,
10

Titulcia, 266-267

Tobacco monopoly, Moroccan, 99

Toledo, seat of Spanish Church, 18, 14

Tomas, Belarmino, Asturian Socialist
leader, 83

Torquemada, Tomas, 93


INDEX


Torr, General, British Military Attaché,
223

Torres, Baron de las, 198

Toulouse, German garrison at, 188

Tovar, Antonio, 272-273, 357

Trade, 336-337; British and American,
with Spain, 216, 312; Belgian treaty,
284. See also Petroleum products,
Wolfram

Trajan, Roman emperor, 10

Transocean, German news agency, 146

Transportation, 139

Truman, Harry S., hailed by Spanish
press, 312-313

Tungsten, 205

Tunisia, in World War II, 191


UGT. See Unién General de Trabaja-
dores

Unamuno, Miguel, 272; quoted on JONS,
61; on Civil War, 247-248

Underground, 246, 249-250, 251, 323

Unemployment, 104-105

Union General de Trabajadores, 323

Unién Militar Espafiola, Spanish Army

| club, 37, 176

| United Nations, Spain barred from, 292,
307-309, 330

United Press, EFE contracts for services
of, 233

United States, in Spanish Civil War, 51-
52; appeasement of Falange, 143-
144, 145, 159-160, 174, 199; enters
World War II, 166-167; respects
Spanish sovereignty, 186-187; wolf-
ram-petroleum agreement with Spain,
215-217; post-war Spanish attitude
toward, 293-295; denounces Franco
régime, 306; trade with Spain, 312;
relations with Spain, 330-336 passim

United States Commercial Corporation,
216

University City, Madrid, 266

Urquijo, Estanislao de, 137

Urquijo Bank, 137, 229

Urquijo family, 64, 98


Valdecasas, Alfonso Garefa, co-founder of
Falange, 69, 70


——


INDEX


Valencia, Army revolt fails in, 43

Van Zeeland, Paul, offers loan to Spain,
143

Vanguardia, Barcelona, 299

Varela, Lieutenant General José En-
rique, 125, 126-127, 128, 172-1783, 176,
338

Vazquez de Mella, Juan, Carlist philoso-
pher, 60-61, 148, 349, 350

V-E Day, in Spain, 235-236

Ventosa, Juan, Catalan financier, 138,
192, 194, 195

Victory in the West, Nazi film, 160

Vigon, General Juan, 153, 155, 314

Visigoths, in northern Spain, 10, 11

Vizcaya, defense of, 55


Wages, 262-263

Warlimont, General Karl, 159

Warsaw, 144

Wartime Mission in Spain (Hayes), 186
Washington, George, 228

Wealth, corporate, 137-139

Weapons, test of, in Civil War, 56


375


Weddell, Alexander W., United States
Ambassador, 144

Weizsaecker, von, State Secretary of
German Foreign Ministry, 154

Welles, Sumner, quoted on policy to-
ward Spain, 335

Wellington, Duke of, 16

West, Alburn, 300

Wheat, production of, 310-311

Wise, Sidney, 307

Wolfram, struggle for, 205-210, 214, 215,
217

Woman’s suffrage, 23

World War II, Spanish aid to Axis, 144—
147, 148, 151-169, 186, 187-190, 191-
192, 278, 279-280


Ximénez de Sandoval, Felipe, secretary
to Serrano Sufier, 172, 352-358


YA, Madrid clerical daily, 220


Zaragoza, in Civil War, 43
Zhukov, Marshal, 283
Zuloaga, Ignacio, 275, 296
