|!N.iKp STAII S COVI KNh ^

Aiemorandum


TO


Mr. Conrad


ad t 7
ith/^


date:


2 / 10/64


FROM : w. D. Griffith


sudject: lee HARVEY OSWALD, aka.

IS - R - CUBA

iASSASSINA-nON OF PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY

U/22/C3, DALLAS, TOXAS

JACK L. RUBY, aka.

♦LEE HARVEY OSWALD, aka - Victim (Deceased)

! f

• • *

Pursuant to your instructions we have worked out a new procedure to
insure the President's Commission Jias been furnished pliotographs of every piece
of physical evidence received in any of the three captioned cases and/or to furniba
photographs of new evidence that we receive. I have coordinated this procedure
with Inspector Malley, SAC Shanklin in Dallas and Supervisor Lenihan in the
Domestic Intelligence Division.

Henceforth as any new evidence is received in the Laboratory,
Subjected to examination and Laboi'atory report submitted, the Laboratory rcoort
Will be directed to Dallas. Four 8 x 10 photographs will be furnished to Dallas
along with Laboratory report. The photographs will liave been assigned a listing
number in the Laboratory and this number will appear on the photographs so that
our master list of photographs furnished to the Commission wiU be complete.
Dallas will be instructed to incorporate results of the Laboratory elimination in
an investigative report and attach three photographs to three copies of each
investigative report. One photograph will be attached to the copy of the report
that bears the SAC's initials and will eventually be the Bureau file copy. DaUas
will flag the other two reports to which photographs are attached as "Commission”
copies and in this manner the Commission will receive the photographs along with
the report that sets forth the investigation to which the photographs pertain.

The fourth photograph furnished to DaUas wiU serve as DaUas's file copy.
Domestic Intelligence Division and the Investigative Division wiU be furnished
copies of our outgoing Laboratory report along with duplicate photographs of those
being transmitted to Dallas.


K( 1 1


-A

. L.


Ji


'■CO


1 - Mr. Belmont

2 - I\^. Sullivan (Mr. Lenihan)

3 - Mr. Rosen (Mr. MaUey, Mr. Rogge, Mr. Hines)

r. ‘ ' 1^'


* t *v >>


■:i''V^fcorr:3

WDO.-mb r*l) ' • - A


; 7 I t 8. 18. 954

bovilT SKn-noN


ii X' II A.


V'


• • ♦•If • — - •


Stulv V %


Ki Lmk i M


Memorandum to Mr. Conrad
Re; Lee Harvey Oswald

With respect to physical evidence currenUy being sent to the Bureau

the^Com miss ion in Uie future iriU*be alert*to Insure no photographs are sent

bien previously reported, we wlU transmit the photographs to the Commission
under cover ol letter as we have done In the past. ,

U we are unable to determine readily whether Investigation which^

relates to a particular photograph has been Incorporated In an f

we will send four copies of the photograph to Dallas ^th a
determine whether the InvesUgaUon has been reported. U no
tas'^r srbmltted, Dallas wlU submit one and "

indicated aber/e. If the report has been previously submitted, D^as PpP
a letterliead memorandum suitable for dissemination idenUfying the
the pertinent Information is set forth and wiU atUch three of the P^^rap^ sw
I exhibit The Selt of Government Supervisor will then disseminata the letterhead

* memorandum with exhibits attached.

There will be a number of Instances when the Laboratory, w repository
only of the physical evidence, has not conducted any examlnaUon of such «idence.

to DaUas and Dallas wiU resolve the problem In accordance with the above-
described arrangements, ^ ‘ ... - - -


KE COMMENDATION: None. For information.
