7aEle oI &ontents
Dedication
A Note to the Third French Edition
Introduction to the American Edition
Introduction: - Letter to Daniel Halevy
Introduction to the First Publication
Chapter 1 - Class War and Violence
Chapter 2 - Violence and the Decadence of the Middle Classes
Chapter 3 - Prejudices Against Violence
Chapter 4 - The Proletarian Strike
Chapter 5 - The Political General Strike
Chapter 6 - The Ethics of Violence
Chapter 7 - The Ethics of the Producers
Appendix 1 - Unity and Multiplicity
Appendix 2 - Apology for Violence
Appendix 3 - In Defense of Lenin

--- PAGE BREAK ---ke
Chapter 6 - The Ethics of Violence
Chapter 7 - The Ethics of the Producers
Appendix 1 - Unity and Multiplicity
Appendix 2 - Apology for Violence
Appendix 3 - In Defense of Lenin

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Introduction:
/etter to 'aniel +aleY\
MY DEAR HALEVY—I should doubtless have left these studies buried in
the bound volumes of a review if some friends, whose judgment I value,
had not thought that it would be a good thing to bring them before the
notice of a wider public, as they serve to make better known one of the
most singular social phenomena that history records. But it seemed to me
that it would be necessary to give this public some additional explanations,
since I cannot often expect to find judges as indulgent as you have been.
When I published, in the Mouvement Socialiste, the articles which are
now collected in this volume, I did not write with the intention of
composing a book: I simply wrote down my reflections as they came into
my mind. I knew that the subscribers to that review would have no
difficulty in following me, since they were already familiar with the
theories, which for some years my friends and I had developed in its pages.
But I am convinced that the readers of this book, on the contrary, will be
very bewildered if I do not submit a kind of defense which will enable them
to consider things from my own habitual point of view. In the course of our
conversations, you have sometimes made remarks which fitted so well into
the system of my own ideas that they often led me to investigate certain
questions more thoroughly. I am sure that the reflections which I here
submit to you, and which you have provoked, will be very useful to those
who wish to read this book with profit.
There are perhaps few studies in which the defects of my method of
writing are more evident; I have been frequently reproached for not
respecting the rules of the art of writing, to which all our contemporaries
submit, and for thus inconveniencing my readers by the disorder of my
explanations. I have tried to render the text clearer by numerous correctionsthe art of writing, to which all our contemporaries
submit, and for thus inconveniencing my readers by the disorder of my
explanations. I have tried to render the text clearer by numerous corrections

--- PAGE BREAK ---to which all our contemporaries
submit, and for thus inconveniencing my readers by the disorder of my
explanations. I have tried to render the text clearer by numerous corrections

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of detail, but I have not been able to make the disorder disappear. I do not
wish to defend myself by pleading the example of great writers who have
been blamed for not knowing how to compose. Arthur Chuquet, speaking of
J. J. Rousseau, said: “His writings lack harmony, order, and that connection
of the parts which constitutes a unity.”16 The defects of illustrious, men do
not justify the faults of the obscure, and I think that it is better to explain
frankly the origin of this incorrigible vice in my writings.
It is only recently that the rules of the art of writing have imposed
themselves in a really imperative way; contemporary authors appear to have
accepted them readily, because they wished to please a hurried and often
very inattentive public, and one which is desirous above all of avoiding any
personal investigation. These rules were first applied by the people who
manufacture scholastic books. Since the aim of education has been to make
the pupils absorb an enormous amount of information, it has been necessary
to put into their hands manuals suitable to this extra rapid instruction;
everything has had to be presented in a form so clear, so logically arranged,
and so calculated to dispel doubt, that in the end the beginner comes to
believe that science is much simpler than our fathers supposed. In this way
the mind is very richly furnished in a very little time, but it is not furnished
with implements which facilitate individual effort. These methods have
been imitated by political publicists and by the people who attempt to
popularise knowledge. 17 Seeing these rules of the art of writing so widely
adopted, people who reflect little have ended by believing that they were
based on the nature of things themselves.
I am neither a professor, a populariser of knowledge, nor a candidate for
party leadership. I am a self-taught man exhibiting to other people the
notebooks which have served for my own instruction. That is why the rules
of the art of writing have never interested me very much.
During twenty years I worked to deliver myself from what I retained of
my education; I read books, not so much to learn as to efface from my
memory the ideas which had been thrust upon it. It is only during the last
fifteen years that I have really worked for the purpose of learning; but I
have never found any one to teach me what I wanted to know. I have had to
be my own master, and in a way to educate myself. I make notes in which Iave really worked for the purpose of learning; but I
have never found any one to teach me what I wanted to know. I have had to
be my own master, and in a way to educate myself. I make notes in which I

--- PAGE BREAK ---r the purpose of learning; but I
have never found any one to teach me what I wanted to know. I have had to
be my own master, and in a way to educate myself. I make notes in which I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

formulate my thoughts as they arise; I return three or four times to the same
question, adding corrections which amplify the original, and sometimes
even transform it from top to bottom; I only stop when I have exhausted the
reserve of ideas stirred up by recent reading. This work is very difficult for
me; that is why I like to take as my subject the discussion of a book by a
good author: I can then arrange my thoughts more easily than when I am
left to my own unaided efforts.
You will remember what Bergson has written about the impersonal, the
socialised, the ready-made, all of which contains a lesson for students who
need knowledge for practical life. A student has more confidence in the
formulas which he is taught, and consequently retains them more easily,
when he believes that they are accepted by the great majority; in this way
all metaphysical preoccupations are removed from his mind and he is to
feel no need for a personal conception of things; he often comes to look on
the absence of any inventive spirit as a superiority.
My own method of work is entirely opposed to this; for I put before my
readers the working of a mental effort which is continually endeavouring to
break through the bonds of what has been previously constructed for
common use, in order to discover that which is truly personal and
individual. The only things I find it worth while entering in my notebooks
are those which I have not met elsewhere; I readily skip the transitions
between these things, because they nearly always come under the heading
of commonplaces.
The communication of thought is always very difficult for any one who
has strong metaphysical preoccupations; he thinks that speech will spoil the
most fundamental parts of his thought, those which are very near to the
motive power of the mind, those which appear so natural to him that he
never seeks to express them. A reader has great difficulty in grasping the
thought of an inventor, because he can only attain it by finding again the
path traversed by the latter. Verbal communication is much easier than
written communication, because words act on the feelings in a mysterious
way and easily establish a current of sympathy between people; it is for this
reason that an orator is able to produce conviction by arguments which do
not seem very comprehensible to any one reading the speech later. Youish a current of sympathy between people; it is for this
reason that an orator is able to produce conviction by arguments which do
not seem very comprehensible to any one reading the speech later. You

--- PAGE BREAK ---pathy between people; it is for this
reason that an orator is able to produce conviction by arguments which do
not seem very comprehensible to any one reading the speech later. You

--- PAGE BREAK ---

know how useful it is to have heard Bergson if one wants to recognise
clearly the tendencies of his doctrine and to understand his books rightly.
When one has followed his courses of lectures for some time one becomes
familiar with the order of his ideas and gets one’s bearings more easily
amidst the novelties of his philosophy.
The defects of my manner of writing prevent me getting access to a wide
public; but I think that we ought to be content with the place that nature and
circumstances have assigned to each of us, without desiring to force our
natural talent. There is a necessary division of functions in the world; it is a
good thing that some are content to work, simply that they may submit their
reflections to a few studious people, whilst others love to address the great
mass of busy humanity. All things considered, I do not think that mine is the
worst lot, for I am not exposed to the danger of becoming my own disciple,
as has happened to the greatest philosophers when they have endeavoured
to give a perfectly symmetrical form to the intuitions they brought into the
world. You will certainly not have forgotten the smiling disdain with which
Bergson has spoken of this infirmity of genius. So little am I capable of
becoming my own disciple that I am unable to take up an old work of mine
again with the idea of stating it better, or even of completing it; it is easy
enough for me to add corrections and to annotate it, but I have many times
vainly tried to think the past over again.
Much more, then, am I prevented from ever becoming the founder of a
school;18 but is that really a great misfortune? Disciples have nearly always
exercised a pernicious influence on the thought of him they call their
master, and who has often believed himself obliged to follow them. There is
no doubt that his transformation by young enthusiasts into the leader of a
party was a real disaster for Marx; he would have done much more useful
work if he had not been the slave of the Marxists.
People have often laughed at Hegel’s belief—that humanity, since its
origins, had worked to give birth to the Hegelian philosophy, and that with
that philosophy Spirit had at last completed its development. Similar
illusions are found to a certain extent in all founders of schools; disciples
expect their master to close the era of doubt by giving final solutions to all
problems. I have no aptitude for a task of that kind. Every time that I haveextent in all founders of schools; disciples
expect their master to close the era of doubt by giving final solutions to all
problems. I have no aptitude for a task of that kind. Every time that I have

--- PAGE BREAK ---rs of schools; disciples
expect their master to close the era of doubt by giving final solutions to all
problems. I have no aptitude for a task of that kind. Every time that I have

--- PAGE BREAK ---

approached a question, I have found that my enquiries ended by giving rise
to new problems, and the farther I pushed my investigations the more
disquieting these new problems became. But philosophy is after all perhaps
only the recognition of the abysses which lie on each side of the footpath
that the vulgar follow with the serenity of somnambulists.
It is my ambition to be able occasionally to stir up personal research.
There is probably in the mind of every man, hidden under the ashes, a
quickening fire, and the greater the number of ready-made doctrines the
mind has received blindly the more is this fire threatened with extinction;
the awakener is the man who stirs the ashes and thus makes the flames leap
up. I do not think that I am praising myself without cause when I say that I
have sometimes succeeded in liberating the spirit of invention in my
readers; and it is the spirit of invention which it is above all necessary to stir
up in the world. It is better to have obtained this result than to have gained
the banal approbation of people who repeat formulas and enslave their own
thought in the disputes of the schools.
I
My Reflections on Violence have irritated many people on account of the
pessimistic conception on which the whole of the study rests; but I know
that you do not share this impression; you have brilliantly shown in your
Histoire de quatre ans that you despise the deceptive hopes with which the
weak solace themselves. We can then talk pessimism freely to each other,
and I am happy to have a correspondent who does not revolt against a
doctrine without which nothing very great has been accomplished in this
world. I have felt for some time that Greek philosophy did not produce any
great moral result, simply because it was, as a rule, very optimistic.
Socrates was at times optimistic to an almost unbearable degree.
The aversion of most of our contemporaries from every pessimistic
conception is doubtless derived, to a great extent, from our system of
education. The Jesuits, who created nearly everything that the University
still continues to teach, were optimists because they had to combat the
pessimism which dominated Protestant theories, and because they
popularised the ideas of the Renaissance; the Renaissance interpretedcontinues to teach, were optimists because they had to combat the
pessimism which dominated Protestant theories, and because they
popularised the ideas of the Renaissance; the Renaissance interpreted

--- PAGE BREAK ---were optimists because they had to combat the
pessimism which dominated Protestant theories, and because they
popularised the ideas of the Renaissance; the Renaissance interpreted

--- PAGE BREAK ---

antiquity by means of the philosophers, and consequently misunderstood
the masterpieces of tragic art so completely that our contemporaries have
had considerable difficulty in rediscovering their pessimistic significance.19
At the beginning of the nineteenth century, there was such a concert of
groaning that pessimism became odious. Poets, who were not, as a matter of
fact, much to be pitied, professed to be victims of fate, of human
wickedness, and still more of the stupidity of a world which had not been
able to distract them; they eagerly assumed the attitudes of a Prometheus
called upon to dethrone jealous gods, and with a pride equal to that of the
fierce Nimrod of Victor Hugo (whose arrows, hurled at the sky, fell back
stained with blood), they imagined that their verses inflicted deadly wounds
on the established powers who dared to refuse to bow down before them.
The prophets of the Jews never dreamed of so much destruction to avenge
their Jehovah as these literary people dreamed of to satisfy their vanity.
When this fashion for imprecations had passed, sensible men began to ask
themselves if all this display of pretended pessimism had not been the result
of a certain want of mental balance.
The immense successes obtained by industrial civilisation has created the
belief that, in the near future, happiness will be produced automatically for
everybody. “The present century,” writes Hartmann, “has for the last forty
years only entered the third period of illusion. In the enthusiasm and
enchantment of its hopes, it rushes towards the realisation of the promise of
a new age of gold. Providence takes care that the anticipations of the
isolated thinker do not disarrange the course of history by prematurely
gaining too many adherents.” He thinks that for this reason his readers will
have some difficulty in accepting his criticism of the illusion of future
happiness. The leaders of the contemporary world are pushed towards
optimism by economic forces.20
So little are we prepared to understand pessimism, that we generally
employ the word quite incorrectly: we call pessimists people who are in
reality only disillusioned optimists. When we meet a man who, having been
unfortunate in his enterprises, deceived in his most legitimate ambitions,
humiliated in his affections, expresses his griefs in the form of a violent
revolt against the duplicity of his associates, the stupidity of society, or thedeceived in his most legitimate ambitions,
humiliated in his affections, expresses his griefs in the form of a violent
revolt against the duplicity of his associates, the stupidity of society, or the

--- PAGE BREAK ---t legitimate ambitions,
humiliated in his affections, expresses his griefs in the form of a violent
revolt against the duplicity of his associates, the stupidity of society, or the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

blindness of destiny, we are disposed to look upon him as a pessimist;
whereas we ought nearly always to regard him as a disheartened optimist
who has not had the courage to start afresh, and who is unable to understand
why so many misfortunes have befallen him, contrary to what he supposes
to be the general law governing the production of happiness.
The optimist in politics is an inconstant and even dangerous man,
because he takes no account of the great difficulties presented by his
projects; these projects seem to him to possess a force of their own, which
tends to bring about their realisation all the more easily as they are, in his
opinion, destined to produce the happiest result. He frequently thinks that
small reforms in the political constitution, and, above all, in the personnel
of the government, will be sufficient to direct social development in such a
way as to mitigate those evils of the contemporary world which seem so
harsh to the sensitive mind. As soon as his friends come into power, he
declares that it is necessary to let things alone for a little, not to hurry too
much, and to learn how to be content with whatever their own benevolent
intentions prompt them to do. It is not always self-interest that suggests
these expressions of satisfaction, as people have often believed; self-interest
is strongly aided by vanity and by the illusions of philosophy. The optimist
passes with remarkable facility from revolutionary anger to the most
ridiculous social pacificism.
If he possesses an exalted temperament, and if unhappily he finds himself
armed with great power, permitting him to realise the ideal he has
fashioned, the optimist may lead his country into the worst disasters. He is
not long in finding out that social transformations are not brought about
with the ease that he had counted on; he then supposes that this is the fault
of his contemporaries, instead of explaining what actually happens by
historical necessities; he is tempted to get rid of people whose obstinacy
seems to him to be so dangerous to the happiness of all. During the Terror,
the men who spilt most blood were precisely those who had the greatest
desire to let their equals enjoy the golden age they had dreamt of, and who
had the most sympathy with human wretchedness: optimists, idealists, and
sensitive men, the greater desire they had for universal happiness the more
inexorable they showed themselves.eamt of, and who
had the most sympathy with human wretchedness: optimists, idealists, and
sensitive men, the greater desire they had for universal happiness the more
inexorable they showed themselves.

--- PAGE BREAK ---the most sympathy with human wretchedness: optimists, idealists, and
sensitive men, the greater desire they had for universal happiness the more
inexorable they showed themselves.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Pessimism is quite a different thing from the caricatures of it which are
usually presented to us; it is a philosophy of conduct rather than a theory of
the world; it considers the march towards deliverance as narrowly
conditioned, on the one hand, by the experimental knowledge that we have
acquired from the obstacles which oppose themselves to the satisfaction of
our imaginations (or, if we like, by the feeling of social determinism), and,
on the other, by a profound conviction of our natural weakness. These two
aspects of pessimism should never be separated, although, as a rule,
scarcely any attention is paid to their close connection.
1. The conception of pessimism springs from the fact that literary
historians have been very much struck with the complaints made by the
great poets of antiquity on the subject of the griefs which constantly
threaten mankind. There are few people who have not, at one time or
another, experienced a piece of good fortune; but we are surrounded by
malevolent forces always ready to spring out on us from some ambuscade
and overwhelm us. Hence the very real sufferings which arouse the
sympathy of nearly all men, even of those who have been more favourably
treated by fortune; so that the literature of grief has always had a certain
success throughout the whole course of history.21 But a study of this kind of
literature would give us a very imperfect idea of pessimism. It may be laid
down as a general rule, that in order to understand a doctrine it is not
sufficient to study it in an abstract manner, nor even as it occurs in isolated
people: it is necessary to find out how it has been manifested in historical
groups; it is for this reason that I am here led to add the two elements that
were mentioned earlier.
2. The pessimist regards social conditions as forming a system bound
together by an iron law which cannot be evaded, so that the system is given,
as it were, in one block, and cannot disappear except in a catastrophe which
involves the whole. If this theory is admitted, it then becomes absurd to
make certain wicked men responsible for the evils from which society
suffers; the pessimist is not subject to the sanguinary follies of the optimist,
infatuated by the unexpected obstacles that his projects meet with; he does
not dream of bringing about the happiness of future generations by
slaughtering existing egoists.y follies of the optimist,
infatuated by the unexpected obstacles that his projects meet with; he does
not dream of bringing about the happiness of future generations by
slaughtering existing egoists.

--- PAGE BREAK ---imist,
infatuated by the unexpected obstacles that his projects meet with; he does
not dream of bringing about the happiness of future generations by
slaughtering existing egoists.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3. The most fundamental element of pessimism is its method of
conceiving the paths towards deliverance. A man would not go very far in
the examination either of the laws of his own wretchedness or of fate,
which so much shock the ingenuousness of our pride, if he were not borne
up by the hope of putting an end to these tyrannies by an effort, to be
attempted with the help of a whole band of companions. The Christians
would not have discussed original sin so much if they had not felt the
necessity of justifying the deliverance (which was to result from the death
of Jesus) by supposing that this sacrifice had been rendered necessary by a
frightful crime, which could be imputed to humanity. If the people of the
West were much more occupied with original sin than those of the East, it
was not solely, as Taine thought, owing to the influence of Roman law,22
but also because the Latins, having a more elevated conception of the
imperial majesty than the Greeks, regarded the sacrifice of the Son of God
as having realised an extraordinarily marvellous deliverance; from this
proceeded the necessity of intensifying human wretchedness and of destiny.
It seems to me that the optimism of the Greek philosophers depended to a
great extent on economic reasons; it probably arose in the rich and
commercial urban populations who were able to regard the universe as an
immense shop full of excellent things with which they could satisfy their
greed.23 I imagine that Greek pessimism sprang from poor warlike tribes
living in the mountains, who were filled with an enormous aristocratic
pride, but whose material conditions were correspondingly poor; their poets
charmed them by praising their ancestors and made them look forward to
triumphal expeditions conducted by superhuman heroes; they explained
their present wretchedness to them by relating catastrophes in which semi-
divine former chiefs had succumbed to fate or the jealousy of the gods; the
courage of the warriors might for the moment be unable to accomplish
anything, but it would not always be so; the tribe must remain faithful to the
old customs in order to be ready for great and victorious expeditions, which
might very well take place in the near future.
Oriental asceticism has often been considered the most remarkable
manifestation of pessimism; Hartmann is certainly right when he regards it
as having only the value of an anticipation, which was useful since itceticism has often been considered the most remarkable
manifestation of pessimism; Hartmann is certainly right when he regards it
as having only the value of an anticipation, which was useful since it

--- PAGE BREAK ---een considered the most remarkable
manifestation of pessimism; Hartmann is certainly right when he regards it
as having only the value of an anticipation, which was useful since it

--- PAGE BREAK ---

reminded men how much there is that is illusory in vulgar riches; he was
wrong, however, in saying that asceticism taught men that the “destined end
to all their efforts” was the annihilation of will,24 for in the course of history
deliverance has taken quite other forms than this.
In primitive Christianity we find a fully developed and completely armed
pessimism: man is condemned to slavery from his birth—Satan is the prince
of the world—the Christian, already regenerate by baptism, can render
himself capable of obtaining the resurrection of the body by means of the
Eucharist; 25 he awaits the glorious second coming of Christ, who will
destroy the rule of Satan and call his comrades in the fight to the heavenly
Jerusalem. The Christian life of that time was dominated by the necessity of
membership in the holy army which was constantly exposed to the
ambuscades set by the accomplices of Satan; this conception produced
many heroic acts, engendered a courageous propaganda, and was the cause
of considerable moral progress. The deliverance did not take place, but we
know by innumerable testimonies from that time what great things the
march towards deliverance can bring about.
Sixteen-century Calvinism presents a spectacle which is perhaps even
more instructive; but we must be careful not to confuse it, as many authors
have done, with contemporary Protestantism; these two doctrines are the
antipodes of each other. I cannot understand how Hartmann came to say
that Protestantism “is a halting place in the journey of true Christianity,”
and that it “allied itself with the renaissance of ancient paganism.” 26 These
judgments only apply to recent Protestantism, which has abandoned its own
principles in order to adopt those of the Renaissance. Pessimism, which
formed no part of the current of ideas which characterised the
Renaissance,27 has never been so strongly affirmed as it was by the
Reformers. The dogmas of sin and predestination which correspond to the
two first aspects of pessimism, the wretchedness of the human species, and
social determinism, were pushed to their most extreme consequences.
Deliverance was conceived under a very different form to that which had
been given it by primitive Christianity; Protestants organised themselves
into a military force wherever possible; they made expeditions into Catholic
countries, expelled the priests, introduced the reformed cult, andprimitive Christianity; Protestants organised themselves
into a military force wherever possible; they made expeditions into Catholic
countries, expelled the priests, introduced the reformed cult, and

--- PAGE BREAK ---ty; Protestants organised themselves
into a military force wherever possible; they made expeditions into Catholic
countries, expelled the priests, introduced the reformed cult, and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

promulgated laws of proscription against papists. They no longer borrowed
from the apocalypses the idea of a great final catastrophe, of which the
brothers-in-arms who had for so long defended themselves against the
attacks of Satan would only be spectators; the Protestants, nourished on the
reading of the Old Testament, wished to imitate the exploits of the con
querors of the Holy Land; they took the offensive, and wished to establish
the kingdom of God by force. In each locality they conquered the Calvinists
brought about a real catastrophic revolution, which changed everything
from top to bottom.
Calvinism was finally conquered by the Renaissance; it was full of
theological prejudices derived from medieval traditions, and there came a
time when it feared to be thought too far behind the times; it wished to be
on the level of modern culture, and it finished by becoming simply a lax
Christianity.28 To-day very few people suspect what the reformers of the
sixteenth century meant by “free examination,” the Protestants of to-day
apply the same method to the Bible that philologists apply to any profane
text; Calvin’s exegesis has been replaced by the criticisms of the humanists.
The annalist who contents himself with recording facts is tempted to
regard the conception of deliverance as a dream or an error, but the true
historian considers things from a different point of view; whenever he
endeavours to find out what has been the influence of the Calvinist spirit on
morals, law, or literature, he is always driven back to a consideration of the
way in which former Protestant thought was dominated by the conception
of the path to deliverance. The experience of this great epoch shows quite
clearly that in this warlike excitement which accompanies this will-to-
deliverance the courageous man finds a satisfaction which is sufficient to
keep up his ardour. I am convinced that in the history of that time you might
find excellent illustrations of the idea that you once expressed to me—that
the Wandering Jew may be taken as a symbol of the highest aspirations of
mankind, condemned as it is to march for ever without knowing rest.
II
My theses have shocked many people who are, to a certain extent, under
the influence of the ideas of natural justice implanted in us by ourondemned as it is to march for ever without knowing rest.
II
My theses have shocked many people who are, to a certain extent, under
the influence of the ideas of natural justice implanted in us by our

--- PAGE BREAK ---march for ever without knowing rest.
II
My theses have shocked many people who are, to a certain extent, under
the influence of the ideas of natural justice implanted in us by our

--- PAGE BREAK ---

education; very few educated men have been able to free themselves from
these ideas. While the philosophy of natural justice is in perfect agreement
with that of force (understanding this word in the special meaning that I
have given it in Chapters IV. and V.), it cannot be reconciled with my
conception of the historical function of violence. The scholastic doctrines of
natural right contain nothing but this simple tautology—what is just is
good, and what is unjust is bad; as if in enunciating such a doctrine we did
not implicitly admit that the just must adapt itself to the natural order of
events. It was for a reason of this kind that the economists for a long time
asserted that the conditions created under the capitalist regime of
competition are perfectly just, because they result from the natural course
of things; and inversely the makers of Utopias have always claimed that the
actual state of the world was not natural enough; they have wished,
consequently, to paint a picture of a society naturally better regulated and
therefore juster.
I cannot deny myself the pleasure of quoting some of Pascal’s Pensées
which terribly embarrassed his contemporaries, and which have only been
understood in our day. Pascal had considerable difficulty in freeing himself
from the ideas of natural justice which he found in the philosophers; he
abandoned them because he did not think them sufficiently imbued with
Christianity. “I have passed a great part of my life believing that there was
justice, and in this I was not mistaken, for there is justice according as God
has willed to reveal it to us. But I did not take it so, and this is where I made
a mistake, for I believed that our justice was essentially just, and that I
possessed means by which I could know this and judge of it” (fragment 375
of the Braunschvieg edition). “Doubtless there are natural laws; but this
good reason once corrupted, has corrupted all”29 (fragment 294); “Veri
juris. We have it no longer” (fragment 297).
Moreover, mere observation showed Pascal the absurdity of the theory of
natural right; if their theory was correct; we ought to find laws which are
universally admitted; but actions which we regard as criminal have at other
times been regarded as virtuous. “Three degrees of latitude nearer the Pole
reverse all jurisprudence, a meridian decides what is truth; fundamental
laws change after a few years of possession, right has its epochs, the entry
of Saturn into the constellation of the Lion marks to us the origin of such, a meridian decides what is truth; fundamental
laws change after a few years of possession, right has its epochs, the entry
of Saturn into the constellation of the Lion marks to us the origin of such

--- PAGE BREAK ---what is truth; fundamental
laws change after a few years of possession, right has its epochs, the entry
of Saturn into the constellation of the Lion marks to us the origin of such

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and such a crime. A strange justice that is bounded by a river! Truth on this
side of the Pyrenees becomes error on the other. . . . We must, it is said, get
back to the natural and fundamental laws of the State, which an unjust
custom has abolished. This is a game certain to result in the loss of all;
nothing will be just on the balance” (fragment 294; cf. fragment 379).
As it is thus impossible for us to reason about justice, we ought to appeal
to custom; and Pascal often falls back on this precept (fragments 294, 297,
299, 309, 312). He goes still further and shows how justice is practically
dependent on force: “Justice is subject to dispute; might is easily recognised
and is not disputed. Thus it is not possible to attribute might to justice,
because might has often contradicted justice, and said that it itself was just.
And thus not being able to make what was just strong, what was strong has
been made just” (fragment 298; cf. fragments 302, 303, 306, 307, 311).
This criticism of natural right has not the perfect clearness that we could
give it at the present day, because we know now that it is in economics we
must seek for a type of force that has attained absolutely uncontrolled
development, and can thus be identified naturally with right, whilst Pascal
under the one heading confuses together all the manifestations of force.30
Pascal was vividly impressed by the changes that the conception of
justice has experienced in the course of time, and these changes still
continue to embarrass philosophers exceedingly. A well-organised social
system is destroyed by a revolution and is replaced by another system,
which in its turn is considered to be perfectly just; so that what was just
before now becomes unjust. Any amount of sophisms have been produced
to show that force has been placed at the service of justice during
revolutions; these arguments have been many times shown to be absurd.
But the public is so accustomed to believe in natural rights that it cannot
make up its mind to abandon them.
There is hardly anything, not excepting even war, that people have not
tried to bring inside the scope of natural right: they compare war to a
process in which one nation reclaims a right which a malevolent neighbour
refuses to recognise. Our fathers readily acknowledged that God decided
battles in favour of those who had justice on their side; the vanquished were
to be treated as an unsuccessful litigant: they must pay the costs of the warathers readily acknowledged that God decided
battles in favour of those who had justice on their side; the vanquished were
to be treated as an unsuccessful litigant: they must pay the costs of the war

--- PAGE BREAK ---wledged that God decided
battles in favour of those who had justice on their side; the vanquished were
to be treated as an unsuccessful litigant: they must pay the costs of the war

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and give guarantees to the victor in order that the latter might enjoy their
restored rights in peace. At the present time there are plenty of people who
propose that international conflicts should be submitted to arbitration; this
would only be a secularisation of the ancient mythology.31
The people who believe in natural right are not always implacable
enemies of civil struggles, and certainly not of tumultuous rioting; that has
been sufficiently shown in the course of the Dreyfus question. When the
force of the State was in the hands of their adversaries, they acknowledged,
naturally enough, that it was being employed to violate justice, and they
then proved that one might with a good conscience “step out of the region
of legality in order to enter that of justice” (to borrow a phrase of the
Bonapartists); when they could not overthrow the government, they tried at
least to intimidate it. But when they attacked the people who for the time
being controlled the force of the State, they did not at all desire to suppress
that force, for they wished to utilise it some day for their own profit; all the
revolutionary disturbances of the nineteenth century have ended in
reinforcing the power of the State.
Proletarian violence entirely changes the aspect of all the conflicts in
which it intervenes, since it disowns the force organised by the middle
class, and claims to suppress the State which serves as its central nucleus.
Under such conditions, it is no longer possible to argue about the primordial
rights of man. That is why our parliamentary socialists, who spring from the
middle classes and who know nothing outside the ideology of the State, are
so bewildered when they are confronted with working-class violence. They
cannot apply to it the commonplaces which generally serve them when they
speak about force, and they look with terror on movements which may
result in the ruin of the institutions by which they live. If revolutionary
syndicalism triumphs, there will be no more brilliant speeches on immanent
Justice, and the parliamentary regime, so dear to the intellectuals, will be
finished with—it is the abomination of desolation! We must not be
astonished, then, that they speak about violence with so much anger.
Giving evidence on June 5, 1907, before the Cours d’Assises de la Seine,
in the Bousquet-Levy case, Jaurès said, “I have no superstitious belief in
legality, it has already received too many blows; but I always advisen June 5, 1907, before the Cours d’Assises de la Seine,
in the Bousquet-Levy case, Jaurès said, “I have no superstitious belief in
legality, it has already received too many blows; but I always advise

--- PAGE BREAK ---re the Cours d’Assises de la Seine,
in the Bousquet-Levy case, Jaurès said, “I have no superstitious belief in
legality, it has already received too many blows; but I always advise

--- PAGE BREAK ---

workmen to have recourse to legal means, for violence is the sign of
temporary weakness. This is clearly a reminiscence of the Dreyfus question.
Jaurès remembered that his freinds were obliged to have recourse to
revolutionary manifestations, and it is easy to understand that, as a result of
this affair, he had not retained very great respect for legality. He probably
likened the present position of the syndicalists to the former position of the
Dreyfusards; for the moment they are weak, but they are destined ultimately
to have the force of the State at their own disposal; they would then be very
imprudent to destroy by violence a force which is destined to become theirs.
He may even regret at times that the State has been so severely shaken by
the Dreyfus agitation, just as Gambetta regretted that the administration had
lost its former prestige and discipline.
One of the most elegant of Republican ministers32 has made a specialty
of high-sounding phrases directed against the upholders of violence. Viviani
charms deputies, senators, and the employés assembled to admire his
excellency on his official tours, by telling them that violence is the
caricature, or rather “the fallen and degenerate daughter,” of force. After
boasting that he has, by a magnificent gesture, extinguished the lamps of
Heaven, he assumes the attitudes of a matador, at whose feet a furious bull
has fallen.33
If I were more vain about my literary efforts than I am, I should like to
imagine that he was thinking of me when he said in the Senate, on
November 16, 1906, that “one must not mistake a fanatic for a party, nor
rash statements for a system of doctrine.” There is only one pleasure greater
than that of being appreciated by intelligent people, and that is the pleasure
of not being understood by blunder-heads, who are only capable of
expressing in a kind of jargon what serves them in the place of thought. But
I have every reason to suppose that, in the brilliant set which surrounds this
charlatan,34 there is not one who has ever heard of the Mouvement
Socialiste. It is quite within the comprehension of Viviani and his
companions in the Cabinet that people may attempt an insurrection when
they feel themselves solidly organised enough to take over the State; but
working-class violence which has no such aim, seems to them only follyhe Cabinet that people may attempt an insurrection when
they feel themselves solidly organised enough to take over the State; but
working-class violence which has no such aim, seems to them only folly

--- PAGE BREAK ---le may attempt an insurrection when
they feel themselves solidly organised enough to take over the State; but
working-class violence which has no such aim, seems to them only folly

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and an odious caricature of revolution. Do what you like, but don’t kill the
goose.
III
In the course of this study one thing has always been present in my mind,
which seemed to me so evident that I did not think it worth while to lay
much stress on it—that men who are participating in a great social
movement always picture their coming action as a battle in which their
cause is certain to triumph. These constructions, knowledge of which is so
important for historians, I propose to call myths;35 the syndicalist “general
strike” and Marx’s catastrophic revolution are such myths. As remarkable
examples of such myths, I have given those which were constructed by
primitive Christianity, by the Reformation, by the Revolution and by the
followers of Mazzini. I now wish to show that we should not attempt to
analyse such groups of images in the way that we analyse a thing into its
elements, but that they must be taken as a whole, as historical forces, and
that we should be especially careful not to make any comparison between
accomplished fact and the picture people had formed for themselves before
action.
I could have given one more example which is perhaps still more
striking: Catholics have never been discouraged even in the hardest trials,
because they have always pictured the history of the Church as a series of
battles between Satan and the hierarchy supported by Christ; every new
difficulty which arises is only an episode in a war which must finally end in
the victory of Catholicism.
At the beginning of the nineteenth century the revolutionary persecutions
revived this myth of the struggle with Satan, which inspired so many of the
eloquent pages in Joseph de Maistre; this rejuvenation explains to a large
extent the religious renascence which took place at that epoch. If
Catholicism is in danger at the present time, it is to a great extent owing to
the fact that the myth of the Church militant tends to disappear.
Ecclesiastical literature has greatly contributed to rendering it ridiculous;
thus in 1872, a Belgian writer recommended a revival of exorcisms, as they
seemed to him an efficacious means of combating the revolutionaries.36re has greatly contributed to rendering it ridiculous;
thus in 1872, a Belgian writer recommended a revival of exorcisms, as they
seemed to him an efficacious means of combating the revolutionaries.36

--- PAGE BREAK ---ibuted to rendering it ridiculous;
thus in 1872, a Belgian writer recommended a revival of exorcisms, as they
seemed to him an efficacious means of combating the revolutionaries.36

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Many educated Catholics are horrified when they discover that the ideas of
Joseph de Maistre have helped to encourage the ignorance of the clergy,
which did not attempt to acquire an adequate knowledge of a science which
it held to be accursed; to these educated Catholics the myth of the struggle
with Satan then appears dangerous, and they point out its ridiculous aspects;
but they do not in the least understand its historical bearing. The gentle,
sceptical, and, above all, pacific, habits of the present generation are,
moreover, unfavourable to its continued existence; and the enemies of the
Church loudly proclaim that they do not wish to return to a regime of
persecution which might restore their former power to warlike images.
In employing the term myth I believed that I had made a happy choice,
because I thus put myself in a position to refuse any discussion whatever
with the people who wish to submit the idea of a general strike to a detailed
criticism, and who accumulate objections against its practical possibility. It
appears, on the contrary, that I had made a most unfortunate choice, for
while some told me that myths were only suitable to a primitive state of
society, others imagined that I thought the modern world might be moved
by illusions analogous in nature to those which Renan thought might
usefully replace religion.37 But there has been a worse misunderstanding
than this even, for it has been asserted that my theory of myths was only a
kind of lawyer’s plea, a falsification of the real opinions of the
revolutionaries, the sophistry of an intellectualist.
If this were true, I should not have been exactly fortunate, for I have
always tried to escape the influence of that intellectualist philosophy, which
seems to me a great hindrance to the historian who allows himself to be
dominated by it. The contradiction that exists between this philosophy and
the true understanding of events has often struck the readers of Renan.
Renan is continually wavering between his own intuition, which was nearly
always admirable, and a philosophy which cannot touch history without
falling into platitudes; but, alas, he too often believed himself bound to
think in accordance with the scientific opinions of his day.
The intellectualist philosophy finds itself unable to explain phenomena
like the following—the sacrifice of his life which the soldier of Napoleon
made in order to have had the honour of taking part in “immortal deeds”t philosophy finds itself unable to explain phenomena
like the following—the sacrifice of his life which the soldier of Napoleon
made in order to have had the honour of taking part in “immortal deeds”

--- PAGE BREAK ---tself unable to explain phenomena
like the following—the sacrifice of his life which the soldier of Napoleon
made in order to have had the honour of taking part in “immortal deeds”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and of living in the glory of France, knowing all the time that “he would
always be a poor man”; then, again, the extraordinary virtues shown by the
Romans who resigned themselves to a frightful inequality and who suffered
so much to conquer the world;38 “the belief in glory (which was) a value
without equal,” created by Greece, and as a result of which “a selection was
made from the swarming masses of humanity, life acquired an incentive and
there was a recompense here for those who had pursued the good and the
beautiful.”39 The intellectualist philosophy, far from being able to explain
these things, leads, on the contrary, to an admiration for the fifty-first
chapter of Jeremiah, “the lofty though profoundly sad feeling with which
the peaceful man contemplates these falls of empires, and the pity excited in
the heart of the wise man by the spectacle of the nations labouring for
vanity, victims of the arrogance of the few.” Greece, according to Renan,
did not experience anything of that kind, and I do not think that we need
complain about that.40 Moreover, he himself praises the Romans for not
having acted in accordance with the conceptions of the Jewish thinker.
“They laboured, they wore themselves out for nothing, said the Jewish
thinker—yes, doubtless, but those are the virtues that history rewards.”41
Religions constitute a very troublesome problem for the intellectualists,
for they can neither regard them as being without historical importance nor
can they explain them. Renan, for example, has written some very strange
sentences on this subject. “Religion is a necessary imposture. Even the most
obvious ways of throwing dust in people’s eyes cannot be neglected when
you are dealing with a race as stupid as the human species, a race created
for error, which, when it does admit the truth, never does so for the right
reasons. It is necessary then to give it the wrong ones.”42
Comparing Giordano Bruno, who “allowed himself to be burnt at
Champ-de-Flore” with Galileo, who submitted to the Holy See, Renan sides
with the second, because, according to him, the scientist need not bring
anything to support his d‘iscoveries beyond good arguments. He considered
that the Italian philosopher wished to supplement his inadequate proofs by
his sacrifice, and he puts forward this scornful maxim: “A man suffers
martyrdom only for the sake of things about which he is not certain.“43
Renan here confuses conviction, which must have been very powerful ine, and he puts forward this scornful maxim: “A man suffers
martyrdom only for the sake of things about which he is not certain.“43
Renan here confuses conviction, which must have been very powerful in

--- PAGE BREAK ---rd this scornful maxim: “A man suffers
martyrdom only for the sake of things about which he is not certain.“43
Renan here confuses conviction, which must have been very powerful in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bruno’s case, with that particular kind of certitude about the accepted
theories of science, which instruction ultimately produces; it would be
difficult to give a more misleading idea of the forces which really move
men.
The whole of this philosophy can be summed up in the following phrase
of Renan’s: “Human affairs are always an approximation lacking gravity
and precision”; and as a matter of fact, for an intellectualist, what lacks
precision must also lack gravity. But in Renan the conscientious historian
was never entirely asleep, and he at once adds as a corrective: “To have
realised this truth is a great result obtained by philosophy; but it is an
abdication of any active role. The future lies in the hands of those who are
not disillusioned.”44 From this we may conclude that the intellectualist
philosophy is entirely unable to explain the great movements of history.
The intellectualist philosophy would have vainly endeavoured to
convince the ardent Catholics, who for so long struggled successfully
against the revolutionary traditions, that the myth of the Church militant
was not in harmony with the scientific theories formulated by the most
learned authors according to the best rules of criticism; it would never have
succeeded in persuading them. It would not have been possible to shake the
faith that these men had in the promises made to the Church by any
argument; and so long as this faith remained, the myth was, in their eyes,
incontestable. Similarly, the objections urged by philosophy against the
revolutionary myths would have made an impression only on those men
who were anxious to find a pretext for abandoning any active role, for
remaining revolutionary in words only.
I can understand the fear that this myth of the general strike inspires in
many worthy progressives,45 on account of its character of infinity;46 the
world of to-day is very much inclined to return to the opinions of the
ancients and to subordinate ethics to the smooth working of public affairs,
which results in a definition of virtue as the golden mean; as long as
socialism remains a doctrine expressed only in words, it is very easy to
deflect it towards this doctrine of the golden mean; but this transformation
is manifestly impossible when the myth of the “general strike” is
introduced, as this implies an absolute revolution. You know as well as I dothis doctrine of the golden mean; but this transformation
is manifestly impossible when the myth of the “general strike” is
introduced, as this implies an absolute revolution. You know as well as I do

--- PAGE BREAK ---golden mean; but this transformation
is manifestly impossible when the myth of the “general strike” is
introduced, as this implies an absolute revolution. You know as well as I do

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that all that is best in the modern mind is derived from this “torment of the
infinite”; you are not one of those people who look upon the tricks by
means of which readers can be deceived by words, as happy discoveries.
That is why you will not condemn me for having attached great worth to a
myth which gives to socialism such high moral value and such great
sincerity. It is because the theory of myths tends to produce such fine results
that so many seek to dispute it.
I9
The mind of man is so constituted that it cannot remain content with the
mere observation of facts, but always attempts to penetrate into the inner
reason of things. I therefore ask myself whether it might not be desirable to
study this theory of myths more thoroughly, utilising the enlightenment we
owe to the Bergsonian philosophy. The attempt I am about to submit to you
is doubtless very imperfect, but I think that it has been planned in
accordance with the only method which can possibly throw light on the
problem. In the first place, we should notice that the discussions of the
moralists hardly ever come into contact with what is truly fundamental in
our individuality. As a rule, they simply try to appraise our already
completed acts with the help of the moral valuations formulated in advance
by society, for the different types of action commonest in contemporary life.
They say that in this way they are determining motives; but these motives
are of the same nature as those which jurists take account of in criminal
justice; they are merely social valuations of facts known to everybody.
Many philosophers, especially the ancients, have believed that all values
could be deduced from utility, and if any social valuation does exist, it is
surely this latter,—theologians estimate transgressions by the place they
occupy on the road which, according to average human experience, leads to
mortal sin; they are thus able to ascertain the degree of viciousness of any
given sin,—while the moderns usually teach that we act after having
established a particular maxim (which is, as it were, an abstraction or
generalisation of our projected conduct), and justify this maxim by
deducing it (more or less sophistically) from general principles which are,
to a certain extent, analogous to the Declaration of the Rights of Man; and,
as a matter of fact, this theory was probably inspired by the admirationsophistically) from general principles which are,
to a certain extent, analogous to the Declaration of the Rights of Man; and,
as a matter of fact, this theory was probably inspired by the admiration

--- PAGE BREAK ---general principles which are,
to a certain extent, analogous to the Declaration of the Rights of Man; and,
as a matter of fact, this theory was probably inspired by the admiration

--- PAGE BREAK ---

excited by the Bill of Rights placed at the head of each American
constitution.47
We are all so extremely concerned in knowing what the world thinks of
us that, sooner or later, considerations analogous to those the moralists
speak of do pass through our mind; as a result of this the moralists have
been able to imagine that they have really made an appeal to experience for
the purpose of finding out what exists at the bottom of the creative
conscience, when, as a matter of fact, all they have done is to consider
already accomplished acts from the point of view of its social effects.
Bergson asks us, on the contrary, to consider the inner depths of the mind
and what happens there during a creative moment. “There are,” he says,
“two different selves, one of which is, as it were, the external projection of
the other, its spatial and, so to speak, social representation. We reach the
former by deep introspection, which leads us to grasp our inner states as
living things, constantly becoming, as statues not amenable to measure. . . .
But the moments at which we thus grasp ourselves are rare, and that is just
why we are rarely free. The greater part of our time we live outside
ourselves, hardly perceiving anything of ourselves but our own ghost, a
colourless shadow. . . . Hence we live for the external world rather than for
ourselves; we speak rather than think; we are acted rather than act
ourselves. To act freely is to recover possession of oneself, and to get back
into pure duration.“48
In order to acquire a real understanding of this psychology we must
“carry ourselves back in thought to those moments of our life, when we
made some serious decision, moments unique of their kind, which will
never be repeated—any more than the past phases in the history of a nation
will ever come back again.”49 It is very evident that we enjoy this liberty
preeminently when we are making an effort to create a new individuality in
ourselves, thus endeavouring to break the bonds of habit which enclose us.
It might at first be supposed that it would be sufficient to say that, at such
moments, we are dominated by an overwhelming emotion; but everybody
now recognises that movement is the essence of emotional life, and it is,
then, in terms of movement that we must speak of creative consciousness.e dominated by an overwhelming emotion; but everybody
now recognises that movement is the essence of emotional life, and it is,
then, in terms of movement that we must speak of creative consciousness.

--- PAGE BREAK ---erwhelming emotion; but everybody
now recognises that movement is the essence of emotional life, and it is,
then, in terms of movement that we must speak of creative consciousness.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It seems to me that this psychology of the deeper life must be represented
in the following way. We must abandon the idea that the soul can be
compared to something moving, which, obeying a more or less mechanical
law, is impelled in the direction of certain given motive forces. To say that
we are acting, implies that we are creating an imaginary world placed ahead
of the present world and composed of movements which depend entirely on
us. In this way our freedom becomes perfectly intelligible. Starting from a
study of these artificial constructions which embrace everything that
interests us, several philosophers, inspired by Bergsonian doctrines, have
been led to formulate a rather startling theory. Edouard Le Roy, for
example, says: “Our real body is the entire universe in as far as it is
experienced by us. And what common sense more strictly calls our body is
only the region of least unconsciousness and greatest liberty in this greater
body, the part which we most directly control and by means of which we
are able to act on the rest.”50 But we must not, as this subtle philosopher
constantly does, confuse a passing state of our willing activity with the
stable affirmations of science.51
These artificial worlds generally disappear from our minds without
leaving any trace in our memory; but when the masses are deeply moved it
then becomes possible to trace the outlines of the kind of representation
which constitutes a social myth.
This belief in “glory” which Renan praised so much quickly fades away
into rhapsodies when it is not supported by myths; these myths have varied
greatly in different epochs: the citizen of the Greek republics, the Roman
legionary, the soldier of the wars of Liberty and the artist of the
Renaissance did not picture their conception of glory by the help of the
same set of images. Renan complained that “the faith in glory” is
compromised by the limited historical outlook more or less prevalent at the
present day. “Very few,” he said, “act with a view to immortal fame. . . .
Every one wants to enjoy his own glory; they eat it in the green blade, and
do not gather the sheaves after death.”52 In my opinion, this limited
historical outlook is, on the contrary, not a cause but a consequence; it
results from the weakening of the heroic myths which had such great
popularity at the beginning of the nineteenth century; the belief in “glory”is, on the contrary, not a cause but a consequence; it
results from the weakening of the heroic myths which had such great
popularity at the beginning of the nineteenth century; the belief in “glory”

--- PAGE BREAK ---, not a cause but a consequence; it
results from the weakening of the heroic myths which had such great
popularity at the beginning of the nineteenth century; the belief in “glory”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

perished and a limited historic outlook became predominant at the time
when these myths vanished.53
As long as there are no myths accepted by the masses, one may go on
talking of revolts indefinitely, without ever provoking any revolutionary
movement; this is what gives such importance to the general strike and
renders it so odious to socialists who are afraid of a revolution; they do all
they can to shake the confidence felt by the workers in the preparations they
are making for the revolution; and in order to succeed in this they cast
ridicule on the idea of the general strike—the only idea that could have any
value as a motive force. One of the chief means employed by them is to
represent it as a Utopia; this is easy enough, because there are very few
myths which are perfectly free from any Utopian element.
The revolutionary myths which exist at the present time are almost free
from any such mixture; by means of them it is possible to understand the
activity, the feelings and the ideas of the masses preparing themselves to
enter on a decisive struggle; the myths are not descriptions of things, but
expressions of a determination to act. A Utopia is, on the contrary, an
intellectual product; it is the work of theorists who, after observing and
discussing the known facts, seek to establish a model to which they can
compare existing society in order to estimate the amount of good and evil it
contains.54 It is a combination of imaginary institutions having sufficient
analogies to real institutions for the jurist to be able to reason about them; it
is a construction which can be taken to pieces, and certain parts of it have
been shaped in such a way that they can (with a few alterations by way of
adjustment) be fitted into approaching legislation. Whilst contemporary
myths lead men to prepare themselves for a combat which will destroy the
existing state of things, the effect of Utopias has always been to direct
men’s minds towards reforms which can be brought about by patching up
the existing system; it is not surprising, then, that so many makers of
Utopias were able to develop into able statesmen when they had acquired a
greater experience of political life. A myth cannot be refuted, since it is, at
bottom, identical with the convictions of a group, being the expression of
these convictions in the language of movement; and it is, in consequence,
unanalysable into parts which could be placed on the plane of historicalh the convictions of a group, being the expression of
these convictions in the language of movement; and it is, in consequence,
unanalysable into parts which could be placed on the plane of historical

--- PAGE BREAK ---a group, being the expression of
these convictions in the language of movement; and it is, in consequence,
unanalysable into parts which could be placed on the plane of historical

--- PAGE BREAK ---

descriptions. A Utopia, on the contrary, can be discussed like any other
social constitution; the spontaneous movements it presupposes can be
compared with the movements actually observed in the course of history,
and we can in this way evaluate its verisimilitude; it is possible to refute
Utopias by showing that the economic system on which they have been
made to rest is incompatible with the necessary conditions of modem
production.
Liberal political economy is one of the best examples of a Utopia that
could be given. A state of society was imagined which could contain only
the types produced by commerce, and which would exist under the law of
the fullest competition; it is recognised to-day that this kind of ideal society
would be as difficult to realise as that of Plato; but several great statesmen
of modern times have owed their fame to the efforts they made to introduce
something of this ideal of commercial liberty into industrial legislation.
We have here a Utopia free from any mixture of myth; the history of
French democracy, however, presents a very remarkable combination of
Utopias and myths. The theories that inspired the authors of our first
constitutions are regarded to-day as extremely chimerical; indeed, people
are often loth to concede them the value which they have been so long
recognised to possess—that of an ideal on which legislators, magistrates,
and administrators should constantly fix their eyes, in order to secure for
men a little more justice. With these Utopias were mixed up the myths
which represented the struggle against the ancient regime; so long as the
myths survived, all the refutations of liberal Utopias could produce no
result; the myth safeguarded the Utopia with which it was mixed.
For a long time Socialism was scarcely anything but a Utopia; the
Marxists were right in claiming for their master the honour of bringing
about a change in this state of things; Socialism has now become the
preparation of the masses employed in great industries for the suppression
of the State and property; and it is no longer necessary, therefore, to discuss
how men must organise themselves in order to enjoy future happiness;
everything is reduced to the revolutionary apprenticeship of the proletariat.
Unfortunately Marx was not acquainted with facts which have now become
familiar to us; we know better than he did what strikes are, because we havethe revolutionary apprenticeship of the proletariat.
Unfortunately Marx was not acquainted with facts which have now become
familiar to us; we know better than he did what strikes are, because we have

--- PAGE BREAK ---prenticeship of the proletariat.
Unfortunately Marx was not acquainted with facts which have now become
familiar to us; we know better than he did what strikes are, because we have

--- PAGE BREAK ---

been able to observe economic conflicts of considerable extent and
duration; the myth of the “general strike” has become popular, and is now
firmly established in the minds of the workers; we possess ideas about
violence that it would have been difficult for him to have formed; we can
then complete his doctrine, instead of making commentaries on his text, as
his unfortunate disciples have done for so long.
In this way Utopias tend to disappear completely from Socialism;
Socialism has no longer any need to concern itself with the organisation of
industry since capitalism does that. I think, moreover, that I have shown
that the general strike corresponds to a kind of feeling which is so closely
related to those which are necessary to promote production in any very
progressive state of industry, that a revolutionary apprenticeship may at the
same time be considered as an apprenticeship which will enable the
workmen to occupy a high rank among the best workmen of his own trade.
People who are living in this world of “myths,” are secure from all
refutation; this has led many to assert that Socialism is a kind of religion.
For a long time people have been struck by the fact that religious
convictions are unaffected by criticism, and from that they have concluded
that everything which claims to be beyond science must be a religion. It has
been observed also that Christianity tends at the present day to be less a
system of dogmas than a Christian life, i.e. a moral reform penetrating to
the roots of one’s being; consequently, a new analogy has been discovered
between religion and the revolutionary Socialism which aims at the
apprenticeship, preparation, and even reconstruction of the individual,—a
gigantic task. But Bergson has taught us that it is not only religion which
occupies the profounder region of our mental life; revolutionary myths have
their place there equally with religion. The arguments which Yves Guyot
urges against Socialism on the ground that it is a religion, seem to me, then,
to be founded on an imperfect acquaintance with the new psychology.
Renan was very surprised to discover that Socialists are beyond
discouragement. “After each abortive experiment they recommence their
work: the solution is not yet found, but it will be. The idea that no solution
exists never occurs to them, and in this lies their strength.”55 The
explanation given by Renan is superficial; it regards Socialism as a Utopia,t yet found, but it will be. The idea that no solution
exists never occurs to them, and in this lies their strength.”55 The
explanation given by Renan is superficial; it regards Socialism as a Utopia,

--- PAGE BREAK ---will be. The idea that no solution
exists never occurs to them, and in this lies their strength.”55 The
explanation given by Renan is superficial; it regards Socialism as a Utopia,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that is, as a thing which can be compared to observed realities; if this were
true, it would be scarcely possible to understand how confidence can
survive so many failures. But by the side of the Utopias there have always
been myths capable of urging on the workers to revolt. For a long time
these myths were founded on the legends of the Revolution, and they
preserved all their value as long as these legends remained unshaken. To-
day the confidence of the Socialists is greater than ever since the myth of
the general strike dominates all the truly working-class movement. No
failure proves anything against Socialism since the latter has become a
work of preparation (for revolution); if they are checked, it merely proves
that the apprenticeship has been insufficient; they must set to work again
with more courage, persistence, and confidence than before; their
experience of labour has taught workmen that it is by means of patient
apprenticeship that a man may become a true comrade, and it is also the
only way of becoming a true revolutionary.56
9
The works of my friends have been treated with great contempt by the
Socialists who mix in politics, but at the same time with much sympathy by
people who do not concern themselves with parliamentary affairs. We
cannot be suspected of seeking to carry on a kind of intellectual industry,
and we protest every time people profess to confuse us with the
intellectuals, who do, as a matter of fact, make the exploitation of thought
their profession. The old stagers of democracy cannot understand why
people should take so much trouble unless they secretly aim at the
leadership of the working classes. However, we could not act in any other
way.
The man who has constructed a Utopia designed to make mankind happy
is inclined to look upon the invention as his own personal property; he
believes that no one is in a better position than he is to apply his system. He
thinks it very unreasonable that his writings do not procure him some post
in the government. But we, on the contrary, have invented nothing at all,
and even assert that nothing can be invented; we have limited ourselves to
defining the historical bearing of the notion of a general strike. We havewe, on the contrary, have invented nothing at all,
and even assert that nothing can be invented; we have limited ourselves to
defining the historical bearing of the notion of a general strike. We have

--- PAGE BREAK ---have invented nothing at all,
and even assert that nothing can be invented; we have limited ourselves to
defining the historical bearing of the notion of a general strike. We have

--- PAGE BREAK ---

tried to show that a new culture might spring from the struggle of the
revolutionary trades unions against the employers and the State; our
greatest claim to originality consists in our having maintained that the
proletariat can emancipate itself without being compelled to seek the
guidance of that section of the middle classes which concerns itself
professionally with matters of the intellect. We have thus been led to regard
as essential in contemporary phenomena what was before regarded as
accessory, and what is indeed really educative for a revolutionary proletariat
that is serving its apprenticeship in struggle. It would be impossible for us
to exercise any direct influence on such a work of formation.
We may play a useful part if we limit ourselves to attacking middle-class
thought in such a way as to put the proletariat on its guard against an
invasion of ideas and customs from the hostile class.
Men who have received an elementary education are generally imbued
with a certain reverence for print as such, and they readily attribute genius
to the people who attract the attention of the literary world to any great
extent; they imagine that they must have a great deal to learn from authors
whose names are so often mentioned with praise in the newspapers; they
listen with singular respect to the commentaries that these literary prize-
winners present to them. It is not easy to fight against these prejudices, but
it is a very useful work; we regard this task as being absolutely of the first
importance, and we can carry it to a profitable conclusion without ever
attempting to direct the working-class movement. The proletariat must be
preserved from the experience of the Germans who conquered the Roman
Empire; the latter were ashamed of being barbarians, and put themselves to
school with the rhetoricians of the Latin decadence; they had no reason to
congratulate themselves for having wished to be civilised.
In the course of my career I have touched on many subjects which might
be considered to be outside the proper range of a Socialist writer. I have
endeavoured to show that the science whose marvellous results the middle
class constantly boasts of is not as infallible as those who live by its
exploitation would have us believe; and that a study of the phenomena of
the Socialist world would often furnish philosophers with an enlightenment
which they do not find in the works of the learned. I do not believe, then,us believe; and that a study of the phenomena of
the Socialist world would often furnish philosophers with an enlightenment
which they do not find in the works of the learned. I do not believe, then,

--- PAGE BREAK ---t a study of the phenomena of
the Socialist world would often furnish philosophers with an enlightenment
which they do not find in the works of the learned. I do not believe, then,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that I am labouring in vain, for in this way I help to ruin the prestige of
middle-class culture, a prestige which up to now has been opposed to the
complete development of the principle of the “class war.”
In the last chapter of my book, I have said that art is an anticipation of the
kind of work that ought to be carried on in a highly productive state of
society. It seems that this observation has been very much misunderstood
by some of my critics, who have been under the impression that I wished to
propose as the socialist solution—an aesthetic education of the proletariat
under the tutelage of modem artists. This would have been a singular
paradox on my part, for the art that we possess to-day is a residue left to us
by an aristocratic society, a residue which has, moreover, been greatly
corrupted by the middle class. According to the most enlightened minds, it
is greatly to be desired that contemporary art could renew itself by a more
intimate contact with craftsmen; academic art has used up the greatest
geniuses without succeeding in producing anything which equals what has
been given us by generations of craftsmen. I had in view something
altogether different from such an imitation when I spoke of an anticipation,
I wished to show how one found in art (practised by its best representatives,
and, above all, in its best periods) analogies which make it easier for us to
understand what the qualities of the workers of the future would be.
Moreover, so little did I think of asking the École des Beaux-Arts to provide
a teaching suitable to the proletariat, that I based the morale of the
producers not on an aesthetic education transmitted by the middle class, but
on the feelings developed by the struggles of the workers against their
masters.
These observations lead us to recognize the enormous difference which
exists between the new school and the anarchism which flourished twenty
years ago in Paris. The middle class itself had much less admiration for its
literary men and its artists than the anarchists of that time felt for them;
their enthusiasm for the celebrities of a day often surpassed that felt by
disciples for the greatest masters of the past. We need not then be
astonished that by a kind of compensation the novelists and the poets thus
adulated have shown a sympathy for the anarchists which has often
astonished people who do not know what a force vanity is in the artistic
world.kind of compensation the novelists and the poets thus
adulated have shown a sympathy for the anarchists which has often
astonished people who do not know what a force vanity is in the artistic
world.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n the novelists and the poets thus
adulated have shown a sympathy for the anarchists which has often
astonished people who do not know what a force vanity is in the artistic
world.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Intellectually, then, this kind of anarchism was entirely middle class, and
the Guesdistes attacked it for this reason. They said that their adversaries,
while proclaiming themselves the irreconcilable enemies of the past, were
themselves the servile pupils of this cursed past; they observed, moreover,
that the most eloquent dissertations on revolt could produce nothing, and
that literature cannot change the course of history. The anarchists replied by
showing that their adversaries had entered on a road which could not lead to
the revolution they announced; by taking part in political debates,
Socialists, they said, will become merely reformers of a more or less radical
type, and will lose the sense of their revolutionary formulas. Experience has
quickly shown that the anarchists were right in this view, and that in
entering into middle-class institutions, revolutionaries have been
transformed by adopting the spirit of these institutions. All the deputies
agree that there is very little difference between a middle-class
representative and a representative of the proletariat.
Many anarchists, tired at last of continually reading the same
grandiloquent maledictions hurled at the capitalist system, set themselves to
find a way which would lead them to acts which were really revolutionary.
They became members of syndicates which, thanks to violent strikes,
realised, to a certain extent, the social war they had so often heard spoken
of. Historians will one day see in this entry of the anarchists into the
syndicates one of the greatest events that has been produced in our time,
and then the name of my poor friend Fernand Pelloutier will be as well
known as it deserves to be.57
The anarchist writers who remained faithful to their former revolutionary
literature do not seem to have looked with much favour upon the passage of
their friends into the syndicates; their attitude proves that the anarchists who
became syndicalists showed real originality, and had not merely applied
theories which had been fabricated in philosophical coteries.
Above all, they taught the workers that they need not be ashamed of acts
of violence. Till that time it had been usual in the Socialist world to
attenuate or to excuse the violence of the strikers; the new members of the
syndicates regarded these acts of violence as normal manifestations of the
struggle, and as a result of this, the tendencies at work in the syndicates,violence of the strikers; the new members of the
syndicates regarded these acts of violence as normal manifestations of the
struggle, and as a result of this, the tendencies at work in the syndicates,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

pushing them towards trades unionism, were abandoned. It was their
revolutionary temperament which led them to this conception of violence,
for it would be a gross error to suppose that these former anarchists carried
over into the workers’ associations any of their ideas about propaganda by
deed.
Revolutionary syndicalism is not then, as many believe, the first
confused form of the working-class movement, which is bound, in the end,
to free itself from this youthful error; it has been, on the contrary, the
produce of an improvement brought about by men who had just arrested a
threatened deviation towards middle-class ideas. It might be compared to
the Reformation, which wished to prevent Christianity submitting to the
influence of the humanists; like the Reformation, revolutionary syndicalism
may prove abortive, if it loses, as did the latter, the sense of its own
originality; it is this which gives such great interest to inquiries on
proletarian violence.
July 15th, 1907.

--- PAGE BREAK ---prove abortive, if it loses, as did the latter, the sense of its own
originality; it is this which gives such great interest to inquiries on
proletarian violence.
July 15th, 1907.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Introduction to the )irst 3uElication
THE REFLECTIONS that I submit to the readers of the Mouvement
Socialiste on the subject of violence have been inspired by some simple
observations about very evident facts, which play an increasingly marked
role in the history of contemporary classes.
For a long time I had been struck by the fact that the normal development
of strikes is accompanied by an important series of acts of violence;59 but
certain learned sociologists seek to disguise a phenomenon that every one
who cares to use his eyes must have noticed. Revolutionary syndicalism
keeps alive in the minds of the masses the desire to strike, and only prospers
when important strikes, accompanied by violence, take place. Socialism
tends to appear more and more as a theory of revolutionary syndicalism—or
rather as a philosophy of modem history, in as far as it is under the
influence of this syndicalism. It follows from these incontestable data, that
if we desire to discuss Socialism with any benefit, we must first of all
investigate the functions of violence in actual social conditions.60
I do not believe that this question has yet been approached with the care
it admits of; I hope that these reflections will lead a few thinkers to examine
the problems of proletarian violence more closely. I cannot too strongly
recommend this investigation to the new school which, inspired by the
principles of Marx rather than by the formulas taught by the official
proprietors of Marxism, is about to give to Socialist doctrines a sense of
reality and a gravity which it certainly has lacked for several years. Since
the new school calls itself Marxist, syndicalist, revolutionary, it should have
nothing so much at heart as the investigation of the exact historical
significance of the spontaneous movements which are being produced in
the working classes, movements which may possibly ensure that the future
direction of social development will conform to Marx’s ideas.ificance of the spontaneous movements which are being produced in
the working classes, movements which may possibly ensure that the future
direction of social development will conform to Marx’s ideas.

--- PAGE BREAK ---taneous movements which are being produced in
the working classes, movements which may possibly ensure that the future
direction of social development will conform to Marx’s ideas.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Socialism is a philosophy of the history of contemporary institutions, and
Marx has always argued as a philosopher of history when he was not led
away by personal polemics to write about matters outside the proper scope
of his own system.
The Socialist imagines, then, that he has been transported into a very
distant future, so that he can consider actual events as elements of a long
and completed development, and he can attribute to them the colour that
they might take for a future philosopher. Such a procedure certainly
presupposes a considerable use of hypothesis; but without certain
hypotheses about the future there can be no social philosophy, no reflection
on evolution, and no important action in the present even. The object of this
study is a more thorough investigation of customs, and not a discussion of
the merits or faults of certain important people. I want to find out how the
feelings by which the masses are moved form themselves into groups; all
the discussions of the moralists about the motives for the actions of
prominent men, and all psychological analyses of character are, then, quite
secondary in importance, and even altogether negligible.
It seems, however, that it is more difficult to reason in this way, when we
are concerned with acts of violence, than with any other set of
circumstances. That is due to our habit of looking on conspiracy as the
typical example of violence, or as the anticipation of a revolution; we are
thus led to ask ourselves whether certain criminal acts could not be
considered heroic, or at least meritorious, if we were to take into account
the happy consequences for their fellow-citizens anticipated by the
perpetrators, as the result of their crimes. Certain individual criminal
attempts have rendered such great services to democracy that the latter has
often consecrated as great men those who, at the peril of their lives, have
tried to rid it of its enemies; it has done this the more readily since these
great men were no longer living when the hour for dividing the spoils of
victory arrived, and we know that the dead obtain admiration more easily
than the living.
Each time an outrage occurs, the doctors of the ethico-social sciences,
who swarm in journalism, indulge in reflections on the question, Can the
criminal act be excused, or sometimes even justified, from the point of viewoccurs, the doctors of the ethico-social sciences,
who swarm in journalism, indulge in reflections on the question, Can the
criminal act be excused, or sometimes even justified, from the point of view

--- PAGE BREAK ---of the ethico-social sciences,
who swarm in journalism, indulge in reflections on the question, Can the
criminal act be excused, or sometimes even justified, from the point of view

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of the highest justice? Then there is an irruption into the democratic press of
that casuistry for which the Jesuits have so many times been reproached.
I think it may be useful here to mention a note on the assassination of the
Grand Duke Sergius which appeared in Humanité of February 18, 1905; the
author was not one of those vulgar members of the Bloc whose intelligence
is hardly superior to that of a negrito, he was one of the leading lights of the
State universities: Lucien Herr is one of those who ought to know what they
are talking about. The title Just Reprisals warns us that the question is to be
treated from a high ethical standpoint; it is the judgment of the world61
which is about to be pronounced. The author scrupulously endeavours to
assign the responsibility, calculates the equivalence which ought to exist
between a crime and its expiation, goes back to the original misdeeds which
have engendered this series of acts of violence in Russia; all this is a
philosophy of history strictly in accordance with the pure principles of the
Corsican vendetta. Carried away by the lyricism of his subject, Lucien Herr
concludes in the style of a prophet: “The battle will go on in this way, in
suffering and in blood, abominable and odious, till that predestined day,
which cannot be far off, when the throne itself, the homicidal throne, the
throne which heaps up so many crimes, will fall down into the ditch that has
to-day been dug for it.” This prophecy has not yet been realised, but the true
character of all great prophecies is never to be realised; the homicidal
throne is much more secure than the cash-box of Humanité. But, after all,
what can we learn from all this?
It is not the business of the historian to award prizes for virtue, to propose
the erection of statues, or to establish any catechism whatever; his business
is to understand what is least individual in the course of events; the
questions which interest the chroniclers and excite novelists are those which
he most willingly leaves on one side. And so I am not at all concerned to
justify the perpetrators of violence, but to inquire into the function of
violence of the working classes in contemporary Socialism.
It seems to me that the problem of violence has been very badly
formulated by many Socialists; as a proof of this, I instance an article
published in the Socialiste on October 21, 1905, by Rappoport. The author,
who has written a book on the philosophy of history,62 ought, it seems tocialists; as a proof of this, I instance an article
published in the Socialiste on October 21, 1905, by Rappoport. The author,
who has written a book on the philosophy of history,62 ought, it seems to

--- PAGE BREAK ---of this, I instance an article
published in the Socialiste on October 21, 1905, by Rappoport. The author,
who has written a book on the philosophy of history,62 ought, it seems to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

me, to have discussed the question by examining the remoter consequences
of these events; but, on the contrary, he considered them under their most
immediate, most paltry, and, consequently, least historical aspect.
According to him, syndicalism tends necessarily to opportunism, and as this
law does not seem to be verified in France, he adds: “If in some Latin
countries it assumes revolutionary attitudes, that is mere appearance. It
shouts louder, but that is always for the purpose of demanding reforms
inside the framework of existing society. It is a meliorism by blows, but it is
always meliorism.”
Thus there would be two kinds of meliorism: the one patronised by the
Musée Social, the Direction du Travail, and Jaurès, which would work with
the aid of maxims, half-lies, and supplication to eternal justice; the other
proceeds by blows —the latter being the only one that is within the scope of
uneducated people who have not yet been enlightened by a knowledge of
advanced social economics. These worthy people, democrats devoted to the
cause of the Rights of man and the Duties of the informer, sociologist
members of the Bloc, think that violence will disappear when popular
education becomes more advanced; they recommend, then, a great increase
in the numbers of courses and lectures; they hope to overturn revolutionary
syndicalism by the breath of the professors. It is very strange that a
revolutionary like Rappoport should agree with these worthy progressives63
and their acolytes in their estimate of the meaning of syndicalism; this can
only be explained by admitting that even for the best-informed Socialists
the problems of violence still remain very obscure.
To examine the effects of violence it is necessary to start from its distant
consequences and not from its immediate results. We should not ask
whether it is more or less directly advantageous for contemporary workmen
than adroit diplomacy would be, but we should inquire what will result
from the introduction of violence into the relations of the proletariat with
society. We are not comparing two kinds of reformism, but we are
endeavouring to find out what contemporary violence is in relation to the
future social revolution.
Many will reproach me for not having given any information which
might be useful for tactical purposes; no formulas, no recipes. What thenrary violence is in relation to the
future social revolution.
Many will reproach me for not having given any information which
might be useful for tactical purposes; no formulas, no recipes. What then

--- PAGE BREAK ---relation to the
future social revolution.
Many will reproach me for not having given any information which
might be useful for tactical purposes; no formulas, no recipes. What then

--- PAGE BREAK ---

was the use of writing at all? Clear-headed people will say that these studies
are addressed to men who live outside the realities of everyday life and
outside the true movement—that is, outside editors’ offices, parliamentary
lobbies, and the ante-chambers of the Socialist financiers. Those who have
become scientists merely by coming into contact with Belgian sociology
will accuse me of having a metaphysical rather than a scientific mind.64
These are opinions which will scarcely touch me, since I have never paid
any attention to the views of people who think vulgar stupidity the height of
wisdom, and who admire above all men who speak and write without
thinking.
Marx also was accused by the great lords of positivism of having, in
Capital, treated economics metaphysically; they were astonished “that he
had confined himself to a mere critical analysis of actual facts, instead of
formulating receipts.”65 This reproach does not seem to have moved him
very much; moreover, in his preface to his book, he had warned the reader
that he would not determine the social position of any particular country,
and that he would confine himself to an investigation of the laws of
capitalist production, “the tendencies working with iron necessity towards
inevitable results.”66
One does not need a great knowledge of history to perceive that the
mystery of historical development is only intelligible to men who are far
removed from superficial disturbances; the chroniclers and the actors of the
drama do not see at all, what, later on, will be regarded as fundamental; so
that one might formulate this apparently paradoxical rule, “It is necessary to
be outside in order to see the inside.” When we apply these principals to
contemporary events we run the risk of being taken for metaphysicians, but
that is of no importance, for this time we are not at Brussels savez-vous,
sais-tu, pour une fois.67 If we are dissatisfied with the unsystematic views
formed by common sense, we must follow a method altogether opposed to
that of the sociologists, who found their reputation amongst stupid people
by means of insipid and confused chatter; we must firmly resolve to ignore
immediate applications, and think only of elaborating generalisations and
concepts; it is necessary to set aside all the favourite preoccupations of thefused chatter; we must firmly resolve to ignore
immediate applications, and think only of elaborating generalisations and
concepts; it is necessary to set aside all the favourite preoccupations of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---st firmly resolve to ignore
immediate applications, and think only of elaborating generalisations and
concepts; it is necessary to set aside all the favourite preoccupations of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

politicians. I hope that in the end it will be recognized that I have never
broken this rule.
Though they may lack other qualities, these reflections possess one merit
which cannot be questioned; it is quite evident that they are inspired by a
passionate love of truth. Love of truth has become a rare enough quality;
the members of the Bloc despise it profoundly; official Socialists regard it
as having anarchial tendencies; politicians and their hangers-on cannot
sufficiently insult the wretched people who prefer truth to the delights of
power. But there are still some honest people left in France, and it is for
them alone that I have always written.
The greater my experience the more I have recognised that in the study of
historical questions a passion for truth is worth more than the most learned
methodologies; it enables one to break through conventional wrappings, to
penetrate to the foundations of things, and to grasp reality. There has never
been a great historian who has not been altogether carried along by this
passion; and looking at this matter closely, one sees that it is this passion
which has given rise to so many happy intuitions.
I do not claim that I have, in this book, said everything that there is to say
about violence, and still less to have produced a systematic theory of
violence. I have merely reunited and revised a series of articles which
appeared in an Italian review, Il Divenire sociale,68 a review which
maintains, on the other side of the Alps, the good fight against the exploiters
of popular credulity. The articles were written without any fixed plan; I
have not tried to rewrite them, because I did not know how to set about
giving a didactic appearance to such an exposition; it even seemed to me
better to preserve their untidy arrangement, since in that form they will
perhaps more easily awake thought. We should always be careful in
opening up a little-known subject, not to trace its boundaries too rigorously,
for in this way the door is closed to the many new facts which arise from
unforeseen circumstances. Time after time the theorists of Socialism have
been embarrassed by contemporary history. They had constructed
magnificent formulas, clear-cut and symmetrical, but they could not make
them fit the facts. Rather than abandon their theories, they preferred torrassed by contemporary history. They had constructed
magnificent formulas, clear-cut and symmetrical, but they could not make
them fit the facts. Rather than abandon their theories, they preferred to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

declare that the most important facts were mere anomalies, which science
must ignore if it is to obtain a real understanding of the whole.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

&haSter
&lass :ar and Violence
I. War of the poorer groups against the rich groups—opposition
of democracy to the division into classes—methods of buying
social peace—the corporative mind.
II. Illusions relating to the disappearance of violence—the
mechanism of conciliation and the encouragement which it gives
to strikers—influence of fear on social legislation and its
consequences.
EVERYBODY COMPLAINS that discussions about Socialism are
generally exceedingly obscure. This obscurity is due, for the most part, to
the fact that contemporary Socialists use a terminology which no longer
corresponds to their ideas. The best known among the people who call
themselves revisionists do not wish to appear to be abandoning certain
phrases, which have served for a very long time as a label to characterise
Socialist literature. When Bernstein, perceiving the enormous contradiction
between the language of social democracy and the true nature of its activity,
urged his German comrades to have the courage to appear what they were
in reality,69 and to revise a doctrine that had become mendacious, there was
a universal outburst of indignation at his audacity; and the reformists
themselves were not the least eager of the defenders of the ancient formula.
I remember hearing well-known French Socialists say they found it easier
to accept the tactics of Millerand than the arguments of Bernstein.
This idolatry of words plays a large part in the history of all ideologies;
the preservation of a Marxist vocabulary by people who have become

--- PAGE BREAK ---rand than the arguments of Bernstein.
This idolatry of words plays a large part in the history of all ideologies;
the preservation of a Marxist vocabulary by people who have become

--- PAGE BREAK ---

completely estranged from the thought of Marx constitutes a great
misfortune for Socialism. The expression “class war,” for example, is
employed in the most improper manner; and until a precise meaning can be
given to this term, we must give up all hope of a reasonable exposition of
Socialism.e expression “class war,” for example, is
employed in the most improper manner; and until a precise meaning can be
given to this term, we must give up all hope of a reasonable exposition of
Socialism.

A. To most people the class war is the principle of Socialist tactics. That
means that the Socialist party founds its electoral successes on the clashing
of interests which exist in an acute state between certain groups, and that, if
need be, it would undertake to make this hostility still more acute; their
candidates ask the poorest and most numerous class to look upon
themselves as forming a corporation, and they offer to become the
advocates of this corporation; they promise to use their influence as
representatives to improve the lot of the disinherited. Thus we are not very
far from what happened in the Greek states; Parliamentary Socialists are
very much akin to the demagogues who clamoured constantly for the
abolition of debts, and the division of landed property, who put all public
charges upon the rich, and invented plots in order to get large fortunes
confiscated. “In the democracies in which the crowd is above the law,” says
Aristotle, “the demagogues, by their continual attacks upon the rich, always
divide the city into two camps . . . the oligarchs should abandon all
swearing of oaths like those they swear to-day; for there are cities in which
they have taken this oath—I will be the constant enemy of the people, and I
will do them all the evil that lies in my power.”70 Here, certainly, is a war
between two classes as clearly defined as it can be; but it seems to me
absurd to assert that it was in this way that Marx understood the class war,
which, according to him, was the essence of Socialism.
I believe that the authors of the French law of August 11, 1848, had their
heads full of these classical reminiscences when they decreed punishment
against all those who, by speeches and newspaper articles, sought “to
trouble the public peace by stirring up hatred and contempt amongst the
citizens.” The terrible insurrection of the month of June was just over, and it
was firmly believed that the victory of the Parisian workmen would have
brought on, if not an attempt to put communism into practice, at least a
series of formidable requisitions on the rich in favour of the poor; it wasthat the victory of the Parisian workmen would have
brought on, if not an attempt to put communism into practice, at least a
series of formidable requisitions on the rich in favour of the poor; it was

--- PAGE BREAK ---the Parisian workmen would have
brought on, if not an attempt to put communism into practice, at least a
series of formidable requisitions on the rich in favour of the poor; it was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

hoped that an end would be put to civil wars by increasing the difficulty of
propogating doctrines of hatred, which might raise the proletariat against
the middle class.
Nowadays Parliamentary Socialists no longer entertain the idea of
insurrection; if they still occasionally speak of it, it is merely to give
themselves airs of importance; they teach that the ballot-box has replaced
the gun; but the means of acquiring power may have changed without there
being any change of mental attitude. Electoral literature seems inspired by
the purest demagogic doctrines; Socialism makes its appeal to the
discontented without troubling about the place they occupy in the world of
production; in a society as complex as ours, and as subject to economic
upheavals, there is an enormous number of discontented people in all
classes—that is why Socialists are often found in places where one would
least expect to meet them. Parliamentary Socialism speaks as many
languages as it has types of clients. It makes its appeal to workmen, to small
employers of labour, to peasants; and in spite of Engels, it aims at reaching
the farmers;71 it is at times patriotic; at other times it declares against the
Army. It is stopped by no contradiction, experience having shown that is
possible, in the course of an electoral campaign, to group together forces
which, according to Marxian conceptions, should normally be antagonistic.
Besides, cannot a Member of Parliament be of service to electors of every
economic situation?
In the end the term “proletariat” became synonymous with oppressed;
and there are oppressed in all classes:72 German Socialists have taken a
great interest in the adventures of the Princess of Coburg.73 One of our most
distinguished reformers, Henri Turot, for a long time one of the editors of
the Petite République74 and municipal councillor of Paris, has written a
book on the “proletariat of love,” by which title he designates the lowest
class of prostitutes. If one of these days the suffrage is granted to women,
he will doubtless be called upon to draw up a statement of the claims of this
special proletariat.
B. Contemporary democracy in France finds itself somewhat bewildered
by the tactics of the class war. This explains why Parliamentary Socialism
does not mingle with the main body of the parties of the extreme left.y democracy in France finds itself somewhat bewildered
by the tactics of the class war. This explains why Parliamentary Socialism
does not mingle with the main body of the parties of the extreme left.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e finds itself somewhat bewildered
by the tactics of the class war. This explains why Parliamentary Socialism
does not mingle with the main body of the parties of the extreme left.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In order to understand this situation, we must remember the important
part played by revolutionary war in our history; an enormous number of our
political ideas originated from war; war presupposes the union of national
forces against the enemy, and our French historians have always severely
criticised those insurrections which hampered the defence of the country. It
seems that our democracy is harder on its rebels than monarchies are; the
Vendéens are still denounced daily as infamous traitors. All the articles
published by Clémenceau to combat the ideas of Hervé are inspired by the
purest revolutionary tradition, and he says so himself clearly: “I stand by
and shall always stand by the old-fashioned patriotism of our fathers of the
Revolution,” and he scoffs at people who would “suppress international
wars in order to hand us over in peace to the amenities of civil war”
(Aurore, May 12, 1905).
For some considerable time the Republicans denied that there was any
struggle between the classes in France; they had so great a horror of revolt
that they would not recognise the facts. Judging all things from the abstract
point of view of the Declaration of the Rights of Man, they said that the
legislation of 1789 had been created in order to abolish all distinction of
class in law; for that reason they were opposed to proposals for social
legislation, which, nearly always, reintroduced the idea of class, and
distinguished certain groups of citizens as being unfitted for the use of
liberty. “The revolution was supposed to have suppressed class distinction,”
wrote Joseph Reinach sadly in the Matin of April 19, 1895; “but they spring
up again at every step. . . . It is necessary to point out these aggressive
returns of the past, but they must not be allowed to pass unchallenged; they
must be resisted.”75
Electoral dealing led many Republicans to recognise that the Socialists
obtain great successes by utilising the passions of jealousy, of deception, or
of hate, which exist in the world; thenceforward they became aware of the
class war, and many have borrowed the jargon of the Parliamentary
Socialists: in this way the party that is called Radical Socialist came into
being. Clémenceau asserts even that he knows moderates who became
Socialists in twenty-four hours. “In France,” he says, “the Socialists that I
know76 are excellent Radicals who, thinking that social reforms do noteau asserts even that he knows moderates who became
Socialists in twenty-four hours. “In France,” he says, “the Socialists that I
know76 are excellent Radicals who, thinking that social reforms do not

--- PAGE BREAK ---t he knows moderates who became
Socialists in twenty-four hours. “In France,” he says, “the Socialists that I
know76 are excellent Radicals who, thinking that social reforms do not

--- PAGE BREAK ---

advance quickly enough to please them, conceive that it would be good
tactics to claim the greater in order to get the less. How many names and
how many secret avowals I could quote to support what I say! But that
would be useless, for nothing could be less mysterious” (Aurore, August
14,1905).
Léon Bourgeois—who was not willing to adapt himself completely to the
new methods, and who, for that reason perhaps, left the Chamber of
Deputies for the Senate—said, at the congress of his party in July 1905:
“The class war is a fact, but a cruel fact. I do not believe that it is by
prolonging this war that the solution of the problem will be attained; I
believe that the solution rather lies in its suppression; men must be brought
to look upon themselves as partners in the same work.” It would therefore
seem to be a question of creating social legislation, thus peace
demonstrating to poor that the Government has no greater care than that of
improving their lot, and by imposing the necessary sacrifices on people who
possess a fortune judged to be too great for the harmony of the classes.
Capitalist society is so rich, and the future appears to it in such optimistic
colours, that it endures the most frightful burdens without complaining
overmuch: in America politicians waste large taxes shamelessly; in Europe,
the expenditure in military preparation increases every year;77 social peace
might very well be bought by a few supplementary sacrifices.78 Experience
shows that the middle classes allow themselves to be plundered quite easily,
provided that a little pressure is brought to bear, and that they are
intimidated by the fear of revolution; that party will possess the future
which can most skillfully manipulate the spectre of revolution; the radical
party is beginning to understand this; but, however clever its clowns may
be, it will have some difficulty in finding any who can dazzle the big Jew
bankers as well as Jaurès and his friends can do.
C. The Syndicalist organization gives a third value to the class war. In
each branch of industry employers and workmen form antagonistic groups,
which have continual discussions, which negotiate and make agreements.
Socialism brings along its terminology of class war, and thus complicates
conflicts which might have remained of a purely private order; corporative
exclusiveness, which resembles the local or the racial spirit, is therebyits terminology of class war, and thus complicates
conflicts which might have remained of a purely private order; corporative
exclusiveness, which resembles the local or the racial spirit, is thereby

--- PAGE BREAK ---class war, and thus complicates
conflicts which might have remained of a purely private order; corporative
exclusiveness, which resembles the local or the racial spirit, is thereby

--- PAGE BREAK ---

consolidated, and those who represent it like to imagine that they are
accomplishing a higher duty and are doing excellent work for Socialism.
It is well known that litigants who are strangers in a town are generally
very badly treated by the judges of commercial courts sitting there, who try
to give judgment in favour of their fellow-townsmen. Railway companies
pay fantastic prices for pieces of ground, the value of which is fixed by
juries recruited from among the neighbouring land-owners. I have seen
Italian sailors overwhelmed with fines, for pretended infractions of the law,
by the fishing, arbitrators with whom they had come to compete on the
strength of ancient treaties. Many workmen are in the same way inclined to
assert that in all their contests with the employers, the worker has morality
and justice on his side; I have heard the secretary of a syndicate (so
fanatically a reformer as distinct from a revolutionary that he denied the
oratorical talent of Guesde) declare that nobody had class feeling so
strongly developed as he had,—because he argued in the way I have just
indicated,—and he concluded that the revolutionaries did not possess the
monopoly of the just conception of the class war.
It is quite understandable that many people have considered this
corporative spirit as no better than the parish spirit, and also that they
should have attempted to destroy it by employing methods very analogous
to those which have so much weakened the jealousies which formerly
existed in France between the various provinces. A more general culture
and the intermixing with people of another region rapidly destroy
provincialism: would it not be possible to destroy the corporative feeling by
frequently bringing the important men in the syndicates into connection
with the employers, and by furnishing them with opportunities of taking
part in discussions of a general order in mixed commissions? Experience
has shown that this is feasible.
II
THE EFFORTS which have been made to remove the causes of hostility
which exist in modern society have undoubtedly had some effect, although
the peacemakers may be much deceived about the extent of their work. By
showing a few of the officials of the syndicates that the middle classes aresociety have undoubtedly had some effect, although
the peacemakers may be much deceived about the extent of their work. By
showing a few of the officials of the syndicates that the middle classes are

--- PAGE BREAK ---tedly had some effect, although
the peacemakers may be much deceived about the extent of their work. By
showing a few of the officials of the syndicates that the middle classes are

--- PAGE BREAK ---

not such terrible men as they had believed, by loading them with politeness
in commissions set up in ministerial offices or at the Musée Social, and by
giving them the impression that there is a natural and Republican equity,
above class prejudices and hatreds, it has been found possible to change the
attitude of a few former revolutionaries.79 These conversions of a few of
their old chiefs have caused great confusion in the mind of the working
classes; the former enthusiasm of more than one Socialist has given place to
discouragement; many working men have wondered whether the trades
union organization was not becoming a kind of politics, a means of getting
on.
But simultaneously with this evolution, which filled the heart of the
peacemakers with joy, there was a recrudescence of the revolutionary spirit
in a large section of the proletariat. Since the Republican Government and
the philanthropists have taken it into their heads to exterminate Socialism
by developing social legislation, and by moderating the resistance of the
employers in strikes, it has been observed that, more than once, the conflicts
have become more acute than formerly.80 This is often explained away by
saying that it was an accident, the result simply of the survival of old
usages; people like to lull themselves with the hope that everything will go
perfectly well on the day when manufacturers have a better understanding
of the usages of social peace.81 I believe, on the contrary, that we are in the
presence of a phenomenon which flows quite naturally from the conditions
in which this pretended pacification is carried out.
I observe, first of all, that both the theories and action of the peacemakers
are founded on the notion of duty, and that duty is something entirely
indefinite—while law seeks rigid definition. This difference is due to the
fact that the latter finds a real basis in the economics of production, while
the former is founded on sentiments of resignation, goodness, and of
sacrifices; and who can judge whether the man who submits to duty has
been sufficiently resigned, sufficiently good, sufficiently self-sacrificing?
The Christian is convinced that he will never succeed in doing all that the
gospel enjoins on him; when he is free from economic ties (in a monastery)
he invents all sorts of pious obligations, so that he may bring his life nearert he will never succeed in doing all that the
gospel enjoins on him; when he is free from economic ties (in a monastery)
he invents all sorts of pious obligations, so that he may bring his life nearer

--- PAGE BREAK ---eed in doing all that the
gospel enjoins on him; when he is free from economic ties (in a monastery)
he invents all sorts of pious obligations, so that he may bring his life nearer

--- PAGE BREAK ---

to that of Christ, who loved men to such an extent that he accepted an
ignominious fate that they might be redeemed.
In the economic world everybody limits his duty by his unwillingness to
give up certain profits. While the employer will be always convinced that
he has done the whole of his duty, the worker will be of a contrary opinion,
and no argument could possibly settle the matter: the first will believe that
he has been heroic, and the second will treat this pretended heroism as
shameful exploitation.
Our great pontiffs of duty refuse to look upon a contract to work as being
of the nature of a sale; nothing is so simple as a sale; nobody troubles
himself to find out whether the grocer or his customer is right when they do
not agree on the price of cheese; the customer goes where he can buy more
cheaply, and the grocer is obliged to change his prices when his customers
leave him. But when a strike takes place it is quite another thing. All the
well-intentioned people, all the “progressives” and the friends of the
Republic, begin to discuss which of the two parties is in the right: to be in
the right is to have accomplished one’s whole social duty. Le Play has given
much advice on the means of organising labour with a view to the strict
fulfilment of duty; but he could not fix the extent of the mutual obligations;
he left it to the tact of each, to the just estimation of the duties attaching to
one’s place in the social hierarchy, to the master’s intelligent appreciation of
the real needs of the workmen.82
The employers generally agree to discuss disputes on these lines; to the
claims of the workers they reply that they have already reached the limit of
possible concessions—while the philanthropists wonder whether the selling
price will not permit of a slight rise in wages. Such a discussion
presupposes that it is possible to ascertain the exact extent of a man’s social
duty, and what sacrifices an employer must continue to make in order to
carry out the duties of his social position. As there is no process of
reasoning which can resolve such a problem, wiseacres suggest recourse to
arbitration; Rabelais would have suggested recourse to the chance of the
dice. When the strike is important, deputies loudly demand an inquiry, with
the object of discovering whether the industrial leaders are properly
fulfilling their duties as good masters.chance of the
dice. When the strike is important, deputies loudly demand an inquiry, with
the object of discovering whether the industrial leaders are properly
fulfilling their duties as good masters.

--- PAGE BREAK ---When the strike is important, deputies loudly demand an inquiry, with
the object of discovering whether the industrial leaders are properly
fulfilling their duties as good masters.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Certain results are obtained in this way—which nevertheless seem absurd
—because on the one hand the large employers of labour have been brought
up with religious, philanthropic, and civic ideas; 83 and on the other hand
because they cannot show themselves too stubborn, when certain demands
are made by people occupying a high position in the country. Conciliators
stake their vanity on succeeding, and they would be extremely hurt if
industrial leaders prevented them from making social peace. The workmen
are in a much more favourable position, because the prestige of the
peacemakers is very much less with them than with the capitalists; the latter
give way, therefore, much more easily than the workers, in order to allow
these well-intentioned folk the glory of ending the conflict. It is noticeable
that these proceedings very rarely succeed when the matter is in the hands
of workmen who have become rich: literary, moral, or sociological
considerations have very little effect upon people born outside the ranks of
the middle classes.
People who are called upon to intervene in disputes in this way are
misled by what they have seen of certain secretaries of syndicates, whom
they find much less irreconcilable than they expected, and who seem to
them to be ripe for a recognition of the idea of social peace. In the course of
conciliation meetings more than one revolutionary has shown that he
aspires to become a member of the middle class, and there are many
intelligent people who imagine that socialistic and revolutionary
conceptions are only accidents that might be avoided by establishing better
relations between the classes. They believe that the working-class world
looks at the economic question entirely from the standpoint of duty, and
they imagine that harmony would be established if a better social education
were given to the citizens.
Let us see what influences are behind the other movement that tends to
make conflicts more acute.
Workmen quickly perceive that the labour of conciliation or of arbitration
rests on no economico-judicial basis, and their tactics have been conducted
—instinctively perhaps—in accordance with this datum. Since the feelings,
and, above all, the vanity of the peacemakers are in question, a strong
appeal must be made to their imaginations, and they must be given the ideaps—in accordance with this datum. Since the feelings,
and, above all, the vanity of the peacemakers are in question, a strong
appeal must be made to their imaginations, and they must be given the idea

--- PAGE BREAK ---h this datum. Since the feelings,
and, above all, the vanity of the peacemakers are in question, a strong
appeal must be made to their imaginations, and they must be given the idea

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that they have to accomplish a titanic task: demands are piled up, therefore,
figures fixed in a rather haphazard way, and there are no scruples about
exaggerating them; often the success of the strike depends on the cleverness
with which a syndicalist (who thoroughly understands the spirit of social
diplomacy) has been able to introduce claims, in themselves very minor, but
capable of giving the impression that the employers are not fulfilling their
social duty. It often happens that writers who concern themselves with these
questions are astonished that several days pass before the strikers have
settled what exactly they have to demand, and that in the end demands are
put forward which had not been mentioned in the course of the preceding
negotiations. This is easily understood when we consider the bizarre
conditions under which the discussion between the interested parties is
carried on.
I am surprised that there are no strike professionals who would undertake
to draw up a list of the workers’ claims; they would obtain all the more
success in conciliation councils as they would not let themselves be dazzled
by fine words so easily as the workers’ delegates.84
When the strike is finished the workmen do not forget that the employers
at first declared that no concession was possible; they are led thus to the
belief that the employers are either ignorant or liars. This result is not
conducive to the development of social peace!
So long as the workers submitted without protest to the exactions of the
employers, they believed that the will of their masters was completely
dominated by economic necessities; they perceived, after the strike, that this
necessity is not of a very rigid kind, and that if energetic pressure from
below is brought to bear on the masters, the latter will find some means of
liberating themselves from the pretended fetters of economic necessity; thus
within practical limits capitalism appears to the workers to be unfettered,
and they reason as if it were entirely so. What in their eyes restrains this
liberty is not the necessities of competition but the ignorance of the
employers. Thus is introduced the notion of the inexhaustibility of
production, which is one of the postulates of the theory of class war in the
Socialism of Marx.85mpetition but the ignorance of the
employers. Thus is introduced the notion of the inexhaustibility of
production, which is one of the postulates of the theory of class war in the
Socialism of Marx.85

--- PAGE BREAK ---norance of the
employers. Thus is introduced the notion of the inexhaustibility of
production, which is one of the postulates of the theory of class war in the
Socialism of Marx.85

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Why then speak of social duty? Duty has some meaning in a society in
which all the parts are intimately connected and responsible to one another;
but if capitalism is inexhaustible, joint responsibility is no longer founded
on economic realities, and the workers think they would be dupes if they
did not demand all they can obtain; they look upon the employer as an
adversary with whom one comes to terms after a war. Social duty no more
exists than does international duty.
These ideas are somewhat confused, I admit, in many minds; but they
exist in a much more stable manner than the partisans of social peace
imagine; the latter are deluded by appearances, and never penetrate to the
hidden roots of the existing tendencies of Socialism.
Before passing to other considerations, it must be noticed that our Latin
countries present one great obstacle to the formation of social peace; the
classes are more sharply separated by external characteristics than they are
in Saxon countries; these separations very much embarrass Syndicalist
leaders when they abandon their former manners and take up a position in
the official or philanthropic circles.86 These circles have welcomed them
with great pleasure, since it has been perceived that the gradual
transformation of trades union officials into members of the middle classes
might produce excellent results; but their comrades distrust them. In France
this distrust has become much more definite since a great number of
anarchists have entered the Syndicalist movement; because the anarchist
has a horror of everything which recalls the proceedings of politicians—a
class of people devoured by the desire to climb into superior classes, and
having already the capitalist mind while yet poor.87
Social politics have introduced new elements which must now be taken
into account. First of all, it must be noticed that the workers count to-day in
the world by the same right as the different productive groups which
demand to be protected; they must be treated with solicitude just as the
vine-growers or the sugar manufacturers.88 There is nothing settled about
Protectionism; the custom duties are fixed so as to satisfy the desires of
every influential people who wish to increase their incomes; social politics
proceed in the same manner. The Protectionist Government professes to
have knowledge which permits it to judge what should be granted to eachpeople who wish to increase their incomes; social politics
proceed in the same manner. The Protectionist Government professes to
have knowledge which permits it to judge what should be granted to each

--- PAGE BREAK ---ncrease their incomes; social politics
proceed in the same manner. The Protectionist Government professes to
have knowledge which permits it to judge what should be granted to each

--- PAGE BREAK ---

group so as to defend the producers without injuring the consumers;
similarly, in social politics it declares that it will take into consideration the
interests of the employers and those of the workers.
Few people, outside the faculties of law, are so simple as to believe that
the State can carry out such a programme: in actual fact, the
Parliamentarians decide on a compromise that partially satisfies the
interests of those who are most influential in elections without provoking
too lively protests from those who are sacrificed. There is no other rule than
the true or presumed interest of the electors; every day the customs
commission recasts its tariffs, and it declares that it will not stop recasting
them until it succeeds in securing prices which it considers remunerative to
the people for whom it has undertaken the part of providence: it keeps a
watchful eye on the operations of importers; every lowering of price attracts
its attention and provokes inquiries with the object of discovering whether it
would not be possible to raise values again artificially. Social politics are
carried on in exactly the same way; on June 27, 1905, the rapporteur89 of a
law on the length of the hours of work in the mines said, in the Chamber of
Deputies: “Should the application of the law give rise to disappointment
among the workmen, we have undertaken to lay a new bill before the
house.“ This worthy man spoke exactly like the rapporteur of a tariff law.
There are plenty of workmen who understand perfectly well that all the
trash of Parliamentary literature only serves to disguise the real motives by
which the Government is influenced. The Protectionists succeed by
subsidising a few important party leaders or by financing newspapers which
support the politics of these party leaders; the workers have no money, but
they have at their disposal a much more efficacious means of action; they
can inspire fear, and for several years past they have availed themselves of
this resource.
At the time of the discussion of the law regulating labour in mines, the
question of the threats addressed to the Government cropped up several
times: on February 5, 1902, the president of the commission told the
Chamber that those in power had “lent an attentive ear to clamourings from
without; that they had been inspired by a sentiment of benevolent
generosity in allowing themselves to be moved (despite the tone in whichthose in power had “lent an attentive ear to clamourings from
without; that they had been inspired by a sentiment of benevolent
generosity in allowing themselves to be moved (despite the tone in which

--- PAGE BREAK ---lent an attentive ear to clamourings from
without; that they had been inspired by a sentiment of benevolent
generosity in allowing themselves to be moved (despite the tone in which

--- PAGE BREAK ---

they were couched), by the claims of the working classes and the long cry
of suffering of the workers in the mines.” A little later he added: “We have
accomplished a work of social justice, . . . a work of benevolence also, in
going to those who toil and suffer, like friends solely desirous of working in
peace and under honourable conditions, and we must not by a brutal and too
egotistic refusal to unbend, allow them to give way to impulses which,
while not actual revolts, would yet have as many victims.” All these
confused phrases served to hide the terrible fear which clutched this
grotesque deputy.90 In the sitting of November 6, 1904, at the Senate, the
minister declared that the Government was incapable of giving way to
threats, but that it was necessary to open not only ears and mind, but also
the heart “to respectful claims” (!); a good deal of water had passed under
the bridges since the day when the Government had promised to pass the
law under the threat of a general strike.91
I could choose other examples to show that the most decisive factor in
social politics is the cowardice of the Government. This was shown in the
plainest possible way in the recent discussions on the suppression of
registry offices, and on the law which sent to the civil courts appeals against
the decisions of the arbitrators in industrial disputes. Nearly all the
Syndicalist leaders know how to make excellent use of this situation, and
they teach the workers that it is not at all a question of demanding favours,
but that they must profit by middle-class cowardice to impose the will of
the proletariat. These tactics are supported by so many facts that they were
bound to take root in the working-class world.
One of the things which appear to me to have most astonished the
workers during the last few years has been the timidity of the forces of law
and order in the presence of a riot; magistrates who have the right to
demand the services of soldiers dare not use their power to the utmost, and
officers allow themselves to be abused and struck with a patience hitherto
unknown in them. It is becoming more and more evident every day that
working class violence possesses an extraordinary efficacity in strikes:
prefects, fearing that they may be obliged to use force against
insurrectionary violence, bring pressure to bear on employers in order to
compel them to give way; the safety of factories is now looked upon as afearing that they may be obliged to use force against
insurrectionary violence, bring pressure to bear on employers in order to
compel them to give way; the safety of factories is now looked upon as a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

favour which the prefect may dispense as he pleases; consequently he
arranges the use of his police so as to intimidate the two parties, and
skilfully brings them to an agreement.
Trades union leaders have not been long in grasping the full bearing of
this situation, and it must be admitted that they have used the weapon that
has been put into their hands with great skill. They endeavour to intimidate
the prefects by popular demonstrations which might lead to serious
conflicts with the police, and they commend violence as the most
efficacious means of obtaining concessions. At the end of a certain time the
obsessed and frightened administration nearly always intervenes with the
masters and forces an agreement upon them, which becomes an
encouragement to the propagandists of violence.
Whether we approve or condemn what is called the revolutionary and
direct method, it is evident that it is not on the point of disappearing; in a
country as warlike as France there are profound reasons which would assure
a considerable popularity for this method, even if its enormous efficacy had
not been demonstrated by so many examples. This is the one great social
fact of the present hour, and we must seek to understand its bearing.ularity for this method, even if its enormous efficacy had
not been demonstrated by so many examples. This is the one great social
fact of the present hour, and we must seek to understand its bearing.

I cannot refrain from noting down here a reflection made by Clémenceau
with regard to our relations with Germany, which applies equally well to
social conflicts when they take a violent aspect (which seems likely to
become more and more general in proportion as a cowardly middle class
continues to pursue the chimera of social peace): “There is no better
means,” he said (than the policy of perpetual concessions), “of making the
opposite party ask for more and more. Every man or every power whose
action consists solely in surrender can only finish by self-annihilation.
Everything that lives resists; that which does not resist allows itself to be
cut up piecemeal” (Aurore, August 15, 1905).
A social policy founded on middle-class cowardice, which consists in
always surrendering before the threat of violence, cannot fail to engender
the idea that the middle class is condemned to death, and that its
disappearance is only a matter of time. Thus every conflict which gives rise
to violence becomes a vanguard fight, and nobody can foresee what will

--- PAGE BREAK ---condemned to death, and that its
disappearance is only a matter of time. Thus every conflict which gives rise
to violence becomes a vanguard fight, and nobody can foresee what will

--- PAGE BREAK ---

arise from such engagements; although the great battle never comes to a
head, yet each time they come to blows the strikers hope that it is the
beginning of the great Napoleonic battle (that which will definitely crush
the vanquished) ; in this way the practice of strikes engenders the notion of
a catastrophic revolution.
A keen observer of the contemporary proletarian movement has
expressed the same ideas: “They, like their ancestors (the French
revolutionaries), are for struggle, for conquest; they desire to accomplish
great works by force. Only, the war of conquest interests them no longer.
Instead of thinking of battles, they now think of strikes; instead of setting
up as their ideal a battle against the armies of Europe, they now set up the
general strike in which the capitalist regime will be annihilated.92
The theorists of social peace shut their eyes to these embarrassing facts;
they are doubtless ashamed to admit their cowardice, just as the
Government is ashamed to admit that its social politics are carried out under
the threat of disturbances. It is curious that people who boast of having read
Le Play have not observed that his conception of the conditions of social
peace was quite different from that of his imbecile successors. He supposed
the existence of a middle class of serious moral habits, imbued with the
feelings of its own dignity, and having the energy necessary to govern the
country without recourse to the old traditional bureaucracy. To those men,
who held riches and power in their hands, he professed to teach their social
duty towards their subjects. His system supposed an undisputed authority; it
is well known that he deplored the licence of the press under Napoleon III
as scandalous and dangerous; his reflections on this subject seem somewhat
ludicrous to those who compare the newspaper of that time with those of to-
day.93 Nobody in his time would have believed that a great country would
accept peace at any price; his point of view in this matter did not differ
greatly from that of Clémenceau. He would never have admitted that
anyone could be cowardly and hypocritical enough to decorate with the
name of social duty the cowardice of a middle class incapable of defending
itself.
Middle-class cowardice very much resembles the cowardice of the
English Liberal party, which constantly proclaims its absolute confidence incowardice of a middle class incapable of defending
itself.
Middle-class cowardice very much resembles the cowardice of the
English Liberal party, which constantly proclaims its absolute confidence in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

arbitration between nations: arbitration nearly always gives disastrous
results for England.94 But these worthy progressives prefer to pay, or even
to compromise the future of their country, rather than face the horrors of
war. The English Liberal party has the word justice always on its lips,
absolutely like our middle class; we might very well wonder whether all the
high morality of our great contemporary thinkers is not founded on a
degradation of the sentiment of honour.

--- PAGE BREAK ---lutely like our middle class; we might very well wonder whether all the
high morality of our great contemporary thinkers is not founded on a
degradation of the sentiment of honour.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

&haSter
Violence and tKe 'ecadence oI tKe 0iddle
&lasses
I. Parliamentarians, who have to inspire fear—Parnell’s
methods—casuistry; fundamental identity of the parliamentary
socialist groups.
II. Degeneration of the middle class brought about by Peace—
Marx’s conceptions of necessity —part played by violence in the
restoration of former social relationships.
III. Relation between revolution and economic prosperity—the
French revolution—the Christian conquest—invasion of the
barbarians—dangers which threaten the world.
I
IT is very difficult to understand proletarian violence as long as we think in
terms of the ideas disseminated by middle-class philosophers; according to
their philosophy, violence is a relic of barbarism which is bound to
disappear under the influence of the progress of enlightenment. It is
therefore quite natural that Jaurès, who has been brought up on middle-class
ideology, should have a profound contempt for people who favour
proletarian violence; he is astonished to see educated Socialists hand in
hand with the Syndicalist; he wonders by what miracle men who have
proved themselves thinkers can accumulate sophistries in order to give a
semblance of reason to the dreams of stupid people who are incapable of
thought.95 This question worries the friends of Jaurès considerably, and they

--- PAGE BREAK ---sophistries in order to give a
semblance of reason to the dreams of stupid people who are incapable of
thought.95 This question worries the friends of Jaurès considerably, and they

--- PAGE BREAK ---

are only too ready to treat the representatives of the new school as
demagogues, and accuse them of seeking the applause of the impulsive
masses.
Parliamentary Socialists cannot understand the ends pursued by the new
school; they imagine that ultimately all Socialism can be reduced to the
pursuit of the means of getting into power. Is it possible that they think the
followers of the new school wish to make a higher bid for the confidence of
simple electors and cheat the Socialists of the seats provided for them?
Again, the apologia of violence might have the very unfortunate result of
disgusting the workers with electoral politics, and this would tend to
destroy the chances of the Socialist candidates by multiplying the
abstentions from voting! Do you wish to revive civil war? they ask. To our
great statesmen that seems mad.
Civil war has become very difficult since the discovery of the new
firearms, and since the cutting of rectilinear streets in the capital towns.96
The recent troubles in Russia seem even to have shown that Governments
can count much more than was supposed on the energy of their officers.
Nearly all French politicians had prophesied the imminent fall of Czarism at
the time of the Manchurian defeats, but the Russian army in the presence of
rioting did not manifest the weakness shown by the French army during our
revolutions; nearly everywhere repression was rapid, efficacious, and even
pitiless. The discussions which took place at the congress of social
democrats at Jena show that the Parliamentary Socialists no longer rely
upon an armed struggle to obtain possession of the State.
Does this mean that they are utterly opposed to violence? It would not be
in their interest for the people to be quite calm; a certain amount of
agitation suits them, but this agitation must be contained within well-
defined limits and controlled by politicians. When he considers it useful for
his own interests, Jaurès makes advances to the Confederation Génèrale du
Travail;97 sometimes he instructs his peaceable clerks to fill his paper with
revolutionary phrases; he is past master in the art of utilising popular anger.
A cunningly conducted agitation is extremely useful to Parliamentary
Socialists, who boast before the Government and the rich middle class of
their ability to moderate revolution; they can thus arrange the success of thed agitation is extremely useful to Parliamentary
Socialists, who boast before the Government and the rich middle class of
their ability to moderate revolution; they can thus arrange the success of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---mely useful to Parliamentary
Socialists, who boast before the Government and the rich middle class of
their ability to moderate revolution; they can thus arrange the success of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

financial affairs in which they are interested, obtain minor favours for many
influential electors, and get social laws voted in order to appear important in
the eyes of the blockheads who imagine that these Socialists are great
reformers of the law. In order that all this may come off there must always
be a certain amount of movement, and the middle class must always be kept
in a state of fear.
It is conceivable that a regular system of diplomacy might be established
between the Socialist party and the State each time an economic conflict
arose between workers and employers; the two powers would settle the
particular difference. In Germany the Government enters into negotiations
with the Church each time the clericals stand in the way of the
administration. Socialists have even been urged to imitate Parnell, who so
often found a means of imposing his will on England. This resemblance is
all the greater in that Parnell’s authority did not rest only on the number of
votes at his disposal, but mainly upon the terror which every Englishman
felt at the bare announcement of agrarian troubles in Ireland. A few acts of
violence controlled by a Parliamentary group were exceedingly useful to
the Par-nellian policy, just as they are useful to the policy of Jaures. 3n both
cases a Parliamentary group sells peace of mind to the Conservatives, who
dare not use the force they command.
This kind of diplomacy is difficult to conduct, and the Irish after the
death of Parnell do not seem to have succeeded in carrying it on with the
same success as in his time. In France it presents particular difficulty,
because in no other country perhaps are the workers more difficult to
manage: it is easy enough to arouse popular anger, but it is not easy to stifle
it. As long as there are no very rich and strongly centralised trade unions
whose leaders are in continuous relationship with political men,98 so long
will it be impossible to say exactly to what lengths violence will go. Jaures
would very much like to see such associations of workers in existence, for
his prestige will disappear at once when the general public perceives that he
is not in a position to moderate revolution.
Everything becomes a question of valuation, accurate estimation, and
opportunism; much skill, tact, and calm audacity are necessary to carry on
such a diplomacy, i.e. to make the workers believe that you are carrying thequestion of valuation, accurate estimation, and
opportunism; much skill, tact, and calm audacity are necessary to carry on
such a diplomacy, i.e. to make the workers believe that you are carrying the

--- PAGE BREAK ---on, accurate estimation, and
opportunism; much skill, tact, and calm audacity are necessary to carry on
such a diplomacy, i.e. to make the workers believe that you are carrying the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

flag of revolution, the middle class that you are arresting the danger which
threatens them, and the country that you represent an irresistible current of
opinion. The great mass of the electors understands nothing of what passes
in politics, and has no intelligent knowledge of economic history; they take
sides with the party which seems to possess power, and you can obtain
everything you wish from them when you can prove to them that you are
strong enough to make the Government capitulate. But you must not go too
far, because the middle class might wake up and the country might be given
over to a resolutely conservative statesman. A proletarian violence which
escapes all valuation, all measurement, and all opportunism, may jeopardise
everything and ruin socialistic diplomacy.
This diplomacy is played both on a large and small scale; with the
Government, with the heads of the groups in Parliament, and with
influential electors. Politicians seek to draw the greatest possible advantage
from the discordant forces existing in the political field.
Parliamentary Socialists feel a certain embarrassment from the fact that
at its origin Socialism took its stand on absolute principles and appealed for
a long time to the same sentiments of revolt as the most advanced
Republican Party. These two circumstances prevent them from following a
party policy like that which Charles Bonnier often recommended: this
writer, who has long been the principal theorist of the Guesdist party, would
like the Socialists to follow closely the example of Parnell, who used to
negotiate with the English parties without allowing himself to become the
vassal of any one of them; in the same way it might be possible to come to
an agreement with the Conservatives, if the latter pledged themselves to
grant better conditions to the proletariat than the Radicals (Socialiste,
August 27, 1905). This policy seemed scandalous to many people. Bonnier
was obliged to dilute his thesis. He then contented himself with asking that
the party should act in the best interests of the proletariat (September 17,
1905); but how is it possible to know where these interests lie when the
principle of the class war is no longer taken as your unique and absolute
rule?
Parliamentary Socialists believe that they possess special faculties which
enable them to take into account, not only the material and immediatear is no longer taken as your unique and absolute
rule?
Parliamentary Socialists believe that they possess special faculties which
enable them to take into account, not only the material and immediate

--- PAGE BREAK ---n as your unique and absolute
rule?
Parliamentary Socialists believe that they possess special faculties which
enable them to take into account, not only the material and immediate

--- PAGE BREAK ---

advantages reaped by the working classes, but also the moral reasons which
compel Socialism to form part of the great Republican family. Their
congresses spend their energies in putting together formulas designed to
regulate Socialist diplomacy, in settling what alliances are permitted and
what forbidden, in reconciling the abstract principle of the class war (which
they are anxious to retain verbally) with the reality of the agreements with
politicians. Such an undertaking is madness, and therefore leads to
equivocations, when it does not force deputies into attitudes of deplorably
hypocrisy. Each year problems have to be rediscussed, because all
diplomacy requires a flexibility which is incompatible with the existence of
perfectly clear statutes.
The casuistry which Pascal scoffed at so much was not more subtle and
more absurd than that which is to be found in polemics between what are
called the Socialist schools. Escobar would have some difficulty in finding
his bearings amid the distinctions of Jaures; the moral theology of
responsible Socialists is not one of the least of the buffooneries of our time.
All moral theology can be split up into two tendencies: there are casuists
who say that we must be content with opinions having a slight probability,
others that we should always adopt those that are strictest and most certain.
This distinction was bound to be met with among our Parliamentary
Socialists. Jaurès prefers the soft and conciliatory method, provided that
means are found to make it agree, somehow or other, with first principles,
and that it has behind it a few respectable authorities ; he is a probabilist in
the strongest sense of the term—or even a latitudinarian (laxist).99 Vaillant
recommends the strong and belligerent method, which alone, in his opinion,
is in accordance with the class war, and which has in its favour the
unanimous sanction of all the old authorities; he is a tutiorist and a kind of
Jansenist.
Jaurès no doubt believes that he is acting for the greatest good of
Socialism, just as the more easy going type of casuists believed themselves
the best and most useful defenders of the Church; they did, as a matter of
fact, prevent weak Christians from falling into irreligion, and led them to
practise the sacraments—exactly as Jaurès prevents the rich intellectuals
who have come to Socialism by way of Dreyfusism from drawing back inChristians from falling into irreligion, and led them to
practise the sacraments—exactly as Jaurès prevents the rich intellectuals
who have come to Socialism by way of Dreyfusism from drawing back in

--- PAGE BREAK ---ling into irreligion, and led them to
practise the sacraments—exactly as Jaurès prevents the rich intellectuals
who have come to Socialism by way of Dreyfusism from drawing back in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

horror before the class war, and induces them to take up the shares of the
party journals. In his eyes, Vaillant is a dreamer who does not see the reality
of the world, who intoxicates himself with the chimeras of an insurrection
which has now become impossible, and who does not understand the great
advantages which may be got from universal suffrage by a boastful
politician.
Between these two methods there is only a difference of de-gree, and not
one of kind as is believed by those Parliamentary Socialists who call
themselves revolutionary. On this point Jaurès has a great intellectual
superiority over his adversaries, for he has never cast any doubt upon the
fundamental identity of the two methods.
Both of these methods suppose an entirely dislocated middle-class
society—rich classes who have lost all sentiment of their class interest, men
ready to follow blindly the lead of people who have taken up the business
of directing public opinion. The Dreyfus affair showed that the enlightened
middle class was in a strange mental state; people who had long and loudly
served the Conservative party co-operated with anarchists, took part in
violent attacks on the army, or even definitely enrolled themselves in the
Socialist party; on the other hand, newspapers, which make it their business
to defend traditional institutions, dragged the magistrates of the Court of
Cassation in the mire. This strange episode in our contemporary history
brought to light the state of dislocation of the classes.
Jaurès, who was very much mixed up in all the ups and downs of
Dreyfusism, had rapidly judged the mentality of the upper middle class, into
which he had not yet penetrated. He saw that this upper middle class was
terribly ignorant, gapingly stupid, politically absolutely impotent; he
recognised that with people who understand nothing of the principles of
capitalist economics it is easy to contrive a policy of compromise on the
basis of an extremely broad Socialism; he calculated the proportions in
which it is necessary to mix together flattery of the superior intelligence of
the imbeciles whose seduction was aimed at, appeals to the disinterested
sentiments of speculators who pride themselves on having invented the
ideal, and threats of revolution in order to obtain the leadership of people
void of ideas. Experience has shown that he had a very remarkable intuitionors who pride themselves on having invented the
ideal, and threats of revolution in order to obtain the leadership of people
void of ideas. Experience has shown that he had a very remarkable intuition

--- PAGE BREAK ---lves on having invented the
ideal, and threats of revolution in order to obtain the leadership of people
void of ideas. Experience has shown that he had a very remarkable intuition

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of the forces which exist at this present moment in the middle-class world.
Vaillant, on the contrary, is very little acquainted with this world; he
believes that the only weapon that can be employed to move the middle
class is fear; doubtless fear is an excellent weapon, but it might provoke
obstinate resistance if you went beyond a certain limit. Vaillant does not
possess those remarkable qualities of suppleness of mind, and perhaps even
of peasant duplicity, which shine in Jaurès, and which have often caused
people to say that he would have made a wonderful cattle-dealer.
The more closely the history of these last years is examined, the more the
discussions concerning the two methods will be recognised as puerile: the
partisans of the two methods are equally opposed to proletarian violence,
because it escapes from the control of the people engaged in Parliamentary
politics. Revolutionary Syndicalism cannot be controlled by the so-called
revolution Socialists of Parliament.
II
The two methods favoured by official Socialism presuppose this same
historical datum. The ideology of a timorous humanitarian middle class
professing to have freed its thought from the conditions of its existence is
grafted on the degeneration of the capitalist system; and the race of bold
captains who made the greatness of modern industry disappear to make way
for an ultra-civilised aristocracy which asks to be allowed to live in peace.
This degeneration fills our Parliamentary Socialists with joy. Their r{le
would vanish if they were confronted with a middle class which was
energetically engaged on the paths of capitalistic progress, a class that
would look upon timidity with shame, and which would find satisfaction in
looking after its class interests. In the presence of a middle class which has
become almost as stupid as the nobility of the eighteenth century, their
power is enormous. If the stultifying of the upper middle class progresses in
a regular manner at the pace it has taken for the last few years, our official
Socialists may reasonably hope to reach the goal of their dreams and sleep
in sumptuous mansions.
Two accidents alone, it seems, would be able to stop this movement: a
great foreign war, which might renew lost energies, and which in any casehe goal of their dreams and sleep
in sumptuous mansions.
Two accidents alone, it seems, would be able to stop this movement: a
great foreign war, which might renew lost energies, and which in any case

--- PAGE BREAK ---ams and sleep
in sumptuous mansions.
Two accidents alone, it seems, would be able to stop this movement: a
great foreign war, which might renew lost energies, and which in any case

--- PAGE BREAK ---

would doubtless bring into power men with the will to govern;100 or a great
extension of proletarian violence, which would make the revolutionary
reality evident to the middle class, and would disgust them with the
humanitarian platitudes with which Jaurès lulls them to sleep. It is in view
of these two great dangers that the latter displays all his resources as a
popular orator. European peace must be maintained at all costs; some limit
must be put to proletarian violence.
Jaurès is persuaded that France will be perfectly happy on the day on
which the editors of his paper, and its shareholders, can draw freely on the
coffers of the public Treasury; it is an illustration of the celebrated proverb:
“Quand Auguste avait bu, la Pologne était ivre.” A Socialist government of
this kind would without doubt ruin any country, if it was administered with
the same care for financial order as l’Humanité has, been administered; but
what does the future of the country matter, provided that the new regime
gives a good time to a few professors, who imagine that they have invented
Socialism, and to a few Dreyfusard financiers?
Before the working class also could accept this dictatorship of incapacity,
it must itself become as stupid as the middle class, and must lose all
revolutionary energy, at the same time that its masters will have lost all
capitalistic energy. Such a future is not impossible; and a great deal of hard
work is being done to stupefy the worker for this purpose. The Direction du
Travail and the Musée Social are doing their best to carry on this
marvellous work of idealistic education, which is decorated with the most
pompous names, and which is represented as a means of civilising the
proletariat. Our professional idealists are very much disturbed by the
Syndicalists, and experience shows that a strike is sometimes sufficient to
ruin all the work of education which these manufacturers of social peace
have patiently built by years of labour.
In order to understand thoroughly the consequences of the very singular
regime in the midst of which we are living, we must hark back to Marx’s
conceptions of the passage from capitalism to Socialism. These conceptions
are well known, yet we must continually return to them, because they are
often forgotten, or at least undervalued by official Socialist writers; it is
necessary to insist on them strongly each time that we have to argue aboutst continually return to them, because they are
often forgotten, or at least undervalued by official Socialist writers; it is
necessary to insist on them strongly each time that we have to argue about

--- PAGE BREAK ---n to them, because they are
often forgotten, or at least undervalued by official Socialist writers; it is
necessary to insist on them strongly each time that we have to argue about

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the anti-Marxist transformation which contemporary Socialism is
undergoing.
According to Marx, capitalism, by reason of the innate laws of its own
nature, is hurrying along a path which will lead the world of to-day, with
the inevitability of the evolution of organic life, to the doors of the world of
tomorrow. This movement comprises a long period of capitalistic
construction, and it ends by a rapid destruction, which is the work of the
proletariat. Capitalism creates the heritage which Socialism will receive, the
men who will suppress the present regime, and the means of bringing about
this destruction, at the same time that it preserves the results obtained in
production.101 Capitalism begets new ways of working; it throws the
working class into revolutionary organisations by the pressure it exercises
on wages; it restricts its own political basis by competition, which is
constantly eliminating industrial leaders. Thus, after having solved the great
problem of the organisation of labour, to effect which Utopians have
brought forward so many naive or stupid hypotheses, capitalism provokes
the birth of the cause which will overthrow it, and thus renders useless
everything that Utopians have written to induce enlightened people to make
reforms; and it gradually ruins the traditional order, against which the critics
of the idealists had proved themselves to be so deplorably incompetent. It
might therefore be said that capitalism plays a part analogous to that
attributed by Hartmann to The Unconscious in nature, since it prepares the
coming of social reforms which it did not intend to produce. Without any
co-ordinated plan, without any directive ideas, without any ideal of a future
world, it is the cause of an inevitable evolution; it draws from the present all
that the present can give towards historical development ; it performs in an
almost mechanical manner all that is necessary, in order that a new era may
appear, and that this new era may break every link with the idealism of the
present times, while preserving the acquisitions of the capitalistic economic
system.102
Socialists should therefore abandon the attempt (initiated by the
Utopians) to find a means of inducing the enlightened middle class to
prepare the transition to a more perfect system of legislation; their sole
function is that of explaining to the proletariat the greatness of thend a means of inducing the enlightened middle class to
prepare the transition to a more perfect system of legislation; their sole
function is that of explaining to the proletariat the greatness of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---ng the enlightened middle class to
prepare the transition to a more perfect system of legislation; their sole
function is that of explaining to the proletariat the greatness of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

revolutionary part they are called upon to play. By ceaseless criticism the
proletariat must be brought to perfect their organisations; they must be
shown how the embryonic forms which appear in their unions103 may be
developed, so that, finally, they may build up institutions without any
parallel in the history of the middle class; that they may form ideas which
depend solely on their position as producers in large industries, and which
owe nothing to middle-class thought; and that they may acquire habits of
liberty with which the middle class nowadays are no longer acquainted.
This doctrine will evidently be inapplicable if the middle class and the
proletariat do not oppose each other implacably, with all the forces at their
disposal; the more ardently capitalist the middle class is, the more the
proletariat is full of a warlike spirit and confident of its revolutionary
strength, the more certain will be the success of the proletarian movement.
The middle class with which Marx was familiar in England was still, as
regards the immense majority, animated by their conquering, insatiable, and
pitiless spirit, which had characterised at the beginning of modem times the
creators of new industries and the adventurers launched on the discovery of
unknown lands. When we are studying the modern industrial system we
should always bear in mind this similarity between the capitalist type and
the warrior type; it was for very good reasons that the men who directed
gigantic enterprises were named captains of industry. This type is still found
today in all its purity in the United States: there are found the indomitable
energy, the audacity based on a just appreciation of its strength, the cold
calculation of interests, which are the qualities of great generals and great
capitalists.104 According to Paul de Rousiers, every American feels himself
capable of “trying his luck” on the battlefield of business,105 so that the
general spirit of the country is in complete harmony with that of the multi-
millionaires ; our men of letters are exceedingly surprised to see these latter
condemning themselves to lead to the end of their days a galley-slave
existence, without ever thinking of leading a nobleman’s life for
themselves, as the Rothschilds do.
In a society so enfevered by the passion for the success which can be
obtained in competition, all the actors walk straight before them like
veritable automata, without taking any notice of the great ideas of theso enfevered by the passion for the success which can be
obtained in competition, all the actors walk straight before them like
veritable automata, without taking any notice of the great ideas of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---passion for the success which can be
obtained in competition, all the actors walk straight before them like
veritable automata, without taking any notice of the great ideas of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

sociologists; they are subject to very simple forces, and not one of them
dreams of escaping from the circumstances of his condition. Then only is
the development of capitalism carried on with that inevitableness which
struck Marx so much, and which seemed to him comparable to that of a
natural law. If, on the contrary, the middle class, led astray by the chatter of
the preachers of ethics and sociology, return to an ideal of conservative
mediocrity, seek to correct the abuses of economics, and wish to break with
the barbarism of their predecessors, then one part of the forces which were
to further the development of capitalism is employed in hindering it, an
arbitrary and irrational element is introduced, and the future of the world
becomes completely indeterminate.
This indetermination grows still greater if the proletariat are converted to
the ideas of social peace at the same time as their masters, or even if they
simply consider everything from the corporative point of view; while
Socialism gives to every economic contest a general and revolutionary
colour.
Conservatives are not deceived when they see in the compromises which
lead to collective contracts, and in corporative particularism,106 the means
of avoiding the Marxian revolution; 107 but they escape one danger only to
fall into another, and they run the risk of being devoured by Parliamentary
Socialism. 108 Jaurès is as enthusiastic as the clericals about measures
which turn away the working classes from the idea of the Marxian
revolution; I believe he understands better than they do what the result of
social peace will be; he founds his own hopes on the simultaneous ruin of
the capitalistic and revolutionary spirit.
It is often urged, in objection to the people who defend the Marxian
conception, that it is impossible for them to stop the movement of
degeneration which is dragging both the middle class and the proletariat far
from the paths assigned to them by Marx’s theory. They can doubtless
influence the working classes, and it is hardly to be denied that strike
violences do keep the revolutionary spirit alive; but how can they hope to
give back to the middle class an ardour which is spent?
It is here that the role of violence in history appears to us as singularly
great, for it can, in an indirect manner, so operate on the middle class as toto the middle class an ardour which is spent?
It is here that the role of violence in history appears to us as singularly
great, for it can, in an indirect manner, so operate on the middle class as to

--- PAGE BREAK ---an ardour which is spent?
It is here that the role of violence in history appears to us as singularly
great, for it can, in an indirect manner, so operate on the middle class as to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

awaken them to a sense of their own class sentiment. Attention has often
been drawn to the danger of certain acts of violence which compromised
admirable social works, disgusted employers who were disposed to arrange
the happiness of their workmen, and developed egoism where the most
noble sentiments formerly reigned.
To repay with black ingratitude the benevolence of those who would
protect the workers,109 to meet with insults the homilies of the defenders of
human fraternity, and to reply by blows to the advances of the propagators
of social peace—all that is assuredly not in conformity with the rules of the
fashionable Socialism of M. and Mme. Georges Renard,110 but it is a very
practical way of indicating to the middle class that they must mind their
own business and only that.
I believe also that it may be useful to thrash the orators of democracy and
the representatives of the Government, for in this way you insure that none
shall retain any illusions about the character of acts of violence. But these
acts can have historical value only if they are the clear and brutal
expression of the class war: the middle classes must not be allowed to
imagine that, aided by cleverness, social science, or high-flown sentiments,
they might find a better welcome at the hands of the proletariat.
The day on which employers perceive that they have nothing to gain by
works which promote social peace, or by democracy, they will understand
that they have been ill-advised by the people who persuaded them to
abandon their trade of creators of productive forces for the noble profession
of educators of the proletariat. Then there is some chance that they may get
back a part of their energy, and that moderate or conservative economics
may appear as absurd to them as they appeared to Marx. In any case, the
separation of classes being more clearly accentuated, the proletarian
movement will have some chance of developing with greater regularity than
to-day.
The two antagonistic classes therefore influence each other in a partly
indirect but decisive manner. Capitalism drives the proletariat into revolt,
because in daily life the employers use their force in a direction opposed to
the desire of their workers; but the future of the proletariat is not entirely
dependent on this revolt; the working classes are organised under theemployers use their force in a direction opposed to
the desire of their workers; but the future of the proletariat is not entirely
dependent on this revolt; the working classes are organised under the

--- PAGE BREAK ---force in a direction opposed to
the desire of their workers; but the future of the proletariat is not entirely
dependent on this revolt; the working classes are organised under the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

influence of other causes, and Socialism, inculcating in them the
revolutionary idea, prepares them to suppress the hostile class. Capitalist
force is at the base of all this process, and its action is automatic and
inevitable.111 Marx supposed that the middle class had no need to be incited
to employ force, but we are to-day faced with a new and very unforeseen
fact—a middle class which seeks to weaken its own strength. Must we
believe that the Marxian conception is dead? By no means, for proletarian
violence comes upon the scene just at the moment when the conception of
social peace is being held up as a means of moderating disputes; proletarian
violence confines employers to their r{le of producers, and tends to restore
the separation of the classes, just when they seemed on the point of
intermingling in the democratic marsh.
Proletarian violence not only makes the future revolution certain, but it
seems also to be the only means by which the European nations—at present
stupefied by humanitarianism—can recover their former energy. This kind
of violence compels capitalism to restrict its attentions solely to its material
role and tends to restore to it the warlike qualities which it formerly
possessed. A growing and solidly organised working class can compel the
capitalist class to remain firm in the industrial war; if a united and
revolutionary proletariat confronts a rich middle class, eager for conquest,
capitalist society will have reached its historical perfection.
Thus proletarian violence has become an essential factor of Marxism. Let
us add once more that, if properly conducted, it will suppress the
Parliamentary Socialists, who will no longer be able to pose as the leaders
of the working classes and the guardians of order.
III
The Marxian theory of revolution supposes that capitalism, while it is
still in full swing, will be struck to the heart, when—having attained
complete industrial efficiency—it has finally achieved its historical mission,
and whilst the economic system is still a progressive one. Marx does not
seem to have asked himself what would happen if the economic system
were on the down grade; he never dreamt of the possibility of a revolutioneconomic system is still a progressive one. Marx does not
seem to have asked himself what would happen if the economic system
were on the down grade; he never dreamt of the possibility of a revolution

--- PAGE BREAK ---till a progressive one. Marx does not
seem to have asked himself what would happen if the economic system
were on the down grade; he never dreamt of the possibility of a revolution

--- PAGE BREAK ---

which would take a return to the past, or even social conservation, as its
ideal.
We see nowadays that such a revolution might easily come to pass: the
friends of Jaurès, the clericals, and the democrats all take the Middle Ages
as their ideal for the future; they would like competition to be tempered,
riches limited, production subordinated to needs. These are dreams which
Marx looked upon as reactionary,112 and consequently negligible, because it
seemed to him that capitalism was embarked on an irresistible progress; but
nowadays we see considerable forces grouped together in the endeavour to
reform the capitalist economic system by bringing it, with the aid of laws,
nearer to the medieval ideal. Parliamentary Socialism would like to
combine with the moralists, the Church, and the democracy, with the
common aim of impeding the capitalist movement; and, in view of middle-
class cowardice, that would not perhaps be impossible.
Marx compared the passage from one historical era to another to a civil
inheritance; the new age inherits prior acquisitions. If the revolution took
place during a period of economic decadence, would not the inheritance be
very much compromised, and in that case could there be any hope of the
speedy reappearance of progress in the economic system? The ideologists
hardly trouble themselves at all with this question; they affirm that the
decadence will stop on the day that the public Treasury is at their disposal;
they are dazzled by the immense reserve of riches which would be
delivered up to their pillage; what banquets there would be, what women,
and what opportunities for self-display! We, on the other hand, who have no
such prospect before our eyes, have to ask whether history can furnish us
with any guidance on this subject, which will enable us to guess what
would be the result of a revolution accomplished in times of decadence.efore our eyes, have to ask whether history can furnish us
with any guidance on this subject, which will enable us to guess what
would be the result of a revolution accomplished in times of decadence.

The researches of Tocqueville enable us to study the French Revolution
from this point of view. He very much astonished his contemporaries when,
a half-century ago, he showed them that the Revolution had been much
more conservative than had been supposed till then. He pointed out that
most of the characteristic institutions of modern France date from the Old
Regime (centralisation, the issue of regulations on every possible pretext,

--- PAGE BREAK ---ill then. He pointed out that
most of the characteristic institutions of modern France date from the Old
Regime (centralisation, the issue of regulations on every possible pretext,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

administrative tutelage of the communes, exemption of civil servants from
the jurisdiction of the courts); he found only one important innovation—the
coexistence, which was established in the year VIII., of isolated civil
servants and deliberative councils. The principles of the Old Regime
reappeared in 1800, and the old customs were received back into favour.113
Turgot seemed to him to be an excellent type of the Napoleonic
administrator, who had “the ideal of a civil servant, in a democratic society
subject to an absolute government.”114 He was of the opinion that the
partition of the land, which it is customary to place to the credit of the
Revolution, had begun long before, and had not gone on at an exceptionally
rapid pace under its influence.115
It is certain that Napoleon did not have to make any extraordinary effort
to put the country once more on a monarchial footing. He found France
quite ready, and had only a few corrections of detail to make in order to
profit by the experience acquired since 1789. The administrative and fiscal
laws had been drawn up during the Revolution by people who had applied
the methods of the Old Regime; they remain in force to-day, still almost
intact. The men he employed had served their apprenticeship under the Old
Régime and under the Revolution; they all resemble one another; in their
governmental practices they are all men of the preceding period; they all
work with an equal ardour for the greatness of His Majesty.116 The real
merit of Napoleon lay in his not trusting too much to his own genius, in not
giving himself up to the dreams which had so often deluded men of the
eighteenth century, and had led them to desire to regenerate everything from
top to bottom—in short, in his full recognition of the principle of historical
heredity. It follows from all this that the Napoleonic regime may be looked
upon as an experiment, showing clearly the enormous part played by
conservation throughout the greatest revolutions.
Indeed, I think that the principle of conservation might even be extended
to things military, and the armies of the Revolution and the Empire may be
shown to be an extension of former institutions. In any case, it is very
curious that Napoleon should have made no essential innovations in
military equipment, and that it should have been the fire-arms of the old
Regime which so greatly contributed to securing the victories of thehat Napoleon should have made no essential innovations in
military equipment, and that it should have been the fire-arms of the old
Regime which so greatly contributed to securing the victories of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---have made no essential innovations in
military equipment, and that it should have been the fire-arms of the old
Regime which so greatly contributed to securing the victories of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

revolutionary troops. It was only under the Restoration that the artillery was
improved.
The ease with which the Revolution and the Empire succeeded in
radically transforming the country while still retaining such a large number
of the acquisitions of the past, is bound up with a fact to which our
historians have not always called attention, and which Taine does not seem
to have noticed: industrial production was making great progress, and this
progress was such that towards 1780, everybody believed in the dogma of
the indefinite progress of mankind.117 This dogma, which was to exercise
so great an influence on modern thought, would be a bizarre and
inexplicable paradox if it were not considered as bound up with economic
progress and with the feeling of absolute confidence which this economic
progress engendered. The wars of the Revolution and of the Empire only
stimulated this feeling still further, not only because they were glorious, but
also because they caused a great deal of money to enter the country, and
thus contributed to the development of production.118
The triumph of the Revolution astonished nearly all its contemporaries,
and it seems that the most intelligent, the most deliberate, and the best
informed as regards political matters, were the most surprised; this was
because reasons drawn from theory could not explain this paradoxical
success. It seems to me that even to-day the question is scarcely less
obscure to historians than it was to our ancestors. The primary cause of this
triumph must be sought in the economic progress of the time; it is because
the Old Regime was struck by rapid blows, while production was making
great strides, that the contemporary world was born with comparatively
little labour, and could so rapidly be assured of a vigorous life.
We possess, on the other hand, a dreadful historical experience of a great
transformation taking place at a time of economic decadence; I mean the
victory of Christianity and the fall of the Roman Empire which closely
followed it.
All the old Christian authors agree in informing us that the new religion
brought no serious improvement in the situation of the world; corruption,
oppression, and disasters continued to crush the people as in the past. This
was a great disillusion for the fathers of the Church; at the time of thevement in the situation of the world; corruption,
oppression, and disasters continued to crush the people as in the past. This
was a great disillusion for the fathers of the Church; at the time of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---ion of the world; corruption,
oppression, and disasters continued to crush the people as in the past. This
was a great disillusion for the fathers of the Church; at the time of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

persecutions the Christians had believed that God would overwhelm Rome
with favours on the day that the Empire ceased to persecute the faithful;
now the Empire was Christian, and the bishops had become personages of
the first rank, yet everything continued to go on as badly as in the past.
What was still more disheartening, the immorality, so often denounced as
the result of idolatry, had spread to the adorers of Christ. Far from imposing
a far-reaching reform on the profane world, the Church itself had become
corrupted by imitating the profane world; it began to resemble an imperial
administration, and the factions which tore it asunder were much more
moved by an appetite for power than by religious reasons.
It has often been asked whether Christianity was not the cause, or at least
one of the principal causes, of the fall of Rome. Gaston Boissier combats
this opinion by endeavouring to show that the decadent movement observed
after Constantine is the continuation of a movement which had existed for
some time, and that it is not possible to see whether Christianity accelerated
or retarded the death of the ancient world.119 That amounts to saying that
the extent of the conservation was enormous; we can, by analogy, imagine
what would follow from a revolution which brought our official Socialists
of to-day into power. Institutions remaining almost what they are to-day, all
the middle-class ideology would be preserved; the middle-class state would
dominate with its ancient abuses; if economic decadence had begun, it
would be accentuated.
Shortly after the Christian conquest, the barbarian invasions began. More
than one Christian wondered whether an order in conformity with the
principles of the new religion was not at length to appear; this hope was all
the more reasonable as the barbarians had been converted on coming into
the Empire, and because they were not accustomed to the corruption of
Roman life. From the economic point of view, a regeneration might be
hoped for, since the world was perishing beneath the weight of urban
exploitation; the new masters, who had coarse rural manners, would not live
as great lords, but as heads of large demesnes; perhaps, therefore, the earth
would be better cultivated. The illusions of Christian authors contemporary
with the invasions may be compared to those of the numerous Utopians
who hope to see the modern world regenerated by the virtues which they
attribute to the man of average condition; the replacing of the very richsions may be compared to those of the numerous Utopians
who hope to see the modern world regenerated by the virtues which they
attribute to the man of average condition; the replacing of the very rich

--- PAGE BREAK ---d to those of the numerous Utopians
who hope to see the modern world regenerated by the virtues which they
attribute to the man of average condition; the replacing of the very rich

--- PAGE BREAK ---

classes by new social strata should bring about morality, happiness, and
universal prosperity.
The barbarians did not establish any progressive state of society; there
were not many of them, and almost everywhere they simply took the place
of the old lords, led the same life as they did, and were devoured by urban
civilisation. In France, the Merovingian royalty has been made the subject
of particularly thorough investigation; Fustel de Coulanges has used all his
erudition in throwing light on the conservative character which it assumed;
its conservatism appeared to him to be so strong that he was even able to
say that there had been no real revolution, and he represented the whole of
the history of the late Middle Ages as a movement which had carried on the
movement of the Roman Empire with a little acceleration.120 “The
Merovingian Government,” he said, “is more than three parts the
continuation of that which the Roman Empire had given to Gaul.”121
The economic decadence was accentuated under these barbarian kings;
no renascence could take place until very long afterwards, when the world
had gone through a long series of trials. At least four centuries of barbarism
had to be gone through before a progressive movement showed itself;
society was compelled to descend to a state not far removed from its
origins, and Vico was to find in this phenomenon an illustration of his
doctrine of ricorsi.122 Thus a revolution which took place in a time of
economic decadence had forced the world to pass again through a period of
almost primitive civilisation, and had stopped all progress for several
centuries.
These dreadful events have been many times invoked by the adversaries
of Socialism; I do not deny the validity of the argument, but two details
must be added which may perhaps appear of small importance to
professional sociologists. Such events presuppose (1) an economic
decadence; (2) an organisation which assures a very perfect conservation of
the current system of ideas. The civilised Socialism of our professors has
many times been presented as a safeguard of civilisation: I believe that it
would produce the same effect as was produced by the classical education
given by the Church to the barbarian kings. The proletariat would be
corrupted and stultified as the Merovingians were, and economic decadencehe same effect as was produced by the classical education
given by the Church to the barbarian kings. The proletariat would be
corrupted and stultified as the Merovingians were, and economic decadence

--- PAGE BREAK ---

would only be more certain under the action of these pretended civilising
agents.
The dangers which threaten the future of the world may be avoided, if the
proletariat hold on with obstinacy to revolutionary ideas, so as to realise as
much as possible Marx’s conception. Everything may be saved, if the
proletariat, by their use of violence, manage to re-establish the division into
classes, and so restore to the middle class something of its former energy;
that is the great aim towards which the whole thought of men —who are not
hypnotised by the event of the day, but who think of the conditions of to-
morrow—must be directed. Proletarian violence, carried on as a pure and
simple manifestation of the sentiment of the class war, appears thus as a
very fine and very heroic thing; it is at the service of the immemorial
interests of civilisation; it is not perhaps the most appropriate method of
obtaining immediate material advantages, but it may save the world from
barbarism.

We have a very effective reply to those who accuse Syndicalists of being
obtuse and ignorant people. We may ask them to consider the economic
decadence for which they are working. Let us salute the revolutionaries as
the Greeks saluted the Spartan heroes who defended Thermopylae and
helped to preserve the civilisation of the ancient world.

--- PAGE BREAK ---they are working. Let us salute the revolutionaries as
the Greeks saluted the Spartan heroes who defended Thermopylae and
helped to preserve the civilisation of the ancient world.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

&haSter
Prejudices Against Violence
I. Old ideas relative to the Revolution—change resulting from
the year of 1870 and from the parliamentary régime.
II. Drumont’s observations on middle-class ferocity—the
judicial third estate and the history of the law courts—
capitalism against the cult of the state.
III. Attitude of the Dreyfusards-Jaurès’s judgments on the
revolution; his adoration of success and his hatred for the
vanquished.
IV. Antimilitarism as a proof of an abandonment of middle-class
traditions.
I
THE IDEAS current among the outside public on the subject of proletarian
violence are not founded on observation of contemporary facts, and on a
rational interpretation of the present Syndicalist movement; they are derived
from a comparison of the present with the past—an infinitely simpler
mental process; they are shaped by the memories which the word revolution
evokes almost automatically. It is supposed that the Syndicalists, merely
because they call themselves revolutionaries, wish to reproduce the history
of the revolutionaries of ’93. The Blanquists, who look upon themselves as
the legitimate owners of the Terrorist tradition, consider that for this very
reason they are called upon the direct the proletarian movement;123 they
display much more condescension to the Syndicalists than the other

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Parliamentary Socialists; they are inclined to assert that the workers’
organisations will come to understand in the end that they cannot do better
than to put themselves under their tuition. It seems to me that Jaurès
himself, when writing the Histoire socialiste of ’93, thought more once of
the teachings which this past, a thousand times dead, might yield to him for
the conduct of the present.ms to me that Jaurès
himself, when writing the Histoire socialiste of ’93, thought more once of
the teachings which this past, a thousand times dead, might yield to him for
the conduct of the present.

Proper attention has not always been given to the great changes which
have taken place since 1870 in the way people judge the revolution; yet
these changes must be considered if we wish to understand contemporary
ideas relative to violence.
For a very long time the Revolution appeared to be essentially a
succession of glorious wars, which a people famished for liberty and carried
away by the noblest passions had maintained against a coalition of all the
powers of oppression and error. Riots and coups d’état, the struggles
between parties often destitute of any scruple and the banishment of the
vanquished, the Parliamentary debates and the adventures of illustrious
men, in a word, all the events of its political history were in the eyes of our
fathers only very secondary accessories to the wars of liberty.
For about twenty-five years the form of government in France had been
at issue; after campaigns before which the memories of Cæsar and
Alexander paled the charter of 1814 had definitely incorporated in the
national tradition, the Parliamentary system, Napoleonic legislation, and the
Church established by the Concordat; war had given an irrevocable
judgment whose preambles, as Proudhon said, had been dated from Valmy,
from Jemmapes, and from fifty other battlefields, and whose conclusions124
had been received at Saint-Ouen by Louis ;VIII.125 Protected by the
prestige of the wars of liberty, the new institutions had become inviolable,
and the ideology which was built up to explain them became a faith which
seemed for a long time to have for the French the value which the
revelation of Jesus has for the Catholics.
From time to time eloquent writers have thought that they could set up a
current of reaction against these doctrines, and the Church had hopes that it
might get the better of what it called the error of liberalism. A long periodriters have thought that they could set up a
current of reaction against these doctrines, and the Church had hopes that it
might get the better of what it called the error of liberalism. A long period

--- PAGE BREAK ---that they could set up a
current of reaction against these doctrines, and the Church had hopes that it
might get the better of what it called the error of liberalism. A long period

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of admiration for medieval art and of contempt for the period of Voltaire
seemed to threaten the new ideology with ruin; but all these attempts to
return to the past left no trace except in literary history. There were times
when those in power governed in the least liberal manner, but the principles
of the modern regime were never seriously threatened. This fact could not
be explained by the power of reason and by some law of progress; its cause
lies simply in the epic of the wars which had filled the French soul with an
enthusiasm analogous to that provoked by religions.
This military epic gave an epical colour to all the events of internal
politics; party struggles were thus raised to the level of an Iliad; politicians
became giants, and the revolution, which Joseph de Maistre had denounced
as satanical, was made divine. The bloody scenes of the Terror were
episodes without great significance by the side of the enormous hecatombs
of war, and means were found to envelop them in a dramatic mythology;
riots were elevated to the same rank as illustrious battles; and calmer
historians vainly endeavoured to bring the Revolution and the Empire down
to the plane of common history. The prodigious triumphs of the
revolutionary and imperial arms rendered all criticism impossible.
The war of 1870 changed all that. At the moment of the fall of the
Second Empire the immense majority in France still firmly believed the
legends which had been spread about regarding the armies of volunteers,
the miraculous role of the representatives of the people, and the improvised
generals; experience produced a cruel disillusion. Tocqueville had written:
“The Convention created the policy of the impossible, the theory of furious
madness, the cult of blind audacity.”126 The disasters of 1870 brought the
country back to practical, prudent, and prosaic conditions; the first result of
these disasters was the development of the conception most opposed to that
spoken of by Tocqueville; this was the idea of opportunism, which has now
been introduced even into Socialism.
Another consequence was the change that took place in all revolutionary
values, and notably the modification in the opinions which were held on the
subject of violence.
After 1871 everybody in France thought only of the search for the most
suitable means of setting the country on its feet again. Taine endeavoured topinions which were held on the
subject of violence.
After 1871 everybody in France thought only of the search for the most
suitable means of setting the country on its feet again. Taine endeavoured to

--- PAGE BREAK ---eld on the
subject of violence.
After 1871 everybody in France thought only of the search for the most
suitable means of setting the country on its feet again. Taine endeavoured to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

apply the methods of the most scientific psychology to this question, and he
looked upon the history of the Revolution as a social experiment. He hoped
to be able to make quite clear the danger presented in his opinion by the
Jacobin spirit, and thus to induce his contemporaries to change the course of
French politics by abandoning ideas which had seemed incorporated in the
national tradition, and which were all the more solidly rooted in people’s
minds because nobody had ever discussed their origin. Taine failed in his
enterprise, as Le Play and Renan failed, as all those will fail who try to
found an intellectual and moral reform on investigations, on scientific
syntheses, and on demonstrations.
It cannot be said, however, that Taine’s immense labour was
accomplished to no purpose; the history of the Revolution was thoroughly
overhauled; the military epic no longer dominates people’s judgments about
political events. The life of men, the inner workings of factions, the material
needs which determine the tendencies of the great masses have now come
into the foreground. In the speech which he made on September 24, 1905,
at the inauguration of the monument to Taine at Vouziers, the deputy
Hulbert, while giving all homage to the great and many sided talent of his
illustrious compatriot, expressed a regret that the epic side of the
Revolution had been disregarded by him in a systematic manner. These are
superfluous regrets; the epic vision can henceforth no longer govern that
political history; an idea of the grotesque effects to which this constant
desire to return to the old methods may lead can be obtained by reading
Jaurès’s Histoire socialiste. In vain does Jaurès revive all the most
melodramatic images of the old rhetoric; the only effect he manages to
produce is one of absurdity.
The prestige of the great revolutionary days has been directly hit by the
comparison with contemporary civil struggles; there was nothing during the
Revolution which could bear comparison with the battles which
ensanguined Paris in 1848 and in 1871; July 14 and August 10 seem to us
now mere scuffles which would not have made an energetic Government
tremble.
There is yet another reason, still hardly recognised by professional
writers on revolutionary history, which has contributed a great deal towardsh would not have made an energetic Government
tremble.
There is yet another reason, still hardly recognised by professional
writers on revolutionary history, which has contributed a great deal towards

--- PAGE BREAK ---e an energetic Government
tremble.
There is yet another reason, still hardly recognised by professional
writers on revolutionary history, which has contributed a great deal towards

--- PAGE BREAK ---

taking all the romance out of these events. There can be no national epic
about things which the people cannot picture to themselves as reproducible
in a near future; popular poetry implies the future much more than the past;
it is for this reason that the adventures of the Gauls, of Charlemagne, of the
Crusades, of Joan of Arc cannot form the subject of a narrative capable of
moving any but literary people.127 Since the people have become convinced
that contemporary Governments cannot be overthrown by riots like those of
July 14 and August 10, they have ceased to look upon the events of these
days as epical. Parliamentary Socialists, who would like to utilise the
memory of the Revolution to excite the ardour of the people, and who ask
them at the same time to put all their confidence in Parliamentarism, are
very inconsistent, for they are themselves helping to ruin the epic, whose
prestige they wish to maintain in their speeches.
But then what remains of the Revolution when we have taken away the
epic of the wars against the coalition, and of that of the victories of the
populace? What remains is not very savoury: police operations,
proscriptions, and sittings of servile courts of law. The employment of the
force of the State against the vanquished shocks us all the more because so
many of the coryphées of the Revolution were soon to be distinguished
among the servants of Napoleon, and to employ the same police zeal on
behalf of the Emperor as they did on behalf of the Terror. In a country
which had been convulsed by so many changes of Government, and which
consequently had known so many recantations, political justice had
something particularly odious about it, because the criminal of to-day might
become the judge of tomorrow : General Malet could say before the council
of war which condemned him in 1812 that had he succeeded he would have
had for his accomplices the whole of France and his judges themselves.128
It is useless to carry these reflections any further; the slightest
observation will suffice to show that proletarian violence recalls a mass of
painful memories of those past times: instinctively, people start thinking of
the committees of revolutionary inspection, of the brutalities of suspicious
agents, coarsened and frightened by fear, of the tragedies of the guillotine.
You understand, therefore, why Parliamentary Socialists make such great
efforts to persuade the public that they have the souls of sensitiveand frightened by fear, of the tragedies of the guillotine.
You understand, therefore, why Parliamentary Socialists make such great
efforts to persuade the public that they have the souls of sensitive

--- PAGE BREAK ---ar, of the tragedies of the guillotine.
You understand, therefore, why Parliamentary Socialists make such great
efforts to persuade the public that they have the souls of sensitive

--- PAGE BREAK ---

shepherds, that their hearts are overflowing with good feeling, and that they
have only one passion—hatred of violence. They would readily give
themselves out to be the protectors of the middle class against proletarian
violence; and in order to heighten their prestige as humanitarians they never
fail to shun all contact with anarchists; sometimes, even, they shun this
contact with an abruptness which is not without a certain mixture of
cowardice and hypocrisy.
When Millerand was the unquestioned chief of the Socialist party in
Parliament, he advised his party to be afraid to frighten; and, as a matter of
fact, Socialist deputies would obtain very few notes if they did not manage
to convince the general public that they are very reasonable people, great
enemies of the old practices of bloody men, and solely occupied in
meditating on the philosophy of future law. In a long speech given on
October 8, 1905, at Limoges, Jaurès strove to reassure the middle class
much more than had been done hitherto; he informed them that victorious
Socialism would show princely generosity, and that he was studying the
different ways in which the former holders of property might be
indemnified. A few years ago Millerand promised indemnities to the poor
(Petite République, March 25, 1898); now everybody will be put on the
same footing, and Jaurès assures us that Vandervelde has written things on
this subject full of profundity. I am quite willing to take his word for it!
The social revolution is conceived by Jaurès as a kind of bankruptcy;
substantial annuities will be given to the middle class of to-day: then from
generation to generation these annuities will decrease. These plans must
often seem very alluring to financiers accustomed to draw great advantages
from bankruptcies ; I have no doubt that the shareholders of L’Humanité
think these ideas marvellous; they will be made liquidators of the
bankruptcy, and will pocket large fees, which will compensate them for the
losses which this newspaper has caused them.
In the eyes of the contemporary middle class everything is admirable
which dispels the idea of violence. Our middle class desire to die in peace
—after them the deluge.
IIs newspaper has caused them.
In the eyes of the contemporary middle class everything is admirable
which dispels the idea of violence. Our middle class desire to die in peace
—after them the deluge.
II

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed them.
In the eyes of the contemporary middle class everything is admirable
which dispels the idea of violence. Our middle class desire to die in peace
—after them the deluge.
II

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Let us now examine the violence of ’93 a little more closely, and
endeavour to see whether it can be identified with that of contemporary
Syndicalism.
Fifteen years ago Drumont, speaking of Socialism and of its future, wrote
these sentences, which then appeared exceedingly paradoxical to many
people: “The historian, who is always somewhat of a prophet, might say to
the Conservatives, ‘Salute the working-men leaders of the Commune, you
will never see their like again! . . . Those who are to come will be
malicious, wicked, and vindictive in a different way from the men of 1871.
Henceforward, a new feeling takes possession of the French proletariat:
hatred.’ ”129 These were not the airy words of a man of letters: Drumont
learned what he knew of the Commune and the Socialist world from Malon,
of whom he gave a very appreciative portrait in his book.
This sinister prediction was founded on the idea that the working man
was getting farther and farther away from the national tradition, and nearer
to the middle class, which is much more accessible than he is to bad feeling.
“It was the middle-class element,” said Drumont, “which was most
ferocious in the Commune, the vicious and bohemian middle class of the
Latin Quarter; the popular element, amid this dreadful crisis, remained
human, that is French. . . . Among the internationalists who formed part of
the Commune four only pronounced themselves in favour of violent
measures.”130 As will be seen, Drumont has got no farther than that naive
philosophy of the eighteenth century, and of the Utopians prior to 1848,
according to which men will follow the injunctions of the moral law all the
better for not having been spoiled by civilisation; in descending from the
superior classes to the poorer classes a greater number of good qualities are
found; good is only natural to individuals who have remained close to a
state of nature.
This theory about the nature of the classes led Drumont to a rather
curious historical speculation: none of our revolutions was so bloody as the
first, because it was conducted by the middle class—“in proportion as the
people became more intimately mixed up with revolutions, they became
less ferocious”—“the proletariat, when, for the first time, it had acquired an
effective share of authority, was infinitely less sanguinary than the middleately mixed up with revolutions, they became
less ferocious”—“the proletariat, when, for the first time, it had acquired an
effective share of authority, was infinitely less sanguinary than the middle

--- PAGE BREAK ---revolutions, they became
less ferocious”—“the proletariat, when, for the first time, it had acquired an
effective share of authority, was infinitely less sanguinary than the middle

--- PAGE BREAK ---

class.”131 We cannot remain content with the easy explanations which
satisfied Drumont; but it is certain that something has changed since ‘93.
We have to ask ourselves whether the ferocity of the old revolutionaries was
not due to reasons depending on the past history of the middle class, so that
in confusing the abuses of the revolutionary middle-class force of ’93 with
the violence of our revolutionary Syndicalists a grave error would be
committed: the word revolutionary would, in this case, have two perfectly
distinct meanings.
The Third Estate which filled the assemblies in the revolutionary epoch,
what may be called the official Third Estate, was not a body of
agriculturists and leaders of industry; power was never then in the hands of
manufacturers, but in the hands of the lawyers (basochiens).132 Taine was
very much struck by the fact that out of 577 deputies of the Third Estate in
the Constituent Assembly, there were 373 “unknown barristers and lawyers
of a minor order, notaries, King’s attorneys, court-roll commissioners,
judges and recorders of the presidial bench, bailiffs and lieutenants of the
bailiwick, simple practitioners shut up since their youth within the narrow
circle of a mediocre jurisdiction or the routine of continual scribbling,
without any other escape than philosophical wanderings through imaginary
. spaces under the guidance of Rousseau or of Raynal.”133 We have some
difficulty nowadays in understanding the importance which lawyers
possessed in ancient France; but a multitude of jurisdictions existed;
property owners were extremely punctilious in going to law about questions
which appear to us nowadays as of very minor importance, but which
seemed of enormous importance to them on account of the dovetailing of
feudal law with the law of property; functionaries of a judicial order were
found everywhere, and they enjoyed the greatest prestige with the people.
This class brought to the Revolution a great deal of administrative
capacity; it was owing to them that the country was able to pass easily
through the crisis which shook it for ten years, and that Napoleon was able
to reconstruct regular administrative services so rapidly; but this class also
brought a mass of prejudices which caused those of its representatives who
occupied high positions to commit grave errors. It is impossible to
understand the character of Robespierre, for example, if we compare him toprejudices which caused those of its representatives who
occupied high positions to commit grave errors. It is impossible to
understand the character of Robespierre, for example, if we compare him to

--- PAGE BREAK ---used those of its representatives who
occupied high positions to commit grave errors. It is impossible to
understand the character of Robespierre, for example, if we compare him to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the politicians of to-day; we must always see in him the serious lawyer,
taken up with his duties, anxious not to tarnish the professional honour of
an orator of the bar; moreover, he had literary leanings and was a disciple of
Rousseau. He had scruples about legality which astonish the historians of
to-day; when he was obliged to come to supreme resolutions and to defend
himself before the Convention, he showed a simplicity which bordered on
stupidity. The famous law of the 22nd Prairial, with which he has been so
often reproached and which gave so rapid a pace to the revolutionary
courts, is the masterpiece of his type of mind; the whole of the Old Regime
is found in it, expressed in clear-cut formulas.
One of the fundamental ideas of the Old Régime had been the
employment of the penal procedure to ruin any power which was an
obstacle to the monarchy. It seems that in all primitive societies the penal
law, at its inception, was a protection granted to the chief and to a few
privileged persons whom he honoured with special favour; it is only much
later that the legal power serves to safeguard, indiscriminately, the persons
and goods of all the inhabitants of a country. The Middle Ages being a
return to the customs of very ancient times, it was natural that they should
reproduce exceedingly archaic ideas about justice, and that the courts of
justice should come to be considered as instruments of royal greatness. An
historical accident happened to favour the extraordinary development of
this theory of criminal administration. The Inquisition furnished a model for
courts which, set in motion on very slight pretexts, prosecuted people who
embarrassed authority, with great persistence, and made it impossible for
them to harm the latter. The monarchy borrowed from the Inquisition many
of its procedures, and nearly always followed the same principles.
The king constantly demanded of his courts of justice that they should
work for the enlargement of his territories; it seems strange to us nowadays
that Louis ;IV should have had annexations proclaimed by commissions of
magistrates; but he was following the old tradition; many of his
predecessors had used Parliament to confiscate feudal manors for very
arbitrary motives. Justice, which seems to us, nowadays created to secure
the prosperity of production, and to permit its free and constantly widening
development, seemed created in former days to secure the greatness of the
monarchy: its essential aim was not justice, but the welfare of the State.ion, and to permit its free and constantly widening
development, seemed created in former days to secure the greatness of the
monarchy: its essential aim was not justice, but the welfare of the State.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ts free and constantly widening
development, seemed created in former days to secure the greatness of the
monarchy: its essential aim was not justice, but the welfare of the State.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It was very difficult to establish strict discipline in the services set up by
royalty for war and administration Enquiries had continually to be made in
order to punish unfaithful or disobedient employees; kings employed, for
this purpose, men taken from their courts of law; thus they came to confuse
acts of disciplinary surveillance with the repression of crimes. Lawyers
must transform everything according to their habits of mind; in this way
negligence, ill-will, or carelessness became revolt against authority, crime,
or treason.
The Revolution piously gathered up this tradition, gave an importance to
imaginary crimes which was all the greater because its political courts of
law carried on their operations in the midst of a populace maddened by the
seriousness, of the peril; it seemed quite natural to explain the defeats of
generals by criminal intentions, and to guillotine people who had not been
able to realise hopes fostered by a public opinion, that had returned to the
superstitions of childhood. Our penal code contains not a few paradoxical
articles dating from this time; nowadays it is not easy to understand how a
citizen can be seriously accused of plotting or of keeping up a
correspondence with foreign powers or their agents in order to induce them
to begin hostilities, or to enter into war with France, or to furnish them with
the means therefor. Such a crime supposes that the State can be imperilled
by the act of one person; this appears scarcely credible to us.134
Actions against enemies of the king were always conducted in an
exceptional manner; the procedure was simplified as much as possible;
flimsy proofs which would not have sufficed for ordinary crimes were
accepted; the endeavour was to make a terrible and profoundly intimidating
example. All this is to be found in Robespierre’s legislation. The law of the
22nd Prairial lays down rather vague definitions of political crime, so as not
to let any enemy of the Revolution escape; and the kind of proofs required
are worthy of the purest tradition of the Old Regime and of the Inquisition.
“The proof necessary to condemn the enemies of the people is any kind of
document, material, moral, verbal or written, which can naturally obtain the
assent of any just and reasonable mind. Juries in giving their verdict should
be guided solely by what love of their country indicates to their conscience;
their aim is the triumph of the republic and the ruin of its enemies.” Weable mind. Juries in giving their verdict should
be guided solely by what love of their country indicates to their conscience;
their aim is the triumph of the republic and the ruin of its enemies.” We

--- PAGE BREAK ---giving their verdict should
be guided solely by what love of their country indicates to their conscience;
their aim is the triumph of the republic and the ruin of its enemies.” We

--- PAGE BREAK ---

have in this celebrated Terrorist law the strongest expression of the theory
of the predominance of the State.135
The philosophy of the eighteenth century happened to render these
methods still more formidable. It professed, in fact, to formulate a return to
natural law; humanity had been till then corrupted by the fault of a small
number of people whose interest it had been to deceive it; but the true
means of returning to the principles of primitive goodness, of truth, and of
justice had at last been discovered; all opposition to so excellent a reform,
one so easy to apply and so certain of success, was the most criminal act
imaginable; the innovators were resolved to show themselves inexorable in
destroying the evil influence which bad citizens might exercise for the
purpose of hindering the regeneration of humanity. Indulgence was a
culpable weakness, for it amounted to nothing less than the sacrifice of the
happiness of multitudes to the caprices of incorrigible people, who gave
proof of an incomprehensible obstinacy, who refused to recognise evidence,
and only lived on lies.
From the Inquisition to the political justice of the monarchy, and from
this to the revolutionary courts of justice, there was a constant progress
towards greater severity in laws, the extension of the use of force, and the
amplification of authority. For a considerable time the Church had felt
doubts about the value of the exceptional methods practised by its
inquisitors.136 The monarchy, especially when it had reached its full
maturity, was troubled with very few scruples about the matter; but the
Revolution displayed the scandal of its superstitious cult of the State quite
openly, in the full light of day.
A reason of an economical order gave to the State at that time a strength
which the Church had never possessed. At the beginning of modern times,
Governments, by their maritime expeditions and the encouragement they
gave to industry, had played a very great part in production; but in the
eighteenth century this part had become exceptionally important in the
minds of theorists. People at that time had their heads full of great projects;
they conceived kingdoms as vast companies undertaking to colonise and
cultivate new lands, and they made efforts to ensure the good working of
these companies. Thus the State was the god of the reformers. “Theyived kingdoms as vast companies undertaking to colonise and
cultivate new lands, and they made efforts to ensure the good working of
these companies. Thus the State was the god of the reformers. “They

--- PAGE BREAK ---t companies undertaking to colonise and
cultivate new lands, and they made efforts to ensure the good working of
these companies. Thus the State was the god of the reformers. “They

--- PAGE BREAK ---

desire,” wrote Tocqueville, “to borrow the authority of the central power
and to use it to break up and to remake everything according to a new plan
which they have themselves conceived; the central power alone appears to
them capable of accomplishing such a task. The power of the State must be
limitless, as its rights,137 they say; all that is necessary is to persuade the
State to make a suitable use of this power.”138 The physiocrats seemed
ready to sacrifice individuals to the common weal; they had no great love of
liberty, and thought the idea of an equipoise of powers absurd; they hoped
to convert the State; their system is defined by Tocqueville as “a democratic
despotism”; the Government would have been in theory the representative
of everybody, controlled by an enlightened public opinion; practically it
was an absolute master.139 One of the things which most astonished
Tocqueville in the course of his studies of the Old Regime is the admiration
felt by the physiocrats for China, which appeared to them as the type of
good government, because in that country there were only valets and clerks
carefully catalogued and chosen by competition.140
Since the Revolution there has been such an upheaval of ideas that we
have considerable difficulty in understanding correctly the conceptions of
our fathers.141 The capitalist economic system has thrown full light on the
extraordinary power of the individual unaided by the State; the confidence
which the men of the eighteenth century had in the industrial capacities of
the State seems puerile to everybody who has studied production elsewhere
than in the insipid books of the sociologists, which still preserve very
carefully the cult for the blunders of the past; the law of nature has become
an inexhaustible subject of banter for people who have the slightest
knowledge of history; the employment of the courts of law as a means of
coercing a political adversary arouses universal indignation, and people
with ordinary common sense hold that it ruins all judicial conceptions.
Sumner Maine points out that the relationships of governments and
citizens have been completely overhauled since the end of the eighteenth
century; formerly the State was always supposed to be good and wise,
consequently any attempt to hinder its working was looked upon as a grave
offence; the Liberal system supposes, on the contrary, that the citizen, left
free, chooses the better part, and that he exercises the first of his rights inder its working was looked upon as a grave
offence; the Liberal system supposes, on the contrary, that the citizen, left
free, chooses the better part, and that he exercises the first of his rights in

--- PAGE BREAK ---looked upon as a grave
offence; the Liberal system supposes, on the contrary, that the citizen, left
free, chooses the better part, and that he exercises the first of his rights in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

criticising the Government, which has passed from the position of master to
that of servant.142 Maine does not say what is the cause of this
transformation; the cause seems to me to be above all of an economic order.
In the new state of things political crime is an act of simple revolt which
cannot carry with it disgrace of any kind, which is combated for reasons of
prudence, but which no longer merits the name of crime, for its author in no
way resembles a criminal.
We are not perhaps better, more human, more sensitive to the misfortunes
of others than were the men of ’93; and I should even be rather disposed to
assert that the country is probably less moral than it was at that time; but we
are no longer dominated to the same extent that our fathers were by this
superstition of the God-State, to which they sacrificed so many victims. The
ferocity of the members of the National Convention is easily explained by
the influence of the conceptions which the Third Estate derived from the
detestable practices. of the Old Regime.
III
It would be strange if the old ideas were quite dead; the Dreyfus case
showed us that the immense majority of the officers and priests still
conceived justice in the manner of the Old Regime and looked upon
condemnations for “State reasons” as quite natural.143 That should not
surprise us, for these two types of people, never having had any direct
relationship with production, can understand nothing about law. The revolt
of the enlightened public against the practices of the Minister of War was so
great that for a moment it might have been believed that “reasons of State”
would no longer be admitted as a pretext for condemnation (outside the two
types mentioned above), except by the readers of the Petit Journal, whose
mentality would thus be characterised and shown to be much the same as
that which existed a century ago. We know now, alas! by cruel experience,
that the State had its high priests and its fervent worshippers even among
the Dreyfusards.
The Dreyfus case was scarcely over when the Government of
“Republican defence” began another political prosecution, in the name of
state policy, and accumulated almost as many lies as the Etat-Major (armyDreyfus case was scarcely over when the Government of
“Republican defence” began another political prosecution, in the name of
state policy, and accumulated almost as many lies as the Etat-Major (army

--- PAGE BREAK ---rcely over when the Government of
“Republican defence” began another political prosecution, in the name of
state policy, and accumulated almost as many lies as the Etat-Major (army

--- PAGE BREAK ---

council) had accumulated in the Dreyfus trial. No serious person nowadays
can doubt that the great plot for which Déroulède, Buffet, and Lur-Saluces
were condemned was an invention of the police; the siege of what has been
called the Fort Chabrol was arranged in order to make Parisians believe that
they had been on the eve of a civil war. The victims of this judicial crime
were granted an amnesty, but the amnesty should not have sufficed: if the
Dreyfusards had been sincere they should have demanded a recognition by
the Senate of the scandalous error which the lies of the police had caused it
to commit; on the contrary, they seem to have seen nothing that violated the
principles of eternal justice, in their continued support of a condemnation
founded on the most evident fraud.
Jaurès and many other prominent Dreyfusards commended General
André and Combes for having organised a regular system of secret
accusations. Kautsky warmly reproached him for his conduct; the German
writer demanded that Socialists should not continue to represent “the
wretched practices of the middle-class Republic” as great democratic
actions, and that they should remain “faithful to the principle which
declares that the informer is the worst kind of rascal” (Débats, November
13, 1904). The saddest thing about this affair was that Jaurès asserted that
Colonel Hartmann, who protested against the system of fiches (secret
reports), had himself employed similar methods;144 the latter wrote to him:
“I pity you for this —that you have come to defend to-day, and by such
means, the guilty acts which, with us, you condemned a few years ago; I
pity you, that you should believe yourself obliged to make the Republican
form of Government responsible for the vile proceedings of the police spies
who dishonour it” (Débats, November 5, 1904).
Experience has always shown us hitherto that revolutionaries plead
“reasons of State” as soon as they get into power, that they then employ
police methods and look upon justice as a weapon which they may use
unfairly against their enemies. Parliamentary Socialists do not escape the
universal rule; they preserve the old cult of the State; they are therefore
prepared to commit all the misdeeds of the Old Regime and of the
Revolution.ies. Parliamentary Socialists do not escape the
universal rule; they preserve the old cult of the State; they are therefore
prepared to commit all the misdeeds of the Old Regime and of the
Revolution.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ocialists do not escape the
universal rule; they preserve the old cult of the State; they are therefore
prepared to commit all the misdeeds of the Old Regime and of the
Revolution.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A fine collection of platitudinous political maxims might be composed by
going through Jaurès’s Histoire socialiste. I have never had the patience to
read the 1824 pages devoted to the story of the Revolution between August
10, 1792, and the fall of Robespierre; I have simply turned over the leaves
of this tedious book, and seen that it contained a mixture of a philosophy
worthy of M. Pantalon and a policy fitting a purveyor to the guillotine. For
a long time I had reckoned that Jaurè would be capable of every ferocity
against the vanquished; I saw that I had not been mistaken; but I should not
have thought that he was capable of so much platitude: in his eyes the
vanquished are always in the wrong, and victory fascinates our great
defender of eternal justice so much that he is ready to consent to every
proscription demanded of him: “Revolutions,” he says, “claim from a man
the most frightful sacrifices, not only of his rest, not only of his life, but of
human tenderness and pity.”145 Why write so much, then, about the
inhumanity of the executioners of Dreyfus? They also sacrificed “human
tenderness” to what appeared to them to be the safety of the country.
A few years ago the Republicans were extremely indignant with the
Vicomte de Vogé, who, when receiving Hanotaux into the French
Academy, called the coup d’état of 1851 “a somewhat harsh police
exploit.”146 Jaurès, taught by revolutionary history, now reasons in exactly
the same manner as the jovial vicomte;147 he praises, for example, “the
policy of vigour and of wisdom” which consisted in forcing the Convention
to expel the Girondins “with a certain appearance of legality.”148
The massacres of September 1792 embarrass him somewhat; legality is
not very apparent here, but he has big words and bad reasons for every ugly
cause; Danton’s conduct was not very worthy of admiration at the time of
these melancholy happenings, but Jaurès must excuse him, since Danton
was triumphant during this period. “He did not think it was his duty as a
revolutionary and patriotic minister to enter upon a struggle with these
misguided popular forces. How can we refine the metal of the bells when
they are sounding the alarm of imperilled liberty?”149 It seems to me that
Cavaignac might have explained his conduct in the Dreyfus case in the
same way. To the people who accused him of being hand in hand with the
Anti-Semites, he might have answered that his duty as a patriotic ministerhave explained his conduct in the Dreyfus case in the
same way. To the people who accused him of being hand in hand with the
Anti-Semites, he might have answered that his duty as a patriotic minister

--- PAGE BREAK ---conduct in the Dreyfus case in the
same way. To the people who accused him of being hand in hand with the
Anti-Semites, he might have answered that his duty as a patriotic minister

--- PAGE BREAK ---

did not compel him to enter upon a struggle with the misguided populace,
and that on the days when the safety of national defence is at stake we
cannot refine the metal of the bells which are sounding the alarm of the
country in danger.
When he comes to the period when Camille Desmoulins sought to stir up
a movement of opinion strong enough to stop the Terror, Jaurès speaks
energetically against this attempt. He acknowledges, however, a few pages
farther on, that the guillotine system could not last for ever; but
Desmoulins, having succumbed, is wrong in the eyes of our humble
worshipper of success. Jaurès accuses the author of the Vieux Cordelier of
forgetting the conspiracies, the treasons, the corruptions, and all the dreams
with which the Terrorists fed their infatuated imaginations; he is even
ironical enough to speak of “free France!” and he brings forth this sentence,
worthy of a Jacobin pupil of Joseph Prudhomme: “The knife of Desmoulins
was chiselled with an incomparable art; but he planted it in the heart of the
Revolution;”150 When Robespierre no longer commands the majority in the
Convention he is, as a matter of course, put to death by the other Terrorists,
in virtue of the legitimate working of the parliamentary institutions of that
time; but to appeal to mere public opinion against the Government leaders,
that was the “crime” of Desmoulins. His crime was also that committed by
Jaurès at the time he defended Dreyfus against the great leaders of the army
and the Government; how many times has not Jaurès been accused of
compromising the national defence? But that time is already a long way off;
and our orator at that period, not having yet tasted the advantages of power,
did not possess a theory of the State as ferocious as that which he possesses
to-day.that time is already a long way off;
and our orator at that period, not having yet tasted the advantages of power,
did not possess a theory of the State as ferocious as that which he possesses
to-day.

I think that I have said sufficient to enable me to conclude that if by
chance our Parliamentary Socialists get possession of the reins of
Government, they will prove to be worthy successors of the Inquisition, of
the Old Regime, and of Robespierre; political courts will be at work on a
large scale, and we may even suppose that the unfortunate law of 1848,
which abolished the death penalty in political matters, will be repealed.
Thanks to this reform, we might again see the State triumphing by the hand
of the executioner.

--- PAGE BREAK ---aw of 1848,
which abolished the death penalty in political matters, will be repealed.
Thanks to this reform, we might again see the State triumphing by the hand
of the executioner.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Proletarian acts of violence have no resemblance to these proscriptions;
they are purely and simply acts of war; they have the value of military
demonstrations, and serve to mark the separation of classes. Everything in
war is carried on without hatred and without the spirit of revenge: in war
the vanquished are not killed; non-combatants are not made to bear the
consequences of the disappointments which the armies may have
experienced on the fields of battle;151 force is then displayed according to
its own nature, without ever professing to borrow anything from the judicial
proceedings which society sets up against criminals.
The more Syndicalism develops, by abandoning the old superstitions
which come to it from the Old Regime and from the Church—through the
men of letters, professors of philosophy, and historians of the Revolution,—
the more will social conflicts assume the character of a simple struggle,
similar to those of armies on campaign. We cannot censure too severely
those who teach the people that they ought to carry out the highly idealistic
decrees of a progressive justice. Their efforts will only result in the
maintenance of those ideas about the State which provoked the bloody acts
of ’93, whilst the idea of a class war, on the contrary, tends to refine the
conception of violence.
I9
Syndicalism in France is engaged on an antimilitarist propaganda, which
shows clearly the immense distance which separates it from Parliamentary
Socialism in its conception of the nature of the State. Many newspapers
believe that all this is merely an exaggerated humanitarian movement,
provoked by the articles of Hervé; this is a great error. We should be
misconceiving the nature of the movement if we supposed that it was
merely a protest against harshness of discipline, against the length of
military service, or against the presence, in the higher ranks, of officers
hostile to the existing institutions of the country; 152 these are the reasons
which led many middle-class people to applaud declamations against the
army at the time of the Dreyfus case, but they are not the Syndicalists’
reasons.tions of the country; 152 these are the reasons
which led many middle-class people to applaud declamations against the
army at the time of the Dreyfus case, but they are not the Syndicalists’
reasons.

--- PAGE BREAK ---; 152 these are the reasons
which led many middle-class people to applaud declamations against the
army at the time of the Dreyfus case, but they are not the Syndicalists’
reasons.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The army is the clearest and the most tangible of all possible
manifestations of the State, and the one which is most firmly connected
with its origins and traditions. Syndicalists do not propose to reform the
State, as the men of the eighteenth century did; they want to destroy it,153
because they wish to realise this idea of Marx’s that the Socialist revolution
ought not to culminate in the replacement of one governing authority by
another minority.154 The Syndicalists outline their doctrine still more clearly
when they give it a more ideological aspect, and declare themselves
antipatriotic—following the example of the Communist Manifesto.
It is impossible that there should be the slightest understanding between
Syndicalists and official Socialists on this question; the latter, of course,
speak of breaking up everything, but they attack men in power rather than
power itself; they hope to possess the State forces, and they are aware that
on the day when they control the Government they will have need of an
army; they will carry on foreign politics, and consequently they in their turn
will have to praise the feeling of devotion to the fatherland.
Parliamentary Socialists perceive that antipatriotism is deeply rooted in
the minds of Socialist workmen, and they make great efforts to reconcile
the irreconcilable; they are anxious not to oppose too strongly ideas to
which the proletariat has become attached, but at the same time they cannot
abandon their cherished State, which promises them so many delights. They
have stooped to the most comical oratorical acrobatics in order to get over
the difficulty. For instance, after the sentence of the Court of Assizes of the
Seine, condemning Hervé and the antimilitarists, the National Council of
the Socialist party passed a resolution branding this “verdict, due to hatred
and fear,” declaring that a class justice could not “respect liberty of
opinion,” protesting against the employment of troops in strikes, and
affirming “resolutely the necessity for action, and for an international
understanding among the workers, for the suppression of war” (Socialiste,
January 20, 1906). All this is very clever, but the fundamental question is
avoided.
Thus it cannot any longer be contested that there is an absolute
opposition between revolutionary Syndicalism and the State; this opposition
takes in France the particularly harsh form of antipatriotism, because theany longer be contested that there is an absolute
opposition between revolutionary Syndicalism and the State; this opposition
takes in France the particularly harsh form of antipatriotism, because the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

politicians have devoted all their knowledge and ability to the task of
spreading confusion in people’s minds about the essence of Socialism. On
the plane of patriotism there can be no compromises and halfway positions;
it is therefore on this plane that the Syndicalists have been forced to take
their stand when middle-class people of every description employed all
their powers of seduction to corrupt Socialism and to alienate the workers
from the revolutionary idea. They have been led to deny the idea of
patriotism by one of those necessities which are met with at all times in the
course of history,155 and which philosophers have sometimes great
difficulty in explaining—because the choice is imposed by external
conditions, and not freely made for reasons drawn from the nature of things.
This character of historical necessity gives to the existing antipatriotic
movement a strength which it would be useless to attempt to dissimulate by
means of sophistries.156

We have the right to conclude from the preceding analysis that
Syndicalist violence, perpetrated in the course of strikes by proletarians
who desire the overthrow of the State, must not be confused with those acts
of savagery which the superstition of the State suggested to the
revolutionaries of 593, when they had power in their hands and were able to
opress the conquered—following the principles which they had received
from the Church and from the Monarchy. We have the right to hope that a
Socialist revolution carried out by pure Syndicalists would not be defiled by
the abominations which sullied the middle-class revolutions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---onarchy. We have the right to hope that a
Socialist revolution carried out by pure Syndicalists would not be defiled by
the abominations which sullied the middle-class revolutions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

&haSter
7Ke Proletarian 6triNe
I. The confusion in parliamentary socialism and the clearness of
the general strike—myths in history—the value of the general
strike proved by experience.
II. Researches made to perfect Marxism—means of throwing
light upon it, starting from the point of view of the general
strike: class war; preparation for the revolution and absence of
utopias; irrevocable character of the revolution.
III. Scientific prejudices against the general strike; doubts about
science—the clear and the obscure parts in thought—economic
incompetence of parliaments.
I
EVERY TIME that we attempt to obtain an exact conception of the ideas
behind proletarian violence we are forced to go back to the notion of the
general strike; and this same conception may render many other services,
and throw an unexpected light on all the obscure parts of Socialism. In the
last pages of the first chapter I compared the general strike to the
Napoleonic battle which definitely crushes an adversary; this comparison
will help us to understand the part played by the general strike in the world
of ideas.
Military writers of to-day, when discussing the new methods of war
necessitated by the employment of troops infinitely more numerous than
those of Napoleon, equipped with arms much more deadly than those of his

--- PAGE BREAK ---en discussing the new methods of war
necessitated by the employment of troops infinitely more numerous than
those of Napoleon, equipped with arms much more deadly than those of his

--- PAGE BREAK ---

time, do not for all that imagine that wars will be decided in any other way
than that of the Napoleonic battle. The new tactics proposed must fit into
the drama Napoleon had conceived; the detailed development of the combat
will doubtless be quite different from what it used to be, but the end must
always be the catastrophic defeat of the enemy. The methods of military
instruction are intended to prepare the soldier for this great and terrible
action, in which everybody must be ready to take part at the first signal.
From the highest to the lowest, the members of a really solid army have
always in mind this catastrophic issue of international conflicts.
The revolutionary Syndicates argue about Socialist action exactly in the
same manner as military writers argue about war; they restrict the whole of
Socialism to the general strike; they look upon every combination as one
that should culminate in this catastrophe; they see in each strike a reduced
facsimile, an essay, a preparation for the great final upheaval.
The new school, which calls itself Marxist, Syndicalist, and
revolutionary, declared in favour of the idea of the general strike as soon as
it became clearly conscious of the true sense of its own doctrine, of the
consequences of its activity, and of its own originality. It was thus led to
leave the old official, Utopian, and political tabernacles, which hold the
general strike in horror, and to launch itself into the true current of the
proletarian revolutionary movement; for a long time past the proletariat had
made adherence to the principle of the general strike the test by means of
which the Socialism of the workers was distinguished from that of the
amateur revolutionaries.
Parliamentary Socialists can only obtain great influence if they can
manage, by the use of a very confused language, to impose themselves on
very diverse groups; for example, they must have working-men constituents
simple enough to allow themselves to be duped by high-sounding phrases
about future collectivism; they are compelled to represent themselves as
profound philosophers to stupid middle-class people who wish to appear to
be well informed about social questions; it is very necessary also for them
to be able to exploit rich people who think that they are earning the
gratitude of humanity by taking shares in the enterprises of Socialist
politicians. This influence is founded on balderdash, and our bigwigsto exploit rich people who think that they are earning the
gratitude of humanity by taking shares in the enterprises of Socialist
politicians. This influence is founded on balderdash, and our bigwigs

--- PAGE BREAK ---ple who think that they are earning the
gratitude of humanity by taking shares in the enterprises of Socialist
politicians. This influence is founded on balderdash, and our bigwigs

--- PAGE BREAK ---

endeavour—sometimes only too successfully—to spread confusion among
the ideas of their readers; they detest the general strike because all
propaganda carried on from that point of view is too socialistic to please
philanthropists.
In the mouths of these self-styled representatives of the proletariat all
socialistic formulas lose their real sense. The class war still remains the
great principle, but it must be subordinated to national solidarity.157
Internationalism is an article of faith about which the most moderate declare
themselves ready to take the most solemn oaths; but patriotism also imposes
sacred duties.158 The emancipation of the workers must be the work of the
workers themselves—their newspapers repeat this every day,—but real
emancipation consists in voting for a professional politician, in securing for
him the means of obtaining a comfortable situation in the world, in
subjecting oneself to a leader. In the end the State must disappear—and they
are very careful not to dispute what Engels has written on this subject—but
this disappearance will take place only in a future so far distant that you
must prepare yourself for it by using the State meanwhile as a means of
providing the politicians with tidbits; and the best means of bringing about
the disappearance of the State consists in strengthening meanwhile the
Governmental machine. This method of reasoning resembles that of
Gribouille, who threw himself into the water in order to escape getting wet
in the rain.
Whole pages could be filled with the bare outlines of the contradictory,
comical, and quack arguments which form the substance of the harangues
of our great men; nothing embarrasses them, and they know how to
combine, in pompous, impetuous, and nebulous speeches, the most absolute
irreconcilability with the most supple opportunism. A learned exponent of
Socialism has said that the art of reconciling opposites by means of
nonsense is the most obvious result which he had got from the study of the
works of Marx.159 I confess my extreme incompetence in these difficult
matters; moreover, I make no claim whatever to be counted among the
people upon whom politicians confer the title of learned; yet I cannot easily
bring myself to admit that this is the sum and substance of the Marxian
philosophy.claim whatever to be counted among the
people upon whom politicians confer the title of learned; yet I cannot easily
bring myself to admit that this is the sum and substance of the Marxian
philosophy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---counted among the
people upon whom politicians confer the title of learned; yet I cannot easily
bring myself to admit that this is the sum and substance of the Marxian
philosophy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The controversy between Jaurès and Clemenceau demonstrated quite
clearly that our Parliamentary Socialists can succeed in deceiving the public
only by their equivocation; and that, as the result of continually deceiving
their readers, they have finally lost all sense of honest discussion. In the
Aurore of September 4, 1905, Clemenceau accuses Jaurès of muddling the
minds of his partisans “with metaphysical subtleties into which they are
incapable of following him”; there is nothing to object to in this accusation,
save the use of the word Metaphysical; Jaurès is no more a metaphysician
than he is a lawyer or an astronomer. In the number of October 26
Clemenceau proves that his opponent possesses “the art of falsifying his
texts,” and he ends by saying, “It seemed to me instructive to expose certain
polemical practices which we wrongly supposed to be monopoly of the
Jesuits.”
Against this noisy, garrulous, and lying Socialism, which is exploited by
ambitious people of every description, which amuses a few buffoons, and
which is admired by decadents —revolutionary Syndicalism takes its stand,
and endeavours, on the contrary, to leave nothing in a state of indecision; its
ideas are honestly expressed, without trickery and without mental
reservations; no attempt is made to dilute doctrines by a stream of confused
commentaries. Syndicalism endeavours to employ methods of expression
which throw a full light on things, which put them exactly in the place
assigned to them by their nature, and which bring out the whole value of the
forces in play. Oppositions, instead of being glozed over, must be thrown
into sharp relief if we desire to obtain a clear idea of the Syndicalist
movement; the groups which are struggling one against the other must be
shown as separate and as compact as possible; in short, the movements of
the revolted masses must be represented in such a way that the soul of the
revolu-. tionaries may receive a deep and lasting impression.
These results could not be produced in any very certain manner by the
use of ordinary language; use must be made of a body of images which, by
intuition alone, and before any considered analyses are made, is capable of
evoking as an undivided whole the mass of sentiments which corresponds
to the different manifestations of the war undertaken by Socialism against
modern society. The Syndicalists solve this problem perfectly, by
concentrating the whole of Socialism in the drama of the general strike;ent manifestations of the war undertaken by Socialism against
modern society. The Syndicalists solve this problem perfectly, by
concentrating the whole of Socialism in the drama of the general strike;

--- PAGE BREAK ---f the war undertaken by Socialism against
modern society. The Syndicalists solve this problem perfectly, by
concentrating the whole of Socialism in the drama of the general strike;

--- PAGE BREAK ---

there is thus no longer any place for the reconciliation of contraries in the
equivocations of the professors; everything is clearly mapped out, so that
only one interpretation of Socialism is possible. This method has all the
advantages which “integral” knowledge has over analysis, according to the
doctrine of Bergson; and perhaps it would not be possible to cite another
example which would so perfectly demonstrate the value of the famous
professor’s doctrines.160
The possibility of the actual realisation of the general strike has been
much discussed; it has been stated that the Socialist war could not be
decided in one single battle. To the people who think themselves cautious,
practical, and scientific the difficulty of setting great masses of the
proletariat in motion at the same moment seems prodigious; they have
analysed the difficulties of detail which such an enormous struggle would
present. It is the opinion of the Socialist-sociologists, as also of the
politicians, that the general strike is a popular dream, characteristic of the
beginnings of a working-class movement; we have had quoted against us
the authority of Sidney Webb, who has decreed that the general strike is an
illusion of youth,161 of which the English workers—whom the monopolists
of sociology have so often presented to us as the depositaries of the true
conception of the working-class movement—soon rid themselves.
That the general strike is not popular in contemporary England, is a poor
argument to bring against the historical significance of the idea, for the
English are distinguished by an extraordinary lack of understanding of the
class war; their ideas have remained very much dominated by medieval
influences : the guild, privileged, or at least protected by laws, still seems to
them the ideal of working-class organisation; it is for England that the term
working-class aristocracy, as a name for the trades unionists, was invented,
and, as a matter of fact, trades unionism does pursue the acquisition of legal
privileges.162 We might therefore say that the aversion felt by England for
the general strike should be looked upon as strong presumptive evidence in
favour of the latter by all those who look upon the class war as the essence
of Socialism.
Moreover, Sidney Webb enjoys a reputation for competence which is
very much exaggerated; all that can be put to his credit is that he has wadedwho look upon the class war as the essence
of Socialism.
Moreover, Sidney Webb enjoys a reputation for competence which is
very much exaggerated; all that can be put to his credit is that he has waded

--- PAGE BREAK ---ass war as the essence
of Socialism.
Moreover, Sidney Webb enjoys a reputation for competence which is
very much exaggerated; all that can be put to his credit is that he has waded

--- PAGE BREAK ---

through uninteresting blue-books, and has had the patience to compose an
extremely indigestible compilation on the history of trades unionism; he has
a mind of the narrowest description, which could only impress people
unaccustomed to reflection.163 Those who introduced his fame into France
knew nothing at all about Socialism; and if he is really in the first rank of
contemporary authors of economic history, as his translator affirms,164 it is
because the intellectual level of these historians is rather low; moreover,
many examples show us that it is possible to be a most illustrious
professional historian and yet possess a mind something less than mediocre.
Neither do I attach any importance to the objections made to the general
strike based on considerations of a practical order. The attempt to construct
hypotheses about the nature of the struggles of the future and the means of
suppressing capitalism, on the model furnished by history, is a return to the
old methods of the Utopists. There is no process by which the future can be
predicted scientifically, nor even one which enables us to discuss whether
one hypothesis about it is better than another; it has been proved by too
many memorable examples that the greatest men have committed
prodigious errors in thus desiring to make predictions about even the least
distant future.165
And yet without leaving the present, without reasoning about this future,
which seems for ever condemned to escape our reason, we should be unable
to act at all. Experience shows that the framing of a future, in some
indeterminate time, may, when it is done in a certain way, be very effective,
and have very few inconveniences; this happens when the anticipations of
the future take the form of those myths, which enclose with them, all the
strongest inclinations of a people, of a party or of a class, inclinations which
recur to the mind with the insistence of instincts in all the circumstances of
life; and which give an aspect of complete reality to the hopes of immediate
action by which, more easily than by any other method, men can reform
their desires, passions, and mental activity. We know, moreover, that these
social myths in no way prevent a man profiting by the observations which
he makes in the course of his life, and form no obstacle to the pursuit of his
normal occupations.166now, moreover, that these
social myths in no way prevent a man profiting by the observations which
he makes in the course of his life, and form no obstacle to the pursuit of his
normal occupations.166

--- PAGE BREAK ---these
social myths in no way prevent a man profiting by the observations which
he makes in the course of his life, and form no obstacle to the pursuit of his
normal occupations.166

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The truth of this may be shown by numerous examples.
The first Christians expected the return of Christ and the total ruin of the
pagan world, with the inauguration of the kingdom of the saints, at the end
of the first generation. The catastrophe did not come to pass, but Christian
thought profited so greatly from the apocalyptic myth that certain
contemporary scholars maintain that the whole preaching of Christ referred
solely to this one point.167 The hopes which Luther and Calvin had formed
of the religious exaltation of Europe were by no means realised; these
fathers of the Reformation very soon seemed men of a past era; for present-
day Protestants they belong rather to the Middle Ages than to modern times,
and the problems which troubled them most occupy very little place in
contemporary Protestantism. Must we for that reason deny the immense
result which came from their dreams of Christian renovation? It must be
admitted that the real developments of the Revolution did not in any way
resemble the enchanting pictures which created the enthusiasm at its first
adepts; but without those pictures would the Revolution have been
victorious? Many Utopias were mixed up with the Revolutionary myth,168
because it had been formed by a society passionately fond of imaginative
literature, full of confidence in the “science,”169 and very little acquainted
with the economic history of the past. These Utopias came to nothing; but it
may be asked whether the Revolution was not a much more profound
transformation than those dreamed of by the people who in the eighteenth
century had invented social Utopias. In our own times Mazzini pursued
what the wiseacres of his time called a mad chimera; but it can no longer be
denied that, without Mazzini, Italy would never have become a great power,
and that he did more for Italian unity than Cavour and all the politicians of
his school.
A knowledge of what the myths contain in the way of details which will
actually form part of the history of the future is then of small importance;
they are not astrological almanacs; it is even possible that nothing which
they contain will ever come to pass,—as was the case with the catastrophe
expected by the first Christians.170 In our own daily life, are we not familiar
with the fact that what actually happens is very different from our
preconceived notion of it? And that does not prevent us from continuing toChristians.170 In our own daily life, are we not familiar
with the fact that what actually happens is very different from our
preconceived notion of it? And that does not prevent us from continuing to

--- PAGE BREAK ---r own daily life, are we not familiar
with the fact that what actually happens is very different from our
preconceived notion of it? And that does not prevent us from continuing to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

make resolutions. Psychologists say that there is heterogeneity between the
ends in view and the ends actually realised: the slightest experience of life
reveals this law to us, which Spencer transferred into nature, to extract
therefrom his theory of the multiplication of effects.171
The myth must be judged as a means of acting on the present; any
attempt to discuss how far it can be taken literally as future history is
devoid of sense. It is the myth in its entirety which is alone important: its
parts are only of interest in so far as they bring out the main idea. No useful
purpose is served, therefore, in arguing about the incidents which may
occur in the course of a social war, and about the decisive conflicts which
may give victory to the proletariat; even supposing the revolutionaries to
have been wholly and entirely deluded in setting up this imaginary picture
of the general strike, this picture may yet have been, in the course of the
preparation for the Revolution, a great element of strength, if it has
embraced all the aspirations of Socialism, and if it has given to the whole
body of Revolutionary thought a precision and a rigidity which no other
method of thought could have given.
To estimate, then, the significance of the idea of the general strike, all the
methods of discussion which are current among politicians, sociologists, or
people with pretensions to political science, must be abandoned. Everything
which its opponents endeavour to establish may be conceded to them,
without reducing in any way the value of the theory which they think they
have refuted. The question whether the general strike is a partial reality, or
only a product of popular imagination, is of little importance. All that it is
necessary to know is, whether the general strike contains everything that the
Socialist doctrine expects of the revolutionary proletariat.
To solve this question we are no longer compelled to argue learnedly
about the future; we are not obliged to indulge in lofty reflections about
philosophy, history, or economics; we are not on the plane of theories, and
we can remain on the level of observable facts. We have to question men
who take a very active part in the real revolutionary movement amidst the
proletariat, men who do not aspire to climb into the middle class and whose
mind is not dominated by corporative prejudices. These men may be
deceived about an infinite number of political, economical, or moralt, men who do not aspire to climb into the middle class and whose
mind is not dominated by corporative prejudices. These men may be
deceived about an infinite number of political, economical, or moral

--- PAGE BREAK ---pire to climb into the middle class and whose
mind is not dominated by corporative prejudices. These men may be
deceived about an infinite number of political, economical, or moral

--- PAGE BREAK ---

questions; but their testimony is decisive, sovereign, and irrefutable when it
is a question of knowing what are the ideas which most powerfully move
them and their comrades, which most appeal to them as being identical with
their socialistic conceptions, and thanks to which their reason, their hopes,
and their way of looking at particular facts seem to make but one indivisible
unity.172
Thanks to these men, we know that the general strike is indeed what I
have said: the myth in which Socialism is wholly comprised, i.e. a body of
images capable of evoking instinctively all the sentiments which correspond
to the different manifestations of the war undertaken by Socialism against
modern society. Strikes have engendered in the proletariat the noblest,
deepest, and most moving sentiments that they possess; the general strike
groups them all in a co-ordinated picture, and, by bringing them together,
gives to each one of them its maximum of intensity; appealing to their
painful memories of particular conflicts, it colours with an intense life all
the details of the composition presented to consciousness. We thus obtain
that intuition of Socialism which language cannot give us with perfect
clearness—and we obtain it as a whole, perceived instantaneously.173
We may urge yet another piece of evidence to prove the power of the idea
of the general strike. If that idea were a pure chimera, as is so frequently
said, Parliamentary Socialists would not attack it with such heat; I do not
remember that they ever attacked the senseless hopes which the Utopists
have always held up before the dazzled eyes of the people.174 In the course
of a polemic about realisable social reforms, Clemenceau brought out the
Machiavelianism in the attitude of Jaurès, when he is confronted with
popular illusions: he shelters his conscience beneath “some cleverly
balanced sentence,” but so cleverly balanced that it “will be received
without thinking by those who have the greatest need to probe into its
substance, while they will drink in with delight the delusive rhetoric of
terrestrial joys to come” (Aurore, December 28, 1905). But when it is a
question of the general strike, it is quite another thing; our politicians are no
longer content with complicated reservations; they speak violently, and
endeavour to induce their listeners to abandon this conception.eneral strike, it is quite another thing; our politicians are no
longer content with complicated reservations; they speak violently, and
endeavour to induce their listeners to abandon this conception.

--- PAGE BREAK ---quite another thing; our politicians are no
longer content with complicated reservations; they speak violently, and
endeavour to induce their listeners to abandon this conception.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is easy to understand the reason for this attitude: politicians have
nothing to fear from the Utopias which present a deceptive mirage of the
future to the people, and turn “men towards immediate realisations of
terrestrial felicity, which any one who looks at these matters scientifically
knows can only be very partially realised, and even then only after long
efforts on the part of several generations.” (That is what Socialist politicians
do, according to Clemenceau.) The more readily the electors believe in the
magical forces of the State, the more will they be disposed to vote for the
candidate who promises marvels; in the electoral struggle each candidate
tries to outbid the others: in order that the Socialist candidates may put the
Radicals to rout, the electors must be credulous enough to believe every
promise of future bliss;175 our Socialist politicians take very good care,
therefore, not to combat these comfortable Utopias in any very effective
way.
They struggle against the conception of the general strike, because they
recognise, in the course of their propagandist rounds, that this conception is
so admirably adapted to the working-class mind that there is a possibility of
its dominating the latter in the most absolute manner, thus leaving no place
for the desires which the Parliamentarians are able to satisfy. They perceive
that this idea is so effective as a motive force that once it has entered the
minds of the people they can no longer be controlled by leaders, and that
thus the power of the deputies would be reduced to nothing. In short, they
feel in a vague way that the whole Socialist movement might easily be
absorbed by the general strike, which would render useless all those
compromises between political groups in view of which the Parliamentary
regime has been built up.
The opposition it meets with from official Socialists, therefore, furnishes
a confirmation of our first inquiry into the scope of the general strike.
II
We must now proceed further, and inquire whether the picture furnished
by the general strike is really complete; that is to say, whether it comprises
all those features of the struggle which are recognised by modern
Socialism. But, first of all, we must state the problem more precisely; thisis really complete; that is to say, whether it comprises
all those features of the struggle which are recognised by modern
Socialism. But, first of all, we must state the problem more precisely; this

--- PAGE BREAK ---that is to say, whether it comprises
all those features of the struggle which are recognised by modern
Socialism. But, first of all, we must state the problem more precisely; this

--- PAGE BREAK ---

will not be difficult if we start from the explanation given above on the
nature of the conception. We have seen that the general strike must be
considered as an undivided whole; consequently, no details about ways and
means will be of the slightest help to the understanding of Socialism; it
must even be added that there is always a danger of losing something of this
understanding, if an attempt is made to split up this whole into parts. We
will now endeavour to show that there is a fundamental identity between
the chief tenets of Marxism and the co-ordinated aspects furnished by the
picture of the general strike.
This affirmation is certain to appear paradoxical to many who have read
the publications of the most accredited Marxians; and, in fact, for a very
long time a well-marked hostility to the general strike existed in Marxian
circles. This tradition has done a good deal of harm to the progress of
Marx’s doctrine; and it is in fact a very good illustration of the way in
which, as a rule, disciples tend to restrict the application of their master’s
ideas. The new school has had considerable difficulty in liberating itself
from these influences; it was formed by people who had received the
Marxian imprint in a very marked degree; and it was a long time before the
school recognised that the objections brought against the general strike
arose from the incapacity of the official representatives of Marxism rather
than from the principles of the doctrine itself.176
The new school began its emancipation on the day when it perceived
clearly that the formulas of Socialism were often very far from the spirit of
Marx, and when it recommended a return to that spirit. It was not without a
certain amount of stupefaction that it discerned that it had credited the
master with many so-called inventions which were in reality taken from his
predecessors, or which were commonplaces, even, at the time when the
Communist Manifesto was drawn up. According to an author—who, in the
opinion of the Government and the Musée Social is considered to be well
informed,—“the accumulation (of capital in the hands of a few individuals)
is one of the great discoveries of Marx, one of the discoveries of which he
was most proud.”177 With all due deference to the historical science of this
notable university light, this theory was one which was in everybody’s
mouth long before Marx had ever written a word, and it had become a”177 With all due deference to the historical science of this
notable university light, this theory was one which was in everybody’s
mouth long before Marx had ever written a word, and it had become a

--- PAGE BREAK ---ference to the historical science of this
notable university light, this theory was one which was in everybody’s
mouth long before Marx had ever written a word, and it had become a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

dogma in the Socialist world at the end of the reign of Louis-Philippe.
There are many Marxian theories of the same kind.
A decided step towards reform was made when those Marxians who
aspired to think for themselves began to study the syndicalist movement;
they discovered that “the genuine trade unionists have more to teach us than
they have to learn from us.”178 This was the beginning of wisdom; it was a
step towards the realistic method which had led Marx to his real
discoveries; in this way a return might be made to those methods which
alone merit the name philosophical, “for true and fruitful ideas are so many
close contacts with currents of reality,” and they “owe most of their
clearness to the light which the facts, and the applications to which they led,
have by reflection shed on them—the clearness of a concept being scarcely
anything more at bottom than the certainty, at last obtained, of manipulating
the concept profitably.“179 And yet another profound thought of Bergson
may usefully be quoted: ”For we do not obtain an intuition from reality—
that is, an intellectual sympathy with the most intimate part of it—unless we
have won its confidence by a long fellowship with its superficial
manifestations. And it is not merely a question of assimilating the most
conspicuous facts; so immense a mass of facts must be accumulated and
fused together, that in this fusion all the preconceived and premature ideas
which observers may unwittingly have put into their observations will be
certain to neutralize each other. In this way only can the bare materiality of
the known facts be exposed to view.“ Finally, what Bergson calls an
integral experience is obtained.180
Thanks to the new principle, people very soon came to recognise that the
propositions which in their opinion contained a complete statement of
Socialism were deplorably inadequate, so that they were often more
dangerous than useful. It is the superstitious respect paid by social
democracy to the mere text of its doctrines that nullified every attempt in
Germany to perfect Marxism.
When the new school had acquired a full understanding of the general
strike, and had thus obtained a profound intuition of the working-class
movement, it saw that all the Socialist theories, interpreted in the light of
this powerful construction, took on a meaning which till then they hadobtained a profound intuition of the working-class
movement, it saw that all the Socialist theories, interpreted in the light of
this powerful construction, took on a meaning which till then they had

--- PAGE BREAK ---intuition of the working-class
movement, it saw that all the Socialist theories, interpreted in the light of
this powerful construction, took on a meaning which till then they had

--- PAGE BREAK ---

lacked; it perceived that the clumsy and rickety apparatus which had been
manufactured in Germany to explain Marx’s doctrines, must be rejected if
the contemporary transformation of the proletarian idea was to be followed
exactly; it discovered that the conception of the general strike enabled them
to explore profitably the whole vast domain of Marxism, which until then
had remained practically unknown to the big-wigs who professed to be
guiding Socialism. Thus the fundamental principles of Marxism are
perfectly intelligible only with the aid of the picture of the general strike,
and, on the other hand, the full significance of this picture, it may be
supposed, is apparent only to those who are deeply versed in the Marxian
doctrine.
A. First of all, I shall speak of the class war, which is the point of
departure for all Socialistic thought, and which stands in such great need of
elucidation, since sophists have endeavoured to give a false idea of it.
(1) Marx speaks of society as if it were divided into two fundamentally
antagonistic groups; observation, it has often been urged, does not justify
this division, and it is true that a certain effort of will is necessary before we
can find it verified in the phenomena of everyday life.
The organisation of a capitalistic workshop furnishes a first
approximation, and piece-work plays an essential part in the formation of
the class idea; in fact, it throws into relief the very clear opposition of
interests about the price of commodities;181 the workers feel themselves
under the thumb of the employers in the same way that peasants feel
themselves in the power of the merchants and the money-lenders of the
towns; history shows that no economic opposition has been more clearly
felt than the latter; since civilisation has existed, country and town have
formed two hostile camps.182 Piece-work also shows that in the wage-
earning world there is a group of men somewhat analogous to the retail
shopkeepers, possessing the confidence of the employer, and not belonging
to the proletariat class.
The strike throws a new light on all this; it separates the interests and the
different ways of thinking of the two groups of wage-earners—the foremen
clerks, engineers, etc., as contrasted with the workmen who alone go on
strike—much better than the daily circumstances of life do; it then becomesinking of the two groups of wage-earners—the foremen
clerks, engineers, etc., as contrasted with the workmen who alone go on
strike—much better than the daily circumstances of life do; it then becomes

--- PAGE BREAK ---oups of wage-earners—the foremen
clerks, engineers, etc., as contrasted with the workmen who alone go on
strike—much better than the daily circumstances of life do; it then becomes

--- PAGE BREAK ---

clear that the administrative group has a natural tendency to become a little
aristocracy; for these people, State Socialism would be advantageous,
because they would go up one in the social hierarchy.
But all oppositions become extraordinarily clear when conflicts are
supposed to be enlarged to the size of the general strike; then all parts of the
economico-judicial structure, in so far as the latter is looked upon from the
point of view of the class war, reach the summit of their perfection; society
is plainly divided into two camps, and only into two, on a field of battle. No
philosophical explanation of the facts observed in practical affairs could
throw such vivid light on the situation as the extremely simple picture
called up by the conception of the general strike.
(2) It would be impossible to conceive the disappearance of capitalistic
dominance if we did not suppose an ardent sentiment of revolt, always
present in the soul of the worker; but experience shows that very often the
revolts of a day are far from possessing a really specifically socialistic
character; more than once the most violent outbursts have depended on
passions which could be satisfied inside the middle-class world; many
revolutionaries have been seen to abandon their old irreconcilability when
they found themselves on the road to fortune. 183 It is not only satisfactions
of a material kind which produce these frequent and scandalous
conversions; vanity, much more than money, is the great motive force in
transformation of the revolutionary into a bourgeois. All that would be
negligible if it were only a question of a few exceptional people, but it has
often been maintained that the psychology of the working classes would so
easily adapt itself to the capitalistic order of things that social peace would
be rapidly obtained if employers on their part would make a few sacrifices
of money and amour propre.
G. Le Bon says that the belief in the revolutionary instincts of crowds is a
very great mistake, that their tendencies are conservative, that the whole
power of Socialism lies in the rather muddled state of mind of the middle
class; he is convinced that the masses will always flock to a Cæsar.184 There
is a good deal of truth in these judgments, which are founded on a very
wide knowledge of history, but G. Le Bon’s theories must be corrected inthat the masses will always flock to a Cæsar.184 There
is a good deal of truth in these judgments, which are founded on a very
wide knowledge of history, but G. Le Bon’s theories must be corrected in

--- PAGE BREAK ---l always flock to a Cæsar.184 There
is a good deal of truth in these judgments, which are founded on a very
wide knowledge of history, but G. Le Bon’s theories must be corrected in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

one respect: they are only valid for societies which lack the conception of
the class war.
Observation shows that this last conception is maintained with an
indestructible vitality in every circle which has been touched by the idea of
the general strike: the day when the slightest incidents of daily life become
symptoms of the state of war between the classes, when every conflicts is
an incident in the social war, when every strike begets the perspective of a
total catastrophe, on that day there is no longer any possibility of social
peace, of resignation to routine, or of enthusiasm for philanthropic or
successful employers. The idea of the general strike has such power behind
it that it drags into the revolutionary track everything it touches. In virtue of
this idea, Socialism remains ever young; all attempts made to bring about
social peace seem childish; desertions of comrades into the ranks of the
middle class, far from discouraging the masses, only excite them still more
to rebellion; in a word, the line of cleavage is never in danger of
disappearing.
(3) The successes obtained by politicians in their attempts to make what
they call the proletarian influence felt in middle-class institutions, constitute
a very great obstacle to the maintenance of the notion of class war. The
world has always been carried on by compromises between opposing
parties, and order has always been provisional. No change, however
considerable, can be looked upon as impossible in a time like ours, which
has seen so many novelties introduced in an unexpected manner. Modern
progress has been brought about by successive compromises; why not
pursue the aims of Socialism by methods which have succeeded so well?
Many means of satisfying the more pressing desires of the unfortunate
classes can be thought of. For a long time these proposals for improvement
were inspired by a conservative, feudal, or Catholic spirit. We wish, said the
inventors, to rescue the masses from the influence of the Radicals. The
latter, seeing their political influence assailed, not so much by their old
enemies as by Socialist politicians, invent nowadays all kinds of projects of
a progressive, democratic, free-thinking colour. We are beginning at last to
be threatened with socialistic compromises!d
enemies as by Socialist politicians, invent nowadays all kinds of projects of
a progressive, democratic, free-thinking colour. We are beginning at last to
be threatened with socialistic compromises!

--- PAGE BREAK ---alist politicians, invent nowadays all kinds of projects of
a progressive, democratic, free-thinking colour. We are beginning at last to
be threatened with socialistic compromises!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Enough attention has not always been paid to the fact that many kinds of
political, administrative, and financial systems engender and support the
domination of a middle class.185 We must not always attach too much
importance to violent attacks on the middle class; they may have behind
them the desire to reform and perfect capitalism.186 There are, it seems,
quite a number of people about nowadays who, though not in the least
desiring the disappearance of the capitalistic regime, would willingly
abolish inheritance like the followers of Saint Simon.187
The idea of the general strike destroys all the theoretical consequences of
every possible social policy; its partisans look upon even the most popular
reforms as having a middle-class character; so far as they are concerned,
nothing can weaken the fundamental opposition of the class war. The more
the policy of social reforms becomes preponderant, the more will Socialists
feel the need of placing against the picture of the progress which it is the
aim of this policy to bring about, this other picture of complete catastrophe
furnished so perfectly by the general strike.
B. Let us now examine, with the aid of the conception of the general
strike, certain very essential aspects of the Marxian Revolution.
(1) Marx says that on the day of the Revolution the proletariat will be
disciplined, united, and organised by the very mechanism of production.
This exceedingly concentrated formula would not be very intelligible if we
did not read it in connection with its context; according to Marx, the
working class is bowed beneath a system in which “abject poverty,
oppression, slavery, degradation, and exploitation increase,” and against
which it is organising an ever-increasing resistance until the day when the
whole social structure breaks up 188 The accuracy of this description has
been many times disputed; it seems indeed to be more suited to the
Manifesto period (1847) than to the time when Capital was published
(1867); but this objection must not stop us, and it may be thrust on one side
by means of the theory of myths. The different terms which Marx uses to
describe the preparation for the decisive combat are not to be taken literally
as statements of fact about a determined future; it is the description in its
entirety which should engage our attention, and taken in this way it is
perfectly clear: Marx wishes us to understand that the whole preparation ofut a determined future; it is the description in its
entirety which should engage our attention, and taken in this way it is
perfectly clear: Marx wishes us to understand that the whole preparation of

--- PAGE BREAK ---re; it is the description in its
entirety which should engage our attention, and taken in this way it is
perfectly clear: Marx wishes us to understand that the whole preparation of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the proletariat depends solely on the organization of a stubborn, increasing,
and passionate resistance to the present order of things.
This argument is of supreme importance if we are to have a sound
conception of Marxism; but it is often contested, if not in theory, at least in
practice; the proletariat, it has been held, should prepare for the part it is to
play in the future by other ways than those of revolutionary Syndicalism.
Thus the exponents of co-operation hold that a prominent place in the work
of enfranchisement must be given to their own particular remedy; the
democrats say that it is essential to abolish all the prejudices arising from
the old Catholic influence, etc. Many revolutionaries believe that, however
useful Syndicalism may be, it is not, in itself, sufficient to organise a society
which needs a new philosophy, a new code of laws, etc.; as the division of
labour is a fundamental law of the world, Socialists should not be ashamed
to apply to specialists in philosophy and law, of whom there is never any
lack. Jaurès never stops repeating this kind of stuff. This expansion of
Socialism is contrary to the Marxian theory, as also to the conception of the
general strike; but it is evident that the conception of the general strike
makes a much more striking appeal to the mind than any formula.
(2) I have already called attention to the danger for the future of
civilisation presented by revolutions which take place in a period of
economic decadence; many Marxists do not seem to have formed a clear
idea of Marx’s thought on this subject. The latter believed that the great
catastrophe would be preceded by an enormous economic crisis, but the
crisis Marx had in mind must not be confused with an economic decadence;
crises appeared to him as the result of a too risky venture on the part of
production, which creates productive forces out of proportion to the means
of regulation which the capitalistic system automatically brings into play.
Such a venture supposes that the future was looked upon as favourable to
very large enterprises, and that the conception of economic progress
prevailed absolutely at the time. In order that the lower middle classes, who
are still able to find tolerable conditions of existence under the capitalist
regime, may join hands with the proletariat, it is essential that they shall be
able to picture the future of production as bright with hope, just as the
conquest of America formerly appeared to the English peasants, who left
Europe to throw themselves into a life of adventure.e
able to picture the future of production as bright with hope, just as the
conquest of America formerly appeared to the English peasants, who left
Europe to throw themselves into a life of adventure.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e future of production as bright with hope, just as the
conquest of America formerly appeared to the English peasants, who left
Europe to throw themselves into a life of adventure.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The general strike leads to the same conclusions. The workers are
accustomed to seeing their revolts against the restrictions imposed by
capitalism succeed during periods of prosperity; so that it may be said that
if you once identify revolution and general strike it then becomes
impossible to conceive this of an essential transformation of the world
taking place in a time of economic decadence. The workers are equally well
aware that the peasants and the artisans will not join hands with them unless
the future appears so rosy-coloured that industrialism will be able to
ameliorate the lot not only of the producers, but that of everybody. 189
It is very important always to lay stress on the high degree of prosperity
which industry must possess in order that the realisation of Socialism may
be possible; for experience shows us that it is by seeking to stop the
progress of capitalism, and to preserve the means of existence of classes
who are on the down-grade, that the prophets of social peace chiefly
endeavour to capture popular favour. The dependence of the revolution on
the constant and rapid progress of industry must be demonstrated in a
striking manner.190
(3) Too great stress cannot be laid on the fact that Marxism condemns
every hypothesis about the future manufactured by the Utopists. Professor
Brentano of Munich relates that in 1869 Marx wrote to his friend Beesly
(who had published an article on the future of the working class) to say that
up till then he had looked upon him as the sole revolutionary Englishman,
and that henceforth he looked upon him as a reactionary —for, he said, “the
man who draws up a programme for the future is a reactionary.”191 He
considered that the proletariat had no need to take lessons from the learned
inventors of solutions to social problems, but simply to take up production
where capitalism left it. There was no need for programmes of the future;
the programmes were already worked out in the workshops. The idea of a
technological continuity dominates the whole of the Marxian position.
Experience gained in strikes leads us to a conception identical with that
of Marx. Workmen who put down their tools do not go to their employers
with schemes for the better organisation of labour, and do not offer them
assistance in the management of their business; in short, Utopias have no
place in economic conflicts. Jaurès and his friends are well aware that thister organisation of labour, and do not offer them
assistance in the management of their business; in short, Utopias have no
place in economic conflicts. Jaurès and his friends are well aware that this

--- PAGE BREAK ---labour, and do not offer them
assistance in the management of their business; in short, Utopias have no
place in economic conflicts. Jaurès and his friends are well aware that this

--- PAGE BREAK ---

is a very strong argument against their own ideas of the way in which
Socialism is to be realised: they would like even now to have fragments of
the industrial programmes manufactured by learned sociologists and
accepted by the workers introduced into strike negotiations; they would like
to see the creation of what they call industrial parliamentarism which,
exactly as in the case of political parliamentarism would imply, on the one
hand, the masses who are led and, on the other, demagogues to show them
the way. This would be the apprentice stage of their sham Socialism, and
might begin at once.
With the general strike all these fine things disappear; the revolution
appears as a revolt, pure and simple, and no place is reserved for
sociologists, for fashionable people who are in favour of social reforms, and
for the Intellectuals who have embraced the profession of thinking for the
proletariat.
C. Socialism has always inspired terror because of the enormous element
of the unknown which it contains; people feel that a transformation of this
kind would permit of no turning back. Utopists have used all their literary
art in the endeavour to lull anxiety by pictures of the future, so enchanting
that fear might be banished; but the more they accumulated fine promises,
the more did thoughtful people suspect traps, and in this they were not
altogether mistaken, for the Utopists would have led the world to disasters,
tyranny, and stupidity, if they had been hearkened to.
Marx was firmly convinced that the social revolution of which he spoke
would constitute an irrevocable transformation, and that it would mark an
absolute separation between two historical eras; he often returned to this
idea, and Engels has endeavoured to show, by means of images which were
sometimes a little grandiose, how economic enfranchisement would be the
point of departure of an era having no relationship with the past. Rejecting
all Utopias, these two founders of modern Socialism renounced all the
resources by which their predecessors had rendered the prospect of a great
revolution less formidable; but however strong the expressions which they
employed might have been, the effects which they produced are still very
inferior to those produced by the evocation of the general strike. Thisrmidable; but however strong the expressions which they
employed might have been, the effects which they produced are still very
inferior to those produced by the evocation of the general strike. This

--- PAGE BREAK ---r strong the expressions which they
employed might have been, the effects which they produced are still very
inferior to those produced by the evocation of the general strike. This

--- PAGE BREAK ---

conception makes it impossible for us to ignore the fact that a kind of
irresistible wave will pass over the old civilisation.
There is something really terrifying in all this; but I believe that it is very
essential that this feature of Socialism should be insisted on if the latter is to
have its full educational value. Socialists must be convinced that the work
to which they are devoting themselves is a serious, formidable, and sublime
work; it is only on this condition that they will be able to bear the
innumerable sacrifices imposed on them by a propaganda, which can
procure them neither honours, profits, nor even immediate intellectual
satisfaction. Even if the only result of the idea of the general strike was to
make the Socialist conception more heroic, it should on that account alone
be looked upon as having an incalculable value.
The resemblances which I have just established between Marxism and
the general strike might be carried still further and deeper; if they have been
overlooked hitherto, it is because we are much more struck by the form of
things than by their content; a large number of people find great difficulty
in believing that there can be any parallelism between a philosophy based
on Hegelianism and the constructions made by men entirely devoid of
higher culture. Marx had acquired in Germany a taste for very condensed
formulas, and these formulas were so admirably suited to the conditions in
the midst of which he worked that he naturally made great use of them.
When he wrote, there had been none of the great and numerous strikes
which would have enabled him to speak with a detailed knowledge of the
means by which the proletariat may prepare itself for the revolution. This
absence of knowledge gained from experience very much hampered Marx’s
thought; he avoided the use of too precise formulas which would have had
this inconvenience of giving a kind of sanction to existing institutions,
which seemed valueless to him; he was therefore happy to be able to find in
German academic writing a habit of abstract language which allowed him
to avoid all discussion of detail.192
No better proof perhaps can be given of Marx’s genius than the
remarkable agreement which is found to exist between his views and the
doctrine which revolutionary Syndicalism is to-day building up slowly and
laboriously, keeping always strictly to strike tactics.remarkable agreement which is found to exist between his views and the
doctrine which revolutionary Syndicalism is to-day building up slowly and
laboriously, keeping always strictly to strike tactics.

--- PAGE BREAK ---which is found to exist between his views and the
doctrine which revolutionary Syndicalism is to-day building up slowly and
laboriously, keeping always strictly to strike tactics.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

III
For some time yet, the conception of the general strike will have
considerable difficulty in becoming acclimatised in circles which are not
specially dominated by strike tactics. I think it might be useful at this point
to enquire into the motives which explain the repugnance felt by many
intelligent and sincere people who are disturbed by the novelty of the
Syndicalist point of view. All the members of the new school know that
they had to make great efforts in order to overcome the prejudices of their
upbringing, to set aside the associations of ideas which sprang up
spontaneously in their mind, and to reason along lines which in no way
corresponded to those which they had been taught.
During the nineteenth century there existed an incredible scientific
ingenuousness which was the direct outcome of the illusions that had
aroused so much excitement towards the end of the eighteenth century.193
Because astronomers had managed to calculate the tables of the moon, it
was believed that the aim of all science was to forecast the future with
accuracy; because Le Verrier had been able to indicate the probable position
of the planet Neptune—which had never been seen, and which accounted
for the disturbances of observable planets —it was believed that science
could remedy the defects of society, and indicate what measures should be
taken to bring about the disappearance of the unpleasant things in the world.
It may be said that this was the middle-class conception of science: it
certainly corresponds very closely to the mental attitude of those capitalists,
who, ignorant of the perfected appliances of their workshops, yet direct
industry, and always find ingenious inventors to get them out of their
difficulties. For the middle class science is a mill which produces solutions
to all the problems we are faced with:194 science is no longer considered as
a perfected means of knowledge, but only as a recipe for procuring certain
advantages.195
I have said that Marx rejected all attempts to determine the conditions of
a future society; too much stress cannot be laid on this point, for it shows
that he took his stand outside middle-class science. The doctrine of the
general strike also repudiates this science, and many professors
consequently accuse the new school of having negative ideas only; theirook his stand outside middle-class science. The doctrine of the
general strike also repudiates this science, and many professors
consequently accuse the new school of having negative ideas only; their

--- PAGE BREAK ---e middle-class science. The doctrine of the
general strike also repudiates this science, and many professors
consequently accuse the new school of having negative ideas only; their

--- PAGE BREAK ---

own aim, on the other hand, is the noble one of constructing universal
happiness. The leaders of social democracy, it seems to me, have not been
very Marxian on this point; a few years ago, Kautsky wrote a preface to a
somewhat burlesque Utopia.196
I believe that among the motives which led Bernstein to part from his old
friends must be counted the horror which he felt for their Utopias. If
Bernstein had lived in France and had known our revolutionary
Syndicalism, he would soon have perceived that the latter was on the true
Marxian track; but neither in England nor in Germany did he find a
working-class movement which could guide him; wishing to remain
attached to realities, as Marx had been, he thought that it was better to carry
on a policy of social reform, pursuing practical ends, than to lull himself to
sleep to the sound of fine phrases about the happiness of future humanity.
The worshippers of this useless pseudo science did not allow themselves
to be stopped by the objection, legitimate in this case, that their methods of
calculation were entirely inadequate of their means of determination. Their
conception of science, being derived from astronomy, supposes that
everything can be expressed by some mathematical law. Evidently there are
no laws of this kind in sociology; but man is always susceptible to analogies
connected with the forms of expression: it was thought that a high degree of
perfection had been attained, and that already something had been
accomplished for science when—starting from a few principles not
offensive to common sense, which seem confirmed by a few common
experiences—it had been found possible to present a doctrine in a simple,
clear, and deductive manner. This so-called science is simply chatter.197
The Utopists excelled in the art of exposition in accordance with these
prejudices; the more their exposition satisfied the requirements of a school
book, the more convincing they thought their inventions were. I believe that
the contrary of this belief is the truth, and that we should distrust proposals
for social reform all the more, when every difficulty seems solved in an
apparently satisfactory manner.
I should like to examine here, very briefly, a few of the illusions which
have arisen out of what may be called the little science,198 which believes
that when it has attained clarity of exposition that is had attained truth. Thisvery briefly, a few of the illusions which
have arisen out of what may be called the little science,198 which believes
that when it has attained clarity of exposition that is had attained truth. This

--- PAGE BREAK ---of the illusions which
have arisen out of what may be called the little science,198 which believes
that when it has attained clarity of exposition that is had attained truth. This

--- PAGE BREAK ---

little science has contributed a great deal towards creating the crisis in
Marxism, and every day we hear the new school accused of delighting in
the obscurities of which Marx has so often been accused, while French
Socialists and Belgian Sociologists, on the contrary, . . . !
Perhaps the best way of giving an accurate idea of the error committed by
these sham scientists against whom the new school is waging war will be to
examine the general characteristics of some social phenomena, and to run
through some of the achievements of the mind, beginning with the highest.
A. (1) The positivists, who represent, in an eminent degree, mediocrity,
pride, and pedantry, had decreed that philosophy was to give way before
their science; but philosophy is not dead, and it has acquired a new and
vigorous lease of life thanks to Bergson, who far from wishing to reduce
everything to science, has claimed for the philosopher the right to proceed
in a manner quite opposed to that employed by the scientist. It might be said
that metaphysics has reclaimed the lost ground by demonstrating to man the
illusion of so-called scientific solutions, and by bringing the mind back to
the mysterious region which the little science abhors. Positivism is still
admired by a few Belgians, the employees of the Office du Travail,199 and
General André;200 but these are people who count for very little in the world
of thought.
(2) Religions do not seem to be on the point of disappearing. Liberal
Protestantism is dying because it attempted, at all costs, to give a perfectly
rationalistic exposition of Christian theology. Auguste Comte manufactured
a caricature of Catholicism, in which he had retained only the
administrative, hierarchical, and disciplinary machinery of that Church; his
attempt obtained success only with those people who like to laugh at the
simplicity of their dupes. In the course of the nineteenth century,
Catholicism recovered strength to an extraordinary degree because it would
abandon nothing; it even strengthened its mysteries, and, what is very
curious, it gains ground in cultivated circles where the rationalism which
was formerly in fashion at the University is scoffed at.201
(3) The old claim made by our fathers that they had created a science of
art or even that they could describe a work of art in so adequate a manner
that the reader could obtain from a book an exact aesthetic appreciation of aour fathers that they had created a science of
art or even that they could describe a work of art in so adequate a manner
that the reader could obtain from a book an exact aesthetic appreciation of a

--- PAGE BREAK ---ey had created a science of
art or even that they could describe a work of art in so adequate a manner
that the reader could obtain from a book an exact aesthetic appreciation of a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

picture or of a statue, we look upon nowadays as a perfect example of
pedantry. Taine’s efforts in the direction first mentioned are very interesting,
but only as regards the history of the various schools. His method gives us
no useful information about the works themselves. As for the descriptions,
they are only of value if the works themselves are of small aesthetic value,
and if they belong to what is sometimes called literary painting. The
poorest photograph of the Parthenon conveys a hundred times as much
information as a volume devoted to the praise of the marvels of this
monument; it seems to me that the famous Prière sur l’Acropole, so often
praised as one of the finest passages in Renan, is a rather remarkable
example of rhetoric, and that it is much more likely to render Greek art
unintelligible to us than to make us admire the Parthenon. Despite all his
enthusiasm for Diderot (which is sometimes comical and expressed
nonsensically), Joseph Reinach is obliged to acknowledge that his hero was
lacking in artistic feeling in his famous Salons, because Diderot appreciated
most of all those pictures which offered possibilities of literary
dissertation,202 and Brunetière could say that Diderot’s Salons were the
corruption of criticism, because he discussed works of art in them as if they
were books.203
The impotence of speech is due to the fact that art flourishes best on
mystery, half shades and indeterminate outlines; the more speech is
methodical and perfect, the more likely is it to eliminate everything that
distinguishes a masterpiece; it reduces the masterpiece to the proportions of
an academic product.
As a result of this preliminary examination of the three highest
achievements of the mind, we are led to believe that it is possible to
distinguish in every complex body of knowledge a clear and an obscure
region, and to say that the latter is perhaps the more important. The mistake
made by superficial people consists in the statement that this second part
must disappear with the progress of enlightenment, and that eventually
everything will be explained rationally in terms of the little science. This
error is particularly revolting as regards art, and, above all, perhaps, as
regards modern painting, which seeks more and more to render
combinations of shades to which no attention was formerly paid on accountarticularly revolting as regards art, and, above all, perhaps, as
regards modern painting, which seeks more and more to render
combinations of shades to which no attention was formerly paid on account

--- PAGE BREAK ---g as regards art, and, above all, perhaps, as
regards modern painting, which seeks more and more to render
combinations of shades to which no attention was formerly paid on account

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of their lack of stability and of the difficulty of rendering them by
speech.204
B. (1) In ethics, the part that can be expressed easily, in clearly reasoned
expositions, is that which has reference to the equitable relations between
men; it contains maxims which are to be found in many different
civilisations; consequently it was for a long time believed that a résumé of
these precepts might form the basis of a natural morality applicable to the
whole of humanity. The obscure part of morality is that which has reference
to sexual relationships, and this part is not easily expressed in formulas; to
understand it thoroughly you must have lived in a country for a great
number of years. It is, moreover, the fundamental part; when it is known the
whole psychology of a people is understood; the supposed uniformity of the
first system in reality then conceals many differences; almost identical
maxims may correspond to very different applications; their clearness was
only a delusion.
(2) In legislation, everybody sees immediately that the law regulating
contracts and debts constitutes the obvious part, that which is called
scientific; here again there is great uniformity in the rules adopted by
different peoples, and it was believed that it was eminently desirable to
draw up a common code founded on a rational revision of those which
existed, but in practice it is again found that, in different countries, the
courts generally attach different meanings to these supposed common
principles; that is because there is something individual and particular in
each maxim.
The mysterious region is the family, which influences all social
relationships. Le Play was very much struck by an opinion of Tocqueville
on this subject: “I am astonished,” said this great thinker, “that ancient and
modern publicists have not attributed a greater influence on the progress of
human affairs to the laws of inheritance. These laws, it is true, refer to civil
private affairs, but they should be placed at the head of all political
institutions, for they have an incredible influence on the social state of
peoples, of which state the political laws are only the expression.”205 This
remark governed all the researches of Le Play.l
institutions, for they have an incredible influence on the social state of
peoples, of which state the political laws are only the expression.”205 This
remark governed all the researches of Le Play.

--- PAGE BREAK ---they have an incredible influence on the social state of
peoples, of which state the political laws are only the expression.”205 This
remark governed all the researches of Le Play.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This division of legislation into a clear and an obscure region has one
curious consequence: it is very rare for people who are not members of the
legal professions to undertake any discussion of equity; they know that it is
necessary to have an intimate knowledge of certain rules of law, in order to
be able to argue about these questions: an outsider would run the risk of
making himself ridiculous if he were to venture on an opinion; but on the
question of divorce, of paternal authority, of inheritance, every man of
letters believes himself as learned as the cleverest lawyer, because in this
obscure region there are no well-defined principles, nor regular deductions.
(3) In economics, the same distinction is, perhaps, still more evident;
questions relative to exchange can be easily expounded; the methods of
exchange are very much alike in the different countries, and it is hardly
likely that any very violent paradoxes will be made about monetary
circulation. On the other hand, everything relative to production presents a
complexity which is sometimes inextricable; it is in production that local
traditions are most strongly maintained; ridiculous Utopias regarding
production may be invented indefinitely without revolting the common
sense of readers. Nobody denies that production is the fundamental part of
any economic system; this is a truth which plays a great part in Marxism,
and which has been acknowledged even by authors who have been unable
to understand its importance.206
C. Let us now examine how Parliamentary assemblies work. For a long
time it was believed that their principal function was that of arguing out the
most important questions of social organisation, and, above all, those
relating to the constitution. In such matters it is possible to proceed from
first principles by way of deduction to clear and concise conclusions. Our
forefathers excelled in this scholastic type of argument, which forms the
luminous part of political discussions. Now that the question of the
constitution is scarcely ever discussed, certain great laws still give rise to
fine oratorical tournaments; thus on the question of the separation of the
Church and the State, the professional expounders of first principles were
heard and even applauded; it was the opinion of all that the debates had
rarely reached so high a level, and this was because the question was one
that lent itself to academic discussion. But when, as more frequently
happens, commercial laws or social measures are discussed, then we see thehigh a level, and this was because the question was one
that lent itself to academic discussion. But when, as more frequently
happens, commercial laws or social measures are discussed, then we see the

--- PAGE BREAK ---is was because the question was one
that lent itself to academic discussion. But when, as more frequently
happens, commercial laws or social measures are discussed, then we see the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

stupidity of our representatives displayed in all its splendour; ministers,
presidents, or rapporteurs de commissions,207 specialists, vie with each
other in displays of stupidity; the reason for this is that we are now dealing
with economic questions, and the mind is no longer guided by simple rules;
in order to be able to give an opinion worthy of consideration on these
questions, one must have had a practical acquaintance with them, and our
honourable members cannot be said to possess this kind of knowledge.
Among them may be found many representatives of the little science; on
July 5, 1905, a well-known specialist in venereal diseases208 declared that
he had not studied political economy, having “a certain mistrust for that
conjectural science.” We must doubtless understand from this that it is more
difficult to argue about production than it is to diagnose syphilis.
The little science has engendered a fabulous number of sophistries which
we continually come across, and which go down very well with the people
who possess the stupid and mediocre culture distributed by the University.
These sophistries consist in putting very different things on the same plane
from a love of logical simplicity; thus sexual morality is reduced to the
equitable relations between contracting parties, the family code to that
regulating debts and agreements, and production to exchange.
Because, in nearly every country and in every age, the State has
undertaken to regulate circulation, both of money and of banknotes, or has
laid down a legal system of measures, it does not by any means follow that
there would be the same advantage in entrusting to the State, for mere love
of uniformity, the management of great enterprises: yet this argument is one
of those which appeal most strongly to many medical students and nurslings
of the School of Law. I am convinced that Jaurès is even now unable to
understand why industry has been abandoned by lazy legislators to the
anarchical tendencies of egotists; if production is really the base of
everything, as Marx says, it is criminal not to place it in the front rank, not
to subject it to a great legislative action, conceived on the same lines as
those parts of legislation which owe their clearness to their abstract
character, i.e. not to order and arrange it so that it rests on great principles
analogous to those which are brought forward when constitutional laws are
discussed.their clearness to their abstract
character, i.e. not to order and arrange it so that it rests on great principles
analogous to those which are brought forward when constitutional laws are
discussed.

--- PAGE BREAK ---their abstract
character, i.e. not to order and arrange it so that it rests on great principles
analogous to those which are brought forward when constitutional laws are
discussed.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Socialism is necessarily very obscure, since it deals with production, i.e.
with the most mysterious part of human activity, and since it proposes to
bring about a radical transformation of that region which it is impossible to
describe with the clearness that is to be found in more superficial regions.
No effort of thought, no progress of knowledge, no rational induction will
ever dispel the mystery which envelops Socialism; and it is because the
philosophy of Marx recognised fully this feature of Socialism that it
acquired the right to serve as the starting-point of Socialist inquiry.
But we must hasten to add that this obscurity lies only in the language by
which we endeavour to describe the methods of realising Socialism; this
obscurity may be said to be scholastic only; it does not in the least prevent
us picturing the proletarian movement in a way that is exact, complete, and
striking, and this may be achieved by the aid of that powerful construction
which the proletarian mind has conceived in the course of social conflicts,
and which is called the “general strike.” It must never be forgotten that the
perfection of this method of representation would vanish in a moment if any
attempt were made to resolve the general strike into a sum of historical
details; the general strike must be taken as a whole and undivided, and the
passage from capitalism to Socialism conceived as a catastrophe, the
development of which baffles description.
The professors of the little science are really difficult to satisfy. They
assert very loudly that they will only admit into thought abstractions
analogous to those used in the deductive sciences: as a matter of fact, this is
a rule which is insufficient for purposes of action, for we do nothing great
without the help of warmly-coloured and clearly-defined images, which
absorb the whole of our attention; now, is it possible to find anything more
satisfying from their point of view than the general strike? But, reply the
professors, we ought to rely only on those realities which are given by
experience: is, then, the picture of the general strike made up of tendencies
which were not obtained directly from observation of the revolutionary
movement? Is it a work of pure reason, manufactured by indoor scientists
attempting to solve the social problem according to the rules of logic? Is it
something arbitrary? Is it not, on the contrary, a spontaneous product
analogous to those others which students of history come across in periods
of action? They insist, and say that man ought not to let himself be carrieds it not, on the contrary, a spontaneous product
analogous to those others which students of history come across in periods
of action? They insist, and say that man ought not to let himself be carried

--- PAGE BREAK ---

away by his impulses without submitting them to the control of his
intelligence, whose rights are unchallenged; nobody dreams of disputing
them; of course, this picture of the general strike must be tested, and that is
what I have tried to do above; but the critical spirit does not consist in
replacing historical data by the charlatanism of a sham science.
If it is desired to criticise the basis of the idea of the general strike, the
attack must be directed against the revolutionary tendencies which it groups
together, and shows as in action; by no other method worthy of attention
can you hope to prove to the revolutionaries that they are wrong in giving
all their energies to the cause of Socialism, and that their real interests
would be better served if they were politicians; they have known this for a
long time, and their choice is made; as they do not take up a utilitarian
standpoint, any advice which you may give will be in vain.better served if they were politicians; they have known this for a
long time, and their choice is made; as they do not take up a utilitarian
standpoint, any advice which you may give will be in vain.

We are perfectly well aware that the historians of the future are bound to
discover that we laboured under many illusions, because they will see
behind them a finished world. We, on the other hand, must act, and nobody
can tell us to-day what these historians will know; nobody can furnish us
with the means of modifying our motor images in such a way as to avoid
their criticisms.
Our situation resembles somewhat that of the physicists who work at
huge calculations based on theories which are not destined to endure for
ever. We have nowadays abandoned all hopes of discovering a complete
science of nature; the spectacle of modern scientific revolutions is not
encouraging for scientists, and has no doubt led many people, naturally
enough, to proclaim the bankruptcy of science, and yet we should be mad if
we handed the management of industry over to sorcerers, mediums, and
wonder-workers. The philosopher who does not seek to make a practical
application of his theories may take up the point of view of the future
historian of science, and then dispute the absolute character of present-day
scientific theses; but he is as ignorant as the present-day physicist when he
is asked how to correct the explanations given by the latter; must he
therefore take refuge in scepticism?

--- PAGE BREAK ---ntific theses; but he is as ignorant as the present-day physicist when he
is asked how to correct the explanations given by the latter; must he
therefore take refuge in scepticism?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Nowadays no philosophers worthy of consideration accept the sceptical
position; their great aim, on the contrary, is to prove the legitimacy of a
science which, however, makes no claim to know the real nature of things,
and which confines itself to discovering relations which can be utilised for
practical ends. It is because sociology is in the hands of people who are
incapable of any philosophic reasoning that it is possible for us to be
attacked (in the name of the little science) for being content with methods
founded on the laws that a really thorough psychological analysis reveals as
fundamental in the genesis of action, and which are revealed to us in all
great historical movements.
To proceed scientifically means, first of all, to know what forces exist in
the world, and then to take measures whereby we may utilise them, by
reasoning from experience. That is why I say that, by accepting the idea of
the general strike, although we know that it is a myth, we are proceeding
exactly as a modern physicist does who has complete confidence in his
science, although he knows that the future will look upon it as antiquated. It
is we who really possess the scientific spirit, while our critics have lost
touch both with modern science and modern philosophy; and having proved
this, we are quite easy in our minds.

--- PAGE BREAK ---who really possess the scientific spirit, while our critics have lost
touch both with modern science and modern philosophy; and having proved
this, we are quite easy in our minds.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

&haSter
7Ke Political *eneral 6triNe
1. Use made of the syndicates by politicians—pressure on
parliaments—the general strike in Belgium and Russia.
II. Differences in the two currents of ideas corresponding to the
two conceptions of the general strike: Class War; the State; the
Aristocracy of Thought.
III. Jealousy fostered by politicians—war as a source of heroism
and as pillage—dictatorship of the proletariat and its historical
antecedents.
IV. Force and violence—Marx’s ideas about force—necessity of
a new theory in the case of proletarian violence.
I
POLITICIANS ARE people whose wits are singularly sharpened by their
voracious appetites, and in whom the hunt for fat jobs develops the cunning
of Apaches. They hold purely proletarian organisations in horror, and
discredit them as much as they can; frequently they even deny their
efficacity, in the hope of alienating the workers from groups which, they
say, have no future. But when they perceive that their hatred is powerless,
that their abuse does not hinder the working of these detested organisations,
and that these have become strong, then they seek to turn to their own profit
the forces which the proletariat has created.
The co-operative societies were for a long time denounced as useless to
the workers; since they have prospered, more than one politician has cast

--- PAGE BREAK ---which the proletariat has created.
The co-operative societies were for a long time denounced as useless to
the workers; since they have prospered, more than one politician has cast

--- PAGE BREAK ---

languishing eyes on their cash-box, and would like to see the party
supported by the income from the bakery and the grocery, as the Israelite
consistories in many countries live on the dues from the Jewish butchers.209
The syndicates may be very useful in electoral propaganda; a certain
amount of skill is needed to utilise them profitably, but politicians do not
lack lightness of finger. Guérard, the secretary of the railway syndicate, was
once one of the most ardent revolutionaries in France; in the end, however,
it was borne in upon him that it was easier to play with politics than to
prepare for the general strike;210 he is to-day one of those men in whom the
Direction du Travail has most confidence, and in 1902 he went to a great
deal of trouble in order to secure the return of Millerand to Parliament.
There is a very large railway station in the constituency which the Socialist
minister sought to represent, and, without the support of Guérard, Millerand
would probably have been defeated. In the Socialiste of September 14,
1902, a Guesdist denounced this conduct, which seemed to him doubly
scandalous since, in the first place, the congress of railway workers had
decided that the syndicate should not enter into politics and, secondly,
because a former deputy, a Guesdist, was Millerand’s opponent. The author
of the article feared that “the corporative groups were on the wrong track,
and that, although they started out to utilise politics, they might finally find
themselves the tools of a party.” He was quite right; in any deals between
the representatives of the syndicates and politicians, it will always be the
latter who will reap the greater advantage.
Politicians have more than once intervened in strikes, desiring to destroy
the prestige of their adversaries and to capture the confidence of the
workers. The Longwy dock strikes, in 1905, arose out of the efforts of a
Republican federation which attempted to organise the syndicates that
might possibly serve its policy as against that of the employers;211 the
business did not quite take the turn desired by the promoters of the
movement, who were not familiar enough with this kind of operation. Some
Socialist politicians, on the contrary, possess consummate skill in
combining instincts of revolt into electoral forces. It was inevitable,
therefore, that a few people should be struck by the idea that the great
movements of the masses might be used for political ends.mbining instincts of revolt into electoral forces. It was inevitable,
therefore, that a few people should be struck by the idea that the great
movements of the masses might be used for political ends.

--- PAGE BREAK ---revolt into electoral forces. It was inevitable,
therefore, that a few people should be struck by the idea that the great
movements of the masses might be used for political ends.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The history of England affords more than one example of a Government
giving way when numerous demonstrations against its proposals took place,
even though it was strong enough to repel by force any attack on existing
institutions. It seems to be an admitted principle of Parliamentary
Government that the majority cannot persist in pursuing schemes which
give rise to popular demonstrations of too serious a kind. It is one of the
applications of the system of compromise on which this regime is founded;
no law is valid when it is looked upon by a minority as being so oppressive
that it rouses them to violent opposition. Great riotous demonstrations are
an indication that the moment is not far off when an armed revolt might
break out; Governments which are respectful of the old traditions give way
before such demonstrations.212
Between the first simple threat of trouble and a riot a general political
strike might take place, which might assume any one of a large number of
forms: it might be peaceful and of short duration, its aim being to show the
Government that it is on the wrong track, and that there are forces which
could resist it; it might also be the first act of a series of bloody riots.
During the last few years Parliamentary Socialists have not been so sure
that they would soon come into power, and they have recognised that their
authority in the two Houses is not destined to increase indefinitely. When
there are no exceptional circumstances to force the Government to buy their
support with large concessions, their Parliamentary power is very much
reduced. It would therefore be a great advantage to them if they could bring
outside pressure to bear on recalcitrant majorities which would appear to
threaten the Conservatives with a formidable insurrection.
If there were in existence rich working-class federations, highly
centralised and in a position to impose a strict discipline on their members,
Socialist deputies would not have very much trouble in inflicting their
leadership occasionally on their Parliamentary colleagues. All that they
would have to do would be to take advantage of an opportunity that was
favourable to a movement of revolt, in order to stop some branch of
industry for a few days. It has more than once been proposed that the
Government should be brought to a standstill in this fashion by a stoppage
in the working of the mines or of the railways.213 For such tactics tofew days. It has more than once been proposed that the
Government should be brought to a standstill in this fashion by a stoppage
in the working of the mines or of the railways.213 For such tactics to

--- PAGE BREAK ---e than once been proposed that the
Government should be brought to a standstill in this fashion by a stoppage
in the working of the mines or of the railways.213 For such tactics to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

produce the full effect desired, the strike must break out unexpectedly at the
word of command of the party; and must stop when the latter has signed a
compact with the Government. It is for these reasons that politicians are so
very much in favour of the centralisation of the syndicates, and that they
talk so much about discipline.214 It is to be understood, of course, that this
discipline is one which must subject the proletariat to their command.
Associations which are very decentralised and grouped into Bourses du
Travail would offer them far fewer guarantees of success; so that all those
who are not in favour of a solid concentration of the proletariat round the
party leaders are regarded by the latter as anarchists.
The political general strike has this immense advantage, that it does not
greatly imperil the precious lives of the politicians; it is an improvement on
the moral insurrection which the “Mountain” made use of in the month of
May 1793, in order to force the Convention to expel the Girondists from its
midst; Jaurès, who is afraid of alarming his clients, the financiers (just as
the members of the “Mountain” were afraid of alarming the Departments),
admires exceedingly any movement which is free from the violent acts that
distress humanity;215 he is not, therefore, an irreconcilable opponent of the
political general strike.
Recent events have given a very great impetus to the idea of the general
political strike. The Belgians obtained the reform of the Constitution by a
display which has been decorated, perhaps rather ambitiously, with the
name of general strike. It now appears that these events did not have the
tragic aspect they have been sometimes credited with: the ministry was very
pleased to be put in a position to compel the House to accept an electoral
bill which the majority disapproved of; many Liberal employers were very
much opposed to this ultra-clerical majority; what happened, therefore, was
something quite contrary to a proletarian general strike, since the workers
served the ends of the State and of the capitalists. Since those already far-
off times there has been another attempt to bring pressure to bear on the
central authority, with a view to establishing a more democratic system of
suffrage; this attempt failed completely; the ministry, this time, was no
longer secretly on the side of the promoters of the bill, and they did not
force its adoption. Many Belgians were very much astonished at theirtempt failed completely; the ministry, this time, was no
longer secretly on the side of the promoters of the bill, and they did not
force its adoption. Many Belgians were very much astonished at their

--- PAGE BREAK ---ely; the ministry, this time, was no
longer secretly on the side of the promoters of the bill, and they did not
force its adoption. Many Belgians were very much astonished at their

--- PAGE BREAK ---

failure, and could not understand why the king did not dismiss his ministers
to please the Socialists; he had formerly insisted on the resignation of his
clerical ministers in face of a display of Liberal feeling; in fact, this king in
their opinion understood nothing of his duties, and, as was said at the time,
he was only a pasteboard king.
This Belgian incident is not without interest, because it brings home to us
the fact that the proletarian general strike and the political general strike are
diametrically opposed to one another. Belgium is one of the countries where
the Syndicalist movement is weakest; the whole Socialist organisation is
founded on the bakers’, grocers’, and haberdashers’ shops that are run by
committees of the party; the worker, accustomed from of old to a clerical
discipline, remains an inferior, who believes himself obliged to follow the
leadership of people who sell him the commodities he needs at a slight
reduction, and who din catholic or socialistic speeches into his ears. Not
only do we find grocery set up as a priestcraft, but it is also from Belgium
that we get the well-known theory of public services against which Guesde
wrote such a violent pamphlet in 1883, and which Deville called in the
same year a Belgium imitation of collectivism.216 The whole of Belgian
Socialism tends towards the development of State industrialism and the
constitution of a class. of State-workers who would be firmly disciplined
under the iron hand of leaders accepted by democracy. 217 It is quite natural,
therefore, that in such a country the general strike should be conceived in a
political form; in such conditions the only aim of popular insurrection must
be to take the power from one group of politicians and to hand it over to
another—the people still remaining the passive beast that bears the yoke.218
The recent troubles in Russia have helped to popularise the idea of the
general strike among professional politicians. Many people were surprised
at the results produced by great concerted stoppages of work; but what
really happened and what followed from these disturbances is not very well
known. People who are acquainted with the country believe that Witte was
hand in glove with many of the revolutionaries, and that he was delighted at
being able to obtain, by terrifying the Czar, the dismissal of his enemies and
the grant of institutions which, in his opinion, would put obstacles in the
way of any return to the old regime. It is very remarkable that for a longifying the Czar, the dismissal of his enemies and
the grant of institutions which, in his opinion, would put obstacles in the
way of any return to the old regime. It is very remarkable that for a long

--- PAGE BREAK ---dismissal of his enemies and
the grant of institutions which, in his opinion, would put obstacles in the
way of any return to the old regime. It is very remarkable that for a long

--- PAGE BREAK ---

time the Government seemed paralysed, and in the administration anarchy
was at its height, while, from the moment Witte thought it necessary in his
personal interests to act vigorously, repression was rapid; that day arrived
(as several people had foreseen) when the financiers needed to revive
Russian credit. It seems hardly probable that previous insurrections ever
had the irresistible power attributed to them; the Petit Parisien, which was
one of the French newspapers that had advertised219 the fame of Witte, said
that the great strike of October 1905 came to an end on account of the
hunger of the workers; according to this newspaper, the strike had even
been prolonged for a day in the hope that the Poles would take part in the
movement, and would obtain concessions as the Finns had done; then it
congratulated the Poles for having been wise enough not to budge, and for
not having given a pretext for German intervention (Petit Parisien,
November 7, 1905).
We must not allow ourselves, therefore, to be too much dazzled by
certain descriptions, and Ch. Bonnier was right when, in the Socialiste of
November 18, 1905, he cast doubt on the truth of the account which had
been given of the course of events in Russia; he had always been an
irreconcilable opponent of the general strike, and he pointed out that there
was no resemblance at all between what had happened in Russia and what
the “genuine Syndicalists in France” look forward to. In his opinion, the
strike in Russia had merely been the consummation of a very complex
process, one method out of the many employed, which had succeeded
owing to the exceptionally favourable circumstances in which it had
developed.
We have here, then, a criterion which will serve to distinguish two kinds
of movement generally designated by the same name. We have studied a
proletarian general strike, which is one undivided whole; now we have to
consider the general political strike, which combines the incidents of
economic revolt with many other elements depending on systems foreign to
the industrial system. In the first case, no detail ought to be considered by
itself; in the second, everything depends on the art with which
heterogeneous details are combined. In this case the parts must be
considered separately, their importance estimated, and an attempt made to
harmonise them. One would think that such a task ought to be looked upondetails are combined. In this case the parts must be
considered separately, their importance estimated, and an attempt made to
harmonise them. One would think that such a task ought to be looked upon

--- PAGE BREAK ---d. In this case the parts must be
considered separately, their importance estimated, and an attempt made to
harmonise them. One would think that such a task ought to be looked upon

--- PAGE BREAK ---

as purely Utopian (or even quite absurd) by the people who are in the habit
of bringing forward so many practical objections to the proletarian general
strike; but if the proletariat, left to itself, can do nothing, politicians are
equal to anything. Is it not one of the dogmas of democracy that the genius
of demagogues can overcome all obstacles?
I will not stop here to discuss what chances of success these tactics have,
and I leave it to the stock-jobbers who read L’Humanité to discover how the
general political strike may be prevented from degenerating into anarchy.
My only concern in the following pages will be to throw full light on the
difference between the two conceptions of the general strike.
II
We have seen that the idea of the Syndicalist general strike contains
within itself the whole of proletarian Socialism; not only are all its real
elements found therein, but they are moreover grouped in the same way as
in social struggles, and their movements are exactly those proper to their
nature. It would be impossible to find any image which would represent
equally well the political form of Socialism, and which could be contrasted
with the proletarian conception of its as represented by the general strike;
yet, by making the political general strike the pivoting point in the tactics of
those Socialists who are at the same time revolutionary and Parliamentary,
it becomes possible to obtain an exact notion of what it is that separates the
latter from the Syndicalists.
A. To begin with, we perceive immediately that the political general
strike does not presuppose a class war concentrated on a field of battle in
which the proletariat attacks the middle class; the division of society into
two antagonistic armies disappears, for this class of revolt is possible with
any kind of social structure. In the past many revolutions were the result of
coalitions between discontented groups; Socialist writers have often pointed
out that the poorer classes have more than once allowed themselves to be
massacred to no purpose, save to place power in the hands of new rulers
who, with great astuteness, had managed to utilise for their own advantage
a passing discontent of the people against the former authorities.no purpose, save to place power in the hands of new rulers
who, with great astuteness, had managed to utilise for their own advantage
a passing discontent of the people against the former authorities.

--- PAGE BREAK ---place power in the hands of new rulers
who, with great astuteness, had managed to utilise for their own advantage
a passing discontent of the people against the former authorities.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It seems, indeed, that the Russian Liberals had hoped to see something of
the kind happen in 1905; they were delighted at the number of peasant and
working-class insurrections; it has even been asserted that they heard with
great satisfaction of the reverses of the army in Manchuria.220 They
believed that the Government, getting alarmed, would have recourse to their
enlightenment; as there is a large number of sociologists among them, the
little science would thus have obtained a huge success; but it is probable
that the people would have been left to twiddle their thumbs.
It is, I suppose, for much the same kind of reason that the capitalistic
shareholders of L’Humanité are such ardent admirers of certain strikes; they
look upon the proletariat as a very convenient instrument with which to
clear the ground, and they feel certain from their study of history that it will
always be possible for a Socialist Government to bring rebels to reason.
Moreover, are not the laws against anarchists, made in an hour of madness,
still carefully preserved on the Statute books? They are stigmatised as
rascally laws; but they may yet serve to protect capitalist-socialists.221
B. (1) Further, under the influence of this conception it would no longer
be true to say that the whole organisation of the proletariat was contained
within revolutionary Syndicalism. Since the Syndicalist general strike
would no longer be the entire revolution, other organisations would have
been created side by side with the syndicates; as the strike could only be
one detail cunningly dovetailed into many other incidents which must be set
going at the propitious moment, the syndicates would have to await the
word of command of the political committees, or at least work in perfect
unison with the committees which represent the superior intelligence of the
Socialist movement. In Italy Ferri has symbolised this unison in a rather
comical manner, by saying that Socialism has need of two legs; this figure
of speech was borrowed from Lessing, who little thought that it might
become one of the principles of sociology. In the second scene of Minna
von Barnhelm, the innkeeper says to Just that a man cannot stand on one
glass of brandy any more than he can walk on one leg; he also adds that all
good things are three in number, and that a rope of four strands is all the
stronger. I am not aware that sociology has made any use of these other
aphorisms, which are worth just as much as the one Ferri misused.re three in number, and that a rope of four strands is all the
stronger. I am not aware that sociology has made any use of these other
aphorisms, which are worth just as much as the one Ferri misused.

--- PAGE BREAK ---and that a rope of four strands is all the
stronger. I am not aware that sociology has made any use of these other
aphorisms, which are worth just as much as the one Ferri misused.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(2) If the Syndicalist general strike is connected with the idea of an era of
great economic progress, the political general strike calls up rather that of a
period of decadence. Experience shows that classes on the downgrade are
more easily captured by the fallacious harangues of politicians than classes
on the upgrade, so that there seems to be a close relation between the
political perspicacity of men and the conditions under which they live.
Prosperous classes may often act very imprudently, because they have too
much confidence in their own strength; they face the future with too much
boldness, and they are overcome for the moment by a frenzied desire for
renown. Enfeebled classes habitually put their trust in people who promise
them the protection of the State, without ever trying to understand how this
protection could possibly harmonise their discordant interests; they readily
enter into every coalition formed for the purpose of forcing concessions
from the Government; they greatly admire charlatans who speak with a glib
tongue. Socialism must be exceedingly careful if it is not to fall to the level
of what Engels called bombastic antisemitism,222 and the advice of Engels
on this point has not always been followed.
The political general strike presupposes that very diverse social groups
shall possess the same faith in the magical force of the State; this faith is
never lacking in social groups which are on the downgrade, and its
existence enables windbags to represent themselves as able to do
everything. The political general strike would be greatly helped by the
stupidity of philanthropists, and this stupidity is always a result of the
degeneration of the rich classes. Its chances of success would be enhanced
by the fact that it would have to deal with cowardly and discouraged
capitalists.
(3) Under such conditions it would no longer be possible to ignore plans
of the future state of society; these plans on which Marx poured ridicule,
and which the Syndicalist general strike ignores, would become an essential
element of the new system. A political general strike could not be
proclaimed until it was known with absolute certainty that the complete
framework of the future organisation was ready. That is what Jaurès
intended to convey in his articles of 1901 when he said that modern societyl it was known with absolute certainty that the complete
framework of the future organisation was ready. That is what Jaurès
intended to convey in his articles of 1901 when he said that modern society

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“will recoil from an enterprise as indeterminate and as empty (as the
Syndicalist strike) as one draws back from a precipice.”223
There are plenty of young barristers, briefless and likely to remain so,
who have filled enormous note-books with their detailed projects for the
social organisation of the future. If we have not yet been favoured with the
breviary of the revolution which Lucien Herr announced in 1900, we know
at least that regulations have been framed for the establishment of the book-
keeping branch of collectivist society, and Tarbouriech has even gone into
the question of the printed forms to be recommended for the use of the
future bureaucracy.224 Jaurès is continually bewailing the fact that so many
lights are condemned to remain hidden under the capitalist bushel; and he
feels convinced that the revolution depends very much less on the
conditions Marx had in mind than on the efforts of unknown geniuses.re condemned to remain hidden under the capitalist bushel; and he
feels convinced that the revolution depends very much less on the
conditions Marx had in mind than on the efforts of unknown geniuses.

C. I have already called attention to the terrible nature of the revolution
as conceived by Marx and the Syndicalists, and I have said that it is very
important that its character of absolute and irrevocable transformation
should be preserved, because it is that which gives Socialism its high
educational value. The comfort-loving followers of our politicians could not
view with any approval the profoundly serious work which is being carried
on by the proletariat; the former desire to reassure the middle class, and
promise not to allow the people to give themselves up entirely to their
anarchical instincts. They explain to the middle class that they do not by
any means dream of suppressing the great State machine, but wise
Socialists desire two things: (1) to take possession of this machine so that
they may improve its works, and make them run to further their friends’
interests as much as possible, and (2) to assure the stability of the
Government, which will be very advantageous for all business men.
Tocqueville had observed that, since the beginning of the nineteenth
century, the administrative institutions of France having changed very little,
revolutions had no longer produced any very great upheavals.225 Socialist
financiers have not read Tocqueville, but they understand instinctively that
the preservation of a highly centralised, very authoritative and very
democratic State puts immense resources at their disposal, and protects

--- PAGE BREAK ---but they understand instinctively that
the preservation of a highly centralised, very authoritative and very
democratic State puts immense resources at their disposal, and protects

--- PAGE BREAK ---

them from proletarian revolution. The transformations which their friends,
the Parliamentary Socialists, may carry out will always be of a very limited
scope, and it will always be possible, thanks to the State, to correct any
imprudences they may commit.
The general strike of the Syndicalists drives away from Socialism all
financiers in quest of adventures; the political strike rather pleases these
gentlemen, because it would be carried out in circumstances favourable to
the power of politicians, and consequently to the operations of their
financial allies.226
Marx supposes, exactly as the Syndicalists do, that the revolution will be
absolute and irrevocable, because it will place the forces of production in
the hands of free men, i.e. of men who will be capable of running the
workshop created by capitalism without any need of masters. This
conception would not at all suit the financiers and the politicians whom
they support, for both are only fit to exercise the noble profession of
masters. Therefore, the authors of all enquiries into moderate Socialism are
forced to acknowledge that the latter implies the division of society into two
groups: the first of these is a select body, organised as a political party,
which has adopted the mission of thinking for the thoughtless masses, and
which imagines that, because it allows the latter to enjoy the results of its
superior enlightenment, it has done something admirable.227 The second is
the whole body of the producers. The select body of politicians has no other
profession than that of using its wits, and they find that it is strictly in
accordance with the principles of immanent justice (of which they are sole
owners) that the proletariat should work to feed them and furnish them with
the means for an existence that only distantly resembles an ascetic’s.
This division is so evident that generally no attempt is made to hide it:
the officials of Socialism constantly speak of the party as of an organism
having a life of its own. At the International Socialist Congress of 1900, the
party was warned against the danger it ran in following a policy which
might separate it too much from the proletariat; it must inspire the masses
with confidence if it desires to have their support on the day of the great
battle.228 The great reproach which Marx levelled at his adversaries in the
Alliance was this separation of the leaders and the led, which had the effectto have their support on the day of the great
battle.228 The great reproach which Marx levelled at his adversaries in the
Alliance was this separation of the leaders and the led, which had the effect

--- PAGE BREAK ---rt on the day of the great
battle.228 The great reproach which Marx levelled at his adversaries in the
Alliance was this separation of the leaders and the led, which had the effect

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of reinstating the State—and which is to-day so marked in Germany—and
elsewhere.
III
A. We will now carry our analysis of the ideas grouped round the
political strike a little farther, and enquire first of all what becomes of the
notion of class.
(1) It will no longer be possible to distinguish the classes by the place
occupied by their members in capitalistic production; we go back to the old
distinction between rich groups and poor groups—such was the division
between the classes as it appeared to those older Socialists who sought to
reform the iniquities of the actual distribution of riches. The “social
Catholics” take up this position also, and endeavour to improve the lot of
the poor, not only by charity, but also by a large number of institutions
which aim at a mitigation of the wretchedness caused by the capitalist
industrial system. It seems that even today things are considered from this
point of view in circles that admire Jaurès as a prophet; I have been told that
the latter sought to convert Buisson to Socialism by making an appeal to the
goodness of his heart, and that these two soothsayers had a very ludicrous
discussion as to the best way to remedy the defects of society.
The masses believe that they are suffering from the iniquitous
consequences of a past which was full of violence, ignorance, and
wickedness; they are confident that the genius of their leaders will render
them less unhappy; they believe that democracy, if it were only free, would
replace a malevolent hierarchy by a benevolent hierarchy.
The leaders, who foster this sweet illusion in their men, see the situation
from quite another point of view; the present social organisation revolts
them just in so far as it creates obstacles to their ambition; they are less
shocked by the existence of the classes than by their own inability to attain
to the positions already acquired by older men; when they have penetrated
far enough into the sanctuaries of the State, into drawing-rooms and places
of amusement, they cease, as a rule, to be revolutionary and speak learnedly
of “evolution.”men; when they have penetrated
far enough into the sanctuaries of the State, into drawing-rooms and places
of amusement, they cease, as a rule, to be revolutionary and speak learnedly
of “evolution.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---penetrated
far enough into the sanctuaries of the State, into drawing-rooms and places
of amusement, they cease, as a rule, to be revolutionary and speak learnedly
of “evolution.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(2) The sentiment of revolt which is met with in the poorer classes will
henceforth be coloured by a violent jealousy. Our democratic newspapers
foster this passion with considerable skill, imagining that this is the best
means of dulling the minds of their readers and of keeping up the
circulation of the paper; they exploit the scandals which arise from time to
time among the rich; they lead their readers to feel a savage pleasure when
they see shame entering the household of one of the great ones of the earth.
With a really astonishing impudence, they pretend that they are thus serving
the cause of the superfine morality, which they hold as much at heart, they
say, as the well-being and the liberty of the poorer classes! But it is
probable that their own interests are the sole motives for their actions.229
Jealousy is a sentiment which seems to belong, above all, to passive
beings. Leaders have active sentiments; with them, jealousy is transformed
into a thirst to obtain, at whatever cost, the most coveted situations, and
they employ to this end any means which enables them to set aside people
who stand in the way of their onward march. In politics, people are no more
held back by scruples than they are in sport, and we hear every day of cases
where competitors in all kinds of contests seek to improve their chances by
some trickery or other.
(3) The masses who are led have a very vague and extremely simple idea
of the means by which their lot can be improved; demagogues easily get
them to believe that the best way is to utilise the power of the State to
pester the rich. We pass thus from jealousy to vengeance, and it is well
known that vengeance is a sentiment of extraordinary power, especially
with the weak. The history of the Greek cities and of the Italian republics of
the Middle Ages is full of instances of fiscal laws which were very
oppressive on the rich, and which contributed not a little towards the ruin of
governments. In the fifteenth century, Aeneas Sylvius (later Pope Pius II.)
noted with astonishment the extraordinary prosperity of the commercial
towns of Germany and the great liberty enjoyed therein by the middle class,
who, in Italy, were persecuted.230 If our contemporary social policy were
examined closely, it would be seen that it also was steeped in ideas of
jealousy and vengeance; many regulations have been framed more with the
idea of pestering employers than of improving the situation of the workers.t would be seen that it also was steeped in ideas of
jealousy and vengeance; many regulations have been framed more with the
idea of pestering employers than of improving the situation of the workers.

--- PAGE BREAK ---it also was steeped in ideas of
jealousy and vengeance; many regulations have been framed more with the
idea of pestering employers than of improving the situation of the workers.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

When the clericals are in a minority, they never fail to recommend severe
regulations in order to be revenged on free-thinking free-mason employers
231
The leaders obtain all sorts of advantages from these methods; they alarm
the rich, and exploit them for their own personal profit; they cry louder than
anybody against the privileges of fortune, and know how to obtain for
themselves all the enjoyments which the latter procures; by making use of
the evil instincts and the stupidity of their followers, they realise this
curious paradox, that they get the people to applaud the inequality of
conditions in the name of democratic equality. It would be impossible to
understand the success of demagogues from the time of Athens to
contemporary New York, if due account was not taken of the extraordinary
power of the idea of vengeance in extinguishing reasonable reflection.
I believe that the only means by which this pernicious influence of the
demagogues may be wiped out are those employed by Socialism in
propagating the notion of the proletarian general strike; it awakens in the
depths of the soul a sentiment of the sublime proportionate to the conditions
of a gigantic struggle; it forces the desire to satisfy jealousy by malice into
the background; it brings to the fore the pride of free men, and thus protects
the worker from the quackery of ambitious leaders, hungering for the
fleshpots.
B. The great differences which exist between the two general strikes (i.e.
between the two kinds of Socialism) become still more obvious when social
struggles are compared with war; in fact, war also may give rise to two
opposite systems of ideas, so that quite contradictory things can be said
about it, all based on incontestable facts.
War may be considered from its noble side, i.e. as it has been considered
by poets celebrating armies which have been particularly illustrious;
proceeding thus we find in war:
(1) The idea that the profession of arms cannot compare to any other
profession—that it puts the man who adopts this profession in a class which
is superior to the ordinary conditions of life,—that history is based entirelyrofession of arms cannot compare to any other
profession—that it puts the man who adopts this profession in a class which
is superior to the ordinary conditions of life,—that history is based entirely

--- PAGE BREAK ---nnot compare to any other
profession—that it puts the man who adopts this profession in a class which
is superior to the ordinary conditions of life,—that history is based entirely

--- PAGE BREAK ---

on the adventures of warriors, so that the economic life only existed to
maintain them.
(2) The sentiment of glory which Renan so justly looked upon as one of
the most singular and the most powerful creations of human genius, and
which has been of such incomparable value in history.232
(3) The ardent desire to try one’s strength in great battles, to submit to the
test which gives the military calling its claim to superiority, and to conquer
glory at the peril of one’s life.
There is no need for me to insist on these features of war at any great
length; my readers will understand the part played in ancient Greece by this
conception of war. The whole of classical history is dominated by the idea
of war conceived heroically: in their origin, the institutions of the Greek
republics had as their basis the organisation of armies of citizens; Greek art
reached its apex in the citadels; philosophers conceived of no other possible
form of education than that which fostered in youth the heroic tradition, and
they endeavoured to keep the study and practice of music within bounds,
because they wished to prevent the development of sentiments foreign to
this discipline; social Utopias were created with a view to maintaining a
nucleus of homeric warriors in the cities, etc. In our own times, the wars of
Liberty have been scarcely less fruitful in ideas than those of the ancient
Greeks.
There is another aspect of war which does not possess this character of
nobility, and on which the pacificists always dwell.233 The object of war is
no longer war itself; its object is to allow politicians to satisfy their
ambitions: the foreigner must be conquered in order that they themselves
may obtain great and immediate material advantages; the victory must also
give the party which led the country during the time of success so great a
preponderance that it can distribute great favours to its followers; finally, it
is hoped that the citizens will be so intoxicated by the spell of victory they
will overlook the sacrifices which they are called upon to make, and will
allow themselves to be carried away by enthusiastic conceptions of the
future. Under the influence of this state of mind, the people permit the
Government to develop its authority in an improper manner, without anyes to be carried away by enthusiastic conceptions of the
future. Under the influence of this state of mind, the people permit the
Government to develop its authority in an improper manner, without any

--- PAGE BREAK ---y by enthusiastic conceptions of the
future. Under the influence of this state of mind, the people permit the
Government to develop its authority in an improper manner, without any

--- PAGE BREAK ---

protest, so that every conquest abroad may be considered as having for its
inevitable corollary a conquest at home made by the party in office.
The Syndicalist general strike presents a very great number of analogies
with the first conception of war: the proletariat organises itself for battle,
separating itself distinctly from the other parts of the nation, and regarding
itself as the great motive power of history, all other social considerations
being subordinated to that of combat; it is very clearly conscious of the
glory which will be attached to its historical role and of the heroism of its
militant attitude; it longs for the final contest in which it will give proof of
the whole measure of its valour. Pursuing no conquest, it has no need to
make plans for utilising its victories: it counts on expelling the capitalists
from the productive domain, and on taking their place in the workshop
created by capitalism.
This conception of the general strike manifests in the clearest manner its
indifference to the material profits of conquest by affirming that it proposes
to suppress the State. The State has always been, in fact, the organiser of the
war of conquest, the dispenser of its fruits, and the raison d’être of the
dominating groups which profit by the enterprises—the cost of which is
borne by the general body of society.
Politicians adopt the other point of view; they argue about social conflicts
in exactly the same manner as diplomats argue about international affairs;
all the actual fighting apparatus interests them very little; they see in the
combatants nothing but instruments. The proletariat is their army, which
they love in the same way that a colonial administrator loves the troops
which enable him to bring large numbers of negroes under his authority;
they apply themselves to the task of training the proletariat, because they
are in a hurry to win quickly the great battles which will deliver the State
into their hands; they keep up the ardour of their men, as the ardour of
troops of mercenaries has always been kept up, by promises of pillage, by
appeals to hatred, and also by the small favours which their occupancy of a
few political places enables them to distribute already. But the proletariat
for them is food for cannon, and nothing else, as Marx said in 1873.234
The reinforcement of power of the State is at the basis of all their
conceptions; in the organisations which they at present control, theis food for cannon, and nothing else, as Marx said in 1873.234
The reinforcement of power of the State is at the basis of all their
conceptions; in the organisations which they at present control, the

--- PAGE BREAK ---and nothing else, as Marx said in 1873.234
The reinforcement of power of the State is at the basis of all their
conceptions; in the organisations which they at present control, the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

politicians are already preparing the framework of a strong, centralised and
disciplined authority, which. will not be hampered by the criticism of an
opposition, which will be able to enforce silence, and which will give
currency to its lies.
C. In Socialist literature the question of a future dictatorship of the
proletariat is constantly cropping up, but nobody likes to explain it;
sometimes this formula is improved and the epithet impersonal is added to
the substantive dictatorship, though this addition does not throw much light
on the question. Bernstein pointed out a few years ago that this dictatorship
would probably be that “of club orators and of literary men.”235 and he was
of opinion that the Socialists of 1848, when speaking of this dictatorship,
had had in view an imitation of 1793, “a central, dictatorial and
revolutionary authority, upheld by the terrorist dictatorship of the
revolutionary clubs”; he was alarmed by this outlook, and he asserted that
all the working men with whom he had had an opportunity of conversing
were very mistrustful of the future.236 Hence he concluded that it would be
better to base Socialist policy and propaganda on a conception of modern
society more in accordance with the idea of evolution. His analysis seems to
be inadequate.
In the dictatorship of the proletariat we may first of all notice a
reminiscence of the Old Regime. Socialists have for a long time been
dominated by the idea that capitalist society must be likened to the feudal
system; I scarcely know any idea more false and more dangerous. They
imagine that the new feudalism would disappear beneath the influence of
forces analogous to those which ruined the old feudal system. The latter
succumbed beneath the attacks of a strong and centralised power, imbued
with the conviction that it had received a mandate from God to employ
exceptional measures against the evil. The kings of the new model237 who
established modern monarchical system were terrible despots, wholly
destitute of scruples; but great historians have absolved them from all blame
for the acts of violence they committed, because they lived in times when
feudal anarchy, the barbarous manners of the old nobles and their lack of
culture, joined to a want of respect for the ideas of the past,238 seemed
crimes against which it was the duty of the royal power to act energetically.rous manners of the old nobles and their lack of
culture, joined to a want of respect for the ideas of the past,238 seemed
crimes against which it was the duty of the royal power to act energetically.

--- PAGE BREAK ---old nobles and their lack of
culture, joined to a want of respect for the ideas of the past,238 seemed
crimes against which it was the duty of the royal power to act energetically.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is probably then with a view to treating the leaders of capitalism with a
wholly royal energy that there is so much talk nowadays of a dictatorship of
the proletariat.
Later on, royalty relaxed its despotism and constitutional government
took its place. It is said that the dictatorship of the proletariat will also
weaken at length, and will disappear, and that finally an anarchical society
will take its place; but how this will come about is not explained. The regal
despotism did not fall by itself or by the goodness of sovereigns; one must
be very simple to suppose that the people who would profit by the
demagogic dictatorship would willingly abandon its advantages.
Bernstein saw quite plainly that the dictatorship of the proletariat
corresponds to a division of society into masters and servants, but it is
curious that he did not perceive that the idea of the political strike (which he
now, to a certain extent, accepts) is connected in the closest manner with
this dictatorship of politicians which he fears. The men who had managed
to organise the proletariat in the form of an army, ever ready to obey their
orders, would be generals who would set up a state of siege in vanquished
society; we should therefore have, on the day following the revolution, a
dictatorship exercised by those politicians who in the society of to-day
already form a compact group.
I have already recalled what Marx said about the people who reinstated
the State by creating in contemporary society an embryo of the future
society of masters. The history of the French Revolution shows us how
these things happen. The revolutionaries made arrangements whereby their
administrative staff was ready to take possession of authority immediately
the old administration decamped, so that there was no break of continuity in
the domination of a governing class. There are no bounds to Jaurès’s
admiration for these operations, which he describes in the course of his
Histoire socialiste; he does not exactly understand their significance, but he
guesses the analogy they bear to his own conceptions of social revolution.
The flabbiness of the men of that time was so great that sometimes the
substitution of the old by the new officials was accomplished under
conditions bordering on farce; we always find a supernumerary state—État
postiche239 (artificial state), to use the expression of that time—which isthe old by the new officials was accomplished under
conditions bordering on farce; we always find a supernumerary state—État
postiche239 (artificial state), to use the expression of that time—which is

--- PAGE BREAK ---fficials was accomplished under
conditions bordering on farce; we always find a supernumerary state—État
postiche239 (artificial state), to use the expression of that time—which is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

organised in advance by the side of the legal State, which considers itself a
legitimate before it has become a legal power, and which profits by some
slight incident to take up the reins of government as they slip from the
feeble hands of the constituted authorities.
The adoption of the red flag is one of the most singular and the most
characteristic episodes of that time. This signal was used in times of
disaffection to give warning that martial law was about to be set up; on
August 10, 1792, it became the revolutionary symbol, in order to proclaim
“the martial law of the people against rebels to the executive power.” Jaurès
comments on this incident in these terms: “It is we, the people, who are
now the law. . . . We are not rebels. The rebels are in the Tuileries, and it is
against the factions of the court and the party of the constitutional
monarchy that we raise, in the name of the country and of liberty, the flag of
legal repressions.”240 Thus the insurgents began by proclaiming that they
held legitimate authority; they are fighting against a State which has only
the appearance of legitimacy, and they take the red flag to symbolise the re-
establishment by force of the real order. As conquerors, they will treat the
conquered as conspirators, and will demand that their plots be punished.
The real conclusion to all these fine ideas was to be the massacre of the
prisoners in September.
All this is perfectly simple, and the general political strike would develop
in the same way with similar occurrences. In order that this strike should
succeed, the greater part of the proletariat must be members of syndicates
which are under the thumb of political committees; there must be a
complete organisation made up of the men who will take over the
Government, so that it will only be necessary to make a simple
transmutation in the personnel of the State. The organisation of the État
postiche would have to be more complete than it was at the time of the
Revolution, because the conquest of the State by force does not seem so
easy to accomplish as formerly; but the principle would be the same. It is
even possible that, since the transmission of authority operates nowadays in
a more perfect fashion, thanks to the new resources at the disposal of the
Parliamentary system, and since the proletariat would be thoroughly well
organised under the official syndicates, we should see the social revolution
culminate in a wonderful system of slavery.of the
Parliamentary system, and since the proletariat would be thoroughly well
organised under the official syndicates, we should see the social revolution
culminate in a wonderful system of slavery.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I9
The study of the political strike leads us to a better understanding of a
distinction we must always have in mind when we reflect on contemporary
social questions. Sometimes the terms force and violence are used in
speaking of acts of authority, sometimes in speaking of acts of revolt. It is
obvious that the two cases give rise to very different consequences. I think
it would be better to adopt a terminology which would give rise to no
ambiguity, and that the term violence should be employed only for acts of
revolt; we should say, therefore, that the object of force is to impose a
certain social order in which the minority governs, while violence tends to
the destruction of that order. The middle class have used force since the
beginning of modern times, while the proletariat now reacts against the
middle class and against the State by violence.nds to
the destruction of that order. The middle class have used force since the
beginning of modern times, while the proletariat now reacts against the
middle class and against the State by violence.

For a long time I was convinced that it is very important that the theory
of social forces should be thoroughly investigated—in a large measure, the
forces may be compared to those acting on matter; but I was not able to
perceive the capital distinction in question here until I had come to consider
the problem of the general strike. Moreover, I do not think that Marx had
ever examined any other form of social constraints except force. In my
Saggi di critica del marxismo I endeavoured, a few years ago, to sum up the
arguments of Marx with respect to the adaptation of man to the conditions
of capitalism, and I presented these arguments in the following manner, on
pages 38-40:—
“(1) There is a social system which is to certain extent mechanical, in
which man seems subject to true natural laws: classical economists place at
the beginning of things that automatism which is in reality the last product
of the capitalistic regime. ‘But the advance of capitalist production,’ says
Marx,241 ‘develops a more and more numerous class of workers who, by
educations, tradition, and habit, look upon the conditions of that mode of
production as self-evident laws of nature.’ The intervention of an intelligent
will in this mechanism would appear as an exception.
“(2) There is a regime of emulation and of keen competition which
impels men to set aside traditional obstacles, to seek constantly for what is

--- PAGE BREAK ---hanism would appear as an exception.
“(2) There is a regime of emulation and of keen competition which
impels men to set aside traditional obstacles, to seek constantly for what is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

new, and to imagine conditions of existence which seem to them to be
better. According to Marx, it is in this revolutionary task that the middle
class excelled.
“(3) There is a regime of violence, which plays an important part in
history, and which assumes several distinct forms:
“(a) On the lowest level, we find a scattered kind of violence, which
resembles the struggle for life, which acts through economic conditions,
and which carries out a slow but sure expropriation; violence of this
character works especially with the aid of fiscal arrangements.242
“(b) Next comes the concentrated and organised force of the State, which
acts directly on labour, ‘to regulate wages,’ i.e. force them within the limits
suitable to surplus value making, to lengthen the working day, and to
maintain the labourer himself in the normal degree of dependence; this is an
essential element of the so-called primitive accumulation.243
“(c) We have, finally, violence properly so called, which occupies so
great a place in the history of primitive accumulation, and which constitutes
the principle subject of history.”
A few supplementary observations may be useful here.
We must first of all observe that these different phases are placed in a
logical sequence, starting from states which most resemble an organism,
and in which no independent will appears, and ending in states in which
individual minds bring forward their considered plans; but the historical
order is quite the contrary of this order.
At the origin of capitalist accumulation we find some very distinct
historical facts, which appear each in its proper time, with its own
characteristics, and under conditions so clearly marked that they are
described in the chronicles. We find, for instance, the expropriation of the
peasants and the suppression of the old legislation which had constituted
“serfdom and the industrial hierarchy.” Marx adds: “The history of this
expropriation is not a matter of conjecture; it is inscribed in the annals of
humanity in indelible letters of blood and fire.”244erfdom and the industrial hierarchy.” Marx adds: “The history of this
expropriation is not a matter of conjecture; it is inscribed in the annals of
humanity in indelible letters of blood and fire.”244

--- PAGE BREAK ---trial hierarchy.” Marx adds: “The history of this
expropriation is not a matter of conjecture; it is inscribed in the annals of
humanity in indelible letters of blood and fire.”244

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Farther on Marx shows how the dawn of modern times was marked by
the conquest of America, the enslavement of negroes and the colonial wars:
“The different methods of primitive accumulation which the capitalist era
brought about are divided in a more or less chronological order first of all
[between] Portugal, Spain, France and England, until the latter combined
the lot, during the last thirty years of the seventeenth century, into a
systematic whole, embracing simultaneously the colonial system, public
credit, modern finance and the protectionist system. Some of these methods
are backed by the employment of brute force; but all, without exception,
exploit the power of the State, the concentrated and organised force of
society, in order to precipitate violently the passage from the feudal
economic order to the capitalist economic order, and to shorten the phases
of the transition.” It is on this occasion that he compared force to a midwife,
and says that it multiplies the social movement.245
Thus we see that economic forces are closely bound up with political
power, and capitalism finally perfects itself to the point of being able to
dispense with any direct appeal to the public force, except in very
exceptional cases. “In the ordinary run of things, the worker can be left to
the action of the natural laws of production, i.e. to his dependence on
capital, a dependence springing from guaranteed, and perpetuated by the
very mechanism of production.”246
When we reach the last historical stage, the action of independent wills
disappears, and the whole of society resembles an organised body, working
automatically; observers can then establish an economic science which
appears to them as exact as the sciences of physical nature. The error of
many economists consisted in their ignorance of the fact that this system,
which seemed natural or primitive to them.247 is the result of a series of
transformations which might not have taken place, and always remains a
very unstable structure, for it could be destroyed by force, as it had been
created by the intervention of force; moreover, contemporary economic
literature is full of complaints respecting the intervention of the State,
which has thereby upset natural laws.
Nowadays economists are little disposed to believe that these natural
laws are in reality laws of Nature; they are well aware that the capitaliston of the State,
which has thereby upset natural laws.
Nowadays economists are little disposed to believe that these natural
laws are in reality laws of Nature; they are well aware that the capitalist

--- PAGE BREAK ---ch has thereby upset natural laws.
Nowadays economists are little disposed to believe that these natural
laws are in reality laws of Nature; they are well aware that the capitalist

--- PAGE BREAK ---

system was reached but slowly, but they consider that it was reached by a
progress which should enchant the minds of all enlightened men. This
progress, in fact, is demonstrated by three remarkable facts: it has become
possible to set up a science of economics; laws can be stated in the simplest,
surest, and most elegant formulas, since the law of contract dominates every
country of advanced capitalism;248 the caprices of the rulers of the State are
no longer so apparent, and thus the path towards liberty is open. Any return
to the past seems to them a crime against science, law, and human dignity.
Socialism looks upon this evolution as being a history of middle-class
force, and it only sees differences of degree where the economists imagine
that they are discovering difference of kind. Whether force manifests itself
under the aspect of historical acts of coercion, or of fiscal oppression, or of
conquest, or labour legislation, or whether it is wholly bound up with the
economic system, it is always a middle-class force labouring with more or
less skill to bring about the capitalist order of society.
Marx endeavoured to describe the details of this evolution very carefully;
he gave very little detail, however, about the organisation of the proletariat.
This gap in his work has often been explained. He found in England an
enormous mass of materials concerning the history of capitalism, which
was fairly well arranged, and which had already been discussed by
economists ; he was therefore able to investigate thoroughly the different
peculiarities of middle-class evolution, but he was not very well furnished
with matter on which he could argue about the organisation of the
proletariat; he was obliged, therefore, to remain content with an
explanation, in very abstract formulas, of his ideas on the subject of the path
which the proletariat must take, in order to arrive at the final revolutionary
struggle. The consequence of this inadequacy of Marx’s work was that
Marxism has deviated from the path assigned to it by its real nature.
The people who pride themselves on being orthodox Marxians have
made no attempt to add anything essential to what their master has written,
and they have always imagined that, in order to argue about the proletariat,
they must make use of what they had learned from the history of middle-
class development. They have never suspected, therefore, that a distinction
should be drawn between the force that aims at authority, endeavouring towhat they had learned from the history of middle-
class development. They have never suspected, therefore, that a distinction
should be drawn between the force that aims at authority, endeavouring to

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed from the history of middle-
class development. They have never suspected, therefore, that a distinction
should be drawn between the force that aims at authority, endeavouring to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

bring about an automatic obedience, and the violence that would smash that
authority. According to them, the proletariat must acquire force just as the
middle class acquired it, use it as. the latter used it, and end finally by
establishing a Socialist State which will replace the middle-class State.
As the State formerly played a most important part in the revolutions
which abolished the old economic systems, so it must again be the State
which should abolish capitalism. The workers should therefore sacrifice
everything to one end alone —that of putting into power men who promise
them solemnly to ruin capitalism for the benefit of the people; that is how a
Parliamentary Socialist party is formed. Former militant Socialists provided
with modest jobs, middle-class people, educated, frivolous, and eager to be
in the public eye, and Stock Exchange speculators imagine that a golden
age might spring up for them as the result of a cautious—a very cautious—
revolution, which would not seriously disturb the traditional State. Quite
naturally, these future masters of the world harbour the thought of
reproducing the history of middle-class force, and they are organising
themselves so that they may be able to draw the greatest possible profit
from this revolution. Quite a number of such people might find a place in
the new hierarchy, and what Paul Leroy Beaulieu calls the “Fourth Estate”
would become really a lower middle class.249
The whole future of democracy might easily depend on this lower middle
class which hopes to make use of the strength of the really proletarian
organisations for its own great personal advantage.42 The politicians believe
that this class will always have peaceful tendencies, that it may be
organised and disciplined, and that since the leaders of such sane syndicates
understand equally with the politicians the action of the State, this class will
form an excellent body of followers. They would like to make use of it to
govern the proletariat; it is for this reason that Ferdinand Buisson and
Jaurès are in favour of syndicates of the minor grades of civil servants, who,
entering the Bourses du Travail, would inspire the proletariat with the idea
of imitating their own feeble and peaceful attitude.re in favour of syndicates of the minor grades of civil servants, who,
entering the Bourses du Travail, would inspire the proletariat with the idea
of imitating their own feeble and peaceful attitude.

The political general strike concentrates the whole of this conception into
one easily understood picture: it shows us how the State would lose nothing

--- PAGE BREAK ---eble and peaceful attitude.

The political general strike concentrates the whole of this conception into
one easily understood picture: it shows us how the State would lose nothing

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of its strength, how the transmission of power from one privileged class to
another would take place, and how the mass of the producers would merely
change masters. These new masters would very probably be less able than
those of to-day; they would make more flowery speeches than the
capitalists, but there is every evidence that they would be much harder and
much more insolent than their predecessors.
The new school approaches the question from quite another point of
view: it cannot accept the idea that the historical mission of the proletariat is
to imitate the middle class; it cannot conceive that a revolution as vast as
that which would abolish capitalism could be attempted for a trifling and
doubtful result, for a change of masters, for the satisfaction of theorists,
politicians, and speculators—all worshippers and exploiters of the State. It
does not wish to restrict itself to the formulas of Marx; although he gave no
other theory than that of middle-class force, that, in its eyes, is no reason
why it should confine itself to a scrupulous imitation of middle-class force.
In the course of his revolutionary career, Marx was not always happily
inspired, and too often he followed inspirations which belong to the past; he
even allowed from time to time a quantity of old rubbish which he found in
the Utopists to creep into his writings. The new school does not in the least
feel itself bound to admire the illusions, the faults, and the errors of the man
who did so much to work out revolutionary ideas; it endeavours to separate
what disfigures the work of Marx from what will immortalise his name; its
attitude is thus the reverse of that of official Socialists, who admire
especially in Marx that which is not Marxian. We shall therefore attach no
importance whatever to the numerous extracts which may be quoted against
us to prove that Marx often understood history as the politicians do.
We know now the reason for his attitude: he did not know the distinction,
which appears to us nowadays so obvious, between middle-class force and
proletarian violence, because he did not move in circles which had acquired
a satisfactory notion of the general strike.250 We now possess sufficient
material to enable us to understand the Syndicalist strike as thoroughly as
we do the political strike; we know what differentiates the proletarian
movement from the older middle-class movement; we find in the attitude ofto understand the Syndicalist strike as thoroughly as
we do the political strike; we know what differentiates the proletarian
movement from the older middle-class movement; we find in the attitude of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the revolutionaries towards the State a means of elucidating ideas which
were still very confused in Marx’s mind.

The method which has served us to mark the difference which exists
between middle-class force and proletarian violence may also serve to solve
many questions which crop up in the course of researches about the
organisation of the proletariat. In comparing attempts to organise the
Syndicalist strike, and attempts to organise the political strike, we may
often judge what is good and what is bad, i.e. what is specifically socialistic
and what has middle-class tendencies.
Popular education, for example, seems to be wholly carried on in a
middle-class spirit; history shows us that the whole effort of capitalism has
been to bring about the submission of the masses to the conditions of the
capitalist economic system, so that society might become an organism; the
whole revolutionary effort tends to create free men, but democratic rulers
adopt as their mission the accomplishment of the moral unity of France.
This moral unity is the automatic discipline of the producers, who would
doubtless be happy to work for the glory of their intellectual leaders.
It may be said, too, that the greatest danger which threatens Syndicalism
would be an attempt to imitate democracy; it would be better for it to
remain content for a time with weak and chaotic organisations rather than
that it should fall beneath the sway of syndicates which would copy the
political forms of the middle class.
The revolutionary Syndicalists have never yet made that mistake,
because those who seek to lead them into an imitation of middle-class
methods happen to be adversaries of the Syndicalist general strike, and have
thus stood confessed as enemies.

--- PAGE BREAK ---because those who seek to lead them into an imitation of middle-class
methods happen to be adversaries of the Syndicalist general strike, and have
thus stood confessed as enemies.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

&haSter
7Ke (tKics oI Violence
I. Observations of P. Bureau and of P. De Rousiers—the era of
martyrs—possibility of maintaining the cleavage with very little
violence, thanks to a catastrophic myth.
II. Old habits of brutality in schools and workshops—the
dangerous classes—indulgence for crimes of cunning—
informers.
III. Law of 1884 passed to intimidate conservatives—part
played by Millerand in the Waldeck-Rousseau Ministry—
motives behind present ideas on arbitration.
IV. Search for the sublime in morality—Proudhon—no moral
development in trade unionism —the “sublime” in Germany and
the catastrophic conception.
I
THERE ARE so many legal precautions against violence, and our
upbringing is directed towards so weakening our tendencies towards
violence, that we are instinctively inclined to think that any act of violence
is a manifestation of a return to barbarism. Peace has always been
considered the greatest of blessings and the essential condition of all
material progress, and it is for this reason that industrial societies have so
often been contrasted favourably with the military ones. This last point of
view explains why, almost uninterruptedly since the eighteenth century,
economists have been in favour of strong central authorities, and have

--- PAGE BREAK ---the military ones. This last point of
view explains why, almost uninterruptedly since the eighteenth century,
economists have been in favour of strong central authorities, and have

--- PAGE BREAK ---

troubled little about political liberties. Condorcet levels this reproach at the
followers of Quesnay, and Napoleon III. had probably no greater admirer
than Michel Chevalier .251
It may be questioned whether there is not a little stupidity in the
admiration of our contemporaries for gentle methods. I see, in fact, that
several authors, remarkable for their perspicacity and their interest in the
ethical side of every question, do not seem to have the same fear of violence
as our official professors.
P. Bureau was extremely surprised to find in Norway a rural population
which had remained profoundy Christian. The peasants, nevertheless,
carried a dagger at their belt; when a quarrel ended in a stabbing affray, the
police enquiry generally came to nothing for lack of witnesses ready to
come forward and give evidence.
The author concludes thus: “In men, a soft and effeminate character is
more to be feared than their feeling of independence, however exaggerated
and brutal, and a stab given by a man who is virtuous in his morals, but
violent, is a social evil less serious and more easily curable than the
excessive profligacy of young men reputed to be more civilised.”252
I borrow a second example from P. de Rousiers, who like P. Bureau, is a
fervent Catholic and interested especially in the moral side of all questions.
He narrates how, towards 1860, the country of Denver, the great mining
centre of the Rocky Mountains, was cleared of the bandits who infested it;
the American magistracy being impotent, courageous citizens undertook the
work. “Lynch law was frequently put into operation; a man accused of
murder or of theft might be arrested, condemned and hanged in less than a
quarter of an hour, if an energetic Vigilance Committee could get hold of
him. The American who happens to be honest has one excellent habit—he
does not allow himself to be crushed on the pretext that he is virtuous. A
law-abiding man is not necessarily a craven, as is often the case with us; on
the contrary, he is convinced that his interests ought to be considered before
those of an habitual criminal or of a gambler. Moreover, he possesses the
necessary energy to resist, and the kind of life which he leads makes him
capable of resisting effectively, even of taking the initiative and the
responsibility of a serious step when circumstances demand it. . . . Such aesist, and the kind of life which he leads makes him
capable of resisting effectively, even of taking the initiative and the
responsibility of a serious step when circumstances demand it. . . . Such a

--- PAGE BREAK ---of life which he leads makes him
capable of resisting effectively, even of taking the initiative and the
responsibility of a serious step when circumstances demand it. . . . Such a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

man, placed in a new country, full of natural resources, wishing to take
advantage of the riches it contains and to acquire a superior situation in life
by his labour, will not hesitate to suppress, in the name of the higher
interests he represents, the bandits who compromise the future of this
country. That is why, twenty-five years ago at Denver, so many corpses
were dangling above the little wooden bridge thrown across Cherry
Creek.“253
This is a considered opinion of P. de Rousiers, for he returns elsewhere to
this question. “I know,” he says, “that lynch law is generally considered in
France as a symptom of barbarism . . . ; but if honest virtuous people in
Europe think thus, virtuous people in America think quite otherwise.”254 He
highly approved of the Vigilance Committee of New Orleans which, in
1890, “to the great satisfaction of all virtuous people,” hanged maffiosi
acquitted by the jury.255
In Corsica, at the time when the vendetta was the regular means of
supplying the deficiencies or correcting the action of a too halting justice,
the people do not appear to have been less moral than to-day. Before the
French conquest, Kabylie had no other means of punishment but private
vengeance, yet the Kabyles were not a bad people.
It may be conceded to those in favour of mild methods that violence may
hamper economic progress, and even, when it goes beyond a certain limit,
that it is a danger to morality. This concession cannot be used as an
argument against the doctrine set forth here, because I consider violence
only from the point of view of its influence on social theories. It is, in fact,
certain that a great development of brutality accompanied by much blood-
letting is quite unnecessary in order to induce the workers to look upon
economic conflicts as the reduced facsimiles of the great battle which will
decide the future. If a capitalist class is energetic, it is constantly affirming
its determination to defend itself; its frank and consistently reactionary
attitude contributes at least as greatly as proletarian violence towards
keeping distinct that cleavage between the classes which is the basis of all
Socialism.
We may make use here of the great historical example provided by the
persecutions which Christians were obliged to suffer during the firstvage between the classes which is the basis of all
Socialism.
We may make use here of the great historical example provided by the
persecutions which Christians were obliged to suffer during the first

--- PAGE BREAK ---sses which is the basis of all
Socialism.
We may make use here of the great historical example provided by the
persecutions which Christians were obliged to suffer during the first

--- PAGE BREAK ---

centuries. Modern authors have been so struck by the language of the
Fathers of the Church, and by the details given in the acts of the Martyrs,
that they have generally imagined the Christians as outlaws whose blood
was continually being spilt. The cleavage between the pagan world and the
Christian world was extraordinarily well marked; without this cleavage the
latter would never have acquired all its characteristic features; but this
cleavage was maintained by a combination of circumstances very different
from that formerly imagined.
Nobody believes any longer that the Christians took refuge in
subterranean quarries in order to escape the searches of the police; the
catacombs were dug out at great expense by communities with large
resources at their disposal, under land belonging generally to powerful
families which protected the new cult. Nobody has any doubt now that
before the end of the first century Christianity had its followers among the
Roman aristocracy; “in the very ancient catacomb of Priscilla . . . has been
found the family vault in which was buried from the first to the fourth
century the Christian line of the Acilii.”256 It seems also that the old belief
that the number of the martyrdoms was very great must be abandoned.
Renan still asserted that the literature of martyrdom should be taken
seriously. “The details of the Acts of the Martyrs,” he said, “may be false
for the most part; the dreadful picture which they unroll before us was
nevertheless a reality. The true nature of this terrible struggle has often been
misconceived, but its seriousness has not been exaggerated.”257 The
researches of Harnack lead to quite another conclusion: the language of the
Christian authors was entirely disproportionate to the actual importance of
the persecutions; there were very few martyrs before the middle of the third
century. Tertullian is the writer who has most strongly indicated the horror
which the new religion felt for its persecutors, and yet here is what Harnack
says: “If, with the help of the works of Tertullian, we consider Carthage and
Northern Africa we shall find that before the year 180 there was in those
regions no case of martyrdom, and that from that year to the death of
Tertullian (after 220), and adding Numidia and the Mauritanias, scarcely
more than two dozen could be counted.”258 It must be remembered that at
that time there was in Africa a rather large number of Montanists, whoer 220), and adding Numidia and the Mauritanias, scarcely
more than two dozen could be counted.”258 It must be remembered that at
that time there was in Africa a rather large number of Montanists, who

--- PAGE BREAK ---Numidia and the Mauritanias, scarcely
more than two dozen could be counted.”258 It must be remembered that at
that time there was in Africa a rather large number of Montanists, who

--- PAGE BREAK ---

extolled the glory of martyrdom, and denied that any one had the right to fly
from persecution.
P. Allard combats Harnack’s proposition with arguments which seem to
me somewhat weak.259 He is unable to understand the enormous difference
which probably exists between the reality of the persecutions and the
conceptions which the persecuted formed of them. “The Christians,” says
the German professor, “were able to complain of being persecuted flocks,
and yet such persecution was exceptional; they were able to look upon
themselves as models of heroism, and yet they were rarely put to the
proof”; and I call attention to the end of this sentence: “They were able to
place themselves above the grandeurs of the world, and yet at the same time
to make themselves more and more at home in it.”260
There is something paradoxical at first sight in the situation of the
Church, which had its followers in the upper classes, who were obliged to
make many concessions to custom, and who yet could hold beliefs based on
the idea of an absolute cleavage. The inscriptions on the catacomb of
Priscilla prove “the continuance of the faith through a series of generations
of the Acilli, among whom were to be found not only consuls and
magistrates of the highest order, but also priests, priestesses, even children,
members of illustrious idolatrous colleges, reserved by privilege for
patricians and their sons.”261 If the Christian system of ideas had been
rigorously based on actual facts, such a paradox would have been
impossible.
The statistics of persecutions therefore play no great part in this question;
what was of much greater importance than the frequency of the torments
were the remarkable occurrences which took place during the scenes of
martyrdom. The Christian ideology was based on these rather rare but very
heroic events; there was no necessity for the martyrdoms to be numerous in
order to prove, by the test of experience, the absolute truth of the new
religion and the absolute error of the old, to establish thus that there were
two incompatible ways, and to make clear that the reign of evil would come
to an end. “In spite of the small number of martyrs,” says Harnack, “we
may estimate at its true value the courage needed to become a Christian and
to live as one. Above all else we ought to praise the conviction of the martyre small number of martyrs,” says Harnack, “we
may estimate at its true value the courage needed to become a Christian and
to live as one. Above all else we ought to praise the conviction of the martyr

--- PAGE BREAK ---rtyrs,” says Harnack, “we
may estimate at its true value the courage needed to become a Christian and
to live as one. Above all else we ought to praise the conviction of the martyr

--- PAGE BREAK ---

whom a word or a gesture could save, and who preferred death to such
freedom.”262 Contemporaries who saw in martyrdom a judicial proof
testifying to the honor of Christ,263 drew from these facts quite other
conclusions than those which a modern historian, whose mind runs in
modern grooves, might draw from them; no ideology was ever more remote
from the facts than that of the early Christians.
The Roman administration dealt very severely with any one who showed
a tendency to disturb the public peace, especially with any accused person
who defied its majesty. In striking down from time to time a few Christians
who had been denounced to it (for reasons which have generally remained
hidden from us) it did not think that it was accomplishing an act which
would ever interest posterity; it seems that the general public itself hardly
ever took any great notice of these punishments; and this explains why the
persecutions left scarcely any trace on pagan literature. The pagans had no
reason to attach to martyrdom the extraordinary importance which the
faithful and those who already sympathised with them attached to it.
This ideology would certainly not have been formed in so paradoxical a
manner had it not been for the firm belief that people had in the
catastrophes described by the numerous apocalypses which were composed
at the end of the first century and at the beginning of the second; it was the
conviction of all that the world was to be delivered up completely to the
reign of evil, and that Christ would then come and give the final victory to
His elect. Any case of persecution borrowed from the mythology of the
Antichrist something of its dread dramatic character; instead of being
valued on its actual importance as a misfortune which had befallen a few
individuals, a lesson for the community, or a temporary check on
propaganda, it became an incident of the war carried on by Satan, prince of
this world, who was soon to reveal his Antichrist. Thus the cleavage sprang
at the same time from the persecutions and from the feverish expectation of
a decisive battle. When Christianity had developed sufficiently, the
apocalyptic literature ceased to be cultivated to any extent; although the
root idea contained therein still continued to exercise its influence, the Acts
of the Martyrs were drawn up in such a way that they might excite the same
feelings that the apocalypses excited; it may be said that they replacedstill continued to exercise its influence, the Acts
of the Martyrs were drawn up in such a way that they might excite the same
feelings that the apocalypses excited; it may be said that they replaced

--- PAGE BREAK ---

these:264 we sometimes find in the literature of the persecutions, set down
as clearly as in the apocalypses, the horror which the faithful felt for the
ministers of Satan who persecuted them.265
It is possible, therefore, to conceive Socialism as being perfectly
revolutionary, although there may only be a few short conflicts, provided
that these have strength enough to evoke the idea of the general strike: all
the events of the conflict will then appear under a magnified form, and the
idea of catastrophe being maintained, the cleavage will be perfect. Thus one
objection often urged against revolutionary Socialism may be set aside—
there is no danger of civilisation succumbing under the consequences of a
development of brutality, since the idea of the general strike may foster the
notion of the class war by means of incidents which would appear to
middle-class historians as of small importance.s of a
development of brutality, since the idea of the general strike may foster the
notion of the class war by means of incidents which would appear to
middle-class historians as of small importance.

When the governing classes, no longer daring to govern, are ashamed of
their privileged situation, are eager to make advances to their enemies, and
proclaim their horror of all cleavage in society, it becomes much more
difficult to maintain in the minds of the proletariat this idea of cleavage
which without Socialism cannot fulfil its historical role. So much the better,
declare the worthy progressives; we may then hope that the future of the
world will not be left in the hands of brutes who do not even respect the
State, who laugh at the lofty ideas of the middle class, and who have no
more admiration for the professional expounders of lofty thought than for
priests. Let us therefore do more and more every day for the disinherited,
say these gentlemen; let us show ourselves more Christian, more
philanthropic, or more democratic (according to the temperament of each) ;
let us unite for the accomplishment of social duty. We shall thus get the
better of these dreadful Socialists, who think it possible to destroy the
prestige of the Intellectuals now that the intellectuals have destroyed that of
the Church. As a matter of fact, these cunning moral combinations have
failed; it is not difficult to see why.
The specious reasoning of these gentlemen—the pontiffs of “social
duty”—supposes that violence cannot increase, and may even diminish in
proportion as the Intellectuals unbend to the masses and make platitudes

--- PAGE BREAK ---se gentlemen—the pontiffs of “social
duty”—supposes that violence cannot increase, and may even diminish in
proportion as the Intellectuals unbend to the masses and make platitudes

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and grimaces in honour of the union of the classes. Unfortunately for these
great thinkers, things do not happen in this way; violence does not diminish
in the proportion that it should diminish according to the principles of
advanced sociology. There are, in fact, Socialist scoundrels, who, profiting
by middle-class cowardice, entice the masses into a movement which every
day becomes less like that which ought to result from the sacrifices
consented to by the middle class in order to obtain peace. If they dared, the
sociologists would declare that the Socialists cheat and use unfair methods,
so little do the facts come up to their expectations.
However, it was only to be expected that the Socialists would not allow
themselves to be beaten without having used all the resources which the
situation offered them. People who have devoted their life to a cause which
they identify with the regeneration of the world could not hesitate to make
use of any weapon which might serve to develop to a greater degree the
spirit of the class war, seeing that greater efforts were being made to
suppress it. Existing social conditions favour the production of an infinite
number of acts of violence, and there has been no hesitation in urging the
workers not to refrain from brutality when this might do them service.
Philanthropic members of the middle class having given a kindly reception
to members of the syndicates who were willing to come and discuss matters
with them, in the hope that these workmen, proud of their aristocratic
acquaintances, would give peaceful advice to their comrades, it is not to be
wondered their fellow-workmen soon suspected them of treachery when
they became upholders of “social reform.” Finally, and this is the most
remarkable fact in the whole business, anti-patriotism becomes an essential
element of the Syndicalist programme.266
The introduction of anti-patriotism into the working-class movement is
all the more remarkable because it came just when the Government was
about to put its theories about the solidarity of the class into practice. It was
in vain that Léon Bourgeois approached the proletariat with particularly
amiable airs and graces; in vain that he assured the workers that capitalist
society was one great family, and that the poor had a right to share in the
general riches; he maintained that the whole of contemporary legislation
was directed towards the application of the principles of solidarity; the
proletariat replied to him by denying the social compact in the most brutalntained that the whole of contemporary legislation
was directed towards the application of the principles of solidarity; the
proletariat replied to him by denying the social compact in the most brutal

--- PAGE BREAK ---

fashion—by denying the duty of patriotism. At the moment when it seemed
that a means of suppressing the class war had been found, behold, it springs
up again in a particularly displeasing form.267

Thus all the efforts of the worthy progressives only brought about results
in flat contradiction with their aims; it is enough to make one despair of
sociology! If they had any common sense, and if they really desired to
protect society against an increase of brutality, they would not drive the
Socialists into the necessity of adopting the tactics which are forced on
them to-day; they would remain quiet instead of devoting themselves to
“social duty”; they would bless the propagandists of the general strike, who,
as a matter of fact, endeavour to render the maintenance of Socialism
compatible with the minimum of brutality. But these well-intentioned people
are not blessed with common sense; and they have yet to suffer many
blows, many humiliations, and many losses of money, before they decide to
allow Socialism to follow its own course.
II
We must now carry our investigations farther, and enquire what are the
motives behind the great aversion felt by moralists for acts of violence; a
very brief summary of a few very curious changes which have taken place
in the manners of the working classes is first of all indispensable.he great aversion felt by moralists for acts of violence; a
very brief summary of a few very curious changes which have taken place
in the manners of the working classes is first of all indispensable.

A. I observe, in the first place, that nothing is more remarkable than the
change which has taken place in the methods of bringing up children;
formerly it was believed that the rod was the most necessary instrument of
the schoolmaster; nowadays corporal punishments have disappeared from
our public elementary schools. I believe that the competition which the
latter had to maintain against the Church schools played a very great part in
this progress; the Brothers applied the old principles of clerical pedagogy
with extreme severity; and these, as is well known, involve an excessive
amount of corporal punishment inflicted for the purpose of taming the
demon who prompted so many of the child’s bad habits.268 The
Government was intelligent enough to set up in opposition to this barbarous

--- PAGE BREAK ---ent inflicted for the purpose of taming the
demon who prompted so many of the child’s bad habits.268 The
Government was intelligent enough to set up in opposition to this barbarous

--- PAGE BREAK ---

system a milder form of education which brought it a great deal of
sympathy; it is not at all improbable that the severity of clerical
punishments is largely responsible for the present tumult of hatred against
which the Church is struggling with such difficulty. In 1901 I wrote: “If (the
Church) were well advised, it would suppress entirely that part of its
activities which is devoted to children; it would do away with its schools
and workshops; it would thus do away with the principal sources of anti-
clericalism: far from showing any desire to adopt this course, it seems to be
its intention to develop these establishments still further, and thus it is
laying up for itself still further opportunities for displays of popular hatred
for the clergy.”269 What has happened since 1901 surpasses my forecast.
In factories and workshops customs of great brutality formerly existed,
especially in those where it was necessary to employ men of superior
strength, to whom was given the name of “grosses culottes” (big breeches);
in the end these men managed to get entrusted with the task of engaging
other men, because “any individual taken on by others was subjected to an
infinite number of humiliations and insults”; the man who wished to enter
their workshop had to buy them drink, and on the following day to treat all
his fellow-workers. “The notorious When’s it to be? (Quand est-ce?)270
would be started; every body gets tipsy. . . . When’s it to be? is the devourer
of savings; in a workshop where When’s it to be? is the custom, you must
stand your turn or beware.” Denis Poulot, from whom I borrow these
details, observes that machinery did away with the prestige of the grosses
culottes, who were scarcely more than a memory when he wrote in 1870.271
The manners of the compagnonnages272 (a kind of trade union) were for
a long time remarkable for their brutality. Before 1840 there were constant
brawls, often ending in bloodshed, between groups with different rites.
Martin Saint Léon, in his book on the compagnonnage, gives extracts from
really barbarous songs.273 Initiation into the lodge was accompanied by the
severest tests; young men were treated as if they were pariahs in the
“Devoirs de Jacques et de Subise”:274 “Compagnons (carpenters) have been
known,” says Perdiguier, “to call themselves the Scourge of the Foxes
(candidates for admission), the Terror of the Foxes. . . . In the provinces, a
‘fox’ rarely works in the towns; he is hunted back, as they say, into ther, “to call themselves the Scourge of the Foxes
(candidates for admission), the Terror of the Foxes. . . . In the provinces, a
‘fox’ rarely works in the towns; he is hunted back, as they say, into the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

brushwood.”275 There were many secessions when the tyranny of the
companions came into opposition with the more liberal habits which
prevailed in society. When the workers were no longer in need of
protection, especially for the purpose of finding work, they were no longer
so willing to submit to the demands which had formerly seemed to be of
little consequence in comparison with the advantages of the
compagnonnage. The struggle for work more than once brought candidates
into opposition with companions who wished to reserve certain
privileges.276 We might find still other reasons to explain the decline of an
institution which, while rendering many important services, had contributed
very much to maintaining the idea of brutality.
Everybody agrees that the disappearance of these old brutalities is an
excellent thing. From this opinion it was so easy to pass to the idea that all
violence is an evil, that this step was bound to have been taken; and, in fact,
the great mass of the people, who are not accustomed to thinking, have
come to this conclusion, which is accepted nowadays as a dogma by the
bleating herd of moralists. They have not asked themselves what there is in
brutality which is reprehensible.
When we no longer remain content with current stupidity we discover
that our ideas about the disappearance of violence depend much more on a
very important transformation which has taken place in the criminal world
than on ethical principles. I shall endeavour to prove this.r ideas about the disappearance of violence depend much more on a
very important transformation which has taken place in the criminal world
than on ethical principles. I shall endeavour to prove this.

B. Middle-class scientists are very chary of touching on anything relating
to the dangerous classes;277 that is one of the reasons why their
observations on the history of morals always remain superficial; it is not
very difficult to see that it is a knowledge of these classes which alone
enables us to penetrate the mysteries of the moral thought of peoples.
The dangerous classes of past times practised the simplest form of
offence, that which was nearest to hand, that which is nowadays left to
groups of young scoundrels without experience and without judgment.
Offences of brutality seem to us nowadays something abnormal; so much
so, that when the brutality has been great we often ask ourselves whether
the culprit is in possession of all his senses. This transformation has

--- PAGE BREAK ---wadays something abnormal; so much
so, that when the brutality has been great we often ask ourselves whether
the culprit is in possession of all his senses. This transformation has

--- PAGE BREAK ---

evidently not come about because criminals have become moral, but
because they have changed their method of procedure to suit the new
economic conditions, as we shall see farther on. This change has had the
greatest influence on popular thought.
We all know that by using brutality, associations of criminals manage to
maintain excellent discipline among themselves. When we see a child ill-
treated we instinctively suppose that its parents have criminal habits. The
methods used by the old schoolmasters, which the ecclesiastical houses
persist in preserving, are those of vagabonds who steal children to make
clever acrobats or interesting beggars of them. Everything which reminds us
of the habits of dangerous classes of former times is extremely odious to us.
There is a tendency for the old ferocity to be replaced by cunning, and
many sociologists believe that this is a real progress. Some philosophers
who are not in the habit of following the opinions of the herd, do not see
exactly how this constitutes progress, from the point of view of morals: “If
we are revolted by the cruelty, by the brutality of past times,” says
Hartmann, “it must not be forgotten that uprightness, sincerity, a lively
sentiment of justice, pious respect before holiness of morals characterised
the ancient peoples; while nowadays we see predominant lies, duplicity,
treachery, the spirit of chicane, the contempt for property, disdain for
instinctive probity and legitimate customs—the value of which is not even
understood.278 Robbery, deceit, and fraud increase in spite of legal
repression more rapidly than brutal and violent crimes, like pillage, murder,
and rape, etc., decrease. Egoism of the basest kind shamelessly breaks the
sacred bonds of the family and friendship in every case in which these
oppose its desires.“279
At the present time money losses are generally looked upon as accidents
to which we are constantly exposed and easily made good again, while
bodily accidents are not so easily reparable. Fraud is therefore regarded as
infinitely less serious than brutality; criminals benefit from this change
which has come about in legal sentences.
Our penal code was drawn up at a time when the citizen was pictured as a
rural proprietor occupied solely with the administration of his property, as a
good family man, saving to secure an honourable position for his children;p at a time when the citizen was pictured as a
rural proprietor occupied solely with the administration of his property, as a
good family man, saving to secure an honourable position for his children;

--- PAGE BREAK ---citizen was pictured as a
rural proprietor occupied solely with the administration of his property, as a
good family man, saving to secure an honourable position for his children;

--- PAGE BREAK ---

large fortunes made in business, in politics, or by speculation were rare and
were looked on as real monstrosities; the defence of the savings of the
middle classes was one of the first concerns of the legislator. The previous
judicial system had been still more severe in the punishment of fraud, for a
royal declaration of August 5, 1725, punished a fraudulent bankrupt with
death; it would be difficult to imagine anything further removed from our
customs. We are now inclined to consider that offences of this sort can, as a
rule, only be committed as the result of the imprudence of the victims, and
that it is only exceptionally that they deserve severe penalties; we, on the
contrary, content ourselves with light punishment.
In a rich community where business is on a very large scale, and in which
everybody is wide awake in defence of his own interests, as in America,
crimes of fraud never have the same consequences as in a community
which is forced to practise rigid economy; as a matter of fact, these crimes
seldom cause a serious and lasting disturbance in the economic system; it is
for this reason that Americans put up with the excesses of their politicians
and financiers with so little complaint. P. de Rousiers compares the
American to the captain of a ship who, during a dangerous voyage, has no
time to look after his thieving cook. “When you point out to Americans that
they are being robbed by their politicians, they usually reply, ‘Of course we
are quite aware of that! But as long as business is good and politicians do
not get in the way, it will be very difficult for them to escape the
punishment they deserve.’ ”280
In Europe also, since it has become easy to gain money, ideas, analogous
to those current in America, have spread among us. Great company
promoters have been able to escape punishment because in their hour of
success they were clever enough to make friends in all circles. We have
finally come to believe that it would be extremely unjust to condemn
bankrupt merchants and lawyers who retire ruined after moderate
catastrophes, while the princes of financial swindling continue to lead gay
lives. Gradually the new industrial system has created a new and
extraordinary indulgence for all crimes of fraud in the great capitalist
countries.281nces of financial swindling continue to lead gay
lives. Gradually the new industrial system has created a new and
extraordinary indulgence for all crimes of fraud in the great capitalist
countries.281

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In those countries where the old parsimonious and non-speculative
family economy still prevails, the relative estimation of acts of fraud and
acts of brutality has not followed the same evolution as in America,
England, and France; this is why Germany has preserved so many of the
customs of former times,282 and does not feel the same horror that we do for
brutal punishments; these never seem to them, as they do to us, only
suitable to the most dangerous classes.
Many philosophers have protested against this mitigation of sentences;
after what we have related earlier about Hartmann, we shall expect to meet
him among those who protest. “We are already,” he says, “approaching the
time when theft and lying condemned by law will be despised as vulgar
errors, as gross clumsiness, by the clever cheats who know how to preserve
the letter of the law while infringing the rights of other people. For my part,
I would much rather live amongst the ancient Germans, at the risk of being
killed on occasion, than be obliged, as I am in modern cities, to look on
every man as a swindler or a rogue unless I have evident proofs of his
honesty.” 283 Hartmann takes no account of economic conditions; he argues
from an entirely personal point of view, and never looks at what goes on
round him. Nobody to-day wants to run the risk of being slain by ancient
Germans; fraud or a theft are very easily reparable.s
from an entirely personal point of view, and never looks at what goes on
round him. Nobody to-day wants to run the risk of being slain by ancient
Germans; fraud or a theft are very easily reparable.

C. Finally, in order to get to the heart of contemporary thought on this
matter, it is necessary to examine the way in which the public judges the
relations existing between the State and the criminal associations. Such
relations have always existed; these associations, after having practised
violence, have ended by employing craft alone, or at least their acts of
violence have become somewhat exceptional.
Nowadays we should think it very strange if the magistrates were to put
themselves at the head of armed bands, as they did in Rome during the last
years of the Republic. In the course of the Zola trial, the Anti-Semites
recruited bands of paid demonstrators, who were commissioned to manifest
patriotic indignation; the Government of Méline protected these antics,
which for some months had considerable success and helped considerably
in hindering a fair revision of the sentence on Dreyfus.

--- PAGE BREAK ---on; the Government of Méline protected these antics,
which for some months had considerable success and helped considerably
in hindering a fair revision of the sentence on Dreyfus.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I believe that I am not mistaken in saying that these tactics of the
partisans of the Church have been the principal cause of all the measures
directed against Catholicism since 1901; the middle-class liberals would
never have accepted these measures if they had not still been under the
influence of the fear they had felt during the Dreyfus affair. The chief
argument which Clemenceau used to stir up his followers to fight against
the Church was that of fear; he never ceased to denounce the danger which
the Republic ran in the continued existence of the Romish faction; the laws
about the congregations, about education and the administration of the
churches were made with the object of preventing the Catholic party again
taking up its former warlike attitude, which Anatol France so often
compared to that of the League;284 they were laws inspired by fear. Many
Conservatives felt this so strongly that they regarded with displeasure the
resistance recently opposed to the inventories of churches; they considered
that the employment of bands of pious apaches would make the middle
classes still more hostile to their cause.285 It was not a little surprising to see
Brunetière, who had been one of the admirers of the anti-Dreyfus apaches,
advise submission; this was because experience had enlightened him as to
the consequences of violence.
Associations which work by craft provoke no such reactions in the
public; in the time of the “clerical republic,”286 the society of Saint Vincent
de Paul was an excellent centre of surveillance over officials of every order
and grade; it is not surprising, then, that free-masonry has been able to
render services to the Radical Government of exactly the same kind as
those which Catholic philanthropy was able to render to former
Governments. The history of recent spying scandals has shown very plainly
what the point of view of the country actually was.
When the nationalists obtained possession of the documents containing
information about officers of the army, which had been compiled by the
dignitaries of the masonic lodges, they believed that their opponents were
lost; the panic which prevailed in the Radical camp for some time seemed
to justify their hopes, but before long the democracy showed only derision
for what they called the “petty virtue” of those who publicly denounced the
methods of General André and his accomplices. In those difficult dayses, but before long the democracy showed only derision
for what they called the “petty virtue” of those who publicly denounced the
methods of General André and his accomplices. In those difficult days

--- PAGE BREAK ---the democracy showed only derision
for what they called the “petty virtue” of those who publicly denounced the
methods of General André and his accomplices. In those difficult days

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Henry Bérenger showed that he understood admirably the ethical standards
of his contemporaries; he did not hesitate to approve of what he called the
“legitimate supervision of the governing classes exercised by the
organisations of the vanguard”; he denounced the cowardice of the
Government which had “allowed those who had undertaken the difficult
task of opposing the military caste and the Roman Church, of examining
and denouncing them, to be branded as informers” (Action, Oct. 31, 1904);
he loaded with insults the few Dreyfusards who dared to show their
indignation; the attitude of Joseph Reinach appeared particularly scandalous
to him; in his opinion the latter should have felt himself extremely
honoured by being tolerated in the “League of the Rights of Man,” which
had decided at last to lead “the good fight for the defence of rights of the
citizen, sacrificed too long to those of one man” (Action, Dec. 12, 1904).
Finally, a law of amnesty was voted declaring that no one wanted to hear
anything more of these trifles.
There was some opposition in the provinces,287 but was it very serious? I
am inclined to think not, when I read the documents published by Peguy in
the ninth number of the sixth series of his Cahiers de la quinzaine. Several
people, accustomed to speaking a verbose, sonorous, and nonsensical
language, doubtless found themselves a little uncomfortable under the
smiles of the leading grocers and eminent chemists who constituted the élite
of the learned and musical societies before which they had been accustomed
to hold forth on Justice, Truth, and Light. They found it necessary to adopt a
stoical attitude.
Could anything be finer than this passage from a letter of Professor
Bougle, an eminent doctor of social science, which I find on page 13: “I am
very happy to learn that at last the League is going to speak. Its silence
astonishes and frightens us.” He must be a man who is easily astonished
and frightened! Francis de Pressensé also suffered some anxiety of mind—
he is a specialist in that kind of thing—but his feelings were of a very
distinguished kind, as is only proper for an aristocratic Socialist; he was
afraid that democracy was threatened with a new guillotine sèche,288
resembling that which had done so much harm to virtuous democrats during
the Panama scandal. 289 When he saw that the public quietly accepted themocracy was threatened with a new guillotine sèche,288
resembling that which had done so much harm to virtuous democrats during
the Panama scandal. 289 When he saw that the public quietly accepted the

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed with a new guillotine sèche,288
resembling that which had done so much harm to virtuous democrats during
the Panama scandal. 289 When he saw that the public quietly accepted the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

complicity of the Government with a philanthropic association which had
turned into a criminal association, he hurled his avenging thunders against
the protestors. Among the most comical of these protestors I pick out a
political pastor of St-Etienne called L. Comte. He wrote, in the
extraordinary language employed by the members of the League of the
Rights of Man: “I had hoped that the [Dreyfus] affair would have definitely
cured us of the moral malaria from which we suffer, and that it would have
cleansed the republican conscience of the clerical virus with which it was
impregnated. It has done nothing. We are more clerical than ever.”290
Accordingly this austere man remained in the League! Protestant and
middle-class logic! It is always possible, you see, that the League might one
of these days be able to render some small service to the deserving
ministers of the Gospel.
I have insisted rather lengthily on these grotesque incidents because they
seem to me to characterise very aptly the moral ideas of the people who
claim to lead us. Henceforth it must be taken for granted that politico-
criminal associations which work by craft have a recognised place in any
democracy that has attained its maturity. P. de Rousiers believes that
America will one day cure itself of the evils which result from the guilty
manoeuvres of its politicians. Ostrogorski, after making a long and minute
inquiry into “Democracy, and the organisation of political parties,” believes
that he has found remedies which will enable modern states to free
themselves from exploitation by political parties. These are platonic vows;
no historical experience justifies the hope that a democracy can be made to
work in a capitalist country, without the criminal abuses experienced
everywhere nowadays. When Rousseau demanded that the democracy
should not tolerate the existence in its midst of any private association, he
reasoned from his knowledge of the republics of the Middle Ages; he knew
that part of history better than his contemporaries did, and was struck with
the enormous part played at that time by the politico-criminal associations;
he asserted the impossibility of reconciling a rational democracy with the
existence of such forces, but we ought to learn from experience that there is
no way of bringing about their disappearance.291
IIIserted the impossibility of reconciling a rational democracy with the
existence of such forces, but we ought to learn from experience that there is
no way of bringing about their disappearance.291
III

--- PAGE BREAK ---lity of reconciling a rational democracy with the
existence of such forces, but we ought to learn from experience that there is
no way of bringing about their disappearance.291
III

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The preceding explanations enable us to understand the ideas about the
proper function of the worker’s syndicates formed by the enlightened
democrats and the worthy progressives. Waldeck-Rousseau has often been
congratulated on having carried the law on syndicates in 1884. In order to
give an account of what was expected from this law we must recall the
situation of France at that epoch. Severe financial embarrassments had
compelled the Government to sign agreements with the railway companies
which the Radicals denounced as acts of brigandage; the colonial policy
gave opportunities for extremely violent attacks and was thoroughly
unpopular;292 the discontent which a few years later took the form of
Boulangism was already very marked, and in the elections of 1885 very
nearly gave a majority to the Conservatives.
Waldeck-Rousseau, without being a very profound seer, was yet sharp
enough to understand the danger which might threaten the opportunist
republic, and cynical enough to look for a means of defence in a politico-
criminal association capable of checkmating the Conservatives.
At the time of the Empire the Government had tried to manipulate the
benefit societies in such a way as to control the employés and a section of
the artisans. Later on, it believed it might be possible to find, in the
workmen’s associations, a weapon with which it might be capable of
ruining the authority which the Liberal party had with the people, and
terrorising the rich classes, who had obstinately opposed the Government
since 1863. Waldeck-Rousseau was inspired by these examples and hoped
to organise among the workmen a hierarchy under the direction of the
police.293
In a circular of August 25, 1884, Waldeck-Rousseau explained to the
prefects that they ought not to confine themselves to their too limited
function of enforcing respect for the law; they must stimulate the spirit of
association and “smooth away the difficulties which were bound to arise
from inexperience and lack of practice in this new liberty,” their task would
be so much the more useful and important if they succeeded in inspiring
greater confidence in the workmen; in diplomatic terms the Minister
advised them to undertake the moral leadership of the Syndicalist
movement.294 “Although the Government is not obliged by the law of 1884er confidence in the workmen; in diplomatic terms the Minister
advised them to undertake the moral leadership of the Syndicalist
movement.294 “Although the Government is not obliged by the law of 1884

--- PAGE BREAK ---workmen; in diplomatic terms the Minister
advised them to undertake the moral leadership of the Syndicalist
movement.294 “Although the Government is not obliged by the law of 1884

--- PAGE BREAK ---

to take any part in the search for the solutions of the great economic and
social problems, it cannot be indifferent to them, and I am convinced that it
is its duty to participate and to put its services and zeal at the disposal of all
the parties concerned.” It will be necessary to act with a great deal of
prudence so as “not to excite mistrust,” to show the workmen’s associations
how very much the Government interests itself in their development, and to
advise them “when they make applications.” The prefects must prepare
themselves for “this role of counsellor and energetic collaborator by a
thorough study of legislation, and of the similar organisations which exist in
France and abroad.”
In 1884 the Government did not in the least foresee that the syndicates
might participate in a great revolutionary agitation, and the circular spoke
with a certain irony of “the hypothetical peril of an anti-social federation of
the whole of the workers.” Nowadays one is very tempted to smile at the
ingenuousness of the man who has so often been represented to us as the
prince of cunning; but to account for his illusions it is necessary to go back
to the writings of the democrats of that period. In 1887, in the preface to the
third edition of Sublime , Denis Poulot, an experienced manufacturer,
former mayor of the 11th arrondissement and a follower of Gambetta, said
that the syndicates would kill strikes; he believed that the revolutionaries
had no serious influence on the organised workmen, and he saw in the
primary schools a sure means of bringing about the disappearance of
Socialism; like nearly all the opportunists of that time, he was much more
preoccupied with blacks than with reds.295 Yves Guyot himself does not
seem to have had much more insight than Waldeck-Rousseau, because in
his Morale (1883) he considered collectivism to be merely a word, he
denounced the existing legislation which “aims at hindering the
organisation of workmen for the sale of their labour at the highest possible
price and for the discussion of their interests,” and he expected that what
the syndicates would lead to would be the “organisation of the sale of
labour on a wholesale basis.” He makes violent attacks on the priests, and
the Chagot family is denounced because it forces the miners of Monceau to
go to Mass.296 Everybody then counted on the working men’s organisations
to destroy the power of the clerical party.ests, and
the Chagot family is denounced because it forces the miners of Monceau to
go to Mass.296 Everybody then counted on the working men’s organisations
to destroy the power of the clerical party.

--- PAGE BREAK ---family is denounced because it forces the miners of Monceau to
go to Mass.296 Everybody then counted on the working men’s organisations
to destroy the power of the clerical party.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

If Waldeck-Rousseau had had the slightest foresight, he would have
perceived the advantage that the Conservatives have tried to draw from the
law on syndicates, with a view to attempting the restoration of social peace
in the country districts under their own leadership. For several years the
peril which the Republic ran in the formation of an agrarian party has been
denounced;297 the result has not answered to the hopes of the promoters of
agricultural syndicates, but it might have been serious. Waldeck-Rousseau
never suspected it for an instant; he does not seem, in his circular, to have
suspected even the material services which the new associations would
render to agriculture.298 If he had had any idea of what might come to pass,
he would have taken precautions in the drawing up of the law; it is certain
that neither the minister who drew up the law, nor the “rapporteur”299
understood the importance of the word “agricultural” which was introduced
by means of an amendment proposed by D’Oudet, the senator for Doubs.300
Workmen’s associations directed by democrats, using cunning, threats,
and sometimes even a certain amount of violence, could have been of the
greatest service to the Government in the struggle against the
Conservatives, then so threatening. Those people who have recently
transformed Waldeck-Rousseau into the father of his country will probably
protest against such a disrespectful interpretation of his policy; but this
interpretation will not seem altogether improbable to the people who
remember the cynicism with which he, who is now represented as a great
Liberal, governed; one had the impression that France was about to enter on
a regime which would recall the follies, the luxuries, and the brutality of the
Cæsars. Moreover, when unforeseen circumstances brought back Waldeck-
Rousseau to power, he immediately resumed his former policy and tried to
use the syndicates against his adversaries.
In 1899 it was no longer possible to attempt to put the workmen’s
associations under the direction of the prefects in the way indicated by the
circular of 1884; but there were other methods which might be tried, and in
including Millerand in his ministry, Waldeck-Rousseau thought he had
carried out a master-stroke. As Millerand had been able to make himself the
leader of the Socialists, who had, until then, been divided into irreconcilable
groups, might he not become the broker who would discreetly manipulatee. As Millerand had been able to make himself the
leader of the Socialists, who had, until then, been divided into irreconcilable
groups, might he not become the broker who would discreetly manipulate

--- PAGE BREAK ---been able to make himself the
leader of the Socialists, who had, until then, been divided into irreconcilable
groups, might he not become the broker who would discreetly manipulate

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the syndicates by influencing their leaders? Every means of seduction was
employed in order to bring the workmen to reason, and to inspire them with
confidence in the higher officials of the “Government of Republican
Defence.”
One cannot help being reminded of the policy that Napoleon, in signing
the Concordat, intended to follow; he had recognised that it would not be
possible for him, as for Henry VIII., to directly influence the Church.
“Failing that method,” said Taine, “he adopts another, which leads to the
same end. He does not want to change the opinions of his people, he
respects spiritual things and wishes to control them without interfering with
them and without becoming entangled himself in them; he wants to make
them square with his policy, but by the influence of temporal things.”301 In
the same way, Millerand was commissioned to assure the workmen that
their Socialist convictions would not be interfered with; the Government
only wanted to direct the action of the syndicates and to make them fit in
with its own policy.
Napoleon had said, “You will see how I shall be able to utilise the
priests.”302 Millerand was instructed to gratify in every way the vanity of
the leaders of the syndicates,303 while the mission of the prefects was to
induce the employers to grant material advantages to the workers; it was
thought that this Napoleonic policy would give results as considerable as
those obtained from the policy pursued in regard to the Church. Dumay, the
Minister of Public Worship, had succeeded in creating a docile episcopacy
formed of men whom the ardent Catholics contemptuously called the
“préfets violets.”304 Might it not be possible, by putting a shrewd principal
clerk in the office of the minister, to create “préfets rouges.” All this was
fairly well thought out and corresponded perfectly with the kind of talent
possessed by Waldeck-Rousseau, who was all his life a great partisan of the
Concordat and was fond of negotiating with Rome. It was not unpleasing to
him to negotiate with the reds; the very originality of the enterprise would
have been enough to charm a mind like his, that delighted in subtlety.
In a speech on December 1, 1905, Marcel Sembat, who had been in a
particularly good position to know how things happened in the time of
Millerand, related several anecdotes which very much astounded thea speech on December 1, 1905, Marcel Sembat, who had been in a
particularly good position to know how things happened in the time of
Millerand, related several anecdotes which very much astounded the

--- PAGE BREAK ---r 1, 1905, Marcel Sembat, who had been in a
particularly good position to know how things happened in the time of
Millerand, related several anecdotes which very much astounded the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chamber. He told them how the Government, in order to make itself
disagreeable to the nationalist municipal councillors of Paris, and to reduce
their influence on the Bourse du Travail,305 had asked the syndicates “to
make applications to it that would justify” the reorganisation of that
establishment. A certain amount of scandal was caused by the march past of
the red flags before the official platform at the inauguration of the
monument to Dalou in the Place de la Nation. We now know that this
happened as the result of negotiations; the prefect of police had hesitated,
but Waldeck-Rousseau had authorised these revolutionary ensigns. The fact
that the Government denied having any relations with the syndicates is of
no importance—a lie more or less would not trouble a politician of
Waldeck-Rousseau’s calibre.
The exposure of these manœuvres shows us that the ministry depended
on the syndicates to frighten the Conservatives. Ever since then it has been
easy to understand the attitude they have adopted in the course of several
strikes: on the one hand, Waldeck-Rousseau proclaimed with great fervour
the necessity of giving the protection of public force to every single
workman who wished to work in spite of the strikers; on the other hand, he
has more than once shut his eyes to acts of violence. The reason of this is,
that he found it necessary to annoy and frighten the progressists,306 and
because he meant to reserve to himself the right of forcible intervention at
the moment when his political interests require the disappearance of all
disorder. In the precarious state of his authority in the country he believed it
possible to govern only by fear and by imposing himself as the supreme
arbitrator in industrial disputes.307
Since 1884 Waldeck-Rousseau’s plan had been to transform the
syndicates into politico-criminal associations which could serve as
auxiliaries to the democratic Government. The syndicates were to play a
part analogous to that played by the lodges, the latter being useful in spying
on the officials, and the former designed to threatening the interests of those
employers who were not on the side of the administration; the freemasons
being rewarded by decorations and favours given to their friends, the
workmen being authorised to extract extra wages from their employers.
This policy was simple and cheap.nistration; the freemasons
being rewarded by decorations and favours given to their friends, the
workmen being authorised to extract extra wages from their employers.
This policy was simple and cheap.

--- PAGE BREAK ---masons
being rewarded by decorations and favours given to their friends, the
workmen being authorised to extract extra wages from their employers.
This policy was simple and cheap.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In order that this system may work properly, a certain moderation in the
conduct of the workmen is necessary. Not only must violence be used with
discretion, but the workmen’s demands also must not exceed certain limits.
The same principles must be applied in this case as in the case of the
bribery of politicians. Everybody approves of that as long as the politicians
are reasonable in their demands. People who are in business know that there
is quite a complete art of bribery; certain intermediaries have acquired a
special skill in estimating the amount of the presents that should be offered
to high officials, or to deputies who can get bills passed. If financiers are
almost always obliged to have recourse to the services of specialists, there
is all the more reason why the workmen, who are quite unaccustomed to the
customs of this world, must need intermediaries to fix the sum which they
can exact from their employers without exceeding reasonable limits.58
We are thus led to consider arbitration in an entirely new light and to
understand it in a really scientific manner, since, instead of allowing
ourselves to be duped by abstractions, we shall explain it by means of the
dominant ideas of middle-class society, who invented it, and who want to
impose it on the workers. It would be evidently absurd to go into a pork
butcher’s shop, order him to sell us a ham at less than the marked price, and
then ask him to submit the question to arbitration; but it is not absurd to
promise to a group of employers the advantages to be derived from the
fixity of wages for several years, and to ask the specialists what present
remuneration this guarantee is worth; this remuneration may be
considerable if business is expected to be good during that time. Instead of
bribing some influential person, the employers raise their workmen’s
wages; from their point of view there is no difference. As for the
Government, it becomes the benefactor of the people, and hopes that it will
do well in the elections; to the politician, the electoral advantages which
result from a successful conciliation are worth more than a very large bribe.
It is easy to understand now why all politicians have so great an
admiration for arbitration; it is because an enterprise conducted without
bribery is inconceivable to them. Many of our politicians are lawyers, and
clients who confide their cases to them attach great weight to their
Parliamentary influence. It is for this reason that a former Minister of
Justice is always sure of getting remunerative law-suits even when he is note their cases to them attach great weight to their
Parliamentary influence. It is for this reason that a former Minister of
Justice is always sure of getting remunerative law-suits even when he is not

--- PAGE BREAK ---m attach great weight to their
Parliamentary influence. It is for this reason that a former Minister of
Justice is always sure of getting remunerative law-suits even when he is not

--- PAGE BREAK ---

very talented, because he has means of influencing the magistrates, with
whose failings he is very familiar, and whom he could ruin if he wished.
The great political advocates are sought out by financiers who have serious
difficulties to overcome in the law courts, who are accustomed to bribe on a
large scale and in consequence pay royally. The world of employers thus
appears to our rulers as a world of adventurers, gamblers, and parasites of
the stock exchange; they consider that this rich and criminal class must
expect to submit from time to time to the demands of other social groups.
Their conception of the ideal capitalist society would be a compromise
between conflicting appetites under the auspices of political lawyers.308
The Catholics would not be sorry, now they are in opposition, to find
support in the working classes. It is not only flattery that they address to the
workers, in order to convince them that it would be greatly to their
advantage to abandon the Socialists. They also would very much like to
organise politico-criminal associations, just as Waldeck-Rousseau hoped to
do twenty years ago; but the results they have obtained up till now have
been very moderate. Their aim is to save the Church, and they think that the
well-disposed capitalists might sacrifice a part of their profits to give to the
Christian syndicates the concessions necessary to assure the success of this
religious policy. A well-informed Catholic, who interests himself in social
questions, lately told me that in a few years the workers would be obliged to
recognise that their prejudices against the Church had no foundation. I think
that he deluded himself as much as Waldeck-Rousseau did when in 1884 he
regarded the idea of a revolutionary federation of syndicates as ridiculous,
but the material interest of the Church so blinds Catholics that they are
capable of every kind of stupidity.
The Social Catholics309 have a way of looking at economic questions that
makes them resemble our vilest politicians very closely. In fact it is difficult
for the clerical world to conceive that things can happen otherwise than by
grace, favouritism, and bribery.
I have often heard a lawyer say that a priest can never be made to
understand that certain actions which the Code never punished are
nevertheless villanies; and I have been told by a bishop’s lawyer, that while
a clientele composed of convents is an excellent one, yet at the same time itin actions which the Code never punished are
nevertheless villanies; and I have been told by a bishop’s lawyer, that while
a clientele composed of convents is an excellent one, yet at the same time it

--- PAGE BREAK ---Code never punished are
nevertheless villanies; and I have been told by a bishop’s lawyer, that while
a clientele composed of convents is an excellent one, yet at the same time it

--- PAGE BREAK ---

is very dangerous, because convents frequently want fraudulent deeds
drawn up. Many people seeing during the last fifteen years so many
gorgeous monuments erected by the religious congregations have wondered
if a wave of madness was not passing over the Church. They are unaware
that these building operations enable a crowd of pious rascals to live at the
expense of the Church treasury. The imprudence of those congregations
which persist in carrying on long and costly lawsuits against the public
treasury has often been pointed out, for such tactics enable the Radicals to
work up a lively agitation against the monks by denouncing the avarice of
people who claim to have taken vows of poverty. But these law-suits make
plenty of business for the army of pious rascality. I do not think I am
exaggerating when I say that more than a third of the fortune of the Church
has been wasted for the benefit of these vampires.
A widespread dishonesty therefore prevails in the Catholic world, which
leads the devout to believe that economic conditions depend chiefly on the
caprices of the people who hold the purse. Everybody who has profited by
an unexpected gain—and all profit from capital is an unexpected gain to
them310—ought to share the profit with those people who have a right to his
affection or to his esteem: first of all the priests,311 and then their
parishioners. If he does not respect this obligation, he is a rascal, a
freemason, or a Jew; no violence is too great to be used against such an imp
of Satan. When priests, then, are heard using revolutionary language, we
need not take them literally and believe that these vehement orators have
socialistic sentiments. It simply indicates that the capitalists have not been
sufficiently generous.
Here again, then, there is a case for arbitration; recourse must be had to
men with great experience of life in order to ascertain exactly what
sacrifices the rich must submit to on behalf of the poor dependants of the
Church.
I9
The study we have just made has not led us to think that the theorists of
“social peace” are on the way to an ethic worthy of acknowledgment. We
now pass to a counterproof and enquire whether proletarian violence mightjust made has not led us to think that the theorists of
“social peace” are on the way to an ethic worthy of acknowledgment. We
now pass to a counterproof and enquire whether proletarian violence might

--- PAGE BREAK ---d us to think that the theorists of
“social peace” are on the way to an ethic worthy of acknowledgment. We
now pass to a counterproof and enquire whether proletarian violence might

--- PAGE BREAK ---

not be capable of producing the effect in vain expected from tactics of
moderation.
First of all, it must be noticed that modern philosophers seem to agree in
demanding a kind of sublimity from the ethics of the future, which will
distinguish it from the petty and insipid morality of the Catholics. The chief
thing with which the theologians are reproached is that they make too great
use of the conception of probabilism; nothing seems more absurd (not to
say more scandalous) to contemporary philosophers than to count the
opinions which have been emitted for and against a maxim, in order to find
out whether we ought to shape our conduct by it or not.
Professor Durkheim said recently, at the Société française de philosophie
(February 11, 1906), that it would be impossible to suppress the religious
element in ethics, and that what characterised this element was its
incommensurability with other human values. He recognised that his
sociological researches led him to conclusions very near those of Kant; he
asserted that utilitarian morality had misunderstood the problem of duty and
obligation. I do not want to discuss these here; I simply cite them to show to
what point the character of the sublime impresses itself on authors who, by
the nature of their work, would seem the least inclined to accept it.
No writer has defined more forcibly than Proudhon the principles of that
morality which modern times have in vain sought to realise. “To feel and to
assert the dignity of man,” he says, “first in everything in connection with
ourselves, then in the person of our neighbor, and that without a shadow of
egoism, without any consideration either of divine or communal sanction—
therein lies Right. To be ready to defend that dignity in every circumstance
with energy, and, if necessary, against oneself, that is Justice.”312
Clemenceau, who doubtless can hardly be said to make a personal use of
this morality, expresses the same thought when he writes: “Without the
dignity of the human person, without independence, liberty, and justice, life
is but a bestial state not worth the trouble of preserving” (Aurore, May 12,
1905).
One well-founded reproach has been brought against Proudhon, as well
as against many others of the great moralists; it has been said that his
maxims were admirable, but that they were doomed to remain ineffective.ded reproach has been brought against Proudhon, as well
as against many others of the great moralists; it has been said that his
maxims were admirable, but that they were doomed to remain ineffective.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n brought against Proudhon, as well
as against many others of the great moralists; it has been said that his
maxims were admirable, but that they were doomed to remain ineffective.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

And, in fact, experience does prove, unfortunately, that those precepts
which the historians of ideas call the most elevated precepts are, as a rule,
entirely ineffective. This was evident in the case of the Stoics, it was no less
remarkable in Kantism, and it does not seem as if the practical influence of
Proudhon has been very noticeable. In order that a man may suppress the
tendencies against which morality struggles, he must have in himself some
source of conviction which must dominate his whole consciousness, and act
before the calculations of reflection have time to enter his mind.
It may even be said that all the fine arguments by which authors hope to
induce men to act morally are more likely to lead them down the slope of
probabilism; as soon as we consider an act to be accomplished, we are led
to ask ourselves if there is not some means of escaping the strict obligations
of duty. A. Comte supposed that human nature would change in the future
and that the cerebral organs which produce altruism (?) would destroy those
which produce egoism; in saying this he very likely bore in mind the fact
that moral decision is instantaneous, and, like instinct, comes from the
depth of man’s nature.
At times Proudhon is reduced, like Kant, to appeal to a kind of
scholasticism for an explanation of the paradox of moral law. “To feel
himself in others, to the point of sacrificing every other interest to this
sentiment, to demand for others the same respect as for himself, and to be
angry with the unworthy creature who suffers others to be lacking in respect
for him, as if the care of his dignity did not concern himself alone, such a
faculty at first sight seems a strange one. . . . There is a tendency in every
man to develop and force the acceptance of that which is essentially himself
—which is, in fact, his own dignity. It results from this that the essential in
man being identical and one for all humanity, each of us is aware of himself
at the same time as individual and as species; and that an insult is felt by a
third party and by the offender himself as well as by the injured person, that
in consequence the protest is common. This precisely is what is meant by
Justice.”313
Religious ethics claim to possess this source of action which wanting in
lay ethics,314 but here it is necessary to make a distinction if an error, into
which so many authors have fallen, is to be avoided. The great mass ofto possess this source of action which wanting in
lay ethics,314 but here it is necessary to make a distinction if an error, into
which so many authors have fallen, is to be avoided. The great mass of

--- PAGE BREAK ---ce of action which wanting in
lay ethics,314 but here it is necessary to make a distinction if an error, into
which so many authors have fallen, is to be avoided. The great mass of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Christians do not carry out the real Christian ethic, that which the
philosopher considers as really peculiar to their religion; worldly people
who profess Catholicism are chiefly preoccupied with probabilism,
mechanical rites and proceeding more or less related to magic and which
are calculated to assure their present and future happiness in spite of their
sins.315
Theoretical Christianity has never been a religion suited to worldly
people; the doctors of the spiritual life have always reasoned about those
people who were able to escape from the conditions of ordinary life. “When
the Council of Gangres, in 325,” said Renan, “declared that the Gospel
maxims about poverty, the renunciation of the family and virginity, were
not intended for the ordinary Christian, the perfectionists made places apart
where the evangelical life, too lofty for the common run of men, could be
practised in all its rigour.” He remarks, moreover, very justly, that the
“monastery took the place of martyrdom so that the precepts of Jesus might
be carried out somewhere,”316 but he does not push this comparison far
enough; the lives of the great hermits were a material struggle against the
infernal powers which pursue them even to the desert,317 and this struggle
was to continue that which the martyrs had waged against their adversaries.
These facts show us the way to a right understanding of the nature of
lofty moral convictions; these never depend on reasoning or on any
education of the individual will, but on a state of war in which men
voluntarily participate and which finds expression in well-defined myths. In
Catholic countries the monks carry on the struggle against the prince of evil
who triumphs in this world, and would subdue them to his will; in
Protestant countries small fanatical sects take the place of the
monasteries.318 These are the battle-fields which enable Christian morality
to hold its own, with that character of sublimity which to-day still fascinates
many minds and gives it sufficient lustre to beget in the community a few
pale imitations.
When one considers a less accentuated state of the Christian ethic, one is
struck by seeing to what extent it depends on strife. Le Play, who was an
excellent Catholic, often contrasted (to the great scandal of his co-
religionists) the solidity of the religious convictions he met with inng to what extent it depends on strife. Le Play, who was an
excellent Catholic, often contrasted (to the great scandal of his co-
religionists) the solidity of the religious convictions he met with in

--- PAGE BREAK ---depends on strife. Le Play, who was an
excellent Catholic, often contrasted (to the great scandal of his co-
religionists) the solidity of the religious convictions he met with in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

countries of mixed religions, with the spirit of inactivity which prevails in
the countries exclusively submitted to the influence of Rome. Among the
Protestant peoples, the more vigorously the Established Church is assailed
by dissident sects the greater the moral fervour developed. We thus see that
conviction is founded on the competition of communions, each of which
regards itself as the army of truth fighting the armies of evil. In such
conditions it is possible to find sublimity; but when religious warfare is
much weakened, probabilism, mechanical rites having a certain
resemblance to magic, take the first place.
We can point out quite similar phenomena in the history of modern
Liberal ideas. For a long while our fathers regarded from an almost
religious point of view the Declaration of the Rights of Man, which seems
to us nowadays only a colourless collection of abstract and confused
formulas, without any great practical bearing. This was due to the fact that
formidable struggles had been undertaken on account of the institutions
which originated in this document; the clerical party asserted that it would
demonstrate the fundamental error of Liberalism; everywhere it organised
fighting societies intended to enforce its authority on the people and on the
Government; it boasted that it would be able to destroy the defenders of the
Revolution before long. At the time when Proudhon wrote his book on
Justice, the conflict was far from being ended; thus the whole book is
written in a war-like tone astonishing to the reader of to-day: the author
speaks as if he were a veteran in the wars of Liberty; he would be revenged
on the temporary conquerors who threaten the acquisitions of the
Revolution; he announces the dawn of the great revolt.
Proudhon hopes that the duel will be soon, that the forces will meet with
their whole strength, and that there will be a Napoleonic battle, finally
destroying the opponent. He often speaks in a language which would be
appropriate to an epic. He did not perceive that when later on his belligerent
ideas had disappeared, his abstract reasonings would seem weak. There is a
ferment all through his soul which colours it and gives a hidden meaning to
his thought, very far removed from the scholastic sense.
The savage fury with which the Church proceeded against Proudhon’s
book shows that the clerical camp had exactly the same conception of theto
his thought, very far removed from the scholastic sense.
The savage fury with which the Church proceeded against Proudhon’s
book shows that the clerical camp had exactly the same conception of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

nature and consequences of the conflict as he had.fury with which the Church proceeded against Proudhon’s
book shows that the clerical camp had exactly the same conception of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

nature and consequences of the conflict as he had.

As long as the “sublime” imposed itself in this way on the modern spirit,
it seemed possible to create a lay and democratic ethic; but in our time such
an enterprise would seem almost comic. Everything is changed now that the
clericals no longer seem formidable; there are no longer any Liberal
convictions, since the Liberals have ceased to be animated by their former
warlike passions. Nowadays everything is in such confusion that the priests
claim to be the best of democrats; they have adopted the Marseillaise as
their party hymn, and if a little persuasion is exerted they will have
illuminations on the anniversary of August 10, 1792. Sublimity has
vanished from the ethics of both parties, giving place to a morality of
extraordinary meanness.
Kautsky is evidently right when he asserts that in our time the
advancement of the workers has depended on their revolutionary spirit. At
the end of a study on social reform and revolution he says, “It is hopeless to
try, by means of moral homilies, to inspire the English workman with a
more exalted conception of life, a feeling of nobler effort. The ethics of the
proletariat spring from its revolutionary aspirations, these are what give it
the greatest force and elevation. It is the idea of revolution which has raised
the proletariat from its degradation.” 319 It is clear that for Kautsky morality
is always subordinate to the idea of sublimity.
The Socialist point of view is quite different from that of former
democratic literature; our fathers believed that the nearer man approached
Nature the better he was, and that a man of the people was a sort of savage;
that consequently the lower we descend the more virtue we find. The
democrats have many times, in support of this idea, called attention to the
fact that during revolutions the poorest people have often given the finest
examples of heroism; they explain this by taking for granted that these
obscure heroes were true children of Nature. I explain it by saying that,
these men being engaged in a war which was bound to end in their triumph
or their enslavement, the sentiment of sublimity was bound to be
engendered by the conditions of the struggle. As a rule, during a revolution
the higher classes show themselves in a particularly unfavourable light, fornt, the sentiment of sublimity was bound to be
engendered by the conditions of the struggle. As a rule, during a revolution
the higher classes show themselves in a particularly unfavourable light, for

--- PAGE BREAK ---sublimity was bound to be
engendered by the conditions of the struggle. As a rule, during a revolution
the higher classes show themselves in a particularly unfavourable light, for

--- PAGE BREAK ---

this reason, that, belonging to a defeated army, they experience the feelings
of conquered people, suppliant or about to capitulate.
When working-class circles are reasonable, as the professional
sociologists wish them to be, when conflicts are confined to disputes about
material interests, there is no more opportunity for heroism than when
agricultural syndicates discuss the subject of the price of guano with
manure merchants. It has never been thought that discussions about prices
could possibly exercise any ethical influence on men; the experience of
sales of live stock would lead to the supposition that in such cases those
interested are led to admire cunning rather than good faith; the ethical
values recognised by horse-dealers have never passed for very elevated.
Among the important things accomplished by agricultural syndicates, De
Rocquigny reports that in 1896, “the municipality of Marmande having
wanted to impose on beasts brought to the fair a tax which the cattle-
breeders considered iniquitous . . . the breeders struck, and stopped
supplying the market of Marmande, with such effect that the municipality
found itself forced to give in.320 This was a very peaceful procedure which
produced results profitable to the peasants; but it is quite clear that nothing
ethical was involved in such a dispute.
When politicians intervene there is, almost necessarily, a noticeable
lowering of ethical standards, because they do nothing for nothing and only
act on condition that the favoured association becomes one of their
customers. We are very far here from the path of sublimity, we are on that
which leads to the practices of the political-criminal societies.
In the opinion of many well-informed people, the transition from
violence to cunning which shows itself in contemporary strikes in England
cannot be too much admired. The great object of the Trades Unions is to
obtain a recognition of the right to employ threats disguised in diplomatic
formulas; they desire that their delegates should not be interfered with when
going the round of the workshops charged with the mission of bringing
those workmen who wish to work to understand that it would be to their
interests to follow the directions of the Trades Unions; they consent to
express their desires in a form which will be perfectly clear to the listener,
but which could be represented in a court of justice as a solidarist321directions of the Trades Unions; they consent to
express their desires in a form which will be perfectly clear to the listener,
but which could be represented in a court of justice as a solidarist321

--- PAGE BREAK ---rades Unions; they consent to
express their desires in a form which will be perfectly clear to the listener,
but which could be represented in a court of justice as a solidarist321

--- PAGE BREAK ---

sermon. I protest I cannot see what is so admirable in these tactics, which
are worthy of Escobar. In the past the Catholics have often employed
similar methods of intimidation against the Liberals; I understand thus
perfectly well why so many worthy progressives admire the Trades Unions,
but the morality of the worthy-progressives does not seem to me very much
to be admired.
It is true that for a long time in England violence has been void of all
revolutionary character. Whether corporative advantages are pursued by
means of blows or by craft, there is not much difference between the two
methods; yet the pacific tactics of the Trade Unions indicate an hypocrisy
which would be better left to the “well intentioned progressives.” In a
country where the conception of the general strike exists, the blows
exchanged between workmen and representatives of the middle classes
have an entirely different import, their consequences are far reaching and
they may beget heroism.
I am convinced that in order to understand part, at any rate, of the dislike
that Bernstein’s doctrines rouse in German social democracy we must bear
in mind these conclusions about the nature of the sublime in ethics. The
German has been brought upon sublimity to an extraordinary extent, first by
the literature connected with the wars of independence,322 then by the
revival of the taste for the old national songs which followed these wars,
then by a philosophy which pursues aims very far removed from sordid
considerations. It must also be remembered that the victory of 1871 has
considerably contributed toward giving Germans of every class a feeling of
confidence in their strength that is not to be found to the same degree in this
country at the present time; compare, for instance, the German Catholic
party with the chicken-hearted creatures who form the clientele of the
Church in France! Our clergy only think of humiliating themselves before
their adversaries and are quite happy, provided that there are plenty of
evening parties during the winter; they have no recollection of services
which are rendered to them.323
The German Socialist party drew its strength particularly from the
catastrophic idea everywhere spread by its propagandists, and which was
taken very seriously as long as the Bismarckian persecutions maintained aocialist party drew its strength particularly from the
catastrophic idea everywhere spread by its propagandists, and which was
taken very seriously as long as the Bismarckian persecutions maintained a

--- PAGE BREAK ---its strength particularly from the
catastrophic idea everywhere spread by its propagandists, and which was
taken very seriously as long as the Bismarckian persecutions maintained a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

warlike spirit in the groups. This spirit was so strong in the masses that they
have not yet succeeded in understanding thoroughly that their leaders are
anything but revolutionaries.
When Bernstein (who was too intelligent not to know what was the real
spirit of his friends on the directing committee) announced that the
grandiose hopes which had been raised must be given up, there was a
moment of stupefaction; very few people understood that Bernstein’s
declarations were courageous and honest actions, intended to make the
language of Socialism accord more with the real facts. If hereafter it was
necessary to be content with the policy of social reform, the parliamentary
parties and the ministry would have to be negotiated with—that is, it would
be necessary to behave exactly as the middle classes did. This appeared
monstrous to men who had been brought up on a catastrophic theory of
Socialism. Many times had the tricks of the middle class politicians been
denounced, their astuteness contrasted with the candour and
disinterestedness of the Socialists, and the large element of artificiality and
expediency in their attitude of opposition pointed out. It could never have
been imagined that the disciples of Marx might follow in the footsteps of
the Liberals. With the new policy, heroic characters, sublimity, and
convictions disappear! The Germans thought that the world was turned
upside down.
It is plain that Bernstein was absolutely right in not wanting to keep up a
revolutionary semblance which was in contradiction with the real state of
mind of the party; he did not find in his own country the elements which
existed in France and Italy; he saw no other way then of keeping Socialism
on a basis of reality than that of suppressing all that was deceptive in a
revolutionary programme which the leaders no longer believed in. Kautsky,
on the contrary, wanted to preserve the veil which hid from the workmen
the real activity of the Socialist party; in this way he achieved much success
among the politicians, but more than any one else he has helped to intensify
the Socialist crisis in Germany. The ideas of Socialism cannot be kept intact
by diluting the phrases of Marx in verbose commentaries, but by
continually adapting the spout of Marx to facts which are capable of
assuming a revolutionary aspect. The general strike alone can produce this
result at the present day.verbose commentaries, but by
continually adapting the spout of Marx to facts which are capable of
assuming a revolutionary aspect. The general strike alone can produce this
result at the present day.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

One serious question must now be asked. “Why is it that in certain
countries acts of violence grouping themselves round the idea of the general
strike, produce a Socialist ideology capable of inspiring sublimity, and why
in others do they seem not to have that power?” Here national traditions
play a great part; the examination of this problem would perhaps help to
throw a strong light on the genesis of ideas; but we will not deal with it
here.

--- PAGE BREAK ---” Here national traditions
play a great part; the examination of this problem would perhaps help to
throw a strong light on the genesis of ideas; but we will not deal with it
here.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

&haSter
7Ke (tKics oI tKe Producers
1. Morality and religion—contempt of democracies for morality
—ethical preoccupations of the “new school.”
II. Renan’s uneasiness about the future of the world—his
conjectures—the need of the sublime.
III. Nietzsche’s ethics—the r{le of the family in the genesis of
morality; Proudhon’s theory—the ethics of Aristotle.
IV. Kautsky’s hypothesis—analogies between the spirit of the
general strike and that of the wars of liberty—fear inspired in
the parliamentarians by the spirit.
V. The artisan employed in progressive and inventive
production, the artist and the soldier in the wars of liberty:
desire to surpass previous models; care for exactitude;
abandonment of the idea of exact recompense.
I
FIFTY YEARS ago Proudhon pointed out the necessity of giving the people
a morality which would fit new needs. The first chapter of the preliminary
discourses placed at the beginning of Justice in the Revolution and in the
Church is entitled “The State of Morals in the Nineteenth Century. Invasion
of moral scepticism; society in danger. What is the remedy?” There one
reads these noteworthy sentences: “France has lost its morals. Not that, as a
matter of fact, the men of our generation are worse than their fathers. . . .
When I say that France has lost its morals I mean that it has ceased to

--- PAGE BREAK ---ost its morals. Not that, as a
matter of fact, the men of our generation are worse than their fathers. . . .
When I say that France has lost its morals I mean that it has ceased to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

believe in the very principles of morality, a very different thing. She has no
longer moral intelligence or conscience, she has almost lost the idea of
morals itself; as a result of continual criticism we have come to this
melancholy conclusion: that right and wrong, between which we formerly
thought we were able to distinguish dogmatically, are now vague and
indeterminate conventional terms; that all these words, Right, Duty,
Morality, Virtue, etc., of which the pulpit and the school talk so much, serve
to cover nothing but pure hypotheses, vain Utopias, and unprovable
prejudices; that thus ordinary social behaviour, which is apparently
governed by some sort of human respect or by conventions, is in reality
arbitrary.”324
However, he did not think that contemporary society was mortally
wounded; he believed that since the Revolution, humanity had acquired an
idea of Justice which was sufficiently clear to enable it to triumph over
temporary lapses; by this conception of the future he separated himself
completely from what was to become the most fundamental idea of
contemporary official Socialism, which sneers at morality. “This juridical
faith . . . this science of right and duty, which we seek everywhere in vain,
that the Church has never possessed, and without which it is impossible for
us to live, I say that the Revolution created all its principles; that these,
principles, unknown to us, rule and uphold us, but while at the bottom of
our hearts affirming then, we shrink from them through prejudice, and it is
this infidelity to ourselves that makes our moral poverty and servitude.”325
He maintains the possibility of bringing light to our minds, of presenting
what he calls “the exegesis of the Revolution”; in order to do this, he
examines history, showing how humanity has never ceased to strive towards
Justice, how religion has been the cause of corruption, and how “the French
Revolution by bringing about the predominance of the juridical principle
(over the religious principle) opens a new epoch, an entirely contrary order
of things, the different elements of which it is now our task to
determine.”326 Whatever may happen in the future to our worn-out race, he
says at the end of this discourse, “posterity will recognise that the third age
of humanity327 has its start in the French Revolution; that an understanding
of this new law has been given to some of us in all of its fulness; that we
have not been found quite wanting in the practice of it; and that to perish inthe French Revolution; that an understanding
of this new law has been given to some of us in all of its fulness; that we
have not been found quite wanting in the practice of it; and that to perish in

--- PAGE BREAK ---on; that an understanding
of this new law has been given to some of us in all of its fulness; that we
have not been found quite wanting in the practice of it; and that to perish in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

this sublime childbirth was, after all, not without grandeur. At that hour the
Revolution became clear, then it lived. The rest of the nation (i.e. those who
had not understood the Revolution) does not think at all. Will that part
which lives and thinks be suppressed by that which does not?“328
I said in the preceding chapter that the whole doctrine of Proudhon was
subordinated to revolutionary enthusiasm and that this enthusiasm has been
extinct since the Church has ceased to be formidable; thus there is nothing
astonishing in the fact that the undertaking which Proudhon considered so
easy (the creation of a morality absolutely free from all religious belief)
seems very uncertain to many of our contemporaries. I find a proof of this
way of thinking in a speech by Combes delivered during a discussion of the
budget of Public Worship, January 26, 1903: “At the present moment we
look upon the moral ideas taught by the Church as necessary ideas. For my
part I find it difficult to accept the idea of a society composed of
philosophers like M. Allard;329 whose primary education would have
sufficiently guaranteed them against the perils and trials of life.” Combes is
not the kind of man to have ideas of his own; he reproduced an opinion
current in his circle.
This declaration created a great commotion in the Chamber. All the
deputies who prided themselves on their knowledge of philosophy took part
in the debate; as Combes had referred to the superficial and narrow
instruction of our primary schools, F. Buisson felt that as the leading
pedagogue of the third Republic, he ought to protest: “The education that
we give to the child of the people,” he said, “is not a half education, it is the
very flower and fruit of civilisation gathered during the centuries, from
among many peoples, in the religions and legal systems of all ages and of
all mankind.” And ethic of this abstract kind must be entirely devoid of
efficacy. I remember having read, in a manual by Paul Bert, that the
fundamental principles of morality are based on the teachings of Zoroaster,
and the Constitution of the year III These do not seem to me the kind of
principles which would be powerful enough to influence a man’s conduct.
It might be imagined that the University had arranged its present
programme in the hope of imposing moral conduct on its pupils by means
of the repetition of precepts; moral courses are multiplied to such an extentagined that the University had arranged its present
programme in the hope of imposing moral conduct on its pupils by means
of the repetition of precepts; moral courses are multiplied to such an extent

--- PAGE BREAK ---ersity had arranged its present
programme in the hope of imposing moral conduct on its pupils by means
of the repetition of precepts; moral courses are multiplied to such an extent

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that one might ask oneself if (with a slight difference) the well-known verse
of Boileau might not be applied:
Aimez-vous la muscade? On en a mis partout.330
I do not think that there are many people who share the nawve confidence
of F. Buisson and the members of the University in this ethic. Exactly like
Combes, G. de Molinari believes that it is necessary to have recourse to
religion, which promises men a reward in the other world, and which is
thus, “the surety of justice. . . . It is religion which in the infancy of
humanity, raised the edifice of morality; it is religion which supports and
which alone can support it. Such are the functions which religion has filled
and which it continues to fill and which, unpleasant as it may be to the
apostles of independent morality, constitute its usefulness.”331 “We must
look for help to a more powerful and more active instrument than the
interests of society, to effect those reforms demonstrated by political
economy to be necessary, and this instrument can only be found in the
religious sentiment associated with the sentiment of justice.”332
G. de Molinari expresses himself in intentionally vague terms; he seems
to regard religion as do many modern Catholics (of the Brunetière type);
that is, as a means of social Government, which must be suited to the needs
of the different classes; people of the higher classes have always considered
that they had less need of moral discipline than their subordinates, and it is
by making this fine discovery the basis of their theology that the Jesuits
have had so much success in contemporary middle classes. Our author
distinguishes four motive forces capable of assuring the accomplishment of
duty—“the power of society invested in the Governmental organism, the
power of public opinion, the power of the individual conscience, and the
power of religion”; and he considers that this spiritual mechanism
perceptibly lags behind the material mechanism. 333 The two first motive
forces may have some influence on capitalists, but none in the workship; for
the workers the last two motive forces are alone effective, and they will
become every day more important on account of “the growth ofhave some influence on capitalists, but none in the workship; for
the workers the last two motive forces are alone effective, and they will
become every day more important on account of “the growth of

--- PAGE BREAK ---on capitalists, but none in the workship; for
the workers the last two motive forces are alone effective, and they will
become every day more important on account of “the growth of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

responsibility in those who are charged with the direction and surveillance
of the working of machinery.”334 But according to Molinari we could not
conceive the power of the individual conscience without that of religion.335
I believe, then, that G. de Molinari would be inclined to approve of the
employers who protect religious institutions; he would only, however, like it
done with a little more circumspection than Chagot used at Monceaules
Mines.336
The Socialists for a long time have been greatly prejudiced against
morality, on account of these Catholic institutions that the large employers
established for their workpeople. It seemed to them that, in our capitalist
society, morality was only a means of assuring the docility of workmen,
who are kept in the fear created by superstition. The literature which the
middle class have admired for so long describes conduct so outrageous, so
scandalous even, that it is difficult to credit the rich classes with sincerity
when they speak of inculcating morality in the people.
The Marxists had a particular reason for showing themselves suspicious
in all that concerned ethics; the propagators of social reforms, the Utopists
and the democrats, had so abused the idea of Justice that it was only
reasonable to consider all discussions on such a subject as an exercise in
rhetoric, or as sophistry intended to mislead those who were interested in
the working-class movement. This is why, several years ago, Rosa
Luxemburg called the idea of Justice “this old post horse, on which all the
regenerators of the world, deprived of surer means of locomotion have
ridden; this ungainly Rosinante, mounted on which so many Quixotes of
history have gone in search of the great reform of the world, bringing back
from these journeys nothing but black eyes.“337 From these sarcasms about
a fantastic Justice springing from the imagination of Utopists, they often
used to pass, too easily, to coarse facetiousness about the most ordinary
morality; a rather sordid selection could easily be made of paradoxes
supported by the official Marxists on this subject. Lafargue distinguishes
himself particularly from this point of view.338
The principal reason which prevented the Socialists from studying ethical
problems as they deserved was the democratic superstition which hasinguishes
himself particularly from this point of view.338
The principal reason which prevented the Socialists from studying ethical
problems as they deserved was the democratic superstition which has

--- PAGE BREAK ---rticularly from this point of view.338
The principal reason which prevented the Socialists from studying ethical
problems as they deserved was the democratic superstition which has

--- PAGE BREAK ---

dominated them for so long and which has led them to believe that above
everything else the aim of their actions must be the acquisition of seats in
political assemblies.
From the moment one has anything to do with elections, it is necessary to
submit to certain general conditions which impose themselves unavoidably
on all parties in every country and at all times. If one is convinced that the
future of the world depends on the electoral programme, on compromises
between influential men and on the sale of privileges, it is not possible to
pay much attention to the moral constraints which prevent a man going in
the direction of his most obvious interests. Experience shows that in all
countries where democracy can develop its nature freely, the most
scandalous corruption is displayed without anyone thinking it even
necessary to conceal his rascality. Tammany Hall of New York has always
been cited as the most perfect type of democratic life, and in the majority of
our large towns politicians are found who ask for nothing better than to
follow the paths of confrères in America. So long as a man is faithful to his
party he only commits peccadilloes, but if he is unwise enough to abandon
it, he is immediately discovered to have the most shameful vices. It would
not be difficult to show, by means of well-known examples, that our
Parliamentary Socialists practise this singular morality with a certain
amount of cynicism.
There is a great resemblance between the electoral democracy and the
Stock Exchange; in one case as in the other it is necessary to work upon the
simplicity of the masses, to buy the co-operation of the most important
papers, and to assist chance by an infinity of trickery. There is not a great
deal of difference between a financier who puts big sounding concerns on
the market which come to grief in a few years, and the politician who
promises an infinity of reforms to the citizens which he does not know how
to bring about,339 and which resolve themselves simply into an
accumulation of Parliamentary papers. Neither one nor the other know
anything about production, and yet they manage to obtain control over it, to
misdirect and exploit it shamelessly; they are dazzled by the marvels of
modern industry, and it is their private opinion that the world is so rich that
they can rob it on a large scale without causing any great outcry among the
producers; the great art of the financier and the politician is to be able toprivate opinion that the world is so rich that
they can rob it on a large scale without causing any great outcry among the
producers; the great art of the financier and the politician is to be able to

--- PAGE BREAK ---the world is so rich that
they can rob it on a large scale without causing any great outcry among the
producers; the great art of the financier and the politician is to be able to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

bleed the taxpayer without bringing him to the point of revolt. Democrats
and business men have quite a special science for the purpose of making the
deliberative assemblies approve of their swindling; the Parliaments are as
packed as shareholders’ meetings. It is probable that they both understand
each other as perfectly as they do because of profound psychological
affinities resulting from these methods of operation; democracy is the
paradise of which unscrupulous financiers dream.
The disheartening spectacle presented to the world by these financial and
political parasites340 explains the success which anarchist writers have had
for so long; these latter founded their hopes of the regeneration of the world
on the intellectual progress of individuals; they never ceased urging the
workmen to educate themselves, to realise more fully their dignity as men,
and to show their devotion to their comrades. This attitude was imposed on
them by their principles: in fact, how was the formation of a society of free
men conceivable if it was not taken for granted that individuals had not
already acquired the capacity of guiding themselves? Politicians assert that
this is a very naive idea, and that the world will enjoy all the happiness it
can desire on the day when messengers of the new Gospel are able to profit
from the advantages that power procures; nothing will be impossible for a
State which turns the editors of Humanité into princes. If in that time it is
considered useful to have free men, they will be manufactured by a few
good laws; but it is doubtful if the friends and shareholders of Jaurès will
find that necessary; it will be sufficient for them if they have servants and
taxpayers.
The new school is rapidly differentiating itself from official Socialism in
recognising the necessity of the improvement of morals.341 It is thus
customary for the dignitaries of Parliamentary Socialism to accuse it of
anarchical tendencies; for my part, I should not object to acknowledge
myself as an anarchist in this respect, since Parliamentary Socialism
professes a contempt for morality equalled only by that which the vilest
representatives of the stockbroking middle class have for it.
The new school also has sometimes been reproached with returning to
the dreams of the Utopists. This criticism shows how much our adversaries
misunderstood the works of the old Socialists as well as the presenthool also has sometimes been reproached with returning to
the dreams of the Utopists. This criticism shows how much our adversaries
misunderstood the works of the old Socialists as well as the present

--- PAGE BREAK ---mes been reproached with returning to
the dreams of the Utopists. This criticism shows how much our adversaries
misunderstood the works of the old Socialists as well as the present

--- PAGE BREAK ---

situation. The aim of the early Socialists was to build up ethical ideas
capable of influencing the feelings of the upper classes, in such a way as to
make them sympathise with those who in pity are called “the disinherited
classes,” and of inducing them to make some sacrifice in favour of their
unfortunate brethren. The writers of that time picture the manufactory of the
future in a very different light from that which it may have in a society of
proletarians carrying on industry in a technically progressive and inventive
way; they suppose that it might resemble drawing-rooms in which ladies
meet to do embroidery; in this way they gave a middle-class setting to the
mechanism of production. Finally, they credited the proletariat with feelings
closely resembling those which eighteenth- and nineteenth-century
explorers attributed to savages—goodness, simplicity, and an anxiety to
imitate a superior race of men. With such hypotheses it was an easy matter
to conceive an organisation of peace and happiness; it was only necessary to
make the rich better and the poorer class more enlightened. These two
operations seemed easily realisable, and then the fusion of the drawing-
room and the factory, which has turned the heads of so many Utopists,
would be brought about.342 The “new school” never conceives things on an
idyllic, Christian, and middle-class model; it knows that the process of
production requires entirely different qualities from those met with in the
upper classes; it is only on account of the moral qualities, which are
necessary to improve production, that it deals so much with ethical
questions.
The new school, then resembles the economists much more than the
Utopists; like G. de Molinari, it considers that the moral progress of the
proletariat is as necessary as material improvement in machinery, if modern
industry is to be lifted to the increasingly higher levels that technical
science allows it to attain; but it descends farther than this author does into
the depths of this problem, and does not content itself with vague
recommendations about religious duty.343 In its insatiable desire for reality,
it tries to arrive at the real roots of this process of moral perfection and
desires to know how to create to-day the ethic of the producers of the
future.
II343 In its insatiable desire for reality,
it tries to arrive at the real roots of this process of moral perfection and
desires to know how to create to-day the ethic of the producers of the
future.
II

--- PAGE BREAK ---e desire for reality,
it tries to arrive at the real roots of this process of moral perfection and
desires to know how to create to-day the ethic of the producers of the
future.
II

--- PAGE BREAK ---

At the beginning of any research on modern ethics this question must be
asked, Under what conditions is regeneration possible? The Marxists are
absolutely right in laughing at the Utopists and in maintaining that morality
is never created by mild preaching, by the ingenious constructions of
theorists, or by fine gestures. Proudhon, having neglected this problem,
suffered from many illusions about the persistence of the forces which gave
life to his own ethics; experience was soon to prove that his undertaking
was to remain fruitless. And if the contemporary world does not contain the
roots of a new ethic what will happen to it? The sighs of a whimpering
middle class will not save it, if it has for ever lost its morality.
Very shortly before his death Renan was much engrossed with the ethical
future of the world: “Moral values decline, that is a certainty, sacrifice has
almost disappeared; one can see the day coming when everything will be
syndicalised,344 when organised selfishness will take the place of love and
devotion. There will be strange upheavals. The two things which alone until
now have resisted the decay of reverence, the army345 and the Church, will
soon be swept away in the universal torrent.“346 Renan showed a
remarkable insight in writing this at the very moment when so many futile
intellects were announcing the renascence of idealism and foreseeing
progressive tendencies in a Church that was at length reconciled with the
modern world. But all his life Renan had been too favoured by fortune not
to be optimistic; he believed, therefore, that the evil of future would consist
simply in the necessity of passing through a bad period, and he added: ”No
matter, the resources of humanity are infinite. The eternal designs will be
fulfilled, the springs of life ever forcing their way to the surface will never
be dried up.”
He had finished, several months before, the fifth volume of his History of
the People of Israel, and this volume, having been printed from the
unaltered manuscript, contains a more imperfect expression of his ideas on
this subject; (it is known that he corrected his proofs very carefully). We
find in this the most gloomy presentiments; the author even questions
whether humanity will ever attain its real end. (“If this globe should happen
not to fulfill its purpose, there will be others to carry on to its final end the
programme of all life—Light, Reason, and Truth.”)347 The times to comeain its real end. (“If this globe should happen
not to fulfill its purpose, there will be others to carry on to its final end the
programme of all life—Light, Reason, and Truth.”)347 The times to come

--- PAGE BREAK ---If this globe should happen
not to fulfill its purpose, there will be others to carry on to its final end the
programme of all life—Light, Reason, and Truth.”)347 The times to come

--- PAGE BREAK ---

frightened him. “The immediate future is dark. The triumph of Light is not
assured.” He dreaded Socialism, and there is no doubt that by Socialism he
meant the humanitarian idiocy which he saw emerging in the stupid middle-
class world; it was, in this way, that he came to think that Catholicism
might perhaps be the accomplice of Socialism.348
On the same page he speaks of the divisions which may exist in a society,
and this is of considerable importance. “Judea and the Greco-Roman world
were like two universes revolving one beside the other under opposing
influences. . . The history of humanity by no means synchronises in its
various parts. Tremble! At this moment perhaps the religion of the future is
being created . . . and we have no part in it. I envy wise Kimri who saw
beneath the earth. It is there that everything is prepared, it is there that we
must look.” There is in these words nothing that the theorist of the class-war
could not approve of; in them I find the commentary to what Renan said a
little later on the subject of ”the springs of life ever forcing their way to the
surface”; regeneration is being brought about by a class which works
subterraneously, and which is separating itself from the modern world as
Judaism did from the ancient world.
Whatever the official sociologists may think, the lower classes are by no
means condemned to live on the crumbs which the upper classes let fall; we
are glad to see Renan protest against this imbecile doctrine. Syndicalism
claims to create a real proletarian ideology, and whatever the middle-class
professors say of it, historical experience, as proclaimed by the mouth of
Renan, tells us that this is quite possible, and that out of it may come the
salvation of the world. The syndicalist movement is really being developed
underground; the men who devote themselves to it do not make much noise
in the world; what a difference between them and the former leaders of
democracy, whose sole aim was the conquest of power!
These men were intoxicated by the hope that the chances of life might
some day make them republican princes. While waiting for the wheel of
fortune to turn to their advantage in this way, they obtained the moral and
material advantages that celebrity procures for all virtuosi, in a society
which is accustomed to paying well those who amuse it. The chief motive
force behind many of them was their immeasurable pride, and they fanciedthat celebrity procures for all virtuosi, in a society
which is accustomed to paying well those who amuse it. The chief motive
force behind many of them was their immeasurable pride, and they fancied

--- PAGE BREAK ---ures for all virtuosi, in a society
which is accustomed to paying well those who amuse it. The chief motive
force behind many of them was their immeasurable pride, and they fancied

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that, as their name was bound to shine with singular brilliancy in the annals
of humanity, they might buy that future glory by a few sacrifices.
None of these motives for action exist for the Syndicalists of to-day; the
proletariat has none of the servile instincts of democracy; it no longer
aspires to walk on all fours before a former comrade who has become a
chief magistrate, or to swoon for joy before the toilettes of ministers’
wives.349 The men who devote themselves to the revolutionary cause know
that they must always remain poor. They carry on their work of organisation
without attracting attention, and the meanest hack who scribbles for
L’Humanité is much better known than the militants of the Confédération
du Travail;350 for the great majority of the French public, Griffuelhes will
never have the notoriety of Rouanet;351 and in the absence of the material
advantages, which they could hardly expect, they have not even the
satisfaction that celebrity can give. Putting their whole trust in the
movements of the masses, they have no expectation of a Napoleonic glory,
and they leave the superstition of great men to the middle classes.
It is well that it is so, because the proletariat will be able to develop itself
much more surely if it organises itself in obscurity; Socialist politicians
shun occupations which do not provide celebrity (and which are
consequently not profitable); they are, then, not at all disposed to trouble
themselves with the work of the syndicates, the object of which is to remain
proletarian; they make a show on the Parliamentary stage, but that, as a
rule, does not amount to much. The men who do participate in the real
working-class movement are an example of what have always been looked
upon as the greatest virtues; they cannot, in fact, acquire any of those things
which the middle classes regard as especially desirable. If, then, as Renan
asserts,352 history rewards the resigned abnegation of men who strive
uncomplainingly, and who accomplish, without profit, a great historical
work, we have a new reason for believing in the advent of Socialism since it
represents the highest moral ideal ever conceived by man. This time it is not
a new religion which is shaping itself underground, without the help of the
middle-class thinkers, it is the birth of a virtue, a virtue which the middle-
class Intellectuals are incapable of understanding, a virtue which has theng itself underground, without the help of the
middle-class thinkers, it is the birth of a virtue, a virtue which the middle-
class Intellectuals are incapable of understanding, a virtue which has the

--- PAGE BREAK ---d, without the help of the
middle-class thinkers, it is the birth of a virtue, a virtue which the middle-
class Intellectuals are incapable of understanding, a virtue which has the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

power to save civilisation, as Renan hoped it would be saved—but by the
total elimination of the class to which Renan belonged.
Let us now consider closely the reasons which made Renan dread a
decadence of the middle-class;353 he was struck by the decay of religious
ideas: “An immense moral, and perhaps intellectual, degeneracy will
follow the disappearance of religion from the world. We, at the present day,
can dispense with religion, because others have it for us. Those who do not
believe are carried along by the more or less believing majority; but on the
day when the majority lose this impulse, the men of spirit themselves will
go feebly to the attack.” It is the absence of the sentiment of sublimity
which Renan dreaded; like all old people in their days of sadness, he thinks
of his childhood, and adds, “Man is of value in proportion to the religious
sentiment which he preserves from his first education and which colours his
whole life.” He himself had lived all his life under the influence of the
sentiment of sublimity inculcated in him by his mother; we know, in fact,
that Madame Renan was a woman of lofty character. But the source of
sublimity is dried up: “Religious people live on a shadow. We live on the
shadow of a shadow. On what will those who come after us live?”354
Renan, as was his wont, tried to mitigate the gloom of the outlook which
his perspicacity presented to him; he is like many other French writers who,
wishing to please a frivolous public, never dare to go to the bottom of the
problems that life presents;355 he does not wish to frighten his amiable lady
admirers, so he adds, therefore, that it is not necessary to have a religion
burdened with dogmas, such a religion, for example, as Christianity; the
religious sentiment should suffice. Since Renan there has been no lack of
chatter about this vague religious sentiment which “should suffice” to
replace the positive religions which are coming to grief. F. Buisson informs
us that “no religious doctrines will survive, but only religious emotions,
which, far from contradicting either science, art, or morality, will steep
them in a feeling of profound harmony with the life of the Universe.”356
This unless I am unable to see beyond my nose, is the merest balderdash.
“On what will those who come after us live?” This is the great problem
posed by Renan and which the middle classes will never be able to solve. If
any doubt is possible on this point, the stupidities uttered by the officialcome after us live?” This is the great problem
posed by Renan and which the middle classes will never be able to solve. If
any doubt is possible on this point, the stupidities uttered by the official

--- PAGE BREAK ---” This is the great problem
posed by Renan and which the middle classes will never be able to solve. If
any doubt is possible on this point, the stupidities uttered by the official

--- PAGE BREAK ---

moralists would show that the decadence is henceforth fatal. Speculations
on the harmony of the Universe (even when the Universe is personified) are
not the kind of thing which will give men that courage which Renan
compared to that of the soldier in the moment of attack. Sublimity is dead in
the middle classes, and they are doomed to possess no ethic in the future.357
The winding-up of the Dreyfus affair, which the Dreyfusards, to the great
indignation of Colonel Picquart;358 knew how to put to such good account,
has shown that middle-class sublimity is a Stock Exchange asset. All the
intellectual and moral defects of a class tainted with folly showed
themselves in that affair.
III
Before examining what qualities the modern industrial system requires of
free producers, we must analyse the component parts of morality. The
philosophers always have a certain amount of difficulty in seeing clearly
into these ethical problems, because they feel the impossibility of
harmonising the ideas which are current at a given time in a class, and yet
imagine it to be their duty to reduce everything to a unity. To conceal from
themselves the fundamental heterogeneity of all this civilised morality, they
have recourse to a great number of subterfuges, sometimes relegating to the
rank of exceptions, importations, or survivals, everything which
embarrasses them —sometimes drowning reality in an ocean of vague
phrases and, most often, employing both methods the better to obscure the
problem. My view, on the contrary, is that the best way of understanding
any group of ideas in the history of thought is to bring all the contradictions
into sharp relief. I shall adopt this method and take for a starting-point the
celebrated opposition which Nietzsche has established between two groups
of moral values, an opposition about which much has been written, but
which has never been properly studied.
A. We know with what force Nietzsche praised the values constructed by
the masters, by a superior class of warriors who, in their expeditions,
enjoying to the full freedom from all social constraint, return to the
simplicity of mind of a wild beast, become once more triumphant monsters
who continually bring to mind “the superb blond beast, prowling in searchull freedom from all social constraint, return to the
simplicity of mind of a wild beast, become once more triumphant monsters
who continually bring to mind “the superb blond beast, prowling in search

--- PAGE BREAK ---social constraint, return to the
simplicity of mind of a wild beast, become once more triumphant monsters
who continually bring to mind “the superb blond beast, prowling in search

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of prey and bloodshed,” in whom “a basis of hidden bestiality needs from
time to time a purgative.” To understand this thesis properly, we must not
attach too much importance to formulas which have at times been
intentionally exaggerated, but should examine the historical facts; the
author tells us that he has in mind “the aristocracy of Rome, Arabia,
Germany, and Japan, the Homeric heroes, the Scandinavian vikings.”
It is chiefly the Homeric heroes that we must bear in mind in order to
understand what Nietzsche wished to make clear to his contemporaries. We
must remember that he had been professor of Greek at the University of
Bale, and that his reputation began with a book devoted to the glorification
of the Hellenic genius (The Origin of Tragedy). He notices that, even at the
period of their highest culture, the Greeks still preserved a memory of their
former character of masters. “Our daring,” said Pericles, “has traced a path
over earth and sea, raising everywhere imperishable monuments both of
good and evil.” It was of the heroes of Greek legend and history that he was
thinking when he speaks of “that audacity of noble races, that mad, absurd,
and spontaneous audacity, their influence and contempt for all security of
the body, for life, for comfort.” Does not “the terrible gaiety and the
profound joy which the heroes tasted in destruction, in all the pleasures of
victory and of cruelty,” apply particularly to Achilles?359
It was certainly to the type of classic Greek that Nietzsche alluded when
he wrote “the moral judgments of the warrior aristocracy are founded on a
powerful bodily constitution, a flourishing health without forgetfulness of
what was necessary to the maintenance of that overflowing vigour—war,
adventure, hunting, dancing, games, and physical exercises, in short,
everything implied by a robust, free, and joyful activity.”360
That very ancient type, the Achaean type celebrated by Homer, is not
simply a memory; it has several times reappeared in the world. “During the
Renaissance there was a superb reawakening of the classic idea of the
aristocratic valuation of all things; and after the Revolution” the most
prodigious and unexpected event came to pass, the antique ideal stood in
person with unwonted splendour before the eyes of consciousness of
humanity . . . . (Then) appeared Napoleon, isolated and belated example
though he was.“361t came to pass, the antique ideal stood in
person with unwonted splendour before the eyes of consciousness of
humanity . . . . (Then) appeared Napoleon, isolated and belated example
though he was.“361

--- PAGE BREAK ---antique ideal stood in
person with unwonted splendour before the eyes of consciousness of
humanity . . . . (Then) appeared Napoleon, isolated and belated example
though he was.“361

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I believe that if the professor of philology had not been continually
cropping up in Nietzsche he would have perceived that the master type still
exists under our own eyes, and that it is this type which, at the present time,
has created the extraordinary greatness of the United States. He would have
been struck by the singing analogies which exist between the Yankee, ready
for any kind of enterprise, and the ancient Greek sailor, sometimes a pirate,
sometimes a colonist or merchant; above all, he would have established a
parallel between the ancient heroes and the man who sets out on the
conquest of the Far West362 P. de Rousiers has described the master type
admirably. “To become and to remain an American, one must look upon life
as a struggle and not as a pleasure, and seek in it, victorious effort,
energetic and efficacious action, rather than pleasure, leisure embellished by
the cultivation of the arts, the refinements proper to other societies.
Everywhere—we have seen that what makes the American succeed, what
constitutes his type—is character, personal energy, energy in action,
creative energy.“363 The profound contempt which the Greek had for the
Barbarian is matched by that of the Yankee for the foreign worker who
makes no effort to become truly American. ”Many of these people would be
better if we took them in hand,” an old colonel of the War of Secession said
to a French traveller, but we are a proud race; a shopkeeper of Pottsville
spoke of the Pennsylvania miners as ”the senseless populace.“364 J.
Bourdeau has drawn attention to the strange likeness which exists between
the ideas of A. Carnegie and Roosevelt, and those of Nietzsche, the first
deploring the waste of money involved in maintaining incapables, the
second urging the Americans to becoming conquerors, a race of prey.365
I am not among those who consider Homer’s Archaean type, the
indomitable hero confident in his strength and putting himself above rules,
as necessarily disappearing in the future. If it has often been believed that
the type was bound to disappear, that was because the Homeric values were
imagined to be irreconcilable with the other values which spring from an
entirely different principle; Nietzsche committed this error, which all those
who believe in the necessity of unity in thought are bound to make. It is
quite evident that liberty would be seriously compromised if men came to
regard the Homeric values (which are approximately the same as the
Cornelian values) as suitable only to barbaric peoples. Many moral evilst that liberty would be seriously compromised if men came to
regard the Homeric values (which are approximately the same as the
Cornelian values) as suitable only to barbaric peoples. Many moral evils

--- PAGE BREAK ---be seriously compromised if men came to
regard the Homeric values (which are approximately the same as the
Cornelian values) as suitable only to barbaric peoples. Many moral evils

--- PAGE BREAK ---

would for ever remain unremedied if some hero of revolt did not force the
people to become aware of their own state of mind on the subject. And art,
which is after all of some value, would lose the finest jewel in its crown.
The philosophers are little disposed to admit the right of art to support the
cult of the “will to power”; it seems to them that they ought to give lessons
to artists, instead of receiving lessons from them; they think that only those
sentiments which have received the stamp of the Universities have the right
to manifest themselves in poetry. Like industry, art has never adapted itself
to the demands of theorists; it always upsets their plans of social harmony,
and humanity has found the freedom of art far too satisfactory ever to think
of allowing it to be controlled by the creators of dull systems of sociology.
The Marxists are accustomed to seeing the ideologists look at things the
wrong way round, and so, in contrast to their enemies, they should look
upon art as a reality which begets ideas and not as an application of ideas.
B. To the values created by the master type, Nietzsche opposed the
system constructed by sacerdotal castes—the ascetic ideal against which he
has piled up so much invective. The history of these values is much more
obscure and complicated than that of the preceding ones. Nietzsche tries to
connect the origin of asceticism with psychological reasons which I will not
examine here. He certainly makes a mistake in attributing a preponderating
part to the Jews. It is not at all evident that antique Judaism had an ascetic
character; doubtless, like the other Semitic religions, it attached importance
to pilgrimages, fasts, and prayers recited in ragged clothes. The Hebrew
poets sang the hope of revenge which existed in the heart of the persecuted,
but, until the second century of our era, the Jews looked to be revenged by
arms:366 on the other hand, family life, with them, was too strong for the
monkish ideal ever to become important.
Imbued with Christianity as our civilisation may be, it is none the less
evident that, even in the Middle Ages, it submitted to influences foreign to
the Church, with the result that the old ascetic values were gradually
transformed. The values to which the contemporary world clings most
closely, and which it considers the true ethical values, are not realised in
convents, but in the family; respect for the human person, sexual fidelity
and devotion to the weak, constitute the elements of morality of which alliders the true ethical values, are not realised in
convents, but in the family; respect for the human person, sexual fidelity
and devotion to the weak, constitute the elements of morality of which all

--- PAGE BREAK ---al values, are not realised in
convents, but in the family; respect for the human person, sexual fidelity
and devotion to the weak, constitute the elements of morality of which all

--- PAGE BREAK ---

high-minded men are proud; morality, even, is very often made to consist of
these alone.
When we examine in a critical spirit the numerous writings which treat,
to-day, of marriage, we see that the reformers who are in earnest propose to
improve family relations in such a way as to assure the better realisation of
these ethical values; thus, they demand that the scandals of conjugal life
shall not be exposed in the law courts, that unions shall not be maintained
when fidelity no longer exists, and that the authority of the head of the
family shall not be diverted from its moral purpose to become mere
exploitation, etc.
On the other hand, it is curious to observe to what extent the modern
Church misunderstands the values that classico-Christian civilisation has
produced. It sees in marriage, above all, a contract directed by financial and
worldly interests; it is unwilling to allow of the union being dissolved when
the household is a hell, and takes no account of the duty of devotion.367 The
priests are wonderfully skilful in procuring rich dowries for impoverished
nobles, so much so, indeed, that the Church has been accused of
considering marriage as a mating of noblemen living as “bullies” with
middle-class women reduced to the role of the women who support such
men. When it is heavily recompensed, the Church finds unexpected reasons
for divorce, and finds means of annulling inconvenient unions for ridiculous
motives. Proudhon asks ironically: “Is it possible for a responsible man of a
serious turn of mind and a true Christian to care for the love of his wife? . . .
If the husband seeking divorce, or the wife seeking separation, alleges the
refusal of the conjugal right, then, of course, there is a legitimate reason for
a rupture, for the service for which the marriage is granted has not been
carried out.”368
Our civilisation having come to consider nearly all morality as consisting
of values derived from those observed in the normally constituted family,
two serious consequences have been produced: (1) it has been asked if,
instead of considering the family as an application of moral theories, it
would not be more exact to say that it is the base of these theories; (2) it
seems that the Church, having become incompetent on matters connected
with sexual union, must also be incompetent as regards morality. These arect to say that it is the base of these theories; (2) it
seems that the Church, having become incompetent on matters connected
with sexual union, must also be incompetent as regards morality. These are

--- PAGE BREAK ---the base of these theories; (2) it
seems that the Church, having become incompetent on matters connected
with sexual union, must also be incompetent as regards morality. These are

--- PAGE BREAK ---

precisely the conclusions to which Proudhon came. “Sexual duality was
created by Nature to be the instrument of Justice. . . . To produce Justice is
the higher aim of the bisexual division; generation, and what follows from
it, only figure here as accessory.”369 “Marriage, both in principle and in
purpose, being the instrument of human right, and the living negation of the
divine right, is thus in formal contradiction with theology and the
Church.“370
Love, by the enthusiasm it begets, can produce that sublimity without
which there would be no effective morality. At the end of his book on
Justice, Proudhon has written pages, which will never be surpassed, on the
role of women.
C. Finally we have to examine the values which escape Nietzsche’s
classification and which treat of civil relations. Originally magic was much
mixed up in the evaluation of these values; among the Jews, until recent
times, one finds a mixture of hygienic principles, rules about sexual
relationships, precepts about honesty, benevolence and national solidarity,
the whole wrapped up in magical superstitions; this mixture, which seems
strange to the philosopher, had the happiest influence on their morality so
long as they maintained their traditional mode of living, and one notices
among them even now a particular exactitude in the carrying out of
contracts.
The ideas held by modern ethical writers are drawn mainly from those of
Greece in its time of decadence; Aristotle, living in a period of transition,
combined ancient values with values that, as time went on, were to prevail;
war and production had ceased to occupy the attention of the most
distinguished men of the towns, who sought, on the contrary, to secure an
easy existence for themselves; the most important things was the
establishment of friendly relations between the better educated men of the
community, and the fundamental maxim was that of the golden mean. The
new morality was to be acquired principally by means of the habits which
the young Greek would pick up in mixing with cultivated people. It may be
said that here we are on the level of an ethic adapted to consumers; it is not
astonishing then that Catholic theologians still find Aristotle’s ethics an
excellent one, for they themselves take the consumer’s point of view.the level of an ethic adapted to consumers; it is not
astonishing then that Catholic theologians still find Aristotle’s ethics an
excellent one, for they themselves take the consumer’s point of view.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ic adapted to consumers; it is not
astonishing then that Catholic theologians still find Aristotle’s ethics an
excellent one, for they themselves take the consumer’s point of view.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the civilisation of antiquity, the ethics of producers could hardly be
any other than that of slave-owners, and it did not seem worth developing at
length, at the time when philosophy made an inventory of Greek customs.
Aristotle said that no far-reaching science was needed to employ slaves:
“For the master need only know how to order what the slaves must, know
how to execute. So, as soon as a man can save himself this trouble, he
leaves it in the charge of a steward, so as to be himself free for a political or
philosophical life.“371 A little farther on he wrote: ”It is manifest, then, that
the master ought to be the source of excellence in the slave; but not merely
because he possesses the art which trains him in his duties.“372 This clearly
expresses the point of view of the urban consumer, who finds it very
tiresome to be obliged to pay any attention whatever to the conditions of
production.373
As to the slave, he needs very limited virtues. “He only needs enough to
prevent him neglecting his work through intemperance or idleness.” He
should be treated with “more indulgence even than children,” although
certain people consider that slaves are deprived of reason and are only fit to
receive orders.374
It is quite easy to see that during a considerable period the moderns also
did not think that there was anything more to be said about workers than
Aristotle had said; they must be given orders, corrected with gentleness,
like children, and treated as passive instruments who do not need to think.
Revolutionary Syndicalism would be impossible if the world of the workers
were under the influence of such a morality of the weak. State Socialism, on
the contrary, could accommodate itself to this morality perfectly well, since
the latter is based on the idea of a society divided into a class of producers
and a class of thinkers applying results of scientific investigation to the
work of production. The only difference which would exist between this
sham Socialism and Capitalism would consist in the employment of more
ingenious methods of procuring discipline in the workshop.
At the present moment, officials of the Bloc are working to create a kind
of ethical discipline which will replace the hazy religion which G. de
Molinari thinks necessary to the successful working of capitalism. It is
perfectly clear, in fact, that religion is daily losing its efficacy with thewhich will replace the hazy religion which G. de
Molinari thinks necessary to the successful working of capitalism. It is
perfectly clear, in fact, that religion is daily losing its efficacy with the

--- PAGE BREAK ---the hazy religion which G. de
Molinari thinks necessary to the successful working of capitalism. It is
perfectly clear, in fact, that religion is daily losing its efficacy with the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

people; something else must be found, if the intellectuals are to be provided
with the means of living on the margin of production.
I9
The problem that we shall now try to solve is the most difficult of all
those which a Socialist writer can touch upon. We are about to ask how it is
possible to conceive the transformation of the men of to-day into the free
producers of tomorrow working in manufactories where there are no
masters. The question must be stated accurately; we must state it, not for a
world which has already arrived at Socialism, but solely for our own time
and for the preparation of the transition from one world to the other; if we
do not limit the question in this way, we shall find ourselves straying into
Utopias.
Kautsky has given a great deal of attention to the question of the
conditions immediately following a social revolution; the solution he
proposes seems to me quite as feeble as that of G. de Molinari. If the
syndicates of to-day are strong enough to induce the workmen of to-day to
abandon their workshops and to submit to great sacrifices, during the strikes
kept up against the capitalists, he thinks that they will then doubtless be
strong enough to bring the workmen back to the workshops, and to obtain
good and regular work from them, when once they see that this work is
necessary for the general good.375 Kautsky, however, does not seem to feel
much confidence in the value of his own solution.
Evidently no comparison can be made between the kind of discipline
which forces a general stoppage of work on the men and that which will
induce them to handle machinery with greater skill. The error springs from
the fact that Kautsky is more of a theorist than he is a disciple of Marx; he
loves reasoning about abstractions and believes that he has brought a
question nearer to solution when he manages to produce a phrase with a
scientific appearance; the underlying reality interests him less than its
academic presentment. Many others have committed the same error, led
astray by the different meanings of the word discipline, which may be
applied both to regular conduct founded on the deepest feelings of the soul
or to a merely external restraint.the same error, led
astray by the different meanings of the word discipline, which may be
applied both to regular conduct founded on the deepest feelings of the soul
or to a merely external restraint.

--- PAGE BREAK ---astray by the different meanings of the word discipline, which may be
applied both to regular conduct founded on the deepest feelings of the soul
or to a merely external restraint.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The history of ancient corporations furnishes us with no really useful
information on this subject; they do not seem to have had any effect
whatever in promoting any kind of improvement, or invention in technical
matters; it would seem rather that they served to protect routine. If we
examine English Trade Unionism closely, we find that it also is strongly
imbued with this industrial routine springing from the corporative spirit.
Nor can the examples of democracy throw any light on the question.
Work conducted democratically would be regulated by resolutions,
inspected by police, and subject to the sanction of tribunals dealing out
rewards or imprisonment. The discipline would be an exterior compulsion
closely analogous to that which now exists in the capitalist workshops; but
it would probably be still more arbitrary because the committee would
always have their eye on the next elections.376 When one thinks of the
peculiarities found in judgments in penal cases one feels convinced that
repression would be exercised in a very unsatisfactory way. It seems to be
generally agreed that light offences cannot be satisfactorily dealt with in
law courts, when hampered by the rules of a strict legal system; the
establishment of administrative councils to decide on the future of children
has often been suggested; in Belgium mendicity is subject to an
administrative arbitration which may be compared to the “police des
mœurs”; it is well known that this police, in spite of innumerable
complaints, continues to be almost supreme in France. It is very noticeable
that administrative intervention in the case of important crimes is
continually increasing. Since the power of mitigating or even of suppressing
penalties is being more and more handed over to the heads of penal
establishments, doctors and sociologists speak in favour of this system,
which tends to give the police as important a function as they had under the
ancien régime. Experience shows that the discipline of the capitalist
workshops is greatly superior to that maintained by the police, so that one
does not see how it would be possible to improve capitalist discipline by
means of the methods which democracy would have at its disposal.377
I think that there is one good point, however, in Kautsky’s hypothesis; he
seems to have been aware that the motive force of the revolutionary
movement must also be the motive force of the ethic of the producers; thate is one good point, however, in Kautsky’s hypothesis; he
seems to have been aware that the motive force of the revolutionary
movement must also be the motive force of the ethic of the producers; that

--- PAGE BREAK ---however, in Kautsky’s hypothesis; he
seems to have been aware that the motive force of the revolutionary
movement must also be the motive force of the ethic of the producers; that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

is a view quite in conformity with Marxist principles, but the idea must be
applied in quite a different way from that in which he applied it. It must not
be thought that the action of the syndicates on work is direct, as he
supposes; this influence of the syndicates on labour should result from
complex and sometimes distant causes, acting on the general character of
the workers rather than from a quasi-military organisation. This is what I try
to show by analysing some of the qualities of the best workmen.
A satisfactory result can be arrived at, by starting from the curious
analogies which exist between the most remarkable qualities of the soldiers
who took part in the wars of Liberty, the qualities which engendered the
propaganda in favour of the general strike, and those that will be required of
a free worker in a highly progressive state of society. I believe that these
analogies constitute a new (and perhaps decisive) proof, in favour of
revolutionary syndicalism.
In the wars of Liberty each soldier considered himself as an individual
having something of importance to do in the battle, instead of looking upon
himself as simply one part of the military mechanism committed to the
supreme direction of a leader. In the literature of those times one is struck
by the frequency with which the free men of the republican armies are
contrasted with the automatons of the royal armies; this was no mere figure
of rhetoric employed by the French writers; I have convinced myself as a
result of a thorough first-hand study of one of the wars of that time, that
these terms corresponded perfectly to the actual feelings of the soldiers.
Battles under these conditions could, then, no longer be likened to games
of chess in which each man is comparable to a pawn; they became
collections of heroic exploits accomplished by individuals under the
influence of an extraordinary enthusiasm. Revolutionary literature is not
entirely false, when it reports so many grandiloquent phrases said to have
been uttered by the combatants; doubtless none of these phrases were
spoken by the people to whom they are attributed, their form is due to men
of letters used to the composition of classical declamation; but the basis is
real in this sense, that we have, thanks to these lies of revolutionary
rhetoric, a perfectly exact representation of the aspect under which the
combatants looked on war, a true expression of the sentiments aroused by it,hat we have, thanks to these lies of revolutionary
rhetoric, a perfectly exact representation of the aspect under which the
combatants looked on war, a true expression of the sentiments aroused by it,

--- PAGE BREAK ---to these lies of revolutionary
rhetoric, a perfectly exact representation of the aspect under which the
combatants looked on war, a true expression of the sentiments aroused by it,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and the actual accent of the truly Homeric conflicts which took place at that
time. I am certain that none of the actors in these dramas ever protested
against the words attributed to them; this was no doubt because each found
beneath these fantastic phrases, a true expression of his own deepest
feelings.378
Until the moment when Napoleon appeared the war had none of the
scientific character which the later theoretists of strategy have sometimes
thought it incumbent on them to attribute to it. Misled by the analogies they
discovered between the triumphs of the revolutionary armies and those of
the Napoleonic armies, historians imagined that generals anterior to
Napoleon had made great plans of campaign; such plans never existed, or at
any rate had very little influence on the course of operations. The best
officers of that time were fully aware that their talent consisted in furnishing
their troops with the suitable opportunities of exhibiting their ardour; and
victory was assured each time that the soldiers could give free scope to all
their enthusiasm, unfettered by bad commissariat, or by the stupidity of
representatives of the people who looked upon themselves as strategists. On
the battlefield the leaders gave an example of daring courage and were
merely the first combatants, like true Homeric kings; it is this which
explains the enormous prestige with the young troops, immediately gained
by so many of the non-commissioned officers of the ancien régime, who
were borne to the highest rank by the unanimous acclamations of the
soldiers at the outset of the war.
If we wished to find, in these first armies, what it was that took the place
of the later idea of discipline, we might say that the soldier was convinced
that the slightest failure of the most insignificant private might compromise
the success of the whole and the life of all his comrades, and that the soldier
acted accordingly. This presupposes that no account is taken of the relative
values of the different factors that go to make up a victory, so that all things
are considered from a qualitative and individualistic point of view. One is,
in fact, extremely struck by the individualistic characters which are met
with in these armies, and by the fact that nothing is to be found in them
which at all resembles the obedience spoken of by our contemporary
authors. There is some truth then in the statement that the incredible French
victories were due to intelligent bayonets.und in them
which at all resembles the obedience spoken of by our contemporary
authors. There is some truth then in the statement that the incredible French
victories were due to intelligent bayonets.

--- PAGE BREAK ---all resembles the obedience spoken of by our contemporary
authors. There is some truth then in the statement that the incredible French
victories were due to intelligent bayonets.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The same spirit is found in the working-class groups who are eager for
the general strike; these groups, in fact, picture the Revolution as an
immense uprising which yet may be called individualistic; each working
with the greatest possible zeal, each acting on his own account, and not
troubling himself much to subordinate his conduct to a great and
scientifically combined plan. This character of the proletarian general strike
has often been pointed out, and it has the effect of frightening the greedy
politicians, who understand perfectly well that a Revolution conducted in
this way would do away with all their chances of seizing the Government.
Jaurès, whom nobody would dream of classing with any but the most
circumspect of men, has clearly recognised the danger which threatens him;
he accuses the upholders of the general strike of considering only one
aspect of social life and thus going against the Revolution.379 This
rigmarole should be translated thus: the revolutionary Syndicalists desire to
exalt the individuality of the life of the producer; they thus run counter to
the interests of the politicians who want to direct the Revolution in such a
way as to transmit power to a new minority; they thus undermine the
foundations of the State. We entirely agree with all this; it is precisely this
characteristic which so terrifies the Parliamentary Socialists, the financiers,
and the ideologists, which gives such extraordinary moral value to the
notion of the general strike.
The upholders of the general strike are accused of anarchical tendencies;
and as a matter of fact, it has been observed during the last few years that
anarchists have entered the syndicates in great numbers, and have done a
great deal to develop tendencies favourable to the general strike.
This movement becomes understandable when we bear the preceding
explanations in mind; because the general strike, just like the wars of
Liberty, is a most striking manifestation of individualistic force in the
revolted masses. It seems to me, moreover, that the official Socialists would
do well not to insist too much on this point; they would thus avoid some
reflections which are not altogether to their advantage. We might, in fact, be
led to ask if our official Socialists, with their passion for discipline, and
their infinite confidence in the genius of their leaders, are not the authentic
inheritors of the traditions of the royal armies, while the anarchists and thes, with their passion for discipline, and
their infinite confidence in the genius of their leaders, are not the authentic
inheritors of the traditions of the royal armies, while the anarchists and the

--- PAGE BREAK ---n for discipline, and
their infinite confidence in the genius of their leaders, are not the authentic
inheritors of the traditions of the royal armies, while the anarchists and the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

upholders of the general strike represent at the present time the spirit of the
revolutionary warriors who, against all the rules of the art of war, so
thoroughly thrashed the fine armies of the coalition. I can understand why
the Socialists approved, controlled, and duly patented by the administrators
of Humanité, have not much sympathy for the heroes of Fleurus,380 who
were very badly dressed, and would have cut a sorry figure in the drawing-
rooms of the great financiers; but everybody does not adapt his convictions
to suit the tastes of M. Jaurès’s shareholders.
9
I want now to point out some analogies which show how revolutionary
syndicalism is the greatest educative force that contemporary society has at
its disposal for the preparation of the system of production, which the
workmen will adopt, in a society organised in accordance with the new
conceptions.
A. The free producer in a progressive and inventive workshop must never
evaluate his own efforts by any external standing; he ought to consider the
models given him as inferior, and desire to surpass everything that has been
done before. Constant improvement in quality and quantity will be thus
assured to production; the idea of continual progress will be realised in a
workshop of this kind.
Early Socialists had had an intuition of this law when they demanded that
each should produce according to his faculties; but they did not know how
to explain this principle, which in their Utopias seemed made for a convent
or for a family rather than for modern industrial life. Sometimes, however,
they pictured their workers as possessed by an enthusiasm similar to that
which we find in the lives of certain great artists; this last point of view is
by no means negligible, although the early Socialists hardly understand the
value of the comparison.
Whenever we consider questions relative to industrial progress, we are
led to consider art as an anticipation of the highest and technically most
perfect forms of production, although the artist, with his caprices, often
seems to be at the antipodes of the modern worker.381 This analogy is
justified by the fact that the artist dislikes reproducing accepted types; thetion, although the artist, with his caprices, often
seems to be at the antipodes of the modern worker.381 This analogy is
justified by the fact that the artist dislikes reproducing accepted types; the

--- PAGE BREAK ---rtist, with his caprices, often
seems to be at the antipodes of the modern worker.381 This analogy is
justified by the fact that the artist dislikes reproducing accepted types; the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

inexhaustibly inventive turn of his mind distinguishes him from the
ordinary artisan, who is mainly successful in the unending reproduction of
models which are not his own. The inventor is an artist who wears himself
out in pursuing the realisation of ends which practical people generally
declare absurd; and who, if he has made any important discovery is often
supposed to be mad; practical people thus resemble artisans. One could cite
in every industry important improvements which originated in small
changes made by workmen endowed with the artist’s taste for innovation.
This state of mind is, moreover, exactly that which was found in the first
armies which carried on the wars of Liberty and that possessed by the
propagandists of the general strike. This passionate individualism is entirely
wanting in the working classes who have been educated by politicians; all
they are fit for is to change their masters. These bad shepherds382 sincerely
hope that it will be so; and the Stock Exchange people would not provide
them with money, were they not convinced that Parliamentary Socialism is
quite compatible with financial robbery.
B. Modern industry is characterised by an evergrowing care for
exactitude; as tools get more scientific it is expected that the product shall
have fewer hidden faults, and that in use its quality shall be as good as its
appearance.
If Germany has not yet taken the place in the economic world which the
mineral riches of its soil, the energy of its manufacturers and the science of
its technicians ought to give it, it is because its manufacturers for a long
time thought it clever to flood the markets with trash; although the quality
of German manufacturers has much improved during the last few years, it is
not yet held in any very great esteem.
Here again it is possible to draw a comparison between industry in a high
state of perfection and art. There have been periods in which the public
appreciated above all the technical tricks by which the artist created an
illusion of reality; but these tricks have never been accepted in the great
schools, and they are universally condemned by the authors who are
accepted as authorities in matters of art.383created an
illusion of reality; but these tricks have never been accepted in the great
schools, and they are universally condemned by the authors who are
accepted as authorities in matters of art.383

--- PAGE BREAK ---of reality; but these tricks have never been accepted in the great
schools, and they are universally condemned by the authors who are
accepted as authorities in matters of art.383

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This honesty which now seems to us to-day as necessary in industry as in
art, was hardly suspected by the Utopists;384 Fourier, at the beginning of the
new era, believed that fraud in the quality of merchandise was characteristic
of the relations between civilised people; he turned his back on progress
and showed himself incapable of understanding the world which was being
formed about him; like nearly all professional prophets this sham seer
confused the future with the past. Marx, on the contrary, said that
“deception in merchandise in the capitalist system of production is unjust,”
because it no longer corresponds with the modern system of business.385
The soldier of the wars of Liberty attached an almost superstitious
importance to the carrying out of the smallest order. As a result of this he
felt no pity for the generals or officers whom he saw guillotined after a
defeat on the charge of dereliction of duty; he did not look at these events as
the historians of to-day do; he had no means of knowing whether the
condemned had really committed treason or not; in his eyes failure could
only be explained by some grave error on the part of his leaders. The high
sense of responsibility felt by the soldier about his own duties, and the
extreme thoroughness with which he carried out the most insignificant
order, made him approve of rigorous measures taken against men who in his
eyes had brought about the defeat of the army and caused it to lose the fruit
of so much heroism.
It is not difficult to see that the same spirit is met with in strikes; the
beaten workmen are convinced that their failure is due to the base conduct
of a few comrades who have not done all that might have been expected of
them; numerous accusations of treason are brought forward; for the beaten
masses, treason alone can explain the defeat of heroic troops; the sentiment,
felt by all, of the thoroughness that must be brought to the accomplishment
of their duties, will therefore be accompanied by many acts of violence. I do
not think that the authors who have written on the events which follow
strikes, have sufficiently reflected on this analogy between strikes and the
wars of Liberty, and, consequently, between these acts of violence and the
executions of generals accused of treason.386
C. There would never have been greats of heroism in war, if each soldier,
while acting like a hero, yet at the same time claimed to receive a rewardd the
executions of generals accused of treason.386
C. There would never have been greats of heroism in war, if each soldier,
while acting like a hero, yet at the same time claimed to receive a reward

--- PAGE BREAK ---generals accused of treason.386
C. There would never have been greats of heroism in war, if each soldier,
while acting like a hero, yet at the same time claimed to receive a reward

--- PAGE BREAK ---

proportionate to his deserts. When a column is sent to an assault, the men at
the head know they are sent to their death, and that the glory of victory will
be for those who passing over their dead bodies enter the enemy’s position.
However, they do not reflect on this injustice, but march forward.
The value of any army where the need of rewards makes itself actively
felt, may be said to be on the decline. Officers who had served in the
campaigns of the Revolution and of the Empire, but who had served under
the direct orders of Napoleon only in the last years of their career, were
amazed to see the fuss made about feats of arms which in the time of their
youth would have passed unnoticed: “I have been overwhelmed with
praise,” said General Duhesne, “for things which would not have been
noticed in the army of Sambre-et-Meuse.”387 This theatricality was carried
by Murat to a grotesque degree, and historians have not taken enough notice
of the responsibility of Napoleon for this degeneracy of the true warlike
spirit. The extraordinary enthusiasm which had been the cause of so many
prodigies of valour on the part of the men of 1794 was unknown to him; he
believed that it was his function to measure all capacities, and to give to
each a reward exactly proportionate to what he had accomplished; this was
the Saint-Simonian principle already coming into practice, and every officer
was encouraged to bring himself forward. Charlatanism 388 exhausted the
moral forces of the nation whilst its material forces were still very
considerable. Napoleon formed very few distinguished general officers and
carried on the war principally with those left him by the Revolution; this
impotence is the most absolute condemnation of the system.389
The scarcity of the information which we possess about the great Gothic
artists has often been pointed out. Among the stone-carvers who sculptured
the statues in the cathedrals there were men of great talent who seem always
to have remained anonymous; nevertheless they produced masterpieces.
Viollet-le-Duc was surprised that the archives of Notre Dame had preserved
for us no detailed information about the building of this gigantic monument
and that, as a rule, the documents of the Middle Ages say very little about
the architects; he adds that “genius can develop itself in obscurity, and that
it is its very nature to seek silence and obscurity.”390 We might even go
farther and question whether their contemporaries suspected that thesethat “genius can develop itself in obscurity, and that
it is its very nature to seek silence and obscurity.”390 We might even go
farther and question whether their contemporaries suspected that these

--- PAGE BREAK ---velop itself in obscurity, and that
it is its very nature to seek silence and obscurity.”390 We might even go
farther and question whether their contemporaries suspected that these

--- PAGE BREAK ---

artists of genius had raised edifices of unperishable glory; it seems very
probable to me that the cathedrals were only admired by the artists.
This striving towards perfection which manifests itself, in spite of the
absence of any personal, immediate, and proportional reward, constitutes
the secret virtue which assures the continued progress of the world. What
would become of modern industry if inventors could only be found for
those things which would procure them an almost certain remuneration?
The calling of an inventor is much the most desirable of all, and yet there is
no lack of inventors. How often in workshops have little modifications
introduced by ingenious artisans into their work, become by accumulation
fundamental improvements, without the innovators ever getting any
permanent or appreciable benefit from their ingenuity! And has not even
simple piece-work brought about a gradual but uninterrupted progress in the
processes of production, a progress which, after having temporarily
improved the position of a few workers and especially that of their
employers, has proved finally of benefit chiefly to the consumer?
Renan asked what was it that moved the heroes of great wars. “The
soldier of Napoleon was well aware that he would always be a poor man,
but he felt that the epic in which he was taking part would be eternal, that
he would live in the glory of France.” The Greeks had fought for glory; the
Russians and the Turks seek death because they expect a chimerical
paradise. “A soldier is not made by promises of temporal rewards. He must
have immortality. In default of paradise, there is glory, which is itself a kind
of immortality.”391
Economic progress goes far beyond the individual life, and profits future
generations more than those who create it; but does it give glory? Is there
an economic epic capable of stimulating the enthusiasm of the workers. The
inspiration of immortality which Renan considered so powerful is obviously
without efficacy here, because artists have never produced masterpieces
under the influence of the idea that their work would procure them a place
in paradise (as Turks seek death that they may enjoy the happiness
promised by Mahomet). The workmen are not entirely wrong when they
look on religion as a middle-class luxury, since, as a matter of fact, theise (as Turks seek death that they may enjoy the happiness
promised by Mahomet). The workmen are not entirely wrong when they
look on religion as a middle-class luxury, since, as a matter of fact, the

--- PAGE BREAK ---eath that they may enjoy the happiness
promised by Mahomet). The workmen are not entirely wrong when they
look on religion as a middle-class luxury, since, as a matter of fact, the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

emotions it calls up are not those which inspire workmen with the desire to
perfect machinery, or which create methods of accelerating labour.
The question must be stated otherwise than Renan put it; do there exist
among the workmen forces capable of producing enthusiasm equivalent to
those of which Renan speaks, forces which could combine with the ethics
of good work, so that in our days, which seem to many people to presage
the darkest future, this ethic may acquire all the authority necessary to lead
society along the path of economic progress.
We must be careful that the keen sentiment which we have of the
necessity of such a morality, and our ardent desire to see it realised does not
induce us to mistake phantoms for forces capable of moving the world. The
abundant “idyllic” literature of the professors of rhetoric is evidently mere
chatter. Equally vain are the attempts made by so many scholars to find
institutions in the past, an imitation of which might serve as a means of
disciplining their contemporaries; imitation has never produced much good
and often bred much sorrow; how absurd the idea is then of borrowing from
some dead and gone social structure, a suitable means of controlling a
system of production, whose principal characteristic is that every day it
must become more and more opposed to all preceding economic systems. Is
there then nothing to hope for?
Morality is not doomed to perish because the motive forces behind it will
change; it is not destined to become a mere collection of precepts as long as
it can still vivify itself by an alliance with an enthusiasm capable of
conquering all the obstacles, prejudices, and the need of immediate
enjoyment, which oppose its progress. But it is certain that this sovereign
force will not be found along the paths which contemporary philosophers,
the experts of social science, and the inventors of far-reaching reforms
would make us go. There is only one force which can produce to-day that
enthusiasm without whose co-operation no morality is possible, and that is
the force resulting from the propaganda in favour of a general strike. The
preceding explanations have shown that the idea of the general strike
(constantly rejuvenated by the feelings roused by proletarian violence)
produces an entirely epic state of mind, and at the same time bends all the
energies of the mind to that condition necessary to the realisation of ated by the feelings roused by proletarian violence)
produces an entirely epic state of mind, and at the same time bends all the
energies of the mind to that condition necessary to the realisation of a

--- PAGE BREAK ---roused by proletarian violence)
produces an entirely epic state of mind, and at the same time bends all the
energies of the mind to that condition necessary to the realisation of a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

workshop carried on by free men, eagerly seeking the betterment of the
industry; we have thus recognised that there are great resemblances
between the sentiments aroused by the idea of the general strike and those
which are necessary to bring about a continued progress in methods of
production. We have then the right to maintain that the modern world
possesses that prime mover which is necessary to the creation of the ethics
of the producers.
I stop here, because it seems to me that I have accomplished the task
which I imposed upon myself; I have, in fact, established that proletarian
violence has an entirely different significance from that attributed to it by
superficial scholars and by politicians. In the total ruin of institutions and of
morals there remains something which is powerful, new, and intact, and it is
that which constitutes, properly speaking, the soul of the revolutionary
proletariat. Nor will this be swept away in the general decadence of moral
values, if the workers have enough energy to bar the road to the middle-
class corrupters, answering their advances with the plainest brutality.
I believe that I have brought an important contribution to discussions on
Socialism; these discussions must henceforth deal exclusively with the
conditions which allow the development of specifically proletarian forces,
that is to say, with violence enlightened by the idea of the general strike. All
the old abstract dissertations on the Socialist régime of the future become
useless; we pass to the domain of real history, to the interpretation of facts
—to the ethical evaluations of the revolutionary movement.
The bond which I pointed out in the beginning of this inquiry between
Socialism and proletarian violence appears to us now in all its strength. It is
to violence that Socialism owes those high ethical values by means of
which it brings salvation to the modern world.een
Socialism and proletarian violence appears to us now in all its strength. It is
to violence that Socialism owes those high ethical values by means of
which it brings salvation to the modern world.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ASSendi[
8nit\ and 0ultiSlicit\
I. Biological concepts which support the idea of unity; their
origin.
II. Ancient unity and its exceptions. Christian mysticism. The
rights of man; their consequences and their criticism. Utility of
the historic conception of man.
III. The ecclesiastical monarchy. Harmony of powers.
Abandonment of the theory of harmony; idea of absoluteness
better understood today.
IV. Current preference of Catholics for accommodation.
Indifference of the state. Current conflicts.
V. Contemporary experiments provided by the church:
parliamentarism; selection of fighting groups; multiplicity of
forms.
I
THIS NEW edition of the Réflexions sur la violence is a reprint of the one
which appeared in 1908; I have thought it necessary to add this chapter to it
in order to show how mistaken people are who believe they raise an
irrefutable argument against the doctrines based on the class struggle by
saying that, according to the evidence of common sense, the conception of
society is permeated throughout with the idea of unity.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ainst the doctrines based on the class struggle by
saying that, according to the evidence of common sense, the conception of
society is permeated throughout with the idea of unity.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

That in many circumstances the unity of society must be taken into very
serious consideration, especially those circumstances which are most
related to acting on the every day constructions of the mind which we
attribute to common sense, is something no reasonable person will dream of
challenging. One may say, in effect, that social unity presses upon us from
all sides, so to speak, in the ordinary course of life; because we feel, almost
always, the operation of the effects of hierarchical authority which imposes
uniform rules on citizens of the same country. It must not be forgotten, on
the other hand, that if common sense is perfectly adapted to the
requirements of ordinary relations, it almost always omits the most serious
events in life, those in which the value of profound intentions makes itself
evident; it must not, therefore, be regarded as certain that the idea of unity
thrusts itself into every social philosophy.
Certain widely current language habits of today have contributed more
than all the arguments to popularizing the prejudices in favor of unity. It has
been found convenient very often to employ formulas in which human
organizations are likened to the higher order of organisms; the sociologists
took considerable advantage of these ways of speaking, which permitted
them to give the impression that they possessed a very substantial science
based on biology; since the naturalists made many resounding discoveries
during the nineteenth century, sociology profited from the prestige which
natural history acquired. Such socio-biological analogies present the idea of
unity with singular insistence; one cannot, indeed, study the higher animals
without being struck by the extreme state of dependence of the parts in
relation to the whole living body. This connection is so much closer than
many scholars believed for a long time, that it would be impossible to apply
to physiology the methods which were so successful in physics; the natural
unity, they thought, would be impaired by the mechanism of
experimentation, so that one would only see a sick person like those
destroyed by neoplasms.393
It is not necessary to be a very profound philosopher to perceive that
language deceives us constantly as to the true nature of the relationships
which exist between things. Quite often before venturing upon a dogmatic
criticism of a system, there would be a very real advantage in finding out
the origin of the images which are frequently encountered in it. In thethings. Quite often before venturing upon a dogmatic
criticism of a system, there would be a very real advantage in finding out
the origin of the images which are frequently encountered in it. In the

--- PAGE BREAK ---before venturing upon a dogmatic
criticism of a system, there would be a very real advantage in finding out
the origin of the images which are frequently encountered in it. In the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

present case, it is evident that the socio-biological analogies indicate the
reverse of reality. Just read, for example, the famous book of Edmond
Perrier on the Colonies animales: This scholar manages to render rather
intelligible the mysterious phenomena that he wishes to describe, by
employing concepts borrowed from the so varied relationships that men
form among themselves; he, therefore, follows a very good method, for he
employs the relatively clearer areas of knowledge to make the organization
of the extremely obscure areas intelligible;394 but he does not suspect for an
instant the nature of the task he sets for himself. Taken in by the doctrine of
the sociologists who pretend to teach something more advanced than
biology, he thinks that investigation of the animal colonies are capable of
providing the basis for a social science destined, “to permit us to foresee the
future of our societies, to regulate their organization, and to justify the
contracts on which they are based.”395
After having utilized in order to obtain sound biological description, the
abundant evidence that human groups provide us, does one have the right to
transfer into social philosophy, as do the sociologists, formulas which had
been constructed by means of observations made on men, but which, in the
course of their adaptation to the requirements of natural history, evidently
have not escaped undergoing some modifications? In order to be suitably
applied to organisms, they have singularly distorted the notion of human
activity by disregarding what everyone regards as being the most noble
prerogatives of our nature.
When one compares the animal colonies, one may arrange them on a
ladder of evolution culminating in that perfect unity of all the partial
activities which is revealed in the normal psychology of man; one may say
of those which are least controlled by a directing center, that they already
possess potential unity; the different levels are distinguishable, one from the
other, only by the greater or less concentration which they present; for there
is, nowhere, any element irreducible to unification. On the other hand, it has
often been said that our Western societies, thanks to their Christian culture,
offer the spectacle of consciences which achieve a full moral life only on
condition that they understand the infinity of their value;396 such societies
are, therefore, irreconcilable with the unity which the animal coloniesonsciences which achieve a full moral life only on
condition that they understand the infinity of their value;396 such societies
are, therefore, irreconcilable with the unity which the animal colonies

--- PAGE BREAK ---ieve a full moral life only on
condition that they understand the infinity of their value;396 such societies
are, therefore, irreconcilable with the unity which the animal colonies

--- PAGE BREAK ---

reveal to us. By resetting in sociology the social concepts that biology has
devised for its own needs, one exposes oneself, therefore, to committing
grave contradictions.
II
Historians have often pointed out that the societies of antiquity were
much more unitary than ours.397 In reading in the second book of the
Politics the arguments that Aristotle opposes to the Platonic theories, one
becomes readily aware that the spirit of the Greek philosophers had been
generally dominated by the idea that the most absolute unity is the greatest
good that one may wish for a community;398 one is even led to doubt if
Aristotle would have dared present his anti-unitary conceptions with so
much assurance if, in his time, the communities had not been struck with an
irremediable decadence, so that the restoration of the old discipline must
have appeared singularly Utopian to his readers.
There have certainly existed, in all periods probably, anarchical elements
in the world: but these elements were confined to the frontiers of society,
which did not protect them the people came to understand their existence
only by assuming the existence of mysterious protectors who defended
these isolated groups against the dangers which threatened them; such
anomalies could not influence the minds of men who wanted to found the
science of politics in Greece by the observation of things which most
commonly occurred.
The mendicants, certain itinerant artists, and especially the singers, the
bandits, have provided the most significant isolated types; their adventures
were able to give birth to the legends which charmed the masses; this charm
arose especially from what these adventures contained of the unusual; the
unusual could not enter into the classical philosophy of the Greeks.
I really believe, however, that despite this rule Aristotle recalled the
Greek hero, who had occupied so eminent a place in the national traditions,
when he spoke of the destiny reserved for the man of genius. The latter may
not be subjected to the common laws; he could not be suppressed by death
or by exile; the Community has, therefore, no other recourse than that of
submitting to his authority. One must observe that these celebrateded to the common laws; he could not be suppressed by death
or by exile; the Community has, therefore, no other recourse than that of
submitting to his authority. One must observe that these celebrated

--- PAGE BREAK ---s; he could not be suppressed by death
or by exile; the Community has, therefore, no other recourse than that of
submitting to his authority. One must observe that these celebrated

--- PAGE BREAK ---

reflections occupy only a few lines in the Politics and, especially that
Aristotle seems to regard the hypothesis of the reappearance of such
demigods as extremely unlikely.399
The ascetics were called upon to have far more significance than the
other isolated individuals. The men who submit themselves to bodily
ordeals, sufficient to strike the imagination of the people with amazement,
are regarded throughout the Orient as being placed above the conditions
which limit human powers; as a consequence, they pass for being capable
of achieving in nature things as extraordinary as the tortures which they
impose on their flesh; the more extravagant their acts, therefore, the more
powerful the miracles. In India they easily become divine incarnations,
when the Brahmins find it advantageous to deify them, because of
numerous marvels being accomplished around their tombs.400
The Greeks had no taste for this kind of life; but they had been
influenced somewhat by Stoic literature which had modeled its most
peculiar paradoxes on pain in the practices of Oriental asceticism. Saint
Nilus, who in the Fifth century adapted the maxims of Epictetus to the
teachings of the spiritual life, did no more than recognize the true nature of
this doctrine.
Western Christianity profoundly transformed asceticism in its
monasteries; it brought forth this multitude of mystical persons, who,
instead of fleeing from the world, were devoured by the desire to spread
their reforming activities all around them and to whom the religious
experience gave superhuman strength. To universalize these gifts of grace,
until then almost exclusively reserved to monks, was the principal objective
of the Reformation: instead of saying, as one does ordinarily, that Luther
wanted to make a priest of every Christian, it would be more exact to say
that he ascribes to each of the convinced faithful some of the mystical
faculties which the spiritual life develops in the monasteries. The disciple of
Luther who reads the Bible in the frame of mind that his master calls faith,
believes he enters into regular relations with the Holy Spirit, very much like
the monks well on the road to mysticism believe they receive revelations
from Christ, from the Virgin, or from the saints.elieves he enters into regular relations with the Holy Spirit, very much like
the monks well on the road to mysticism believe they receive revelations
from Christ, from the Virgin, or from the saints.

--- PAGE BREAK ---to regular relations with the Holy Spirit, very much like
the monks well on the road to mysticism believe they receive revelations
from Christ, from the Virgin, or from the saints.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This postulate of the Reformation is manifestly false; it is not easy for
men drawn along by all the currents of everyday life to undergo this
experience of the Holy Spirit which Luther, as an ecstatic monk, found very
simple. For the majority of present day Protestants, the reading of the Bible
is only an edifying study; ascertaining, therefore, that they do not receive, in
the presence of the sacred texts, the supernatural light that had been
promised them, they question the teaching of their pastors: some go as far
as complete unbelief, while others are converted to Catholicism, because
they wish, at any price, to remain Christians. By not relating the mystical
faculties to the conditions of an exceptional life which could sustain them,
the theoreticians of the Reformation committed a very gross error which
must, at length, lead to the bankruptcy of their churches; we shall here only
concern ourselves with the consequences which this error has had for
philosophy.
It has often been observed that there have, almost always, existed two
divergent tendencies in the work of human reflection; one may distinguish
them, for want of better terms, by names borrowed from the history of the
Middle Ages and say that thinkers may be divided into scholastics and into
mystics.
The writers of the first group believe that our intelligence, taking the
evidence of the senses as the point of departure, may discover how things
really are, express the relations which exist between essences, in a language
which is evident to every reasonable man, and thus arrive at a knowledge of
the external world. The others are preoccupied with personal convictions;
they have an absolute confidence in the decisions of their conscience; they
wish to have their way of conceiving the world shared by those who will
listen to them; but they have no scientific proof to support them. The most
important objective one might recommend to philosophy would be to
distinguish between these two tendencies; it does not seem that this
undertaking would be too difficult; the frequently enormous obscurities
which the doctrine of Kant presents arise from the fact that these two
tendencies are confounded in it in a particularly complicated manner.
Catholic writers reproach Kant unceasingly for having taught a subjectivism
which may easily lead to skepticism; he did not think he deserved such
criticism, accustomed as he was to admitting that religious experiencereproach Kant unceasingly for having taught a subjectivism
which may easily lead to skepticism; he did not think he deserved such
criticism, accustomed as he was to admitting that religious experience

--- PAGE BREAK ---ingly for having taught a subjectivism
which may easily lead to skepticism; he did not think he deserved such
criticism, accustomed as he was to admitting that religious experience

--- PAGE BREAK ---

provides us with all the expression of truth compatible with our human
frailty.401
The errors of Kant must make us lenient with men who did not have his
philosophical genius, and who derived such highly defective political
theories from mysticism debased and vulgarized by Protestantism.
Protestantism was to lead people ignorant of every historical consideration
to a strange hypothesis: they supposed that, in order to arrive at the prime
social principles, it was necessary for them to imagine that they had
consciences like that of the monk who lives constantly in the presence of
God. Such a hypothesis which severs all connection between the citizen and
the economic, familial, or political bases of life, has been introduced into
juridical constructions whose importance has been enormous.
It is easily understood why the earliest American societies regulated their
public law in accordance with the paradoxical principles of the mystical;
their constitutions were to embody something of the monastic, since the
Puritans very markedly resembled monks intoxicated with the spiritual life;
their formulas were maintained in the United States, by virtue of the
continuing religious respect attached to the memory of these illustrious
ancestors. This literature came to be mixed in our country with that of
Rousseau; he had dreamed of a community inhabited by Swiss artisans and
based on an ahistoric man, in accordance with his impressions as a nomad.
The legislators of the Revolution, great admirers of Americans and of Jean
Jacques, believed they had devised a masterpiece by proclaiming the rights
of absolute man.
The jests made by Joseph de Maistre in 1796 à propos of the work of our
constituent assemblies have often been cited; they wanted to make laws,
“for man. But,” said he, “there is no man in the world. I have seen
Frenchmen, Italians, Russians, etc., but as for man, I declare that I have
never met him in my life; if he exists, it is without my knowledge. . . . A
constitution which is made for all nations, is made for none: it is a pure
abstraction, a work of scholasticism devised to exercise the mind according
to an ideal hypothesis and which must be addressed to man, in the
imaginary spaces where he lives. What is a constitution? Is it not the
solution of the following problem? Given the population, the religion, thehypothesis and which must be addressed to man, in the
imaginary spaces where he lives. What is a constitution? Is it not the
solution of the following problem? Given the population, the religion, the

--- PAGE BREAK ---h must be addressed to man, in the
imaginary spaces where he lives. What is a constitution? Is it not the
solution of the following problem? Given the population, the religion, the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

geographical situation, the political relations, the wealth, the good and bad
qualities of each nation, is it not to find the laws which are most suitable?
”402
The formulations of this excessively clever writer go on to say that
legislators must be of their country and of their time; it does not seem,
moerover, that the men of the Revolution had forgotten this verity as much
as Joseph de Maistre said; it has often been remarked that while they
proclaimed their intention to reason about an ahistoric man, they had, most
often, worked to satisfy the needs, the aspirations, or the rancor of the
contemporary middle classes; so many of the rules relating to civil law or
administration would not have survived the Revolution if their authors had
always navigated in imaginary space, in pursuit of absolute man.
What is especially worthy of being closely examined in the heritage
which they have left us, is the co-existence of a law formulated for real
people of that time and the ahistoric arguments. The history of modern
France permits us to determine with precision what disadvantages result
from the introduction in a juridical system of arguments of this type. The
principles of ’89 were regarded as forming the philosophical foundation of
our codes; professors believe themselves obliged to prove that these
principles may serve to substantiate the general rules of juridical science,
which they taught: they succeeded in this because by means of subtility the
mind may triumph over the most difficult undertakings; but some clever
writers placed, in opposition to these conservative sophisms, other
sophisms, either to establish the necessity for furthering the progress of law,
or even to establish the absurdity of the present social order.
At Rome something very similar took place when the jurists of the
Antonian period wanted to utilize Stoic philosophy in order to elucidate
their doctrines. This philosophy, derived from Oriental asceticism, could
only reason about a man alien to the conditions of actual life; there came
about, therefore, a dissolution of the ancient juridical order. Historians have
generally been so dazzled by the prestige possessed, in the tradition of the
schools, by the texts which the Pandects have preserved for us,403 that they
have not seen, ordinarily, the social consequences of this great work of
renovation. They have extolled the fine progress achieved by jurisprudence,ch the Pandects have preserved for us,403 that they
have not seen, ordinarily, the social consequences of this great work of
renovation. They have extolled the fine progress achieved by jurisprudence,

--- PAGE BREAK ---preserved for us,403 that they
have not seen, ordinarily, the social consequences of this great work of
renovation. They have extolled the fine progress achieved by jurisprudence,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

but they have not recognized that at the same time the respect that the
ancient Romans had had for law were disappearing.404 Similarly with us,
juridical progress405 engendered by the introduction of the principles of ’89
in our legislation, has certainly contributed to the debasement of the idea of
law.
In the course of the Nineteenth century, many dogmatic criticisms were
directed at the doctrine of the ahistoric man; it was demonstrated many
times that it was impossible, starting from laws suitable to this scholastic
being, to construct a society which resembles those we know. If the
theoreticians of democracy have believed that this undertaking was
possible, it is because they had,—without always being aware of the deceit
which they employed,—greatly limited the field to which this absolute man
may extend the action of his free will.
A philosophy based on postulates taken from the mystical life can pertain
only to isolated persons, or people who have left their isolation by joining a
group where exactly the same convictions as theirs prevail. In order to find
a true and normal application of the principles proclaimed by modern
democracy, one will, therefore, be led to study what happens in
monasteries; that is what Taine said in an excellent manner: “At the base of
this [religious] republic may be found the cornerstone devised by Rousseau
. . . a social contract, a pact proposed by the legislators and accepted by the
citizens; only, in the monastic pact the will of the acceptants is unanimous,
sincere, serious, deliberate, and permanent, and, in the political pact, it is
not so; thus, while the second contract is a theoretical fiction, the first
contract is an actual fact.”406
One would be tempted to conclude from this criticism that it is necessary
to abandon every consideration of the ahistoric man to the professors of
rhetoric; but such a conclusion would arouse protestations from the greatest
number of moralists; the latter are accustomed, for more than a century
already, to proposing a conception of absolute duty,407 which supposes,
evidently, that man may free himself from the ties which bind him to
historic conditions. On the other hand, many of the great things of history
were accomplished by the human masses who, during a more or less
lengthy period, were dominated by convictions similar to religious forces inns. On the other hand, many of the great things of history
were accomplished by the human masses who, during a more or less
lengthy period, were dominated by convictions similar to religious forces in

--- PAGE BREAK ---d, many of the great things of history
were accomplished by the human masses who, during a more or less
lengthy period, were dominated by convictions similar to religious forces in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that they are sufficiently absolute to make them forget many of the material
circumstances which are habitually taken into consideration in choosing the
direction to be taken. If one wishes to express this fact in a language
appropriate to the procedures which are called scientific, juridical, or
logical, it is necessary to formulate principles which will be considered as
having been those of ahistoric men, more or less thrust on the road of the
absolute. The abstract man is not, therefore, as Joseph de Maistre thought, a
useless person for philosophy; he constitutes an artifice of our
understanding,—many artifices are necessary in the effort whereby we
adapt reality in our intelligence.
The fundamental difference which exists between the methods of social
philosophy and those of physiology, now appears to us more clearly. The
latter can never consider the function of an organ without relating it to the
whole living being; one could say that this whole determines the type of
activity into which this element enters. Social philosophy is obliged, in
order to study the most significant phenomena of history, to proceed to a
diremption,408 to examine certain parts without taking into account all of
the ties which connect them to the whole, to determine in some manner the
character of their activity by isolating them. When it has thus arrived at the
most perfect understanding, it can no longer attempt to reconstitute the
broken unity.
We are going to apply these principles to the history of the Church and
their value can then be better appreciated.
III
It cannot be doubted that at the beginning of our era and, very probably,
immediately after the death of Jesus, the Christian communities, by taking
Oriental monarchies for models, organized themselves very firmly: their
heads were not, consequently, popular magistrates, as the Protestants have
written, but kings acting by virtue of a divine delegation.409 Thanks to this
theocratic administration, the Church was able to render the greatest
services to the faithful while the Roman state was beginning to
disintegrate;410 it assured them a more uniform justice than that of the
official tribunals; it bought the good will of the imperial police in order tofaithful while the Roman state was beginning to
disintegrate;410 it assured them a more uniform justice than that of the
official tribunals; it bought the good will of the imperial police in order to

--- PAGE BREAK ---Roman state was beginning to
disintegrate;410 it assured them a more uniform justice than that of the
official tribunals; it bought the good will of the imperial police in order to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

avoid bother;411 it supported bands of poor who might be of great help in
defending the peaceful bourgeoisie against the agitators of the cities.
The Empire, after the conversion of Constantine, ended by giving to
episcopal authority a prestige which permitted it to impose itself on the
German conquerors. For several centuries the Church protected in a very
effective manner some privileged groups in which was maintained a very
large part of the Roman tradition; our Western civilization owes
Catholicism much more than the conserving of classical literature; it owes it
what [our civilization] has retained of the Roman spirit; and we can realize
the immense value of this inheritance by comparing the peoples who have
shared it to the Orientals who have so much difficulty in understanding our
institutions.412
Ecclesiastical theoreticians have constructed their doctrines by idealizing
this glorious past of the Church; she is, according to them, the only
monarchy which can pretend to derive its authority directly from God; as
distinguished from the Protestant legists who defended the divine right of
kings, the Catholic theologians think that there is something popular in the
origins of temporal powers,413 which places him in an inferior position in
relation to the papacy. The Church could not, therefore, be controlled by
any sovereign; but, in practice, it is not in as independent circumstances as a
kingdom, because it does not have a territory distinct from that of the
States; it is inserted into civil societies; its adherents are citizens at the same
time. Two crowns may readily remain absolutely without relations, while
the Church cannot perform all that it considers to be necessary in order to
accomplish its mission, without encountering, at every instant, some of the
social relations on which secular law has, rather generally, formulated
regulations; it is, therefore, necessary that the State come to an
understanding with the Church or that it abstain from legislating on certain
matters.
Christianity has a tradition which prevents it from becoming a military
power, similar to the Moslem caliphate; that derives not only from the
doctrines of the very earliest Fathers,414 but also from a system of
government created by Theodosius which remained, “the eternal dream of
the Christian conscience, at least in the Roman countries”; Renan is correctvery earliest Fathers,414 but also from a system of
government created by Theodosius which remained, “the eternal dream of
the Christian conscience, at least in the Roman countries”; Renan is correct

--- PAGE BREAK ---rs,414 but also from a system of
government created by Theodosius which remained, “the eternal dream of
the Christian conscience, at least in the Roman countries”; Renan is correct

--- PAGE BREAK ---

in saying that the Christian empire has been, “the thing which the Church,
in its long life, has loved the most.”415 During the Middle Ages the papacy
attempted to carry out great undertakings which would have been easy with
the collaboration of a Theodosius and which presented unheard-of
difficulties by the use of forces accidentally grouped under its patronage;
the Crusades, the Inquisition, the Italian wars show very mediocre results
obtained by means of desperate efforts; this experience presented the best
evidence one could wish in favor of the Theodosian system.
The theologians arrive, consequently, neither at a unity nor a perfect
independence of the two powers; they dream of a harmony which does not
seem to them very difficult to obtain, because they put much greater trust in
reasonings which permits them to say what ought to exist than in the
observation of facts. Men would have some right, in the judgment of these
doctors, to accuse Providence of lacking wisdom if it did not normally
assure them the means of enjoying all the advantages which the Church and
State must procure; these advantages could only be obtained if perfect
harmony reigns between the two powers; one concludes from these
premises that harmony will exist whenever the true order of things, as
discovered by reasoning, is not troubled by abuses.
During the time which followed the Counter-Reformation and the
consolidation of the monarchies, this happy harmony had been regarded as
deriving naturally from the institutions. Monarchy was then the usual form
of government of civilised societies;416 harmony could not help producing
its benefits if the kings had, to the same degree as the heads of the Christian
hierarchy, a clear knowledge of the heavy responsibility which would weigh
on them in case of conflict. It was enough, they thought, that the men called
to educate the princes should apply themselves to instilling in them feelings
for the episcopacy similar to those which Theodosius had felt for Saint
Ambrose.
The history of the Church in the course of the Nineteenth century has not
been propitious to the doctrine of harmony; there have been, almost
constantly, many grave difficulties between the ecclesiastical authorities
and the governments which have taken office in France; the problems of the
present time have led to an examination of the past from a quite differentifficulties between the ecclesiastical authorities
and the governments which have taken office in France; the problems of the
present time have led to an examination of the past from a quite different

--- PAGE BREAK ---the ecclesiastical authorities
and the governments which have taken office in France; the problems of the
present time have led to an examination of the past from a quite different

--- PAGE BREAK ---

point of view from that taken by former theoreticians; it is now seen that in
all periods the conflicts occurred too frequently for them to be regarded as
abuses; it was more fitting to compare them with wars which broke out so
frequently between interdependent powers which disputed the hegemony of
a part of Europe.
The ecclesiastical authors, attributing capital importance to the education
of the princely consciences to secure the harmony, formerly ascribed the
conflicts to moral origins: the pride of the sovereigns, the cupidity of the
great, the mean, wicked, and at times impious jealousy of the legists. The
scholars of the Nineteenth century introduced the rule of explaining great
things only by great causes; they have, consequently, found the old
controversies of the casuist-historians ridiculous; the politico-ecclesiastical
struggles have been regarded as having been motivated by the same type of
reasons as those which permit an understanding of the great European wars.
The work done on the Middle Ages by the apologists of the papacy has
contributed a great deal to the confirmation of this interpretation. Wishing
to defend the popes against the people who had so frequently denounced
their insatiable ambition, many Catholics began to write the history of the
quarrels of the Priesthood and the Empire in a Guelf spirit. They maintained
that the sovereign pontifs had rendered immense services to civilization by
defending Italian liberties against German despotism. This entirely political
manner of presenting the greatest conflicts which have ever existed between
Church and State, leads to a comparison of the normal relations which exist
between the two powers, to those which exist between two independent
crowns.
The ancient doctrine of harmony has, then, become as chimerical in the
eyes of modern historians, as, perhaps, that of the United States of Europe;
these two conceptions are of the same type, having as an objective the
replacement of the fact of accidental peace by the theory of normal union.
After the drinks in the congresses of comedians, discourses are offered from
time to time on the United States of Europe; but no serious person occupies
himself with these games.
For quite some time lay authors have examined the assertions of papal
power formulated during the quarrels of the Priesthood and the Empirepe; but no serious person occupies
himself with these games.
For quite some time lay authors have examined the assertions of papal
power formulated during the quarrels of the Priesthood and the Empire

--- PAGE BREAK ---erson occupies
himself with these games.
For quite some time lay authors have examined the assertions of papal
power formulated during the quarrels of the Priesthood and the Empire

--- PAGE BREAK ---

from a juridical rather than from a historical point of view. French legists
had found absurd the arguments which would have rendered impossible the
royal order of which they were the principle representatives; they had posed
Gallican principles with the purpose of confining ultramontane pretensions
within limits compatible with the principles of civil administration;
historians were disposed to treat as extravagant paradoxes the things which
legists condemned with so much severity. But today they no longer concern
themselves with knowing to what extent the popes were legally right and
how they might have applied their theories in practice; they wish to know
what relations exist between these assertions of ecclesiastical authority and
the development of the conflicts; it cannot be doubted that they constitute a
very acceptable ideological translation of the struggle in which the Church
was engaged.
When one has really understood the implications of these old documents,
one becomes more aware of the claims which produced such a great shock
among liberals when the Syllabus of Pius IX was published in 1864. The
Church has almost always had a clear perception that to fill the role which
was assigned to it by its founder, it is obliged to assert an absolute right,
although in practice, in order to facilitate the advance of the civil societies
into which it is inserted, it is disposed to accept many limitations on its
authority. Diremption alone makes possible the recognition of the internal
law of the Church; in the periods in which the struggle is seriously
conducted, Catholics claim an independence for the Church conformable
with this internal law and incompatible with the general order established
by the State; most frequently, ecclesiastical diplomacy arranges agreements
which, for the superficial observer, dissimulate the absoluteness of its
principles. Harmony is only a dream of theoreticians, which corresponds
neither to the internal law of the Church, nor to practical arrangements, and
which serves to explain nothing in history.
With each renaissance of the Church, history has been convulsed by
manifestations of the absolute independence demanded by Catholics; it is
these periods of renaissance which reveal what constitutes the essential
nature of the Church; thus is the method of diremption, indicated at the end
of section II, fully justified.y Catholics; it is
these periods of renaissance which reveal what constitutes the essential
nature of the Church; thus is the method of diremption, indicated at the end
of section II, fully justified.

--- PAGE BREAK ---hese periods of renaissance which reveal what constitutes the essential
nature of the Church; thus is the method of diremption, indicated at the end
of section II, fully justified.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I9
In the eyes of a very great number of French Catholics, the Church
should leave its old absolute theses to the pastime of college pedants. The
latter, who know the world only by what old books say about it, will never
be able to understand how modern society functions; it is, then, necessary
that men devoid of scholastic prejudices apply themselves to observing with
care the phenomena of contemporary life; the Church would profit
considerably by listening to the advice of persons who have a feeling for the
suitable and for the possible. It should resolve to replace thesis by
hypothesis, by making all the concessions necessary in order to suffer least
from the detestable conditions in which Catholicism must henceforth live.
We are assured that this policy of extreme prudence is based on the
highest considerations of scientific philosophy. The Catholic public is
almost always way behind the secular public; 417 it adopts as very important
novelties the fashions which are beginning to disappear; the clergy,
consequently, has already for some years been amazingly impassioned for
Science, to the point where it could remonstrate with M. Homais himself.
The clerical party, which prides itself on being equal to present day
difficulties, has discovered transformism and loves to intoxicate itself with
discussion on the notion of development; but there are many ways of
understanding these words; it cannot be doubted that for modern priests
more or less tinged with modernism, evolution, adaptation, and relativity
correspond to a single current of ideas. By proclaiming themselves
transformists, Catholics wish to combat the former fanaticism for truth, to
content themselves with the most convenient theories, and to have on all
matters only those opinions likely to win the favor of those indifferent to
religious matters: these are pragmatists of a rather low type.
There exists a considerable difference between the doctrine of harmony
and the transformist blabbering which pleases present day Catholics so
much. The first was suited to an active and powerful Church imbued with
the idea of the absolute, which frequently condescended to limit its
demands, in order that it not interfere too much with the operation of the
State, but which imposed on it, as often as it could, the obligation of
recognizing the infinite rights which it held from God. The second system isit not interfere too much with the operation of the
State, but which imposed on it, as often as it could, the obligation of
recognizing the infinite rights which it held from God. The second system is

--- PAGE BREAK ---much with the operation of the
State, but which imposed on it, as often as it could, the obligation of
recognizing the infinite rights which it held from God. The second system is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

proper to those people whose weakness has been tested by numerous
defeats, who live constantly in the fear of receiving new blows, and who are
overjoyed when they obtain a delay sufficient for them to develop the habits
of a new servility, conformable with the demands of their masters.
This so scholarly tactic has not been too successful for the Church; Leo
XIII was frequently celebrated by the republicans and treated by them as a
great pope because he counselled Catholics to submit to the necessities of
the time; the climax of his policy was the dissolution of the religious
orders;418 Drumont was able, several times, to make him answerable for the
disasters which overwhelmed the Church in France (for example, Libre
Parole, March 30, 1903); but one might also say that the Catholics gathered
the bitter fruits of their cowardice and that never were misfortunes more
deserved than theirs. Such an experience must not be lost to the
Syndicalists, who are advised so frequently to abandon the absolute in order
to confine themselves to a policy which is prudent, skilful, and entirely
concerned with immediate results; the Syndicalists do not want to
accommodate themselves and they are certainly right, as they have the
courage to bear the inconveniences of struggle.
There is no lack of Catholics who think that peace might be obtained in
contemporary society without submitting to an accommodation and without
attempting to achieve the impossible harmony of the earlier theologians.
The difficulties which the co-existence of the two powers present might be
reduced, in effect, to almost nothing, whenever the number of mixed
matters over which the competition of the two sovereigns were formerly
exercised, should have diminished a bit more.
In barbaric times, the inordinate extension of ecclesiastical jurisdiction
could be benevolent, when there did not yet exist any really organized
tribunals; this regime had to disappear as the State began to perform its
functions more completely; secular institutions were preferred, and justly,
because they were better adapted to the economy: no one dreams any more,
for example, of treating wills as religious acts; for many centuries we have
stopped completing contracts by promissory oaths the fulfilment of which
were examined by ecclesiastical courts; the clerics have ended by being
judged like the other citizens. Although the theologians continue to assert,ntracts by promissory oaths the fulfilment of which
were examined by ecclesiastical courts; the clerics have ended by being
judged like the other citizens. Although the theologians continue to assert,

--- PAGE BREAK ---y oaths the fulfilment of which
were examined by ecclesiastical courts; the clerics have ended by being
judged like the other citizens. Although the theologians continue to assert,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

with the same force as formerly, that the Church alone may bring into being
true marriages, the making of the family is slipping away from it
completely; the clergy is no longer even able to limit, even slightly, the
respectability enjoyed in society by people who are civilly married after
divorce. The wealth which had been accumulated by former generations to
provide for works of Catholic charity have been confiscated and these
works have been, in a great part, secularized.
The fundamental prescriptions on which the religious monarchy was
based could, in the opinion of many persons, be faithfully executed if the
Church were satisfied with governing the public worship, the schools of
theological instruction, and the monastic institutions. In case the common
law were sufficiently permeated with liberty, it might suffice to allow
Catholicism to accomplish this mission. An understanding would no longer
be necessary between the heads of the spiritual and the temporal power;
instead of the harmony which was only a dream of theoreticians, there
would reign the most complete indifference. One could not say that the
State would ignore the Church completely, for the first duty of the legislator
is to really understand the conditions in which each of the juridical persons
develops his activity; it would then be necessary for the laws to be
fashioned in a manner as not to impede the free expansion of the Church.
This regime of indifference would not be without analogy to that
experienced by Judaism after the destruction of the kingdom of Judea.419
The Jews wanted to restore Jerusalem, but solely to make of it a sort of
great monastery consecrated to the rites of the Temple; on the
administration of Nehemiah, Renan writes: “It is a Church which is being
founded at Jerusalem and not a state. A mob that is amused by festivities,
and a nobility whose vanity is flattered by the honors of processions are not
the elements of a fatherland: a military aristocracy is necessary. The Jew
will not be a citizen; he will live in the cities of others. But, we hasten to
say, there are in the world other things than the fatherland.”420 It was
precisely when they no longer had any fatherland that the Jews came to give
to their religion a definitive existence; during the time of national
independence they were very disposed toward a syncretism odious to the
prophets; they became fanatic worshippers of Jehovah when they werereligion a definitive existence; during the time of national
independence they were very disposed toward a syncretism odious to the
prophets; they became fanatic worshippers of Jehovah when they were

--- PAGE BREAK ---ve existence; during the time of national
independence they were very disposed toward a syncretism odious to the
prophets; they became fanatic worshippers of Jehovah when they were

--- PAGE BREAK ---

subjected to the pagans. The development of the priestly code, the Psalms,
whose theological importance came to be so great, and the second Isaiah421
are of this period. Thus, the most intense religious life may exist in a
Church which lives under a regime of indifference.422
The Catholicism which exists in Protestant countries is very happy with
this system: its hierarchy, its professors, and its monasteries are hardly
embarrassing; it is something as politically trivial as Judaism was in the
Persian world. It is rather different with French Catholicism, whose heads
have been, until recently, involved in too many matters to be able to easily
accept a transformation of their activity in accordance with the plan which I
indicated above. The right to operate educational establishments appears to
them especially important to maintain; they are persuaded, in effect, that
primary and secondary schools must be directed with the object of
implanting in all instruction of the faithful the theological formulations
which they judge necessary to assure the guidance of souls by the clergy;
from that comes the ardent competition between the Church and the State.
For some thirty years now, the republican government has been impelled
by a sort of Anti-Church, which pursues an ordinarily underhanded
policy,423 at times brutal and always fanatic, with the object of destroying
Christian belief in France. This Anti-Church, today triumphant, wishes to
take advantage of the unhoped-for success which it has obtained since the
Dreyfus revolution; it believes that a regime of indifference would be a
fraud as long as the Church still has considerable influence; its great
preoccupation is to suppress completely the whole regular clergy, its heads
believing, with reason, that the secular clergy would not be sufficient to
maintain Catholicism.
9
The present situation of Catholicism in France suggests sufficiently
remarkable similarities to that of the proletariat engaged in the class
struggle, for the Syndicalists to have a real interest in following attentively
contemporary ecclesiastical history. Just as in the workers’ world we find
many reformists who regard themselves as being great scholars of social
science, the Catholic world abounds in men of considerable stature, veryiastical history. Just as in the workers’ world we find
many reformists who regard themselves as being great scholars of social
science, the Catholic world abounds in men of considerable stature, very

--- PAGE BREAK ---st as in the workers’ world we find
many reformists who regard themselves as being great scholars of social
science, the Catholic world abounds in men of considerable stature, very

--- PAGE BREAK ---

up-to-date on modern knowledge, knowing the needs of their time, who
dream of religious peace, moral unity of the nation, and compromise with
the enemy. The Church does not have the same facilities as the syndicates
for getting rid of these bad counsellors.
Renan points out that the renewal of the Roman persecutions provoked a
renewal of the ideas of the advent of the AntiChrist, 424 and as a
consequence, of all the apocalyptic hopes relative to the reign of Christ; one
may then compare these persecutions with the great violent strikes which
give such extraordinary importance to catastrophic conceptions. We shall no
longer see in our time the atrocities which were committed during the first
centuries of our era; but Renan has regarded the monasteries, again very
justly, as able to replace the martyrdom. 425 There can be no doubt that
certain religious orders have been very effective educators for heroism;
unfortunately, for a number of years monastic institutions seem to have
made serious efforts to take on the secular spirit, with the object of getting
along better with people of the world. From the new situation it results that
the Church today lacks the conditions which have in the past brought about
the advent, sustained the energy, and popularized the guidance of heroic
leaders; the compromisers no longer have much to fear from these
nuisances.
The wise men of Catholicism, like the wise men of working-men’s world,
imagine that, in order to ameliorate a difficult situation, the best method to
follow consists in winning the support of political interests; the
ecclesiastical colleges have contributed a great deal to the development of
this spirit of intrigue in their students. The Church was greatly surprised
when it tested at its own expense the value of this wisdom; parliament voted
against the Church many laws which were obviously dictated to it by
Freemasonry; decrees based on whimsical considerations were multiplied
against the congregations; the public accepted the most arbitrary measures
with an extreme indifference; all recourse against the activity of the Anti-
Church was thus closed. Catholics were happy to hear some eloquent voices
condemn these unjust laws; but their indignation flowed out in the form of
literature; the sole heroic resolution which they were capable of taking wasatholics were happy to hear some eloquent voices
condemn these unjust laws; but their indignation flowed out in the form of
literature; the sole heroic resolution which they were capable of taking was

--- PAGE BREAK ---to hear some eloquent voices
condemn these unjust laws; but their indignation flowed out in the form of
literature; the sole heroic resolution which they were capable of taking was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that of crimping some votes in favor of the Sganarelles who represent the
Church in parliament in such a comic fashion.426
The practice of strikes has led the workers to more virile thought: they
hardly respect all the sheets of paper on which imbecilic legislators inscribe
marvelous formulas, designed to assure social peace; for the discussions of
law,427 they substitute acts of war; they no longer permit the Socialist
deputies to advise them; the reformists are, almost always, obliged to
burrow underground while the energetic work to impose their victorious
will on the employers.
Many people imagine that if the syndicates were rich enough to occupy
themselves largely with mutual-aid work, their spirit would change; the
majority of the syndicates would be afraid to see their treasuries threatened
by the fines following illegal acts by revolutionaries; the tactics of trickery
would thus become necessary and leadership would pass into the hands of
those cunning fellows with whom the republican statesmen can always
come to an understanding. The clergy is governed by other economic
preoccupations; it has been able, without too great injury to itself, to give up
the property of the factories, because the generosity of the faithful will
permit it to live from day to day, but it is afraid of not being able to
continue to celebrate the ritual with the elaborate material which it
habitually uses; not having a very clear right to the churches, it could not
guarantee the pious that their gifts would always be assigned to increase the
splendor of the ritual. It is for this reason that intriguing Catholics never
cease proposing schemes of conciliation to the papacy.
The meetings of the bishops held after the voting of the law of Separation
showed that the moderate party would have prevailed in the Church of
France if the parliamentary system had been able to function. The prelates
were not sparing in solemn declarations asserting the absolute rights of the
religious monarchy, 428 but they greatly desired not to create embarrassment
for Aristide Briand; many facts permit us to believe that episcopal
parliamentarism would even have resulted in giving to ministers of the
Republic under the regime of the Separation, more influence over the
Church than the ministers of Napoleon III ever had. The papacy ended by
adopting the only reasonable decision that it could take; it suppressed thehe regime of the Separation, more influence over the
Church than the ministers of Napoleon III ever had. The papacy ended by
adopting the only reasonable decision that it could take; it suppressed the

--- PAGE BREAK ---aration, more influence over the
Church than the ministers of Napoleon III ever had. The papacy ended by
adopting the only reasonable decision that it could take; it suppressed the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

general assemblies so that the energetic might not be hindered by the clever;
some day French Catholics will bless Pius X who saved the honor of their
Church.
This experience with parliamentarism is worth studying; the syndicates,
they also, ought to dread great solemn assizes, in which it is so easy for the
government to prevent every virile resolution from materializing; war is not
made under the direction of talking assemblies.429
Catholicism has always reserved the function of combat to rather small
bodies whose members had been rigidly selected, by means of tests
designed to confirm their vocation; the regular clergy, thus, practices this
rule, so often forgotten by revolutionary writers, that a trade union head
once stated before P. de Rousiers: “One weakens oneself by assimilating
weak elements.” 430 It is with elite troops, perfectly trained by monastic life,
ready to brave all obstacles, and filled with an absolute confidence in
victory, that Catholicism has been able, until now, to triumph over its
enemies. Each time that a formidable peril has arisen for the Church, men,
particularly adept, like the great captains, at discerning the weak points of
an opposing army, created new religious orders, appropriate to the tactics
demanded by the new struggle. If today the religious tradition appears so
threatened, it is because institutions suited to lead the struggle against the
Anti-Church have not been organized; the faithful, perhaps, still preserve a
great deal of piety; but they form an inert mass.
It would be extremely dangerous for the proletariat not to practice a
division of functions which has succeded so well for Catholicism during its
long history; it would be no more than an inert mass destined to fall, as
democracy,431 under the direction of politicians who live on the
subordination of their electors; the syndicates must search less for the
greatest number of adherents than for the organization of the vigorous
elements; revolutionary strikes are excellent for effecting a selection by
weeding out the pacifists who would spoil the elite troops.
This division of functions has permitted Catholicism to present all the
nuances: from the groups whose life is swamped in the general unity to the
orders which are dedicated to the absolute. Catholicism finds itself, by
reason of its religious specialization, in a much better condition thanroups whose life is swamped in the general unity to the
orders which are dedicated to the absolute. Catholicism finds itself, by
reason of its religious specialization, in a much better condition than

--- PAGE BREAK ---swamped in the general unity to the
orders which are dedicated to the absolute. Catholicism finds itself, by
reason of its religious specialization, in a much better condition than

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Protestantism: a true Christian, following the principles of the Reformation,
would have to be able to pass, at will, from economic standards to monastic
standards; this shift is considerably more difficult to obtain from an
individual than the exact discipline of a monastic order. Renan has
compared the small Anglo-Saxon congregations to monasteries;432 these
groups show us that the principle of the Reformation is applicable to those
of exceptional natures; but the action of these societies is generally less
fecund than that of the regular clergy, because it is less supported by the
greater Christian public. It has frequently been observed that the Church
adopted, with an extreme facility, the new systems which were put into
practice by the founders of orders, with the object of strengthening the
spiritual life; by contrast, the Protestant pastors have been, almost always,
strongly hostile to sects; in this way Anglicanism has much to repent for
having allowed the Methodists to escape from its control.433
The majority of Catholics has thus been able to remain alien to the
pursuit of the absolute, and yet collaborate very effectively in the work of
those who, by conflict, were maintaining or perfecting the doctrines; the
elite which bore the assault to the enemy positions, received material and
moral assistance from the masses which saw in it the reality of Christianity.
According to the points of view which one takes, one has the right to
consider society as a unity or as a multiplicity of antagonistic forces: there
is an approximation of economic-juridicial uniformity generally sufficiently
developed for one to be able, in a very great number of cases, not to worry
about the religious absolute represented by monks; on the other hand, there
are many important questions that one could not hope to comprehend
without picturing the activity of fighting institutions as preponderant.
Rather similar observations may be made with regard to workers’
organizations, they ought to vary to infinity as the proletariat feels itself
more capable of cutting a figure in the world; the Socialist parties believe
themselves charged with furnishing ideas to these organizations,434 with
counselling them, and with grouping them into a class unity, at the same
time that their parliamentary action would establish a connection between
the workers’ movement and the bourgeoisie; and we know that the Socialist
parties have borrowed from democracy its great love for unity. In order tomentary action would establish a connection between
the workers’ movement and the bourgeoisie; and we know that the Socialist
parties have borrowed from democracy its great love for unity. In order to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

really understand the reality of the revolutionary movement, it is necessary
to take a point of view diametrically opposed to the one taken by
politicians. A great number of organizations are mingled, more or less
intimately in the economic-juridical life of the whole of society, in a way
that whatever is required of unity in society is produced automatically;
others, less numerous and well selected, lead the class struggle; they are the
ones who train proletarian thought by creating the ideological unity which
the proletariat requires in order to accomplish its revolutionary work;—and
the leaders demand no recompense, quite different in this respect, as in so
many others, from the Intellectuals, who insist upon being maintained in a
joyous way of life by the poor devils whom they consent to harangue.

--- PAGE BREAK ---different in this respect, as in so
many others, from the Intellectuals, who insist upon being maintained in a
joyous way of life by the poor devils whom they consent to harangue.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ASSendi[
ASolog\ Ior 9iolence
MEN WHO make revolutionary speeches to the people are bound to set
before themselves a high standard of sincerity, because the workers
understand their words in their exact and literal sense, and never indulge in
any symbolic interpretation. When in 1905 I ventured to write in some
detail on proletarian violence I understood perfectly the grave responsibility
I assumed in trying to show the historic bearing of actions which our
Parliamentary Socialists try to dissimulate, with so much skill. To-day I do
not hesitate to assert that Socialism could not continue to exist without an
apology for violence.
It is in strikes that the proletariat assert its existence. I cannot agree with
the view which sees in strikes merely something analogous to the temporary
rupture of commercial relations which is brought about when a grocer and
the wholesale dealer from whom he buys his dried plums cannot agree
about the price. The strike is a phenomenon of war. It is thus a serious
misrepresentation to say that violence is an accident doomed to disappear
from the strikes of the future.
The social revolution is an extension of that war in which each great
strike is an episode; this is the reason why Syndicalists speak of that
revolution in the language of strikes; for them Socialism is reduced to the
conception, the expectation of, and the preparation for the general strike,
which, like the Napoleonic battle, is to completely annihilate a condemned
régime.
Such a conception allows none of those subtle exegeses in which Jaurès
excels. It is a question here of an overthrow in the course of which both
employers and the State would be set aside by the organised producers. Our

--- PAGE BREAK ---subtle exegeses in which Jaurès
excels. It is a question here of an overthrow in the course of which both
employers and the State would be set aside by the organised producers. Our

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Intellectuals, who hope to obtain the highest places from democracy, would
be sent back to their literature; the Parliamentary Socialists, who find in the
organisations created by the middle classes means of exercising a certain
amount of power, would become useless.
The analogy which exists between strikes accompanied by violence and
war is prolific of consequences. No one doubts (except d’Estournelles de
Constant) that it was war that provided the republics of antiquity with the
ideas which form the ornament of our modern culture. The social war, for
which the proletariat ceaselessly prepares itself in the syndicates, may
engender the elements of a new civilisation suited to a people of producers.
I continually call the attention of my young friends to the problems
presented by Socialism considered from the point of view of a civilisation
of producers; I assert that today a philosophy is being elaborated according
to this plan, whose possibility even was hardly suspected a few years ago;
this philosophy is closely bound up with the apology for violence.
I have never had that admiration for creative hatred which Jaurès has
devoted to it; I do not feel the same indulgence towards the guillotiners as
he does; I have a horror of any measure which strikes the vanquished under
a judicial disguise. War, carried on in broad daylight, without hypocritical
attenuation, for the purpose of ruining an irreconcilable enemy, excludes all
the abominations which dishonoured the middle-class revolution of the
eighteenth century. The apology for violence in this case is particularly
easy.
It would serve no purpose to explain to the poor that they ought not to
feel sentiments of jealousy and vengeance against their masters; these
feelings are too powerful to be suppressed by exhortations; it is on the
widespread prevalence of these feelings that democracy chiefly founds its
strength. Social war, by making an appeal to the honour which develops so
naturally in all organised armies, can eliminate those evil feelings against
which morality would remain powerless. If this were the only reason we
had for attributing a high civilising value to revolutionary Syndicalism, this
reason alone would, it seems to me, be decisive in favour of the apologists
for violence.If this were the only reason we
had for attributing a high civilising value to revolutionary Syndicalism, this
reason alone would, it seems to me, be decisive in favour of the apologists
for violence.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The conception of the general strike, engendered by the practice of
violent strikes, admits the conception of an irrevocable overthrow. There is
something terrifying in this which will appear more and more terrifying as
violence takes a greater place in the mind of the proletariat. But, in
undertaking a serious, formidable, and sublime work, Socialists raise
themselves above our frivolous society and make themselves worthy of
pointing out new roads to the world.
Parliamentary Socialists may be compared to the officials whom
Napoleon made into a nobility and who laboured to strengthen the State
bequeathed by the Ancien Regime. Revolutionary Syndicalism corresponds
well enough to the Napoleonic armies whose soldiers accomplished such
heroic acts, knowing all the time that they would remain poor. What
remains of the Empire? Nothing but the epic of the Grande Armée. What
will remain of the present Socialist movement will be the epic of the strikes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---at they would remain poor. What
remains of the Empire? Nothing but the epic of the Grande Armée. What
will remain of the present Socialist movement will be the epic of the strikes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ASSendi[
In 'eIense oI /enin
ON FEBRUARY 4, 1918, the Journal de Genève published under the title:
“The Other Danger,” an article the greatest portion of which I reproduce
below.
“The great revolutionary wave which originated in the East, is spreading
in Europe, is passing over the German plains, and is already breaking
against the rocks at the foot of our Alps. We must expect that our country
may have to undergo a supreme test before having definitely won its right
to existence in the new world to which the war will give birth. Our insipid
and vain quarrels between French Swiss and German Swiss are a turned
page, a sad page to which we must not return. Other, much more serious
conflicts are in the making. Another ditch has been dug which will be more
difficult to fill up.
“It becomes more and more evident that an internationalist agitation,
planned and methodical, is spreading in our large cities. It is tending to
incite, by violence, a revolution which, from Switzerland, would step by
step advance to neighboring countries.
. . . “Before the war there was propagated a doctrine of Force in
syndicalist circles which had an obvious affinity with that of the German
imperialists. In his Réflexions sur la violence Georges Sorel preached this
new gospel: ‘The role of violence,’ he said, ‘appears to us singularly great
in history, provided that it be the brutal and direct expression of the class
struggle.’437 Nothing can be done except by violence. It is only necessary
that it no longer be exercised from the top down, as formerly, but from
below upward. There is no intention to put an end to the abuse of Force.
They want Force to change hands and that the oppressed of yesterday

--- PAGE BREAK ---rom the top down, as formerly, but from
below upward. There is no intention to put an end to the abuse of Force.
They want Force to change hands and that the oppressed of yesterday

--- PAGE BREAK ---

become the tyrants of tomorrow,438 waiting for the inevitable tilt of the
scale which puts things back to their original state.
“During their stay in Switzerland, Lenin and Trotsky must have thought
over the book of Georges Sorel at leisure. They are applying the principles
in it with the most terrifying logic. . . . They must have an army in order to
impose the tyrannical domination of a minority on a great people,
amorphous and trained for centuries to servitude. . . . If they want to end the
foreign war, it is in order to pursue the class war more at their own
convenience. These Jacobin militarists aspire to establish a tsarism in
reverse for their own benefit. And this is the ideal that is being proposed
today to the European nations.
“In Germany socialism has become impregnated with the same despotic
spirit. Marxism is the enemy-brother of Prussian militarism. It has the same
spirit, the same methods, the same worship of automatic discipline, the
same sovereign contempt for all individual independence.439
. . . “Let us not be alarmed. Switzerland is still a country where every
citizen has an old habit of discharging his function and duty at the post
which he occupies. He does it voluntarily and freely because that is his
function and his duty, and not because he has been made an automaton. . . .
All despotism is odious to him, whether it comes from above or below. For
that reason the Swiss citizen, heir to a long tradition of healthy and normal
public life, will not allow himself to be subjected to doctrines coming from
a neighboring dominion whose subjects are still held in a condition of
political minority, or from a republic which is but a few months old,440
whose improvised citizens have no political education whatsoever and most
of whom neither know how to read nor how to write.
“Once and for all let those Papierlischweitzer441 remember this, they
who are beginning to speak among us as masters and who permit
themselves to dictate to excessively docile assemblies ultimatums addressed
to our authorities. We shall not permit them to sabotage the country which
sheltered them. If they imagine that the Swiss nation may be used as a
culture for the bacteria of disorder, they are greatly mistaken. We will know
how to protect ourselves from civil strife as from foreign war, knowinghey imagine that the Swiss nation may be used as a
culture for the bacteria of disorder, they are greatly mistaken. We will know
how to protect ourselves from civil strife as from foreign war, knowing

--- PAGE BREAK ---Swiss nation may be used as a
culture for the bacteria of disorder, they are greatly mistaken. We will know
how to protect ourselves from civil strife as from foreign war, knowing

--- PAGE BREAK ---

moreover that the one would only be a prelude to the other and that the least
crack in the walls of our house could become a breach open to invasion.“442
Although, more than once, the friends of the Journal de Genève have
been accused of being agents of the secret diplomacy of the Entente, I am
inclined to believe that Professor Paul Seippel, in writing this article, did
not have the charitable desire of calling the attention of the suspicious
French police to me. I need not point out to my readers that this eminent
representative of the liberal bourgeoisie understood nothing of my book.
His case indicates, once again, how polemicists who undertake the defense
of Latin civilization against Nordic barbarism, take an approach verging on
stupidity.
I do not intend to be worthy of the indulgence of the innumerable Paul
Seippels which the literature of Victory contains, by cursing the Bolsheviks
whom the bourgeoisie fear so greatly.443 I have no reason for believing that
Lenin made use of some of the ideas in my books; but if that were the case,
I would be uncommonly proud for having contributed to the intellectual
formation of a man who seems to me to be, at once, the greatest theoretician
that socialism has had since Marx and the head of a state whose genius
recalls that of Peter the Great.
At the moment when the Paris Commune was falling Marx wrote a
manifesto of the Internationale, into which present day socialists are
accustomed to look for the most perfect expression of the political doctrines
of the master. The address given in May, 1918 by Lenin on the problems of
the power of the soviets has no less importance than the study of Marx on
the civil war of 1871. It may be that the Bolsheviks will end by succumbing,
in the long run, under the blows of the mercenaries engaged by the
plutocracies of the Entente; but the ideology of the new form of proletarian
state will never perish; it will survive by merging with the myths which will
take their substance from the popular accounts of the struggle sustained by
the Republic of the soviets against the coalition of the great capitalist
powers.
When Peter the Great ascended the throne, Russia did not differ greatly
from Merovingian Gaul: he wanted her transformed from top to bottom, in
such a way that his empire might be worthy of playing a role among theGreat ascended the throne, Russia did not differ greatly
from Merovingian Gaul: he wanted her transformed from top to bottom, in
such a way that his empire might be worthy of playing a role among the

--- PAGE BREAK ---throne, Russia did not differ greatly
from Merovingian Gaul: he wanted her transformed from top to bottom, in
such a way that his empire might be worthy of playing a role among the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

enlightened states of the day; all those who could be called the ruling class
(court nobility, functionaries, officers) were duty bound to imitate the
persons who held analogous positions in France. His work was completed
by Catherine II, whom the philosophes of the Voltairian period exalted,
justifiably, as an incredible creator of order—as order was understood in the
XVIIIth century.
One might say of Lenin that like Peter the Great he wants to force
history.444 He aspires to introduce in his country, in effect, the socialism
which, according to the most authoritative masters of Social Democracy,
could only follow a highly developed capitalism; now, Russian industry,
subjected for so long a time to a regime of overall governmental direction,
of annoying police, and of technical incompetency, finds itself in a very
backward state; there is no lack of distinguished socialists who dub the
undertaking of Lenin as chimerical. The proper techniques of the factories
had imposed themselves on capitalists through the play of half-blind
mechanisms; the role of the intelligence, being limited to criticism which
pointed out what benefit or harm was embodied in each practice, had been
rather mediocre; if a socialist economy followed a capitalist economy under
the circumstances foreseen by Marx, suggested to him by observations
made with regard to England,445 the transmission of these proper techniques
would operate in an almost automatic manner—intelligence being, at most,
called upon to safeguard the acquisitions from the bourgeois past against
the fancies of naive revolutionaries. In order to give to Russian socialism a
basis which a Marxist (such as Lenin) may regard as secure, a stupendous
effort of intelligence is required: the latter must be in a position to
demonstrate to the directors of production the value of certain rules derived
from the experiences of a highly developed capitalism; it is necessary to
have them accepted by the masses, by virtue of the moral authority enjoyed
by men who have won, through their services, the confidence of the people;
at every instant, the responsible persons of the revolution are obliged to
defend it against the instincts which always impel humanity toward the
lowest spheres of life.
When Lenin asserts that the campaign to be undertaken to establish the
socialist regime definitively in Russia is a thousand times more difficultways impel humanity toward the
lowest spheres of life.
When Lenin asserts that the campaign to be undertaken to establish the
socialist regime definitively in Russia is a thousand times more difficult

--- PAGE BREAK ---toward the
lowest spheres of life.
When Lenin asserts that the campaign to be undertaken to establish the
socialist regime definitively in Russia is a thousand times more difficult

--- PAGE BREAK ---

than the most difficult military campaign, he is not guilty of exaggeration.
He is right in saying that never were there revolutionaries who found
themselves confronted with a task similar to his; formerly the innovators
had only to destroy certain reputedly harmful institutions, while the
reconstruction was left to the initiative of those motivated by the desire for
extra profits to launch various enterprises; but the Bolsheviks are obliged to
destroy and to reconstruct in such a fashion that capitalists will no longer
come between society and the workers. No substantial progress can be
obtained in industry without the making of many blunders; the directors of
production must stop in time when they are on the wrong road and see if
there is not opportunity for greater success by some other means; that is
what is called getting experience. Lenin is not one of those theorists who
believe that their genius places them above the evidence of reality; he is,
therefore, very quick to note the lessons learned by practical experience
since the revolution.
In order that Russian socialism become a stable economy, it is necessary,
therefore, that the intelligence of the revolutionaries be very nimble, very
well informed, and very free from prejudices. Even though Lenin might not
be able to carry out his whole program, he would leave to the world very
important lessons from which European society would draw profit.446 Lenin
may, justifiably, be proud of what his comrades are doing; the Russian
workers are acquiring immortal glory by approaching the realization of
what until now had been only an abstract idea.
Despite the predictions of the great men of the Entente, Bolshevism does
not seem easy to suppress; the Brisish and French governments should
begin to recognize that they were mistaken in bending an obliging ear to
wealthy Russians who live in the metropolises of the West; this entire world
is completely alien to the ideas which have taken hold of the workers and
peasants of their country. Although he has lived a long time outside of
Russia, Lenin has remained a true Moscovite. When the time comes to
evaluate present day events with historical impartiality, it will be recognized
that Bolshevism owed a good part of its power to the fact that the masses
regarded it as a protest against an oligarchy whose greatest concern had
been not to appear Russian; at the end of the year 1917, the former
spokesman of the Black Hundreds said that the Bolsheviks had “proven thata protest against an oligarchy whose greatest concern had
been not to appear Russian; at the end of the year 1917, the former
spokesman of the Black Hundreds said that the Bolsheviks had “proven that

--- PAGE BREAK ---n oligarchy whose greatest concern had
been not to appear Russian; at the end of the year 1917, the former
spokesman of the Black Hundreds said that the Bolsheviks had “proven that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

they were more Russian than the rebels Kaledin, Roussky,447 etc., who
betrayed the tsar and the country” (Journal de Genève, December 20,
1917); Russia patiently endures a great deal of suffering because she feels
herself finally ruled by a true Moscovite.
For the last two centuries, one tsar alone had wanted to be Russian: that
was Nicholas I. “I love my country,” he said to Custine in 1839, “and I
believe I have understood it; I assure you that when I tire of all the troubles
of our time, I try to forget the rest of Europe, by retiring to the interior of
Russia. No one is more Russian than I.“448 Custine concluded that Nicholas
wanted to restore, “to its own nature a nation led astray for more than a
century along paths of servile imitation;” the emperor demanded, especially,
that Russian be spoken at court, although most of the women did not know
the national language.449 He regretted that Nicholas, “not withstanding his
great practical sense and his profound sagacity,” had lacked the courage to
abandon St. Petersburg for Moscow: ”By this change, he might have
retrieved the error of Tsar Peter, who, instead of training his boyars in the
play-house that he built for them on the shores of the Baltic, he might have
been able and should have attempted to civilize them at home, by taking
advantage of the admirable elements that nature had placed at his disposal,
elements which he ignored with a disdain, with a levity of spirit, unworthy
of a superior man, which he was in certain respects. . . . Either Russia will
not fulfil what to us appears to be her destiny, or Moscow will again
become some day the capital of the empire. If I ever saw the throne of
Russia majestically restored to its true home, I would say: the Slavic nation,
triumphing through a just pride over the vanity of its rulers, finally lives its
own life.“450
The accidents of war have led the Bolsheviks to effect this transfer: if it
came to pass that they were to succumb under the blows of their enemies, it
is not likely that a government of reaction would dare take away from old
Moscow its status of capital;451 thus, admitting that the new regime may not
last, it would have contributed to the reinforcement of Moscovitism in a
society whose rulers, for so long a time, had oriented their minds toward the
West.thus, admitting that the new regime may not
last, it would have contributed to the reinforcement of Moscovitism in a
society whose rulers, for so long a time, had oriented their minds toward the
West.

--- PAGE BREAK ---the new regime may not
last, it would have contributed to the reinforcement of Moscovitism in a
society whose rulers, for so long a time, had oriented their minds toward the
West.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

One may speak as a historian of the process of revolutionary repression
in Russia only by keeping in mind the Moscovite character of
Bolshevism.452 There are certainly many lies in the accusations which the
press of the Entente hurls at the Bolsheviks,453 but in order to evaluate
soundly the painful episodes of the Russian Revolution, one must ask
oneself what the great tsars would have done had they been threatened by
revolts similar to those which the Republic of the soviets is obliged to
overcome quickly if it does not wish to commit suicide; they certainly
would not have recoiled from the most terrifying severities in order to wipe
out conspiracies aided from without, and swarming with assassins.454 On
the other hand, the national traditions provided the Red Guards with
innumerable precedents, which they believed they had the right to imitate in
order to defend the Revolution;455 after a frightfully bloody war, in the
course of which we have seen General Komilov massacre entire regiments
(Journal de Genève, October 16, 1917), human life cannot be respected in
Russia;456 the number of people shot by the Bolsheviks is, in any case,
considerably smaller than the number of victims of the blockade organized
by the official organs of democratic Justice.
Lenin is not, after all, a candidate for the prize for virtue awarded by the
French Academy; he is accountable only to Russian history; the sole really
important question that the philosopher may consider is whether he is
directing the orientation of Russia toward the construction of a republic of
producers, capable of embodying an economy as progressive as that of our
capitalist democracies.
Let us return, in conclusion, to the moral complicity which, according to
the Journal de Genève, links me with Lenin. I do not believe I have, in any
of my writings, presented an apology for proscriptions; it is, consequently,
absurd to suppose, as Professor Paul Seippel does, that Lenin may have
found in the Réflexions sur la violence any incitement to terrorism; but if he
really meditated on them during his stay in Switzerland, they could have
exercised on his genius an entirely different influence than that which my
accuser speaks. It would not be impossible that this book, so Prodhonian in
inspiration, had led Lenin to adopt the doctrines revealed by Proudhon in La
Guerre et la Paix. If this hypothesis were correct, he might have been led toe impossible that this book, so Prodhonian in
inspiration, had led Lenin to adopt the doctrines revealed by Proudhon in La
Guerre et la Paix. If this hypothesis were correct, he might have been led to

--- PAGE BREAK ---is book, so Prodhonian in
inspiration, had led Lenin to adopt the doctrines revealed by Proudhon in La
Guerre et la Paix. If this hypothesis were correct, he might have been led to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

believe, with all the strength of his passionate soul, that violations of the
laws of war have infallible historical sanctions. His indomitable resistance
could then readily be explained.457
This is a statement that I would readily attribute to Lenin. The war of
starvation that the capitalist democracies are directing against the Republic
of the soviets is a war of cowardice; it has the effect of nothing less than
denying the true laws of war defined by Proudhon; admitting the possibility
that the Red Guards were obliged to capitulate, the spurious victory of the
Entente would only produce ephemeral results. By contrast, the heroic
efforts of the Russian proletariat deserve history’s reward for achieving the
triumph of institutions in whose defense so many sacrifices were made by
the working and peasant masses of Russia. History, according to Renan,
rewarded the military virtues by giving to Rome the Mediterranean empire:
despite the innumerable abuses of conquest, the legions were accomplishing
what he calls, “the work of God;”458 if we are grateful to the Roman
soldiers for having replaced abortive, strayed, or impotent civilizations by a
civilization whose pupils we are still in law, literature, and monuments, how
grateful will not the future have to be to the Russian soldiers of socialism!
How lightly for the historians will weigh the criticism of the rhetoricians
charged by democracy with denouncing the excesses of the Bolsheviks.
New Carthages must not triumph over what is now the Rome of the
proletariat.
And this, finally, is what I permit myself to add on my own account:
Cursed be the plutocratic democracies which are starving Russia! I am only
an old man whose life is at the mercy of trifling accidents; but may I, before
descending into the tomb, see the humiliation of the arrogant bourgeois
democracies, today shamelessly triumphant.459nly
an old man whose life is at the mercy of trifling accidents; but may I, before
descending into the tomb, see the humiliation of the arrogant bourgeois
democracies, today shamelessly triumphant.459

--- PAGE BREAK ---life is at the mercy of trifling accidents; but may I, before
descending into the tomb, see the humiliation of the arrogant bourgeois
democracies, today shamelessly triumphant.459

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 Within the body of socialist literature, only Georg Lukacs’ Geschichte
und Klassenbewusstsein (Berlin, 1923), R. H. Tawney’s The Acquisitive
Society (London, 1921), and Henri de Man’s Zur Psychologie des
Sozialismus (Jena, 1926) have tried to discuss fundamental questions in a
manner worthy of a political movement of the scope and aspirations of
twentieth century socialism. These were perhaps the last works of socialist
theory which were at the level of the best political and social-philosophical
discussion of the time. It also may be mentioned that Lukacs and de Man
were both severely criticized in their respective parties for their intellectual
independence.
 There are probably many causes for this evaporation of ethical ardor
from socialist literature. The split between the Communists and Social
Democrats which broke the discipline of practical judgment over the
apocalyptic fanaticism of the extreme left and which withdrew from the
former the stimulus which the latter provided is undoubtedly one of the
most important factors. The deflation of socialism through the use of
welfare and full employment measures by professional politicians and
administrators, the check imposed by considerations of Soviet foreign
policy on the excited sense of glory and immiment expectations which
flourished in the first years of the Communist International, the general
growth of hedonism and the further penetration of secularism, the continued
expansion of bureaucracy in trades unions and left wing parties, and the
growth in the size of the left parties with the consequent adulteration of
membership, the internal development and wider diffusion of academic
social science have all contributed to this result. But the detailed
examination of this problem must be left for another occasion.
 Sorel, who was most influenced in this regard by Proudhon and Le Play,
differed from most of his socialist contemporaries by his deliberate
conservatism concerning the family and his insistence on the value of
tradition. But even among those of more radical and even bohemian
tendencies, there was little ethical indifference. Emancipation in sexual
relations was for the latter a positive ethical value, not just a morally neutral
private affair to be settled in the light of personal taste or convenience.hical indifference. Emancipation in sexual
relations was for the latter a positive ethical value, not just a morally neutral
private affair to be settled in the light of personal taste or convenience.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Emancipation in sexual
relations was for the latter a positive ethical value, not just a morally neutral
private affair to be settled in the light of personal taste or convenience.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 Sorel regarded calculation of consequences as irrelevant for the
determination of the ethical value of an action. Thus he was of the view that
an aggressive bourgeoisie, proud, confident of its future and convinced of
its calling, would constitute a moral improvement in our society. He
explicitly excluded expectations of economic or political advantage from
the merits of his own revolutionary tactics and strategy. And even his
argument that the ethic of revolutionary violence would still be required in a
socialist society, because it is the only admissible ethic and because it
would, as a result of workshop solidarity and pride, improve production,
seems definitely to regard increased output and the material gains as
subordinate ends. The superiority of socialism for Sorel rested very clearly
in the intrinsic ethical superiority of the actions and institutions which
characterize the socialist society: small autonomous groups of producers,
proud of their work, intensely solidary and free of egoism. The material
advantages seem to be secondary. Incidentally, he hardly ever mentions
poverty or material distress as a motive for socialism, and actually thought
that poverty demoralizes those who suffer from it so that they are not
morally qualified to be revolutionary socialists.
 Sorel always emphasized his pessimism which he wished to contrast
with the belief in inevitable progress and the innate goodness of man. But
his pessimism did not imply man’s inevitable failure; it meant that the great
obstacles presented by nature and society could be overcome only by heroic
action. It meant also that man’s highest condition was not a state of
harmony and ease. This was another of his points of difference from the
main trends of European socialist thought.
 Sorel was no sadist and no admirer of brutality. Violence without the
charismatic excitement and the association with a sublime far-off end, was
not regarded by him as genuine violence.
 The first appendix, “Unity and Multiplicity,” was first published in the
second edition (1910). The second appendix, “Apology for Violence,” was
added to the third edition (1913) after having been published in Le Matin in
1908. The third appendix, “In Defense of Lenin,” was published in the10). The second appendix, “Apology for Violence,” was
added to the third edition (1913) after having been published in Le Matin in
1908. The third appendix, “In Defense of Lenin,” was published in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---ndix, “Apology for Violence,” was
added to the third edition (1913) after having been published in Le Matin in
1908. The third appendix, “In Defense of Lenin,” was published in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

fourth edition (1919). The first and third appendices are translated here for
the first time.
 His main books are: Contribution à l‘étude profane de la Bible (1889);
Le Procès de Socrate (1889); La Ruine du monde antique (1898);
Introduction à l’economie moderne (1903); Le Système historique de Renan
(1906); La Decomposition du Marxisme (1908); Reflexions sur la violence
(1908); Les Illusions du progrès (1908); La Revolution dreyfusienne (1909);
Materiaux d‘une theorie du proletariat (1919), containing L’Avenir
socialiste des Syndicats (1898); De l‘utilité du pragmatisme (1921);
D’Aristotle à Marx: (L’ancienne et la nouvelle metaphysique) (1935). There
is a bibliography of Sorel’s writings by Paul Delasalle, “Bibliographie
Sorelienne,” in International Review for Social History, edited by The
International Institute for Social History, Vol. IV (Leiden, 1939), pp. 463-
487.
 Sorel’s engineering and scientific training never led him into
technocratic paths of thought. It is possible, however, that his studies at the
École Polytechnique alienated him from the École Normale Supérieure and
the Sorbonne and intensified his conservative resentment against
rationalistic politicians and professional intellectuals.
 Oddly enough, it was only shortly after this that in his preface to
Colajanni’s Le Socialisme (1900) he recommended that socialism should be
transformed from sect to party, because sects incline towards violence,
towards dictatorial solutions and towards self-isolation.
 Its closest affinities in English-speaking countries were the bookish
Guild Socialism in Great Britain, which took over its producers’ pluralism
without its irrationalist violence, and the rough-handed Industrial Workers
of the World in America, which adopted its violence as well as its antipathy
towards political democracy and democratic politicians.
 Sorel, while admiring its general readiness for violence, was not
attracted by its main application in the form of sabotage. For him, sober
application to the impersonal obligations of one’s task was an importantadmiring its general readiness for violence, was not
attracted by its main application in the form of sabotage. For him, sober
application to the impersonal obligations of one’s task was an important

--- PAGE BREAK ---l readiness for violence, was not
attracted by its main application in the form of sabotage. For him, sober
application to the impersonal obligations of one’s task was an important

--- PAGE BREAK ---

part of the elevated ethic of the producers and was indispensable for the
realization of socialism.
 In the dedication to Materiaux d’une théorie du proletariat, prepared
for publication in 1914, he describes himself as “a disinterested servant of
the proletariat.”
 Lewis, Wyndham, The Art of Being Ruled (London, 1926).
 Cf. Hulme, T. E., Speculations (edited by Herbert Read) (London,
1924), Appendix A, “Reflections on Violence,” pp. 294-260. Hulme’s essay
was originally intended to serve as an Introduction to the present
translation, but I have been unable to find any edition in which it was
printed.
 A. Chuquet, Jean Jacques Rousseau, p. 179.
 I recall here a phrase of Renan: “Reading, in order to be of any use,
must be an exercise involving some effort” (Feuilles détachées, p. 231).
 I think it may be interesting to quote here some reflections borrowed
from an admirable book of Newman’s: “It will be our wisdom to avail
ourselves of language, as far as it will go, but to aim mainly, by means of it,
to stimulate in those to whom we address ourselves, a mode of thinking and
trains of thought similar to our own, leading them on by their own
independent action, not by any syllogistic compulsion. Hence it is that an
intellectual school will always have something of an esoteric character; for
it is an assemblage of minds that think, their bond is unity of thought, and
their words become a sort of tessera, not expressing thought but
symbolising it” (Grammar of Assent, p. 309). As a matter of fact, the
schools have hardly ever resembled this ideal sketched out by Newman.
 “The significant melancholy found in the masterpieces of Hellenic art
prove that, even at that time, gifted individuals were able to peer through
the illusions of life to which the spirit of their own surrendered itself
without the slightest critical reflection” (Hartmann, The Philosophy of the
Unconscious, Eng. trans., vol. iii. p. 78; ii. p. 436).llusions of life to which the spirit of their own surrendered itself
without the slightest critical reflection” (Hartmann, The Philosophy of the
Unconscious, Eng. trans., vol. iii. p. 78; ii. p. 436).

--- PAGE BREAK ---which the spirit of their own surrendered itself
without the slightest critical reflection” (Hartmann, The Philosophy of the
Unconscious, Eng. trans., vol. iii. p. 78; ii. p. 436).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I call attention to this view, which sees in the genius of the great Greeks
a historical anticipation; few doctrines are more important for an
understanding of history than that of anticipations, which Newman used in
his researches on the history of dogmas.
 Hartmann, loc. cit. vol. iii. p. 102.
 The sham cries of despair which were heard at the beginning of the
nineteenth century owed part of their success to the analogies of form
which they presented to the real literature of pessimism.
 Taine, Le Régime Moderne, vol. ii. pp. 121-122.
 The Athenian comic poets have several times depicted a land of
Cokaigne, where there was no need to work (A. and M. Croiset, Historie de
la littérature Grecque, vol. iii. pp. 472-474).
 Hartmann, loc. cit. p. 130. “Contempt for the world, combined with a
transcendent life of the spirit, had, indeed, in India, already found a place in
the esoteric doctrine of Buddhism. But this teaching was only within the
reach of a narrow circle of celibate adepts; the outside world had only taken
the ‘letter which kills,’ so that the thought only attained realisation in the
eccentric phenomena of hermits and penitents” (p. 81).
 Battifol, Études d’historie et de théologie positive, 2nd series, p. 162.
 Hartmann, The Religion of the Future, Eng. trans., p. 23.
 “At this epoch commenced the struggle between the Pagan love of life
and the Christian hatred of this world and avoidance of it” (Hartmann, op.
cit. p. 88). This pagan conception is to be found in liberal protestantism, and
this is why Hartmann rightly considers it to be irreligious; but the men of
the sixteenth century took a very different view of the matter.
 If Socialism comes to grief it will evidently be in the same way,
because it will have been alarmed at its own barbarity.the men of
the sixteenth century took a very different view of the matter.
 If Socialism comes to grief it will evidently be in the same way,
because it will have been alarmed at its own barbarity.

--- PAGE BREAK ---eenth century took a very different view of the matter.
 If Socialism comes to grief it will evidently be in the same way,
because it will have been alarmed at its own barbarity.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 It seems to me that Pascal’s editors in 1670 must have been alarmed at
his Calvinism. I am astonished that Sainte-Beuve should have said nothing
more than that there “was in Pascal’s Christianity something which they
could not understand, that Pascal had a greater need than they had of
Christian faith” (Fort Royal, vol. iii. p. 383).
 Cf. what I say about force in Chapter V.
 I cannot succeed in finding the idea of international arbitration in
fragment 296 of Pascal, where several people claim to have discovered it; in
this paragraph Pascal simply points out the ridiculous aspect of the claim
made in his time by every belligerent—to condemn the conduct of his
adversary in the name of justice.
 The petit Parisien, that one always quotes with pleasure as the
barometer of democratic stupidity, tells us that “this scornful definition of
the elegant and immoral M. de Morny—Republicans are people who dress
badly—seems to-day altogether without any foundation.” I borrow this
philosophical observation from an enthusiastic description of the marriage
of the charming minister Clémentel (October 22, 1905). This well-informed
newspaper has accused me of giving the workers hooligan advice (April 7,
1907).
 “I have seen violence myself,” he told the Senate on November 16,
1906, “face to face. I have been, day after day, in the midst of thousands of
men who bore on their faces the marks of a terrifying exaltation. I have
remained in the midst of them, face to face and shoulder to shoulder.” He
boasted that in the end he had triumphed over the strikers in the Creusot
workshops.
 In the course of the same speech, Viviani strongly insisted on his own
Socialism, and declared that he intended “to remain faithful to the ideal of
his first years of public life.” If we are to judge by a brochure in 1897 by
the Allemanistes , under the title La Vérité sur l’union socialiste, this ideal
was opportunism; when he left Algeria for Paris, Viviani was transformed
into a Socialist, and the brochure then asserts that his new attitude is a lie.le La Vérité sur l’union socialiste, this ideal
was opportunism; when he left Algeria for Paris, Viviani was transformed
into a Socialist, and the brochure then asserts that his new attitude is a lie.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Evidently this work was edited by fanatics with no understanding of the
manners of polite society.
[Allemanistes: this was the name given to the members of the
“Revolutionary Socialist Workmen’s Party” because Allemane was the
best-known member of the group. They did not wish (in principle at any
rate) to admit any but workmen into the party; they were for a long time
very hostile to the parliamentary Socialists. During the Dreyfus affair they
went with the rest and demanded a retrial; to-day they have disappeared,
but they had some influence in the formation of the Syndicalist idea.—
Trans. Note.]
 In the Introduction à l’économie moderne, I have given the word myth
a more general sense, which closely corresponds to the narrower meaning
given to it here.
 P. Bureau, La Crise morale des temps nouveaux, p. 213. The author, a
professor of the Institut Catholique de Paris, adds: “This recommendation
can only excite hilarity nowadays. We are compelled to believe that the
author’s curious proposition was then accepted by a large number of his
correligionists, when we remember the astonishing success of the writings
of Léo Taxil after his pretended conversion.”
 The principal object of these illusions seems to me to have been the
calming of the anxieties that Renan had retained on the subject of the
beyond (cf. an article by Mgr. d’Hulst in the Correspondent on October 25,
1892, pp. 210, 224-225).
 Renan, Histoire du peuple d’Israël, vol. iv. p. 191.
 Renan, loc. cit. p. 267.
 Renan, loc. cit. pp. 199-200.
 Renan, op. cit. vol. iii. pp. 458-459.
 Renan, op. cit. vol. v. pp. 105-106.

--- PAGE BREAK ---du peuple d’Israël, vol. iv. p. 191.
 Renan, loc. cit. p. 267.
 Renan, loc. cit. pp. 199-200.
 Renan, op. cit. vol. iii. pp. 458-459.
 Renan, op. cit. vol. v. pp. 105-106.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 Renan, Nouvelles Études d‘histoire religieuse, p. vii. Previously he had
said, speaking of the persecutions: “People die for opinions, and not for
certitudes, because they believe and not because they know . . . whenever
beliefs are in question the greatest testimony and the most efficacious
demonstration is to die for them” (L’Église chrétienne, p. 317). This thesis
presupposes that martyrdom is a kind of ordeal, which was partly true in the
Roman epoch, by reason of certain special circumstances (G. Sorel, Le
Système historique de Renan, p. 335).
 Renan, Histoire du peuple d’Israel, vol. iii. p. 497.
 Translator’s Note.—In French, “braves gens.” Sorel is using the words
ironically to indicate those naive, philanthropically disposed people who
believe that they have discovered the solution to the problem of social
reform—whose attitude, however, is often complicated by a good deal of
hypocrisy, they being frequently rapacious when their own personal
interests are at stake.
 Parties, as a rule, define the reforms that they wish to bring about; but
the general strike has a character of infinity, because it puts on one side all
discussion of definite reforms and confronts men with a catastrophe. People
who pride themselves on their practical wisdom are very much upset by
such a conception, which puts forward no definite project of future social
organisation.
 The Constitution of Virginia dates from June 1776. The American
constitutions were known in Europe by two French translations, in 1778
and 1789. Kant had published the Foundations of the Metaphysic of Custom
in 1785 and the Critique of Practical Reason in 1788. One might say that
the utilitarian system of the ancients has certain analogies with economics,
that of the theologians with law, and that of Kant with the political theory of
growing democracy (cf. Jellinck, La Declaration des droits de l’homme et
du citoyen, trad. franc., pp. 18-25; pp. 49-50; p. 89).
 Bergson, Time and Free Will, Eng. trans., pp. 231-232. In this
philosophy a distinction is made between duration which flows, in whichmme et
du citoyen, trad. franc., pp. 18-25; pp. 49-50; p. 89).
 Bergson, Time and Free Will, Eng. trans., pp. 231-232. In this
philosophy a distinction is made between duration which flows, in which

--- PAGE BREAK ---rad. franc., pp. 18-25; pp. 49-50; p. 89).
 Bergson, Time and Free Will, Eng. trans., pp. 231-232. In this
philosophy a distinction is made between duration which flows, in which

--- PAGE BREAK ---

our personality manifests itself, and mathematical time, which science uses
to measure and space out accomplished facts.
 Bergson op. cit., Eng. trans., pp. 238-239.
 E. Le Roy, Dogme et critique, p. 239.
 It is easy to see here how the sophism creeps in; the universe
experienced by us may be either the real world in which we live or the
world invented by us for action.
 Renan, op. cit., vol. iv. p. 329.
 “Assent,” said Newman, “however strong, and accorded to images
however vivid, is not therefore necessarily practical. Strictly speaking, it is
not imagination that causes action; but hope and fear, likes and dislikes,
appetite, passion, affection, the stirrings of selfishness and self-love. What
imagination does for us is to find a means of stimulating those motive
powers; and it does so by providing a supply of objects strong enough to
stimulate them” (op. cit. p. 82). It may be seen from this that the illustrious
thinker adopts an attitude which strongly resembles that of the theory of
myths. It is impossible to read Newman without being struck by the
analogies between his thought and that of Bergson: people who like to make
the history of ideas depend on ethnical traditions will observe that Newman
was descended from Israelites.
 It was evidently a method of this kind that was adopted by those Greek
philosophers who wished to be able to argue about ethics without being
obliged to accept the customs which historical necessity had imposed at
Athens.
 Renan, op. cit. vol. iii. p. 497.
 It is extremely important to notice the analogy between the
revolutionary state of mind and that which corresponds to the morale of the
producers. I have indicated some remarkable resemblances at the end of
these reflections, but there are many more analogies to be pointed out.e of mind and that which corresponds to the morale of the
producers. I have indicated some remarkable resemblances at the end of
these reflections, but there are many more analogies to be pointed out.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 I believe that Léon de Seilhac was the first to render justice to the high
qualities of Fernand Pelloutier (Les Congres ouvriers en France, p. 272).
 These Reflections were first published in the Mouvement Socialiste
(first six months, 1906).
 Cf. “Les Grèves” in the Science sociale, October-November 1900.
 In the Insegnamenti sociali della economia contemporanea (written in
1903, but not published till 1906) I had already, but in a very inadequate
manner, pointed out what seemed to me to be the function of violence, in
maintaining the division between the proletariat and the middle classes (pp.
53-55).
 This expression is not too strong, seeing that the author’s studies have
been mainly confined to Hegel.
 Ch. Rappoport, La Philosophie de l‘histoire comme science de
l’évolution.
 See note p. 13. Trans.
 This expectation has been realised; for in a speech in the Chambre des
Deputés on May 11, 1907, Jaurès called me “the metaphysician of
Syndicalism,” doubtless ironically.
 Capital, Eng. trans., p. xxvi.
 Loc. cit. p. xvii.
 Some Belgian comrades have been offended by these innocent jokes,
which nevertheless I retain here; Belgian Socialism is best known in France
through Vandevelde, one of the most useless creatures that ever existed,
who not being able to console himself for having been born in a country too
small to give scope to his genius, came to Paris and gave lectures on all
kinds of subjects, and who can be reproached, among other things, for
having made an enormous profit on a very small intellectual capital. I have

--- PAGE BREAK ---to Paris and gave lectures on all
kinds of subjects, and who can be reproached, among other things, for
having made an enormous profit on a very small intellectual capital. I have

--- PAGE BREAK ---

already said what I think of him in the Introduction à l’économie moderne,
pp. 42-49.
 The last four chapters have been much more developed than they were
in the Italian text. I have thus been able to give more space to philosophic
considerations. The Italian articles have been collected in a brochure under
the title Lo Sciopero generale e la violenza with a preface by Enrico Leone.
 Bernstein complains of the pettifoggery and cant which reigns among
the social democrats (Socialisme théorique et socialdémocratie pratique,
French translation, p. 277). He addresses these words from Schiller to social
democracy: “Let it dare to appear what it is” (p. 238).
 Aristotle, Politics, v. 9, §§ 10, 11.
 Engels, La Question agraire et le socialisme. critique du programme du
parti ouvrier français, translated in the Mouvement socialiste. October 15,
1900, p. 453. It has often been pointed out that certain Socialist candidates
had separate bills for the town and the country.
 Hampered by the monopoly of the licensed stockbrokers (agents de
change), the other brokers (coulissiers) of the Bourse thus form a financial
proletariat, and among them more than one Socialist admirer of Jaurès may
be found. [Trans. Note.—The coulissiers are only allowed to deal in certain
markets—the Kaffir, Argentine, etc. They are constantly conducting press
campaigns against the privileged brokers. Many of them are naturalised
German Jews, and the licensed brokers utilise this fact in defending their
own position.]
 The Socialist deputy Sudekum, the best-dressed man in Berlin, played
a large part in the abduction of the Princess of Coburg; let us hope that he
had no financial interest in this affaire. At that time he represented Jaurès’s
newspaper at Berlin.
 H. Turot was for some considerable time one of the editors of the
nationalist paper, L’Eclair, and of the Petite Republique at the same time.that time he represented Jaurès’s
newspaper at Berlin.
 H. Turot was for some considerable time one of the editors of the
nationalist paper, L’Eclair, and of the Petite Republique at the same time.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

When Judet took over the management of L’Eclair he dismissed his
Socialist contributor.
 J. Reinach, Démagogues et soclalistes, p. 198.
 Clémenceau knows the Socialists in Parliament exceedingly well, and
from long experience.
 At The Hague Conference the German delegate declared that his
country bore the expense of armed peace with ease; Léon Bourgeois held
that France bore “quite as lightly the personal and financial obligations
which the national defence imposed on its citizens.” Ch. Guieysse, who
quotes this speech, thinks that the Tsar had asked for the limitation of
military expenditure because Russia was not rich enough yet to maintain
herself at the level of the great capitalist countries (La France et la paix
armée, p. 45).
 That is why Briand told on June 9, 1907, his constituents at Saint-
Etienne that the Republic had made a sacred pledge to the workers about
old-age pensions.
 In the matter of social “clowneries” there are very few new things
under the sun. Aristotle had already laid down the rules of social peace: he
says that demagogues “should in their harangues appear to be concerned
only with the interest of the rich, just as in oligarchies the government
should only seem to have in view the interests of the people” (loc. cit.).
That is a text which should be inscribed on the door of the offices of the
Direction du Travail.
 Cf. G. Sorel, Insegnamenti sociali, p. 343.
 In his speech of May 11, 1907, Jaurès said that nowhere had there been
such violence as there was in England during the period when both the
employers and Government refused to recognise the trade unions. “They
have given way; there is now vigorous and strong action, but which is at the
same time legal, firm, and wise.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---employers and Government refused to recognise the trade unions. “They
have given way; there is now vigorous and strong action, but which is at the
same time legal, firm, and wise.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 Le Play, Organisation du travail, chap. ii. § 21. According to this
writer, more attention should be paid to moral forces than to the systems
that are invented in order to regulate wages in a more or less automatic
manner.
 About the forces which tend to maintain sentiments of moderation, cf.
Insegnamenti sociali, part iii. chap. v.
 The French law of December 27, 1892, seems to have foreseen this
possibility; it lays down that delegates on conciliation boards should be
chosen among the interested parties; it thus keeps out these professionals
whose presence would render the prestige of the authorities and of
philanthropists precarious.
 G. Sorel, Insegnamenti sociali, p. 390.
 Everybody who has seen trades union leaders close at hand is struck
with the extreme difference which exists between France and England from
this point of view; the English trades union leaders rapidly become
gentlemen, without anybody blaming them for it (P. de Rousiers, Le Trade-
unionisme en Angleterre, p. 309 and p. 322). While correcting this proof, I
read an article by Jacques Bardaux, pointing out that a carpenter and a
miner had been made knights by Edward VII. (Débats, December 16,
1907).
 Some years ago Arsène Dumont invented the term social capillarity to
express the slow climbing of the classes. If Syndicalism submitted to the
influence of the pacifists, it would be a powerful agent of social capillarity.
 It has often been pointed out that the workers’ organisation in England
is a simple union of interests, for the purposes of immediate material
advantages. Some writers are very pleased with this situation because, quite
rightly, they see in it an obstacle to Socialistic propaganda. To embarrass
the Socialists, even at the price of economic progress and of the safety of
the culture of the future, that is the great aim of certain great Idealists dear
to the philanthropic middle classes.arrass
the Socialists, even at the price of economic progress and of the safety of
the culture of the future, that is the great aim of certain great Idealists dear
to the philanthropic middle classes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s, even at the price of economic progress and of the safety of
the culture of the future, that is the great aim of certain great Idealists dear
to the philanthropic middle classes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 See Translator’s Note, p. 162.
 This imbecile has become Minister of Commerce. All his speeches on
this question are full of balderdash; he has been a lunacy doctor, and has
perhaps been influenced by the logic and the language of his clients.
 The Minister declared that he was creating “real democracy,” and that it
was demagogy “to give way to external pressure, to haughty summonses,
which, for the most part, are only higher bids and baits addressed to the
credulity of people whose life is laborious.”
 Ch. Guieysse, op. cit. p. 125.
 Speaking of the elections of 1869, he said that there had been
“violences of language which France had not till then heard, even in the
worst days of the Revolution” (Organisation du Travail, 3rd ed. p. 340).
Evidently, the revolution of 1848 was meant. In 1873, he declared that the
Emperor could not congratulate himself on having abrogated the system of
restraint on the press, before having reformed the morals of the country
(Réforme sociale en France, 5th ed. tome iii. p. 356).
 Sumner Maine observed a long while ago that it was England’s fate to
have advocates who aroused very little sympathy (Le Droit international,
French translation, p. 279). Many Englishmen believe that by humiliating
their country they will rouse more sympathy towards themselves; but this
supposition is not borne out by the facts.
 This is apparently the way in which the proletarian movement is
spoken of in the fashionable circles of refined Socialism.
 Cf. the reflections of Engels in the preface to the new edition of articles
by Marx which he published in 1895 under the title, Struggles of the
Classes in France from 1848 to 1850. This preface is wanting in the French
translation. In the German edition a passage has been left out, the social
democratic leaders considering certain phrases of Engels not politic enough.8 to 1850. This preface is wanting in the French
translation. In the German edition a passage has been left out, the social
democratic leaders considering certain phrases of Engels not politic enough.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ace is wanting in the French
translation. In the German edition a passage has been left out, the social
democratic leaders considering certain phrases of Engels not politic enough.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 According to the necessities of the moment he is for or against the
general strike. According to some he voted for the general strike at the
International Congress of 1900; according to others he abstained.
 Gambetta complained because the French clergy was “acephalous”; he
would have liked a select body to have been formed in its midst, with which
the Government could discuss matters (Garilhe, Le clergé séculier français
un XIXe siècle, pp. 88-89). Syndicalism has no head with which it would be
possible to carry on diplomatic relations usefully.
 [The writers on moral theology who maintain that our actions should be
guided only by absolutely sure maxims were called tutiorists; opposed to
them were the laxists. In the Provinciales Pascal defends the tutiorist
position, the Jesuits he attacks are laxists.—Trans. Note.]
 Cf. G. Sorel, Insegnamenti sociali, p. 388. The hypothesis of a great
European war seems very far fetched at the moment.
 This notion of revolutionary preservation is very important; I have
pointed out something analogous in the passage from Judaism to
Christianity (Le Système historique de Renan, pp. 72-73, 171-172, 467).
 Cf. what I have said on the transformation which Marx wrought in
Socialism, Insegnamenti sociali, pp. 179-186.
 [The French is sociétés de résistance. What is meant is the syndicate,
considered principally as a means of combining workmen against the
employers.—Trans. Note.]
 I will come back to this resemblance in Chapter VII. iii.
 P. de Rousiers La Vie américaine, l’éducation et la société, p. 19.
“Fathers give very little advice to their children, and let them learn for
themselves, as they say over there” (p. 14). “Not only does (the American)
wish to be independent, but he wishes to be powerful” (La Vie américaine.
ranches, fermes et usines, p. 6).et them learn for
themselves, as they say over there” (p. 14). “Not only does (the American)
wish to be independent, but he wishes to be powerful” (La Vie américaine.
ranches, fermes et usines, p. 6).

--- PAGE BREAK ---emselves, as they say over there” (p. 14). “Not only does (the American)
wish to be independent, but he wishes to be powerful” (La Vie américaine.
ranches, fermes et usines, p. 6).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 [This refers to the conduct of former syndicates which limited their
ambitions to the interests of their own handicraft without concerning
themselves with the general interests of the working classes.—Trans. Note.]
 There is constant talk nowadays of organising labour, i.e., of utilising
the corporative spirit by giving it over to the management of well-
intentioned, very serious and responsible people, and liberating the workers
from the yoke of sophists. The responsible people are de Mun, Charles
Benoist (the amusing specialist in constitutional law), Arthur Fontaine, and
the band of democratic abbés, . . . and lastly Gabriel Hanotaux!
 Vilredo Pareto laughs at the simple middle class who are happy,
because they are no longer threatened by intractable Marxians, and who
have fallen into the snare of the conciliatory Marxians (Systèmes socialistes,
tome ii. p. 453).
 Cf. G. Sorel, Insegnamenti sociali, p. 53.
 Mme. G. Renard has published in the Suisse of July 26, 1900, an
article full of lofty psychological considerations about the workers’ fête
given by Millerand (Léon de Seilhac, Le Monde socialiste, pp. 307-309).
Her husband has solved the grave question as to who will drink Clos-
Vougeot in the society of the future (G. Renard, Le Régime socialiste, p.
175).
 In an article written in September 1851 (the first of the series
published under the title: Revolution and Counter-revolution), Marx
established the following parallelism between the development of the
middle class and of the proletariat: To a numerous, rich, concentrated, and
powerful middle class corresponds a numerous, strong, concentrated and
intelligent proletariat. Thus he seems to have thought that the intelligence of
the proletariat depends on the historical conditions which secured power in
society to the middle classes. He says, again, that the true characters of the
class war only exist in countries where the middle class has recast the
Government in conformity with its needs.power in
society to the middle classes. He says, again, that the true characters of the
class war only exist in countries where the middle class has recast the
Government in conformity with its needs.

--- PAGE BREAK ---the middle classes. He says, again, that the true characters of the
class war only exist in countries where the middle class has recast the
Government in conformity with its needs.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 “Those who, like Sismondi, would return to the just proportion of
production, while preserving the existing bases of society, are reactionary,
since, to be consistent, they should also desire to re-establish all the other
conditions of past times . . . . In existing society, in the industry based on
individual exchanges, the anarchy of production, which is the source of so
much poverty is at the same time the source of all progress” (Marx, The
Poverty of Philosophy, Eng. trans., p. 41).
 Tocqueville, L’Ancien Régime et la Révolution (édition des œuvres
complates ), livre ii. chapitres i., iii., iv., pp. 89, 91, 94, 288.
 Tocqueville, Mélanges, pp. 155-156.
 Tocqueville, L’Ancien Régime et la Révolution, pp. 35-37.
 L. Madelin also comes to this conclusion in an article in the Débats of
July 6, 1907, on the prefects of Napoleon I.
 Tocqueville, L’Ancien Réglme et la Révolution, pp. 254-262, and
Mélanges, p. 62. Cf. chapter IV. iv. of my study on Les Illusions du Progrès.
 Kautsky has dwelt very strongly on the rôle played by the treasures
which the French armies took possession of (La Lutte des classes en France
en 1789, French trans., pp. 104-106).
 Gaston Boissier, La Fin du paganisme, livre iv. chap. iii.
 Fustel de Coulanges, Origines du régime féodal, pp. 566-567. I do not
deny that there is a good deal of exaggeration in the thesis of Fustel de
Coulanges, but the conservation was undeniable.
 Fustel de Coulanges, La Monarchie franque, p. 650.
 [Vico’s doctrine of “reflux” (ricorsi). Civilisation comes to an end in
the “barbarism of reflection” which is worse than the primitive barbarism of
sensation. . . . The mind, after traversing its course of progress, after rising
from sensation . . . to the rational, from violence to equity, is bound, inch is worse than the primitive barbarism of
sensation. . . . The mind, after traversing its course of progress, after rising
from sensation . . . to the rational, from violence to equity, is bound, in

--- PAGE BREAK ---primitive barbarism of
sensation. . . . The mind, after traversing its course of progress, after rising
from sensation . . . to the rational, from violence to equity, is bound, in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

conformity with its eternal nature, to retraverse the course, to relapse into
violence and sensation, and thence to renew its upward movement, “to
commence a reflux.” See chap. xi. of The Philosophy of Giambattista Vico,
by Benedetto Croce. Eng. trans.—Trans. Note.]
 The reader may usefully refer to a very interesting chapter of
Bernstein’s book, Socialisme théorique et socialdémocratie pratique, pp.
47-63. Bernstein, who knows nothing of the aims of our present-day
syndicalism, has not, in my opinion, drawn from Marxism all that it
contains. His book, moreover, was written at a time when it was impossible
still to understand the revolutionary movement, in view of which these
reflections are written.
 [The word “conclusions” is employed in two senses in civil
proceedings. Each counsel presents his claims and arguments to the court in
writing in a document which is called “conclusion.” On the other hand, at
the end of the case the ministre public states what, in his opinion, is the
decision the court ought to make for the best administration of Justice; these
are the “conclusions” of the ministre public. The judgment always declares
that the ministre public has been heard in his “conclusion.” Proudhon uses
the word in the second sense. On the return of the Bourbons, Louis XVIII,
issued a proclamation in which he stated the principles on which it seemed
to him the government of the country must henceforth rest.—Trans. Note.]
 Proudhon, La Guerre et la paix, livre v. chap. iii.
 Tocqueville, Mélanges, p. 189.
 It is very remarkable that in the seventeenth century Boileau had
already pronounced against the supernatural Christian epic; this was
because his contemporaries, however religious they might have been, did
not expect that angels would come to help Vauban to capture fortresses;
they did not doubt what was related in the Bible, but they did not see matter
in it for epics, because these marvels were not destined to be reproduced.
 Ernest Hamel, Histoire de la conspiration du général Malet, p. 241.
According to some newspapers, Jaurès, in his evidence before the Court ofause these marvels were not destined to be reproduced.
 Ernest Hamel, Histoire de la conspiration du général Malet, p. 241.
According to some newspapers, Jaurès, in his evidence before the Court of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Assizes of the Seine on June 5, 1907, in the Bousquet-Lévy trial, said that
the police officers would show more consideration for the accused,
Bousquet, when he had become a legislator. [Bousquet was the secretary of
the bakers’ syndicate, with whom the police dealt rather harshly. As he was
a good orator Jaurès looked upon him as a future deputy.—Trans. Note.]
 Drumont, La Fin d’un monde, pp. 137-138.
 Drumont, op. cit. p. 128.
 Drumont, op. cit. p. 136.
 Basoche was a name given somewhat ironically to all the people
employed in the law courts—principally solicitors and ushers.
 Taine, La Révolution, tome i. p. 155.
 Yet this was the article which was applied to Dreyfus, without
anybody, moreover, having attempted to prove that France had been in
danger.
 The details themselves of this law can only be explained by
comparing them with the rules of the old penal law.
 Modern authors, by taking literally certain instructions of the papacy,
have been able to maintain that the Inquisition had been relatively
indulgent, having regard to the customs of the time.
 Tocqueville is probably alluding here to the maxims of Blackstone on
the unlimited power of the English Parliament. The economists of the
eighteenth century thought that the State had the right to do everything,
since it was the expression of “reason,” and no single force could oppose
the action of this “reason.”
 Tocqueville, L’Ancien Régime et la Révolution, p. 100.
 Tocqueville, op. cit. pp. 235-240.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ression of “reason,” and no single force could oppose
the action of this “reason.”
 Tocqueville, L’Ancien Régime et la Révolution, p. 100.
 Tocqueville, op. cit. pp. 235-240.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 Tocqueville, op. cit. p. 241.
 In the history of judicial ideas in France, full consideration must be
given to the dividing up of landed property, which, by multiplying the
independent heads of productive units, contributed more to the spread of
judicial ideas among the masses than was ever done among the literate
classes by the finest treatises on philosophy.
 Sumner Maine, Essais sur le gouvernement populaire, French trans.,
p. 20.
 The extraordinary and illegal severity which was brought to bear in
the application of the penalty is explained by the fact that the aim of the
trial was to terrify certain spies who, by their situation, were out of reach;
whether Dreyfus was guilty or innocent troubled his accusers little; the
essential thing was to protect the State from treachery and to reassure the
French people, who were maddened by the fear of war.
 In L’Humanité of November 17, 1904, there is a letter from Paul
Guieysse and from Vazeilles, declaring that nothing of this kind can be
imputed to Colonel Hartmann. Jaurès follows this letter with a strange
commentary; he considers that the informers acted in perfect good faith,
and he regrets that the colonel should have furnished “imprudently, further
matter for the systematic campaign of the reactionary newspapers.” Jaurès
has no suspicion that this commentary made his own case much worse, and
that it was not unworthy of a disciple of Escobar.
 J. Jaurès, La Convention, p. 1732.
 This was on March 24, 1898, at a particularly critical moment of the
Dreyfus case, when the Nationalists were asking that agitators and enemies
of the army should be swept away. J. Reinach says that De Vogüé openly
invited the army to begin again the work of 1850 (Histoire de l’affaire
Dreyfus, tome iii. p. 545).
 De Vogüé has the habit in his polemics of thanking his adversaries for
having given him much amusement; that is why I take the liberty of calling(Histoire de l’affaire
Dreyfus, tome iii. p. 545).
 De Vogüé has the habit in his polemics of thanking his adversaries for
having given him much amusement; that is why I take the liberty of calling

--- PAGE BREAK ---re
Dreyfus, tome iii. p. 545).
 De Vogüé has the habit in his polemics of thanking his adversaries for
having given him much amusement; that is why I take the liberty of calling

--- PAGE BREAK ---

him jovial, although his writings are rather soporific.
 J. Jaurès, op. cit. p. 1434.
 J. Jaurès, op. cit. p. 77.
 J. Jaurès, op. cit. p. 1731.
 I bring to notice here a fact which is perhaps not very well known: the
Spanish war in the time of Napoleon was the occasion of innumerable
atrocities, but Colonel Lafaille says that in Catalonia the murders and
cruelties were never committed by Spanish soldiers who had been enlisted
for some time and had become familiar with the usages of war (Mémoires
sur les campagnes de Catalogne de 1808 à 1814, pp. 164-165).
 According to Joseph Reinach, an error was committed after the war in
choosing as generals former pupils of the military schools (Saint-Cyr and
the Polytechnique). He said that the Jesuit colleges had sent many clericals
to the School, and it would have been better to choose instead officers who
had risen from the ranks; the generals would have then been less clerical.
Loc. cit. SS 555-556 (I believe that his system would not have had the
result he imagined it would).
 “The society which will organise production on the basis of a free and
equal association of producers will transport the whole machinery of State
to where its place will be henceforward—in the museum of antiquities, by
the side of the spinning wheel and the bronze axe” (Engels, Les Origines de
la Société, French trans. p. 281).
 Manifeste communiste, translated, Andler, tome i. p. 39.
 After the trial of Hervé, Léon Daudet wrote: “Those who followed
this case were thrilled by the testimonies, by no means theatrical, of the
trade union secretaries” (Libre Parole, December 31, 1905).
 Yet Jaurès had the audacity to declare in the Chamber on May 11,
1907, that there was only “on the surface of the working-class movement aade union secretaries” (Libre Parole, December 31, 1905).
 Yet Jaurès had the audacity to declare in the Chamber on May 11,
1907, that there was only “on the surface of the working-class movement a

--- PAGE BREAK ---s” (Libre Parole, December 31, 1905).
 Yet Jaurès had the audacity to declare in the Chamber on May 11,
1907, that there was only “on the surface of the working-class movement a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

few paradoxical and outrageous formulas, which originated, not from the
negation of the fatherland, but from condemnation of the abuse to which
word and idea were so often put.” Language like this could only have been
used before an assembly which was entirely ignorant of the working-class
movement.
 The Petit Parisien, which makes a specialty of Socialist and working-
class questions, warned strikers on March 31, 1907, that they “must never
imagine that they are absolved from the observance of the ordinary social
duties and responsibilities.”
 At the time when the antimilitarists were beginning to occupy public
attention, the Petit Parisien was distinguished by its patriotism: on October
8, 1905, it published an article on “The Sacred Duty” and on “The Worship
of this Tricolor Flag which has carried all over the World our Glories and
our Liberties” ; on January 1, 1906, it congratulated the Jury de la Seine:
“The flag has been avenged for the insults flung by its detractors on this
noble emblem. When it is carried through the streets it is saluted. The juries
have done more than bow to it; they have gathered round it with respect.”
This is certainly very cautious Socialism.
 Two motions had been discussed at length by the National Council,
one proposing that the departmental federations should be invited to enter
the electoral struggle wherever it was possible, the other that candidates
should be put forward everywhere. One member got up and said, “I should
be glad of your earnest attention, for the argument which I am about to state
may at first sight appear strange and paradoxical. (These two motions) are
not irreconcilable, if we try to solve this contradiction according to the
natural Marxian method of solving any contradiction” (Socialiste, October
7, 1905). It seems that nobody understood. And, in fact, it was
unintelligible.
 The nature of these articles will not allow of any long discussion of
this subject but I believe that it would be possible to develop still further the
application of Bergson’s ideas to the theory of the general strike.articles will not allow of any long discussion of
this subject but I believe that it would be possible to develop still further the
application of Bergson’s ideas to the theory of the general strike.

--- PAGE BREAK ---llow of any long discussion of
this subject but I believe that it would be possible to develop still further the
application of Bergson’s ideas to the theory of the general strike.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Movement, in Bergson’s philosophy, is looked upon as an undivided whole;
which leads us precisely to the catastrophic conception of Socialism.
 Bourdeau, Evolution du Socialisme, p. 232.
 This is seen, for example, in the efforts made by the trade unions to
obtain laws absolving them from the civil responsibilities of their acts.
 Tarde could never understand the reputation enjoyed by Sidney Webb,
who seemed to him to be a worthless scribbler.
 Mátin, Le Socialisme en Angleterre, p. 210. This writer has received
from the Government a certificate of socialism; on July 26, 1904, the
French Commissioner-General at the St. Louis exhibition said: “M. Métin is
animated by the best democratic spirit; he is an excellent republican; he is
even a socialist whom working-class organisation should welcome as a
friend” (Association ouvrière, July 30, 1904). An amusing study could be
made of those persons who possess certificates of this kind, given to them,
either by the Government, the Musée social, or the well-informed press.
 The errors committed by Marx are numerous and sometimes
enormous (cf. G. Sorel, Saggi di critica del marxismo, pp. 51-57).
 It has often been remarked that English or American sectarians whose
religious exaltation was fed by the apocalyptic myths were often none the
less very practical men.
 At the present time, this doctrine occupies an important place in
German exegesis; it was introduced into France by the Abbè Loisy.
 Cf. the Letter to Daniel Halévy, IV.
 In French petite science. This expression is used to indicate the
popular science with which the majority is much more familiar than it is
with the difficult researches of the real scientists. These latter are generally
as modest as the writers on popular science are vain and boastful.which the majority is much more familiar than it is
with the difficult researches of the real scientists. These latter are generally
as modest as the writers on popular science are vain and boastful.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 I have tried to show elsewhere how this social myth, which has
disappeared, was succeeded by a piety which has remained extremely
important in Catholic life; this evolution from the social to the individual,
seems to me quite natural in a religion (Le Système historique de Renan, pp.
374-382).
 I believe, moreover, that the whole of Spencer’s evolutionism is to be
explained as an application of the most commonplace psychology to
physics.
 This is another application of Bergson’s theories.
 This is the “global knowledge” of Bergson’s philosophy.
 I do not remember that the official Socialists have ever shown up the
ridiculousness of the novels of Bellamy, which have had so great a success.
These novels needed criticism all the more, because they presented to the
people an entirely middle-class ideal of life. They were a natural product of
America, a country which is ignorant of the class war; but in Europe, would
not the theorists of the class war have understood them?
 In the article which I have already quoted, Clemenceau recalls that
Jaurès made use of these outbidding tactics in a long speech which he made
at Beziers.
 In an article, Introduction à la metaphysique, published in 1903,
Bergson points out that disciples are always inclined to exaggerate the
points of difference between masters, and that “the master in so far as he
formulates, develops, translates into abstract ideas what he brings is already
in a way his own disciple.” [Eng. trans. by T. E. Hulme.]
 A. Métin, op. cit. p. 191.
 G. Sorel, Avenir socialiste des syndicats, p. 12.
 Bergson, loc. cit.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ngs is already
in a way his own disciple.” [Eng. trans. by T. E. Hulme.]
 A. Métin, op. cit. p. 191.
 G. Sorel, Avenir socialiste des syndicats, p. 12.
 Bergson, loc. cit.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 Bergson, loc. cit.
 I do not know whether the learned (economists and other people who
make inquiries on social conditions) have always quite understood the
function of piece-work. It is evident that the well-known formula, “the
producer should be able to buy back his product,” arose from reflections on
the subject of piece-work.
 “It may be said that the economic history of society turns on this
antithesis,” —of town and country (Capital, vol. i. p. 152, col. 1).
 It may be remembered that in the eruption at Martinique a governor
perished who, in 1879, had been one of the protagonists of the Socialists
congress held at Marseilles. The Commune itself was not fatal to all its
partisans; several have had fairly distinguished careers; the ambassador of
France at Rome was among the most importunate of those who, in 1871,
demanded the death of the hostages.
 G. Le Bon, Psychologie du socialisme, 3rd ed. p. 111 and pp. 457-459.
The author, who a few years ago was treated as an imbecile by the little
bullies of university Socialism, is one of the most original physicists of our
time.
 The Socialists are mistaken in believing that the existence of a middle
class is bound up with the existence of the capitalist industrial system. Any
country submitted to a bureaucracy, directing production—either directly or
through corporations—would have a middle class.
 I know, for instance, a very enlightened Catholic, who gives vent with
singular acrimony to his contempt for the French middle class; but his ideal
is Americanism, i.e. a very young and very active capitalistic society.
 P. de Rousiers was very much struck by the way rich fathers in the
United States forced their sons to earn their own living; he often met
“Frenchmen who were profoundly shocked by what they called the egoism
of American fathers. It seemed revolting to them that a rich man shoulds forced their sons to earn their own living; he often met
“Frenchmen who were profoundly shocked by what they called the egoism
of American fathers. It seemed revolting to them that a rich man should

--- PAGE BREAK ---to earn their own living; he often met
“Frenchmen who were profoundly shocked by what they called the egoism
of American fathers. It seemed revolting to them that a rich man should

--- PAGE BREAK ---

leave his son to earn his own living, that he did nothing to set him up In
life” (La Vie américaine, l’éducation et la société, p. 9).
 Capital, vol. i. p. 342, col. 1.
 It is not difficult to see that propagandists are obliged to refer
frequently to this aspect of the social revolution: this will take place while
the intermediary classes are still in existence, but when they become
sickened by the farce of social pacification, and when a period of such great
economic progress has been reached that the future will appear in colours
favourable to everybody.
 Kautsky has often dwelt on this idea, of which Engels was particularly
fond.
 Bernstein said about this story that Brentano might have exaggerated a
little, but that “the phrase quoted by him was not inconsistent with Marx’s
general line of thought” (Mouvement socialiste, September 1, 1899, p. 270).
Of what can Utopias be composed? Of the past and often of a very far-off
past; it is probably for this reason that Marx called Beesly a reactionary,
while everybody else was astonished at his revolutionary boldness. The
Catholics are not the only people who are hypnotised by the Middle Ages,
and Yves Guyot pokes fun at the collectivist troubadourisrn of Lafargue
(Lafargue and Y. Guyot, La Propriété, pp. 121-122).
 I have elsewhere put forward the hypothesis that Marx, in the
penultimate chapter of the first volume of Capital perhaps wished to
demonstrate the difference between the evolution of the proletariat and that
of middle-class force. He said that the working class is disciplined, united
and organised by the very mechanism of capitalist production. There is
perhaps an indication of a movement towards liberty, opposed to the
movement towards automatism which will be discussed later when we
come to consider middle-class force (Saggi di critica, pp. 46-47).
 The history of scientific superstitions is of the deepest interest to
philosophers who wish to understand Socialism. These superstitions have
remained dear to our democracy, as they had been dear to the beaux espritscientific superstitions is of the deepest interest to
philosophers who wish to understand Socialism. These superstitions have
remained dear to our democracy, as they had been dear to the beaux esprits

--- PAGE BREAK ---ons is of the deepest interest to
philosophers who wish to understand Socialism. These superstitions have
remained dear to our democracy, as they had been dear to the beaux esprits

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of the Old Regime; I have touched on a few of the aspects of this history in
Les Illusions du progrès. Engels was often under the influence of these
errors, from which Marx himself was not always free.
 Marx quotes this curious phrase from Ure, written about 1830: “This
invention supports the doctrine already developed by us: if capital enlists
the aid of science, the rebel hand of labour always learns how to be
tractable” (Capital, Eng. trans., vol. i. p. 188, col. 2).
 To use the language of the new school, science was considered from
the point of view of the consumer and not from the point of view of the
producer.
 Atlanticus, Ein Blick in den Zukunftsstaat. E. Seillière reviewed this
book in the Débats of August 16, 1899.
 “It has not been enough noticed how feeble is the reach of deduction
in the psychological and moral sciences. . . . Very soon appeal has to be
made to common sense, that is to say, to the continuous experience of the
real, in order to inflect the consequences deduced and bend them along the
sinuosities of life. Deduction succeeds in things moral only metaphorically
so to speak” (Bergson, Creative Evolution, p. 224). Newman had already
written something similar to this, but in more precise terms: “Thus it is that
the logician for his own purposes, and most usefully as far as these
purposes are concerned, turns rivers, full, winding and beautiful, into
navigable canals. . . . His business is not to ascertain facts in the concrete
but to find and dress up middle terms; and, provided they and the extremes
which they go between are not equivocal, either in themselves or in their
use. Supposing he can enable his pupils to show well in aviva voce
disputation, . . . he has achieved the main purpose of his profession”
(Grammar of Assent, pp. 261-262). There is no weakness in this
denunciation of small talk.
 See note, p. 66.
 This is the office of the Minister for Labour, and is principally
occupied with the Syndicates. It gives itself a certain socialistic air in theis
denunciation of small talk.
 See note, p. 66.
 This is the office of the Minister for Labour, and is principally
occupied with the Syndicates. It gives itself a certain socialistic air in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

hope of duping the workmen.
 A few years ago, this illustrious warrior (?) was instrumental in
blocking the candidature for the Collège de France of Paul Tennery (whose
erudition was universally recognised in Europe) in favour of a positivist.
The positivists constitute a lay congregation which is ready for any dirty
work.
 Pascal protested eloquently against those who considered obscurity an
objection against Catholicism, and Brunetière was right in looking upon
him as being one of the most anticartesian of the men of his time (Etudes
critiques, 4e série, pp. 144-149).
 J. Reinach, Diderot, pp. 116-117, 125-127, 131-132.
 Brunetière, Évolution des genres, p. 122. Elsewhere he calls Diderot a
philistine, p. 153.
 it is to the credit of the impressionists that they showed that these fine
shades can be rendered by painting; but some few among them soon began
to paint according to the formulas of a school, and then there appeared a
scandalous contrast between their works and their avowed aims.
 Tocqueville, Democratie en Amérique, tome i. chap. iii. Le Play,
Réforme sociale en France, chap. xvii. 4.
 In my Introduction à l’économie moderne I have shown how this
distinction may be used to throw light on many questions which had till
then remained exceedingly obscure, and notably to show the exact value of
certain important arguments used by Proudhon.
 [Laws in France are discussed by a committee elected by the
Chamber; they alter the text of the law, and it is the duty of the rapporteur,
named by the committee, to defend the amended text in open discussion in
the Chamber. —Trans. Note.]

--- PAGE BREAK ---Chamber; they alter the text of the law, and it is the duty of the rapporteur,
named by the committee, to defend the amended text in open discussion in
the Chamber. —Trans. Note.]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 Doctor Augagneur was for a long time one of the glories of that class
of Intellectuals who looked upon Socialism as a variety of Dreyfusism; his
great protests in favour of Justice have brought him to the governorship of
Madagascar, which proves that virtue is sometimes rewarded.
 In Algeria the scandals in the administration of the consistories (the
administrative councils of the Jewish community), which had become sinks
of electoral corruption, compelled the Government to reform them; but the
recent law respecting the separation of the Churches and the State will
probably bring about a return to the old practices.
 An attempt to organise a railway strike was made in 1898; Joseph
Reinach says this about it: “A very shady individual, Guérard, who had
founded an association of railway workers and employees which had a
membership of 20,000, intervened (in the conflict with the navvies of Paris)
with the announcement of a general strike of his syndicate. . . . Brisson
authorised search warrants, had the stations guarded by soldiery, and placed
lines of sentinels along the track; nobody came out” (Historie de l‘affaire
Dreyfus, tome iv. pp. 310-311). Nowadays the Guérard syndicate is in such
good odour with the Government that the latter has granted it permission to
start a big lottery. On May 14, 1907, Clemenceau spoke of it in the
Chamber as a body of “sensible and reasonable people,” opposed to the
goings-on of the Confédération du Travail.
 Mouvement socialiste, December 1-15, 1905, p. 130.
 The clerical party thought that it would be able to make use of these
tactics to block the application of the law regarding the congregations; it
hoped that some show of violence would cause the Government to give
way, but the latter stuck to its guns, and it may be said that one of the
mainsprings of the Parliamentary system was thus broken, since there are
fewer obstacles than formerly to the dictatorship of Parliament.
 In 1890 the National Congress at Lille of the Guesdist party passed a
resolution by which it declared that the general strike of the miners was
actually possible, and that a general strike of the miners by itself wouldal Congress at Lille of the Guesdist party passed a
resolution by which it declared that the general strike of the miners was
actually possible, and that a general strike of the miners by itself would

--- PAGE BREAK ---of the Guesdist party passed a
resolution by which it declared that the general strike of the miners was
actually possible, and that a general strike of the miners by itself would

--- PAGE BREAK ---

bring about the results that are expected in vain from a stoppage of every
trade.
 “There may be room in the party for individual initiative, but the
arbitrary fancies of the individual must be put down. The safety of the party
lies in its laws; we must steadfastly abide by them. It is the constitution
freely chosen by ourselves which binds us together, and which will enable
us to conquer together or to die.” Thus spoke a learned exponent of
Socialism at the National Council (Socialiste, October 7, 1905). If a Jesuit
expressed himself thus, there would be an outcry about monkish fanaticism.
 J. Jaurès, La Convention, p. 1384.
 Deville, Le Capital, p.10.
 Paul Leroy-Beaulieu recently proposed to call the whole body of
Government employees “the Fourth Estate,” and those in private
employment “the Fifth Estate”; he said that the first tended to form
hereditary cases (Débats, November 28, 1905). As time goes on, the
distinction between the two groups will grow more pronounced; the first
group is a great source of support to Socialist politicians, who desire to
transform it into a perfectly disciplined corporation capable of taking the
lead in the working-class movement; thus, by the intermediacy of the
employees of the State, the Parliamentarians would govern the more easily
the workers in private industry.
 This does not prevent Vandervelde from comparing the future world
to the Abbey of Thelema, celebrated by Rabelais, where everybody did as
he pleased, and from saying that he aspires to an “anarchist community”
(Destrée and Vandervelde, Le Socialisme en Belgique, p. 289). Oh, the
magic of big words!
 Many French papers advertised the merits of the Russian minister,
Witte, exactly as they advertised cures made by patent medicines. The
French press receives at all time large subventions from the Russian
embassy, but in this period Witte spent much more than usual, in order to
secure his continuance in office by quoting French opinion.ench press receives at all time large subventions from the Russian
embassy, but in this period Witte spent much more than usual, in order to
secure his continuance in office by quoting French opinion.

--- PAGE BREAK ---at all time large subventions from the Russian
embassy, but in this period Witte spent much more than usual, in order to
secure his continuance in office by quoting French opinion.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 The correspondent of the Débats, in the issue of November 25, 1906,
related how the members of the Duma had congratulated a Japanese
journalist on the victories of his compatriots. (Cf. the Débats, December 25,
1907.)
 We may also ask how much the old enemies of military justice desire
the abolition of the courts martial. For a long time, the Nationalists were
able to maintain with some show of reason that they were retained in order
that Dreyfus, if the Court of Cassation ordered a third trial, should not be
brought up before a Court of Assizes; a court martial can be more easily
packed than a jury.
 Engels feared that the Socialists, in order to gain adherents in the
electoral struggles rapidly, would make promises which were contrary to
Marxist doctrine. The antisemites told the peasants and the small
shopkeepers that they would protect them from the development of
capitalism. Engels thought that an imitation of this procedure would be
dangerous, since, in his opinion, the social revolution could only be realised
when capitalism had almost completely destroyed the small proprietors and
small industries; if the Socialists, then, endeavoured to hinder this
evolution, they would ultimately compromise their own cause. Engels did
not know that the French Socialists (whose agrarian programme he was
criticising) had often made such promises, and that several Socialist
deputies were very friendly with Drumont. Engels, “La Question agraire et
le Socialisme,” in the Mouvement socialiste, October 15, 1900, p. 462. Cf.
pp. 458-459 and p. 463.
 Jaurès, Études socialistes, p. 107.
 Many idiotically serious things like this may be found in
Tarbouriech’s Cité future. People who call themselves well-informed say
that Arthur Fontaine, Directeur du Travail, has some astonishing solutions
of the social question in his portfolios, and that he will reveal them on the
day he retires. Our successors will bless him for having saved up for them
pleasures we shall not know.onishing solutions
of the social question in his portfolios, and that he will reveal them on the
day he retires. Our successors will bless him for having saved up for them
pleasures we shall not know.

--- PAGE BREAK ---f the social question in his portfolios, and that he will reveal them on the
day he retires. Our successors will bless him for having saved up for them
pleasures we shall not know.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 Tocqueville, L’Ancien Régime et la Révolution, p. 297.
 In the Avant-Garde of October 29, 1905, may be read the report of
Lucien Rolland to the National Council of the Unified Socialist Party on the
election at Florac of Louis Dreyfus, a speculator in grain and shareholder of
L’Humanité . “I was greatly pained,” says Rolland, “to hear one of the rois
de l’époque (kings of the time) speak in the name of our Internationale, of
our red flag, of our principles, and cry, ‘Long live the social republic!’ ”
Those whose only knowledge of this election has been gained from the
official report published in the Socialiste of October 28, 1905, will have
gained a singularly false idea of it. Official Socialist documents should be
mistrusted. I do not believe that, during the Dreyfus case, the friends of the
general staff ever distorted truth so much as the official Socialists did on
this occasion.
The fourieriste Tousseil published in the reign of Louis-Philippe a book
entitled Les Juifs rois de l’époque, in which he attacked the great
speculators. Rolland is alluding to this, and wishes to recall the fact that L.
Dreyfus was a large speculator in corn.
 The Intellectuals are not, as is so often said, men who think: they are
people who have adopted the profession of thinking, and who take an
aristocratic salary on account of the nobility of this profession.
 For example, Vaillant says: “Since we have to fight this great battle,
do you think that we can win it if we have not the proletariat behind us? We
must have the proletariat; and we shall not have it if we have discouraged it,
if we have shown it that the Party no longer represents its interests, no
longer represents the war of the working class against the capitalist class”
(Cahiers de la Qutnzaine, 16e de. la IIe série, pp. 159-160). This number
contains the shorthand note of the proceedings at the Congress.
 I note here, in passing, that the Petit Parisien, the importance of
which as an organ of the policy of social reform is so great, took up strongly
the case of the Princess of Saxony and the charming teacher Giron. This
newspaper, which is very fond of sermonising the people, cannot
understand why the outraged husband obstinately refuses to take back hisof the Princess of Saxony and the charming teacher Giron. This
newspaper, which is very fond of sermonising the people, cannot
understand why the outraged husband obstinately refuses to take back his

--- PAGE BREAK ---

wife. On September 14, 1906, it said that “she had broken with the ordinary
moral code”; it may be concluded from this that the moral code of the Petite
Parisien is something quite out of the ordinary.
 Jansen, L’Allemagne et la Réforme, French trans., tome i. p. 361.
 The application of the social laws gives rise—in France, at least—to
very singular inequalities of treatment; judicial proceedings depend on
political or financial conditions. The case of the rich tailor may be
remembered who was decorated by Millerand and against whom
proceedings had so often been taken for infringement of the laws for the
protection of work-girls.
 Renan, Histoire du peuple d’Israël, tome iv. pp. 199-200.
 The distinction between the two aspects of war is the basis of
Proudhon’s book on La Guerre et la paix.
 L’Alliance de la démocratie socialiste, p. 15. Marx accused his
opponents of modelling their policy on Napoleonic lines.
 Bernstein evidently had in mind here a well-known article by
Proudhon, from which, moreover, he quotes a fragment on page 47 of his
book. This article closes with imprecations against the Intellectuals: “Then
you will know what a revolution is, that has been set going by lawyers,
accomplished by artists, and conducted by novelists and poets. Nero was an
artist, a lyric and dramatic artist, a passionate lover of the ideal, a
worshipper of the antique, a collector of medals, a tourist, a poet, an orator,
a swordsman, a sophist, a Don Juan, a Lovelace, a nobleman full of wit,
fancy, and fellow-feeling, overflowing with love of life and love of
pleasure. That is why he was Nero” (Représentant du peuple, April 29,
1848).
 Bernstein, Soctalisme théorique et social-démocratie pratique, pp.
226 and 298.

--- PAGE BREAK ---of life and love of
pleasure. That is why he was Nero” (Représentant du peuple, April 29,
1848).
 Bernstein, Soctalisme théorique et social-démocratie pratique, pp.
226 and 298.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 Cf. Gervinus, Introduction à l’histoire du XlXe siècle, French trans., p.
27.
 The history of the papacy very much embarrasses modern writers;
some of them are fundamentally hostile to it on account of their hatred of
Christianity; but many are led to condone the greatest faults of the papal
policy in the Middle Ages on account of the natural sympathy which
inclines them to admire all the efforts made by theorists to tyrannise the
world.
 One of the ludicrous comedies of the Revolution is that related by
Jaurès in La Convention, pp. 1386-1388. In the month of May 1793 an
insurrectionary committee was set up at the Bishop’s palace, which formed
an État postiche (see above), and which on May 31 repaired to the town-
hall and declared that the people of Paris withdrew all powers from every
constituted authority; the general council of the Commune, having no
means of defence, “was forced to give in,” but not without assuming an air
of high tragedy: pompous speeches, embracings all round, “to prove that
there was neither wounded vanity on the one part, nor pride of domination
on the other”; finally, this buffoonery was terminated by an order which
reinstated the council which had just been dismissed. Jaurès is delightful
here: the revolutionary committee, he says, “freed (the legal authority) from
all the fetters of legality.” This happy thought is a reproduction of the well-
known phrase of the Bonapartists: “Sortir de la légalité pour rentrer dans le
droit.”
 Jaurès, Législative, p. 1288.
 Capital, English translation edit. by Engels, p. 76.
 Marx points out that in Holland taxation was used to raise the price of
necessities artificially; this was the application of a principle of
government: this system had a vicious effect on the working class and
ruined the peasant, the artisan, and the other members of the better-paid
workers; but it secured the absolute submission of the workers to their
masters, the manufacturers (Capital, Eng. trans. p. 781).ned the peasant, the artisan, and the other members of the better-paid
workers; but it secured the absolute submission of the workers to their
masters, the manufacturers (Capital, Eng. trans. p. 781).

--- PAGE BREAK ---artisan, and the other members of the better-paid
workers; but it secured the absolute submission of the workers to their
masters, the manufacturers (Capital, Eng. trans. p. 781).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 Capital, Eng. trans. p. 761.
 Capital, Eng. trans. p. 738.
 Capital, Eng. trans. p. 776. The German text says that force is an
oekono-mlsche Potenz (Kapital, 4th edition, p. 716); the French text says
that force is an agent économique. Fourier calls geometric progressions
puissancielles (Nouveau Monde industriel et sociétaire, p. 376). Marx
evidently used the word Potenz in the sense of a multiplier; cf. in Capital, p.
176, col. 1, the term travail puissancié for labour of a multiplied
productivity. [The English translation has economic power.—Trans. Note.]
 Capital, tome i. p. 327, col. 1.
 Natural, in the Marxian sense, is that which resembles a physical
movement as opposed to the idea of creation by an intelligent will; for the
deists of the eighteenth century, natural was that which had been created by
God, and which was both primitive and excellent; this is still, it seems, the
view of G. de Molinari.
 in a very advanced capitalist régime questions of agricultural rights,
women’s dowries, the division of landed property go into the background;
the first place is occupied by commercial associations, bills of exchange,
sale of stocks and shares, etc.
 In an article in the Radical (January 2, 1906), Ferdinand Buisson
shows that those classes of workers who are more favoured at the present
time will continue to rise above the others; the miners, the railway workers,
employees in the State factories or municipal services who are well
organised form a “working-class aristocracy,” which succeeds all the more
easily because it has continually to discuss all kinds of affairs with
corporative bodies who “stand for the recognition of the rights of man,
national supremacy, and the authority of universal suffrage.” Beneath this
nonsense is to be found merely the recognition of the relationship existing
between politicians and obsequious followers. 42 “A portion of the nation
throwing in its lot with the proletariat to demand its just rights,” saysmerely the recognition of the relationship existing
between politicians and obsequious followers. 42 “A portion of the nation
throwing in its lot with the proletariat to demand its just rights,” says

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Maxime Leroy, in a book devoted to the defence of the syndicates of civil
servants (Les Transformations de la puissance publique, p. 216).
 The inadequacy of, and the errors contained in Marx’s work in respect
to everything concerning the revolutionary organisation of the proletariat
may be cited as memorable examples of that law which prevents us from
thinking anything but that which has actual bases in life. Let us not confuse
thought and imagination.
 “One day Michel Chevalier came beaming into the editorial room of
the Journal des débats. His first words were: ‘I have achieved liberty!’
Everybody was all agog; he was asked to explain. He meant the liberty of
the slaughterhouses” (Renan, Feuilles débachés, p. 149).
 P. Bureau, Le Paysan des fjords de Norwège, pp. 114 and 115.
 De Rousiers, La Vie américaine: ranches, fermes et usines, pp. 224-
225.
 De Rousiers, La Vie américaine, l’education et la société, p. 218.
 De Rousiers, loc. cit. p. 221.
 P. Allard, Dix leçons sur le martyre, p. 171.
 Renan, Église chrétienne, p. 137.
 P. Allard, op. cit. p. 137.
 Revue des questions historiques, July 1905.
 P. Allard, op. cit. p. 142. Cf. What I have said in Le Système historique
de Renan, pp. 312-315.
 P. Allard, op. cit. p. 206.
 P. Allard, op. cit. p. 142.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ues, July 1905.
 P. Allard, op. cit. p. 142. Cf. What I have said in Le Système historique
de Renan, pp. 312-315.
 P. Allard, op. cit. p. 206.
 P. Allard, op. cit. p. 142.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 G. Sorel, Le Système historique de Renan, pp. 335-336.
 It is probable that the first Christian generation had no clear idea of
the possibility of replacing the apocalypses imitated from Jewish literature
by the Acts of the Martyrs; this would explain why we possess no accounts
prior to the year 155 (letter of Smyrniotes telling of the death of Saint
Polycarpe), and why all memory of a certain number of very ancient Roman
martyrs has been lost.
 Marc Aurèle, p. 500.
 As we consider everything from the historical point of view, it is of
small importance to know what reasons were actually in the mind of the
first apostles of anti-patriotism; reasons of this kind are almost never the
right ones; the essential thing is that for the revolutionary workers anti-
patriotism appears an inseparable part of Socialism.
 This propaganda produced results which went far beyond the
expectations of its promoters, and which would be inexplicable without the
revolutionary idea.
 Cf. Renan, Histoire du peuple d’Israël, tome iv. pp. 289 and 296; Y.
Guyot, La Morale, pp. 212-215; Alphonse Daudet, Numa Roumestan, chap.
iv.
 G. Sorel, Essai sur l‘église et l’état, p. 63.
 Quand est-ce? This was the question addressed to the newcomer in a
workshop, to remind him that according to custom he must pay for drinks
all round —“Pay your footing.”
 Denis Poulot, Le Sublime, pp. 150-153. I quote from the edition of
1887. This author says that the grosses culottes very much hampered
progress in the forges.
 the compagnonnages were very ancient workmen’s associations,
whose principal purpose was to enable carpenters, jointers, locksmiths,

--- PAGE BREAK ---very much hampered
progress in the forges.
 the compagnonnages were very ancient workmen’s associations,
whose principal purpose was to enable carpenters, jointers, locksmiths,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

farriers, and others, to make a circular tour round France, in order to learn
their trades thoroughly. In the towns on this circuit there was an hotel kept
by the Mère des compagnons; the newly arrived workman was received
there and the older men found him work. The compagnonnages are now in
a state of decay.
 Martin Saint-Léon, Le Compagnonnage, pp. 115, 125, 270-273, 277-
278.
 Each trade possessed often several rival associations of workmen,
which often engaged each other in bloody combats. Each association was
called a Devoir. What was intended by de Jacques and de Subise has long
been forgotten. They are traditional words indicating the rules, and so by
extension, the associations which follow these rules.
 Martin Saint-Léon, op. cit. p. 97. Cf. pp. 91-92, p. 107.
 In 1823, the companion joiners claimed La Rochelle as theirs, a town
which they had for a long time neglected as being of too little importance;
they had previously only stopped at Nantes and Bordeaux (Martin Saint-
Léon, op. cit. p. 103). L’Union des travailleurs du tour de France was
formed in 1830 to 1832 as a rival organisation to the compagnonnage,
following the refusals with which the latter had met a few rather modest
demands for reforms presented by the candidates for election (pp. 108-116,
126, 131).
 On March 30, 1906, Mons said in the Senate: “We cannot write in a
legal text that prostitution exists in France for both sexes.”
 Hartmann here bases his statements on the authority of the English
naturalist Wallace, who has greatly praised the simplicity of life among the
Malays; there must surely be a considerable element of exaggeration in this
praise, although other travellers have made similar observations about some
of the tribes of Sumatra, Hartmann wishes to show that there is no progress
towards happiness, and this preoccupation leads him to exaggerate the
happiness of the ancients.lar observations about some
of the tribes of Sumatra, Hartmann wishes to show that there is no progress
towards happiness, and this preoccupation leads him to exaggerate the
happiness of the ancients.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 Hartmann, Philosophy of the Unconscious, French trans., pp. 464-465.
 De Rousiers, La Vie amérlcaine: l’éducation et la société, p. 217.
 Several small countries have adopted these ideas, thinking by such
imitation to reach the greatness of the large countries.
 It must be noticed that in Germany there are so many Jews in the
world of speculation that American ideas do not spread very easily. The
majority look upon the speculator as a foreigner who is robbing the nation.
 Hartmann, loc. cit., p. 465.
 [The League was a political organisation directed by the partisans of
the Duc de Guise against the Protestants; it resisted Henri IV, for a
considerable time.—Trans. Note.]
 At a meeting of the Municipal Council of Paris on March 26, 1906,
the Prefect of Police said that the resistance was organised by a committee
sitting at 86. rue de Richelieu, which hired pious apaches at between three
and four francs a day. He asserted that fifty-two Parisian curés had
promised him either to facilitate the inventories or to be content with a
merely passive resistance. He accused the Catholic politicians of having
forced the hands of the clergy.
 [I.e. in the time when MacMahon was President.—Trans. Note.]
 The people in the provinces are not, as a matter of fact, so accustomed
as the Parisians are to indulgence towards non-violent trickery and
brigandage.
 [“Dry guillotine,” popular expression meaning persecution.—Trans.]
 Cahiers de la quinzaine 9th of the VIth series, p. 9. F. de Pressensé
was at the time of the Panama affair Hébrard’s principal clerk; we know
that the latter was one of the principal beneficiaries from the Panama booty,
but that has not injured his position in the eyes of the austere Huguenots;nama affair Hébrard’s principal clerk; we know
that the latter was one of the principal beneficiaries from the Panama booty,
but that has not injured his position in the eyes of the austere Huguenots;

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the Temps continues to be the organ of moderate democracy and of the
ministers of the GospeL
 Cahiers de la quinzaine, loc. cit. p. 13.
 Rousseau, stating the question in an abstract way, appeared to
condemn every kind of association, and our Governments for a long time
used his authority to subject every association to authority.
 In his Morale, published in 1883, Y. Guyot violently attacks this
policy. “In spite of the disastrous experiences [of two centuries], we are
taking Tunisia, we are on the point of going to Egypt, we are setting out for
Tonkin, we dream of the conquest of Central Africa” (p. 339).
 I have pointed this out in the Ère nouvelle, March 1894, p. 339.
 According to the Socialist deputy, Marius Devèze, the Prefect du Gard
undertook this leadership of the Syndicalist movement under the minister
Combes (Études socialistes, p. 323). I find in the France du Sud-Ouest
(January 25, 1904) a notice announcing that the Prefect of La Manche,
delegated by the Government, together with the under-prefect, the mayor,
and the municipality, officially inaugurated the Bourse du Travail at
Cherbourg.
 Blacks and reds—clericals and Socialists.
 Y. Guyot, Morale, pp. 293, 183-184, 122, 148 and 320.
 De Rocquigny, Les Syndicats agricoles et leur œuvre, pp. 42, 391-394.
 This is all the more remarkable since the syndicates are represented in
the circular as capable of aiding French industry in its struggle against
foreign competition.
 [See note p. 80.—Trans.]

--- PAGE BREAK ---more remarkable since the syndicates are represented in
the circular as capable of aiding French industry in its struggle against
foreign competition.
 [See note p. 80.—Trans.]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 It was thought to be merely a question of permitting agricultural
labourers to form themselves into syndicates; Tolain declared, in the name
of the Committee, that he had never thought of excluding them from the
benefits of the new law (De Rocquigny, op. cit. p. 10). As a rule, the
agricultural syndicates have served as commercial agencies for farm
bailiffs, landowners, etc.
 Taine, Le Régime moderne, vol. ii. p. 10.
 Taine, loc. cit. p. 11.
 This is what Mme. Georges Renard very sensibly points out in her
report of a workmen’s fête given by Millerand (L. de Seilhac, Le Monde
socialiste, p. 308).
 [Préfets violets; this expression was used ironically by several papers
to designate bishops who were too submissive to the Government. Catholic
bishops wear a violet robe.—Trans. Note.]
 Millerand did not keep on the former Director of the Office du
Travail, who was doubtless not pliant enough for the new policy. It seems to
me to be clearly established that at that time considerable attention was
being given in this Government department to a kind of enquiry as to the
state of feeling among the militants of the syndicates, evidently in order to
ascertain in what way they might be advised. This was revealed by Ch.
Guieysse in the Pages libres of December 10, 1904; the protestations of the
department and those of Millerand do not appear to have been very serious
(Voix du peuple, December 18, 25, 1904, January 1, 1905, June 25, August
27). [The Office du Travail is a ministerial office, which makes enquiries
about labour and publishes statistics; it was created principally in the hope
that it would serve to put the Government into connection with the leaders
of the syndicates.—Trans.]
 It may be questioned whether Waldeck-Rousseau did not go too far,
and thus started the Government on a very different road from that which he
wanted it to take; I do not think that the law about associations would haveed whether Waldeck-Rousseau did not go too far,
and thus started the Government on a very different road from that which he
wanted it to take; I do not think that the law about associations would have

--- PAGE BREAK ---ousseau did not go too far,
and thus started the Government on a very different road from that which he
wanted it to take; I do not think that the law about associations would have

--- PAGE BREAK ---

been voted except under the influence of fear, but it is certain that its final
wording was much more anti-clerical than its promoter would have wished.
 In a speech on June 21, 1907, Charles Benoist complains that the
Dreyfus case had thrown discredit on “reasons of State,” and had led the
Government to appeal to the elements of disorder in the nation in order to
create order. 58 I suppose that no one is ignorant of the fact that no
important undertaking is carried through without bribery.
 I borrow from a celebrated novel by Léon Daudet a description of the
character of the barrister Méderbe. “The latter was a curious character, tall,
thin, of a well-set-up figure, surmounted by a head like a dead fish, green
impenetrable eyes, oiled and flattened hair, his whole appearance being
frozen and rigid. . . . He had chosen the profession of a barrister as being
one which would supply his own and his wife’s need of money. . . . He took
part chiefly in financial cases, on account of the large profit to be made out
of them, and of the secrets he learned from them; he was employed in such
cases on account of his semi-political, semi-judicial relations, which always
secured him victory in any case he pleaded. He charged fabulous fees. What
he was paid for was certain acquittal. This man then had enormous power. .
. . He gave one the impression of a bandit armed for social life and sure of
impunity. . . .” (Les Morticoles, pp. 287-288). It is clear that many of these
traits are copied from those of the man the Socialists so often called the
Eiffel barrister, before they made him the demi-god of Republican Defence.
[In the Panama affair, Eiffel was prosecuted for having illegally
appropriated a large sum. Waldeck-Rousseau defended him in the law
courts.—Trans.]
 [The “catholiques soceaun” form a definite party. De Mutz has been
for a long time the recognised leader of the party and still exercises
considerable influence.—Trans. Note.]
 I do not think that there exists a class less capable of understanding
the economics of production than the priests.d leader of the party and still exercises
considerable influence.—Trans. Note.]
 I do not think that there exists a class less capable of understanding
the economics of production than the priests.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 In Turkey when a high palace dignitary receives a bribe, the Sultan
takes the money and then gives a certain proportion of it back to his
employé; what proportion is given back depends on the Sultan’s disposition
at the moment. The Sultan’s ethical code in these matters is also that of our
Catholic social reform group.
 Proudhon, De la justice dans la révolution et dans l’église, vol. i. 216.
 Proudhon, loc. cit. pp. 216-217. “During
 Proudhon thinks that this was also lacking in pagan antiquity: “During
several centuries, polytheistic societies had customs, but no ethics. In the
absence of a morality solidly based on principles, the customs gradually
disappeared” (loc. cit. p. 173).
 Heinrich Heine claims that the Catholicism of a wife is a very good
thing for the husband, because the wife is never oppressed by the burden of
her sins; after confession she begins again “to chatter and laugh.” Moreover,
there is no danger of her relating her sin (L’Allemagne, 2nd edition, vol. ii.
p. 322).
 Renan, Marc-Aurèle, p. 558.
 Catholic saints do not struggle against abstractions but often against
apparitions which present themselves with all the signs of reality. Luther
also had to fight the Devil, at whom he threw his inkpot.
 Renan, loc. cit. p. 627.
 Karl Kautsky, La Révolution sociale, French trans., pp. 123-124. I
have pointed out elsewhere that the decay of the revolutionary idea in the
minds of former militants who have become moderate seems to be
accompanied by a moral decadence that I have compared to that which as a
rule one finds in the case of a priest who has lost his faith (Insegnamente
sociali, pp. 344-345).

--- PAGE BREAK ---ms to be
accompanied by a moral decadence that I have compared to that which as a
rule one finds in the case of a priest who has lost his faith (Insegnamente
sociali, pp. 344-345).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 De Rocquigny, op. cit. pp. 379-380. I am curious to know how exactly
a tax can be iniquitous. These worthy progressives speak a special language.
 [This is a reference to the “solidarista” doctrine, invented by Buisson;
the interests of the classes are not opposed, and the more wealthy have their
duties toward the poorer.—Trans. Note.]
 Renan even wrote: “The war of 1813 to 1815 is the only one of our
century that had anything epic and elevated about it . . . [it] corresponded to
a movement of ideas and had a real intellectual significance. A man who
had taken part in this great struggle told me that, awakened by the
cannonade on the first night that he passed with the volunteer troops
collected in Silesia, he felt that he was witnessing an immense divine
service” (Essais de morale et de critique, p. 116). Compare Manzoni’s ode
entitled “Mars 1821,” dedicated to “the illustrious memory of Théodore
Koerner, poet and soldier of German independence and killed on the field of
battle at Leipzig, a name dear to all those peoples who are struggling to
defend or to reconquer their fatherland.” Our own wars of Liberty were also
epic, but they have not been so well written up as the war of 1813.
 Drumont has often denounced this state of mind of the fashionable
religious world.
 Proudhon, De la justice dans la révolution et dans l’église vol. i. p.
70.
 Proudhon, loc. cit. p. 74. By juridical faith Proudhon here understands
a triple faith, which dominates the family, contracts, and political relations.
The first is “the conception of the mutual dignity (of husband and wife)
which, raising them above the level of the senses, renders them more sacred
to the other even than dear, and makes their fertile community a religion for
them, sweeter than love itself”—the second “raising the mind above
egoistical appetites, is made happier by respect for the right of another than
by its own fortune” —without the third “citizens submitting to the attraction
of individualism could not form, whatever they did, anything other than a
mere aggregate of incoherent and repulsive existences that the first windout the third “citizens submitting to the attraction
of individualism could not form, whatever they did, anything other than a
mere aggregate of incoherent and repulsive existences that the first wind

--- PAGE BREAK ---

will disperse like dust” (loc. cit. pp. 72-73). In the strict sense of the world,
juridical faith would be the second of these three.
 Proudhon, loc. cit. p. 93.
 The two first epochs are those of paganism and of Christianity.
 Proudhon, loc. cit. p. 104.
 This deputy had made a very anticlerical speech from which I quote
this curious idea that “the Jewish religion was the most clerical of all
religions, possessing the most sectarian and narrowest type of clericalism.”
A little before this he said, “I myself am not an anti-Semite, and only make
one reproach to the Jews, that of having poisoned Aryan thought, so
elevated and broad, with Hebraic monotheism.” He demanded the
introduction of the history of religions into the curriculum of the primary
schools in order to ruin the authority of the Church. According to him the
Socialist party saw in “the intellectual emancipation of the masses the
necessary preface to the progress and social evolution of societies.” It is not
rather the contrary which is true? Does not this speech prove that there is an
anti-Semitism in free-thinking circles quite as narrow and badly informed
as that of the clericals?
 So do like musk? It has been put everywhere.
 G. de Molinari, Science et religion, p. 94.
 G. de Molinari, op. cit. p. 198.
 G. de Molinari, op. cit. p. 61.
 G. de Molinari, op. cit. p. 54.
 G. de Molinari, op. cit. pp. 87 and and 93.
 I have already mentioned that in 1883 Y. Guyot violently denounced
the conduct of Chagot, who placed his workmen under the direction of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---olinari, op. cit. pp. 87 and and 93.
 I have already mentioned that in 1883 Y. Guyot violently denounced
the conduct of Chagot, who placed his workmen under the direction of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

priests, and forced them to go to Mass (Morale, p. 183).
 Mouvement socialiste, June 15, 1889, p. 649.
 See, for example, the Socialiste of June 30, 1901. “As in a communist
society the morals which clogs the brains of the civilised will have vanished
like a frightful nightmare, perhaps to be replaced by another ethic, which
will Incite women to flutter about like butterflies, to use Ch. Fourier’s
expression, instead of submitting to being the property of a male. . . . In
savage tribes and among barbarous communists women are much more
honoured when they distribute their favours to a great number of lovers.”
 On June 21, 1907, Clemenceau, replying to Millerand, told him that in
introducing the bill to establish old age pensions, without concerning
himself with where the money was to come from, he had not acted as “a
statesman nor even as a responsible person.” Millerand’s reply is quite
characteristic of the pride of the political parvenu: “Don’t talk about things
that you know nothing about.” Of what then does he himself speak?
 I am pleased here to be able to support myself in the incontestable
authority of Gérault-Richard who in the Petite République on March 19,
1903, denounced the “intriguers, people who wish to get on at all costs,
starvelings and ladies’ men (who) are only after the spoils” and who at that
time were trying to bring about the fall of the Combes ministry. From the
following number we see that he is speaking of Waldeck-Rousseau’s
friends, who, like him, were opposed to the destruction of the
congregations.
 This is what Benedetto Croce pointed out in the Critica of July 17,
1907, pp. 317-319. This writer is well known in Italy as a remarkably acute
critic and philosopher.
 In the New-Harmony colony founded by R. Owen the work done was
little and bad, but amusements were abundant; in 1826 the Duke of Saxe-
Weimar was dazzled by the music and the balls (Dolléans, Robert Owen,
pp. 247-268).colony founded by R. Owen the work done was
little and bad, but amusements were abundant; in 1826 the Duke of Saxe-
Weimar was dazzled by the music and the balls (Dolléans, Robert Owen,
pp. 247-268).

--- PAGE BREAK ---. Owen the work done was
little and bad, but amusements were abundant; in 1826 the Duke of Saxe-
Weimar was dazzled by the music and the balls (Dolléans, Robert Owen,
pp. 247-268).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 G. de Molinari appears to believe that a natural religion like that of J.
J. Rousseau or Robespierre would suffice. We know to-day that such means
have no moral efficacy.
 Renan is complaining that the corporative associations dominate
society too much. It is clear that he had none of the veneration for the
corporative spirit that so many contemporary idealists display.
 He did not foresee that his son-in-law would agitate violently against
the army in the Dreyfus affair.
 Renan, Feuilles détachées, p. 14.
 Renan, Historie du peuple d’Iraël, vol. v. p. 421.
 Renan, loc. cit. p. 420.
 The essence of democracy is concentrated in the mot attributed to
Mme. Flocon. “It is we who are the princesses.” The democracy is happy
when it sees a ridiculous creature like Félix Faure, whom Joseph Reinach
compared to the bourgeois gentilhomme, treated with princely honours
(Histoire de l’affaire Dreyfus, vol. iv. p. 552).
 Parliamentary Socialism is very keen on good manners, as we can
assure ourselves by consulting Gérault-Richard’s numerous articles. I quote
at random several specimens. On June 1, 1903, he declared in the Petite
République that Queen Nathalie of Servia should have been called to order
“for having listened to the preaching of P. Coubé at Aubervilles, and he
demands that she be admonished by the police commissary of her district.”
On September 26 he is roused to indignation by the coarseness and the
ignorance of good manners exhibited by Admiral Maréchal. The socialist
code has its mysteries; the wives of socialists are sometimes called ladies
and sometimes citizenesses; in the society of the future there will evidently
be disputes about the order of precedence as there were at Versailles. On
July 30, 1903, Cassagnac makes great fun in the Autorité of his having been
taken to task by Gérault-Richard, who had given him lessons in good
manners.r of precedence as there were at Versailles. On
July 30, 1903, Cassagnac makes great fun in the Autorité of his having been
taken to task by Gérault-Richard, who had given him lessons in good
manners.

--- PAGE BREAK ---here were at Versailles. On
July 30, 1903, Cassagnac makes great fun in the Autorité of his having been
taken to task by Gérault-Richard, who had given him lessons in good
manners.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 Griffuelhes, who had been a shoemaker, was at one time secretary of
the Confédération du Travail; he was remarkably intelligent; cf. a pamphlet
by him entitled Voyage révolutionnaire.
[Rouanet was Malon’s principal disciple; he was for some time a deputy,
very much opposed to the Marxists, naturally a great adversary of the
Confédération du Travail, a type of socialist politician who occupies a
considerable place in journalism and in Parliament, but who does not
count at all intellectually.—Trans.]
 Renan, op. cit. vol. iv. p. 267.
 Renan pointed out one symptom of decadence, on which he did not
insist enough and which does not seem to have particularly impressed his
readers; he was irritated by the restlessness, the claims to originality, and
the naïve rivalry of the young metaphysicians; “But, my dear fellows, it is
useless to give oneself so much headache, merely to change from one error
to another (Feuilles détachés, p. 10). A restlessness of this kind (which puts
on nowadays a sociological, socialist, or humanitarian air) is a sure sign of
anæmia.
 Renan, Feuilles détachées, pp. 17-18.
 Brunetière addressed this reproach to French literature: “If you wish
to know why Racine or Molière, for example, never attained the depth we
find in a Shakespeare or a Goethe . . . cherchez la femme, and you will find
that the defect is due to the influence of the salons, and of women”
(Évolution des genres, 3rd edition, p. 128).
 Questions de morale (lectures given by several professors) in the
Biblio-thèque des sciences sociales, p. 328.
 I must call attention to the extraordinary prudence shown by Ribot in
his Psychologie des sentiments in dealing with the evolution of morality; it
might have been expected that, on the analogy of the other sentiments, he
would have come to the conclusion that there was an evolution towards a
purely intellectual state and to the disappearance of its efficacy; but has not
dared to draw this conclusion for morality as he did for religion.the conclusion that there was an evolution towards a
purely intellectual state and to the disappearance of its efficacy; but has not
dared to draw this conclusion for morality as he did for religion.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 I refer to an article published in the Gazette de Lausanne, April 2,
1906, from which the Libre Parole gave a fairly long extract (cf. Joseph
Reinach, op. cit. vol. vi. p. 36). Several months after I had written these
lines Picquart was himself the object of exceptionally favourable treatment;
he had been conquered by the fatalities of Parisian life, which have ruined
stronger men than he.
 Nietzsche, Généalogie de la moral, trad. franç., pp. 57-59.
 Nietzsche, op. cit. p. 43.
 Nietzsche, op. cit. pp. 78-80.
 P. de Rousiers observes that everywhere in America approximately the
same social environment is found, and the same type of men at the head of
big businesses; but “it is in the West that the qualities and defects of this
extraordinary people manifest themselves with the greatest energy; . . . it is
there that the key to the whole social system is to be found” (La Vie
américaine: ranches, fermes, et usines, pp. 8-9; cf. p. 261).
 De Rousiers, La Vie américaine: l’education et la société, p. 325.
 De Rousiers, La Vie américaine: ranches, fermes, et usines, pp. 303-
305.
 J. Bourdeau, Les Maîtres de la pensée contemporaine, p. 145. The
author informs us on the other hand that “Jaurès greatly astonished the
people of Geneva by revealing to them that the hero of Nietzsche, the
superman, was nothing else but the proletariat” (p. 139). I have not been
able to get any information about this lecture of Jaurès; let us hope that he
will some day publish it, for our amusement.
 It is always necessary to remember that the resigned Jew of the
Middle Ages was more like the Christians than his ancestors.
 Epistle to the Ephesians, v. 25-31.

--- PAGE BREAK ---amusement.
 It is always necessary to remember that the resigned Jew of the
Middle Ages was more like the Christians than his ancestors.
 Epistle to the Ephesians, v. 25-31.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 Proudhon is alluding sarcastically to the frequently very comic
nullifications of marriage, pronounced by the Roman courts, for
physiological reasons. Proudhon, op. cit. vol. vi. p. 39. We know that the
theologians do not like curious people to consult ecclesiastical writings
about conjugal duty and the legitimate method of fulfilling it.
 Proudhon, loc. cit. p. 212.
 Proudhon, Œuvres, vol. xx. p. 169. This is extracted from the memoir
he wrote in his own defence, after he had been condemned to three years in
prison for his book on Justice. It is worth while noting that Proudhon was
accused of attacking marriage! This affair is one of the shameful acts which
dishonoured the Church in the reign of Napoleon III.
 Aristotle, Politics, book i. chap. vii. 4-5.
 Aristotle, op. cit. book i. chap v. 13, 14.
 Xenophon, who represents in everything a conception of Greek life
very much earlier than the time in which he lived, discusses the proper
method of training an overseer for a farm (Economics, pp. 12-14). Marx
remarks that Xenophon speaks of the division of labour in the workshop,
and that appears to him to show a middle-class instinct (Capital, vol. i. p.
159, col. 1); I myself think that it characterises an observer who understood
the importance of production, an importance of which Plato had no
comprehension. In the Memorabilia (book ii. p. 7) Socrates advises a
citizen who had to look after a large family, to set up a workshop with the
family; J. Flach supposes that this was something new (Leçon du 19e avril
1907): it seems to me to be rather a return to more ancient customs. The
historians of philosophy appear to me to have been very hostile to
Xenophon because he is too much of an old Greek. Plato suits them much
better since he is more of an aristocrat, and consequently more detached
from production.
 Aristotle, op. cit. book i. chap. v. 9 and 11.
 Karl Kautsky, La Révolution sociale, French translation, p. 153.nce he is more of an aristocrat, and consequently more detached
from production.
 Aristotle, op. cit. book i. chap. v. 9 and 11.
 Karl Kautsky, La Révolution sociale, French translation, p. 153.

--- PAGE BREAK ---aristocrat, and consequently more detached
from production.
 Aristotle, op. cit. book i. chap. v. 9 and 11.
 Karl Kautsky, La Révolution sociale, French translation, p. 153.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 The managers of manufactories would constantly be busying
themselves with how to ensure the success of the government party at the
next election. They would be very indulgent to workmen who were
influential speakers, and very hard on men suspected of lack of electoral
zeal.
 We might ask if the ideal of the relatively honest and enlightened
democrats is not at the present moment the discipline of the capitalist
workshop. The increase of the power given to the mayors and State
governors in America seems to me to be a sign of this tendency.
 This history has also been burdened by a great number of adventures,
which have been fabricated by imitating real ones, and which are very like
those which later on The Three Musketeers rendered popular.
 Jaurès, Études socialistes, pp. 117-118.
 [The battle of Fleurus, won in 1794 by General Jourdain, was one of
the first decisive triumphs of the revolutionary army. The Chant du Départ
was written by J. M. Chénier shortly before this battle.—Trans.]
 When we speak of the educative value of art, we often forget that the
habits of life of the modern artist, founded on an imitation of those of a
jovial aristocracy, are in no way necessary, and are derived from a tradition
which has been fatal to many fine talents. Lafargue appears to believe that
the Parisian jeweller might find it necessary to dress elegantly, to eat
oysters, and run after women in order to be able to keep up the artistic
quality of his work (i.e. in order to keep his mind active; the artistic quality
of his work, destroyed by the wear of daily life in the workshop, will be
reconstituted by the gay life he leads outside) (Journal des économistes,
September 1884, p. 386). He gives no reasons to support this paradox; we
might moreover point out that the mentality of Marx’s son-in-law is always
obsessed by artistocratic prejudices.
 [This is an allusion to a play by Octave Mirbeau with that title.—
Trans.]adox; we
might moreover point out that the mentality of Marx’s son-in-law is always
obsessed by artistocratic prejudices.
 [This is an allusion to a play by Octave Mirbeau with that title.—
Trans.]

--- PAGE BREAK ---ver point out that the mentality of Marx’s son-in-law is always
obsessed by artistocratic prejudices.
 [This is an allusion to a play by Octave Mirbeau with that title.—
Trans.]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 See the chapter in Ruskin’s Seven Lamps of Architecture entitled
“Lamp of Truth.”
 It must not be forgotten that there are two ways of discussing art;
Nietzsche attacks Kant for having “like all the philosophers meditated on
art and the beautiful as a spectator instead of looking at the esthetic
problem from the point of view of the artist, the creator” (op. cit. p. 178). In
the time of the Utopists, esthetics was merely the babbling of amateurs,
who were delighted with the cleverness with which the artist had been able
to deceive the public.
 Marx, Capital, French translation, vol. iii., first part, p. 375.
 P. Bureau has devoted a chapter of his book on the Contrat de Travail
to an explanation of the reasons which justify boycotting of workmen who
do not join their comrades in strikes; he thinks that these people merit their
fate because they are notoriously inferior both in courage and as workmen.
This seems to me very inadequate as an account of the reasons which, in the
eyes of the working classes themselves, explain these acts of violence. The
author takes up a much too intellectualist point of view.
 Lafaille, Mémoires sur les campagnes de Catalogue de 1808 à 1814,
p. 336.
 The charlatanism of the followers of Saint Simon was as disgusting as
that of Murat; moreover, the history of this school is unintelligible if we do
not compare it with its Napoleonic models.
 General Donop strongly insists on the incapacity of Napoleon’s
lieutenants who passively obeyed instructions that they never tried to
understand, and the fulfilment of which was minutely overlooked by their
master (op. cit. pp. 22-29 and 32-34). Napoleon’s armies were valued in
proportion to the exactitude with which they carried out the orders of their
master; initiative being little valued, it was possible to estimate the conduct
of the generals like the ability of a good pupil who has learnt his lessons
well; the Emperor gave pecuniary rewards to his lieutenants, proportionate
to the measure of merit he recognized in them.ct
of the generals like the ability of a good pupil who has learnt his lessons
well; the Emperor gave pecuniary rewards to his lieutenants, proportionate
to the measure of merit he recognized in them.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ike the ability of a good pupil who has learnt his lessons
well; the Emperor gave pecuniary rewards to his lieutenants, proportionate
to the measure of merit he recognized in them.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 Viollet-le-Duc, Dictionnaire raisonné de l’architecture française, vol.
iv. pp. 42-43. This does not contradict what we read in the article
“Architect.” From that we learn that the builders often inscribed their names
in the cathedrals (vol. i. pp. 109-111) ; from that it has been concluded that
these works were not anonymous (Bréhier, Les Eglises gothiques, p. 17),
but what meaning had these inscriptions for the people of the town? They
could only be of interest to artists who came later on to work in the same
edifice and who were familiar with the traditions of the schools.
 Renan, Histoire du peuple d’Israël, vol. iv. p. 191. Renan seems to me
to have identified too readily glory and immortality: he has fallen a victim
to a figure of speech.
 This appendix was added in 1910 to the second edition.
 Physiologists so manage that their experiments do not disturb the
regular course of phenomena to the extent that the animal may be said to be
sick.
 Cournot observes, as opposed to Comte, that, “there is nothing clearer
to the human intellect, nothing which less imposes the additional burden of
a new mystery of a new irreducible principle, than the explanation of the
social process. “Who does not see,” he says, “that in passing from the
phenomena of life to social facts, one is in the process of passing from a
relatively obscure region to a relatively clear one?” (Matérialisme,
vitalisme, rationalisme, p. 172).
 Edmond Perrier, Colonies animales, xxxii.
 Taine, Le gouvernement révolutionnaire, p. 126. Cf. Hegel,
Philosophie de l’esprit, French translation, vol. II, p. 254.
 Dom Leclerq says that the regime of the Spanish church, at the time of
the Visigoths, provides us with a case in which the unitary conception of the
“classical civitas” survived in Christianity (L’Espagne chrétienne, xxxii-
xxxiii).of the Spanish church, at the time of
the Visigoths, provides us with a case in which the unitary conception of the
“classical civitas” survived in Christianity (L’Espagne chrétienne, xxxii-
xxxiii).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 Aristotle, Politics, Bk. II, Chap. I, 7.
 Aristotle, op. cit., Bk. III, Chap. VIII, 1 and Chap XI, 12.
 Tyall, Etudes sur les moeurs religieuses et sociales de l’Extrême
Orient, French translation, pp. 42-48.
 In the second edition there was a passage relative to the antimonies of
Kant which I have removed, because I have treated this question more fully
in the Révue de métaphysique et de morale (September, 1910) and because I
expect to return to it again elsewhere.
 Joseph de Maistre, Considérations sur la France, Chap. IV ad finem.
—There is a great similarity between the formula cited here and the subtitle
of the Esprit des lois: “Concerning the relation which laws must have to the
constitution of each government, to mores, to climate, to religion, and to
commerce.”
 Cf. Renan, Marc-Aurèle, pp. 22-29.
 The history of the persecutions presents evidence of considerable
value: the ancient Romans, so cruel, would not have dreamed of
condemning virgins to the lupanar (Edmond de Blant, Les persécuteurs et
les martyrs, Chap. XVIII). The decision taken by Marcus Aurelius against
the martyrs of Lyon seems to me to mark a retrogression toward barbarism
(G. Sorel, Le système historique de Renan, p. 335).
 I use the word progress because I find it in current usage for speaking
of changes which are not always very desirable.
 Taine, Le régime moderne, Vol. II, p. 108. Cf. pp. 106 and 109.
 Cf. Brunetière, Questions actuelles, p. 33. This idea had been
expressed in the celebrated maxim of Jesus: “Be perfect as your Heavenly
Father is perfect” (Matthew v, 48); the evangelical life was confined to the
monasteries after the triumph of the Church (Renan, op. cit., p. 558);

--- PAGE BREAK ---us: “Be perfect as your Heavenly
Father is perfect” (Matthew v, 48); the evangelical life was confined to the
monasteries after the triumph of the Church (Renan, op. cit., p. 558);

--- PAGE BREAK ---

modern philosophy is inspired by the Reformation, which aspired to unify
the entire Christian world on the monastic model.
 Not able to find English equivalent—perhaps Sorel coined it. [Ed.]
 G. Sorel, op. cit., p. 421.
 Renan compares the bishop of the Third century with the Greek or
Armenian bishops of contemporary Turkey (Renan, op. cit., p. 586).
 Tertullian was indignant that the Church could in this way mitigate the
persecutions (Tertullian, de fuga, 13).
 The Germans seem to have learned the lessons of the Church with
great profit. When we notice the resignation with which they accept
inequality, the strict discipline which they keep, in their associations, as in
the army and in the factory, the tenacity which they show in their
enterprises, we cannot but compare them to the ancient Romans. Luther’s
Reformation has protected them for a long time against the invasion of
Renaissance ideas and has prolonged for them the influence of Roman
education.
 Some contemporary Catholics go into ecstasies on this subject of the
democratic spirit of the Church; the theologians have only followed the
doctrine of the imperial jurists who had ascribed to the emperors a
delegation of authority from the Roman people (Taine, loc. cit., p. 133).
 Gregory VII was inspired by very old Christian ideas when he
denounced the power of the princes as having had at its origin the character
of brigandage, which permitted associating it with the action of the devil,
“the prince of the world” (Flach, Les origines de l’ancienne France, Vol.
III, p. 297).
 Renan, op. cit., p. 621 and pp. 624-625.
 In the first half of the Eighteenth century Vico believed that England
was destined to become a pure monarchy (Michelet, Oeuvres choisies de

--- PAGE BREAK ---, op. cit., p. 621 and pp. 624-625.
 In the first half of the Eighteenth century Vico believed that England
was destined to become a pure monarchy (Michelet, Oeuvres choisies de

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Vico, p. 629).
 Huysman assures us that from the “point of view of the
comprehension of art, the Catholic public is a hundred feet below the
secular public” (La cathedral, p. 19). This inferiority is not confined to art!
 It was observed in France that the protestation contained in the letter
of June 29, 1901, against the law of associations was singularly mean.
Compare this vague literature to the dispatches of June 1 and 8, 1903,
relative to the journey of Loubet to Rome; Leo XIII was really conscious of
the significance of the Italian action, which wounded his pride, after having
believed that the French acts were not of great significance, because he
based his most peculiar hopes on the consequences which ought to follow
his general diplomacy.
 The juridical causes would not be the same, even though the results
might be similar; Renan does, in fact, point out that, “liberty is definitely a
creation of modern times. It is the consequence of an idea which antiquity
did not have, the state guaranteeing the most diverse modes of human
activity and remaining neutral in matters of conscience, of taste, and of
sentiment” (Histoire du peuple d’Israël, vol. IV, p. 82).
 Renan, loc. cit., p. 81.
 Renan places this book before the second Temple; I agree with Isidore
Loëb who seems to me to be more reasonable.
 Judaism shows, in its literature following the fall from independence,
such singular indifference for the state that Renan marvels at it as
something of a paradox: “All the monkeries are there,” says he, “The
Catholic Church, so scornful of the State, could not know how to live
without the State (op. cit., vol. III, p. 427).
 For example, the famous academic neutrality has only been a
stratagem designed to lull the vigilance of Catholics; today the official
representatives of the government declare that the great aim to pursue in the
primary school is the suppression of religious faith (Cf. the addresslull the vigilance of Catholics; today the official
representatives of the government declare that the great aim to pursue in the
primary school is the suppression of religious faith (Cf. the address

--- PAGE BREAK ---

delivered before the Ligue de l’Enseignement in 1906 at Angers by Aristide
Briand).
 Renan, Marc-Aurèle, p. 337.
 Renan, op. cit., p. 558.
 In the discussion which occured December 21, 1906 in the Chamber
on the circumstances in which Cardinal Richard had been expelled from his
palace, Denys Cochin performed the role of dupe of the comedy with great
authority.
 On November 9, 1906, Aristide Briand declared to the Chamber that if
the Catholic deputies had refused to concern themselves with the laws of
Separation, he would not have succeeded in working out the project. The
utility of parliamentarians clearly appears here!
 The socialist congresses are not, any longer, sparing in declarations
devoted to the execration of the bourgeoisie.
 The republicans do not appear disposed to pardon Pius X for having
frustrated their maneuvers: Aristide Briand has complained several times in
the Chamber of the conduct of the Pope; he has even insinuated that it may
have been instigated by Germany: “We were disposed to accept the law.
What happened? I do not know. Has a related situation influenced the
decisions of the Holy See? Does the current situation in this country
become the ransom for a better situation in another country? . . . It is a
problem which poses itself and which I have the right and the duty to place
before your consciences.” (Session of November 9, 1906.) Joseph Reinach
consoles himself for the wickedness of Pius X by proclaiming that the latter
has only, “the learning of a country priest,” and that he does not understand
the importance of the results of the Reformation, of the Encyclopedia, and
of the Revolution. (Histoire de l’affaire Dreyfus, vol. VI, p. 427).
 De Rousiers, Le trade-unionisme en Angleterre, p. 93.he importance of the results of the Reformation, of the Encyclopedia, and
of the Revolution. (Histoire de l’affaire Dreyfus, vol. VI, p. 427).
 De Rousiers, Le trade-unionisme en Angleterre, p. 93.

--- PAGE BREAK ---results of the Reformation, of the Encyclopedia, and
of the Revolution. (Histoire de l’affaire Dreyfus, vol. VI, p. 427).
 De Rousiers, Le trade-unionisme en Angleterre, p. 93.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 The Socialist party has become a democratic mob, since it contains,
“officers, the decorated, rich, great stockholders, and great employers” (Cf.
an article of Lucien Roland in the Socialiste of August 29, 1909).
 Renan, op. cit., p. 627.
 A sentence of Macaulay has often been cited on this question,
observing that if Wesley had been Catholic, he might have founded a great
religious order. (Macaulay, Essais philosophiques, French trans., p. 275;
Brunetière, op. cit., pp. 37-38).—America appears to have utilized more
effectively than England the zeal of the sectarians.
 An all the more ridiculous pretention when these parties are lacking in
ideas which are their own.
 This appendix was added in 1913 to the third edition.
 This appendix was added in 1919 to the fourth edition.
 On page 130, we read: “Proletarian violence, exercised as a pure and
simple manifestation of the feeling of class struggle, has the appearance of
something very beautiful and very heroic.” It is likely that the
correspondent of the Journal de Genève used an old edition; I have not
verified the reference.
 I have, however, very strongly criticized in my book the frequently
bloody tyranny of the French Revolution.
 It is not just to impute to Marxism all the practices of German Social
Democracy, which was far more under the influence of Lassalle than under
that of Marx. Charles Andler said, in 1897, of Lassalle: “It is in order to
give strength to ideal justice that he demands universal suffrage for the job
of emancipation of the proletariat. But he immediately is seized with
distrust and, as if he sensed his error, he appeals to the existing state, though
military and monarchial, to introduce his practical reforms. From the
oscillation between the two systems was born a curious constitutional
conception: a military monarchy, tied to universal suffrage and workingd monarchial, to introduce his practical reforms. From the
oscillation between the two systems was born a curious constitutional
conception: a military monarchy, tied to universal suffrage and working

--- PAGE BREAK ---roduce his practical reforms. From the
oscillation between the two systems was born a curious constitutional
conception: a military monarchy, tied to universal suffrage and working

--- PAGE BREAK ---

with it, in a collaboration frought with conflict, to achieve a social
emancipation. That is really the German Empire of today.”
(Les origines du socialisme d’Etat en Allemagne, pp. 60-61.)
 The Bolshevik revolution took place November 7, 1917.
 In the same fashion the Zionists call the Jews who naturalize
themselves in our country, stamped paper Frenchmen.
 The author is evidently threatening his compatriots with an
intervention of the Entente. Under the regime of the peaceful Louis
Philippe, Switzerland was twice under the threat of a French invasion: in
1838, because it would not expel the future Napoleon III, who was a
burgher of the canton of Thurgau, and in 1848, because after the affair of
the Sonderbund it wanted to reform its constitution in a more unitary sense.
During the last war, the engagements which the Entente made in support of
Swiss neutrality were hardly explicit; General Brialmont had written that
France would probably invade Germany through Switzerland; the Swiss
general staff was frequently attacked with violence by the press supporting
the Entente, because it took the ideas of the great Belgian Engineer
seriously.
 The rabbits of the Union sacrée are more afraid of the Bolsheviks than
of the Germans, and that is saying a great deal, for a defeated Germany,
humiliated and crushed with the cost of the war frightens peculiarly enough,
many of our patriotic head stuffers. To give their clientele a little courage,
the editors of the great newspapers ordinarily speak of Russian
revolutionaries with a blustering tone, the impudence of which is matched
by the terror that convulses their entrails.
 The word “to force” is used here in a sense which is similar to that
employed by gardeners.
 In 1888, the Russian Moniteur Juridique published a note found
among the papers of Marx, according to which the author of Das Kapital
was very far from believing that all economies must follow the same lines
of development. He did not believe that Russia was obliged in order tos of Marx, according to which the author of Das Kapital
was very far from believing that all economies must follow the same lines
of development. He did not believe that Russia was obliged in order to

--- PAGE BREAK ---to which the author of Das Kapital
was very far from believing that all economies must follow the same lines
of development. He did not believe that Russia was obliged in order to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

achieve socialism, to begin by the destruction of its ancient communal
agriculture, in order to transform its peasants into proletarians; it seemed
possible to him that she could, “with experiencing the tortures of the
[capitalist] regime, appropriate all of its fruits while developing her own
historic situation.” This note of Marx is reproduced by Nicholas-On in his
Histoire du développement economique de la Russie depuis
l’affranchissement des serfs, French translation, pp. 507-509.—In a preface
written in 1882 for a Russian edition of the Communist Manifesto, Marx
expressed the following hypothesis: “If it should happen that the Russian
Revolution should give the signal for a workers’ revolution in the West, in
such a manner that the two revolutions complement each other, the agrarian
communism of Russia, the present day mir, will become the point of
departure for a communist development.” (Manifeste communiste,
translated by Charles Andler, vol. I. p. 12). These citations suffice to show
that true Marxism is not as absolute, in its previsions as many of Lenin’s
enemies would have it.
 Cf. a speech by Lenin, translated in the Humanité, September 4, 1919.
 Very probably in the pay of the Entente.
 Custine, La Russie en 1839, 2nd ed., vol. II, p. 46. On page 41 this
writer calls him, “the Louis XIV of the Slavs.”
 Custine, loc. cit., pp. 209-211.
 Custine, op. cit., vol. III, pp. 271-273.
 If Finland and Estona remain separated from Russia, the capital would
find itself poorly located at the mouth of the Neva.
 The Journal de Genève of September 27, 1918 reports a speech by
Lenin, in which he opposes the general proscriptive measures decreed
following an attempt to assassinate him at the beginning of the month. It
seems that it is some Jews who joined the revolutionary movement who are
especially responsibly for the terroristic regulations blamed on the
Bolsheviks. This hypothesis appears to me to be all the more reasonableis some Jews who joined the revolutionary movement who are
especially responsibly for the terroristic regulations blamed on the
Bolsheviks. This hypothesis appears to me to be all the more reasonable

--- PAGE BREAK ---ined the revolutionary movement who are
especially responsibly for the terroristic regulations blamed on the
Bolsheviks. This hypothesis appears to me to be all the more reasonable

--- PAGE BREAK ---

since the intervention of the Jews in the Hungarian Soviet Republic has not
been happy.
 Our compatriots, who fancy themselves the most alert men in the
world, have accepted, like fools, the most absurd calumnies that some
impudent journalists have invented with the purpose of dishonoring the
Bolsheviks.
 On September 3, 1918, the Petit Parisien, an organ dear to our Joseph
Prudhommes, published an article of a frenzied enthusiast in honor of Dora
Kaplan, who had attempted to assassinate Lenin.
 A correspondent of the Journal de Genève asks if the Russian
counterrevolutionaries had not counted greatly on the assistance of criminal
elements, for they had distributed proclamations inviting, “the population to
massacre the youpins and the revolutionaries” (October 14, 1917). In many
cases the Red Guards could very well believe that by suppressing the
enemies most determined to exterminate them in case of victory, they were
acting in legitimate defense.
 The politicians who maintain with Clemenceau that the French
Revolution forms a bloc, are hardly justified in their harshness toward the
Bolsheviks; the Bloc, admired by Clemenceau, was responsible for the death
of at least ten times as many people as the Bolsheviks, denounced by the
friends of Clemenceau as abominable barbarians.
 A French writer who has seen the Bolsheviks at work speaks of the
“stubborn and inspired mysticism” of Lenin (Etienne Antonelli, La Russie
bol-sheviste, p. 272). This expression is not very clear.
 Renan, Histoire du peuple d’Israel, vol. IV, p. 267.
 In concluding the Réflexions sur la violence, I pay a final tribute to the
one to whose memory this book has been dedicated; it was while thinking
of a past filled with labor that I wrote: “Happy is the man who has known a
devoted wife, strong and proud in her love, who will always keep ever
present his youth, who will keep his soul from ever being satisfied, whoith labor that I wrote: “Happy is the man who has known a
devoted wife, strong and proud in her love, who will always keep ever
present his youth, who will keep his soul from ever being satisfied, who

--- PAGE BREAK ---

will never fail to make him mindful of the obligations of his task, and who
will even, at times, reveal to him his genius.”