TIPPIT KILLING

Testimony of - Ted Callaway, March 26, 1964, 3 H 351-7.

He is a car salesman who had two years of college. He was, on

November 22, employed at ’’Harris Brothers, auto sales." He is used
ir

car manager. TheXX location is 501 East Jefferson, which is a block
away from 10th and ^atton. (p.35l)

After hearing 5 shots (and of the witnesses whose testimony about
this incident I have read to this moment there are 4 witnesses and 4
different numbers of shots), he ran onto the sidewalk on Patton where
he could see the cab driver alongside the cab and "a man cutting from
one side of the street to the other". The man "was running. And he
had a gun in his hand, his right hand." The position of the gun he
described as "raised pistol position", meaning muzzle upward, elbow
bent. (p.352)

Callaway said that he saw the man coming toward him with the pis-
tol and "hollered ’Hey, man, what the hell is going on?’" Apparently,
he didn't fear getting shot, (p.353)

After Callaway hollered at him, the nan "slowed his pace, almost
halted for a minute. And he said something to me, which I could not
understand. And then kind o£ shrugged his shoulders, and kept on going.
He asked someone named B. D. Searcy to follow this man while he went bac
to see what had happened. When he got there, "l saw a 3quad car, and by
that time there was four or five people that had gathered, a couple of
cars had stopped. Then I saw - I went an up o to the squad car and saw
the police officer lying in the street." It was he who was told when
he reported It by radio to leave the radio alone. He said,

"I picked the gun up and laid it on the hood of the squad car, and then
someone put It in the front seat of the squad car." It was he who got

Scoggins to chauffeur him around, with the policeman's pistol, (p.354)


2 - Callaway

That evening he went to a lineup with Sam Cuinyard, a porter who
also saw the man. Before goigg to the lineup, he had not seen a news-
paper, listened to the radio or seen a television. He had not seen
any picture of ^swald. He said the man he identified "was the shortest
of the bunch." Asked, "Did he have the same clothes on in the lineup -
did the man have the same clothes?" Callaway replied, "He had the same
trousers and shirt, but he didn't have Ills jacket on. He had ditched
his jacket." (P.3SS)

It is not 4J surprising that the Commission asked I' nothing about

this knowledge "ditching the jacket". That had nothing to do with the

identification of the man and it certainly is suspicious^ o»awme n. b in

view of the fact that the police found the jacket. His identification

to the police was "dark trousers and a light tannish-gray windbreaker

jacket, and I told them that he was fair complexion, da£^ hair. ...

about 5’ 10 " ... he looked right at me." When shown Commission Exhibit

162, he said it looked like the jacket the man was wearing, but "actually,

tan

Ijfthought it had a little more than to it." Callaway said he couldn't
see the shirt because it was open and he saw the white T-shirt under-
neath. (p.356)
