FOR THE PRESIDENT’S EYES ONLY 
Secret Intelligence and the American Presidency 
J?rom WQshirj^orU^J^^^ 
By Christopher Andrew. 
Illustrated 660 pp. New York: 
HarperCollins Publishers. $30. 
By Robert Dallek 
FOR many Americans the Central Intelligence 
Agency, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the 
National Security Agency and the National Secu- 
rity Council are synonymous with skulduggery 
in high places. These are the secret agencies of Govern- 
ment that have supposedly plotted assassinations of 
foreign enemies, indiscriminately wiretapped Ameri-j 
can citizens and abused the public trust by questionable • 
expenditures of billions of dollars in the name of nation- 
al security. 
Most of the country’s recent Presidents are seen as ’ 
largely responsible for these abuses of power. Franklin 
Roosevelt is said to have lied the country into World i 
War II by allowing it to be surprised at Pearl Harbor; 
Harry Truman to have built the apparatus of an Ameri- 
can police state; Dwight Eisenhower to have used that 
apparatus to topple regimes in Iran and Guatemala; 
John Kennedy to have tried to do the same in Cuba; 
Lyndon Johnson to have deceived the press and public 
about what he was doing in the Dominican Republic and 
Vietnam; Richard Nixon to have toppled Salvador! 
Allende in Chile, and then to have toppled himself; 
through Watergate; and Ronald Reagan to have contin- 
ued the pattern of hidden, illegal foreign actions in the j 
Iran-contra scandal. 
Presidents and the intelligence agencies serving 
them are not without sin; many complaints about secret 
government are justified. But many are not. Moreover,: 
Robert Dallek is the Harmsworth Visiting Professor of 
American History at Oxford University. His books 
include ‘‘Franklin D. Roosevelt and American Foreign 
Policy, 1932-1945” and “Lone Star Rising: Lyndon John- 
son and His Times, 1908-1960.“

--- PAGE BREAK ---istory at Oxford University. His books 
include ‘‘Franklin D. Roosevelt and American Foreign 
Policy, 1932-1945” and “Lone Star Rising: Lyndon John- 
son and His Times, 1908-1960.“

--- PAGE BREAK ---

too little has been said about the successes of United 
States intelligence, both during and after World War II. 
What we have needed in this post-cold-war era is an 
objective assessment of the country's intelligence agen- 
cies and Presidential performance in dealing with 
them. 
Christopher Andrew is a professor of history at 
Cambridge University and the author of numerous 
books on intelligence operations, including “Her Majes- 
ty's Secret Service/' He believes that “whether Presi- 
dents have used intelligence and the intelligence com- 
munity well or badly, how they have used it is an 
essential — though frequently neglected — part of the 
history of every Administration since the Second World 
War." Though “much of the story still remains officially 
secret,'* enough of it is open for Mr. Andrew to have 
written a thoughtful, judicious book. 
MOST of “For the President's Eyes Only" is 
devoted to the 10 men who occupied the 
White House from Franklin Roosevelt to 
George Bush and their handling of Ameri- 
can intelligence operations. Mr. Andrew critically as- 
sesses the performance of both the Presidents and the 
agencies, particularly the C.I.A1, about which far more 
is known than about the National Security Agency. His 
book is as objective an account as seems possible on so 
controversial a subject. There are no heroes and vil- 
lains here — only fallible Presidents and military and 
civilian officials struggling to make sense of a compli- 
cated and dangerous world. 
As often as not, in Mr. Andrew’s view, the Presi- 
dents and intelligence chiefs failed to find realistic 
answers to the questions before them. Of the recent 
Presidents, only Dwight Eisenhower, John Kennedy 
and George Bush showed any “real flair for intelli- 
gence," though even they were far from perfect. Ken- 
nedy, for example, performed poorly in the planning for 
the Bay of Pigs invasion. Because he was too accepting 
of wildly exaggerated C.I.A. estimates of the chances 
for overthrowing Fidel Castro, he suffered a major 
setback at the start of his Presidency. 
As Mr. Andrew sees it, at least Kennedy learned 
from his error (as in the Cuban missile crisis). Most of 
his predecessors and successors compiled less success- 
i Continued on next page. 
THE NEW YORK TIMES BOOK REVIEW 15at least Kennedy learned 
from his error (as in the Cuban missile crisis). Most of 
his predecessors and successors compiled less success- 
i Continued on next page. 
THE NEW YORK TIMES BOOK REVIEW 15

--- PAGE BREAK ---rned 
from his error (as in the Cuban missile crisis). Most of 
his predecessors and successors compiled less success- 
i Continued on next page. 
THE NEW YORK TIMES BOOK REVIEW 15

--- PAGE BREAK ---

i 
No Heroes, No Villains 
Continued from preceding page 
^^  — ~ • 
ful records in using the intelli-~~^pects In Vietnam, thus leading 
gence data generated for themj|the United States to a disaster in 
(principally by cryptographers Southeast Asia, 
deciphering diplomatic and Mr. Andrew is critical of 
smnrp8fIn1SH .Rooseveltt f?r in' - America’s intelligence agencies 
stance, failed to give priority tqjj. aS well. Their bureaucratic rival- 
?n T95f. Haadne
hS,e dnnVal °°^S ^r,es <Uke the con«ict within the 
in Had he done so, Mr. A   
Andrew says. United States na- 5™/'^ ^ °Perat,ons 
val intelligence would have hadJ^M ‘"tf‘1,gence
Hd,v,slons). as 
clear indications that Tokyo was . their madcap assassina- 
planning an attack on Pearl Har- «TV,°n plots and their blind Preiu' 
bor. Truman, likewise, neglected ^-~dlce’ caused them t0 ^ less suc- 
to put sufficient resources into cessful ^ey might have 
cryptographic analysis to have 
advance warnings of a North Ko- 
rean attack on South Korea. And 
even when decoded messages in- 
dicated that the Chinese were 
going to cross the Yalu River and 
enter the war, Truman and his 
principal advisers, moved by 
false convictions about the Chi- 
nese Communists, neglected to 
heed the warnings. Johnson’s an- 
tagonism to the C.I.A. and his 
conviction that American power 
would force a North Vietnamese 
surrender made him resistant to 
the agency’s more realistic as- 
sessments of American pros- 
been. Still, even if these prob- 
lems were eliminated, Mr. An- 
drew would have no illusions 
about the perfectibility of intelli- 
gence operations. "Good intelli- 
gence,” he says, "diminishes sur- 
prise, but even the best cannot 
possibly prevent it altogether. 
Human behavior is not, and 
probably never will be, fully pre- 
dictable.” Nevertheless, Mr. An- 
drew predicts, "The Presidents 
of the 21st century, like their cold 
war predecessors, will continue 
to find an enormously expensive 
global intelligence system both 
fallible and indispensable.” □drew predicts, "The Presidents 
of the 21st century, like their cold 
war predecessors, will continue 
to find an enormously expensive 
global intelligence system both 
fallible and indispensable.” □

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Those Clowns in Langley 
Since the missile crisis... Presidents have tended, more 
often than not, to take for granted their daily diet of all-source 
global intelligence. Indeed, they have frequently seemed disap- 
pointed by it. All remember international crises that took them 
by surprise, and most are inclined to treat the surprises as intel- 
ligence failures. “What the hell do those clowns do out there in 
Langley?” Nixon demanded after the unexpected overthrow of 
the Cambodian leader Prince Sihanouk in 1970. Eight years later 
Carter asked much the same question, more politely phrased, 
I when he was suddenly informed that the Shah of Iran was in dan- 
ger of losing his throne. 
The intelligence community has had its fair share of fail- 
ures. Presidents* recurrent disappointment with the intelligence 
they receive, however, has derived, at least in part, from their 
own exaggerated expectations. 
1 From “For the President's Eyes Only .” 
VA/> \ H'fc