ROCKEFELLER


"INTERNATIONALIST"


THE MAN WHO MISRULES THE WORLD


By Emanuel M. Josephson


Author of


Your Life Is Their Toy
Rackets — Social Service & Medical
Merchants In Medicine
Nearsightedness Is Preventable
Glaucoma and Its Medical Treatment With Cortin
The Thymus, Myasthenia Gravis and Manganese
Breathe Deeply and Avoid Colds
The Strange Death of Franklin D. Roosevelt


With a note on "Education" By Fred H. Johnson


Proceeds from the sale of this book are devoted to
the struggle for the preservation
of human freedom.


It is dedicated to


THE CONSTITUTION


a blueprint of human organization drawn up by the wisest
group of men who ever assembled for that purpose.

It is eternally true in its concept of freedom as the
fundamental basis of government.

This is published in the hope of restoring the Constitution
as our basic law, and preserving the freedom that it was
designed to give us, against the onslaught of conspirators from
without and within, so that America may become again

"... the land of the free..."


"The Carnegie-Rockefeller influence is bad. In two
generations they can change the minds of the people to make
them conform to the cult of Rockefeller, or the cult of
Carnegie, rather than the fundamental principles of American
democracy.”

Sen. Chamberlain (Ore.} March 26, 1917


"In our dreams we have limitless resources and the people
yield themselves with perfect docility to our molding hands.
The present educational conventions fade from our minds, and
unhampered by tradition, we work our own good will upon a
grateful and responsive rural folk... The task we set before
ourselves is a very beautiful one, to train these people as we
find them to a perfectly ideal life just where they are. So we
will organize our children into a little community and teach
them to do in a perfect way the things their fathers and
mothers are doing in an imperfect way, in the home, in the
shop and on the farm.”

The objectives of Rockefeller "philanthropies" stated by

him and Gates in Occasional Letter No. 1 of the G.E.B.


"ANYTHING ROCKEFELLER WANTS IS OK.”


Senator Arthur H. Vandenberg, "Bipartisan", San
Francisco Conference For UN Organization, May 1, 1945,
quoted by Drew Pearson.


"Even after we were in the war, Standard Oil of New
Jersey was putting forth every effort of which it was capable
to protect the control of the German government over vital
war material.

"As Patrick Henry said: 'If that is treason (and it certainly is
treason) then make the most of if’.

"YES IT IS TREASON.

"You can not translate it in any other way.”

Harry Shippe Truman, March 27, 1942


"They should lock at their hands. THERE IS BLOOD ON
THEM—the dried blood of the last war and the fresh blood of
the present one."

Chicago Tribune editorial, December 9, 1950


"... by thy words thou shalt be condemned.”
Matthew, 12:37


PHYSICAL SYMBOL OF ROCKRFELLER-SovigT AXIS
At Weat Corner of Park Avenue and 68th Street there stand
three buildings side by side that are the emblem of the Rocke-
feller-Soviet Axis. “A” is the home of Rockefeller’s Counci) on
Foreign Relations, the Foreign Office of the Rockefeller Empire.
“R”, on the opposite corner is the home of the Soviet Russian
Delegation to the UN. “C” houses Rockefeller’s Institute of
Public Administration, controlling city and state governments.


TABLE OF CONTENTS Chapter
Frontispiece


The Plot 3

Emblem Of Rockefeller-Soviet Axis 4

Credits To References 6

Warning 7

TU.S. Betrayed 8

Il The Rise Of The Rockefeller Empire 16

Meet The Rockefellers 30

Objectives Of Rockefeller "Philanthropies" 68

V Organization Of Rockefeller “Philanthropies" &9
VI Rockefeller Institute For Medical Research 99
VI Rockefeller’s General Education Board 125

VII Rockefeller's Foundation 147

IX Rockefeller's Good Government for American "Peasants" 162
X The Rockefeller Crusades And The “Oil War" 183
XI Rockefeller Soviet Axis 204

XT Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial 232

The Council On Foreign Relations 237

Some Rockefeller CFR Stars 253

XV Rockefeller's Institute Of Pacific Relations 274
XVI Rockefeller And Religion 300

XVII Rockefeller "Frees" the Press 313


XVIII The "Trejan Horse"—Rockefeller’s Philanthropy Trust 341
XIX Rockefeller's "Popular Front"—The New and Fair Deals 360


XX Supreme Rockefeller Crusade— World War IT 375
XXI Rockefellers United Nations 396
XXII Rockefeller's Marshall Plan and Point 4 Program
413
XXIII America Betrayed. What Lies Ahead?
What Can We Do About It? 428
Standard Oil Co. Seeks Control Of Schools 441
A Call To Action In American Education
By Fred H. Johnson 442
Index 443


CREDITS TO REFERENCES


Credit and thanks is extended to the following
references:


Biography Of The Reckefeller Brothers, by Joe Alex Morris.
Harper And Brothers

Drew Pearson column. Copyright 1945 by Bell Syndicate, Inc.
Reprinted by special permission of the author and the N.Y.
Mirror.

Dubinsky, Winthrop Rockefeller and Corsi May Be Fusion


Slate, by Murray Snyder. Reprinted by permission of the
New York Tribune


John D.: A Portrait In Oil, by John K. Winkler. Vanguard
Press Inc.


John D. Rockefeller, by Allan Nevins. Charles Scrib-ner's
Sons.


Prejudice And The Press, by Frank Hughes. The Devin-Adair
Co.


Rockefeller Profits From The Marshall Plan, Chicago Tribune
editorial, by Col. Robert McCormick


Rockefeller Or God, by Henry H. Klein


The Free And Responsible Press, Don R. Mellett Lecture at
the University of Syracuse, May 8, 1947, by George E.
Sokolsky.


The Tragedy Of George Marshall, by Walter Tro-han. The
American Mercury.


We Fight For Oil, by Ludwell Denny. Alfred A. Knopf Inc.


To my many patriotic friends who have helped me
unstintingly in my efforts I offer my sincere gratitude.


WARNING ! Soviet Russia i$
controlled by a ruthless gang of criminals, moral and ethical
lepers who pose as “philanthropists” and champions of "the
masses”. They are bent on conquering, lecting and raping the
world; and will not stop until, either they have accomplished
it, or themselves have been destroyed. Any dealings with
them as a government merely gives them the advantage of the
delays and aids implied in international amenities, that they
scorn but use to full advantage.

There never has been a more effective way of checking the
spread of contagion than isolation. A policy of strict
isolationism would weaken the Soviets by withholding from
them the material they require for their mad, criminal plans.

Their accomplices in cur midst have undertaken to
discredit isolationism and make it a term of opprobium and
reproach, to further their conspiracy. They foster
“internationalism” which Stalin has dictated shall mean that:

"An internationalist is one whe is prepared unreservedly,
unhesitatingly and unconditionally to defend the USSR".
(New Leader, March 11,1950) All of the conspirators’
"Internationalist" schemes, the Marshall Plan, the NATO, the
MSA, the Point 4 program, etc. are designed to supply the
Communists with the equipment and material without which
they can not wage war on u$. The material is sent to
our treacherous “allies” in the East and the West, and is
transhipped by them, to their criminal scum, Communist
partners indirectly, when not sent directly. To increase their
loot, the Red racketeers are now resorting to blackmail, in the
ransoming of our prisoners, the "snatch racket". We must act
immediately to oust and bar from public office any person
identified with the vicious conspirators.

Most absurd of the futilities with which the conspirators are
deluding us is the idea that the Communist criminal scum, or
our own, will ever change their stripes—that there ever can be
any peace with them so long as we make war so profitable for
them. The Korean "truce" farce demonstrates that well. Unless
we abandon "internationalism", and frustrate the conspirators,
it will inevitably lead us to bankruptcy and destruction by the
enemies within and without our gates.

7


CHAPTER I
U.S. BETRAYED "WHODUNIT?"


"Anything Rockefeller Wants Is O.K."
Sen. Vandenberg, "Bipartisan", San Francisco UN
Conference, May 10, 1945.


For the fourth time within half a century, the people of the
United States have found themselves drawn into and forced to
fight a war that was not their concern and in which it was not
their desire or will te participate. On each occasion the nation
was tricked into war by the same clique. The more observant
and intelligent sections of the public have sensed that there is
a power behind and above the government that controls it and
dictates its actions without regard to the will of the people.
That power has thus far been immune to exposure.

So insolently confident has this power become that in the
last two wars precipitated by them, World War II and the
Korean War, they have not even made a pretense of
complying with the form prescribed by the Constitution,
declaration of war by Congress. In violation of the
Constitution, the United States has been thrown into the wars
by "royal" edict issued by the power behind the Government,
though ostensibly at the instance of the Presidents who have
been their puppets, after incidents obviously incited by them
through their pawns in our own and foreign governments.

There can be no question, at this late date, that our
Government in Washington, for several decades past, has
been, and now is, very largely composed of subversives,
Communists and their fellow travellers and traitors. Only a
few of them have as yet openly confessed their betrayal of our
land to Communist Russia and to other foreign agencies. A
large number have been exposed as involved in the treason. A
very small fraction of the number involved have been caught
in the act of treason or perjury in connection with treason, and
convicted. The trials and convictions of Alger Hiss, Judy Cop-
lon and William Remington, and the confession of Lee
Pressman, among others, have given the nation, at the expense
of millions of dollars, legal proof of


8


what has been obvious for decades to the intelligent
citizenry—that the nation has been betrayed persistently by
treason of a wide array of public servants who range from the
top policy-makers, such as the "father" of the United Nations,
former Assistant Secretary of State, Alger Hiss, to the lowliest
clerks.

Charges have been made repeatedly by the Committee on
Un-American Activities, by members of Congress and by the
informed press and public, with offers of proof. They have all
been brushed aside in the past and labelled as unfounded by
the administrations of Presidents Roosevelt and Truman, and
by official agencies appointed by them supposedly to
investigate, but actually to whitewash them, under
circumstances that clearly bespoke involvement of the highest
officials of the land in the treason.

The impassioned bias of Presidents Roosevelt and Truman,
and their entourages, in favor of the traitors has raised the
question: "Are they themselves not involved in this treason
and conspiracy to destroy our land, its Constitution and its
government?"

This suspicion was materially strengthened when there rose
to the defense of Alger Hiss, Supreme Court Justices Felix
Frankfurter and Stanley Reed; also U.S. Senators, including
that mysterious power who has operated for years, sometimes
behind the scene, without official status and sometimes on the
scene, John Foster Dulles. It reached fever heat when
Secretary of State, Dean Acheson publicly professed his
friendship and leyalty to freshly convicted Alger Hiss, his
associate in the State Department and the brother of his law
partner, in the words "I will not turn my back on Hiss.”. It
became even more apparent from the hundreds of thousands
of dollars expended upon the defense of Hiss, in his two trials,
that tremendous power and unlimited wealth support the
conspirators. The refuge he was reported to have been given
in the home of Benjamin J. Buttenwieser, partner of Kuhn
Loeb & Co. and then assistant to John J. McCloy, American
High Commissioner of Occupied Germany, confirmed this
impression.

The Tydings Committee treatment of the charges made by
Senator Joseph McCarthy clearly reveal how widespread 1s
the government circle involved


in the conspiracy and how overwhelmingly powerful they are.
Especially was this true of the charges made against Owen
Lattimore and the hearings accorded him. Never was there
revealed in the hearings an important phase of Lattimore's
activities, his close association with Alger Hiss. Nor was he
questioned regarding the control and financing of
AMERASIA of which he had been editor. This might have
given some clue to the identity of the powers who protected
the Communist spies, traitors and thieves of highly
confidential State Department and other government records
that jeopardized the secrecy of our codes and menaced the
lives of our soldiers; and whe forced their release by the court
under criminal circumstances, after the Justice Department
refused to press charges against them.

The shielding of Owen Lattimore is all the more
reprehensible and startling because it is the type of
prepaganda in which he engaged that effected the turning over
of China to the Communists for use by them in the Lenin plan
for slaughter of our troops and vanquishing and destroying
our country. Engagement of our troops, planted in Asia by the
conspirators within our own government, in a diversionary
action, insured the Communists of a free hand in taking over
the lands allotted to them by the conspiracy. The blood of
thousands of our troops is on their hands.

Vituperative, smear-skilled Owen Lattimore has been built
up as wronged, abused and falsely charged. His propagandist
drivel was insured immediate publication under the title of
"TRIAL BY ORDEAL". It appeared so soon after his Senate
hearing that it could have been managed only if pre-arranged
by an ultra-powerful clique who were sure of "fixing the rap"
and to whom money was no object. Even under those
conditions the publication constituted a miracle from the
viewpoint of both speed and access to publication, even in a
bock trade that publishes only pro-Communuist propaganda.
Sister Eleanor Lattimore was given an opportunity to swell the
volume of this insolent propaganda in the October and
November, 1950, issues of the crimson Harper's Magazine.
Any auther can tell how complete a control of avenues of
publication by the clique such a press implies.

A few months later, the Korean "police action", as it was
termed by Truman, precipitated us for the

10


second time in a decade into a war by Presidential ukase, in a
violation of the Constitution that legally requires
impeachment of the President. This "emergency" was
engineered in time to influence the oncoming election. It has
also served as a perfect device for cover-up of the wholesale
treason that had begun to come to light.

The engineered "emergency" resulted in freezing in their
control of the nation for the duration—and possibly for a
period long enough to enable them to carry out fully their
conspiracy for the betrayal of our country—the very
subversive and traitorous elements that had been exposed.
This is the real emergency that confronts the nation.

During the Korean War, our State Department and other
Government agencies have served the Communists more
effectively than could any openly registered Communist
agents or spies. The order that was issued by the Navy to the
7th Fleet, to patrol Formosa Strait and bar any attack by the
Nationalists on the Communists on the mainland, has served
to protect the flank of the Chinese Communists and left them
free to employ their forces in butchering our troops in Korea.
It also enabled them to proceed te take over Tibet, Indo-China
and other points.

Truman, Acheson and the State Department initially
pretended that the purpose of the order was to allay the
suspicions of the Chinese Communists that we planned an
attack on them, in order to insure that they would not
intervene in Korea. This pretense was palpably false and
fraudulent. For it was known from the very start of the Korean
War that the Soviets and the Chinese Communists were
collaborating fully with the Korean Communists and were
supplying them with both munitions and men. But the
conspirators preferred to ignore this and deliberately
misrepresented the situation to the nation.

They carried their treachery to the point of insuring initial
defeat of our forces and slaughter of our troops. The
conspirators engineered to make their war a United Nations
affair, despite the reluctance or actual opposition of its
members. Together with our national sovereignty, the
conspirators arranged to turn over to the United Nations
contrel of our trocps. On the UN military staff there sits a
representative of our enemy, a Soviet

1]


general. Through his hands pass the confidential reports of
the field commander, which he as a matter of course,
transmits to Moscow to be relayed to the enemy. He
participates in dictating the instructions to our field
commander. This gives the enemy the power to dictate the
terms and conditions under which we must fight them. It robs
the field commander of one of the most essential elements in
successful warfare, the element of surprise.

Aligned with the enemy are our false UN “allies”, who
dictate absurd restrictions that bar our forces from attacking
the Manchurian bases from which the Korean Communist
armies are armed, supplied and reinforced. In the meantime
the Communists are being supplied with oil and munitions by
our own nationals and by our UN “allies” at the expense of
our Treasury and taxpayers, through such devices as the
Marshall Plan supplies and arms shipped to Western Europe
under the terms of the Atlantic Pact, and the Point 4 program.
Our own troops in Korea were denied reinforcement and
supplies on the ground that their services are needed in
Europe.

To cap the climax, offers of 500,000 South Korean troops
were rejected just as were the offers of Chinese Nationalist
troops. The conspirators, for reasons of their own, insist that
American blood must be shed in Korea and the flower of our
youth maimed, mutilated and killed in a Communist booby
trap. Benedict ‘Arnold was a patrict as compared with these
brazen, ruthless traitors who completely control our country,
betray it and are seeking to encompass its downfall.

As a climax, when General MacArthur overcame all the
barriers that they placed in the way of success, and threatened
to attack the Communists on their own ground, in Manchuria,
the conspirators arranged to have him relieved of his
command.

Apologists for the conspirators are doing their best to make
the nation believe that these constant acts of national betrayal
are mere "BLUNDERS". But it must be obvious even to the
most imbecilic that no one could conceivably be so stupid as
to commit such repeated acts of betrayal, as mere “blunders.”
For it is quite obvious that in the case of real blunders, the
element of chance would insure that an occasional blunder
would be made in our own favor. The fact that these acts have
consist- i2


ently militated against us, eliminates completely the "blunder"
alibi, even if we did not have at hand conclusive proof to the
contrary.

The absurd campaign of mass hysteria over the atom bomb
that has been engineered by the conspirators in this country
with low cunning and on a vast scale, attests to their
treacherous design and their assured contempt of the nation.
Though the conspirators have done their best to traitorously
turn over to Russia full knowledge and blueprints cf the bomb
and even supply them with processed uranium, no
announcement openly claiming possession of A- bombs had
ever been made by the Russian government. The first two
announcements stirring up the A bomb mass hysteria were
made by President Truman as an excuse for demanding and
seizing wartime dictatorial powers, attaining more intensive
looting of the nation by staggered taxation, and keeping the
nation “artificially alarmed,” the avowed policy of the
conspirators.

On each occasion when the Administration subsequently
sought increased appropriations, the threat of A-bombs was
brought forth, or Truman announced that Russia had exploded
another A-bomb. It was not until a year later, after a host of
scientists had vanished behind the Iron Curtain, that Stalin
announced that Russia had exploded an A-bomb. There is
much in the situation that suggests that the conspirators
themselves had supplied some A-bombs to be exploded in
Russia, for the deliberate purpose of intensifying the hysteria
they create and feed. But Russia continued to demand eli-
mination of the use of the bomb, which indicates it had no
bombs for warfare.

Truman's announcement of Russia's possession of atom
bombs was false and was known to be false by the announcer.
The Communists made it quite clear that Russia had no bomb
other than what had been stolen from us by traitors and their
agents. They openly acknowledge this in the Stockholm
"Peace Petitions" which they circulated for the express
purpose of elimination of the bomb from use in warfare.
Normal intelligence dictates the conclusion that the Soviets
would not seek the elimination of the bomb if they possessed
a supply of them. They have not asked for the elimination of
planes, rockets, disease warfare or of any of the devastating
weapons which we know they possess; nor have

13


they hesitated to use them where they served their own
purposes. And intelligent or informed persons could have no
delusions regarding humanitarianism amongst the Communist
eaders

Nevertheless the conspirators in our midst seek to gain cur
submission to the Communists by creating craven terror of our
own bombs in our midst. One begins to wonder if they
actually conceive of using cur bombs against us, or helding
them until the Communist conspirators take over and use them
against us. In many respects the situation resembles that of
children trembling before a bugaboo that they have created
with their own hands. Infinitely sad and damaging is the
spectacle of craven cowardice and hysterical terror which they
seek to have us present to the world. They are aiding and
abetting our enemies by undermining our morale at home and
our prestige abroad.

So gross and persistent has been the exaggeration of the
effects of atom bombs, in daily newspaper headlines and on
the air by officials and others that even the appearance in our
midst of a missionary, Father Hubert F. Schiffer, who sat in
his mission less than a quarter of a mile from the exploding
atom bomb at Hiroshima, and suffered no injury, has failed to
bring the public to their senses. To be sure the conspirators
have been very careful to minimize or suppress the truth
illustrated by his experience; the newspapers have failed to
make any mention of them or buried small paragraphs on
them in their back pages as contrasted with the daily,
screaming terror headlines and official pronouncements.
(N.Y. Times, March 30, 1950.)

This situation alse is fraught with elements of sabotage by
the conspirators of our military preparedness and defense. For
so much time, money and material are being diverted into
protection from the exaggerated terrors of the atom bomb, that
industry and rearming of the nation are being slowed down by
them; and needless costs and added taxes are being incurred.
In short the bombs which should be used to weaken and scare
our enemies are being used by traitors and fools to effect our
ignominious submission to the Soviets and even to
Communist China. We are going down in a blaze of
cowardice and treachery.

Only one public figure, former New Deal Ambassador to
England, Joseph P. Kennedy, has openly


intimated that the situation in which we find ourselves may
not be a product of mere blunders. He characterized our
policies as “suicidal”. Ex-President Herbert Hoover has
protested the insanity of a foreign policy that seeks to
purchase allies and aims to instill in them courage and the
will to be free, by monetary infusions.

Meanwhile as our troops were being sent to the slaughter, to
die by the thousands in Korea with inadequate reinforcements
and supplies, as our people are being whipped up inte a
frenzy by the phoney atom bomb scare, as our purses and
Treasury are being depleted by the Marshall Plan, by the
Atlantic Pact arming of Europe to permit those treacherous
"allies" to ship their own arms te our enemies, the conspirators
whip up a new plan to hasten national bankruptcy and provide
support for the enemy—the Point 4 program. At this point
there comes to the fore the questions: "Who are these
notorious and callous traitors?" "Who enables them to
penetrate into the topmost ranks of our Government?” The
authors and directors of our destiny and the masters of our
national fate, stepped out on the scene into the open to claim
credit and acclaim for putting us on the international merry-
go-round. In the December 30, 1950, and subsequent issues of
the Saturday Evening Post there appeared a series of articles,
the first of which was entitled The Rockefellers: The Story Of
Five Young Millionaires. In these articles the Rockefellers,
with characteristic "modesty", take the bow as Messrs.
"Internationalism". The author states that they allege that
their “philanthropies" transcend all bounds cf national
interests or patriotism. Like the rest of the "internationalist"
breed, it appears that they scorn patriotism as reprehensible
and undesirable because it interferes with their schemes. The
sole ultimate criterion of desirability is stated in the articles to
be profit to themselves. On that basis, the "Internationalist",
activities have been highly desirable to them, because,
undeniably, they have been highly profitable “for them,
however disastrous they are for us, the "peasantry",
individually, and for our country. For it is we who have had
to foot the bills for the expansion of the “internationalist"
interests of the Rockefeller Empire, with our fortunes, our
liberties and in many cases, our lives.

15


CHAPTER II
THE RISE OF THE ROCKEFELLER EMPIRE
A Lamp More Magic Than Aladdin's


The rise of the Rockefeller Empire, the greatest the world
has ever known, has been the most fateful development of the
twentieth century. Coupled with the spread of Marxism, with
which it has been closely identified, it has assumed the rule
of human destiny.

The story of the origin of the Standard Oil Company, and
of the Rockefeller fortune with which it is synonymous, has
been repeatedly told in such works as Ida Tarbell's The
Standard Oil Company; in the exhaustive biography, John D.
Rockefeller (JDR}, written by Professor Allan Nevins, of
Rockefeller's Council on Foreign Relations and Columbia
University, with the authorization of John D. Jr. and the
cooperation of the family, as a definitive memorial; and in
numerous official government investigations, lawsuits and
other records. A brief resume will suffice.

John D. Rockefeller was the son of "Dec" Williams Avery
Rockefeller. "Doc" was a cunning, crafty, unscrupulous,
ruthless and irresponsible vendor of patent medicines and a
quack physician. He advertised himself as "The Celebrated
Cancer Specialist—All Cases Cured Unless Too Far Gone",
according to John K. Winkler in his John D.—A Pertrait In
Oil (p.12). It is reported that his cancer remedy was crude
petroleum oil, sold at twenty five dollars a pint, (JDR, V. 1, p-
93} when the traffic would bear it. Nevins also reports rumors
of horse thievery (JDR, V. 1, p. 50) bigamy and an indictment
for rape (JDR, V. l, p 52). As a consequence, the
Rockefellers were forced to migrate, an incident that has been
repeated in the family history; and they hit upon hard times.
John D's early life was one of insecurity and spells of poverty.
As biographer Nevins states it: (JDR, v. 1, p. 90)

"the inevitable tendency of this family

atmosphere of hazard and dubiety was to foster

in him... a profound desire for certainty and

dependability .. ."

Though for the major part the father derived a handsome
income from his devious devices, and at times provided well
for the family, the lapses in-


tensified in John D. an instinctive penuriousness and love of

money. This was further intensified by the training which the

father gave his sons, mayhap unintentionally and instinctively

to make amends for failing to provide adequately at all times

for the family, a training that would help materially in

keeping the wolf from the door. Nevins quotes his boasts

about it to his crony, Uncle Joe Webster, as follows: (JDR, v.

l, p.
™'I cheat my boys every time I get a chance’, the

"doctor" said. 'I want to make 'em sharp, I trade

with the boys and skin 'em, and I just beat 'em

every time I can. I want to make ‘em sharp.'"

Ruthlessness and rapacity were masked by a pose

of benevolence and philanthropy. This attitude and

training have become a family tradition.

John D. acknowledged that even as a multi-billicnaire he
suffered from an insane fear of poverty. He related in a talk to
the Standard Oil Club on May 7, 1904, quoted by Nevins,
JDR, v. 1, p. 103) that

"As a multimillionaire, he would occasionally awake
fancying that he was still a clerk under Hewitt (his first
employer} and had discovered a shortage.” Fear of poverty
was imposed by him on those about him, especially on his
family, to such extent that it became the mainspring of the
character of Rockefeller enterprises. This fear could be
allayed only by such complete domination of the community
and of the world that no one could ever arise to offer
competition or to threaten impoverish him. This mental
condition gave rise to a super-Napoleonic complex, a driving
urge to rule the U.S. and the werld.

The initial urge manifested itself in the field of oil.
Rockefeller had built up with ruthless skill the powerful
Standard Oil monopoly. By 1915, it produced almost a third
of the oil of the United States. Complete monopoly of all
phases of the oil business loomed as a conceivable goal. This
dominant rele had been gained by gangsterism that would
make an Al Capone blush. [n the process there had been used
unsavory methods ranging from theft to arson and slaughter.
The tactics adopted by the Rockefeller interests differed pri-
marily in their excesses, from those adopted by the respected
Morgans, Vanderbilts, Goulds and others

17


of the time. But the Rockefeller Standard Oil tactics were even
more ruthless than the others and were crowded with
inordinate success. His methods are illustrated by the reports
of Ida Tarbell in The History Of The Standard Oil Co. and by
Anton Mohr in The Oil War. The latter reports: (p. 209)
"Standard Oil's intrigues—the Americans even hired bands of
Mexican brigands, who destroyed Pearson's (Mexican) oil-
pipes and set his wells on fire .

Nevins subtitled his official biography of Rockefeller, The
Heroic Age Of American Enterprise. If systematic use of
arson, murder, burglary, theft, extortion, swindling, blackmail,
wholesale corruption of public officials and gangsterism on a
grandiose scale are "heroic", this was indeed an heroic age.
And one of the most "heroic" of the contemporary figures was
John D. Rockefeller. All his untiring energy and sleepless
enterprise were devoted to the "hely" purpose of acquiring
unlimited wealth and power, and the "security" he sought for
himself.

In the process of development of the Standard Oil Co. by
merger with powerful allies and by ruthlessly crushing rivals
and weaker independents, a score of great fortunes were made.
A curious collaboration has prevailed among most of those
families whose fortunes were made in the Standard Oil Co.,
and retained. They have accepted the domination of the
Rockefellers. This is denied by them and by biographer
Nevins. But there is much evidence to bear it cut. Many
enterprises are controlled by these fortunes, and in turn by the
Rockefellers, and innumerable matrimonial financial alliances
have been formed.

Oliver H. Payne acquired as in-laws, William C. Whitney
and Gertrude Vanderbilt. They have come to dominate
American Tobacco Co., Great Northern Paper Ceo., Belmont
Park Race Track, Pan American and New York Airways (with
Juan Trippe}, Hudson Bay Mining & Smelting Co., Whitney
Realty Co., Technicolor Ine., Selznick International, the
Communist newspaper PM, now defunct, and many others.

Oliver B. Jennings acquired as in-laws, William Rockefeller
and Mary Brewster. They dominate Bethlehem Steel Corp..
McKesson & Robbins, U.S. Industrial Chemical Co.. National
Fuel Gas Corp.,

18


National Distillers Co., Amalgamated Textiles, and others.

Stephen V. Harkness’ family are important factors in New
York Central and Southern Pacific railroads, and in Time Inc.
The Pratts are factors in the Chase National Bank and Corn
Preducts Refining Co. John D. Archbold and his family had
important holdings in National City Bank, Equitable Trust
Co., General Electric Co. and Pennsylvania Central Airlines.
Henry Flagler controlled Florida East Coast R.R. and other
extensive holdings in Florida. Edward T. Bedford was an im-
portant holder of stock in Title Guarantee & Trust Co.,
American Tebacco Co., Bedford Petroleum Co., Corn
Products Refining Co. and Penick & Ford Ltd., Inc.

William Rockefeller numbered among his inlaws the
Dodges, Stillmans, Carnegies and the Wat-jens. He was a
dominant factor in National City Bank, Anaconda Copper Co.,
American Brass Co., Air Reduction Co., U.S. Industrial
Alcohol Co., U.S. Rubber Co. and many others. Their
holdings in the Standard Oil Co. are small as compared with
those of John D.

The holdings and wealth of John D. Rockefeller and his
descendants mushroomed so rapidly that it is difficult to keep
track of them. Indeed the task has been made almost
impossible because of the family practise of holding stock in
the names of nominees and trustees, almost exclusively in
many instances. They appear in person in very few cor-
perations which they control. Their nominees and agents are
multitudinous. The more important of them are generally
placed by the Rockefellers on the beards of trustees of their
various "philanthropies" and in the membership of their
agencies, especially the Council on Foreign Relations. As a
rule, this is done at the time of acquisition of the property for
which the individual acts as nominee.

Thus, about 1937 it was rumored that the Rockefellers had
acquired control of the New York Times for the sum of
seventeen and a half million dollars. At about the same time
one of the nominal owners of the Times and its publisher,
Arthur Hays Sulzberger, became a trustee of the Rockefeller
Foundation. The name of Rockefeller has never been publicly
identified with the Times. But the publication has been
obviously the official journal of the Rocke-


feller Empire, in much the same sense that the London Times
has been the official journal of the British Empire. Reliable
information regarding Rockefeller ownership or control of the
Times, however, has never been made public.

It has been an apparent objective of the Rockefeller
interests to gain monopolistic control of every necessity of life
and of every source of energy, oil, gas, coal, water-and wind-
power, electricity, atomic energy ‘and every “other source that
exists or comes into being. They have not yet succeeded in
making the greatest of all sources of power, the sun, render
them tribute. But when a means for doing so will be devised,
they will control it, and make the world pay for its solar
energy. They seek to control all necessities from the time they
are produced until they are consumed, and to cartelize the
process. They contrel every impertant governmental agency
in the land, and abroad, and have converted them into their
private agencies that are empowered to levy upon and
confiscate the wealth of every private citizen, and of the
nation, through taxation and control of the expenditure of the
funds thus levied. The citizenry of the U.S. virtually have
been disfranchised in the process. For all effective purposes,
the Rockefellers remain free of taxation under the laws written
and enforced by their agents.

As a consequence, the wealth of the Rockefellers is
incalculable. Favored by the law, their fortune grows while
others are wiped out. It is doubtful if there exists enough
money in the world to make their wealth liquid. For it
represents the wealth of all of us, plus control of the natural
resources of the larger part of the world, or possibly of all of
it. In effect, the wealth of all of us is levied on and, in many
instances, confiscated, for the advantage of the Rockefeller
Empire. Our tax and other laws are effecting for the
Rockefeller interests a monopoly of all the wealth of the
nation. This serves to explain why the Rockefellers personally
are so consistently and insistently demanding increased tax-
ation to pay for ever larger expenditures for the Marshall Plan,
the Point 4 program, and any device for squandering the
taxpayers’ moneys. The tax moneys from these programs flow
into their own coffers. Their ' ‘philanthropies" are defrayed
with "other people's money", the taxpayers’. These matters
will be related later in full detail.

2


The visible wealth of the Rockefellers, that which they held
in their own names, is, nevertheless, the world's largest
fortune. Their holdings of the various Standard Oil
Companies, that constituted the nucleus of their wealth, has
been variously estimated. The semi-official figures released
by them in their publication Life, on April 17, 1950, expressed
as percentages of the outstanding voting stock, is as follows:
Standard Oil of New Jersey, 14.52% of sixty million shares
with market value of more than four billion dollars; Standard
Oil of Indiana, 13.58%; Standard Oil of California, 12.58%;
Socony-Vacuum, 17.25%; Standard Oil of Ohio, 10%; Ohio
Oil Co., 13.02%. (Their market prices have doubled in the
past year and their earnings and dividends have risen
commensurately.} These figures are a bit lower than reported
to the Interstate Commerce Commission in 1933, when in
addition the following holdings were listed: Prairie Pipe Line,
14.72%; Atlantic Refining Co., 7.12%; South Pennsylvania
Oil Co., 32.92%; and 69,020 shares of Shell Union Corp. of
the Royal Dutch group. These holdings constitute but a small
fraction of the holdings in these companies held by the
Rockefellers in the names of the Foundation and other
nominees, and holding companies, interlocking stock
ownership and other devices. Their holdings in the so-called
"independent" oil companies, such as Texas Co., Pure Oil Co.,
and a host of others, are equally important.

Each of these companies controls a host of subsidiaries that
operate throughout the world. Many of them are quite as
important and impressive as their mother companies. Among
the 149 subsidiaries of the Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey
that circle the world are Creole Petroleum Corp., Imperial Oil
Co., Humble Oil & Refining Co., and the Arabian American
Oil Co. (known as Aramco}. The concession of Aramco
holdings to the Rockefeller interests cost the U.S. and the
world two World Wars, the lives of tens of thousands of GI's,
and endless misery for mankind. The expense of its
development has been defrayed largely by U.S. taxpayers. It
produces more than 850,000 barrels of oil, a day for
Rockfeller interests exclusively, that they have supplied to
Russia, the Chinese and Korean Communists, and yields them
a tax-exempt gross income of almost two million dollars a


day,
21


largely, and possibly entirely, paid them by the U.S. Treasury.
The international ramifications of the Reckefeller Empire are
illustrated by the principal affiliates listed in pages 20-21 of
the 1950 Annual Report of the Standard Oil Co. of New
Jersey, as follows: STANDARD OIL CO. OF NEW JERSEY


. Consolidated Companies & Percentage Owned UNITED STATES Esso Standard
OH Company (LODY) . - N
cian. transportation atid marketing on Eastern seaboard Humble Oi] & Refining Company

t]

Producting, transportation, refining and marketing in Texas The Carter Oi) Cornpacry (100%)
Producing. refining and marketing in central United States
and Rocky Mountain area Triterstate Oi] Pipe Line Company (100%)
Pipeline transportation, Oklahorna, Louisiana and Mississippi Triterstate Natural Gas Company,
Tneorporaated (54%) . . .
Production of natural gas in Louisiana Esso Shigping Company (100%)
Marine transportation Esso Export Corporation (100%)
Marketing Mediterranean Standard OF Co. (100%) .
Purchase and sale of Middle East crude and products Gilbert & Barker Manufacturing,
Company (LDDs) . . . . .

Marufacturing and sale of oi] burners and service station equiprnent Enjay Company, Tne.
CLO) Marketing of chemical products Standard Qi) Development Company (LOUY
Research and development CANADA
Tinperial Oi], Lirnited (70%) LATIN AMERICA _ .

Producting, transportation, refining and marketing Creole Petroleum Corporation (94%)
Producting, transportation, refining and marketing in Venezuela Lapo Oil & Transport
Company, Litnited LOD) . oe
Refining in Aruba, Indonesia International Petroleum Company, Limited (88%)
Producing, transportation, refining and marketing in Peru,
Colombia and Venezuela Panama Transport Company (100%)

Marine transportation Standard Qil Company of Brazil (LOUY

Marketing in Brazil Esso, Productora de Petróleo S.A, i wa

Producing in Argentina Esso, Refinadora de Petré leo. ELDU)

Refining in Argentina Esso, Sociedad Anonima Petrolera Argentina (100%)

Marketing | in Argentina Esso Standard Qi] Company (Chile) S.A C. (100%)
Marketing in Chile Esso Standard Oi] Company feu, may), S.A. (LODY)

Marketing in Uruguay Esso Standard Q1) Company (Cuda) Logt

Refining and marketing in Cuba Esso Standard Oi) Company (Puerto Rico) (100%) Esso
Standard O11 (Antilles) S.A. (100%) . . .

Marketing in Guianas and Lesser Antilles Esso Standard Qi] (Caribbean) 3.4. (100%)
Marketing in Bermuda, the Bahamas and Greater Antilles Esso Standard Oil (Central
America) S.A. (LID) . .

Marketing in Central America Standard Oi] (Canal Zone) Company (100%)

Marketing in Canal Zone

NON-CONSOLIDATED COMPANIES UNITED STATES

Manufacture and sale of antiknock compound Plantation Pipe Line Company (49%)

Pipeline transportation from Louisiana to

North Carolina


o


22


ANADA
nterprovincial Pipe Line Company (35%)


Pipeline transportation fror Alberta rs Wisconsin EUROPE AND NORTH AFRICA Anglo-


American QI) Company, Limited (LOO


Marl
Refi


Refi


Marketing in

Marketing in Sweden A/S Ostlandske Petroleurnscompaeni (56)

Refining and marketing in Norway OY Nobel-Standard AP (67%)
i


Marketing in

Marketing in Switzerland Esso Standard Algerie S.A. "a

Marketing in Alperia Esso Standard Tumisie 5. A.

Marketing in Ye)

Marketing in eastern Mediterranean MIDDLE AND FAR Peer Standard-Vacuum Oil
Company (50%)


Prod


ucing, re


Refining, transportation, and LINIO in the
United Kingdotn and Erie Standard Francaise des Petroles $.A. (55%)
Refining and marketing in France Esso A. G. (100

keting in Western Germany Ebano Asphalt-Werke A. G. (100%)
ning in Western Germany G
Producing in Western Germany Societa Petrolifera Ttaliana L A. (59%)
Producing and refining in Ttaly Stanic-Tndustria Petrolifera $. p. A. (50%)
ning in Ttaly Esso S 90%)
Marketing in
Marketing in Beleium Standard Amerikaansche Petroleum Cie. N. V. (66%)
Marketing in the Netherlands N. Y. Nederlandse Aardolie Mils (50%)
Producing in the Netherlands Det Danske Petroleurns A/S


ewerkschaft Brigitta (50%)


tandard Traliana, $. p
taly Esso Standard (Belehira) (88%)


Denmark Svenska Petroleum AB Standard (or
Finland Esso Standard (Switzerland) (100%
Tunisia Esso Standard (Near East), hoy


ining, transportation and emarketing, iti


Far Fast, Australasia and Africa Irag Petroleum Company, Limited (12%)
Producing, re
Producing and refining in Saudi Arabia Trang-Arabian Pipe Line Company (30%)
Pipeline trans


terminal in Le


ining and pipeline transportation in Trag Arabian American Oi] Company (30%)


portation from Saudi Arabia to Mediterranean
anot


The Standard Oil holdings of the Rockefellers is a small
fraction of their wealth. One of the most astute students of the
Rockefeller interests is Henry H. Klein, former Commissioner
of Accounts of New York City. "His estimate of the
Rockefeller wealth in the depression year 1938, published in
his pamphlet Rockefeller Or God, is as follows:

"In my book, Dynastic America and Those Who Own It,

published in 1921, [ estimated the wealth of the Rockefeller

family at $2,400,000,000. I estimated at that time, that the

Rockefellers owned about $1,000,000,000 in oil alone;

$400,-000,000 in railroad stocks, bonds and notes;

$400,000,000 in industrial corporations, mines and banks;
$300,000,000 in national, state, city and


23


foreign bonds; $200,000,000 in public utilities securities; and
$100,000,000 in real estate and mortgages.

"| now revise this estimate to date. The Rockefeller family
now owns about five billion dollars ($5,000,000,000), and
enjoys an income of about $250,000,000 a year, or about
$5,000,000 week. In my opinion, their heldings are approxi-
mately as follows: Standard Oil and other oil


BECULITIOS ....0.ccccccccccececceeceeessaeeeeenees $2,000,000,000
National, state, city and foreign

Bonds oo eee eeeseeseeeeens 1,000,000,000
Real estate and mortgages... 600,000,000


Railroad stocks, bonds and notes 400,000,000 Industrial
corporations, mines and


Danks oo. eee seeseeeeeeseee 400,000,000
Public utilities securities ..............00. 300,000,000
Miscellaneous investments

(unclassified) oo... eee 300,000,000


‘The Rockefellers are the richest family on earth, all made in
the lifetime of one person, the late John D. Rockefeller. When
the latter died a year ago his will disposed of $25,000,000 to a
grandchild. It made no mention of any other property. It is
obvious, therefore, that all the other wealth that he had
accumulated had been distributed before his death, on which
no inheritance tax was paid. In fact, in my book, Dynastic
America and Those Who Own It, published in 1921, I tell of
the transfer of more than one billion dollars in oil holdings
alone, to his son, John D. Rockefeller, Jr., the year before. |
also tell of the transfer of vast oil holdings to his daughter,
Alta Rockefeller Prentice; te Mrs. Edith R. McCormack,
another daughter, to the Rockefeller Foundation, General
Education Board, and Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial
Fund. These transfers from John D. Sr., included hundreds of
thousands of shares of Standard Oil securities, and a vast
amount of other securities which doubled and tripled in value
before he died.

"In Dynastic America and Those Who Own It, I estimated
Mr. Rockefeller's income from his total Standard Oil holdings
alone, prior to 1921, at about $400,000,000 cash, and about
$250,000.-000 in dividend stocks. Since 1921, these amounts
have been at least doubled.


24


"Aside from their ownership of about one-quarter of the
securities of the leading Standard Oil corporations, the
Rockefellers own securities, consisting of stocks, bonds and
notes, in most of the large, so-called independent oil
corporations in the United States. They are also heavily inter-
ested in the Royal Dutch and other foreign oil monopolies in
many countries. Their interests cover virtually every spot on
earth, including Russia, where they own a half interest in the
Nobel Oil Works.

"It is known that the Rockefeller family owns a vast amount
of government securities. John D. Sr. was credited with
having bought most of the second Liberty Loan, and a large
amount of Victory bonds during the World War (tax exempt),
and it is known that he and his brother, William, bought other
securities of the U.S. Government, and of many cities and
states. The Rockefeller family is credited with owning the
largest amount of bonds of the City of New York, their
holdings in these securities being estimated at more than
$100,000,000. When William Rockefeller died in 1922, he
left many millions of dollars of the bonds of the City and State
of New York. His wealth at the time (about $150,000,-000),
was less than one-tenth his brother's holdings. Because of
their ownership of government securities, aside from other
wealth, the Rockefellers are the most influential factors in
government.

"The Rockefellers’ holdings in real estate are tremendous,
their holdings in New York City alone, being estimated at
over $500,000,000, or about 3% of the total assessed value of
all real estate in Greater New York. They have similar large
holdings in other cities, and their personal estates are
estimated to have cost at least $50,-000,000. Besides these
personal holdings, the various Standard Oil corporations
which they control, own real estate whose actual and potential
value is several billion dollars.

"The Rockefellers have long been credited with controlling
the leading railroads in the U.S. through their ownership of the
largest share of railroad securities. They are known to be
heavily interested in the Pennsylvania, New York Central,
Union Pacific, Southern Pacific, Central R. R. of


New Jersey, Erie, Western Maryland, Wabash, Michigan
Central, Missouri ‘Pacific, West Pacific, Texas and Pacitic,
Northern Pacific and Great Northern, Baltimore and Ohio,
Wheeling and Lake Erie, Seaboard Air Line, Reading,
National Railways of Mexico, Missouri, Kansas and Texas;
Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe: Chicago, Milwaukee and St.
Paul; Denver and Rio Grande, Chicago and Alton; Chicago,
Rock Island and Pacific; Illinois Central; New York, New
Haven and Hartford; Kansas City Southern and other
railroads.

"The Rockefellers have been credited with being the
leading, if not controlling factors in most of the large
industrial corporations and mines. They were heavily
interested in the U.S. Steel Corp., Bethlehem Steel, General
Electric, International Harvester, Westinghouse
Manufacturing Co., Armour & Co., American Linseed Co.,
National Lead, Corn Products Refining Co., Sheffield Farms
and Bordens, American Tel. & Tel., Radio Corp. of America;
Colorado Fuel & Iron Co., American Shipbuilding Co.,
Virginia Carolina Chemical Co., Republic Iron & Steel Co.,
Jones & Laughlin Steel Co., Provident Loan Society,
Consolidated Coal Corp., and in other mining and industrial
companies in various parts of the U.S., and in other countries.

"Rockefeller holdings in banks and other financial
institutions are indicated by the fact that they control the
Chase National Bank, the largest in the U.S., with deposits of
two billion dollars, in which they invested $45,000,000 cash,
and that before they acquired this holding, they sold their
interest in the Bankers Trust Company for $28,-000,000. They
owned the Equitable Trust Company almost outright before
they combined it with the Chase National Bank. Winthrop W.
Aldrich, chairman of the Board of the Chase National, is a
brother-in-law of John D. Rockefeller, Jr., who married
Aldrich's sister, a daughter of the late Senator Nelson W.
Aldrich of Rhode Island, who was one of Rockefeller's chief
agents in the U.S. Senate. The Rockefellers are interested in
other large financial institutions in the U.S. and in foreign
countries, including life and fire insurance companies, and
they are heavily interested in the National City Bank in New
York City, the second

26


largest bank in the country; Central Hanover Bank & Trust
Company, New York Trust Company, J. Henry Schroeder
Banking Corporation, and banks and trust companies in many
cities.

"The Rockefellers have long been interested in public
utilities corporations. They early acquired contrel of the
Consolidated Gas Company in New York City which is now
the Consolidated Edison Co., in which their holdings are
worth at least $50,000,000. Most of the Rockefeller stock
holdings in this corporation are in the names of "dummies".
They control the Manhattan Elevated R. R. Co. in New York
City, in which they invested about $25,000,000, and they hold
millions of dollars of the bends and notes of the Brooklyn
Manhattan Transit Corp. and Interborough Rapid Transit
Company, which operate subways in Greater New York. They
own millions of dollars of stocks, bonds and notes, in other
utilities monopolies, including the United Gas Improvement
Co., Public Service of New Jersey, People's Gas of Chicago,
Mountain Fuel Supply Co., Colorado Interstate Gas Co.,
Mutual Fuel Gas Co., Chicago Railways Co., Philadelphia


O.,
"the Rockefellers are interested in many corporations aside
from those enumerated or referred to, whose securities are not
traded in on the Stock Exchange, but which de a large
business in their lines. They are interested financially in
almost every large corporation in the country.
"The Rockefeller family controls the wealth of the world. No
family owns more than half their wealth. The Rothschilds of
Europe, the Du Ponts in the United States, and the Mitsuis in
Japan, are their closest rivals. The wealth ‘of these families is
estimated at about $2,500,000,000, each. The Rockefellers’
wealth is about five billion dollars. Their income is estimated
at $250,000,-000 a year, or about $5,000,000 a week. At that
rate, the Rockefellers will continue to outstrip every other
family. They control about $250,-000,000 a year in
newspaper, magazine, and radio advertising, and their
influence in this direction is supreme. It is realized by those in
the publishing business, that no newspaper or magazine could
live without the advertising patronage of the corporations
which they control. For that reason, the Rockefellers are able
to shape editorial


27


policies in newspapers, magazines, and on the radio. The
Rockefellers are interested in three daily newspapers in
France, and they undoubtedly own or control newspapers
and magazines in other countries. They control
broadcasting and moving picture corporations in this
country, directly through their ownership of 500,000
shares of R.K.O. and through their interest in the Radio
Corporation of America (in which they owned 300,000
shares}, Westinghouse, and General Electric, all of which own
the patent rights on all sound equipment in all the moving
picture houses. Their banking houses finance large
moving-picture corporations.” These estimates of Rockefeller
wealth, made in 1938 in the midst of a depression on the basis
of the depressed market price of stock holdings and at a time
when crude oil sold as low as 10c a barrel as compared with
the present price of more than $2.00 a barrel, have been
made absurd underestimates by ensuing developments.
Two World Wars and = inflation have multiplied the
visible Rockefeller wealth fantastically. To-day, their oil
holdings purchased for them by U.S. taxpayers' money and the
lives of tens of thousands of doughboys and Gls lost in two
World Wars, are alone worth more than five billion dollars.
Their share of the capitalized income from approximately 160
wells in the hundreds of square miles of their Saudi Arabian
concessions, producing almost 850,000 barrels of cil a day
yielding an income of about $?,-000,000 a day, are alone
wotth over $2,500,000,000 aside from the value of the proved
reserves in the one field which runs many times that figure.
And though it was being produced, refined and marketed
virtually entirely at the expense of the American taxpayer,
largely for direct or indirect delivery to the Soviets, it is tax-
exempt for all practical purposes. From the value of this one
holding it can be discerned that the wealth of the Rockefellers
is incalculable and can not be expressed in terms of money.
It must be expressed in terms of control of the limitless
resources of the world.

These holdings of the Rockefellers are but a small
fraction of their domain. They control the Borden
(Milk) Co., as well as National Dairy Products Co.,
comprising together what their protege, Henry
Wallace, has labelled the "Milk Trust”. "Philan-

28


threpically” it has raised the minimal price of milk from six
cents to more than twenty cents a quart while degrading its
quality. They control the Drug Trust, including American
Home Products Co. and its subsidiaries, Winthrop Chemical
Co., Sterling Products, the I. G. Farbenindustrie and its
American and world-wide subsidiaries, American Cyanamid
Co. and its Lederle Laboratories, and numerous other major
drug and chemical concerns. They control most of the
important newspapers, magazines and book-publishing houses
in the country, including the Curtis Publications, the Hearst
Publications, Time, the New York Times, the Associated
Press (through control of its members} and many others, both
here and abroad; and they and their associates have liberally
subsidized the staffs of such radical and Communist
publications as the Daily Worker, Masses, PM and Amerasia.
Through their control of member banks, they dominate the
Federal Reserve System, and through it, the U.S. Treasury.


Personal charm is now rated highly by the Rockefellers, as
an asset in attaining their goal. It helps to delude and serves
well in lieu of more substantial coin, John D. Jr. has recounted
with pride his experiences in this direction with the victims of
the massacre of the families of the striking workers of his
Colorado Fuel & Iron Co. When public indignation against
them for this brutal affair ran high, on the advice of their
public and labor relations adviser, Mackenzie King, he visited
the homes of the intimidated victims amidst a burst of
publicity. He relates, proudly, that not even their victims could
resist his personal charm. In their publicity releases, they
stress the fact that they are liberal with charm only, for it costs
them nothing. Charm and hospitality masking an iron fist,
have won them many victories in dealing with the unsuspect-
ing, and much profit.


29


CHAPTER III
MEET THE ROCKEFELLERS


The Rockefeller Myth has been so cunningly elaborated
and embellished by their host of publicists and propagandists,
that it takes research to get at the true evaluation and
understanding of the character of the members of this
omnipotent clan, whese whims and schemes have meant so
much to the world in the past, and are certain to be even more
fateful in the future. Crafty schemer, John D. Sr., bred in his
son and grandsons the dominant traits of his own character,
including those bred in himself by unscrupulous "Doc"
William Rockefeller. He accomplished it by a mode of
upbringing that has become traditional in the family.

This training is aptly illustrated by an anecdote related to
the author by a mutual friend about Winthrop Rockefeller: In
the early 1940's, when women wore the hobble skirts dictated
by fashion, this friend was walking along Fifth Avenue in
New York City with her boy friend. Winthrop, who is six feet
and two inches tall, was taking inordinately long strides. She
found it impossible to keep up with him no matter how fast
she hobbled. In desperation, she turned and pleaded with him
to slow down. In all seriousness, he replied, "My grandfather
and father have taught us to take long strides, because it saves
shee leather". And he strede on at the same pace.

Concerning Nelson there is told a story that is said to
illustrate his innate craftiness. The proprietor of a candy store
that the children patronized showed his Christmas spirit by
offering the children a handful of candy. When Nelson was
told he could have his handful of candy, he wagged his head
and refused. On the following day, the tale relates, Nelson
returned with his father. Once again the proprietor offered
Nelson a handful of candy, and again he refused. But this time
he talked up and said:

"Let father take it. He has bigger hands."

The active principals of the Rockefeller Empire are
"Emperor" John Davison Jr., and the five "Princes": John
Davison 3rd, Nelson Aldrich, Lau-rance Spelman, Winthrop
and David. Each of them has played a definite and significant
role in Rocke-

30


feller Imperial affairs; and all of them work together in
harmony and close union. There is one curious and striking
characteristic in the activities of all of them. They all
assiduously and ostentatiously dissociate their names from the
enterprises that they most completely control, the Standard Oil
companies. The last of them to hold a Standard Oil
directorship, Winthrop, director of Socony Vacuum Oil Co.,
resigned on July 1, 1951. It is common knowledge, however,
that they control these companies and dominate all their major
activities through nominees and agents, in much the same
manner as did John D. Sr. after Ins pretended "retirement".
John D. Winkler, in his John D. A—Portrait In Oil, relates
that at the age of 90 years he kept
".. In very very close touch with events in Wall Street that
are likely to affect his heldings. Through his son he has
retained stock interest in some fifteen companies of the old
Standard group and is always a considerable subscriber ... to
new stock issues. He has several personal representatives at
26 Broadway and always commends them warmly when
profits are netted from transactions entered into upon their
advice. He has never retired and never will retire in a
definitive sense. "He follows world events in which he is
interested with great care. But the newspapers really tell
him very little. He himself could publish the most
interesting newspaper in the world! And each day he'd have
a flock of beats.

"For while the papers are speculating upon the health of a
great diplomat cr the possible overthrow of a foreign
government, he has already been informed cf latest
developments through direct wires leading from Pocantico
Hills to Standard Oil offices and, indirectly, to the remote
places of the earth. There are over a hundred telephones at
Focantico, forty of them local, suburban and long distance
ines

. He has never lost interest in finance. During the
period we are describing he was very keenly interested in
various deals of the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey.
Through representatives he advised the transaction by which
the New Jersey Standard cut its capital cost by retiring
$200,000,000 of preferred stock and floating a new


3]


issue of $120,000,000 in debenture bonds. His information
about this and other matters that interest him is invariably
accurate.” (pp. 229-35) This is the Rockefeller tradition; and
they are net a clan that deviate from familial tradition, as their
biographer, Joe Alex Morris, stated in his blurb on them in the
Saturday Evening Post.

On the other hand, they make an equally insistent and
ostentatious display of officership in their so-called
"oshilanthropies", in the autobiographies which they submit to
Who's Who and in other reference books. It smacks
excessively of"... thou dost protest too strongly.”

John Davison Rockefeller Jr. was born in Cleveland, on
January 24, 1874, the first son of four children. He received
his early education in four schools, one of which, the
Browning School, was established by his father for the
specific purpose of providing him with a school in which he
could rub shoulders with other children of his own age. He
learned to fiddle and take his place in the family orchestra;
and he earned his pocket money by pulling weeds from the
lawn of the Forest Hill family estate at a cent for each fifteen
weeds and by chopping wood at fifteen cents an hour. At the
age of nineteen, he entered Brown University, a Baptist
institution that was in keeping with the spirit of his religious
training, with several of his friends. At college, John D. Jr.
showed no great brilliance, but managed to get by. A member
of the Alpha Delta Phi, he was junior class president; and he
managed the football team in his senior year with such
frugality (he made the players carry their own luggage on
train trips) that it showed a profit. He received his A.B. degree
in 1897; and his M.A. in 1914.

In October, 1897, John D. Jr. joined the staff cf the
Standard Oil Co. There he learned accounting and business
methods, under the tutelage of Rev. Frederick T. Gates, then
his father's investment manager who also handled
"philanthropies" as investments. For more than a year he was
vice president and director of the Standard Oil Co. of New
Jersey. On his own, he was "taken" in a swindle


32


by David Lamar, to the tune of almost a million dollars. In
this respect he merely matched the experience of his father,
who had been “taken” repeatedly by other swindlers, in such
deals as the West Superior Iron & Steel Co., the Everett Land
Co., the San Miguel Consolidated Mines, the Puget Sound
Pulp & Paper Co., the Everett & Monte Cristo Railroad and
others into which he had been led by faith in friends and co-
religionists, when too busy to give such matters his personal
attention.

With Gates, John D. Jr. managed the family investments in
Brooklyn Union Gas Co., Consolidated Gas Co., National
City Bank, American Linseed Co., Lake Superior
Consolidated Iron Mines Co. which controlled Mesabi, the
New York Central, Santa Fe, and Lackawanna railroads, the
Gould group, including the Missouri Pacific and the Missoun,
Kansas & Texas railroads, and the Colorado Fuel & Iron Co.;
on the beards of the last three John D. Jr. and Gates served as
directors. Of the last, Gates made his nephew president.

It was in connection with the Colorado Fuel & Iron Co.
strike in 1914, that John D. Jr. learned at first hand the
disadvantage of being publicly identified with the Rockefeller
enterprises. These experiences are undoubtedly the basis of
the family practise of hiding their control of industrial
enterprises and parading their "philanthropic" fronts at every
opportunity; and no doubt their publicity men and public-
relations counsellors have confirmed them in this practise. For
both John D. Sr. and Jr. were grilled in connection with the
investigation by Congress of the massacre of strikers at
Ludlow, Colorado, by agents of the Colorado Fuel & Iron Co.
And it took all the efforts of the newly engaged Ivy Lee and
W. L. Mackenzie King to "regild the lily", the Rockefeller
repute. John D. Jr. even was compelled to resort to the device
of lending his name to a volume entitled The Colorado
Industrial Plan. Whether it was ghosted or was a product of
his own pen is not a matter of record; but Mackenzie King's
ideas stand out in the text. This was the beginning of
Rockefeller's fostering of labor unionism as a device for
regimentation of the "peasants" and monopoly of industry
through monopoly of labor, and of subsidy of "social
sciences", which placed the Rockefeller interests in the
position of panderer to the prostituted intellects, the
professors, who 33


serve as handmaidens to the labor union leaders and lead their
activities into channels desired by their sponsor. This is an
essential feature of Rockefeller-ism. John D. III is continuing
this tradition as director of Industrial Relations Counsellors
Inc. which is subsidized by the Foundation.

John D. Jr. resigned virtually all his frank business
directorates at about this time, with the exceptions of his
directorates in the Merchants Fire Insurance Co. and the
Washington Assurance Co. Currently he lists himself in the
biegraphies which he furnishes Who's Who, as President of
the Board of Rockefeller Institute For Medical Research,
which position he has recently turned over to his son David,
and as Chairman of General Education Board and of
Rockefeller Foundation. However noble these sound, they
make it quite clear that he thereby assumes full personal
responsibility for the nefarious activities of these
organizations which are here disclosed. In the Directory of
Directors, he 1s also listed as director of the New York Life
Insurance Co.

John D. Jr. emerged as the "power behind the throne” in
Standard Oil Co. in connection with the prosecution of the
Teapot Dome case, when he testified in favor of Col. Stewart,
president of the Standard Oil Co. of Indiana; and
subsequently, when he ousted Stewart for withhelding and
diverting funds rightly due te the stockholders of the
Company, that had been exposed incidentally. He did so with
a righteous show of indignation that was hardly impressive in
view of the huge pension with which Col. Stewart was
rewarded.

John D. Jr. married Abby Greene Aldrich, daughter of
Senator Nelson W. Aldrich, of Rhede Island, Republican
leader of the Senate, in 1901. Nevins, in his biography (JDR,
v. 2, p. 459) reports:

"Thereafter, John D. Rockefeller Jr., saw a

great deal of the circle of elder statesmen close

to Aldrich, notably Senators Platt, of Connecticut,

Spooner, of Wisconsin, and Allison, of lowa..."

The couple had one daughter, Abby, who married
David M. Milton and subsequently divorced him to
marry her psychoanalyst, Dr. Irving H. Pardee (who
did not long survive the nuptials} ; and five sons.
In one basic manner, John D. Jr. deviated from the
pattern laid down by his father. —a distaste for
fundamentalist religion which had done so much to
34


aid in his father's advancement. It is open to question whether
greater influence in this direction was exercised by his
mentors at Brown University or by Reverend Frederick
Taylor Gates, his father's "man of business" who, though
detesting much of religion, had made it serve him nobly as a
stepping-stone to personal advancement. At the time of the
creation of the Rockefeller Foundation, fundamentalist
ministers had noted John D. Jr.'s advocacy of a "new" and
"liberal" theology that decried sectarianism as pragmatically
unsound and veered toward Marxism and “higher criticism".
John Roach Stratton accused him of seeking to standardize
education and religion through the rationalization of the
German school.

In an address before the Protestant Council of New York
City on January 31, 1945, John D. Jr. revealed, however, that
his aims in respect to religion were much more far reaching.
In this address, which has been published for distribution by
the Council under the title of The Christian Church, What Of
Its Future?, he suggests its transformation inte the “Church of
the Living God", and eliminating or subordinating "ordinance,
ritual, creed, all non-essential”. In the fostering of Marxism in
the churches through such agencies as the Federal Council of
Churches of Christ in America, by the Rockefeller
Foundation, there emerges the idea that the real intent and
purpose is ‘the destruction of religion as the modern world
knows it and its replacement by ancient concepts of religion in
which the "Living Ged" is the ruler of the State,—in the
Roman sense of "Rex, Imperator et Deus" and in the sense
that Stalin is the god of the religion of Communism. Can it be
that this is one of the objectives of the Rockefeller Empire?

John D. Jr.'s Sunday School classes, nevertheless brought
rich returns in publicity, favorable sentiment and seduction of
public opinion. The mask of religiosity, combined with the
sham of pseudo-philanthropy, was invaluable in blinding the
public to the true nature of the activities of the Rockefeller
interests, which are here related. He held close and purposeful
control, both direct and indirect, over the activities of the
"ohilanthrepies" and over the frankly commercial and political
activities of the Empire. His was a missionary zeal to force
others to accept the brand of salvation that

35


he had to offer and to mold them and affairs generally
according to his designs and purposes, that derived in part
from his training, in part from the unbounded zeal that is
characteristic of his clan, and in part from the influence of
Reverend Frederick Taylor Gates, at whose side he worked.
Nothing conceivably could have gained the support of their
"philanthropies" without his instigation, approval and
consent, no matter how much there was maintained the
appearance of independence of his agents. The allegation that
John D. Jr. has no responsibility for all the activities of the
Rockefeller Empire is as absurd as the spider's disavowal of
responsibility for the fate of the fly that he ate, and its
allegation that it merely wove the web, which the fly entered
of its own free will.

His remarriage, to Mrs. Martha Baird Allen, widow of a
Brown University classmate, on August 15, 1951, should put
at rest any rumors of his lack of competence, energy or
alertness. There can be little doubt that John D. Rockefeller
Jr. has been for many years the most powerful man in the
world and the purposeful dictator of its fate, in so far as it can
be humanly or inhumanly dictated.

It is for this reason that such views as those expressed by
Elizabeth Dilling in her Red Network and The Roosevelt
Record And Its Background (p. 166} that John D. Rockefeller
Jr. is a "sap" whe was lured into support of the Communist
League for Industrial Democracy agency, the National
Advisory Council on Radio Education, and other Red
agencies, are so completely unwarranted and absurd. This will
be made more apparent in the account of the high
purposefulness the support of Communist activities had in the
program of the Standard Oil companies and of the Rockefeller
Empire. It will become obvious that these activities, however
malevolent and subversive, manifest a high order of cunning,
ruthless diplomatic skill and exceptional grasp and brilliance,
and an ability to penetrate shallow thinking and shibboleths
that are so dear to the masses and the demagogues who sway
them, to discern deeper and ultimate meanings.

This 1s undoubtedly the real significance of the Rockefeller
support and subsidy of labor organization. John D. Jr.,
supported by his father and Reverend Frederick Taylor Gates,
fought the Colorado Fuel and Iren union strike vigorously and

36


bitterly. Following the shooting of a score of miners and their
women and children by the company's armed guards and the
militia, and a number of government investigations, John D.
Jr. about-faced. He awoke to the value of regimentation of the
"peasants" under amenable leaders, the value of
"homogenizing" mankind, about which he now appears as
enthusiastic as homogenizing milk. Indeed the
"homogenizing" of the heterogeneous mass of mankind in
Asia, with their endless varieties of religions, customs,
superstitions and languages may be one of the purposes of the
Rockefeller Empire in turning over Asia to the Communists;
and on a lesser scale the F.E.P.C. in the U.S. has as its ob-
jective the "homogenizing" of black and white "peasants".

Two books on union regimentation of workers have been
published under John D. Rockefeller Jr.'s name, one of them,
The Colorado Plan, devoted to the company-unien plan
proposed for the Colorado Fuel & Iron Co. The Rockefeller
interests have not overlooked and have made good use of the
monopely of labor that is afforded to unions, to effect
monopolies of industry that would be recognized as illegal if
they had been effected by a monopoly of machinery.

Labor unions have proved to be a powerful weapon for the
Rockefeller Empire in extending its world conquest; and
subsidized unioneers are always in the forefront of the
emissaries that they send cut into newly conquered territories.
With Marxism as a shibboleth, they are rapidly accomplishing
a world-wide subjugation of the "peasantry". This has earned
for wily John D. Jr. a reputation for "liberalism". It is more
appropriately labelled "Rockefellerism”.

Since the balance of this bock is devoted to a detailed
consideration of the activities of the Rockefeller Empire as
directed by John D. Jr., this brief introduction will suffice.

John D. Rockefeller 3rd, the eldest son, was born in 1906.
He received his preparatory education at Browning School,
which as has been noted, was established by his grandfather
for the specific purpose of the education of his father.
Subsequently he attended the Loomis School. He received a
B.S. degree from Princeton U. in 1929. There he was exposed
to the subversive influence with which the


Rockefeller "educational philanthrepies" plague our school
system. This exposure was intensified by his serving during
his student days as assistant in the information section of the
Rockefeller-sponsored and subsidized League of Nations at
Geneva, under the tutelage of his father's agent, Raymond
Blaine Fos-dick, secretary of the League. It was further inten-
sified by his serving as junior secretary at the 1929
conference in Kyoto, Japan, of his family's wholly subversive
agency, the Institute of Pacific Relations.

On his return from a trip around the world, John D. 3rd
immediately assumed the "philanthropic", "social uplift" pose
that had become a family tradition. It was broken by only a
few commercial directorates in firms wholly owned or
controlled by his family, including directorships in the
Dunbar National Bank of Harlem (that was active in con-
nection with the numbers racket and other practices among
the Negroes), Rockefeller Center Ine., Underel Holding Corp.
(real-estate holding companies) and Rockefeller Bros. Inc. He
makes no public mention of his pests as director of the New
York Life Insurance Co. and Chairman of the Paper Industry
Board. In his latest biographic note he lists the following

"philanthropies”:

Colonial Williamsburg, Chairman of the Board

Rockefeller Brothers Fund, President

General Education Beard, Trustee

Rockefeller Foundation, Trustee

American Museum of Natural History, Trustee

Princeton University, Trustee

Tarrytown Hospital, Director

China Medical Board, Trustee

Industrial Relations Counsellors Inc., Trustee

International Education Board, Trustee

American Y outh Hostels, President and Director

International House, Trustee

Spelman Fund, Trustee

Riverside Church, Trustee

United China Relief Inc., Director

British War Relief Society, Member of the Board

It is significant that International House and American
Youth Hostels have been under fire for the aiding or
sponsoring of questionable or subversive groups. The Institute
of International Education like the other Rockefeller

"educational philanthropies", has been identified with actual
Communist espionage activities in the person of its Director,
38


the late Laurence Duggan, former State Department officer
associated with Alger Hiss and charged with being a member
of a Communist cell in the Department.

Like so many of the personnel of the Rockefeller-
sponsored and subsidized left-wing, New Deal and other
subversive organizations identified with the Rockefeller
Empire, Duggan met with a sudden violent death under
extremely strange and suspicious circumstances. With a hat
on his head, wearing a rainceat and one rubber (the other rub-
ber and an umbrella rested beside a chair in which he had
been seated), Duggan "fell" from the sixteenth story window
of his office a few days after he had been interrogated by the
House Committee on Un-American Activities. Despite the
fact that he left no suicide note, that folk who plan to commit
suicide by jumping from a window do not dress for the
occasion, that people who begin to dress usually complete the
act before going on te other acts, and that there was evidence
of a scuffle in his office, no question was ever raised by the
authorities and his death was instantly and definitively
declared to be "suicide", without an investigation by the
police, as if by pre-arrangement.

In his biography John D. 3rd announced that he is still a
member of the family's Institute of Pacific Relations
American Council, which has been pronounced to be
subversive and has been exposed by Congressional
investigation as being actively engaged in Communist
espionage activities on behalf of the Soviets. He is also a
member of the family-subsidized, and equally subversive
Foreign Policy Association; and needless to say, he is a
member of the Foreign Office of their Empire, the Council on
Foreign Relations.

In 1932, John D. Rockefeller 3rd married Blan-chette Ferry
Hooker, daughter of the head of the Hooker Electrochemical
Co., one of the world's largest producers of caustic soda and
chlorine. Their family includes three daughters and one son.
They occupy a duplex apartment at 1 Beekman Place, New
York City. His office is listed at 30 Rockefeller Plaza,
Rockefeller Center, New York City.

Following a two-month trip te Africa in 1948, John D. 3rd
returned on November 14, so filled with enthusiasm about
the commercial and industrial


potentialities of that continent that it took all the efforts of his
public-relations counsellor te divert his New York Times
interview to the supposed interest of his journey "in
connection with his work as Trustee of the Rockefeller
Foundation", the health and welfare of the natives. Since then
subversive agitation among the natives has risen to a new high
level, fostered by such organizations as the Rockefeller-
subsidized Urban League, under the stimulation of such
Rockefeller pawns as Ralph J. Bunche. On January 18, 1951,
John D. Rockefeller 3rd was present at a dinner given in
Bunche's honor by the trustees of the Phelps Stokes Fund to
signalize his receiving the 1950 Nobel Peace Prize. He lauded
Bunche following a speech made by the latter in which he
predicted: "... it will not be many years before the same kind
of upheaval now appearing in Asia (Rockefeller-Soviet Axis
inspired} will be witnessed in Africa.”

The Times interview with John D. 3rd reverently played up
in its headline ROCKEFELLER LUGS HIS BAGGAGE
HERE (because of a longshoremen's strike). It laid little stress
on his statement that he planned te go to Washington and see
President Truman about previding for the development of the
unlimited resources of Africa. Six weeks later, Truman
announced the Point 4 program for development of the
resources of the backward areas of the world, a description
which aptly fits Africa, but also can be applied to many
sections of the United States. The President had "heard his
master's voice" and promptly required Congress to provide
funds, at the American taxpayers' expense, for the
development of Africa for the Rockefeller Empire. The
Rockefeller Point 4 boondoggle bids fair to cost the public
many times what their Marshall Plan scheme cost, as will be
related. Further aspects of the program will be discussed in
another chapter.

The Foreign Office of the Rockefeller Empire, the Council
on Foreign Relations, was briefed on the subject of the Africa
Program by John D. Rockefeller 3rd,—so important was the
matter to the interests of the Empire,—in a group meeting
presided over by Whitney H. Shepardson (Annual Report,
1948-9, p. 6). The Point 4 program was subsequently
presented by Isaiah Bowman, with Francis Adams Truslow
presiding. Discreetly, the

40


Point 4 program was represented by its authors as President
Truman's Point Four Program, not as that of the Rockefellers.

On October 17, 1951, the New York Daily News carried a
dispatch of the UP from Tokyo that curiously was not carried
in their official organ, the Times. It announced that John D.
Rockefeller 3d had arrived in Tokyo by plane, with his wife
and his private secretary. His presence in Japan shortly after
kinsman John Foster Dulles had rushed through his peace
treaty, after arranging the dismissal of General MacArthur,
has a major significance that is not yet apparent. The plant of
Rockefeller's agents in Japan, the Mitsuis, is running full blast
turning out merchandise for the export trade, to Red China.
The Russians accelerated the reinforcement of garrisons on
their Pacific islands adjacent to Japan. After MacArthur's
dismissal, Japanese Communists became more active and ag-
gressive, under the influence of Communist agents of
Rockefeller's Institute of Pacific Relations, who had been
planted on MacArthur's and Ridgeway's staffs. Within a
month after John D. 3d arrived in Japan, on November 12th,
Communist students at Kyoto University greeted Emperor
Hirchito with the Communist anthem, Internationale, and
heckled him, the first such incident in Japanese history. Is the
way prepared for turning over Japan to the Soviets, as per the
Axis plans?

Nelson Aldrich Rockefeller was born at Bar Harbor, Maine,
in 1908. He and the rest of his brothers received their
preliminary education at the Lincoln School of Teachers
College. The school was guided by the Marxist "liberalism" of
John Dewey and his "progressive education" that spell out the
libertinism and totalitarianism of the "youth" movement so
dear to the heart of the Communist. The school was heavily
supported by the General Education Board and was one of the
strongholds of the Rockefeller brand of totalitarian
indoctrination of the younger generation, a so-called "model
school" from which the schools of the rest of the nation were
infected. But thanks to home influences, particularly John D.
Jr., the boys penetrated the moronic concepts of Marxism to a
discernment of the device for attainment of power, the power
pattern, that is the true essence of Marxism; and they have
become adept at its use.


A short time after receiving his A.B. from Dartmouth,
where he acquired a Phi Beta Kappa key and “made” the
soccer team, Nelson married the daughter of a Philadelphia
"mainliner", Bar Harber neighbor, Mary Clark Tedhunter.
They have three sons and two daughters, including a set of
twins, and occupy a triplex apartment on Fifth Avenue, New
York City, but list Pocantico Hills as their home. His office is
at 30 Rockefeller Plaza, New York City.

After a honeymoon trip around the world, Nelson became
interlocking director of the family's Chase National Bank and
its Rockefeller Center, acting director in charge of renting for
the Center. The mercilessly cut-throat tactics adopted in that
process, which are described in another chapter, severely
depressed real estate on a national scale, very materially
prolonged the depression and cost numerous “peasants” their
homes and fortunes. But it subsequently enabled the
Rockefellers to buy some of the most valuable properties in
the country and in the world at bankruptey figures.

In accord with the family policy of avoiding any open
association with the Standard Oil companies Nelson served
for a time on the directorate of the Creole Petroleum Corpora-
tion, a Standard subsidiary, which does not disclose in its
name its identity with the Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey. In
this connection, Nelson proved that he possesses the
astuteness, the agressiveness and the grasp of his Rockefeller
grandfather, plus the political sense of his Aldrich grandfather.
He set about winning over the peoples of the lands in which
his company operates, as a matter of shrewd dollar diplomacy.
He flattered Latin-American vanity by patromzing its art. He
employed Diego Rivera to do a Reckefeller Center fresco, but
rejected the work because it went the full length in following
the Communist Party line by including a portrait of Lenin in
its composition with a caricature of the Rockefeller patron.
But he wooed and won over Rivera, in spite of this incident,
by paying him his full contract price, "$21, 500, before covering
up the rejected work. Nelson also placed Rivera's work in the
family's Museum of Modern Art, of which he is president, and
to whith he contributed, "anonymously", $25,000 for the
specific purpose of purchasing Latin American art.


In 1935, he traveled to Creole Petroleum's home territory,
Venezuela, to inspect the museum of fine arts there. Two
years later with Joseph C. Roven-sky, Vice President of the
Chase National Bank, under whom he had worked, he toured
Venezuela and nine other South American countries on Stand-
ard Oil business, and returned with a plan for New Deal
sponsorship of private U.S. investments there. In the
meantime he had organized a profitable development
company there in association with Edward H. Robbins, a
relative of Franklin D. Roosevelt. Then in 1940, at the time of
the draft, when he was 32 years old, he arranged through
Harry L. Hopkins, Rockefeller almoner and New Deal plant,
to have Reosevelt approve a hemispheric program drawn up
by Laurance Rockefeller and two of the top agents of the
Empire, Ruml and Roven-sky, for the purpose of financing its
expansion in South America at the expense of the U.S.
taxpayer.

The Rockefellers, though they have controlled the country
for more than half a century and dictated all important
nominations and appointments, were extremely cautious about
emerging openly into the government. Public reaction was
feared. For many years their name had been anathema to the
American public, and they feared to undo the deodoriza-tion
that had been effected by their phony "philanthropies". Their
public relations counsellors repeatedly sent up tnal balloons to
test public reaction, in the form of lines in the columns of
Walter Winchell, Drew Pearson and other of their columnists.
In these releases the positions were reported usually as being
offered to Nelson by Harry L. Hopkins, including the post of
Assistant Secretary of Commerce. Finally, with their
approval, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, himself a mere Rocke-
feller puppet, appointed Nelson Rockefeller to the pest of Co-
ordinator of Hemispheric Defense, that later became
Administration of Inter-American Affairs.

As Co-ordinator of Inter-American Affairs, Nelson
Rockefeller spent $6,000,000,000 of the taxpayers' money on
what the members of Congress called “boondoggling
propaganda". He distributed in South America such motion
picture sensations as "Willie & The Mouse" and "Dees Nature
Prefer Blondes?" He sent movie stars and clowns as “good
will ambassadors” to divert the Latin-Amer-


ican “peasants”, or insult their intelligence. He spent $600,000
to combat Nazism in the Latin American press with
advertisements published in pro-Nazi newspapers that were
strengthened financially thereby.

Elizabeth Bentley, in her autobiography published by Devin
Adair under the title Out Of Bondage, reveals how ready
Nelson Rockefeller was to take notorious Communists into his
agency and play into their hands. She relates that Bob Miller,
who was editor of The Hemisphere, a pro-Communist Latin-
American publication, supplied the Communist spy ring with
which she was connected, (p.138} When, in 1941, The
Hemisphere reached the end of its financial rope, the
Communist apparatus advised Miller to take a job in the
government in Washington. She reports that Miller naively
doubted that he could get by the State Department because of
his notorious record as a Communist. He did net know the
extent to which the apparatus of the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis
had taken over the State Department. He was urged, however
to apply for the position by the chiefs of the Communist spy
ring, because he could be an invaluable source of espionage
information. Nelson Rockefeller not only employed this
notoricus Communist with a long Red record, but actually
made him head of the political research division from which
position he could influence the policy of the Inter-American
Affairs bureau, and purchased from him for the bureau the
carefully expurgated files of The Hemisphere for a large sum.

p

The personnel of his Office was so completely Communist
in its complexion that popular report had it that applicants for
positions were required to hold Communist Party cards. Its
propaganda was correspondingly Red. It did much to foster
Communism and totalitarianism in Latin America and to
breed antagonism to the U.S. of greater intensity than had ever
existed, especially in Argentina and Venezuela. Its activities
have served to endanger the sources upon which this country
deliberately has been made dependent for strategic war
materials, as evidenced by Communist uprisings in Colombia
and Bolivia.

Making the U.S. dependent for its source of supply of raw
materials essential for war upon foreign lands, especially Latin
America, became a

44


deliberate policy of Rockefeller's administration and of the
New Deal. This dependence on foreign sources for essential
material, in turn, has been used by them to force upon the
nation their policy of "internationalism."

Chase National Bank is an important factor in the Patine
Enterprises that turn out a grade of tin ore far inferior te that
which could be produced inexpensively in the U.S. A special
refinery for this impure, low grade ore, that refines it to a sub-
standard purity, was built by the Government at the expense
of many millions to the taxpayers, for operation by the
Rockefeller interests with their Bolivian ore. A Rockefeller
attorney, Warfield, heads the company that operates the
refinery in Texas City.

The preduction of high grade domestic tin has been
hampered and discouraged, and the nation left dependent for
its tin upon the Brntish-Dutch-Rockefeller cartel which
grudgingly supplies at exorbitant prices less than the country
nee

aS Walter Trohan stated the case in an article in the April
22,1949, issue of the Chicago Tribune, under the headline
"South American Work Not 100% Altruism":

".. Nelson Rockefeller... outdid his grandfather, John D.
Rockefeller, by giving away billions of American tax dollars,
where the oil king gave away his own dimes.” But there was a
deep purpose and a method in this beondoggling. During
Nelson Rockefeller's administration as Co-ordinator of
Hemispheric Defense, La Prensa of New York reported that
Bolivia was notified that it would not receive money appropri-
ated by Congress for its defenses until and unless it turned
over to the Standard Oil interests certain oil fields. A timely
decision of the Mexican Supreme Court restored to the
Rockefeller Standard Oil companies two oil concessions that
had been expropriated previously.

At about the same time the Standard Oil interests were
indicted in Venezuela on the order of President Medina for the
theft of $200,000,000 in oil by means of false registry of
tanker capacity. A settlement, rumored to be $9,000,000 was
made, and the indictment was quashed. Medina was then
ousted and fled to New York to become a neighbor of the
Rockefellers on Park Avenue. An interesting commentary

45


is that the task of measuring the oil removed, on behalf of the
Venezuelan government was a hereditary privilege of a
Venezuelan family, handed down from father to son. They
thereby became very affluent, while the government was
ooted.

Nelson Rockefeller flitted about South America attending
presidential inaugurations and revolutions indiscriminately,
superseding the accredited U.S. Ambassadors, assuming the
role of Uncle Sam in his high silk topper, embracing a
president here and a concession there, magnificently cloaking
the Rockefeller Empire with the waning majesty of cur United
States and expanding it with the squandered funds of tax
money of the looted American "peasants". He also collected
decorations: the Order of Merit of Chile from President Rio,
and the National Order of the Southern Cross of Brazil from
its dictator, President Getulio Vargas.

In 1944, the Administration for the Co-ordination of Inter-
American Affairs was merged into the State Department, and
Co-ordinator Rockefeller entered by the back door the
Department that has been so consistently controlled by his
family's Standard Oil interests. There he became more in-
timately associated with the subversive, Communist, or pro-
Communist and, in some cases, traitorous officers of the State
Department who represented the Rockefeller Empire's
Foreign Office, the Council On Foreign Relations, in the
Department, including Alger Hiss, Joseph E. Johnsen, Dean
Acheson, William Benton (now Senator}, John Carter Vin-
cent, and Haldere Hanson among others.

As Assistant Secretary of State, Nelson Rockefeller directly
patticipated in setting up the Rockefeller-Soviet United
Nations, in the company of kinsman John Foster Dulles and
their protege and agent, Alger Hiss, both of Rockefeller's
Council on Foreign Relations. As has been related, he there
showed his indiscriminate totalitarian bent, a family trait, by
ordering the American delegation to admit Argentina to
committee posts. In doing so he offended his Soviet allies. A
show was made of appeasing them by ousting Nelson and
replacing him with former Ambassador to Argentina, Spruille
Braden, also of Rockefeller's Council on Foreign Relations.
Braden made a show of hewing close to the Party line.

During his administration as Co-ordinator, 46


Nelson Rockefeller had worked hard to get the American
republics to promote, organize and finance industry and
business. But after they had been financed by the
governments he worked just as hard to force the governments
out of the industries that its taxpayers had financed, to turn
them over to "private interests". These, needless to say, were
to be controlled by his associates. This scheme, which was the
bene of contention at the Chapultepec Conference, that he
helped engineer and attended with Secretary of State Edward
Stettinius and Assistant Secretary Will C. Clayton, both of the
Council on Foreign Relations, reveals the pattern that is
intended to emerge from their "New" and "Fair" Deals at
ome

Nelson Rockefeller established a pattern of use of public
office for personal gain that is being ever more widely
followed by public officials. When adopted by less powerful
individuals it is apt to be regarded as venality. But the country
is rapidly accepting a royal concept regarding Rockefellers
and their agents,—"the King can do ne wrong".

On leaving the State Department, Nelson Rockefeller
undertock (in the words of Walter Trohan, in the Chicago
Tribune of April 22, 1949} "to reap a harvest of dollars, tax
free in America", from the lavish sowing of U.S. Treasury
funds in Latin America. He and his brother organized the
International Basic Economy Corporation, known as IBEC,
for the specific purpose of exploiting the Latin American
situation. It was organized with a capitalization of $8,405,000,
most of it supplied by Nelson, and a staff of employees who
had been groomed for their functions in the Government
service and at the expense of the taxpayers.

IBEC is playing its role in the expansion of the Rockefeller
Empire and its profits in South America. It has undertaken to
give Latin America a "New Deal" that will be as profitable to
the Rockefeller interests as that in the U.S. In Venezuela it has
set up in partnership with Reckefeller-controlled oil
companies, that have invested $10,000,000 in its non-voting
preferred stock, a $12,380,000 Venezuela Basic Economy
Corporation. It established, in cooperation with the
Venezuelan government, a group of retail enterprises which,
as in the case of R. H. Macy, Nelson Rockefeller favors and
has found profitable. These include a food and grocery chain

47


that was designed to give them a throttle-hold on the food
supply of the country. It naturally aroused the antagonism of
the established merchants, has made Rockefeller and
Americans unpopular in Venezuela, and stirred powerful
efforts to oust the Rockefellers and their “benevolence”.
Similar activities have been entered into by IBEC in Brazil,
with the collaboration of dictator President Vargas, and in
Ecuador, where President Plaza acts as agent of the
Rockefellers.

The IBEC is being operated as an extension of the
Rockefeller Foundation's pioneering activities and its profits
are being surrounded with the usual Rockefeller aroma of
"philanthropy". Likewise it is the spearhead of the usual
Rockefeller-Soviet Axis penetration. It is following the usual
pattern of their decoy activities, shifting the burden of
maintenance to the taxpayers and the profits into their own
purses. They established the American International
Association for Economic and Social Development which,
following the Communist vogue, is abbreviated to AIA. In its
agricultural development it is a cooperative, New Deal Farm
Security Administration program with socialized medicine,
health clinics, farm credits and other devices. Arthur H.
Vandenberg Jr., son of Rockefeller's former "bipartisan"
leader in the Senate, is employed by the Rockefellers in their
Brazilian subsidiary.

The inter-American program has been so advantageous to
the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis that the Rockefellers have
undertaken to extend their sham philanthropies to other
sections of the world that affect their interests, at the expense
of the American taxpayer. The use of their Marshall Plan,
Point 4 program and Atlantic Pact for this purpose will be
described presently.

On September 24, 1951, Nelson Rockefeller, as officer of
the family's Museum of Modern Art, opened the People's Art
Institute, a la Stalin, as a new division. The addresses at the
ceremony, and the television broadcast in connection with it,
clearly revealed that its purpose was that common te all
Communist and totalitarian propaganda, —to bring about a
degeneration of intellect, taste and judgment and te reduce
public intelligence to the lowest level of depravity with the
otjectives of more readily gaining the submission and
subjection of the "peasantry" and of holding them in
subjugation. 48


One of the devices used, the exacting of admiration of the
fumings of diseased minds as "art", is a process comparable
to Petruchio's requiring Katherine to call "black", "white", in
Shakespeare's Taming of the Shrew. The participants, most of
them pawns and agents of the Rockefeller Empire, presented
the new Institute as one of Nelson's "noble philanthropes", in
spite of the fact that the money for its erection and equipment
was supplied by others.

The pattern of his activities indicates that it is the objective
of the Rockefellers to place Nelson Rockefeller in the White
House by some means, whether direct, indirect or
cataclysmic. Direct election as President is now possible with
the sham "philanthropic", "benevolent" and "public-spirited"
build up he has had; but it is improbable. More prebable
would be his nomination as Vice-Presidential candidate on
one of their "bipartisan" or "omni-partisan” tickets at the side
of a Presidential candidate whom they know to be tottering at
the edge of the grave, or who could be disposed of by some
other of the methods of purging that have become so
commonplace during their New and Fair Deals. But most
likely methed of all, would be his appointment as Secretary of
State in an Administration headed by two dying or expendable
men, following whose exitus the Secretary of State might be
eligible to succeed as President. Stranger things than that have
transpired in Washington in the past several decades.

The confidence of the Rockefeller Empire planners in their
success in duping the American public is evinced by the
shows they are staging of participation of the Rockefeller
wives in public position, as semi-royal consorts. Thus on
September 17, 1951, according to a special dispatch to their
New York Times, Mrs. Nelson Rockefeller attended a confer-
ence at the Pentagon as one of forty-four members of the
Defense Administration Committee on Women in the
Services, which was presided over by Imperial agents, former
Secretary of Defense General George Marshall, his successor,
Robert Lovett, and Assistant Secretary Anna M. Rosenberg.
In the early edition of the newspaper, Mrs. Nelson Rockefeller
is reported to have posed a rhetoric question on civil defense,
which elicited from their puppet Secretary of the Air
Force

49


Thomas K. Finletter the familiar, anticipated, and most
probably pre-arranged, answer that not enough money was
being squandered on this favorite psychologic device and
method of money-wasting of the conspirators.

Laurance Spelman Rockefeller, who is nicknamed "Bill",
was born in New York in 1910. He received his preliminary
education at the "progressive" Lincoln School and then
graduated from Princeton, where his special interest was
philosophy. In 1934, two years after his graduation, he
married Mary French, whose family were old friends. They
have one son and three daughters.

In August 1933, Laurance widened the "liberal" contacts to
which his "education" had exposed him by representing his
family interests at the Banff Conference of the Institute of
Pacific Relations, as secretary. He was there in company of
such characters and Rockefeller proteges as the self-
proclaimed "top American Communist", who is now
imprisoned for his less savory Communist activities,
Frederick Vanderbilt Field, Benjamin H. Kizer, Harriet
Moore, Kate Mitchell and Owen Lattimore, birds of a feather,
all of them editors of the notorious espionage agency
Amerasia, and all subsidized by Rockefeller "philanthropes".

Laurance Rockefeller holds the family seat on the New
York Stock Exchange. His business interests include
directorates in the Merchants Fire Assurance Corp.,
International Nickel Co. of Canada, Ltd., Filatures & Tissages
Africans, Eastern Air Lines, International Basic Economy
Corp, Chase National Bank, Rockefeller Center Inc. and
Rockefeller Brothers Inc.

Winthrop Rockefeller, now thirty-eight years old, received
his preliminary education at the Linceln School, and in 1931
graduated from the Loomis School. He attended Yale
University, but did net graduate, lacking interest. In the words
of Mrs. John D. Rockefeller Jr., quoted by Joe Alex Morris in
the Saturday Evening Post press release of theirs in the
January 6, 1951 issue, his brothers used to "make Winthrop
the goat all the time ... You know very well,” she is quoted as
writing, "that the only way to help him is being kind to him.
Abuse only makes him angry and much worse, while for love
and kind treatment, he will do anything”. Apparently he was
regarded as a weakling and


something of a black sheep; but has grown to be the strongest
and biggest of them and has acquired a reputation as a Don
Juan.

In February 1949, Winthtop married the divorced wife of
Richard Sears Jr. of the Boston social set. Born Jievute
Paulekiute, the daughter of a Lithuanian emigrant coal miner
of Nobleton, Pa., she was taken with her sister, by their
mother after her divorce from their father, te Chicago. There
the mother obtained employment in a mattress factory. And
Jievute attended high school under the name of Eva Paul, won
a Miss Lithuania contest, attended Northwestern University
for a year and a half, and then became a model and "bit part"
actress. She married Sears in 1941, adopted the name of Bar-
bara, mingled in Boston society, and in October 1948,
divorced him. In the following February she married
Winthrop, after a quarrel and a flight to Palm Beach. Their
son Winthrop Jr., was born seven months later, fully matured.

Shortly after the birth of the child, rumors of estrangement
were followed by a separation. "Bobo", as Barbara Paulekiute
Sears Rockefeller is nicknamed, has refused to grant a divorce
to Winthrop, whose name has been coupled romantically in
the newspaper columns with an endless array of women.
Rumor reports that one of the barriers to a divorce is the
refusal by Winthrop to make adequate financial provision for
his son; and that "Bobo" has said: "I want te make him suffer
the way he has made me suffer." She is living with her mother
and stepfather on a farm near Lowell, Indiana, with her son.

The "Cinderella marriage”, in which there appears to have
been some element of hurriedness and emergency, was made
the best of by the Rockefeller publicity men. It was made the
basis of a story for "humanizing” the Rockefellers in the eyes
of the American "peasants", just as a similar use was made of
the remarriage of John D. Jr. several years later. Attempt was
made to use this “humanization” in connection with the
political ambitions of Winthrop, as will be related below.

Winthrop was the only one of the Rockefeller boys to
identify himself directly with the oil industry. He worked as a
hand in the oil fields. He later served as vice president of the
Socony-Vacuum Oil Co., which is not too closely identified,
in name and 51


in the public mind, with the Standard Oil Co., though it is an
integral part of it. ‘He fell in line with the family tradition of
dissociating from public identification with the Standard Oil,
however, by resigning his Socony Vacuum position at
midyear, 1951, with sufficient attendant publicity to
emphasize the act. Winthrop's active interest in oil included a
participation in the drilling for oil in in the Jackson Hole Park
in the Tetons that had been set up following a "philanthropic
gift" of some acreage to the government by the Rockefellers,
on condition that the large holdings of the local ranchers be
expropriated for inclusion in the park. The records do not
indicate whether the ranchers were permitted to retain rights
to their oil.

Their Saturday Evening Post apologist, Joe Alex Miller,
portrays Winthrop as the humanitarian of the family. He
writes:

"His job is, broadly, human relations, both during office
hours at Soceny Vacuum and in such outside activities as the
Urban League, where he has provided vigorous leadership in
dealing with the social and economic problems of Negroes.
Perhaps, only a psychologist could suggest whether
his interest in this field stems subconsciously from the fact
that his older brothers sometimes were inclined to push him
around, as a child... until he outgrew them all." The reason
the author assigns for the interest of Winthrop in the activities
of the Urban League is an erroneous one. It has become a
tradition in the Rockefeller Empire that each of the princes
inherit and take over one of the traditional "philanthropies” of
the family as a device for maintaining the benevolent pose
before certain elements. As a Baptist, one of the prominent
activities of John D. the First was displaying a missionary
interest in the welfare of his Negro co-religionists. Just as
John D. 3rd took on the Rockefeller Foundation, Nelson A.
the Museum for Modern Art and the fostering of Communist
ideals in the arts, sciences and politics, Lau-rance the
Memorial Center for Cancer, 80 Winthrop took on the Urban
League as his special "philanthropic" pose. His father had
originally developed the General Education Board from what
was an organization for the education of negroes; and the
Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial that was set up in honor
of his grandmother, was a steady con-

52


tributer to both the National and the New York Urban
Leagues. The League is an organization that has been active in
stirring up the question of racialism and color. It has largely
come under Communist influence and serves the purposes of
the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis, especially in the U.S. and Africa,
as will be related. With Rockefeller support it has been very
active in the Fair Employment Practise Act agitation that has
split the Democratic Party wide open. Winthrop Rockefeller is
Director of the Urban League.

In the Army, which Winthrop entered as a private, to be
promoted with amazing rapidity to the rank of lieutenant
colonel, he had an opportunity to display his pose of pro-
Negro favoritism by refusing to discipline a Negro sergeant
who refused to take orders from white, Southern superior
officers; this incident has been widely publicized, especially
in Negro circles and in the Saturday Evening Post propaganda
referred to above.

Some of the uses to which this pro-Negro pose has been put
has been recounted in connection with the Point 4 program for
the development of Africa for Rockefeller's Standard Oil Co.
Another significant use has escaped wide public notice—use
in politics in the U.S. This is illustrated by a story carried by
the New York Herald Tribune in its February 25, 1949, issue.
This report reads as follows:


DUBINSKY, WINTHROP ROCKEFELLER AND CORSI
MAY BE FUSION SLATE


Line-Up of Republicans and Liberals Is Reported
Under Discussion by Anti-O'Dwyer Forces
By Murray Snyder

Anti-O'Dwyer forces were reported last night to be
discussing a possible fusion ticket for the city election
consisting of:

For Mayor—David Dubinsky, president of the International
Ladies Garment Workers Union, vice-chairman of the Liberal
party and a leading New Dealer.

For Comptroller—Winthrop Rockefeller, fourth son of John
D. Rockefeller Jr., leader in the Public Education Association
and Urban League, an executive of Secony-Vacuum Oil
Company, and a Republican.

53


Fer Council President—Edward Corsi, State Industrial
Commissioner, a Republican.

Two leaders in the independent Republican group which is
digging into the city administration's record in the effort to
induce a formal investigation by the Legislature admitted
hearing this ticket discussed, but denied sponsorship of it.

Clendening Ryan, organizer of the National Clean
Government Fund, who has announced that a $500,-000
campaign fund would be made available for a fusion
campaign, insisted he was backing no candidates. But he said
the Dubinsky-Rockefeller-Corsi line-up "looks like a pretty
good combination.”

Desmond Fitzgerald, chairman of the Committee of Five
Million, said: "We're not picking candidates; we're interested
in producing proof of maladministration and corruption in the
cit


The tentative fusion slate even includes a candidate for
Borough President of Manhattan, a race the group believes
will rival the Mayoralty, due to the fact that Tammany Leader
Hugo E. Rogers is the incumbent and candidate for re-
election. The fusionists have suggested Secretary of State
Thomas J. Curran, Manhattan Republican leader, for the
nomination.

Mr. Ryan, an original fusioneer in the 1933 campaign and a
secretary and Commissioner of Commerce under the late
Mayer F. H. LaGuardia, expressed surprise last night—and
some annoyance —that the discussions of a Liberal-
Republican ticket had leaked out.

Asserting that his group's primary interest was "restoring
clean government” rather than naming candidates, Mr. Ryan
said that many "good, bad and indifferent” suggestions had
been made to him in the last week. Asked for his appraisal of
the Dubinsky-Reckefeller-Corsi city slate, he said:

"There's no question but that they would qualify as patriotic
and able officials. Until the full picture of what has been going
on under the present administration is brought out, I hope
these gentlemen will keep an open mind and not turn down an
opportunity to serve the city."

The importance of the suggested nomination of Mr.
Dubinsky was twofold: (D Mayor William O'Dwyer, having
broken with the Left-Wing American Labor party, has courted
the Right-Wing Liberals, who, though uncommitted, have
criticized the 54


Mayor and Tammany Hall increasingly of late; and (2) the
Liberals, with Mr. Dubinsky as the moving spirit, gave more
assistance to President Truman last fall than did Mayor
O'Dwyer and Tammany Hall, thus making it difficult for the
President to intercede in an O'Dwyer-Dubinsky contest.

Mr. Corsi has the high regard of Governor Thomas E.
Dewey, who last week voiced his full support of the projected
fusion movement after a talk with Mr. Ryan and Mr.
Fitzgerald. The Governor is understood to feel that Mr. Corsi
could be elected Mayor. Friends of Mr. Corsi credit him with
a considerable following among labor unions.

Mr. Rockefeller, who is chairman of the board of trustees of
New York University-Bellevue Medical Center, has been a
leader in the Public Education Association's campaign for
greater state aid for schools. His services as a director of the
Urban League won him national recognition as an opponent
of anti-Negro discrimination. (End of quote from N.Y. Herald
Tribune}


The Rockefeller propagandists and publicity agents are
cautiously trying to ease the Rockefellers into elective public
offices that will give them direct control of our government
and will facilitate the plan to make them openly the nation's
rulers. In each case it is sought to build them up as the
proponents of some minority group or splinter fraction; but in
every case as “liberals” or Marxists of the Rockefeller-Soviet
Axis pattern, as proponents of "Rockefellerism". In the case of
Winthrop, the special groups toward which the propaganda
was slanted were the Reds, Labor and the Negroes.

In this particular instance, the scheme struck a snag for
various reasons. The campaign was called off, in so far as it
concerned David Dubinsky, Socialist labor unioneer (who was
one of the original organizers of the Communist-dominated
CIO, and a member of the Rockefeller Empire's Foreign
Office, the Council on Foreign Relations}, and Winthrop
Rockefeller. Marxist State Industrial Commissioner Edward
Corsi became the Rockefeller "tripartisan" Republican
mayoralty candidate in a three-cornered campaign against two
Rockefeller-dominated Democratic candidates, Judge
Ferdinand Pecora and Acting Mayor Vincent Impellitteri.
Corsi accused his opponents of being the candidates

55


of a split underworld, of the Maffia, the former, according to
his statement, was the candidate of Genovese, Adonis and
Costello (top men in the national Crime Syndicate}, and the
latter that of Thomas Luchese, alias Three-Finger Brown (No.
4 man in crime in the East). All of them played stellar roles in
the Senate Committee For Investigation of Crnme headed by
Kefauver, that for a time diverted the attention of the nation
from that acme of crimes, the Korean "police action", engaged
in, in the words of kinsman Dulles, " to keep the American
people artificially alarmed." There does not seem to be any
reason to question the accuracy of Corsi's statements. But in
view of the foregoing story and Corsi's record, they might
have rejoined that Corsi was the candidate of an allied gang,
the Rockefeller gang. But the Rockefeller press would not
have published the story.

Though Winthrop Rockefeller would have been in friendly
company with any and all of these Rockefeller dominated
candidates, no doubt it was deemed wiser for him not to be
openly identified with the mobster complexion cf the election.
A number of schemes of the Rockefeller agents had misfired.
It had been planned that the opposition gangster elements
would be forced to run for cover by the exposure, through the
wiretaps, of their tie-in with former Mayor O'Dwyer and the
wholesale bribing of police officials. This has been done
since, by the District Attorney, just as it had been done for
them in the 1930's by their agent, District Attorney Thomas
Dewey. At that time Dewey effected the conviction and
jailing of "Lucky" Luciano with evidence largely fed him by
his bosses, merely to release him several years later, after
Dewey had risen to the position of their puppet Governor of
the State of New York, largely on the basis of the reputation
he had gained through that conviction. This release left
Luciano free to flood this country with narcotics, as the chief
agent of the drug interests producing them. This performance
was to have been repeated, with the aid of the wire-tappers
employed by Clendening Ryan. Incidentally, Danton Walker
revealed that the same wiretappers were employed on behalf
of Alger Hiss.

Clendening Ryan announced that $500,000 (of Rockefeller
money} would be available for the fusion campaign of
Winthrop Rockefeller. Ryan had

56


been Commissioner of Commerce, and with David
Rockefeller, was secretary to the Rockefeller puppet, Mayor
Fiorello LaGuardia. He is the son of Thomas Fortune Ryan.
Ryan, Anthony Brady and John D. Rockefeller were old-time
buccaneer allies in New York City politics, whe joined forces
to gain control of the utilities of New York City and employed
Bernard Baruch as their stock-market operator in their
malodorous enterprises.

The scheme was inadvertently upset by me when I caught
the wiretappers employed by Rockefeller's agent, Clendening
Ryan, attempting to tap the wires of city officials through a
phone box in the basement of my home. The stench aroused
by this exposure and threats of prosecution undoubtedly were
factors in impelling the calling-off of the "Fusion" move and
the Winthrop Rockefeller candidacy. But Rockefeller interests
lost little. As usual, all the candidates were theirs. Vincent
Impellitteri, product of Sicily, the birthplace of the Maffia,
appointed their agent, Beardsley Ruml, to the post of Deputy
Comptroller of the City of New York, where he could write
their tax bills as effectively as if Winthrop had been elected
Comptroller. Winthrop, in all probability, will be candidate
for some other elective office that will further the interests of
the Empire, at a future date and under more auspicious
circumstances.

In the meantime Winthrep has been busy expanding the
interests of the Empire in South America, more especially in
Brazil, in company with Arthur Vandenberg Jr. and the
dictator President Getulio Vargas.

David Rockefeller was born in New York City on June 12,
1915. He received his preliminary education at John Dewey's
Rockefeller-financed and Marxist, Teachers College's Red
experimental school, the Lincoln School. Of all the
Rockefeller offspring, David, the youngest, was most success-
fully indoctrinated as a Rockefeller Red. This indoctrination
was reinforced at Harvard, where he received his B.S. in 1936.
The process was carried even further at the Rockefeller-
subsidized Marxist breeding ground, the London Scheol of
Economics, under the tutelage of the Reckefeller protege
Harold Laski. And the Marxist thought-contrel process was
finished off at Rockefeller-dominated University of Chicago,
where David tock a Ph.D. 53


degree in "social sciences" in 1940.

For his U. of Chicago Ph.D. thesis, David Rockefeller
wrote on the sutject that is closest to the heart of all
Rockefellers, thrift. The thesis Unused Resources and
Economic Waste, was published by the University of Chicago
Press in 1941. In the preface, he gives credit for "my greatest
intellectual debt" to Professor Frank H. Knight, whose think-
ing and writings are sound and rational. But he also
acknowledges a debt of gratitude to Professor Oskar Lange,
who resigned from his professorial position at the University
of Chicago to serve the Communist regime of his homeland,
Poland, when the Russians took it over. The latter now is a
Communist Polish representative to the United Nations,
whose activities have been heavily subsidized by the
Rockefellers for the writing of textbooks for use in American
public schools. David represents his purpose as follows:

.. | was interested in finding the meaning

and cause of economic waste." After some two hundred
pages of "social science’ abacadabra, mixed with
commonsense observations, criticism of some fellow “social
scientists" and their work, and the usual charts that are
intended to convey a sense of mathematical exactitude and are
therefore so dear to dispensers of social quackery, he arrives at
the inconclusive conclusions: that for the individual and the
family there is no real waste except what might be dictated by
carelessness or stupidity (p. 220} ; that for the businessman
("entrepreneur") waste is a matter of profits, and "is measured
by the ratio of actual performance to the alternative
performance which could be most remunerative" (p. 222) ;
and "the really crucial wastes to be considered are broad social
wastes in the general economic system, which, from the stand-
point of action, fall primarily in the province of governments.”
Social waste, he states, may be predicated on the assumption
"that total welfare moves in the same direction as economic
welfare and that waste is the ratio of the actual to the ideal",
that might be considered on the basis of relative actual
employment to "full" employment, ef relative actual
production to "full" production, er relative "full" employment
and “ideal” distribution of income and purchasing power to
that actually prevailing. It inyolves much evasiveness and


deouble-talk that can be summed up in the remark: "Waste 1s
waste, if that is what you mean.'

Though giving credit for influence and advice to his
professors, David Rockefeller avoids expressing conviction in
the ideas of any of them. He is critically contemptuous of the
economic claptrap which the family philanthropies and their
allies subsidized as propaganda for influencing and "guiding"
the Roosevelt and Truman administrations. Among these are
Brookings Institution report, The Distribution of Wealth and
Income in Relation to Economic Progress, and the National
Resources Committee's report, Patterns of Resource Use. The
Columbia University Commission report, entitled Economic
Reconstruction, he dismisses as even more stupid and
ludicrous than the rest.

From the thesis, it is cbvious that the strongest influence on
David's thought was the pragmatic commercial advice of his
father. This is confirmed by the report in the Saturday
Evening Post publicity on the influence of the father on the
activities of his sons. This leads one to seek for clues in this
thesis, which was obviously designed to mask thought rather
than to express it, of what is in the minds of its authors. In the
concluding chapter, he states:

"Social waste brings up the whole question of how far and by
what means a government can or should play a positive and
aggressive role designed to promote welfare." In the
discussion of this topic he points out that a "tyranny may
exercise many of the same controls as a popularly sanctioned
government ...", and then hastily drops the topie as if to
avoid revealing his preference for it. Then he goes on to
confirm the impression thus given in the next sentence,
reading "Even if the principle of popular sovereignty is taken
as axiomatic ...", which clearly indicates that he questions
this premise, again indicating his preference for some form of
tyranny. He goes on to say:

. there remain a variety of government

forms under which, if their advocates are to be

given credence, the ‘good of all’ is to be cherished

above everything else.”

His cynicism regarding popular sovereignty and
democracy is quite obvious. His views coincide with
those of his father's adviser, Hoffman Nickerson,

59


and his protege, Professor Philip Mosely, who scorn
the "peasants".

He then proceeds to list as distinguishable, "three systems
of popular government which find support at the present time"
and the measures which each would adopt to combat
unemployment. The choice in his listings of both forms and
remedies, suggests the rationalization of "bipartisanship"
which his family have so actively advocated and effected in
our government. The "laissez faire", or free-enterprise, system
that he suggests would discourage monopoly, adopt
government operation or regulation of “natural monopolies,"
"distribute wealth” and income by a graduated income, estate
or inheritance tax, grant temporary relief to the unemployed:
but diminish government interference and act merely as an
economic "policeman." His definition of freedom of enterprise
comes as close to a description of a Marxist managed
economy as does his definition of a democratic managed
economy except in the rate of concentration of power and
management in the hands of the rulers, and in price fixing. In
practise the transition from the former to the latter has been
accomplished by stealth and by gradual encroachment on the
Constitution, by Rockefeller agents in government posts.
Finally the Marxist Socialist economy 1s represented as not in
any respect differing from the other two, except in that the
government would own industry and control wages more
directly and distribute wealth directly instead of through
taxation. It is notable that no reference is made to the
alternative of a truly free economy, such as has restored
prosperity in Belgium, when the other lands about her pined
under a (mis}managed economy; or to the possibility of a free
surplus economy in compliance with the intent of those who
wrote our Constitution.

For popular consumption Dr. David Rockefeller threw in a
line that could be played up by the publicity man as an
illustration of "reform" and "benevolence" of the Rockefellers.
That line, which appears on page 170 and was quoted by all
the reviewers, reads:

"The existence of monopely offers prima facie

evidence of a social evil." There is little in the text other
than reference to some crackpot "social science” dribbles to
bear out the statement. Perhaps, Dr. David had the family-

60


controlled monopoly of American Telephone and Telegraph
Co. in mind when he wrote that passage. And who are we to
disagree?

Following the completion of his erudite thesis and the
receipt of his doctorate, David Rockefeller married Margaret
McGrath of Mount Kisco, New York. They have two sons
and three daughters and reside at 125 East 65 Street, New
York City. He maintains an office, with his brothers, at 30
Rockefeller Plaza, and a summer home at Pocantico Hills,
Westchester County, New York.

Immediately following his graduation, David Rockefeller
became secretary to the Rockefeller-puppet "Fusion" (they
prefer that term in local politics to "bipartisan", which they
reserve for their agents on the national scene) Mayor of New
York City, the violently Red and shifty Fiorello H. La
Guardia. In that position David applied his vast erudition, in
company with Clendening Ryan, to the task of overseeing one
of the most "virtuously" corrupt and most extravagant
administrations that the City of New York had ever had. It
proved highly profitable to the Rockefeller interests in many
directions, but literally bankrupted the City. In the LaGuardia
administration David's "liberalism" had ample eppertunity to
develop by contact with some of the most notorious
Communists and fellow travellers in the land, such as Vito
Marcantonio and Simon Gerson, that infested the regime.

At the outbreak of World War I, he received an
appointment as Assistant Regional Director of the Office of
Defense, Health and Welfare Service. Following a period of
duty in the intelligence service in Africa and France, in the
course of which he rose from the rank of private to captain,
and became assistant military attache in Paris, he assumed the
post of Vice President and Assistant Manager of the Foreign
Department of the Chase National Bank. In the meantime he
adopted the familiar “philanthropic” pose as trustee of various
of the family "philanthropic" enterprises, including the
Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research, the University of
Chicago, the International House, the Museum of Modern Art
and the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. In the
latter post he shared with his kinsman John Foster Dulles and
other fellow members of the Council on Foreign Relations, the
responsibility for the appointment of

61


the Empire's agent, Alger Hiss, a close associate and fellow
member of the Council on Foreign Relations, to the post of
President of the Carnegie Endowment, and for the
appointment of Hiss’ top assistant in the State Department,
(who had resigned when a leak of top secret information was
traced to the Division of International Security Affairs} as
Hiss' successor as president of the Carnegie Endowment For
International Peace.

David Rockefeller is also president of Morning-side
Heights Inc., an organization for planning the redevelopment
of that section of New York City.

David Rockefeller's next foray inte public life was as
Commissioner of Westchester County, acting in advisory
capacity in the Council's five-year planning program. Those
five-year plans are redolent of the stench of the Rockefeller-
Soviet Axis. He acknowledged the Communist tang of such

"plans" in an interview which he gave Merrill Folsom for a
special dispatch to the New York Times on October 18, 1948.

e said:

"Too many planners have held a socialist philosophy and
their planning has reflected that philosophy. The reputation
of planners is that they are left wing. This accounts for the
prejudice many persons have against planning.

"I am in this work because planning is essential to any
institution that is dynamic in growth. Any intelligent person
should look ahead and plan for an ckjective. And I believe
in the (N.B. he omitted private} enterprise system, not
planning for socialism."

No one acquainted with the extent of the Rockefeller
holdings in Westchester and adjacent Putnam counties would
suspect any Socialism about their activities there. Imperialism
is the order of the day. Mention has been made of the devices
that have been adopted by Rockefeller's Westchester County
to reduce their taxes. Most notable is the old "robber baron"
device of charging a tell for use of the roads. Each year there
are fewer highways that the public can use in Westchester
County without paying a toll, or several tolls. To what extent
Rockefeller "planning" has accounted for this baronial pattern,
would bear investigating. But there can be no question of the
overshadowing influence of the Rockefellers in the counties.

It is hard to believe that the Paul Robeson in-62


cident could have occurred in Peekskill without their
acquiescence. The Communist Party undertook to stage a
treasonous demonstration near Peekskill in the summer of
1949, in spite of the protests of the local citizenry and veteran
organizations. They invaded the county under the protection
of the officials who defied the loyal citizenry, created a
disturbance of the peace, and were driven out by a group of
veterans. On the following Sunday, a Communist mob armed
with weapons of all varieties invaded the town, with the
permission, and under the protection, of local officials, that
they demanded and obtained. A group of veterans and loyal
citizens assembled to drive out the subversive invaders, who
came to disturb the peace in organized caravans recruited from
five surrounding states. The local authorities and the
augmented police force defied the citizenry and fought with
them te protect the invaders. Instead of arresting the latter for
disturbing the peace of the community and outraging the
patriotic citizenry, the police arrested loyal townsmen; and the
local authorities subsequently undertook to prosecute the latter
on the demand of the Communist Party and of the subversive
demonstrators. In this manner the Duchy of the Rockefellers
undertook to make a crime of loyalty of the citizenry. To cap
the climax, when the veterans undertock to organize a
patriotic counter- demonstration, their plans were sabotaged
and their efforts blocked by forces so powerful that no loyal
demonstration could be staged. Neighbor Rockefeller never
raised voice or finger to help or come to the support of the
loyal citizenry.

Among the prejects that Commissioner Rockefeller told his
interviewer that he had in mind were new parkways and
throughways, highway improvement and airport expansion.
But he stated he was more especially interested in effecting a
consolidation of the villages of Tarrytown and North Tarry-
town into a city, as proposed by his father, that would
eliminate duplicate services. The Rockefellers are endlessly
persevering in their plans, pass them down from generation to
generation, until they carry them through. Some future date
will undoubtedly arrive when the Rockefellers will openly
emerge as Barons of Westchester.

David Rockefeller, as has been related, is an active member
of their Foreign Office, the Council on

63


Foreign Relations, where he has been associated with such
distinguished gentry as Owen Lattimore, David Dubinsky,
Justice Felix Frankfurter, Dean Acheson, Philip Jessup,
Senator William Benton, Frederick Vanderbilt Field, Joseph
E. Johnson and Alger Hiss.

There are several traits which the Rockefellers share in
commen, of which they boasted in their publicity release by
Joe Alex Miller in the Saturday Evening Pest. First they made
it quite clear that their highest principle is profit. This is
illustrated by the tale of John D. Jr. whe though he was in
theory a Prohibitionist and one of the most important forces in
imposing Prohibition on the nation, was perfectly satisfied to
lease his property to speakeasies and to extend to them the
protection of his authority. It is frankly related that:

"Their attitude toward money was of importance. By
training and example they were far from soft about
financial affairs. On the contrary, they were keenly
interested in making money and, on various occasions, have
made full use of all the legitimate business advantages the
Rockefellers possess to do so. And one of the boys, while at
college, distressed his mother by remarking that he was
deliberately training himself to be cold and calculating in
order to prevent his personal feelings from influencing his
judgment in financial affairs.”

Their parsimony, according to the publicity matter, even
exceeds that of John D. Sr.; and in whatever they do they seek
"to get a sound return on their investment." They are lavish
with what costs them little or nothing—words and sentiment,
as quoted by a friend of theirs:

"The Rockefellers almost never give presents of much
value, but they understand the value of thoughtfulness.” But
they are ultra-lavish with other people's money, usually spent
to serve their own interests, as is illustrated by Nelson
Rockefeller's lavish squandering of public funds as Co-
ordinator of Hemispheric Defense and his current demand for
billions for their Point 4 program, Marshall Plan and Atlantic
Pact. The situation has been aptly expressed by Walter Trohan
to the effect that they outdo John D. Sr. who sparingly gave
away his own dimes, whereas his descendants are lavishly
dissipating

64


other people's money and property, the wealth and patrimony
of the nation, largely for their own advantage.

In all of this there emerges added proof that their so-called

"philanthropies" were conceived as, and are, enormously
profitable indirect investments. This 15 virtually conceded in
the same publicity release in the statement:

"In the Rockefeller concept, however, the philanthropic
principle of helping people to help themselves, of using
money as a teol to make available the means of progress and
self improvement, is inseparably linked to the development of
sound business principles.” This "principle" has been well
understood and frequently restated by all Rockefeller

"philanthropic" agents; and it has been most recently restated
by their agent, Beardsley Ruml, in his announcement of
profits that can be derived from the diversion of tax money to
research and philanthropy, as detailed elsewhere.

There also emerges from a study of the situation, an
amazing picture of overshadowing fear of poverty and loss of
fortune. This was clearly indicated by John D. Sr., when he
acknowledged to the members of the Standard Oil luncheon
club, when he was worth many billions of dollars, in 1905,
that he often awoke at night in a cold sweat in fear of ruin and
poverty. This pathologie driving force behind their super-
Napoleonic complex emerges once again in their Saturday
Evening Post publicity in a statement by one of them:

"There is an old saying: 'Shirt sleeves to shirt sleeves in
three generations.’ Well we have to avoid a third-generation
anticlimax.” In ail the publicity matter released by them there
stands out a studied effort to undervalue their fortune. At
every turn they mention the figures on its size that they want
the public to accept. Thus in the publicity release on August
15, 1951, made by the firm of Ivy Lee & T. J. Ross in
connection with John D. Rockefeller Jr.'s remarriage, it was
stated by them:

"His personal fortune has been estimated at between
$250,000,000 and $400,000,000." This figure is so absurdly
low that it appears probable ‘that it is part of a long and deep
laid plan te avoid the payment of inheritance taxes on the bulk

65


of the fortune at a future date, in the case of John D. Jr. as in
the case of John D. Sr. The latter's estate paid an inheritance
tax on only $25,000,000, though his fortune was probably
hundreds and possibly thousands of times larger.

These estimates can be arrived at in a number of ways.
First, John D. Sr. acknowledged his practise to be to give
away only a tithe, a tenth of his earnings. He gave away well
over a billion dollars, making it apparent that his earnings
were well over ten billion dollars. The capital value, from
which those earnings had been derived, could scarcely be less
than twice that sum, or twenty billion dollars. His estate paid
inheritance taxes on approximately one tenth of one percent of
that sum. Since then the fortune has grown by leaps and
bounds. It has been augmented by the development of new
industries, technologic developments, new conquests and
inflation. It has been augmented by the dissipation of the
tremendous volume of taxes levied on the nation, by their
"New" and "Fair" Deals, a large part of which has flowed inte
their enterprises and eventually into their purses. It has been
augmented by the tremendous expenditures of the nation on
"Lend Lease", the Marshall Plan, the Point 4 program and
numerous other schemes for lecting the taxpayers of the
nation and the peoples of the world, the preponderating part of
which has flowed into their coffers. It has been augmented by
endless wars, including World Wars | and II, and their Korean
"police action”. It has been augmented by the tremendous
profits of their Drug Trust. It has been augmented by the
virtual exemption from taxation of many of their enterprises,
particularly those launched by them abroad, as in Saudi
Arabia and Africa, at the expense of the American taxpayers.
It has been augmented steadily by the events that have spelled
pain and misery for the rest of the world.

It is probably safe to say that the extent of the Rockefeller
fortune is so fabulous that it can not be expressed in terms of
money. In substance their fortune represents control of the
natural resources of the world, plus the contrel of most
important developments of the future, including atomic de-
velopments, on which the American taxpayer is spending
billions for them. It is safe to say that if John D. Jr.'s estate
will pay an inheritance tax


commensurate with that levied on others, the payment will
more than wipe cut our national debt. And that would be
poetic justice. For the bulk of that debt has been incurred in
the expansion of the Rockefeller Empire.

If the Rockefellers desire to extend a true philanthropy to
the nation, let them pay and wipe out the national debt, which
has been so largely incurred in the expansion of their Empire.


On December 1, 1951 the press announced that a John D.
Rockefeller had been jailed. He had not undertaken to
overthrow governments and enslave their citizenry. He had
not looted nations of billions and impoverished whole
peoples. He had committed no act of treason. Nor had he
started wars that robbed mothers of their sons and wives of
their husbands, and killed thousands of persons. His chief
offense was lack of imagination that makes such grandoise
schemes “respectable”. His instincts were traditionally
"correct". But he had robbed someone of a trivial sum that
would scarcely be missed; and he lacked the ingenuity to
pretend that it was done in the interest of his victim and for his
benefit. And even more serious was his offense in being
caught. His was really a grave crime and for it he will be
pumshed by imprisonment under the law. There he will learn
that crimes can be committed with impunity and honor only if
the criminal controls the government.


67


CHAPTER IV


"PHILANTHROPIES" OBJECTIVES OF ROCKEFELLER
US. Monarchy & World Dictatorship


"The people yield themselves with perfect docility
te our molding hands"


Rockefeller-Gates' Occasional Letter No. 1


As early as 1872, in the Southern Improvement Company
scandal, public recognition of the ruthless greed involved in
its affairs threatened to bankrupt and ruin the Standard Oil
Co. and put an end to Rockefeller's aspiration for security
through monopoly and dictatorship. Fortuitous circumstances
saved Rockefeller and his company. But learning nothing
from that experience, Rockefeller and his associates went
right on with their schemes and continued recklessly to flaunt
the force of public opinion, in a headlong career of ruthless
rapacity.

Rockefeller made hosts of enemies who were alert to the
powers of public opinion. They undertook to use it as a
weapon in their battle with the Standard Oil pirates. They
organized and synthesized into an effective force the "socially
conscious", the radicals, the "liberals" and other vocal groups,
together with the demagogues, the politicians, the clergy and
the press, in order to carry their fight to the public and win its
support. Some of this was nothing more than commercial
blackmail.

As resentment against the Oil Trust grew, the Rockefeller-
Standard Oil interests were held up by the politicians through
the device of "strike bills", and badgered by investigations and
court actions. The muckrakers, church organizations and
social-service groups exposed the ugly situation and further
fanned public resentment. President Theodore Roosevelt, who
had succeeded Rockefeller's hand-picked ally, President
McKinley, played to the gallery by attacking the Standard Oil
Company while indirectly he demanded increased Standard
Oil contributions to his campaign funds.

The situation reached its climax in 1907 with the decree
handed down by Judge Kenesaw Landis against the Standard
Oil Company, impesing a fine of twenty nine million dollars.
Two weeks later the panic of 1907 was precipitated. In 1911
the dis- 68


solution of the Standard Oil Company was ordered by the
Supreme Court.

Rockefeller fiercely resented what he regarded as
government interference in his private business. He regarded
its conduct as his own affair. It could hardly be expected that
he would not fight back. He responded as keenly and as
incisively to the virulent and well organized slander and
persecution as he had to the other problems that had
confronted him in his business. Two modes of approach to
such a problem were habitual; first was te compromise with a
powerful enemy and to join forces with him; the second was
to maneuver in the meantime to master and destroy him.

The enemies who confronted Rockefeller and who were
responsible for the situation were three—the Wall Street
crowd whom he had bested, the welfare and "liberal" crowd
and the government. His score with Wall Street he paid
rapidly. Within two weeks after the handing down of the
decree, there broke loose the 1907 panic. As a result of the
panic, the Rockefeller interests managed to get control of
numerous, diversified and allied enterprises, and to tighten
their held on national banking.

As early as 1887, his in- lav, Dr. A. H. Strong, pointed out
to Rockefeller that only by a conspicucus pose of
philanthropy could he hepe te win over and seduce public
opinion. Nevins cites the correspondence of Strong to
Rockefeller of February 22, 1887, from the Harper Papers
JDR, v. 2, p. 208), as follows:

"Very many people do not understand you and they very
unjustly accuse you... Your present gifts, to education and to
the churches, de not stem the tide of aspersion as would the
establishment of an institution for the public good, se great
that it has manifestly cost a large self-sacrifice to build it." He
went on to point out the success of George Pea-body in living
down a bad reputation acquired by the commercial
ruthlessness that was usual in the period, and continued to
point out:

"He changed in his later days; began to make
benevolence, not moneymaking, his principal aim in life;
immediately he got a name for charity and public spirit;
now he is remembered for nothing else. You have the
opportunity of turning the unfavorable judgments of the
world at 69


large into favorable judgments—and not only

that —of going down to history as one of the

world's greatest benefactors."

How little true spirit of charity there was in
Rockefeller is demonstrated by the reply he made
to a letter from his own mother, containing a plea
for help from his cousin, cited by Nevins (JDR,

v. 2, p. 177}:

"I decided (1} would net comply with the request contained
in it. I want to know surely, in giving, that I am putting the
money where it will do the most good.” Avowedly, his was an
ostentatious display of charity, carefully studied to do the
most good for himself and to yield him the highest profit.
There was none of that true spirit of charity which does not let
the nght hand know what the left does. It was his plan not to
give unless others were made acutely aware of his giving
through being forced to give, too, unless giving served to
advertise him, unless it furthered his objective and yielded
him a profit. It is the same spirit that has permeated all of the
Rockefeller "philanthropies", even to the present generation. It
is the same spirit that, bred in his grandchildren, impelled one
to tell his mother "that he was traimng himself to be cold and
calculating in order to prevent his personal feelings from
influencing his judgment in financial affairs.” (Saturday
Evening Post, December 30, 1950, p.64) John D.'s patriotism
and his ruthlessness with the members of even his own family
are illustrated by his relations with his brother Frank. Frank
volunteered for service in the Civil War. John D. opposed the
enlistment and bitterly refused to lend his brother seventy-five
dollars for the purchase of equipment that he needed. When
on his return from the war, Frank went inte the oil business,
John D. stripped him of the business. Frank's estimate of his
brother John D. is as accurate a description of the clan as has
ever been published. Removing the bodies of his children
from the family cemetery plot in Cleveland, Frank said:

"No one of my family will ever rest on land controlled

by that MONSTER, JOHN D. ROCKEFELLER

Coping with public opinion was a more eax problem
that required long-range planning, craftiness and cunning.
The mob, whom he held in con-

70


tempt, had not dealt kindly with Rockefeller. He had taken the
brunt of the blows directed against the "Oil Trust", and had
become the most hated man in the country. He could not walk
the streets in safety. The ill will and hatred of the public also
extended to the members of his family. It is not surprising,
under these circumstances, that contempt of the people should
ripen into hatred and should breed a desire for revenge. No
subtler form of revenge on the mob could be conceived than
to delude it into accomplishing its own subjugation and
enslavement. No more cunning weapon could be conjured for
accomplishing this revenge than fake "philanthropies”.
Rockefeller's "philanthropic" activities and their horrible
consequences for mankind have been his slow but sure
revenge.

Prominent in building up public antagonism against
Rockefeller and the Standard Oil Co. had been "welfare" or
"social service” organizations, the radical, Marxist and self-
styled liberal elements; the church elements, especially the
more "liberal" of them that were incorporated in the Federal
Council of Churches of Christ in America and allied
organizations; and sections of the press. Acting on the
principle—"If you can not lick your enemies, join 'em" —
Rockefeller took them over, lock, stock and barrel.

Many of them, such as ‘the social-service agencies of the
type of the New York, and the National Tuberculosis and
Health Associations, the Association for the Improvement of
the Condition of the Poor and others that raised funds among
the sucker public, emerged as extremely valuable ventures
from every angle. The control of “social service" and of
church organizations proved especially useful. For it served to
muzzle and to check the censure of the sanctimonous and self-
righteous elements in the community, and to cover all
activities engaged in through such agencies with a cloak of
respectability. And the most delicious irony of it, Rockefeller
was wise and shrewd enough to discern, lay in the fact that by
their goals, especially those of the radical and Marxist
organizations, the unthinking mob was betraying itself into
bondage and actually paying the cost thereof, and yielding a
profit to these who engineered their betrayal. Sweet indeed
were the uses of "benevolence" and "philanthrepy"—and very,
very profitable to some.

71


Rockefeller first became alerted to the uses of systematic
and purposeful philanthropy, according te his biographer
Nevins, IDR, v. l, p. 124) in his youth, through reading
Extracts From The Diary & Correspondence Of The Late
Amos Lawrence. The lesson he learned there on making
philanthropy purposeful was well remembered.

The Rockefeller "philanthropies" were conceived for the
dual purpose of taking the curse off the Rockefeller name and
enabling the Rockefeller-Standard Oil interests to carry on
without interference from a hostile public or the government.
One could hardly expect a man of Rockefeller's efficiency and
financial ability to fail to expect to profit handsomely from
the disarming advantages of a "philanthrope" front. That
Rockefeller realized the profitable business possibilities of a
"philanthropic" set-up is indicated by an interesting and
revelatory story told of the inception of the plan to buy over
public opinion and confound his detractors. It was conceived
by Rev. Frederick Taylor Gates whe had won John D's
respect by his sharpness clothed with piety. Rockefeller had
profited handsomely from deals engineered by Gates through
religious activities as an executive officer of the American
Baptist Education Society. Especially appreciated was his aid
in gaining control, for a pittance, of the Mesabi mines, one of
the richest iron deposits in the country. It netted many
millions of dollars when later incorporated into the U.S. Steel
Corporation. In John D.—A Portrait In Oil, John K. Winkler
quotes Rockefeller Sr. as follows:

"'Fred Gates was a wonderful business man,’ said John
D. with satisfaction. 'His work for the American Baptist
Education Society required him to travel extensively. Once,
as he was going south, I asked him to lock into an iron mill
in which | had an interest. His report was a model of
clarity!

"'Then I asked him to make some investigation of other
property in the west. I had been told this particular
company was rolling in wealth. Mr. Gates’ report showed
that I had been deceived.

"'Now I realized that I had met a commercial genius. I
persuaded Mr. Gates to become a man of business.’ "
Mayhap one can judge with reasonable correctness that if

religion helped net Reverend Frederick


T. Gates inordinately large profits in his dealings with his
fellow men, the manipulation of millions certainly would not
fail to do so. The “philanthropies" established with the
cooperation of this "wonderful business man” could be
expected to be highly profitable, directly or indirectly. They
have been more profitable than investments of identical sums
in even the Standard Oil Company.
The objective that lay at the back of Gates' and Rockefeller's
minds at the inception of these "philanthropies" was clearly
stated by Gates in the first publication of the General
Education Board, the Occasional Paper No. 1, in 1904, as
follows: "In our dreams we have limitless resources and the
people yield themselves with perfect decility to our melding
hands. The present educational conventions fade from our
minds, and unhampered by tradition, we work cur own good
will upon a grateful and responsive rural folk. We shall not
try to make these people or any of their children into
philosophers or men of learning, or of science. We have net
to raise up from among them authors, editors, poets or men of
letters. We shall not search for embryo great artists, painters,
musicians, nor lawyers, doctors, preachers, politicians,
statesmen of whom we have ample supply. The task we set
before ourselves is very simple as well as a very beautiful one,
to train these people as we find them to a perfectly ideal life
just where they are. So we will organize our children inte a
community and teach them te do in a perfect way the things
their fathers and mothers are doing in an imperfect way, in the
homes, in the shop and on the farm.” For the past half century,
however, the Rockefeller "philanthropies" have maintained
the pretense that their purpose is exactly the reverse of that
above stated. But that 1s characteristic of the strategies of the
Rockefeller Empire, especially when dealing with the mob
and its psychology. However, careful examination of
the "philanthropic" activities will reveal that they are slowly
but surely attaining the above stated goal.

The clear-cut statement of Rockefeller's purpose in his

"philanthropies" has never been lost to sight by the
Rockefellers or their agents. That purpose, from the very start,
was, and still is, a "new social order," the establishment of a
dictatorship in the

73


United States. The okjective is to convert cur republic into a
totalitarian state, into what Hilaire Belloc has named a
"Servile State", a state of slaves. This Rockefeller proposed to
attain by propaganda, "thought control", bribery, corruption
and force. And it is to be ruled by him or his heirs. In other
words, Rockefeller was the first of the modern crop of would-
be world dictators with super-Napoleonic paranoia. His was
the inspiration of the crop that has plagued the world in the
past half century. And in most instances, the Rockefellers
extended support to them. The Empire which he founded, the
Rockefeller Empire, is the first in all history that has
approached his goal.

A more detailed statement of this purpose was made by
John D. Jr.'s intimate friend, adviser on sociclogy and fellow
member of the Union Club, Hoffman Nickerson. It was
published in book form in 1930, by Doubleday Doran & Co.,
of which Theodore Roosevelt Jr. was president, under the title,
THE AMERICAN RICH. This volume was the blueprint of
the New Deal. In it, Nickerson, who fancies himself a superior
specimen of the human animal ordained to rule by “divine
night", and who speaks of all other Americans, whom he
fancies as being of lesser clay, as "peasants", anticipated
Hitler's regime and advocated a ‘similar form of government
for the United States. He suggested the ultimate goal of the
New Deal as abolition of universal franchise; restriction of the
vote to wealthy property owners, elimination of education
because of the spirit of inquiry which it fosters, so that there
may be restored the medieval mind and its submissiveness;
and he urged the adoption in the United States, when the
people shall have been forced into line, first of an elective but
absolute monarchy and later of an hereditary monarchy.

This plan was advocated by implication and endorsed by
another Rockefeller spokesman, Professor Philip E. Mosely,
whose salary as Professor of International Relations is paid by
the Rockefellers through funds granted by their Foundation to
Columbia University for its Russian Institute. Professor
Mosely is Assistant Director in Social Sciences of Rockefeller
Foundation, and a member of Rockefeller's Council on
Foreign Relations and Foreign Policy Association, which, as
will be re-

74


lated presently, are top agency or "cabinet" and subsidiary,
respectively, in the chan of Rockefeller-financed
"internationalist" propaganda agencies. In a Headline Series
pamphlet which Mosely wrote for distribution by the Foreign
Policy Association as part of its propaganda and lobby
barrage, he said:

"Over the long run, great numbers of people will judge beth
the Soviet and American systems, not by how much
individual freedom they preserve, but by how much they
contribute, in freedom or without it, to develop a better
livelihood and a greater feeling of social fulfillment." So
clearly stated are the totalitarian and subversive objectives
of the Rockefeller "philanthropies” and so well have they
been recognized, that Congress refused repeatedly to grant a
charter to the Foundation. When directly after the Supreme
Court decision in 1911, ordering the dissolution of the
Standard Oil Company, Reckefeller sought of Congress a
charter for the Rockefeller Foundation “to promote the well-
being of mankind", Congress twice refused a charter to hold
one hundred million dollars, on the grounds that it was a
device for evasion of payment of taxes, that it was primarily
intended for propaganda for seduction of public opinien and
influencing politics, and that it would be a menace to the
nation. The Foundation succeeded in securing from New York
State in 1913 a charter to hold five hundred million
dollars. Subsequently, Senator Chamberlain of Oregon, in
1917, on the floor of the U.S. Senate, sounded a warning to
our country on the menace of the Rockefeller
"philanthropies”. He stated:

"The Carnegie-Rockefeller influence is bad. In two
generations they can change the minds of the people to make
them conform to the cult of Rockefeller or to the cult of
Carnegie, rather than to the fundamental principles of
American democracy.” Unfortunately this prediction already
is fulfilled. Senator Robert F. Wagner, planted in the New
York State Senate as a pawn of the Rockefeller interests,
introduced and steered through that legislature a bill
chartering the Rockefeller Foundation with a capitalization of
$500,000,000 and unlimited scope. It may be significant that
Senator Wagner's reputed forebear was Professor Adolph
Wagner,

75


who guided Prince Otto von Bismarck in setting up in
Germany a "New Deal" and "welfare" state as a foundation
for a German dictatorship and Empire, and for the eventual
conquest of "Deutsch-land uber Alles". The pattern of the
program which the Rockefeller interests had undertaken was a
power pattern as old as human history, that already had
become familiar te the modern age by the activities of Prince
Otto von Bismarck. Prince Otte von Bismarck, Teutonic
Knight whe was bound by the Order's thousand-year-old oath
to conquer the world, launched the "welfare" and "social
service” program that now parades as the New Deal. Sub-
sequently, he became the foster-father of Marxism and
Communism. His otjective in doing these things was world
conquest, "Deutschland uber Alles". No one who knew the
Iron Chancellor could be deceived for one moment into the
belief that he had the remotest interest in the welfare of the
weak or downtrodden. His mottoes were "Blood and Steel"
and "Might Makes Right".

His program was a recrudescence of one which was old
when it was introduced by the Gracchi in ancient Rome and
which eventually destroyed the Empire. It furthered
Bismarck's quest for personal power in several ways. First, it
robbed the Socialists of the planks of their platform which
made the greatest appeal to the mob—Social Security,
Unemployment Insurance, Workmen's Compensation, Health
Insurance, and all the other quasi-benevolent and paternalistic
clap-trap. Bismarck shrewdly saw in these plans, devices
fashioned to destroy liberty and to chain the workingcelass to
his program and to any jobs to which they might be assigned.
He saw in that program a snare which would deceive them
into accepting submarginal wages and the surrender of
adequate present existence in return for a mirage of future
security. As a means of winning the favor of the workers and
of gaining some measure of power over industry and entree to
its records, a part of the cost was levied on the employers.
This made of what conceivably might have been a boon to the
worker a penalty on industry for offering employment; and
meant a tax on industry which materially increased the cost of
production. Both factors ultimately operated to increase
unemployment.

Second, Bismarck foresaw that with the working 76


class tied to him by this pregram, he could force inte line the
German industrialists, the nobility, and finally the reluctant
Prussian king, to support his plan of a united German Empire.
Junker Bismarck, who had contemptuously spurned any
traffic with the workingclasses, whom he called a
"revolutionary rabble," had grown tired of being buffeted
about and shelved by his liege lord, the weakling King of
Prussia. Adversity had served to make of him a diplomat who
could advance from one compromise to another, from one
treachery to another, to attain by a series of adroit maneuvers
his ultimate goal— the consolidation of his own power by
forcing his king te accept the position of Emperor of
Germany. How well he planned, history reveals. With the
Danish invasion, the elimination ‘of Austrian interference in
1866, and the consolidation of his pesition by a treacherously
conceived conquest of France in 1870, the German Empire
became not only a reality, but also simultaneously a “first
class power."

But for Bismarck, this was merely a beginning. With far
greater vision, he planned the political and commercial
conquest of the world—"Deutschland uber Alles." He placed
on Germany the stamp of a national paranoia which still
drives it with mad singleness of purpose and signal “success.'
The World Wars were mere interludes, which scholars tell us
Bismarck foresaw and would have avoided.

The conquest of world markets by German industry and
commerce was planned by Bismarck. In such a struggle the
burden of taxation and cost involved in the "welfare" program
might have proved a severe handicap. Obviously it was neces-
sary to overcome it by forcing the adoption of the same
program and handicap on competitor nations. Resort was had
for this purpose to subjugation by ideas, propaganda and
"boring from within.”

There was launched one of the most persistent, persevering
and skilled propaganda campaigns in the world's history for
the imposition of Bismarck's "New Deal" on the entire world.
Now more tnan half a century later it still continues to sway
history and the world.

In this "New Deal” propaganda Bismarck found many
allies. The pretended humanitarianism of the program won
over many unthinking, kindly persons as well as most
religious sects. These are the best possible camouflage and
front for any propa- 7


ganda. Throughout the world these deluded groups still
ardently advance Bismarck's destructive propaganda.

Allies of unusual value were the labor movement, Karl
Marx and the Communist Internationale. Initially Bismarck
had regarded them as the archenemies of his plan. He had
called upon Marx's antagonist, Lasalle, for advice in his fight
on them. On his counsel, he plucked the "New Deal" from the
program which they agitated, with the objective of deflating
them.

But Bismarck soon came to recognize what is just
beginning to dawn on present day deluded Socialists and
Communists. He realized that Karl Marx and his
revolutionary Socialism or Communism were shams. He saw
that they offered no real menace among dull, plodding,
intense, unimaginative, docile and disciplined workers. He
discovered that Karl Marx was an intense German nationalist
who gloried in the "superiority" of the German worker and
who sensed that his program offered no threat to his
Vaterland. Marxian Socialism was therefore the ideal
propaganda weapon with which to demoralize other lands.

Karl Marx was the son of Henrich Marx, whose correct
name before it was "Aryanmzed" was Hirschel Levy, (Karl
Marx—Man & Fighter, by Nicolaievsky & Maenchen-Helfen,
p.4} the son of Rabbi Marx Levy of Trier. His mother was a
Polish Jewess, derived from a family of rabbis, including
Rabbis Meir Katzenellenbogen of Padua, Joseph Ben Gerson
ha-Cohen and Joshua Herschel Lvov. His elder brother, Karl's
uncle, was alse a rabbi.

In order to retain his post as counsellor in the Trier court,
when the Rhineland was taken over by Germany, Heinrich
Marx (ne Herschel Levy} was baptized in 1817, one year
before Karl was born. He retained his court job and advanced
to the position of Justizrat and a leader of the Moderate Con-
stitutional party in Trier. Karl's Hungarian Jewish mother,
Henriette, did not become baptized until after the death of her
parents in 1825. Karl and his brothers and sisters were
baptized in the National Evangelical Church (Pretestant} on
August 24, 1824, when Karl was a little over six years old.

Karl Marx suffered from an acute inferiority complex
regarding his Jewish origin. He never could bring himself to
realize that those about him re-

78


garded him with questioning, if not contempt, because he
pretended to be something he was not. He held the Jews
responsible for his state. His paranoia and inferiority complex
were compensated by an intense hatred of the Jews. This
found expression in the first works he wrote for publication.
In the Deutsch-Franzosische Jahrbuch of 1844 he wrote in a
review entitled "Zur Judenfrage" ("On the Jewish Question”)
the following:
"What is the basis of Judaism? Selfishness
and greed. "What is their faith? Swindling. "Whe is their
God? Money. "There can be no solution of the problems
f


o
the world without the destruction of the Jews and

their religion, (Judenthum}."” In 1875 he wrote: "The
Hebrew faith is repellent to me”. Thus Karl Marx, the
renegade Jew, became one of the fathers of Nazism,
acknowledged by Hitler and his crew.

At college, as a phase of compensation for his paranoid
inferiority complex, Marx paraded as a Christian and
undertook an intensive study of Canonical, or Church, Law.
Thus he wrote to his father from Berlin on November 10,

"| confined myself to positive studies . . . some

of Gauterbach's books .. . especially on ecclesiastical law."

In the Canonical Law he found sections which interpret
profits in commercial transactions as usury and a cardinal sin.
That meant that the Church Law demanded "production for
use and not for profit".

This left open only three legitimate vocations: one was to
join the Church orders; the second was to labor; and the third
was to assume the rele of the baron who preyed on the
laborers on the pretense of protecting them, as do the modern
labor barons and their gangster henchmen, and to live by
physical force or violence. This was Medievalism. The
Church later abandoned this doctrine except within its own
orders, because it was found unsound and dangerous. It was
largely responsible for the breakdown of civilization, law and
order in the Middle Ages, and for the enslavement of
mankind. It threw Europe into a reign of terror that lasted
more than a thousand years.

But Karl Marx was not merely anti-Jewish; he 79


was anti-religious and especially anti-Catholic. He wrote that
he classed Christianity as a Jewish religion. In this respect his
ideas coincided with these of Bismarck, whose anti-Catholic
activities have been recalled by the Pope recently as the
origin of Nazi activities in Poland. Marx attacked religion as
an opiate for the masses. But he stole the doctrine, “to
preduce for profit is a cardinal sin", which the Church
abandoned because it was proved false, ‘and made it the basis
of his new religion, Marxism or Communazism.

Marx's hatred, like that of his followers, the Nazis,
extended to all non-Germanic peoples, even those that
supported his movement. He disparaged the Negro and held
the Russian revolutionaries in contempt.

Labor, Marx hated whole-heartedly, and he despised the
individual worker. When he married he sought out a
noblewoman, Jennie von Westphalen. When one of his
daughters wished to marry a worker, he forbade it and
ordered her to marry a Negro bourgeois capitalist. Karl came
from an affluent bourgeois family and never did a day of
labor in his life. The loss of the fortune which his father left
him, as a result of his incompetence, bred in him a paranotac
hatred of all who possessed property, the "Capitalists",
because he regarded them as responsible for the loss of his
fortune. This aligned him as a bitter supporter of the "have
nots", not because he loved Labor but because he hated "the
Capitalist” more.

His neurotic, paranoid character and overwhelming sense of
inferiority gave rise in Marx to a compensatory delusion of
superiority that insisted upon autocratic and absolute
dominion, and to violent suspicions that were the origin of the
"purge" complex that characterizes all his followers. Karl's
sisters related that even as a bey, he was a fearful tyrant. He
drove girls downhill at full gallop and compelled them to eat
the cakes he made with his dirty hands out of filthy mud. His
schcolmates feared him because of the satirical verses and
lampoons he hurled at his enemies.

Utterly lacking in originality or capacity for lucid thinking,
Marx showed faith in his concept of distribution of wealth
only by plagiarizing the fallacious ideas of others. Foremost
among the fallacies which he borrowed was the so-called
"Law of Supply

80


and Demand.” By its converse form—"1t is primarily scarcity
that gives value’—he undertook to justify ethically its
application to human beings and their labor. That became the
basic idea underlying labor unionism.

But unionism is only a half-way measure in carrying out

the idea of maintaining a scarcity of human beings and their
labor. The full and bold program for creating a shortage of
human beings is concentration camps, wholesale murder.
Hitler alone carried cut Karl Marx's precepts completely and
to their logical conclusion. In this, as in applying his anti-
Semitism, Hitler was Marx's most faithful disciple. In
faithfully following in Hitler's footsteps, Stalin and his
Communist cohorts are carrying out Marx's precepts.
Quite as fallacious was Marx's reasoning in justifying his
German patrictism. As a defense against the Prussian attitude
that Jews were aliens, Karl Marx developed an intense
German nationalism. Among the first words that he wrote
were: "The emancipation of the German is the emancipation
of Man".

His sham pacifism and internationalism vanished with the
outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War, and were replaced by
martial enthusiasm and anxiety for a German victory. Expert
at self-deception by dialectics, he justified his attitude in a
letter to Engels, as follows:

"The German werkingclass is superior to the

French from the viewpoint of organization and

theory." In a victory of Germany he pretended to discern a
victory of the German workingcelass, and most important, of
his theories. Dialectics alone can_match these views or his
advocacy of class hatreds and warfare, which in final analysis
is the worst form of civil war, with his pretended
internationalism and a quest for the common welfare.

But even more obvious is Marx's deception in offering his
Communist program as an improvement on human freedom.
For Communism necessarily means total loss of freedom,
virtual or actual slavery. Under Communism, the government
and the people whe control it, own everything and everyone.
They dictate all conditions ‘of life, including wages and
employment. Without freedom to earn a living, all other
freedoms are meaningless.


Foremost among the fallacies which he adopted were
misconceptions regarding the interaction of supply and
demand, expressed in the "Law of Supply and Demand", a
contrasted with speculative manipulation. Fallaciously he
treated supply and demand as inexorable forces, but sought to
circumvent their interaction by a “managed economy”.

The remedies that he proposes are fundamentally to
frustrate the instinctive possessiveness of man by abolishing
private ownership cf property, through the devices of
progressively heavier income and inheritance taxes, control of
banks and credit with eventual nationalization of all industry;
and enslavement of mankind by a process of progressive
regimentation that begins with labor unionization, progresses
to compulsory military training and compulsory labor and
ends in serfdom and complete subjugation by dictatorship.

The basic fallacy of Marxian doctrines is of vast
significance. For it ultimately justifies all measures which
restrict and reduce population, such as war, exile, purges and
birth control. It justifies barring fellow men from
employment, and the opportunity to earn a livelihood, even
when those fellow men happen to be unionists’ own children.
It justifies all the barbarisms which characterize present day
society. The perfect expression of this phase of Marxism was
Nazi Germany. Hitler alone carried the Marxian idea to its
logical conclusion.

The antisocial character of Marx stamps the entire
propaganda and doctrines that bear his name. It is indeed
ironic that they should take the name "Socialism." For no
doctrine 1s more antisocial or more destructive to the
organization of society.

Bismarck came to regard Karl Marx as an important ally in
his Pan-Germanic propaganda. He realized that Marxian
Socialism planted in other lands would disrupt and demoralize
them and would hasten the conquest of "Deutschland uber
Alles." Bismarck eventually invited Marx to return from exile
and offered him the editorship of his own paper. Marxian
propaganda tracts printed in many languages became some of
Germany's principal exports.

Only a dialectician trained to reason away the obvious and
the truth can fail to realize that state ownership of the
machinery of production implies irresponsible ownership and
neglect. For what be-

82


longs to everyone belongs to no one, and is neglected by
everyone for a reason that is axiomatic and becomes evident
from a psychologic experiment on rats.

Three rats were placed in a cage provided with three levers
which released food to them from an overhead trap. The rats
rapidly learned to press on the levers and catch the food. More
complex conditions were then introduced inte this rat society.
The levers were placed on the opposite side of the cage distant
from the traps that released the food. Only one of the rats had
sufficient intelligence to associate pressure on the lever with
the distant release of food, and had initiative and energy to do
it. But this was of little avail to him. For the stupid and
slothful rats learned to grab the food released by their
ambitious colleague. Though he worked unremittingly he
seldom managed to get the food which he released, and died
of starvation.

Most humans are like the stupid, slothful rats. For that
reason Socialism, Communism and state ownership of the
machinery of production are doomed to failure. Eventually
they degenerate into a dictatorship of the most forceful and
most ruthless member of the community; for in final analysis
the rule of the abstraction, the State, is the rule of an
individual. The more absolute the power of the State, the more
autocratic is the rule of that individual. Thus the Communist
or Socialist State is inevitably a dictatorship; its dictator is
owner of everything and everybody he surveys—he 1s a per-
fect feudal lord. Such overcentralization of power naturally
implies the end of efficiency and initiative and the disruption
or destruction of industry, commerce and social organization.

Communism and Socialism seek to dissemble and hide
their true character and purpose. Bismarck's "New Deal",
Fascism and Nazism are more frank and realistic in seeking
the same goal. But in their ultimate expression they all turn
out to be identical forms of feudalism. They imply
dictatorship based on class hatred, established by propaganda
and intrigue, and maintained by force and by violence. They
are aptly designated as Bismarxian or Com-munazi programs.
For one who understands their identity there is no surprise in
current European events.

The Communist Internationales became important


agencies of propaganda of Bismarck's program. This is
illustrated by the fact that through them Communism was
planted in Russia during World War I with the aid of the
German General Staff and of German funds. This is reported
by Colonel Nikitine, organizer of Russian counterespionage,
in his book The Fatal Years. Recent events have made it
startling clear that Germany maintained her grip on the
Communist movement throughout the following decades. The
unity of purpose of Bismarck's propaganda and that of
Communist Russia has been fully confirmed by every phase
of Soviet pelicy.

The Labor movement has been a part of the Bis-marxian
and the Communazi propagandas from their very beginning. It
still continues to serve the purposes of Bismarck as a most
efficient agency for paralysis of industry and commerce and
for fomenting misery and unrest. It owes its efficiency to
several features in a democratic land. It is a meb that
commands a large vote, which compels the attention and
compliance of the Government. By demanding an ever larger
share of what it aids in producing, it can bankrupt and destroy
commerce and industry. It simultaneously increases un-
employment and the burden on the national treasury.
Eventually it leads to destruction of the nation.

It masks, under the camouflage of "class war,” acceptance
of the basic fallacy underlying Karl Marx's doctrines—man
must be scarce to have value. Labor is not only destroying
itself by its greed and ruthlessness, but is also destroying its
children. It is notable that it is Labor that has barred a refuge
in this country for the victims of persecution abroad without a
dissenting voice from its ranks. For it recognizes the same
motives that prompt the Com-munazis as its basie doctrine.

Led usually by gangsters, thugs and racketeers, and allied
with equally unscrupulous groups, organized labor has seized
control of the governments of nations and converted them to
base and destructive uses. In sc doing it prepares the way for
the conquest of Bismarck's successors. Whatever justification
labor unions may have had and whatever sympathy they may
have deserved they have forfeited by their criminal purposes
and actions. Theirs 1s not the way to salvation of the cause. It
is the path to destruction.

Propagandists and pseudo-liberals in the guise 84


of “authorities” and college professors have been ever at hand
to instigate and justify the subversive activities of Labor. On
the payroll of unions, prostituted to their dictates, with
lectures censored by the union "leaders," they act as show-
fronts for their racketeers and are accomplices of their gang-
şters. They reflect the thoroughness of Bismarck's
organization of his propaganda.

Germany's entire education system, as well as her
diplomatic corps, was made part and parcel of the Bismarxian
propaganda system. Subsidized learning and scientific
achievement were widely advertised and publicized and lent
color to claims of German intellectual superiority. Trading on
this reputation, Germany was able to palm off on the world,
pseudo-sciences, such as sociology, social service and modern
economics, which are nothing more than very thinly disguised
false propaganda.

A system of recognition, adulation and decoration of
foreign educaters and scientists fostered their teaching
doctrines that served the purposes of the Bismarxian
propaganda. Germany thus made the education system of
other lands a part and parcel of her propaganda machine. The
Communist propaganda machine which has recently been ex-
posed as dominating our entire school and university system,
1s but a subsidiary of the machine which Bismarck built and
Rockefeller financed and fostered.

Bismarck's foreign "New Deal" propaganda came out into
the open in 1890, when Kaiser Wilhelm II, for personal and
strategic reasons (which included a survival of the resentment
which his grandfather had held against Bismarck for forcing
him into the undesired role of Emperor of Germany), resolved
to drop the "Pilot," Bismarck. To strengthen his position he
first sought to win over the German Socialist and Labor
elements. In so doing, he let the cat out of the bag with regard
to the stimulation of Socialist and labor propaganda in other
lands, when he called an International Congress on Labor
Legislation te consider the plight of the German workers.
When an individual so jealous of his prerogatives and so
contemptuous of memals appeared so anxious to share the
consideration of the internal difficulties of his Empire with
others, there was obviously something evil afoot.

It was the spirit of Bismarck that clumsily led 85


Germany. The status of Nazi Germany was a direct, logical
and inevitable consequence of the concepts of Marxian
Socialism and of the "welfare" program, the "New Deal"
devised by Bismarck. Its development was guided by Hitler's
"Brain", Professor Haushofer and his Geopolitical Institute.
The class hatred of Marx was converted to another equally
absurd hatred—the Aryan. Marxian internationalism translates
itself rationally into Aryan internationalism The war on
capitalism logically assumes the form of raping other lands;
for the Marxian definition of "capital", in final analysis, is
"the other fellow's property.” Restriction of the supply of
labor to control its wage is served by eliminating minorities.
The philosophies of Marxism and Nazism are obviously
identical. Nazism is merely the active tense of Marxism.

Marxism 18, in essence, a power pattern. It is a device for
conquest of lands from within, by gangsterism and crime. It
operates by robbing the people of their wealth, through
taxation, under the pretense of "distributing wealth". It forces
the people to surrender their freedom to the criminal Socialist,
Nazi, Fascist, New Deal, Fair Deal or Communist rulers. It is
a device for the looting of peoples by the most ruthless and
most violent elements, aided and abetted by the unthinking,
the gullible and the stupid. It means rule by brute force and
violence.

The first of the formidable competitors of Germany that
succumbed to the propagandized Bis-marxian program was
England. A few years before World War I, Great Britain was
forced by the agitation among her workingclasses to swallow
the whole bait—hook, line and sinker. German industrialists
openly urged upon Parliament the adoption of the program.
England thereby set in operation forces which are
accomplishing the fall of the British Empire. Premier Ramsay
MacDonald in an address before Parliament in 1929, frankly
blamed the welfare, dole and health insurance laws for the
insoluble economic problem presented in England by the
unemployment situation.

From the point of view of American affairs, even greater
significance was lent the situation when the wholly alien ideas
were given an aura of respectability in the eyes of American
tories. This was accentuated by the fact that British industry
was

86


now in the same position, with respect to the cost of the
"welfare" program, in its competition for world markets. It
became of interest also to British industry that the United
States should adept an identical handicapping program.

The earliest published record of the launching of the
Bismarxian propaganda in the United States is found in the
report of the German subsidized International Association For
Labor Legislation (reported in the American Labor
Legislation Review, V. 4, p. 511, 1914):

"Work towards the formation of an American

Section was initiated in 1902, when the Board

of the International Association began to make its

objects known in the United States and to form

connections with interested individuals."

Among the original founders of the Association
were Richard T. Ely, Edward T. Devine, Mary K.
Simkhevitch, R. 0. Lovejoy, Mary van Kleeck, and
John B. Andrews. Later joiners were John A.

Kingsbury, Charles C. Burlingham, William Hodson,
Ida M. Tarbell, Homer Folks, Frances Perkins,
Leon Henderson, Harry L. Hopkins and Eleanor
Roosevelt.

They numbered among them the leaders of the U.S.
Communist Party, which was organized by them shortly
thereafter, about 1908.

Numerous organizations were launched to further this
Bismarxian propaganda. Prominent among them was the
American Association for Social Security, as it is now called,
and the American Association for Labor Legislation.

The engineering of this program of propaganda, as has been
related, brought into play all the usual devices of the craft. All
its phases were touted as "liberal" by converted or subsidized
writers, lecturers, labor agitators, professional malcontents
and university professors. Particular attention was given to the
seduction of the younger generation in schools, colleges and
universities. Magazines and periodicals were subsidized, or
founded, to agitate for these "liberal" measures. The foreign-
language press was perverted early to the uses of the propa-
gandists, and was corrupted cheaply.

Capitalizing on human nature and the desire to conform,
"polls" of "popular sentiment” have been developed into
superlative tools for propaganda and influencing public
opinion. Hero worship of leaders,


so essential for a dictatorship, has been fed by sickening
adulation of them by fellow-travelling or prostituted
columnists. Book clubs have been organized to control what is
published and read by the nation. Finally, vested interests in
the form of highly paid positions were created for the leaders
of the various movements that were gotten under way by the
propagandists.

In due time the propaganda began to assume the form of an
indigenous movement and its foreign origin was completely
masked and forgotten. So widely and insistently were the
Bismarxian ideas touted as "liberal" that in due time anyone
who realized their specious character was placed in the light
of an extreme conservative or "reactionary."

Social-service agencies and foundations proved to be most
effective in raising this alien propaganda above all suspicion.
They also enabled placing the burden of financing the
propaganda on the very people who were to be seduced. This
was done by collecting funds and endowments ostensibly for
charitable and other purposes. Organized social service joined
hands with the Socialist and labor elements to form the self-
styled "liberal" group.

Foremost among the social-service agencies which supplied
propaganda funds in the early days were the Russell Sage
Foundation and the "Charity Trust." The latter group, at the
beginning, assumed leadership until misuse of charitable
funds was exposed by Senator Thompson's investigation in
1914-1916. The most influential of the social-service agencies
which became agents of the propagandists was the New York
City group designated the "Charity Trust.” Its activities came
into such disrepute that in 1914 an investigation of them was
demanded of the New York State Legislature and was made
by the Thompson Committee appointed by it. Hearings before
the Committee revealed how the moneys collected by these
agencies for supposedly charitable purposes were converted to
personal use and to commercial and political propaganda.

The objectives of Bismarck and Marx, a “new social
order”, totalitarian in character, became “the purpose of
Rockefeller's "philanthropies”, for which all of these agencies
were taken under his wing.


88


CHAPTER V


ORGANIZATION OF ROCKEFELLER
"PHILANTHROPIES"


Schemed "Benevolence" Hides Mailed Fist


The commercial use of "philanthropy" for evasion of law
and taxes is now a familiar pattern. The Rockefeller
"philanthropes" were pioneers in this direction. They were
conceived and planned to supplement the Standard Oil Co.
and other controlled industries, as the nucleus of the world-
wide Rockefeller Empire. This is made clear in Nevin's
authorized biography of Rockefeller. (IDR, v. 2, p. 164)
"How could so enormous an accumulation of money be
employed? To dissipate it would be easy enough; but it was
intolerable to Rockefeller's systematic and careful mind to
think of frittering it away. Nor could he spend it for personal
whims of a philanthropic or pseudo-philanthropie kind; first,
because, unlike many rich men, he had no whims, and in the
second place, because he had an unconquerable instinct for
giving in an orderly way on the basis of fixed principles (Ed.
the "principle" of acquisition} ... Year by year, he and Gates
were finding out, often by bitter experience, that some types
of philanthropy SIMPLY DID NOT YIELD ADEQUATE
RETURNS.” Nevins goes on to state that the "philanthropies"
were intended to serve "... to fructify seme important work
along a nation-wide or even international front." (JDR, v. 2, p.


The "philanthropies" supplemented Rockefeller's industrial
interests and made possible attaining otjectives that would
have been suspect and conquests that would have been
unattainable in the normal straightforward course of business.
It has proved a perfect instrument for world conquest and the
subjugation of native and unsuspecting folk. It follows that
basic pattern that Bismarck launched in the modern world as a
political weapon for world conquest, the "welfare state". To
this basic pattern the Rockefeller "philanthropies” have
superadded improvements and refinements that make
Bismarck's plans look amateurish and crude.


The Rockefeller "philanthropes" were conceived and
planned as the nucleus of the political control and government
of the projected Rockefeller Empire during its formative
period of world conquest by propaganda of a “new social
order", in other words, subversion. They are superbly
organized to serve to the best advantage all the purposes of
Bismarck's "New Deal". They constitute the most
Machiavellian conspiracy in all human history.

The “philanthropies” were shrewdly designed to retain

control for the Rockefellers of all the activities fostered and
all profits, actual and potential, tangible and intangible,
derived therefrom, while forcing others to assume the bulk of
the costs. Nevins, in his biography, describes the method as
follows: (JDR v. 2, p. 465}
"As the fortune grew, it became necessary for him, his son,
and Gates te plan philanthropies which should aggregate not
millions, but scores of millions, and should if possible fructify
some important work along a nation-wide or even inter-
national front. He insisted that all principles that he had laid
down during the eighties must be maintained. His money
should be given, in general, on conditional terms which would
stimulate (Ed. or exact) gifts by other men and organizations.
And finally the work done should be of continuing character,
which should remain vigorous after his aid was withdrawn."
In brief, the plan was the same as that which Rockefeller
adopted in his business enterprises. His "philanthropic"
investments were designed to take over the enterprise of
others that were in distress to serve his interests and render
him tangible and intangible profits in perpetuo, and to give
him perpetual control of them while forcing others te sustain
them for his own advantage and gain.

In the earlier stages of the development of this system of
"philanthropies", the Rockefeller interests assumed a
maximum of one quarter to one half of the cost of an
enterprise, and required the participation of others for the
balance of the cost, as a condition for their "gifts." Thus they
compelled public suppert and financing of their schemes of
which they assumed full control, benefits and returns. They
took over direct or indirect control, with but nominal
contributions, of rich “charities” such as the Charity
Organization Society, the State

9


Charities Aid and the Greater New York Fund. They were
thus enabled to turn to their purposes and dispose of large
sums contributed by the public at large. Through devious
devices such as interlocking directorates and political
maneuvers, they were able, later, to gain control of a
progressively larger proportion of the colleges, universities,
church organizations, foundations and philanthropies set up
by others. At the present time there is no important foundation
in this country that is not controlled, usually directly but
sometimes indirectly, by the Rockefellers or their agents, to
be converted to the propaganda, conspiracies and other uses
of the Rockefeller Empire.

The program of menopelistic control of foundations,
philanthropies, and charities was initiated by John D.
Rockefeller himself in the "merger" of Carnegie
"philanthropies” with his own, by direct arrangement with old
Andrew Carnegie. The story of it is intimated in Nevin's
biography (JDR v. 2, pp. 591-2), which relates: "Clark was the
publicity agent of the Standard— Rockefeller has none. Still
some of Clark's work benefited the nominal president of the
corporation. His hand perhaps appears in the New York
World's display article of May 10, 1908, on twenty-five years
of the Standard Oil, full of praises for the organization and
its founder. 'One by one’, declared the story, ‘the falsity and
exaggeration of the charges made by interested rivals and
demagogues of every class are being made plain'—a
remarkable statement to appear in The World. We are
tempted to see Clark's touch again in a statement by Carnegie
on his golf matches with Rockefeller. 'Our last game was
hotly contested", said the Scot. 'In fact, we were so excited
over some special good work that we lost count of the score.’
Carnegie intimated that Rockefeller had taken advantage of
this to give himself an extra point." The last sentence of this
quotation points up a Rockefeller trait that has characterized
all their "philanthropies". Carnegie and Rockefeller had a
community of interest in steel. Nevins points out JDR v. 2,
p. 39} "As a matter of fact, Rockefeller and Carnegie were
personally always on the best of terms .. ." Willam S.
Dutton, Rockefeller propagandist, 91


writing for their Collier's magazine, issue of April 28, 1951,
relates that though there were antitrust laws that "barred
Rockefeller from attaining his objective of monopoly in
business, there was no barrier to his attaining it through
"philanthropy". He relates that Rockefeller and Carnegie
merged their foundations, in effect, with an agreement to
collaborate, not to compete or overlap, an understanding, he
reports, that is still effective between their foundations. Thus
did John D. Sr. lay the basis for a "Philanthropy Trust" that
was destined to attain for himself and his descendants the sub-
jugation of the world that he sought.

The pro-British slant of the Carnegie philanthrepies was
made to fit into the Rockefeller scheme of things, when the
Marxist Labor Party, that was heavily subsidized by them,
took over the government. On the Board of Trustees of the
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, one of the most
important of the Carnegie group from the viewpoint of
propaganda in international affairs, sit David Rockefeller and
his kinsman John Foster Dulles, chairman of the Board, with
Alger Hiss as President as late as 1949, General Dwight D.
Eisenhower and Ambassador at Large Philip C. Jessup. It is
also noteworthy that Senator Robert A. Taft served as Trustee,
in the years 1935- 1938, on the Board of this Rockefeller -
dominated “internationalist" outfit.

Herbert Morrison, British Labor leader, was attached to the
Rockefeller-dominated Carnegie Endowment For
International Peace, and was a protege of the Rockefeller
Empire. He displeased his masters when after becoming
Foreign Secretary he announced on March 17, 1951,
according to a special dispatch to the New York Times, that
he opposed abandonment of British national sovereignty te the
super-national Council of Europe, sponsored by the
Rockefeller Empire. His patriotism aroused their antagonism
and brought an attack on him and the Labor Government in
the Sunday, September 12, 1951, issue of the New York
Limes, that presaged Labor's defeat less than two months
ater

When the Rockefeller publicists set out to build the phase
of the "philanthrepic trust" sought by their employer in the
field of “charity”, they undertook to build further on the
discredited organization of the "Charity Trust". They sought a
new front for their organization, one that


would serve to dispel the odor of rot which had issued from
the investigation that had discredited "uplift" activities. They
had te have a fresh approach to the gullibility and purses of
the "peasants".

They found it in the highly regarded New York
Tuberculosis and Health Association set up by a group of
physicians whe were zealots devoted to the cause of fighting
that scourge. It offered the dynamic approach to the public
and its purse of the fear of disease, and the added advantage
of periodic collection drives and a perennial income from the
established sale of Xmas seals to finance the conspiracy.

The use of fear of disease had been one of the first
approaches to public goodwill adopted by Rockefeller and he
knew it to be effective. Since then 1t has become standard and
accepted practise among the conspirators, even in radical
circles. Thus the Russian Communists offered as an excuse
for the invasion of Rumania, statistics that were designed to
show "an appalling prevalence of endemic diseases" in
Bessarabia. The Communists propose, in the words of one
commentator, that "if Rumania will not treat the needlessly ill
with Communism, Russia will cure them with bombs.” The
Rockefeller interests placed the relatively unkown social-
service worker, Harry L. Hopkins, in charge of the program,
as Director of the New York Tuberculosis & Health
Association. Thus did they begin to groom him as one of their
top lieutenants in their conspiracy to take over the nation and
the world. Then their pseudo-philanthropic conspiracy
emerged an ultra-potent power-pattern.

Under the aegis of Harry L. Hopkins, a Rockefeller
almoner and agent, there was built up a social service, charity
and philanthropy trust that was expanded to national and
worldwide scope. In the 1920's it had an annual "take" of
more than four billion dollars a year and was one of the
country's five largest and richest businesses. This racket was
built up about the nucleus of the New York Tuberculosis &
Health Association. It made the sucker public finance its
expansion through the purchase of Xmas seals. Not one penny
of the money ever raised from the sale of the New York
Tuberculosis & Health Association seals ever went to the
relief of a person with tuberculosis or to an institution for

93


his care. This fact was confirmed by New York City Health
Commissioner Louis I. Harris, in a letter to the New York
Times of June 8, 1932; and by subsequent acknowledgement
of the officers of the Association "that all its money had been
expended on salaries and overhead”. (Your Life Is Their Toy,
1940, p. 27) The Xmas seal funds were fraudulently used to
build up a whole array of agencies for the exploitation of
diseases, such as the Heart Association, the American Cancer
Association, the Social Hygiene Association, the Diabetes
Association, the National Association for the Prevention of
Blindness and a host of others.

These organizations, in turn, cadged money from the public
on the fraudulent pretense of helping victims of the diseases.
The funds were used to build up the national and international
"Charity Trust” that controlled the billions of dollars mulcted
from the public under false pretenses. This money was used to
build up a political machine fostering Rockefeller's otjective,
a "new social order", that in its initial phases emerged as the
New and Fair Deals. Its ultimate goal is a Marxist "welfare
state" dictatorship controlled by the imperial lords that rob the
very people whose funds were obtained under the pretense of
defending their freedom and property. Financial allies
dominated by the conspirators swelled their war chest. Thus
the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company officers, among
others, violated their trust, and the law, by pouring millions of
dollars of their policyholders’ money into the political
activities of these organizations, on the pretense of benefiting
public health. (Y our Life Is Their Toy, 1940, pp. 121-135)

These "social services" organizations contributed materially
to the conspiracy to take over the government and convert it to
the uses of the conspirators. They contributed beth money and
propaganda value. Under a pretense of an interest in the
physical welfare of the public, they gained control of the
health, hospital and welfare agencies of the governments.
These. they used in turn to aid in taking over control of the
government as a whole and effecting its conversion to a

"welfare state”. Much of their funds supplemented those of the
Rockefeller controlled "ohilanthropies"” in financing the
spread of the Marxist "social sciences” and Communism, as a
device for attaining their totali-

94


tarian ctjective.

In all of these activities, "Mastermind" Harry L. Hopkins,
Director of the fraudulent New York Tuberculosis & Health
Association, served as a pawn of the Rockefeller interests. His
political ascendancy and power in Roosevelt's "New Deal”
merely meant his emergence into the open as their top agent in
effecting the seizure of the government through the "social
service” device. Hopkins' subservience to the Rockefellers is
clearly discernible in his repeated offers of government posts
to Nelson A. Rockefeller, including the offer te make him his
Assistant Secretary of Commerce.

Before reviewing the Rockefeller propaganda, “thought
control” and commercial agencies that masquerade as

"philanthropies" it should be noted that the Rockefellers never
have let go of financial control of these "philanthropies", or of
their Standard Oil or other industrial enterprises. At various
times they have pretended that they have retired or
relinquished control, for purposes of popular deception, or to
escape the consequences of some nefarious activity. This
pretense was exposed as false by testimony given under oath
by John D. Rockefeller before the U.S. Commission on Indus-
trial Relations in 1916, as stated in the summation of the
chairman of the Commission, Frank Walsh, as follows:

"The Foundation is entirely outside and above the
Government. The power it exercises in practically unlimited

There is hardly anything to which the enormous power of
the money it employs cannot be applied, if Mr. Rockefeller
deems it proper to apply it. I say Mr. Rockefeller because Mr.
Rockefeller 1s the Foundation. The testimony shows that
the Trustees exercised no authority that did not come from
him.” Rockefeller also testified that on dissolution of the
Foundation the capital funds would revert to him or his heirs,
which makes it quite clear that the Foundation is private
property.

The extent of control exercised by Rockefeller dominated
foundations over the activities of its grantees is clearly
illustrated by the recent action of the Rockefeller dominated
Carnegie Endowment For International Peace. It demanded a
refund from the American Bar Association of a $15,000 grant
made to it for a study of the U.N. Genocide

95


Convention that had been approved by the U.S. Senate,
because the report of the Committee condemned the
Convention as approved (N.Y. Times, Oct. 15 & 20, 1950).
"Researches", to the support of which grants are made by the
Rockefeller controlled foundations, are required to make
reports favorable to the Rockefeller interests or approved by
them. As a matter of practise, grants are not made except to
individuals who are known to support Rockefeller causes.
When Rockefeller grants are given to Communists and other
subversives, it can be assumed that the views of the
Rockefellers coincide with those of the grantees, or vice
versa. It is a striking fact that none of the Rockefeller
"philanthropies” or their allies have ever been known to
contribute to a patriotic cause designed to support the
Constitution and inspire respect and devotion for our republic.

The flagrancy of violation of the law by the foundations is
accentuated by the fact that the bulk of their funds are moneys
which are due to the Treasury but are left with the foundations
in trust for use in public interest. The Treasury has the final
say as to whether activities undertaken are "in public interest"
and the foundation funds therefore exempt from taxation, or
whether the moneys shall go directly into the Treasury. Since
the Rockefeller interests control the U.S. Treasury, it is a
simple matter for them to exempt the funds of their own
foundations from seizure for taxes and to bar the setting up of
other foundations than those under their control. In effect, this
means that the Treasury has ruled that the activities of the
Rockefeller controlled foundations, no matter how subversive,
are "in publie interest".

Our tax laws are written by Rockefeller puppets at the
instance of their agents. One of the most important of these
agents in the field of taxes is Beardsley Ruml, former Director
of the Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial who
surreptitiously launched through it the Rockefeller campaign
for the Marxist "social sciences". Of him Horace Coon has
stated in his Money To Burn:

".. wherever the Rockefeller interests have made

contributions to the ‘social sciences’, Beards-ley Ruml's

name is usually to be found." (Quoted by Hughes, Prejudice

& the Press, p. 302) It is no mere coincidence that the same

Beardsley 96


Ruml who directed the spending of the funds of the
Rockefeller controlled foundations to foster Communism in
the guise of “social sciences", has also served as the
mouthpiece of the Rockefellers in dictating for them the tax
legislation of the country. For it is a fundamental of the Marx-
Lenin formula that Communism most readily can be imposed
on lands through national bankruptey. This was epitomized
by Harry Hopkins, in his sloga

"Tax! Tax! ! Spend! Spend! ! Elect! Elect! !" He omitted,
as too revealing, the purpose of this policy:

"Betray! Betray! |! Enslave! Enslave! ! ™

Naturally the Rockefeller interests dictated no tax
legislation that would affect themselves. Those who engage in
the business of drilling for oil are especially provided with
numerous loopholes for evading taxes, "in the interest of
national security". Not even the lowest paid workers, who
earn scarcely enough to keep body and soul together, are per-
mitted to evade taxation, by the withholding tax so kindly
provided for them by the Rockefellers through their agent
Beardsley Ruml. In viclation of the Constitution the
government impresses the services of the employer to collect
it and thereby misdirects public wrath against him.

In many directions the Rockefellers are permitted to evade
taxation entirely by the laws their agents have drawn up. As
an example, John D. Rockefeller's estate paid an inheritance
tax on a mere twenty five million dollars of the fortune of
billions of dollars he left behind. This explains why the
Rockefellers personally are always in the vanguard of the
citizens who appear before legislatures and Congress to
demand the passage of bills calling for continually higher and
more crushing taxes. They escape payment of those taxes by
devices provided for them in the laws or by their
administration.

But there is an even more cogent reason for the activities of
the Rockefellers in demanding ever greater taxation and in
their suppert of the program enunciated by Harry Hopkins,
their agent, in his slogan above quoted. As will be shown at
length and in detail in later chapters, the bulk of the moneys
looted from the U.S. taxpayers by the outrageous method of
taxation devised by them, flows into the coffers of the
Rockefeller Empire. The U.S. Treasury and local tax
collectors merely serve as 97


their collection agents. The Federal and local governments
are administered largely by public officers who are
handpicked agents of the Rockefeller Empire, whom it
imposes on the electorate by control of the nominating
machinery of all parties.

Through such devices the Rockefellers have compelled the
Federal and local governments to assume the burden of any
and all of the schemes launched by them to further their
interests through their own and dominated foundations, as
their supposed "philanthrepies". They have compelled the
Government te finance with taxpayers' money and property
their private business enterprises that parade as
"benevolences”.

The numerous enterprises which the Rockefeller Empire
has financed by sacrifice of life and confiscation of wealth of
the taxpayers of the U.S. through control of the Government
will be described later. Among them is the development of
the Saudi Arabian oilfields by their Aramco to provide the
Communists with oil for their war in Korea, for slaughtering
our troops in a war that was "philan-thropically" engineered
for them; and World Wars I and II that wrested for them from
England the concession for Saudi Arabia and the right to
develop it.

The “philanthropies” of the Rockefellers developed, as
planned, not only into a source of unbounded political power,
but also into the fountainhead of enormous revenues that
literally comprise the bulk of the national income and wealth
of the people of the U.S. and other lands, through such
devices as Lend-Lease, Co-Ordination of Hemispheric
Defense, the Marshall Plan and the ECA, UNRRA, the At-
lantic Pact, the United Nations, the Point 4 program and many
other "philanthropic" schemes.

Strangely enough there is one phase of the Rockefeller
"philanthropies" that must be remembered. The law exempts
philanthropic foundations from taxation. But it specifically
provides that this tax exemption will be forfeited if the
foundations engage in political activities and propaganda.
Since the Rockefeller foundations are almost completely and
exclusively engaged in propaganda and lobbying, their funds
should be sutject te full taxation that would virtually wipe
them out. But the Rockefeller Empire thumbs its nose at our
laws, even those they themselves write. For they are the
powers behind our Government and in it, as well.


CHAPTER VI


ROCKEFELLER INSTITUTE FOR MEDICAL
RESEARCH


"Philanthropy", Drug Profits and Treason


Rockefeller Institute For Medical Research was John D.'s
first bid for public favor. It was intended to allay the bitter
antagonism that his activities had created and had made him
"the most hated man in America”. This was done by bribing
public opinion through a pretended interest in their health.

This plan was first conceived by Reverend Frederick Taylor
Gates, an amazing and completely underestimated character
who has left an indelible stamp on world history of an entirely
unclerical nature. His influence derived from his collaboration
with the Rockefellers in a conspiracy for a super-Napeleonic
world conquest under the sham front of philanthropy.

Frederick Taylor Gates was born on a farm in Broome
County, N.Y., in 1853. His father had studied medicine, which
may serve to explain the son's interest in the subject, much as
the medical quackery of John D.'s father, "Doc" William
Avery Rockefeller, whetted the interest of his son. Gates’
father, unlike John D.'s never practised medicine, but became
a pitifully underpaid Baptist minister whe served in country
churches at Lamb's Corner, Mott's Corner and Ovid, N.Y. In
his unpublished manuscript, Autobiography, which is quoted
in Professor Allan Nevins’ official biography, authorized by
the family, entitled John D. Rockefeller, Gates expressed his
bitter resentment of the family's poverty during his boyhood
and his hatred of the rigid religious discipline to which he was
sutjected. He wrote:

"People handed their church subscriptions to my father
from time to time in cash, as it became convenient. Father's
usual salary amounted to about $250 per annum, and his
‘donations’ added $50 more. His wood was usually
furnished, and we had trifling presents. So we were always
poor, and during the Civil War we became progressively
poorer, because while the salary did not mse, the cost of
living did. Father's was probably a typical case of the
country pastor. He had to keep a horse, because his church
mem-

99


bership was scattered, and expected the usual amount of
pastoral visits and preaching at out-stations. He had to dress
in ministerial broadcloth and wear a silk hat; he must take
papers and magazines, and read books, and his wife and
family must dress respectably. Father always had to pay a
rental of not less, I think, than $50 a year for his house. He
received a few wedding fees of from $2 to $5, but never, |
believe, a funeral fee. Never while he lived in the State of
New York did Father receive as much as $400 in money in
any one year." (JDR, v. 2, p. 271) "The best religion had to
offer me as a boy, was death and heaven, the very things I
most dreaded, —being a normal, healthy boy.” Nevins
recounts that "there was impatience, too, in his recollections
of some crudities of rural religion— the public baptism 1 in the
creek, with hymns and prayers, and the revivals.”

Gates’ father was sent by the Baptists' home-mission
service to Forest City, Kansas, in 1868. Fred attended
Highland University, Kansas, for a brief period; and at the age
of fifteen he left to teach primary school for three winters. He
then went to work for a bank and proved himself to be a good
money-getter. He also sold patent harrows and earned $1500
in commissions. In 1875 he entered the University of
Rochester and twe years later, he matriculated at the
Rochester Theological Seminary. He emerged a "modernist"
minister, whose prime interest was money-getting, and be-
came pastor of a poor congregation in Minneapolis. A series
of essays in the Minneapolis Tribune on the happier
observance of Sunday attracted attention and drew the interest
of wealthy George A. Pillsbury, who called him in to advise
on the disposal of his estate in a manner that would draw
public interest.

Gates shrewdly carved out a job for himself by
recommending to Pillsbury that he should give the Owatonna
Academy only $50,000 forthwith, on condition that the
Baptist community raise an equal amount; and that he leave
the additional $150,000 he had planned to give the Academy,
in his will. He then took on the job of raising the funds; and
was so successful that he was offered simultaneously the
positions of principal of the newly named Pillsbury Academy
and the presi- 100


dency of the University of Rochester. He accepted neither, for
in the meantime, he had attended the May, 1888 meeting of
the American Baptist Education Society, and was appointed
its executive secretary.

In his new post, Gates was in an excellent position to reveal
and give full play to his true nature. Nevins makes it quite
clear that Gates was quite as adept at using the front of
religion and the ministry to advance his interests and these of
his associates as was Rockefeller, and he became skillful at
using the "philanthropic" fronts for the same purpose, Nevins
points out that Gates was in essence “a business man with a
talent for large affairs, a keen interest in the power of money .
..", who "combined strong altruism in some directions with
strong self-interest in others." He gives the impression of
having entered the ministry despite his aversion to
fundamentalist religion for the primary purpose of advancing
and serving himself; and he frankly acknowledged that he was
attracted by Christ's "social and moral teachings . . . and.
wanted to side with him and his friends against the world and
his enemies. That frankly was the only ‘conversion’ I ever
had." JDR, v. 2, p. 271) Nevins comments that it was an
intellectual rather than an emotional experience. At any rate,
he states: "He was, in short, a man after Rockefeller's own
heart" or lack of heart.

Considerable light is thrown on Gates' character by the
rules that he drew up for a financial agent of a Western
college for raising money, that Nevins cites from the records
of the General Education Board. "Keep your victim good-
natured", he admonished. "Let the victim talk freely,
especially in the early part of the interview, while you use the
opportunity to study his peculiarities. Never argue with him.
Never contradict him . Give your fish the reel and listen
with deep interest. Appeal only to his nobler motives. „His own
mind will suggest to him the lower and selfish ones." He was
as cold, callous, cynical, calculating, hard and unscrupulous as
any swindler. The old adage that "birds of a feather flock
together" no doubt accounts for Rockefeller's attraction to
Gates; and in addition there were financial advantages that
Gates gained for Rockefeller in the course of his religious
activities. io]


Gates used his position to ingratiate and serve the
wealthiest co-religionist, John D. Rockefeller. It was not long
before John D. recognized his shrewdness, his
unscrupulousness, his inordinate ambition and his business
ability. First, he employed him as adviser in his

“philanthropic” investments only, but it was not long before
Rockefeller retained Gates to manage his other investments
as well. John K. Winkler, in his John D.—A Portrait in Oil,
reports Rockefeller's tribute to Gates, as follows:

"Fred Gates was a wonderful business man. His work
for the American Baptist Education Society required him
to travel extensively. Once, as he was going south, I asked
him to look into an iron mill in which I had an interest. His
report was a model of clarity!

"Then I asked him to make some investigations of other
property in the west. I had been told this particular company
was rolling in wealth. Mr. Gates' report showed I had been
deceived. "Now I realized that I had met a commercial genius.
I persuaded Mr. Gates to become a man of business." As a
businessman Gates managed the notorious Colorado Fuel &
Iron Co. through his nephew, Bowers, whom he made
president of the company. One of the principal agencies for
seducing public opinion, lulling suspicion and creating a false
sense of trust, while at the same time reaping enormous profits
from their victims, was medical research and practise. Gates
acknowledges in his Autobiography, quoted by Nevins
(IDR, v. 2, pp. 466-70), that it was he who inspired and
initiated the schemes to take over control of medical education
and practise, beginning with the Rockefeller Institute for
Medical Research, that have progressed until today they
dictate medical practise and what remedies may be used.
They derive from this, unconscionable profits that levy a toll
of billions of dollars on the victims for their patent medicines,
whether they be good, indifferent, bad or positively harmful
and lethal. It is a far cry from the shekels garnered by quack
patent-medicine vendor, William Avery Rockefeller, to the
billions raked in by his descendants through their I. G.
Farbenindustrie and other Drug Trust concerns; the spirit,
however, is the same. 102


Gates' story of his inception of this medical enterprise, that
eventually was to prove richer than his most avaricious
dreams, goes back to the days ofhis pastorate in Minneapolis.
The homeopathic physicians of his parish, who were unaware
of the allopathic medical training his father had received,
appealed to Pastor Gates for his support and gave him
Hahnemann's Organon to read. He regarded it, as do most
allopaths, as absurd: and he reported himself as "depressed to
learn that there were thirty schools teaching their doctrines in
the country." When he undertook to investigate the practises
of the allopathic physicians and to read Osier's Principles and
Practise of Medicine, he discovered that all medical treatment
of the time was empiric, and that the majority of patients
recovered in spite of it. And he awoke to the realization that
whereas the homeopathic remedies were harmless, not so
much could be said for some of the poisons used by the
allopaths in larger doses. Quoting from the Nevins biography
(JDR, v. 2, pp. 467-8) :


"Being thus convinced that medicine as taught and practised
in the United States was at best largely futile and at worst very
injurious, Gates searched in Osier for proof or dispreof.
He thought he found a verification. Osier's pages indicated
that of hundreds of diseases then recognized, the best medical
practise did not as yet know any certain cure for more than
four or five." Gates' imagination was fired by the discoveries
of Pasteur and Koch and the institutes established in their
names; and by the profits accruing from the sale of antitoxins
and sera. He also discerned the large profits derived directly
and indirectly from medical schools. Here was a field closest
to the hearts and purses of all men; for the desperately ill are
generally willing to spend all that they have to recover their
health, which for them is the most precious of all things. Gates
was shrewd and hard enough to realize that the domination of
medicine would inevitably prove profitable in many direc-
tions; but he was also cunning enough to invest his purposes
with the sham cloak of philanthropy in the records. Gates
states in his Autobiography: "Filled with these thoughts and
enthusiasm, I returned from my vacation on July 24, 1897. I
103


brought my Osier book into the office at 26 Broadway, and I
dictated for Mr. Rockefeller, who was summering, as usual, at
Cleveland, a memorandum. It enumerated the infectious
diseases, and pointed out how few germs had yet been discov-
ered, and how great the field for discovery, how few specifics
had been found and how appalling was the | unremedied
suffering and fatality. It pointed out the usefulness of the
Koch Institute in Berlin and the success of the Pasteur
Institute in France." (IDR, v. 2, p. 469) The Rockefellers,
whose medical background paralleled that of Gates, as has
been related, promptly recognized the value of Gates'
suggestion. They delegated Starr J. Murphy, an attorney from
Mont-clair and a neighbor of Gates, to make a survey to
determine the best way to go about stimulating medical
research in the country. He brought in a report that it would be
most profitable to subsidize promising research workers
engaged in various parts of the land, but that this procedure
would not serve as well the purposes ‘of controlling medicine
that the Rockefeller-Gates team always had uppermost in
mind, as would an institute which they were bent on setting
up. In 1901 John D. Jr. offered a group of medical men,
including Drs. L. Emmett Holt, Christian A. Herter, T.
Mitchell Pruden, Hermann M. Biggs, William H. Welch,
Theobald Smith and Simon Flexner, an average of $20,000 a
year for ten years, increased to a million dollars the following
year, for the purpose of setting up the Rockefeller Institute for
Medical Research. Simon Flexner and Abraham Flexner did
"the most important work for Gates' fundamental idea".

Before considering the consequences to medical practise
and advance of the Rockefeller Institute and the domination
attained thereby, mention will be made of Gates’ foray into the
field of medical education, domination of which was essential
for control of medicine. The "reorganization" of medical
education along the lines Gates desired was launched by the
General Education Board, in which Gates was boss. Fer this
purpose Gates' hatchet man was Abraham Flexner, who had
been employed by the Rockefeller-dominated Carnegie
Foundation as an expert, and had written two books on
medical education —Medical Education In The United States
and Medical Education In Europe. The

104


medico-political battle for the control of medical education, its
prestige, its profits and its other advantages, that had raged
furiously and often viclently from the very beginnings of
medical education in this country, was decided in the latter
part of the 19th century, by Rockefeller millions, in favor of
the Gates-Rockefeller team and their henchmen.

Abraham Flexner's study of medical schools, launched in
1910, was a joint venture of the Carnegie Foundation, the
Rockefeller-Gates General Education Board and the American
Medical Association. The American Medical Association was
controlled at that time by an advertising quack abortionist by
the name of "Doc" George H. Simmons, who had never had a
day of medical education in his life but, after practising for
decades had received his M.D. degree by mail from a diploma
mill operated by the Rush Medical School. Rush later became
the medical department of Rockefeller's University of
Chicago. Simmons was a fit partner for the Gates-Rockefeller
combine. He welcomed their cooperation in gaining
monopolistic control of medicine, which was also one of the
prime objects of his A.M.A. However, he reserved for himself
the absolute control of the very lucrative medical advertising,
in his medium, the Journal of the American Medical
Association.

Competition in the medical-school business had become so
keen that Simmons and his worthy associates were delighted
to have the cooperation of Gates and Flexner and the support
of Rockefeller in putting competitors cut of business. The
Rockefeller mob bought their way into control of the medical
schools that they decided should survive, by "grants" from the
General Education Board and the Rockefeller Foundation. Up
to 1919, the Board paid out more than $5,000,000 to Johns
Hopkins, Yale and Washington medical schools; and on Sep-
tember 20, 1919, John D. turned over to his agents more than
$20,000,000 in securities "for the advancement of medical
education in the United States". He earmarked additional sums
at later dates for this worthy purpose.

These well-heeled forces launched a violent campaign of
calumny and slander against medical schools in which the
socially or religicusly elect political bosses of medicine had
no interest. The competing schools were represented as low-


grade
105


and inferior. While it is true that the standards of some of
them were low, few were lower in calibre than many of the
schools sponsored by associates of the Rockefeller-Gates
gang and approved by them for reasons of self-interest. Over
half of the 165 medical schools in the country were forced to
close their doors, and the Rockefeller-Gates-Flexner-
Simmons-A.M.A. gang were left in control of medical
education in the U.S. After Simmons retired, his worthy heir,
Morris Fishbein, became the "red herring" and "hatchet man"
for the gang, in much the same sense as President Truman
correctly pointed out that Alger Hiss was their “red herring"
in other activities.

The control of medical education gave the Rockefeller
interests the scope that power-mad Rev. Frederick Taylor
Gates sought. Through contrel of medical education, he and
his spensors gained control of the right to practise medicine
and the power of medical licensing. They could dictate by
whom medicine could be practised and how they must
practise it. Such broad powers over the health and lives of the
people, gained under the pretense of "philanthropy" and
"benevolence", mark the worst aspects of the most menacing
dictatorships. Tn Nazi Germany, under the inspiration and
guidance of Rockefeller henchman Alexis Carrel, such
powers were used to sterilize all enemies of the ruling gang
and to murder millions of humans.

The device through which these powers are enforced today,
is the power to dictate "good medical practise". This "good
medical practise” does not imply that it is good for the patient.
On the contrary, it may mean a death warrant for the patient.

One such instance 1s the use of radium in the treatment of
cancer despite the fact that it often causes the victim so treated
untold misery and that it frequently causes cancer. Another
instance is the use of testosterone, marketed under patents
which Rockefeller's Drug Trust controls, for the restoration of
sex vigor. Testosterone 1s synthesized at a nominal cost but is
sold at a retail price of almost one million dollars a pound. It
has caused so much cancer among its users, who are lured by
false advertising, that a warning against its use has been
issued by the Federal Government.

However, the doctor who follows the "good medical
practise” as dictated, is free to maim and


exterminate humans with absclute impunity and complete
freedom from reprisals, even though it can be proved that he
was aware in advance of the injury that would result from his
"good practise’. A case in point 1s the Lempert Fenestration
Operation.

The Gates-Rockefeller-A.M.A. Medical Trust not only has
the power to dictate how medicine shall be practised, and by
whom, but it also has acquired the power to prescribe what
drugs may be used in medical practise and to dictate that those
drugs must be used in "good practise". This has enabled the
conspirators to gain fabulous profits through their
international Drug Trust, which they have been building up
steadily since their organiza-ton of the I. G. Parbenindustrie.
Every supposed discovery of a new remedy by their
Rockefeller Institute or by agencies subsidized by the
Rockefeller Foundation, and every discovery made by inde-
pendent agencies of which they gain control, is promptly
exploited, with or without patenting, and sensationally
advertised in the best patent-medicine show tradition, hawked
to the public through the entire publicity and propaganda
machinery of the country, which they control, established as
"good practise" and foisted upon the medical profession and
the public as a "life saver", at outrageous prices that yield
them enormous profits.

The entry of the Rockefeller interests into the field of
medicine has materially retarded its advance. Except in the
direction of the development of new drugs which they sell the
public at exorbitant prices and tremendous profits through
concerns owned or controlled by them, and which are market-
ed with all the advertising that their forces can muster without
any regard as to whether they are injurious or beneficial,—
with this striking exception, the advances that have been made
in medicine in the past half century of their control, have
taken place largely in spite of the baneful influence the
Rockefeller "philanthropies” have exercised.

In the field of medical research, the Rockefellers and their
agents have created the usual, unhealthy atmosphere that
results from their predatory entry into any new field. Intensive
commercialization and monopoly have become the keynotes
of medicine and of medical research. Vested interests and
frank rackets have been created or enhanced in


these fields. Institutional and personal jealousies and
commercial rivalries have been intensified by the power
acquired by small cliques with the funds cf the Institute and
of other Rockefeller controlled "philanthropies” and allied
organizations.

This situation was well described in thinly masked fictional
form by Sinclair Lewis in his Arrow-smith, which centered
about a true story of Rockefeller Institute activities. A factual
exposure of the evil influence of the Rockefeller medical
"philanthropes" was published by Hans Zinnser, a brilliant
bacteriologist, researcher and scholar, in the February 1927
issue of Atlantic Monthly magazine.

The medical research cliques thus subsidized seek to
protect their reputations and jobs, as well as the prestige of
their institutions upon which beth are dependent, by setting up
a monopolistic control of research. Manuscripts of research
results are censcred by them te make sure that no researcher
can publish a discovery that will enhance his reputation to the
detriment or overshadowing of their own, or that will
jeopardize commercial interests with which they or their
sponsors are allied. For this purpose they have reestablished
medieval dogmatism in many medical fields and a monopoly
of medical education. They conspire to dictate "accepted
medical practice". They dictate the directions which research
shall take and block research by capable, independent werkers
whenever they can. They undertake to protect their own
mediocrity and ineptitude by the device of group medical
research which enables them to take for themselves the credit
for the work of others. Discoveries by independent research
workers, no matter how important, are suppressed, or stolen,
unless it serves their purposes to permit release or publication
of them.

Thus one of the most important medical discoveries of the
past two decades has been the discovery of a method of
successfully treating with small doses of a cheap mineral,
manganese, myasthenia gravis. The disease without the
treatment is hopelessly fatal. The discovery has been
completely barred from mention in medical literature and has
been barred from use to save the lives of the victims in
institutions and hospitals of the country, by the conspirators.
This is done primarily for political purposes. But it also
serves to protect the invest- 08


ment of the drug firm of Hoffman LaRoche, one of the
licensees of the Rockefeller controlled German Drug Trust, in
prostigmine, a costly drug which sometimes gives temporary
relief to the victims in the early stages of the disease but
hastens their death in the later stages. Medical literature
permits the mention of prostigmine only in a favorably
endorsed light, in the treatment of myasthenia gravis; and has
established this finally lethal drug as "accepted practice” in
the disease. Any mention of the cheap but effective
manganese in the treatment of myasthenia gravis is barred in
medical or popular literature despite the fact that the disease is
growing more widespread. The newspapers report tragically
needless deaths from it with increasing regularity, though
there is no reason for death from the disease in the present
state of medical knowledge.

Another instance of the endorsement as "accepted practice”
of an injurious but lucrative treatment, is the Lempert
Fenestration Operation for the supposed relief of deafness. In
a large proportion of its victims, the hearing is destroyed by
the inflammation of the inner ear caused by the injury of the
operation; and in no case does the hearing, even if slightly
improved temporarily in rare cases, survive the operation
more than a few years. In contrast with these ugly results of
operation, unoperated cases rarely lose their hearing
completely. In every case the sense of equilibrium is
destroyed by the operation and in many cases the victims are
unable to live a normal life or engage in their vocations
because of it; and often the sense of sight is impaired by the
operation. So much damage is done by the operation that it
can not be regarded as being anything short of mayhem. In
spite of this it has been given the status of "accepted practice”;
and numerous victims are maimed by it, because it serves the
commercial interests of certain medical politicians, thanks to
the monopolistic control of medicine and its publications
which "philanthropy" has helped to create. The victims are
lured by fake favorable publicity made possible by the
monopoly thus created.

As might be expected under the circumstances and from the
character of its sponsorship, few significant medical
discoveries have emanated from the Rockefeller Institute.
In an era that has been 109


signalized by vast strides in the chemistry of medicine, no
basic discoveries and few significant ones have emanated
from the Institute in spite of the vast interests of its sponsors
in the chemical and drug monopolies, so detrimental has been
the atmosphere of the Institute to medical discovery. Its chief
accomplishments have been political.

Many so-called "medical discoveries", however, have been
announced by the Rockefeller Institute. Among them have
been the supposed “discoveries” of the organisms that cause
infantile paralysis, smallpox, mumps, measles and yellow
fever, and the "discovery" of preventive vaccines for
pneumonia and yellow fever. All of these "discoveries" an-
nounced by the Institute have proved false. But most of them
have served definite and profitable purposes and have been
exploited commercially and intensively.

The Rockefeller Institute pretends to release its
"discoveries" for the "free use of mankind". But there have
come to light instances of its patenting discoveries and
licensing them to specific drug firms, more especially those
controlled by the Rockefeller interests. An example is the
dangerous arsenical drug, tryparsamide. This drug is so
poisonous that its use was virtually abandoned in the
treatment of syphilis, except for animal experimentation, by
its original discoverer, Paul Ehrlich, in favor of the relatively
non-peisonous drug salvarsan. Tryparsamide causes
permanent blindness or death in a high percentage of the
victims on whom it is used. Clinically its use was regarded as
justified only in hepeless cases of trypanosomiasis, or
sleeping sickness, before the discovery of a less poisonous
remedy

An improvement in the commercial methed of production
of tryparsamide was developed by one of the employees of the
Rockefeller Institute, which patented it. The Institute licensed
the patent to Merck & Co., one of the German chain of drug
concerns, which marketed it. At the time of the "social hy-
giene", anti-venereal campaign, launched in the early days of
the "New Deal", that was sponsored by the Rockefeller and
allied interests which control the chemical firms that produce
salvarsan and the other anti-venereal drugs, orders were issued
to the decters engaged in the treatment of venereal diseases in
clinics set up for the purpose, that a cer-

110


tain percentage of the victims had to be treated with the
blinding tryparsamide. The clinics of the Health Department
of the City of New York employed eye doctors to examine the
victims for the damage and blindness caused by the drug. This
was not done as a precautionary measure, because once the
blindness had set in, nothing was known to stop its progress. It
was done as a matter of commercial research on human
guinea pigs.

The Rockefeller Institute licensee, Merck & Co., sold much
tryparsamide for this purpose. Many victims of the treatment
were blinded by it. But, as far as can be determined, Merck &
Co. paid the Rockefeller interests the royalties due on the try-
parsamide patents. Inquiries directed to the Institute elicited
no answer from it on the royalties or the manner in which they
were paid. The Institute, unlike most foundations, publishes
no information on the stocks which it holds, so that it is not
possible to state if it or its sponsors hold Merck stock. At any
rate, it conferred on pathetic victims the "philanthropic" gift of
blindness.

How many of the fake "discoveries" have been patented and
exploited for the advantage of the Rockefeller Institute or its
sponsors, has not been revealed by them. It is a matter of
record, however, that the Lederle Laboratories, subsidiary of
Rockefeller controlled American Cyanamid Co., intensively
exploited the worthless "“anti-pneumoceccus” serum
"discovery" by the Institute's workers; and though it was
known in scientific circles to be worthless, enough of it was
unloaded on the sucker public, at exorbitant prices, to make
the Company and its stockholders a sizeable fortune.

Threugh similar exploitation of other products, Lederle has
become one of the most profitable divisions of American
Cyanamid, and one of the most profitable drug concerns in the
country. Within the past year the stock has more than doubled
in value on the basis of exploitation of drugs of supposed or
real value, to sell at approximately one hundred dollars a
share, and earnings have risen from a bit over $2.00 per share
on its 3,931,-000 shares of common stock in 1945 to an esti-
mated $12.00 per share in the current year. It required merely
a rumor of its marketing of a supposed preventive of infantile
paralysis to bring about a bull market in the stock, that raised
its

11]


price from a low of approximately $72 a share to more than
$131 per share in the past nine months, soc enormous have
been the profits in drugs and antibiotics.

The Rockefeller interests have steadily expanded their
holdings in the drug industry to the point at which they
control the major drug concerns in the world, and are rapidly
absorbing new ones by the process of merger. They have all
been integrated into a cartel that maintains an absolute mon-
opolistic control of the drug industry.

Control of the Food and Drug Administration, health
departments and other government agencies have given the
Rockefeller Drug Cartel a virtual monopoly of marketing of
drugs, especially of new drugs. They are free to exploit any
patent medicines they wish, in any manner they might choose
to use. Thus the anti-histaminic fraud which would have
landed any less powerful drug vendors in jail, they were able
to exploit as crudely as any of the most vicious quack patent
medicines of the past half century. The spurious claims made
were known to be false from the start. The brief, high-
pressure and cunning advertising campaign netted many
millions of the sucker public's money in profits; and only a
few of the victims died, fewer than are usually claimed by
these quack medicine campaigns. The profits of these newer
patent medicine monopolies are fabulous. Sulfanilamide
tablets that cost a fraction of a cent, for instance, were sold as
high as thirty cents a piece when they originally launched
them on the market with a publicity release on their use by a
Roosevelt. Generally the stunt of withholding the use of the
drug from the rank and file of the medical profession under
the guise of complying with F.D.A. regulations, together with
intensive newspaper publicity worth millions of dollars, in
which grossly exaggerated claims are made, for which they
pay their controlled press nothing, serves to whip up a
frenzied public demand. This permits them tò exact
exorbitant prices. In the case of cortisone, their overrated
remedy and panacea for arthritis, for instance, they have even
brought the government into the picture to give them millions
of dollars of free advertising for their product. They have
made it an excuse for another raid on the public treasury by
way of ECA and Point 4 grants of tens of millions of dollars
for

112


the supposed quest in Africa, which they are now beginning
to exploit for cil and other products, of raw materials for the
production of the drug, many of which are plentifully
available on this continent. Fabulous prices have been paid
for the drug by victims, as much as one hundred dollars a
dose; and the current list price is one dollar a tablet. The
direct and indirect profits to the Cartel from this patent-
medicine exploit has run into the hundreds of millions of
dollars. Also the political and oily business okjectives of the
Rockefeller Empire in Africa have been materially furthered
by it. In the end it has proved that cortisone may do more
harm than good for the victims of arthritis and other diseases,
after an initial boost in some cases.
The Rockefeller subsidized "authorities" who established
"good practise” in the use of sulfanilamide dictated such huge
dosage in order to increase the sales of the vendors, that they
poisoned their patients and in some cases killed them. These
"authorities" who alone were decreed to be competent to
observe the effects of the drug and advise on its use, made
enormous incomes from its exclusive use for a long period.
They also established as "good practise” the administration of
the large and poisonous doses. When it was brought to light
that the drug acts as a posion that interferes with the utiliza-
tion of the essential vitamin, nicotinic acid, and precipitates
pellagra in many victims, the discovery was barred from
publication in medical journals in the U. S. and abroad; and it
only appeared in the British scientific publication Nature be-
cause censorship in that direction had been overlooked. These
instances could be multiplied indefinitely.

Thus ruthless exploitation of the public by the Cartel has
become a fixed practise. Each year there are scheduled by it a
number of new "wonder drugs" to be launched as a device for
the merciless exploitation, mulcting and victimization of the
sick, the halt, the lame and the blind. Following cortisone, for
instance, came ACTH, an even more dangerous drug. When
administered to young children, as has been done in some
hospitals, it distorts the shape of the head and face by
interference with growth; and makes the child victim "moon-
faced". But these injuries are carefully hushed up by the Cartel
with cooperative, complacent and unscrupulous medical

113


bosses. The fabulous profits roll in to the tune of millions of
dollars. The Wall Street commentators seize upon each new
patent medicine of the Cartel to bull the stock of the company
that will market it. With the Cartel's control of the nation,
enormous profits, high dividends and stock splits inevitably
flow from the "benevolent" swindling of the nation's sick
through the "philanthropy" dominated Drug Trust. The profits
from it are even more fabulous than those that flow from oil.
This tale is told at length in YOUR LIFE IS THEIR TOY.

It is reasonable to expect that an institution operating with
the efficiency and spirit of the Rockefeller "philanthropies"
would not be so unbusinesslike as to cast to the winds the
large profits which devolve from drug and other products
touching on the interests of the Institute. Gates, as Rockefeller
discerned when he employed him, was indeed a "business
genius” of the rarest foresight and discernment.

The extensive Rockefeller chemical and drug interests
include American Home Products, Sterling Products,
Winthrop Chemical, American Cyanamid and its subsidiary
Lederle Laboratories, and many other companies. They are all
highly profitable enterprises. They also have very large
holdings in the German Dye Trust, the I. G. Farbenindustrie,
on the directorate of which the Standard Oil of New Jersey
was represented by its president, the late Walter Teagle. The
Chase National Bank, which is controlled by the Rockefellers,
has floated Dye Trust securities on the American market.
Dillon Read & Co., of which former Secretary of War, and
later Secretary of Defense James Forrestal was head, and
General Wm. H. Draper Jr., head of the staff of General
Lucius Clay, Military Governor of Occupied Germany, was an
executive, joined the Rockefeller interests in floating I. G.
Farbenindustrie securities in the American market.

Dillion Read & Co. floated the issue that financed the
building of the I. G. skyscraper office-building in Frankfort,
Germany, that by curious coincidence was the only building in
Frankfort the American and Allied forces were ordered not to
shell or bomb, and that came through the war practically
intact. It was the executive office of the 1. G. Farbenindustrie,
one of the principal factors in the military might of Germany
and her allies.

114


The legal representatives of the I. G. Farben-industrie in the
U.S. are Rockefeller's attorneys. One firm is Sullivan &
Cromwell, which is headed by kinsman John Foster Dulles,
Trustee of the Rockefeller Foundation, who to all effects and
purposes, is the State Department. Another is Milbank,
Tweed, Hope, Hadley & McCloy, which is headed by A. G.
Milbank, Chairman of the Board of the Borden Co. and
President of the Milbank Memorial Fund. It also numbers
among its partners John J. McCloy, Trustee of the Rockefeller
Foundation, son-in-law of August Zinnser who was a factor in
the German Dye Trust, and former Assistant Secretary of
War; his appointment to the post of U. 5. High Commissioner
in Germany signalized the end of the Berlin Blockade
simultaneously with the end of the dismantling of the I. G.
Farbenindustrie plants, for which the Berlin Blockade served
as an excuse, and it signalized the beginning of the return of
the I. G. and its Nazi henchmen to power.

Five hundred thousand shares of the American I. G. Corp.,
the direct American subsidiary of the German holding
company, I. G. Farbenindustrie, were issued in the name of
Walter Teagle at the time of its formation by a merger of
General Aniline works and the Agfa-Ansco Corp. When ques-
tioned by the Securities and Exchange Commission, Teagle
denied that the stock that had been issued in his name was his
stock. He refused to divulge the ownership of the stock by the
Rockefeller interests, saying that he did not know who was the
actual owner. In view of subsequent events there can be little
doubt that the Rockefeller interests were the principals in the
deal. It is a practice in which they regularly engage to hold
control of corporations through dummies and nominees.

The deal was a part of the gigantic conspiracy of the
German Dye Trust to recover property seized during World
War I by the Alien Property Custodian, A. Mitchell Palmer,
and of the preparation for throttling U.S. defenses in a future
war. Through the aid of Earl I. McClintock, an attorney in the
Alien Property Custodian's office, Sterling Products was
enabled to start the reacquisition of the sequestered property
for ultimate retransfer to the newly formed I. G.
Farbenindustrie. So pleased was Sterling Products president,
William E. Weiss, with McClintock's deal that he hired
McClintock at i15


many times the salary he had earned in the APC's office.

Sterling Products organized Winthrop Chemical Co. Inc.
and transferred half of the stock to the I. G. Farbenindustrie.
It, in turn, was given I. G. representation in the U.S. They also
brought the DuPont interests into the deal by selling them half
of the stock of the Bayer-Semesan Co. With the money thus
acquired, Sterling proceeded to buy up numerous nationally
advertised remedies, including Fletcher's Castoria, Phillips’
Milk of Magnesia, and others. With Louis L. Liggett, they
formed Drug Inc., a holding company for Sterling, Bayer,
Winthrop, United Drug Co. and the Rexall Liggett stores; and
then preceeded to buy up Bristol Myers, makers of Sal
Hepatica; Vicks Chemical Co.; Edward J. Noble's Life Savers
Inc. and others. Numerous other chemical and drug firms were
absorbed steadily over the years until the Cartel gained control
of the entire fabulously rich and profitable drug and chemical
industry of the nation.

Through Walter Teagle, the Rockefeller interests played a
key role in building the I. G. Farbenindustrie and the Dye
Trust. It was he who paved the way for the entente between I.
G. and the resistive DuPont interests. In 1930, Dr. Bosch of
the I. G. wrete Teagle to thank him for his assistance, as
follows:

" . the deadlock in the negotiations between

duPont and I. G. has now been overcome...

thanks to your personal interest.”


As a matter of record, Rockefeller's Standard Oil Co. of
New Jersey had sat in at the birth of the 1. G. Farbenindustrie
in 1926. It then insured the combine of the success of their
conspiracy by entering into an agreement with them as
partners, and for an exchange of patents. This was stated in a
letter by Frank A. Howard, head of the Standard Oil De-
velopment Co., as follows:

"The I. G. may be said to be our general partner in the

chemical business as to its developments arising during the

period beginning in 1929 and expiring in 1947."

(Ambruster, Treason's Peace, p. 52)

The Cartel divided the chemical and drug market of the


world amongst themselves and conspired to maintain prices
that yielded them fabulous profits.
116


Later they took over control of the Federal Food and Drug
Administration, as well as local food and drug agencies,
through their control of the governments and political
machines, as well as "by bribery and corruption of the officers
of those agencies. For example, Dr. Theodore G. Klumpp was
head of the Federal Food & Drug Administration in 1940, at
the time that Winthrop Chemical Co. shipped 400, 000 tablets
labelled as "sulfathiazole", that were found later to contain 5
grains of luminal each. They are known to have killed by
poisoning 17 victims in various parts of the country. Winthrop
Chemical Co. failed to notify the public immediately of the
fatally poisonous character of the pills. Instead, the Company,
with the aid or approval of the Council on Pharmacy and
Chemistry of the American Medical Association and of
intensive advertising in the Journal of the American Medical
Association, ruthlessly pushed the sale of the "sulfathiazole"
pills, thus increasing the number of fatalities. Dr. Klumpp, as
Food and Drug Administrator, was very helpful to Winthrop
Chemical Co. and very sympathetic toward them. Exercising
his bureaucratic powers as head of that agency, he refrained
from prosecution for the deaths, helped hush up the matter and
merely revoked Winthrop's license to ship the "sulfathiazole"
for three months, on April 22, 1941, after it had glutted the
market with the product and overstocked the trade with it. The
suspension of shipment for three months was an utterly
meaningless gesture. Shortly thereafter, Dr. Klumpp became
president of Winthrop Chemical at many times the salary that
he had received from the Government. (Treason's Peace, p.23}

Since no real penalty had been imposed on the Winthrop
Chemical Co. to induce it to exercise rudimentary caution to
protect the lives of American "peasants", it is not surprising
that the Company has made no effective effort to avoid recur-
rence of such fatal incidents, but has depended upon the
political control of its bosses and its ability to "Induce" public
officials to overlook its criminal negligence and to suppress
publicity with regard to it in the press. On June 15,1951,
physicians throughout the country received the following
telegram from Winthrop-Stearns Inc., which is the name
adopted by it since it has merged with Stearns, reading as
follows:

117


"Until further notice, discontinue using sulfamy-lon
hydrochloride solution one percent. Contamination with
bacillus pyecyaneus found in some bottles. Advise patients
for whom you prescribed to discontinue use and discard
unused portions. Return for credit bottles of one percent you
may have. All other forms of sulfamylon safe to use.
Winthrop-Stearns Inc.”

The story is entirely different when the manufacturer or
marketer of a remedy is not a member of the Trust. The same
Dr. Klumpp who saw no sericus violation of the law or
infraction of the regulations and arbitrary and dictatorial
ukases of the Food & Drug Administration by the Win-throp
Chemical Co., which subsequently provided him with a high
salaried job, when it killed off humans with its gross
negligence, expressed grave concern when the Iodebor Co.
sought to label its product Iodine and Boric Acid Powder, as it
is labelled in Johns Hopkins Hospital Formulary. The powder,
which permits the use of finely dispersed iodine on even the
most delicate tissues such as the ear and the urethra, and is an
ideal and harmless antiseptic and prophylactic, contains 1%
iodine and 99% anhydrated boric acid, as stated on the label.
But Dr. Klumpp was gravely concerned with what he called
the "misrepresentation" involved in the correct labeling of the
product. He put every impediment in the way ofits marketing.
lodobor Co. is not controlled by the Rockefeller interests and
is net a part of the Drug Trust.

Dr. Louis Koch has undertaken to provide the profession
with glyoxylide which, in the author's knowledge and
experience, has never done anyone any harm or killed anyone.
Many competent physicians state that they have obtained
results with its use in conditions such as carcinoma, which had
been pronounced to be hopeless. Certainly no humane
individual would wish to deprive the victim of such a pathetic
condition as hopeless cancer, of any ray of hope or possbility
of relief. But the gang which we are describing are neither
humane ner human. They do not regard Koch's remedy as
"rational". They have undertaken to prosecute and persecute
mercilessly Koch and all who use this harmless remedy, as
has been pointed out rightly by Dr. G. B. Winrod, in
preference to the remedies which Reverend Frederick Taylor
Gates, his Rocke-

118


feller sponsors and their heirs and associates do regard as
"rational", and which do yield them a profit, which is far more
important.

The Food & Drug Administration was converted by the
Drug Trust into a device that would leave them free to engage
in any type of skulduggery with impunity, but would enable
them to drive competitors out of business by hampering
regulations and excessive expense involved in compliance
with arbitrary rulings and harassments. Thus Winthrop
Chemical Co. was permitted to market sulfathiazole in spite of
the fact that it is a harmful drug that causes the formation of
kidney stones in a large proportion of patients that take it. But
many completely harmless, but useful, preparations that are
produced by less powerful and wealthy firms are completely
barred from sale by the arbitrary rulings of the
Administration. The preducts of the Drug Trust, no matter
how worthless and injurious they may be, invariably get by;
and many of them, such as cortisone, are actually boosted by
the Government. One of the officers of Schering Co., an
affiliate of the Drug Trust, openly has stated that the
maintenance of a drug monopoly is one of the objectives of
the Food & Drug Administration.

The Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey and the I.G. entered into
numerous agreements and formed the Joint American Study
Co. (called Jasco Inc.}. This later was proved to be nothing
less than a conspiracy to paralyze the rearmament and
defenses of the U.S. Dr. A. Mitchell Palmer, Alien Property
Custedian, had warned the nation after World War l: "The
next war... will be a chemists’ war, and the country which
has the best-developed dye and chemical industry is the
country which is going to come out on top." (Treason's Peace,


p. 36)


As will be related presently, the Rockefeller-Standard Oil -
I. G. conspiracy was not only instrumental in precipitating
World War II, but also undermined our national security and
threatened us with defeat by denying the U.S. the use of
synthetic rubber patents, and in other ways. In the first year of
World War II, a series of criminal and civil actions for
treasonous conspiracy with the I. G. Far-benindustrie were
started by Assistant Attorney General Thurman Arnold
against Rockefeller's Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey,
especially in con-

119


nection with the direly needed synthetic rubber and chemical
bases for munitions. Also, action was instituted against
Sterling Products in connection with the use of its
organization in South America, where Nelson Rockefeller was
active as Co-Ordin-ator of Hemispheric Defense and the
brother of Thomas Corcoran, high ranking Harvard New
Dealer, represented it, for espionage and propo-ganda for
Germany. The offenders pleaded nolo contendere, which was
in reality an acknowledgement of guilt. The offenders were
given small fines, and merely ordered to mend their ways. The
penalties were surprisingly light in view of the fact that the
offenses constituted treason in wartime, for which the usual
penalty is death. It later was stated that the Rockefeller
interests had acquiesced in these actions when the treasonous
conspiracy became outrageously obvious and violent public
reactions threatened, — in order to protect themselves and
their fellow conspirators. It appears quite clear now that their
old deal with I. G. Farbenindustrie still prevails and is being
catried out by their agent and attorney, High Commissioner
John Jay McCloy.

It is interesting to note in ths connection that the law firm
of John Foster Dulles and Allen Dulles, Sullivan & Cromwell,
that is closely identified with the Rockefeller-I. G. interests
and our Government, defended a criminal indictment of
Ernest K. Hal-bach, one of the principals of the I. G. set-up in
this country.

The I. G. situation is described in Howard Ambrus-tet's
book, Treason's Peace, published by the Beech-hurst Press in
1947, an excellent book that should be read by every
American.

This entire Rockefeller-Standard Oil-I. G. situation was
aptly characterized by Senator Harry Shippe Truman, as
chairman of the Senate Investigating Committee, as
"TREASON". He said, correctly :

"YES IT IS TREASON.

"YOU CAN NOT TRANSLATE IT ANY OTHER

WAY." And the same group has provided oil, munitions
and other material of war to the Russian and Chinese
Communists and the North Koreans, practically entirely at the
expense of the U.S. taxpayer.

IS THAT ANY LESS TREASON?

These are some of the outgrowths of Rockefeller 120


la T


Institute's "philanthropies".

Public suspicion anent the Rockefellers was further allayed
by establishment of the Rockefeller Sanitary Commission
devoted to mass medicine—to spectacular cooperation with
local health departments in a campaign on hookworm
infestation, intended to demonstrate forcibly that Rockefeller's
heart bled for the "Forgotten Man". The cost of this campaign
was almost entirely borne by the victims, through the support
of their local health departments. But the publicity released
gave the Rockefellers credit for beneficence and a touching
concern in the health and welfare of collaborator Walter Hines
Page's "Forgotten Man". At the same time, it gave the
Rockefeller interests entry inte control of the health
departments of the various sections of the country that in due
time was developed into complete and absolute control of all
of them from the Public Health Service of the U.S. Treasury
Department to those of cities, towns, counties and, ultimately,
of the smallest villages.

The control of health departments thus engineered later
proved extremely profitable to the Rockefeller interests in
many directions. For instance, it enabled them to gain a virtual
monopoly of the production and distribution of milk through-
out the nation, through health-department regulation of that
industry, which was engineered by them on the pretense of
protecting the public's health. Steadily, through decades, they
drove independent milk distributors out of business by various
devices, such as pasteurization, manipulation of milk sheds by
their puppet health commissioners and dishonest and
oppressive "regulation", and by numerous other devious
devices. They are able, consequently, to indoctrinate the
public, at its own expense, with the idea that milk is a perfect
food and an absolutely essential element of the diet, which it
is not. They progressively adulterated the milk distributed to
the public until the bulk of it is, partly or whelly, a synthetic
concoction, such as "homogenized" milk, of types that had
previously been barred from sale for human consumption. Of
the adulteration of milk, one can readily convince oneself by
placing a bottle of milk on the window sill for a week. In
olden days the milk would turn sour and curdle; but today it
merely becomes putrid, slimy and stringy. The price of the
adulterated milk was i2]


progressively raised from an average of six cents a quart for
real milk to an average of twenty-two cents a quart for
watered, synthetic and adulterated milk.

Far from being a source of health and strength, milk has
become a licensed spreader of disease and death. Milk
transmits more diseases than any other one beverage or food.
It carries tuberculosis, scarlet fever, such streptococcus
infections as septic sore throat and acute kidney and heart
disease, undulant fever, infantile paralysis and many other
deadly diseases. Milk can be one of the most dangerous
substances we put into our stomachs. Needless and excessive
consumption of milk has been correlated to childhood ills, to
hardening of the arteries, to premature senility and te cancer.
But these facts have been suppressed and the public has been
urged through official channels to drink ever more milk "for
their health”, in order to boost further the profits of the Milk
Trust. (YOUR LIFE IS THEIR TOY, Rackets Social Service
& Medical, pp. 93-120, Chedney Press, 1940)

Corruption of public health officers on a wholesale scale
has been resorted to in connection with Milk Trust activities.
Henry Wallace, was the first to launch a consistent attack on
the milk cartel, in the Wallace Farmer, and named it the Milk
Trust. He applied that name to the undercover combination
between Borden Co. and National Dairy Products Co., that
was later exposed in reports of the Department of Agriculture,
but kept out of the press. The reports indicate that though the
two companies pretend to be competing, they are actually
working in concert, as a cartel. The Borden Co. is directly
controlled by the Chase National Bank and the Rockefeller
interests represented by the Miulbanks. National Dairy
Products 1s controlled by the Rockefellers, through Lehman
Brothers.

Henry Wallace was silenced by an appointment as
Secretary of Agriculture in Roosevelt's Cabinet; and he was
later made Secretary of Commerce and Vice President. When
denied the Vice-Presidential nomination in 1944, he was
given the job of editor of the New Republic, with a salary
reported to be $75,000 a year, a greater sum than the magazine
ever earned and largely paid by Nelson Rockefeller. Though
Wallace has been closely identified with the Rockefellers,
there is no published record

122


of the extent to which they backed his Progressive Party as a
phase of the activities of their Rockefeller-Soviet Axis.

Control of the public-health activities of the nation was
readily maneuvered by the Rockefeller interests by
subsidizing the activities of the U.S. Public Health
Association, the trade organization of the public-health
officers of the country. Interlocking directorates were
established from the start between that organization, through
its officers (including as a rule the Health Commissioner of
New York City}, and one or another of the Rockefeller
"philanthropies". Subsidies for these activities were arranged
through various dominated organizations and foundations.
Thus the Milbank Foundation, headed by Jeremiah Milbank
and his son A. G. Mil-bank, a Rockefeller attorney and agent,
and financed by 3% of the Borden (Milk} Co. stock,
subsidized "public health" activities. The policyholders’
moneys of controlled insurance companies, especially the
Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, were diverted into
these channels of corruption.

Domination of official health agencies also implies control
of the food and drug industries which they "regulate", and of
the enormous profits which they yield. Such control makes
possible the sale, with impunity, of inferior products or, even,
of products that are actually deleterious to health and life, but
yield extraordinarily large profits. For instance, mineral cil, a
product of petroleum oil, was marketed by a subsidiary of the
Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey, as a remedy for constipation.
In many cases it caused chronic malnutrition by robbing the
body of fat-soluble vitamins. It was sold also as an ingredient
of nose drops, and in many cases, caused lung abscesses. But
the profits were enormous.

Far larger than the direct profits derived from domestic
"health" activities and those gained in the international field
through the International Health Commission, that was set up
later to extend these activities abroad, were the indirect
benefits derived from the good-will created by the pretense of
benevolence, and by abuse of the powers vested in the public
agencies thus taken over. The story has often been told how
Colombia was blackmailed into permitting Standard Oil to
develop the Barco concession by the establishment by the
U.S. Public Health Service of a prolonged quarantine of
Colom- 13


bian shipping for yellow fever.

The incubation period of yellow fever is about six days and
the length of the voyage from Colombia generally was about
two weeks. This meant that if anyone on board the vessels had
been exposed to yellow fever, he would have developed the
disease before coming into port and there was no justification
for quarantining the vessels. Nevertheless, the vessels were
quarantined for prolonged periods on their arrival at American
ports. Perishable cargoes spoiled during the quarantine,
threatening the Colombian merchants with ruin. This abuse of
the powers of the U.S. Public Health Service was employed to
force the Colombian government to relax its prohibition of
development of the concession by Standard Oil interests. The
Rockefeller Institute announced falsely at this juncture that its
Hideyo Noguchi had discovered the cause, remedy and
preventive of yellow fever. And the International Health
Commission offered to Colombia the services of Noguchi in
clearing up the yellow fever and lifting the unwarranted
quarantine, with the implication that unless the Standard Oil
interests had their way, the quarantine would not be lifted. The
Colombian government was forced, in the interest of its
merchants and its trade, to accede to this international
blackmail. The Standard Oil Co. shared the concession with
Gulf Oil Co., controlled by Andrew Mellon who, as U.S.
Secretary of the Treasury, controlled the U.S. Public Health
Service. Yellow fever is still endemic in Colombia, just as it
was before the quarantine was imposed. But there is now no
quarantine because the Rockefeller interests have their way in
Colombia. The profits to the Rockefeller Empire of
international "philanthropy" are great. The world cannot be
blamed for mistaking Reckefeller imperialism for American
imperialism.


124


CHAPTER VII
ROCKEFELLER'S GENERAL EDUCATION
BOARD


Red Totalitarian Thought Contrel For Peasants


".. We work our own good will upon a grateful and
responsive rural folk."— Rockefeller-Gates Occasional Letter
No. 1 Rockefeller's "educational philanthropies” were an
outgrowth of Baptist missionary zeal. To educate Negro co-
religionists, the Baptists had organized the Southern
Education Board. In a spirit of religious rivalry, they had
also undertaken to build the University of Chicago.
Reverend Strong, Rockefeller's in-law, made this religious
educational rivalry quite clear in a memorandum to John D.
Sr. cited by Nevins (JDR, v. 2, p. 203):

"'Now where are we Baptists? Strong wrote. 'We have no
university at all. . we have to send our sons to other
universities . . . Against Harvard's 1500, or Yale's 1200
students, our largest number is 300 at Brown. The only
approach to professional instruction is our theological semin-
aries, and the largest of these numbers no more than 50 well-
prepared students . . . while Union (Theological Seminary)
and Princeton have their 150 each". At about the same time,
Reverend Strong had admonished his in-law that he would be
wise to act to allay public resentment against his brigandage
by courting public opinion with philanthropies, if he desired to
overcome the handicaps to his enterprises arising from the ill
repute his ruthlessness had created. He missed no opportunity
to urge him te give his support te the creation of a college for
Baptist missionary propaganda that would engage in a crusade
to get folks to think as Baptists wished them to think.
Rockefeller's endowment of the University of Chicago
crowned his efforts with a measure of success. But it 1s
doubtful that the divine would be very happy to witness the
present status of the university he inspired. It is a hotbed of
anti-religious Communist propaganda that has even
overwhelmed his church.

Rockefeller was too pragmatic to be content, however, with
mere missionary zeal for the profit of the church. Personal
profits and benefits have a i25


stronger appeal to a person of his acquisitive disposition. His
experience with the influencing of public opinion, that he had
been compelled to resort to on more than one occasion in
connection with his Standard Oil activities, could not have
failed to impress him with the value of molding public
opinion. No doubt, the waste of effort involved in the
repetition of isolated campaigns irked a man of his
methodical, systematic thrift. It is inconceivable that he could
fail to see the economy and the high ultimate return of
permanently melding public opinion as he wished it molded,
through domination of education that would make it possible
to convert that process to thought contrel that would be
entirely imperceptible te both its agents and its subjects. It
would be permanent, would never have to be repeated
wastefully, and would insure him of domination of the
indoctrinated by their own subconscious reactions, for the rest
of their lives.

After a dinner at his home on West Fifty-fourth Street, New
York City, attended by John D. Rockefeller Jr., banker Morris
K. Jesup, Wanamaker partner Robert C. Ogden, Baptist pastor
J. L. M. Curry, banker George Foster Peabody, Walter Hines
Page, the inventor of Roosevelt's "The Forgotten Man",
William H. Baldwin, Albert Shaw, Dr. Wallace Buttrick,
Johns Hopkins U. President, Daniel Coit Gilman and attorney
Edward M. Shepard, John D. Sr. launched the General
Education Board, with an offer of a million dollars over a
period of ten years for the "noble" purpose of influencing all
education as desired, "without regard to sex, race or creed".
The assembled worthies leaped to the bait. Rockefeller
acquired an educational front imbued with the odor of
religion, that would be regarded as above suspicion. And it
was all his own, to be used entirely for his purposes. For
contrary to his ' ‘philanthropic principles" and his past prac-
tises, Rockefeller did not require, seek or permit the
participation of others in this enterprise.

Rockefeller placed his "wonderful businessman", Reverend
Frederick Taylor Gates, in charge of this new enterprise.
Boldly they announced its true purpose at the very start, in
Occasional Letter No. 1 of the General Education Board
already quoted.

The letter is a frank and open statement of the basic
totalitarian conspiracy that underlies all of the Rockefeller

"philanthropies". Their avowed


scheme is to gain the confidence of the people by a show of
sham "benevolence" and then, when they "yield themselves
with perfect docility to our molding hands," to "work our own
good will upen" them through a Reckefeller dictatorship. In
this conspiracy they are largely succeeding. And their "good
will” has proved to be the "will for conquest" that has cost
tens of thousands of "peasants" lives. The letter is about as
open an expression of contempt of the intelligence of the
citizenry (the "peasants", they call them} as can be made.
Their cunning grasp and contempt of human nature did not
fail them. There were some few protests from alert citizens
and on the floor of Congress. But in the main, they were
lauded for their action, by the usual complement of fools and
traitors.

The ambitious character of the scheme is revealed by what
Nevins (JDR, v. 2, p. 485) terms the "extraordinary charter"
that Shepard drew up, and that Rockefeller's henchman and
in-law Senator Nelson Aldrich, promptly rushed through
Congress. It is a perpetual charter that gives authority to held
limitless capital and to engage anywhere in the U.S., in any
activities whatsoever that can be construed as remotely
resembling education. Since the funds contributed te its
endowment and the income thereon are tax-exempt, the
moneys involved are actually public funds. But control of
them 1s effectively held by the Rockefellers. It was a far more
ideal propaganda machine than those provided at a later date
by Rockefeller, through Ivy Lee, his publicity man, for either
Stalin or Hitler. Nevins, a Rockefeller spokesman, states:

"Thus was founded an organization which shortly
became THE MOST POWERFUL EDUCATIONAL
FOUNDATION IN THE WORLD.” The Rockefeller interests
proceeded cautiously, as usual, put their their best foot
forward and bided their time. Their initial activities were
"window-dressing"—agricultural education, a fight on the
boll weevil that was destroying the cotton crop in the South,
and medical education activities—which allayed and disarmed
public suspicion. The character and profits of the forays into
the field of medical education have been described in
connection with the Rockefeller Institute. The only error that
the "planners" made in their estimate of the mentality and
pervertibility of the American "peasant"

127


was in the imposition of Prohibition, for which the
Rockefellers acknowledge their responsibility in their
publicity by Morris in the Saturday Evening Post of January
6, 1951 (p.36). After a decade and a halt, they bowed to
public opinien and agreed to a revocation of the Volstead Act.
But their only error sensed by the “peasants” proved highly
profitable to them; and even in defeat, it served to gain them
new victories through their New Deal program.

The Annual Report Of The General Education Board,
1928-1929, in a historic review of its activities makes clear
the calculated deliberate approach adopted. It divides the
development of the activities into three periods:

First period, 1902-1919, during which the Board
appropriated more than $15,000,000, mostly for increases
of the endowments of 120 colleges.

Second period, 1919-1924, during which it contributed
over $50,000,000 for increasing teachers’ salaries.

Third period, “from 1924, during which it has undertaken to
influence the character of scholarship and teaching. The
extent of dissembling and oversimplification of this
description of its activities is evident from contemporaneous
comments.

At the start, Rockefeller entered into an entente with
Andrew Carnegie to merge their "philanthropes". This gave
Rockefeller effective control of the Carnegie Foundation For
The Advancement Of Teaching, the most potent influence of
which on teaching and teachers at university and college
levels was exercised by its Retiring Allowances (for
professors) and (Teacher} Widows' Pensions. This "security"
scheme was highly effective in insuring that the staffs taught
what was to the liking of the Carnegie-Rockefeller interests,
and that any exercise of "academic freedom” would conform
with their wishes.

On January 26, 1917, Senator Kenyon of lowa reported that
Rockefeller agents were examining the curricula of colleges
that sought the aid of the Board; and that the Board refused
aid unless the applicant colleges made their courses comply
with the Board's dictates.

The General Education Board also dictated ap-128


pointments to the faculties of the colleges, packing them with
their agents and henchmen, in preparation for future plans. Dr.
W. J. Spillman, former chief of the Federal Farm Management
Bureau of the Department of Agriculture, stated in a letter to
the New York Globe of March 28, 1919:

"Nine years ago I was approached by an agent of Mr.
Rockefeller with the statement that his cbject in establishing
the General Education Board was to gain control of the
educational institutions of the country so that all men
employed in them might be ‘right’. I was then informed that
the Board has been successful with the smaller
institutions but that the large institutions had refused te accept
the Rockefeller money with strings tied to it. My information
said that Mr. Rockefeller was going to add $100,000,000 to
the Foundation for the express purpose of forcing his money
into the big institutions." This was exactly what might be
expected from the statement of ckjectives in Occasional Letter
No. 1 queted above. The avowed objective of subverting the
nation through its educational system and establishing a "new
social order", required that the teaching staffs of its schools
should enter into the conspiracy, wittingly or unwittingly. _ It
made the chief requisite for obtaining or holding a teaching
position, in any part of the educational system that was
brought under their centrel, intellectual prostitution and
adherence to subversive totalitarian doctrines that matched the
objective of the Board.

At an early date, the Board began tampering with the public
school system and the teachers colleges, experimenting to
determine how best te succeed in indoctrinating future
generations. It gave by 1929, $500,000 to the School of
Education at Harvard, $1,000,000 to Teachers College of
Columbia University, and $3, 177, 231.43 to George Peabody
College for Teachers, in addition to many other smaller grants.
To Lincoln School, of Teachers College, Columbia
University, for John Dewey's Marxist experiment in youthful
libertinism that goes by the name of Progressive Education,
was given $5,923,747.62; and it was there that Laurance,
Nelson, Winthrop and David Rockefeller were sent for
training. As in the case of all the Rockefeller "philanthropies,"
the GEB and its grantees were made to serve the interests of
the Rockefeller Em- 129


pire. When its plans of subversion were intensified after the
Rockefeller Empire had entered into its entente with
Communist Russia, the educational system of the country,
which by then had come largely, if not completely, under its
control, was converted to a huge "school for subversion”. For
this reason the proportion of exposed and convicted traitors is
higher among the educated than among the uneducated; and it
increases with the extent of education. After the 1926
Rockefeller-Soviet deal, the number of Communists and
fellow travelers among the professors and teachers rose by
leaps and bounds. Before a decade had elapsed, adherence to
Marxism or membership in the Communist Party became a
prerequisite for teaching appointments or for promotion in a
large percentage of the schools, colleges and universities of
the country, not merely in the "social sciences", but in all
fields. Rockefeller, and dominated foundation, subsidy and
endowment had a direct bearing on the degree of Communist
infiltration; the greater the grant, the higher was the
proportion ‘of Communist faculty members. Special chairs and
positions were created by the Rockefeller Foundation for
notorious Red propagandists, as in the case of Hans Eisler at
the New Scheel for Social Research, of Dr. Henry Sie-gerist
and Owen Lattimore, (Amerasia editor) at Johns Hopkins
University, Harlow Shapley and Harold Laski at Harvard,
William W. Lockwood, (Amerasia editor) at Princeton, and
Rexford Tug-well and Harold Clayton Urey at Columbia and
the University of Chicago, respectively.

Control of "social sciences" and their teachings
automatically implies contrel of labor union activities. For
though teachers of economics and labor relations, and of law,
serve as fronts and mouthpieces for the labor unions that
employ them, they also provide the pseudo-scientific
doctrines and grounds for their demands. The "social science”
program has served the Rockefeller Empire well in the
regimentation of workers.

The plight of the  patrictic professor—who rejects
subversive doctrines and refuses to teach them, or to turn
traitor and subvert his students—is not an enviable one in the
Rockefeller-dominated educational system. This is well
portrayed by Professor Harry Elmer Barnes, whe had been
sympathetic to their "liberalism," in his privately printed pam-

130


phlet, The Struggle Against The Historical Blackout, as
follows:
"A state of abject terror and intimidation

exists among the majority of professional

American historians whose views accord with

the facts on the question of responsibility for the

second World War." (p.9
Professor Charles Austin Beard, long heralded
as a “liberal” historian, points to the responsibility
of the Rockefellers for this condition by reference
to the report of the Rockefeller Foundation of 1946,
as follows:

"The Rockefeller Foundation . . . intend to prevent, if they
can, a repetition of what they call in the vernacular ‘the
debunking’ journalistic campaign following World War I."
(id.} The lot of professors and teachers who shifted from a
defense of American institutions and the Constitution to
advecacy of Marxism, Communism and other forms of
totalitarianism in time to serve the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis
has been far happier. They are heralded as paragons of
wisdom and learning and as leaders who are to be followed.
Their prior Americanism is forgiven in proportion to the
number of Communist and Communist front organizations
they join; and they take their places at the sides of those who
have adhered to the Communist Party “line” from the start.
Their totalitarianism wins them rapid advancement and lucra-
tive Government posts as “Brain Trusters", "advisers",
bureaucrats, diplomats and any other posts where they can
serve as pawns of the Rockefeller Empire. The "social
scientists" among them are given employment as economists
and statisticians at high salaries in labor unions, to serve as
"front" men and "mouthpieces" for racketeering and sub-
versive labor leaders. But they must be willing to let the labor
leaders dictate or censor their writings and teachings.
Unscrupulously, these same umon-employed "economists"
also serve as “neutral” arbitrators of labor disputes, often in
cases involving the very unions that employ them. In any
event, their decisions must outrageously favor the unions
without fail and without regard to honesty, or else they lose
their union position and are placed on a blacklist, never to be
so employed again. If they play ball with the subversive and
totalitarian elements, and serve the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis
faith- 31


fully, their futures are assured and they are always
provided for on a liberal, if not lavish, scale.

Zechariah Chafee Jr., professor of law at Harvard, made the
error of writing, as a young instructor, an excellent, scholarly
and American book entitled Freedom of Speech, published in
1920. But by 1927 he had mounted the Rockefeller Red band-
wagon in the Communist-inspired Sacco Vanzetti affair, with
Professor Felix Frankfurter. And he has remained on the pro-
Communist side of the fence. He advanced rapidly to
professorship and now represents the U.S. at the UN, after
having served as vice-chairman of the "Commission on
Freedom of the Press", of which more will be related. He is
engaged in writing the section of the UN Constitution on the
press that proposes to abridge for the press the Bill of Rights
that he had defended so wisely and eloquently in his youth.
For his distinguished services to the Rockefeller Empire, he
has been accorded membership in the Council on Foreign
Relations, the Foreign Office of that Empire, and the
Rockefeller-dominated invisible world government. Professor
Chafee prospered. From the viewpoint of the Rockefeller
interests and the GEB, his about-face had made him "right"
for the furtherance of their totalitarian and pro-Soviet plans.

As the university faculties about the country were packed
with totalitarian professors of all varieties, it became
increasingly difficult for students whe refused to accept
Marxism, that came to be regarded as synonymous with
"liberalism", either to secure admission to colleges and
universities, or to get degrees.

Columbia University, including its Teachers College, was
particularly, directly and heavily subsidized and dominated by
the Rockefeller interests because of the education of the
Rockefeller youngsters at the "experimental" Lincoln School,
its subsidiary. The relations between the Rockefellers and
Columbia University have been very close. Rockefeller Center
is built upon land in part given to Columbia by the
Rockefellers and then leased back by them from the
University for the purpose of avoiding the payment of taxes.
Through the General Education Board, they have dictated Col-
umbia's faculty, policies and curricula. Under their direction
and that of their agents, the faculties


of philosophy and "social sciences" and of Teachers College have
become completely Marxist. It is questionable whether there is a
single member of the faculty who does not subscribe to some form
of totalitarianism that is compatible with the Rockefeller okjectives


stated in the Occasional Letter No.
policy and okjective of all the Roc


1 cited above, that states the
kefeller “philanthropies". The


majority of the members of the faculty are Marxists, and a large


number of them are frankly Communi
the members of the Columbia facul
various committees investigating


sts. The following are some of
ties who have been cited by
un-American activities for


membership in Communist and Communist front organizations, and


the number of organizations with wh
(Red-Ucator, National Council for A
Lane, New York City) :

Philosophy And “Social Sciences"


ich they have been connected
merican Education, 1 Maiden


Angell, James W. 3 Baker, Elizabeth F. 9
Brissenden, Paul F. & Burns, Eveline M. 3
Edel, Abraham 6 Edman, Irwin 4
Frazier, E. Franklin 14 Friess, Horace L. 1
Klein, Philip 11 Kraus, Michael 1
Lamont, Corliss 56 Lindeman, Eduard C. 30
Lindsay, Samuel M. 3 Lynd, Robert S. 27
Maclver, Robert M. 5 Merton, Robert K. 1
Nagel, Ernest 1 Rautenstrauch, W. 62
Smith, J. Russell 3 Stanfield, Boris 1
Stern, Bernard J. 49 Tead, Ordway 4
Weltfish, Gene 32
Education

Brunner, Edmund deS.8 Rugg, Harold 2
Childs, John L. 2 Bryson, Lyman 5
Dewey, John 15 Counts, George S. 20
Hartmann, George W. 2 Goodsell, Willystine 9
Kilpatrick, W. H. 11 Hobbs, Nicholas 1

Osborne, Emest G. 1
Law
Gellhorn, Walter 11 Jessup, Philip C. 4
Llewellyn, Karl N. 1 Michael, Jerome


4
Religion Niebuhr, Reinhold 19 Van


Dusen, Henry P. 1
Miscellaneous


Baehr, Dr. George 4 Behre, Charles H. Jr. 4

Barth, Lester G. 3. Boas, Franz 17
Brewster, Dorothy 38 Demerec, M. 3
Dobzhansky, T. 1 Dunn, Leslie C. 24


133


Ellard, Roscoe B. 1 Emerson, Haven 1]
Grundfest, Harry 16 Kleinberg, Otte 7
Kolchin, Ellis 1 Muzzey, David S. 3
Mocre, Douglas 4 Nevins, Allan l
Robinson, Geroid T. 3 Rosebury, Theodor 8
Saerchinger, Cesar 5 Sargent, 5. Stanfield 3
Schilt, Jan 1 Shotwell, James T. 7
Simmons, Ernest J. 6 Van Doren, Mark 19
Van Metre, T. W. 1 Vernadsky, George 2
Officers
Carman, Dean, H. J. 4 Hacker, Dir. L. M. 3


This list contains only a small fraction of the Columbia staff
who are totalitarian in their views, influence or teachings. But
it contains much that illustrates the nature of the deliberate
influence that Rockefeller's GEB has exerted on the educa-
tional system of the nation and the world. This influence has
been accentuated considerably since the Rockefeller interests
arrived at an entente with Stalin, and has shifted entirely in the
direction of that form of Marxism that suits the purposes of
the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis, most aptly designated as
Rockefellerism.

It has been the consistent practise of the G.E.B. to dictate
faculty appointments as one of the conditions for making
requested grants. Deliberate selection of militant Marxists for
college posts is clearly indicated by the appointment of Paul
F. Brissenden to an assistant professorship at Columbia.
Brissenden had earned a reputation as a militant left-wing
labor agitator long before his Columbia appointment, in
connection with his activities as special agent cf the U.S.
Commission of Industrial Relations and of the Bureau of
Labor Statistics, and with the LW.W. The theme of his
Columbia U. Ph.D. thesis was The LW.W. A Study of
American Syndicalism, which quite clearly evinces his left-
wing, Marxist attitude. His appointment to the post of
assistant professor of economics at Rockefeller-dominated
Columbia University School of Business, therefore, was made
because of his radicalism. His I.W.W. thesis so delighted the
Kremlin that it was translated and published in Russia. His
pro-Communist attitude was a family affair; for both his
mother and sister volunteered to help make a success of the
Bolshevik revolution and migrated to Moscow where they
were

134


employed by the Kremlin. Brissenden himself made no secret
of his support of Communism. He is a member of the Board
of Directors of the notoriously Red American Civil Liberties
Union, and of the equally Red International Juridical
Association and the International Rescue and Relief
Committee. He was one of the signers of a letter to the Daily
Worker of March 5, 1941, defending the Communist Party
anent the Hitler-Stalin Pact. His “liberalism" has been
rewarded by many appointive government jobs in the field of
labor; chairmanships of commissions and boards in many
industries, including cloaks and suits, cap and cloth, millinery
and others; statistician and economist on the payroll of a wide
array of unions; “impartial” chairman under many labor
agreements; member of the Industrial Tribunal of the
American Arbitration Association, and numerous other
lucrative, policymaking appointments. These rewards that
arose out of the Rockefeller-GEB-dictated professorial
appointment are the customary rewards of radical teachers
who subscribe to the doctrines of Rocke-fellerism. As a
member of the Columbia faculty, Professor Brissenden is in a
position to reject any applicants for the higher degrees, that
are a prerequisite for teaching positions, if they do not accept
the doctrines to which he subscribes.

The case of Walter Gellhorn, professor of law, clearly
demonstrates the extent to which the Rockefellers go in their
support of pro-Communist activities. A product of
Rockefeller’s GEB-fostered Columbia totalitarianism of the
post-Rockefeller-Soviet Axis era, he was given, in 1931, the
post of secretary to Supreme Court Justice Harlan F. Stone,
one of his indoctrinators. In 1932, on admission to the bar, he
promptly became attorney in the office of the Solicitor
General of the Department of Justice. In the following year he
was appointed to the law faculty of Columbia and, in 1937, to
the Department of Political Science. His long series of
government appointments included Special Assistant to the
Secretary of the Interior, in 1943, and Chairman of the
National War Labor Board, 2nd Region, in 1945. During this
period of rapid advancement he became increasingly
identified with pro-Communist causes as a director of the
American Civil Liberties Union, the International Juridical
Association, the National Lawyers' Guild, and the

135


semi-official Soviet Open Read. He was in the forefront of
attacks on legislation and investigations directed against
Communism. There was a personal aspect to this fight
because Gellhorn was himself under investigation by the
House Committee on Un-American Activities.

To aid in this fight against the exposure of un-American
activities and such treason as that of Alger Hiss, the
Rockefeller Foundation in 1948, announced a grant of
$110,000 for a "Study of the relation of civil rights to the
control of subversive activities in the United States." The
grant was made to Cornell University, where Edmund E. Day,
former Director of Secial Sciences of the Rockefeller
Foundation, had been planted as president of the University.
Though Professor Robert E. Cushman, of Cornell, a Marxist
New Dealer, was designated to head the "study", he turned
over the job to Gellhorn. The money was used largely in a
campaign to bring about abolition of the Un-American
Activities Committee. The Cushman-Gellhorn-Rockefeller
activities tied in with those of the Anti-Defamation League.
Gellhorn was fittingly assigned the problem of security and
loyalty requirements as applied to government scientists. His
equivocal views were published in a Rockefeller subsidized
book, Security, Loyalty & Science.

The high rewards and distinguished honors that were
heaped upon Philip ©. Jessup, Reverend Rein-held Niebuhr
and Reverend Henry Van Dusen for their services to the
Rockefeller Empire and its Axis are discussed elsewhere.

Donald G. Tewksbury, professor of education at Columbia
U., illustrates the security and promotion offered by the
Rockefeller interests to their Red proteges who serve their
Axis well. He is a product of their Red Chinese Yenching
University, who had been subsidized by them through the
Harvard-Y enching Foundation.

With the entire academic world from which to choose
teachers to influence the minds of its students, Columbia
University shares at least four of its instructors with the
official school of the Communist Party, the Jefferson School
of Social Sciences. They are:

Dorothy Brewster, Associate Professor of

English
Abraham Edel, Lecturer on Philosophy 136


Corliss Lamont, Lecturer on  Philosophy-Walter
Rautenstrauch, Professor of Industrial Engineering


Numerous members of the faculty at Columbia U. are
members and officers of the American Civil Liberties Union,
the chief legal aid of Communist conspirators. Among them
are:


Dr. Harry E. Barnes Prof. Paul F. Brissenden
Prof. George 5. Counts Prof. Walter Gellhorn
Corliss Lament Prof. E. C. Lindeman


There they rub elbows with Rockefeller's minister, Reverend
Harry Emerson Fosdick, Morris Ernst, Melvyn Douglas,
Arthur Garfield Hays, Max Lerner, Carey McWilliams,
Dorothy Kenyon, Elmer Rice, Raymond Swing and Oswald
Garrison Villard.

Professors of law have been particularly handy agents of the
Rockefeller-Soviet conspirators. Subversives planted on the
faculties of universities which they control become endowed
with the hale of unwerldliness and public trust that attaches to
the traditional, but absent-minded professor who is devoted to
learning and. pure science and is unapproachable. The
Communist and other brands of totalitarians, and the
Rockefeller interests, have exploited the public trust in the
college professor to the full limit, and it has served them well.
They have planted their utterly ruthless, traitorous agents in
professorships that are often especially created for them, and
build up their reputations for "erudition" and "wisdom" while
they are engaged in the very process of eroding the law and
Constitution of the land at the behest of their bosses. Then
they plant them in the courts and rapidly advance them until,
not infrequently, they are placed on the Supreme Court bench
itself, where they dictate a revolution by law. The cases of
Supreme Court Justices Holmes, Cardozo, Brandeis, Stone
and many others come to mind in this connection. The
conspirators, who are expert at propaganda and agitation,
create for their agents in high posts, fictitious reputations for
impartiality and learning. These judiciary agents have created
for the conspirators a complete immunity for their treasonous
activity by tortured perversion of the law. Thus a person
participating no matter how indirectly ina

137


crime is an accomplice. But an associate or fellow traveller
who participates in a Communist act of treason is regarded as
blameless; and any charges made against him bring out the
cry of ' ‘ouilt by association”. This is exactly for what the law
holds other criminals accountable. For the status of the
accomplice is guilt by association.

Subversive legal rulings have made it a crime to call a man
a Communist unless he acknowledges himself under oath to
be a Communist, or his Communist Party card can be
produced and it can be proved beyond any doubt that it is his.
So infiltrated are our courts and juries with subversives that it
seldom has proved possible to have a man legally adjudged a
Communist, even on the testimony of several witnesses and
even though it can be demonstrated that he had followed
every bend of the Communist Party line. The defense offered
in these cases is that to call a man a Communist means to
charge him with a crime and injure him. And there is always
plenty of subversive legal talent at hand, endowed with plenty
of foundation and other "civil rights" money, to crucify
anyone who dares label a Communist.

But in defending their Communist clients against
indictments charging them with subversion and attempts to
overthrow the government, the self-same judges and legal
talent plead that the Communist Party is legal, and to be a
Communist is not a crime. If to be a Communist is not a
crime, why have their solicitous agents on the bench ruled that
it is a crime to call a man a Communist? Is it because the
Rockefeller-Soviet Axis dictates it shall be so?

There appears to be no limit to the brazen distortion of the
law and absurd pettifogging of these "jurists" on behalf of the
Communist conspirators. In the first week of October 1951,
the U. 5$. Supreme Court handed down two decisions designed
to protect Communists in their treasonous efforts to destroy
our Government, creating the impression of a desire to
cooperate with them. The first decision, delivered by Chief
Justice Fred M. Vinson, ruled that $50,000 bail was
"unusually high" in the cases of twelve Communists who were
merely charged with advocating overthrow of the Government
by violence, under the Smith Act, and whose colleagues have
skipped bail in flecks when

138


convicted. The court ruled that the Government must produce
evidence of a "really serious offense” to justify this "high
bail", that was so "high" that four of their fellow conspirators
skipped and forfeited the sums.

A second decision that was handed down on the same day
ruled that anyone who patriotically reports a suspected
Communist to the FBI may be sued for damages by the
accused. This decision is designed to ably assist the
Communists in their conspiracy by cutting off reports and
clues regarding them from Government agencies. The Court
appears to be more concerned with protecting the conspirators
than in national security. In this it is serving the interests of
the Axis. The decision was undoubtedly motivated by the
desperate effort of the conspirators to protect the swarms of
Communist and Axis agents planted in the government
departments.

Not included in the above list is Philip Edward Mosely,
totalitarian Professor of International Relations and head of
the Russian Institute at Columbia U., and Assistant Director of
the Rockefeller Foundation. After securing his Ph.D. at
Harvard under the tutelage of Felix Frankfurter, in 1931, and
subsequently instructing at Pnnceton, he was permitted, or
rather invited, by the Bolsheviks te come to Moscow and stay
for two years (a privilege never known to be accorded to any
but avowed and trusted Communists) to engage in "historical
researches." He was then assigned as fellow, by the
Rockefeller-subsidized and dominated, Red Social Science
Research Council, for "research in the Balkans.” From 1942 to
1946, he joined Nelson Rockefeller, Dean Acheson, Alger
Hiss and the rest of the pro-Seviet clique in the State
Department, as chief of the division on political and territorial
studies and was adviser to the U.S. delegation to the disastrous
Moscow Conference, in 1943, to the European Advisory
Commissicn in London in 1944, and to the tragic Potsdam
Conference in 1945. He was also US. representative in 1946
on the Commission for the Investigation of the Yugoslav-
Italian Border. In 1936 he was the sympathetic Soviet-
authorized translator of V. M. Chernoy's official history, The
Great Russian Revolution. He has very concisely stated his
and the Rockefeller Empire's totalitarian credo, as has been
related, in

139


a Headline Series pamphlet issued by Reockefeller's Foreign
Policy Association, repeated here for emphasis:

"Over the long run, great numbers of people will judge both
the Soviet and American Systems, not by how much
individual freedom they preserve, but by how much they
contribute, in freedom cr without it, to develop a better
livelihood and a greater feeling of social fulfillment." This
statement is a variation of the Communist propaganda
theme: "What is freedom without bread?” This is the
Rockefeller-Soviet sales talk for their brand of totalitarianism
and slavery that contrasts so sharply with Patrick Henry's
Americanism of: "Give me liberty or give me death". But
American history and patriotism are both taboo in
schools dominated by Rockefellers GEB. Only
Mosely's views are taught.

The situation is, if possible, even worse in Rockefeller's pet
University of Chicago, the Red gehenna of all the
Rockefeller-subsidized professors. A list of its faculty
indicates that advancement on it appears to be almost entirely
predicated on how Red the professor is and how many
Communist fronts he joins. A partial list of professors and the
Communist and Communist front organizations they have
joined reveals the following::


Abbott, Edith 15 Adams, James Luther 10
Borgese, G. A. 6 Burgess, Ernest W. 8
Carlson, Anton J. 18 Douglas, Sen. Paul H. 22
Havighurst, Robert J. 7 Haydon, A. Eustace 6


Hutchins, Robert M. 2 Lange, Oscar 9
Lovett, R. M. 114 McMillen, Wayne 26

Sharp, Malcolm P. 9 Slye, Maud 8
Thompson, John B. 10 Tugwell, Rexford 7
Urey, Harold C. 15 Wieman, H. N. 20


The extent that subversion effected by "educational
philanthropies" has attained at Yale University is portrayed by
William F. Buckley Jr. in his book God And Man At Yale.
Buckley, a recent graduate of Yale, lists the subversive
teachers. They infest the School of Divinity as completely as
the other faculties, and their religion is Marxist Rocke-
fellerism. He also lists in the appendix, subversive textbooks
that are widely used, and the schools that use them.


The fostering of totalitarian and Rockefeller Reds in all the
schools, colleges and universities over which it could gain
control, is the chief function of Rockefeller's General
Education Board in the pursuit of its boss's objectives. When
found, dependable agents are often planted in key positions in
the Government in Washington. If by any chance they are
exposed or apprehended in illegal or treasonous activities,
they are usually protected and shifted to other positions.

In the Wilson Administration, the Government was loaded
to the gunwales with them. Those that could not be made to fit
into the Republican administrations that followed, by the
"bipartisan" device, were put back in storage in the
universities dominated by the Rockefeller interests, as a part
of a well organized and disciplined machine for totalitarian
subversion and erosion of the Constitution and the law of the
land. They were well provided for and shifted about in the
government and universities for diversity of experience, to
prepare them for their roles in the gigantic conspiracy.

In the universities, they were protected in their subversive
activities when exposed, by all the wealth and power of the
Rockefeller Empire acting through such organizations as the
ultra-Red American Civil Liberties Union, and other subsi-
dized agencies. When, unavoidably, for a particularly heinous
offense, one of them ‘had to be ousted from his position, he
was likewise merely shifted to another position either in the
government, in a foundation or in one of the schools. Oaths of
loyalty to the U.S. are fought bitterly by the GEB-subsi-dized
agents of the Rockefeller Empire, with all the power at their
command. The State of California, for instance, was
compelled by them to revoke its rational requirement that all
members of the faculty must sign loyalty oaths. The only
loyalty that is required of them is loyalty to the Empire. Pro-
fessor Edward C. Tolman, who was dismissed from the
University of California as subversive, was given, after his
dismissal, an honorary degree by Yale in 1951, as an example
to encourage others.

It is an adequate commentary on the General Education
Board and its domination of the educational system that the
“traitor scientists" have become a serious problem and a
menace to the security of the land, a situation that was dilated


upon in
14]


the New York Times of May 15, 1951.

When a change in the political climate had been effected
and Franklin Delano Roosevelt had been put into the
Presidency to head a “Popular Front" government in
Washington, all of the subversive agents were taken out of
their storage in the academic halls of the "educational"
institutions, where they had bent their energies to producing
new generations of vipers and traitors. They were put back
into the government to carry out the subversive tasks for
which they had been trained so well, not infrequently in
Moscow, through the creation of what was sardonically
labeled by the conspirators as the New Deal. Many of the
agents occupied the same posts in the Wilson "War to Save
Democracy" regime as they did two decades later in the New
Deal and World War II, that was its crowning glory.

In the past several decades, it has also become an
established practise of the Rockefeller interests to place their
political hacks, warherses and pawns in the position of
university president. This serves to keep them in the public
eye, invests them with an academic halo in the eyes of the
"peasants", makes it possible for them to serve as unsuspected
propagandists for subversive totalitarian causes, and to
indoctrinate the emerging generation of voters with
Rockefellerism, and to groom them as traitors; it also provides
these agents with handsome incomes. This practise 18
illustrated by their planting General Dwight Eisenhower in
Columbia University, Harold Stassen in the University of
Pennsylvania, Edward Stettinius in the University of Virginia
and many others.

There is no doubt that subversive professors, fostered and
subsidized by the General Education Board and allied
"philanthropies" rank as the nation's most menacing enemies.
They have produced some of our most dangerous traitors.
Thus Hunter College, under the aegis of Rockefeller
henchman, George N. Shuster, its president, spewed forth, in-
culeated with his indiscriminate pro-Nazi and pro-Communist
totalitarian sentiments, "Axis Sally" Gillars. Harvard
University, crawling with Red professorial vermin, evacuated
on the nation its Alger Hiss; Cornell, its Lee Pressman;
Columbia, its Judy Coplon. They have all loosed upen the
nation a horde of unapprehended and unsuspected traitors
who

142


are persistently betraying the nation. What a sham it is to
pretend to be fighting Communism abroad, while at home
these breeders of traitors are turning the younger generation
into a horde of dangerously muddled Marxists!

The most pathetic figures in the situation are the nation's
youngsters. Several generations of them have been made
human sacrifices to the very doctrines that they have been
schooled to adore, victims of their teachers’ witting or
unwitting treachery. For their fate they owe thanks to the
success of the General Education Beard in infiltrating the
public school system throughout the nation and converting it
into a subversive agency of Rockefellerism. Their pro-
Communist training leads them to betray their country in the
interest of the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis. Then they themselves
become the victims of their own betrayal, in wars whipped up
by arrangement between the pawns of the Axis partners. In
the Korean "police action", close to a hundred thousand of
them have been injured, and almost 10,000 killed.

The General Education Board, mindful of the aphorism:
"Give me a child till the age of nine, and you can have it for
the rest of its life", began to infiltrate and take over the public
school system at an early date. It has pursued this objective
steadily and with even greater vigor than it manifests in the
field of higher education. After initial hostility, National
Education Association (NEA) joined forces with the GEB,
thus giving it domination of the greatest power in the field of
primary education. The Rockefeller group also tock over local
school boards directly through their associates and agents, and
converted them into agencies of subversion. Thus in New
York City they took over the school boards and control of the
school system about 1915, during the mayoralty of their
puppet, John Purroy Mitchell. At about the same time they
took over the Gary, Indiana, school system for

"experimentation". They placed in charge of it Dr. William A.
Wirt, who proved to be a better American than they suspected
and “exposed their conspiracy to prolong the depression,
destroy our government and replace it with their totalitarian,
"managed" economy to a Congressional Committee in 1934
(H. R. 73 Congress, 2nd Session, H. $. 314). In Scarsdale,
New York, Edmund E. Day, Director

143


for Social Sciences of the Rockefeller Foundation, took
control for them of the local school beard. The radical
Progressive Education Association has been a Rockefeller
GEB agency from its start.

The nature of the influence which Rockefeller's GEB
exercised directly and indirectly through the NEA, is
illustrated by a number of their deeds. In 1940 the GEB
granted the Progressive Education Society $1,635,941 and the
NEA a total of $706,100. In addition, the National
Association of Secondary School Principals, allied with the
NEA, received a total of $122,600 for the purpose of "helping
pupils gain a clearer understanding of problems invelved in
such fields as planning and public finance, public education,
pepulation, unemployment, health, personal security and selt
development, democracy and dictatorship, free enterprise and
collectivism . . "GEB Annual Report, 1940, p. 48). The
money was used for the writing and publication of a series of
booklets on "Problems in American Life", under the auspices
of the NEA.

The pamphlet, The American Way of Business, that was
prepared to introduce the junior-mgh-school grades to the
subject, was entrusted by the conspirators to a notorious
Communist, Oscar Lange, and Abba Lerner, an advocate of
Communism, and both foreign born. Oscar Lange is the
naturalized Polish-born professor of economics at the
University of Chicago, whom Nelson Rockefeller chose as his
mentor and adviser in the writing of his Ph. D. thesis,
Economic Waste, which has been described; and in its
intreduction Nelson expresses his gratitude to Lange "for
invaluable criticism and advice". One year after his book was
published for distribution among school children, in 1945,
Oscar Lange renounced his American citizenship and returned
to Poland to become a Communist official in his conquered
land. He is now Communist Polish representative in the UN.

True to expectation Lange's pamphlet, The American Way
of Business, used in the public schools under the auspices of
the Rockefeller-subsidized NEA, was a Communist tract that
held up to ridicule American business, that has provided for
Communist Russia well enough to save it from destruction at
the hands of its confederates, the Nazis. It also lauded Marxist
and Communist methods that have failed so utterly to provide


the
144


barest necessities of life to the lands that have adopted them.
It attacked private enterprise, endorsed government ownership
of industry and advised that government bureaucrats be given
the power to repeal acts of Congress. It was a polemic for the
Rockefeller-Soviet brand of Marxism that goes by the name
of New Deal, or Rockefellerism.

Proof that this undertaking to subvert the children was
deliberate, is afforded by the examination of other pamphlets
in the same series. They are all Communist tracts. Economic
Problems of the Post-War World was written by Marxist,
New Deal economist, Alvin H. Hansen, and endorses a Marx-
ist program of taxation and deficit spending that will serve to
force industry into the hands of the government, which he
calls "compensatory spending." Another of the pamphlets of
this series, International Organization After The War, was
written by the avowed Marxist, Max Lerner, former associate
editor of the Communist newspaper, PM.

For the subversion of seventh and eighth grade school
children, the General Education Board made a grant of
$51,000, in 1938, to the NEA Association for Curriculum
Development for the preparation of the "Building America”
series of textbooks for use in the nation's primary schools. The
title adopted displayed the usual use of semantics by the
conspirators. The textbooks are entirely devoted to tearing
down America. The texts and their illustrations subtly
emphasize the unfavorable aspects of American life and breed
a derogatory attitude towards the Constitution and American
institutions. Communist Russia and its institutions, on the
other hand, are presented in favorable contrast and in the
rosiest light. The name of the series should be Building Soviet
America.

The “Building America” series is endorsed as “excellent
source material” by the committee on education of the
National Committee on Soviet-American Friendship,
according to the Report Of The Joint Fact-Finding Committee
To the 1948 Regular California Legislature On Un-American
Activities In California (pp.326-7), which also labels the
Soviet-American Friendship outfit as "a direct agent of the
Soviet Union". A sample of the authors of the Rockefeller-
endowed textbook series for subversion of school children is
Alain Locke, member of its editorial staff, who had a record of
membership 145


in twelve Communist and front organizations.

The "Building America” series was barred from use in the
public schools of California by the legislature, in an order
cutting off funds for the "textbooks".

Thus does Rockefeller's “philanthropy”, the General
Education Board, seek to poison the minds of America with
Communism and New Deal Rockefellerism from the cradle to
the grave, and to convert the school system of the land to a
hotbed of Communism and other forms of subversion. Its
Communist friends are held largely responsible by Lait and
Mortimer in their Washington Confidential for the drive to
poison the bodies of school children with narcotics. They
report that the sale of narcotics among our scheol children has
been launched by the Communist Party and the Soviets, for
the dual purpese of undermining the morale of the country and
of providing a revenue for their propaganda. To what extent I.
G. Far-benindustrie is encouraging this vile traffic through
"Lucky" Luciano as their agent, 1s not definitely known.

The deliberate fostering and breeding of Communism in
our school system emphasizes the sham of the pretense of the
conspirators, of fighting Communism abroad. Of what avail is
it to fight Communism in other lands, while breeding it at
home? Obviously their pretended fight on Communism serves
some other purpose.

The Rockefeller interests have been so successful in their
plan to have the taxpayers take over, as an official agency,
their thought control program launched by the Education
Board, with their trained agents as its personnel, that they plan
to liquidate the Board. This success is illustrated by the fi-
nancing of their Institute of International Education, originally
operated with Carnegie Corporation and Laura Spelman
Rockefeller Memorial funds, by the Federal Government, with
moneys derived from the sale of “surplus” war material
overseas, under a bill introduced by their "Internationalist"
agent, Senator Fulbright. To insure further their subversive
control, the Ford Foundation recently has been brought into
the picture with a $350,000 grant.

From the outset, the GEB engaged in its brand of agitation,
that it calls “education,” among the Negroes, especially for
the F.E.P.C

146


CHAPTER VIII


ROCKEFELLER'S FOUNDATION


"Internationalism", Totalitarianism, Treason &
"Philanthropy."


Trevor Arnett, President of the General eon Board,

stated i in his introductory letter to its 1928 report (p.xi)

the munificence of Mr. John D. Rockefeller cannot be
understood unless these foundations are recognized as parts of
a well ordered whole, in the planning of which his (Gates')
thought, his imagination and his powers of vigorous
and persuasive utterance were dominating factors. As he
himself once said, the cbjects for which the several Boards
were set up represented not an accidental succession of ideas
but one logically developed scheme .. .” The object of the
Rockefeller Foundation was to carry out in the international
field the basic objective of the General Education Board,
enslavement of mankind to serve the purpose of the
Rockefeller Empire, and to enshroud Rockefeller with a toga
of "philanthropy". There was also the more ambitious
objective of further luring the United States and other nations
into the international field to serve Rockefeller interests. This
was clearly stated at a later date by the Foundation's President
Vincent, as follows:

"The aim always kept in mind is not to assume
governmental or social functions, but to show that certain
things can be done successfully, and then as soon as may be,
to turn these over to the community.” (JDR, v. 2, p- 655)
Nevins points out the need for the new charter: (JDR, v. 2, p.

"The General Education Board was restricted by charter to
the United States; this new organization should have the
world as its field..." The basic terms of the charter sought
for the Foundation were:

"To promote the well-being of mankind
throughout the world."

A bill chartering the Rockefeller Foundation was introduced
in Congress and was reported favorably from the Senate
Committee on March 10, 1910. The nation, which had not yet
been as extensively "edu-

147


cated", or indoctrinated, by the Rockefeller interests, still
possessed sufficient native intelligence to discern the
skulduggery that might be expected of their "philanthropy".
Immediately a storm of protest broke out among intelligent,
discerning folks. The only defenders of the bill were from
among the Marxist elements, the Nation and the Survey. The
bill was sidetracked.

A man whose generosity is spurned generally pockets his
funds, and walks off,—unless that generosity has an ulterior
purpose. Rockefeller's "philanthropy" obviously had an
ulterior purpose, and that purpose obviously was extremely
important for the one and only real interest of his life, his
profits. For in the following year a powerful lobby was sent
by him te Washingten to force through Congress, at any cost,
the charter for his "philanthropy", the Foundation. Nevins, his
biographer, tries to explain away the persistent quest for a
Federal charter on the ground that it would be "stronger, safer
and more dignified than a state charter". But this is quite
specious, because eventually Rockefeller was forced to be
content with a New York State charter. For the U.S. Senate in
1913 blocked the charter though it was much amended and re-
stricted, after it had passed the House, in spite of what some
Western newspaper called "the most powerful lobby ever seen
in Washington.”

The New York State charter was put through the legislature
for the Rockefellers by Senator Robert F. Wagner, their agent
whom they had arranged to have elected by Tammany. This
charter, in contrast with the one that the Rockefellers had
been willing to accept from Congress, was unlimited in scope
and provided a considerably higher capitalization.

The attacks made upon the Foundation on the floor of the
U.S. Senate were peculiarly prophetic. It was predicted that
the Rockefellers proposed to use the Foundation to seduce
public opinion, to lobby and influence politics, to subvert
American institutions, to evade the income tax which they
were seeking to impose on the nation, to evade regulation by
the government and to use the nation to further their private
interests in complete disregard of national interests.

Launched in an atmosphere of suspicion and under fire of
criticism, the Foundation adopted an


attitude of caution and courting of public opinion at the
beginning. The Rockefeller Foundation patiently waited for
more than a decade and a half before openly engaging in the
totalitarian conspiracy which Gates and Rockefeller
acknowledged at the start, in Occasional Letter No. 1 of the
GEB, as the true purpose of all Rockefeller "philanthropies”.

At the start, the Rockefellers put their best foot forward and
stressed the "bleeding heart" activities of their Foundation,
especially those that exposed to public gaze their pretended
touching concern for the health of the “peasant,”
euphemistically and prophetically labelled "The Forgotten
Man" by their associate, Walter Hines Page, whom they made
wartime ambassador to England. Their first endeavors were
the establishment of the International Health Commission and
the China Medical Board.

The International Health Commission was designed to
disarm public resentment against the Rockefellers and their
Foundation, both at home and abroad. It undertock to agitate
the problem of hookworm infestations of man and to high-
pressure public health officers to launch spectacular
campaigns, at the expense of the taxpayers, to purge the
victim public for their health and the glory of Rockefeller.
How effective it proved in establishing contacts with
governmental officials in many lands for the Rockefeller
interests is revealed by Dr. Victor Heiser, one of their agents,
in An American Doctors Odyssey. Later the range of
Foundation activities was extended to medical research of the
varieties described in connection with the Rockefeller
Institute.

The China Medical Board activities added to the pose of
interest in "The Forgotten Man”, the sanctimonious aroma of
missionary activity. It helped to redeem Rockefeller with the
clergy and the churches, and to stop their attacks on him. But
why did the Rockefeller Foundation specifically select China
rather than India or other regions for their activities? The
choice was a crafty one. It was dictated, as have been most of
the activities of the Rockefeller "philanthropies”, by either
their immediate commercial or oil interests, or by their
avowed totalitarian conspiracy, which is, in effect, their long-
term commercial policy.

The China Medical Board was an important factor in the
expansion and penetration of the Rocke-

149


feller Standard Oil interests in China and in the expansion of
the Rockefeller Empire. The ruthless-ness and the high profits
involved in the split-penny market for "Oil for the Lamps of
China" is related by Vera Teasdale, the wife of a Standard Oil
official, in her beck bearing that title. The Rockefeller in-
terests more directly involved were the Vacuum Oil Co. (now
the Socony Vacuum) and the Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey.
The China Medical Board activities paved the way, together
with a Standard Oil loan of fifteen million dollars, in 1914, for
a partnership with the Chinese Government and the lease to
Rockefeller's Standard Oil of mineral rights in Shensi and Chi
Li provinces for a period of seventy-five years. These and
other leases were the causus belli in the Japanese invasion of
China. They were important factors in the train of events that
led to Pearl Harbor, that cost the U.S. so heavily and profited
the Rockefeller Empire so much.

In many quarters of the world, the Rockefeller Empire met
with initial success in these Foundation and State Department
spearheaded drives for commercial conquest and control of
the oil and other resources of the world. In due time, however,
they met with setbacks or were actually ousted by gov-
ernments with which they had made deals or set up
monopolies. The reason for these reverses varied in different
locales. In some instances it was the utter ruthlessness of
Rockefeller Imperialism. In others, it was resentment of local
interests at being superseded, or of other world powers at
being shut out. In line with the traditional Rockefeller ' ‘prin-
ciple"—"if you can not lick your enemy, join him until you
have a chance to stab him in the back"— temporary
compromises were made frequently.

But the inevitable ultimate consequences of setbacks of the
Rockefeller Empire in its march for world conquest, masked
as a philanthropic crusade, were wars. Wars have been the
outstanding Rockefeller "philanthropes". And wars have been
the most profitable for them. To these wars they contributed
nothing but incitement. For the oil and other material they
supplied, they were paid well. Invariably they profited hugely
from the waging of the wars. They invariably emerged as the
real victors. No matter which powers waged the Rockefeller
Crusades, the Rockefeller Empire emerged with all the spoils.
The mest consistent

150


banner bearer in the Rockefeller Crusades has been the
government of the U.S.A., which they have converted into a
minor bureau of their Empire. Americans have been
"privileged" to shed their blood and dissipate their wealth in
the oily Rockefeller Crusades.


To make possible these conquests by the Rockefeller
Empire it was necessary, as indicated by Gates in his
Occasional Letter No. 1, not merely to thought control the
American people, whom they seek to reduce to the level of
serfs and peasants, as was being done most efficiently by the
General Education Board, but also to secure their submission
and regimentation, by carrying out the essential features of the
program that already had been launched by Bismarck, under
the guise of "social science”.

In 1914, Rockefeller had a demonstration close to home of
the utter lack of docility of the American "peasant", in the
violent strike of the workers of his Colorado Fuel and Iron Co.
and in the refusal of the people to "yield themselves with
perfect decility to our melding hands". The chairman of the
beard of the C.F.L Co. was L. M. Bowers, a relative of
Rockefeller'’s almoner, Reverend Gates, who wrote the above
phrase as a statement of the purpose of Rockefeller's
"philanthropies”; and was guided by that author of Rockefeller
"benevolence" in his actions.

What happened in this case is a true guide to what the world
might expect in the future of the "charity" of the Rockefeller
clan. The employees of the C.F.L. Co. worked under
conditions that Nevins, official Rockefeller family biographer,
acknowledges were miserable. (JDR, v. 2, p. 667). They were
forced to revolt, or strike, in order to survive. Their union
bosses asked for improvement of working conditions,
increased pay and union recognition, and a "closed shop". The
union involved was the now all-powerful United Mine
Workers.

Rockefeller owned 40% of the C.F.I. Co. stock, dominated
the Company and was acknowledged leader of the local
industry. He refused to recognize the dissatisfaction of the
workers with his "philanthropy", or their other grievances.
Rockefeller's "philanthropy" to these workers is strikingly
stated by George P. West 1n his report of the

151


strike, made for the U.S. Commission on Industrial
Relations:

".. two entire counties of Southern Colorado for years
have been deprived of popular government, while large
groups of their citizens have been stripped of their liberties,
robbed of portions of their earnings, sukjected to ruthless
persecution and abuse, and reduced to a state of economic
and political serfdom." (quoted by Nevins, JDR, v. 2, p.


This pattern of Rockefeller "benevolence" should be borne
in mind. For though its appearance has changed in the course
of years, and the agency through which it is administered has
now become the Government and the unions, both dummies,
its basic spirit and substance still remain the same. The entire
nation now is being accorded the same treatment. It is the
avowed goal of all Rockefeller enterprises, both the frankly
commercial and the sham "philanthropic".

It should also be borne in mind that it is the fixed policy of
the Rockefeller Empire never to yield its ultimate objective
permanently, however frequently it may swerve or
compromise it temporarily. The basic policy of Rockefeller
"philanthropy" and enterprise, dictatorship and serfdom, are
put into practice from the start, everywhere the Rockefeller
Empire extends its dominion, in all lands where it is feasible.

Occasional Paper No. | failed to reveal the treatment that
was planned for the "peasants" who would not "yield
themselves to our molding hands". The Colorado Fuel & Iron
Co. affair furnished the answer. The Rockefeller interests
hired armed guards to drive the workers from their Company-
owned homes. When they continued their resistance to
Rockefeller's "molding hands" and resorted to the usual,
stupid pattern of strike violence, the militia was called out to
protect Roeckefeller's property. It was at this point that
Rockefeller's "philanthropic" method of treatment of the
"peasants" who would not yield to his "molding hands", was
starkly demonstrated for all the world to see and admire.

The story is best told in the words of Rockefeller's official,
family-appointed biographer, Professor Allan Nevins, as
follows (IDR, v. 2, p. 666):


152


"On April 21, 1914, the country was shocked to learn
that the previous day a conflict had broken out between
militia and striking coal-miners at Ludlow, Colo.; that the
workers had been routed with six men killed: and that when
the guardsmen had fired the tents sheltering the strikers'
families, two women and eleven children lying in pits
underneath had been suffocated .. . For days afterward
little battles raged through the coal-mining areas of the
state ... it became clear that a virtual civil war was under
way."


Forty-four men, women and children were
"philanthropically" burned to death in this incident.
Rockefeller's sickening “philanthropy” wen out. The strike
was lost, though later Rockefeller was forced, by aroused
public sentiment, to make grudging concession to the miners.
In retrospect, however, the price paid by the miners was small
as compared with the pathetic costs to the nation of later
"philanthropies” of the Rockefeller Empire, in World Wars I
and II, the Korean "police action” and other events.

The same story was repeated in the case of the Rockefeller-
controlled American Agricultural Chemical Co. of Roosevelt,
New Jersey. The Foundation held half a million dollars worth
of the securities of this company, and A. Barton Hepburn was
interlocking director with the Foundation. The men were paid
so little, an investigation revealed, that they could not afford
to feed their families. The strike was violent and many men
were shot down, again demonstrating the modus operandi of
the Rockefeller-Gates brand of “philanthropy.”

Public outrage, government investigation and threats of
action pointed to urgent need of "philanthropic" camouflage.
With this objective, the Rockefeller Foundation was used as a
cover for instituting a program of “research” into industrial
relations that was to pave the way for Rockefeller control of
the labor unions and their bosses. The man selected to head
this enterprise, W. L. Mackenzie King, had been trained in the
"social sciences” and thought-controlled at universities
subsidized by the General Education Board,—Toronto,
Chicage and Harvard. He had proved that he had learned the
meaning and value of "compromise" in the "liberal" sense so
dear to Bismarck and Rockefeller, in his

3


activities as Minister of Labor in Canada, and in his
authorship of the New York Industrial Disputes Act of 1907.
The real okjective of the task to which he was assigned was to
take the curse off the Rockefeller name in connection with
C.F.I. Co. affairs, te rub balm on the workers’ wounds and
soothe them into the "compromise" that would delude and
"mold" them into acceptance of the "social security” pattern
that would prepare the way for "docile" serfdom and
dictatorship.

In the course of the investigation it was revealed that the
Foundation itself held $2,000,000 worth of securities of the
Colorado Fuel and Iron Co. at the time of the strike, as well as
securities of other companies by which workers were treated
with murder and brutality when they undertock to strike for a
living wage and impreved working conditions.

Public resentment and fury against these shocking
demonstrations of the Rockefeller program "to promote the
well-being of mankind throughout the world", forced
abandonment temporarily, in 1917, of the plan to use the
Foundation to effect a regimentation of labor along lines
desired by Rockefeller, published under his name in a booklet
entitled The Colorado Plan, and once again published in an
elaborated form under the title, The Personal Relation in
Industry. Nevins reports (JDR, v. 2, p. 661):

"Public suspicion and hostility developed; his program was
made the sutject of inquiry by the United States Commission
on Industrial Relations under Frank P. Walsh; and so much
public criticism arose that in 1917 the project was dropped.
The Walsh investigation put a damper on foundation activities
in the social sciences for some years."

But the Rockefellers never give up the fight for their
ultimate objective and profit. Though they pretended to
abandon their plan for regimentation of labor, they were
merely biding their time and planning a more crafty approach
to their goal. Little suspicion was aroused when, in the
following year, Rockefeller "philanthropically" established the
Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial dedicated to Mrs. John
D. Sr. Its initially announced purpose was the support of
charities or "welfare" organizations, of public health, of
religious organizations and the championing of Negro causes,
a course which it pursued for a period of four years. When

154


the Rockefeller interests entered into an entente with
Communist Russia, Ivy L. Lee was assigned to create a
favorable public attitude toward Russia and Communism, and
began te set up Communist front organizations ‘with
Rockefeller funds. The Memorial was converted suddenly,
under the leadership of Beardsley Ruml, to a continuation of
the labor activities that had been started by John D. Jr. and
Mackenzie King only to be abandoned to appease public
resentment, and to the support of a host of Marxist,
Communist and subversive causes. The details will be given
in connection with an account of the Memorial. These
activities were continued by the Memorial until 1978, when
the General Education Board that had bred Ruml and his
radical program, was merged into the Rockefeller Foundation.

With the 1928 merger, the Rockefeller Foundation entered,
for the first time, into the world-wide “international”
totalitarian activities, which, according to the report of the
General Education Board that has been quoted, was the
primary and unitary purpose of all Rockefeller

"philanthropies" —"parts of a well ordered whole". (GEB
Annual Report, 1928, p. xi}

The Rockefeller Foundation, together with the other
foundations of import of which it seized control, became the
spearhead of a world-wide dnve for totalitarianism. Its
vaunted "internationalism" implied a drive to crush
competition and rival powers; world conquest by beth
indoctrination and force; and the ultimate welding of the
world, thus conquered, into a united totalitarian world, "One
World"—a Rockefeller World. For that, the United Nations
organization was established as a forum and debating society,
to give it the semblance of a representative organization, a
"democracy", as they call it with their systematic, semantic
perversion of language.

Following the 1928 merger, the Rockefeller Foundation's
schedule was extended to include, in addition to medical
sciences, natural sciences, the "social sciences" and the
humanities. Work in the field of "education" at graduate levels
and "research" was taken over from the General Education
Board which was eventually to be terminated as having
accomplished its task. All of the subversive "social science"
activities designed to bring

15


about "a new social order" by a revolution, pre-ferrably by
stealth and perversion, initiated by Laura Spelman
Rockefeller Memorial, were assumed by the Foundation. Any
pretense of charity, that is so repulsive to the Rockefeller
mentality, was sloughed off, and abandoned.

The members of the Rockefeller Foundation in
the year of the merger were the following:


John G. Agar Frederick Strauss
David L. Edsall George H. Whipple
Raymond B. Fosdick Ray Lyman Wilbur
Vernon Kellogg John W. Davis
Wickliffe Rose Simon Flexner

Martin A. Ryerson Charles Evans Hughes
George E. Vincent John D. Rockefeller Jr.
William Allen White Julius Rosenwald


The Chairman of the Finance Committee was, as always until
1950, a member of the Rockefeller family—at the beginning
John D. Rockefeller Jr., and later, his brother-in-law,
Winthrop Aldrich. In this manner they retained personal
control of the securities and funds, and of the uses to which
they were put, without paying taxes on them.

In the following decades the pelitical complexion of the
Board shifted te the left, with the inclusion of representatives
and advocates of the Marxist "social sciences”. At all times it
has presaged or reflected the current political scene.
Rockefeller kinsman, John Foster Dulles, became a member
of the Foundation in the early 1930's and immediately
emerged on the public scene as Rockefeller's agent
dominating the State Department, the churches and the
foundations. Lewis W. Douglas likewise became Ambassador
to England after doing his stint on the Foundation Board; as
did Walter 5. Gifford, former president of the American
Telegraph and Telephone Co. John J. McCloy graduated from
membership in the Rockefeller Foundation to the position of
High Commissioner of Germany, Rebert A. Lovett, to the post
of Secretary of Defense and Dean Rusk, to Assistant Secretary
of State. In December, 1951 Rusk returned to Rockefeller
employ as head of the Rockefeller Foundation.

The studied plan of domination of other philanthropies is
indicated by the presence on the Board of the Rockefeller
Foundation of Julius Rosenwald, founder of the extreme left-
wing Rosenwald Foun- 156


dation that devoted the bulk of its funds te Communist
activities under the directorship of Edwin R. Embree, who
was former secretary of the Rockefeller Foundation; of Anson
Phelps Stokes, who established the foundation of the same
name, that devoted its activities almost exclusively to
agitation among the Negroes; and Henry Allen Moe, director
of the crimson Guggenheim Foundation. The manner in
which the control of all impertant foundations was attained
through interlocking trustees, directors and grants will be
presented later.

In the field of medicine, its "window dressing", the record
of the Rockefeller Foundation is much like that of the
Institute. It has done a bit of good by granting aid to research
workers in institutions, who had made discoveries that already
had been confirmed and that generally had a high commercial
value. Such was the case of the grant to Dr. Florey for studies
on increasing the yield of penicillin. But usually it was work
that could have been done and would have been done without
its assistance which was merely a convenience.

The principal activities of the Foundation have been in the
fields of the "social sciences" and the humanities. In accord
with the basic “principle” of the Rockefeller "philanthropies",
no cause has ever been sponsored, subsidized or supported
that does not foster totalitananism, by preference, the Marxist
brand. Support has been given by it lavishly to all of the

"made in Germany” Marxist "social sciences”. The plan was
to establish centers of propaganda, labeled "research centers”,
in every land of consequence that would permit. The 1932
report of the Foundation states: (pp. 263-5)

"The Rockefeller Foundation continued to support in
1932 the program in the social sciences which has been
under way for several years.

"Four clearly defined types of activity feature the general
program in the social sciences: (1} the support of inclusive
advisory and planning bodies; (2) the provision of training and
research fellowships, (3} the maintenance of grants in aid and
small projects; and (4) the development of institutional centers
of advanced training and research." The organization chosen
by the Foundation as its top planning body is:

The Social Science Research Council that "has 157


operated in the field of social sciences since 1923, with three
officials representatives from each of seven scientific
societies." Needless to state all the societies and their
representatives are Marxist, ranging through the entire gamut
of Red. By 1947 the Rockefeller Foundation had granted it a
total of $6,361,500 and its subsidiary, the Carnegie
Corporation, $1,023,500. Eleven controlled foundations
extended it grants. It is the chief agency of all the large
foundations in the social service field. Characteristic of the
grants made by Rockefeller's Social Science Research Council
1s that made in 1946 to John Victor Murra, an instructor in
anthropology at the University of Chicago and protege of
Professor Redfield, who will be mentioned later. Murra was
denied citizenship by a U.S. District Court judge on the basis
of intreduced evidence on his subversive activities on the
University campus and of additional data provided by the U.S.
Army Intelligence. (Chicago Tribune, Jan. 18, 1947) It is
this organization that was subsidized by the Rockefeller
Foundation to prepare and supervise the New Deal "planned
economy” for the nation. It provided the brand of training and
research fellowship that the conspirators desired.

The grants-in-aid made by the Rockefeller Foundation give
some insight inte the range and breadth of their support of the
Marxist "social sciences". They include:

Encyclopedia of Sccial Sciences, a monument of Marxist
and Communist propaganda, that was heavily subsidized by
the Rockefellers from its start in 1927. They contributed to
it $150,000 in 1932, and $102,410.13 in the following year.


On the topic of institutional centers, the 1932 report states
the following:

"In the United States four institutions are regarded as
major centers: Brookings Institution . . . Columbia
University . . . Harvard University .. . the University of
Chicago.

"Sections of the country not directly represented by these
institutions are being assisted . . . University of North
Carolina... University of Virginia... University of Texas
... Stanford University ... McGill University.

"In addition there are seven institutional 158


centers in Europe . . . Londen School of Economics and
Social Sciences . . . Institute of Social and Political
Sciences, Heidelberg University, Germany . . . Institute of
Economics and History, Copenhagen, Denmark

University of Stockholm, Sweden . . . Rumanian Institute of


Social Science, Bucharest . . . International Institute of
Public Law, Paris, France ... University of Oslo, Norway,
Institute of Economics . . American University ‘of Beirut,


Syria... and two in Asia . . Yenching University, Peiping,
China... Nankai University, Tientsin, China, Institute of
Economics.

"Of these the London School of Economics and Political
Science is considered the most highly developed."


Thus did the Rockefellers take over Bismarck's plan of
promulgation of Marxism around the werld on a far grander
scale than he could have conceived possible. The Rockefeller
interests regard the London School of Economics and Political
Science as the most important from the viewpoint of their
designs on the British Empire. Those most fraught with grief
for the U.S. and the world at large, were Yenching and Nankai
Universities, that were more effective in paving the way for
the Communizing of China and the consequences that have
flowed there from it, than was the Soviets Sun Yat Sen
(Chinese) University at Moscow.

It is in the field of international relations that the activities
of the Rockefeller Foundation have yielded the Rockefeller
Empire the most outstanding successes in advancing the
conspiracy, and the greatest profits. The leading institutions
which it supported or subsidized in this field were the follow-
ing:

Council on Foreign Relations, the top organization and

Foreign Office of the Rockefeller Empire and the "Invisible

U.S. and World Government" Institute of Pacific Relations,

the top Soviet propaganda and espionage agency in Asia,

established and maintained by the Rockefeller

"philanthropy"

Royal Institute of International Affairs, London
German School of Political Science, Berlin 159


Postgraduate Institute of International Studies, Geneva,
Switzerland
Notgemeindschaft der Deutschen Wissenschaft, Berlin
League of Nations, Geneva, Switzerland, which among
other matters made a study on taxation. It recommended
elimination of taxes on foreign enterprises, that proved
invaluable to the Rockefellers in inducing Congress to
eliminate taxation of their enterprises in Saudi Arabia and
other lands.
American Institute of Mining and Metallurgical
Engineers
Harvard University and Radcliffe College Social Science
Research Council In the field of community orgamzation and
planning, which was so valuable to the Rockefeller interests in
gaining control of local municipal and state governments, the
Rockefellers scattered grants about the world where they
would serve their purposes best. Their key organizations are
the Institute of Public Administration and a group of or-
ganizations that were financed by the Spelman Fund, that will
be described.

Among the organizations receiving unclassified social
science grants were the following:

American Historical Association, which was quite
helpful in perverting history in a manner that suited the
purpose of the Reckefeller Empire

Association for the Study of Negro Life & History, that
is active in subversive Negro propaganda around the globe
In the field of the "Humanities", the Rockefellers

subsidized their totalitarian propaganda on the pretense of
fostering learning. Their chief agency in this direction is the
American Council of Learned Societies, which will be
described later in connection with the use of its Rockefeller
Foundation grants for the translating under the guise of
"learning", the Soviet publications that embody the latest
Communist Party "line", for the convenience of American
Communists. One of its subsidiaries received a large grant for
the purpese of planting Communist agents and pro-
Communists in the Government in all sections affecting the
Far East and Chinese affairs.
Since the close of World War II several new 160


wrinkles have been added to the activities of the Rockefeller
Foundation. It has gone beyond the point of merely
propagandizing the Rockefeller brand of Communism. In a
erant of $110,000 made to Cornell University in 1948
(Report, p. 64) for the "Study of the relation of civil rights to
the control of subversive activities in the United States,” it has
undertaken to rise openly to the defense of its subversive
agents and to harass those who seek to expose them. In the
same year it made a grant to the notorious Federal Council of
Churches of Christ in America, for the purpose of festering
Marxism and its brand of totalitarianism in the churches. The
Foundation is also contributing to the support of Rockefeller'’s
United Nations. Under the guise of “humanities”, the
Foundation has undertaken to support left-wing penetration of
the theatre, radio and television.

The principal function of the Rockefeller Foundation in the
past decade has been furthering intensively the interests of the
Rockefeller Empire: indirect control of the U.S., of other
governments and of world affairs through such agencies as the
Council on Foreign Relations and the Institute of Pacific
Relations; imposition of the Marxist New Deal on the U.S.
and other lands; to initiate, directly or indirectly, for the glory
and enrichment of Rockefeller and the advancement of the
Empire, "international" schemes such as "Lend-Lease", the
Marshall Plan, the Point 4 program and the North Atlantic
Treaty Organizations; to foster disastrous inflation in the U.S.
by forcing exorbitant expenditures that will lead to ever in-
creasing taxation and popular discontent that will serve to
bring about the "new social order", totalitarianism, that is the
avowed objective of all Rockefeller ' 'philanthropies"; and to
foment, indirectly, under the pretense of seeking peace, a
series of wars which must eventually lead to exhaustion of the
two chief powers in the world today who might contest the
supremacy of the Rockefeller Empire, the U.S. and Russia.

But for emphasis, it must be repeated that the bitter irony of
this ghastly foundation situation is that under the tax laws
vittually all their funds, that are being used to injure public
interests, are withheld from the public treasury by exemption
features of tax laws the malefactors have written.


CHAPTER IX


ROCKEFELLER'S GOOD GOVERNMENT FOR
AMERICAN "PEASANTS" Rockefeller, Kefauver
& Rackets


The flagrant and wholesale law-breaking involved in the
building up of the Standard Oil Co. necessarily required
powerful political protection and control. Long before the
beginning of the twentieth century, Rockefeller had
established control of the local political machines in the oil
districts, in Ohie and Pennsylvania. Especially helpful as
agents or as lobbyists were the following:

Senator Boies Penrose, of Pennsylvania, who on his death

in the early 1930's left a cache of over $10,000,000 in gold

bars in his vault. He was particularly helpful in influencing
the report of the Congressional Industrial Commission ap-
pointed to investigate trusts, especially the Standard Oil

Co., the "Oil Trust.” Senator Matthew S5. Quay, of

Pennsylvania. Congressman Joseph C. Sibley, of

Pennsylvania, who was labelled by the press, "Archheld's

(Standard Oil Co's) jackal"; whe gained his seat in Congress

with Standard Oil Co. funds and support; and who was their

frank lobbyist in Congress.
Senator Mark Hanna, of Ohio, political boss, who won
his seat in the Senate with Standard Oil Co. support.

Senator Joseph Benson Foraker, former Governor of Ohio,

who served the Standard Oil Co. as attorney and legislative

agent, acting for bribes. Senator Nelson W. Aldrich, of

Rhode Island, whe was brought into the Rockefeller tribe by

the marriage of John D. Rockefeller Jr. to Abby Greene

Aldrich; the latter brought into the cold, calculating and

ruthless Rockefeller tribe the hard, parsimonious Greene

and Aldrich blood strains, noted for "thrift" in a super-
thrifty New England. Aldrich and Hanna were bosses of the

Senate and served the Rockefeller interests loyally and well.

Aldrich introduced in the Senate a bill to charter the

Rockefeller Foundation that later failed to pass the House.

President William McKinley, of Ohio, was a Rockefeller-

Hanna creature, representing the 162


emergence of the Rockefeller political domination in the

national field. Since then every presidential nominee of

every party with the exception of Theodore Roosevelt has
been a Rockefeller puppet. Roosevelt resented the

Rockefeller influence that had given the nomination to

McKin-ley, which he demanded for himself but was forced

to waive in return for the vice-presidential nomination. It is

notable that McKinley did not live to enjoy his office long,
but was mysteriously assassinated by a victim of mental
disease, who was highly suggestible and a plant tool.

Roosevelt's antagonism toward the Rockefellers and

subservience to the Morgan interests, however, did not stop

him from seeking an increase in the $125,000 contributed
by the former to his 1904 campaign.

The list of public officers on the Rockefeller Standard Oil
payroll is too long to detail. The nation was given the picture
of their wholesale corruption of public officials by the Clapp
Committee investigation. This investigation, plus seven
Federal and six state indictments and suits against the
Standard Oil and its subsidiaries, plus public reaction to the
South Improvement Co. affair and other exposures forced the
Rockefellers to migrate once again, from Cleveland to New
York. Undoubtedly they served to impress on Rockefeller that
mere bribery of public officials was not sufficient and was
unsatisfactory in its results. It was the decree handed down by
Judge Kenesaw Landis, ordering the disselution of the
Standard Oil Co. and imposing on it a fine of $29,000,000,
that served to convince the Rockefeller interests that they
could carry out their plans only if they completely controlled
the Government in Washington, as well as the local
governments. It was then that government contrel through
propaganda, or thought control, under the cover of

"educational endowments", and manipulation of the
government through the medium of super-lobbies parading as
“philanthropic” foundations came into consideration.

At the same time, by various devices, the Rockefellers
extended their political control of local governments in all
sections of the country. This was engineered through one of
the phoney Rockefeller "philanthropes," the Municipal
Research

163


Bureau, set up for the ostensible purpose of guiding the
"Improvement" of local governments. "Improvement", like
"internationalism", in Rockefeller parlance means invariably
Rockefeller control domination and advantage—the more
complete the advantage the greater the "improvement". The
Municipal Research Bureau was later masked, to hide the
identity of its Rockefeller control, by the adoption of an alias
by which it is now known, the Institute of Public
Administration. It is now located in New York City at 684
Park Avenue.

The methods and devices used by the Rockefellers in

taking over control of a community is well illustrated by the
experience of New York City. The Standard Oil Co. began its
efforts to dominate New York City politics by the corruption
of public officials in 1879. In that year several officials of the
company were indicted by a Grand Jury in New York County.
The indictment was quashed by New York City Corporation
Counsel, William C. Whitney. Whitney rebuked the District
Attorney for permitting the Grand Jury to bring in the indict-
ment.
The Rockefellers were quick to realize the enormous profit
possibilities of the highly cencentrated, rapidly growing
population of the New York area. With the Ryans and the
Bradys, operating in the market through Bernard Baruch, they
bought control of the local utilities and all essential facilities.
They control the Consolidated Edison Co. that has a
monopoly in the supply of gas and electricity to several
boroughs of Greater New York, and Brooklyn Union Gas Co.,
among others.

The transit facilities of New York City were brought under
their control through domination of the Manhattan Elevated
R.R. Co., the Brooklyn Manhattan Transit Corp. and the
Interborough Rapid Transit Co. They looted these roads, that
have the greatest passenger density of any roads in the world
and managed to pay enormous dividends on a five cent fare, to
the point of bankruptcy. Then they engineered the scheme,
through their Fusion puppet, Mayor Fiorello LaGuardia, to
have the city's taxpayers take over, at their par value, the well
nigh worthless securities of the rooked roads, in exchange for
New York City bonds. They labelled this steal
"unification".

164


Through the Transit Commission, which they dominate, they
still retain control of the unified lines, with the objective of
expansion, fare increase, and deliberate mismanagement until
the public will be compelled to demand the return of the lines,
that have been greatly extended at the expense of the
taxpayers, to their private management. Within five years after
unification, the rolling stock of the lines, even the newly
purchased cars, show obvicus signs of deterioration, rust and
flaking paint. Overcrowding is worse than ever. Treatment of
the passengers has become constantly more brutal to the point
of actual murder. The safety devices on the doors of the cars
that protected passengers from being caught in the doors and
dragged by the trains, were removed by order of the Transit
Commission and the Mayor, "in the interest of efficiency”.
Since then five passengers have been killed by being caught in
closed train doors and dragged; and numerous passengers are
injured in varying degrees in this manner. Life has little value
to bureaucrats and dictators. With the ccoperation of
dominated labor unions, demanding constant increase in
wages for ever less work, the fares have been increased from
five cents to ten cents. But the roads are being looted more
mercilessly than ever, under their management, and are
showing a constantly increasing deficit. At this time a fifteen
cent fare is under consideration, and there is no end in sight.

They control most of the important banks of New York,
including the Chase National Bank, the National City Bank,
Central Hanover Bank & Trust Co., New York Trust Co., J.
Henry Schroeder Banking Corp., Manufacturers Trust Co. and
others, to the extent that they practically completely control
the Federal Reserve System. Through their holdings in the
Borden Co. and National Dairy Products Co., that comprise
what Henry Wallace labelled the Milk Trust, they control the
milk supply of the city; and, through their control of city
politics and the Health Department, they have raised the mini-
mal price of milk from 6c a quart te over 20c a quart during a
period of two decades. They are dominant or controlling
factors in the railroads that enter New York City, and also in
many other key enterprises essential for the life of the city.
Every citizen in the metropolitan area pays them heavy


tribute every day of his life.

Henry H. Klein, who was First Deputy Commissioner of
Accounts of New York City under the Hylan administration,
reported in his Rockefeller Or Ged as follows:

"The Rockefellers have contributed hundreds of
thousands of dollars to campaign funds in New York City
during the past twenty-five years. They virtually financed
the campaign of John Purroy Mitchell for mayor in 1913,
and have led in financing political campaigns since. (p. 39}

"Rockefeller guaranteed Billy Sunday three hundred
thousand dollars for his so-called religious revival in New
York City in 1917, where John D. Jr. was trying to re-elect
John Purroy Mitchell mayor, but Billy's eloquence failed to
achieve this result though he collected more than three
hundred thousand dollars from those who attended his
revival meetings. Ivy Lee was his press agent. (p.46)
"Rockefeller cash has been used in local district primary
fights to defeat or elect district leaders. . . "In 1937 the
Rockefellers were behind all the mayoralty candidates, their
Consolidated Edison Co. being behind Senator Copeland,
and their B.M.T. and I.R.T. being behind Whalen and
Mahoney, in the Democratic primary fight against
Copeland. They stood to gain no matter who won the
primaries or the election. Itis doubtful if any candidates can
be elected to high public office hereafter, without
Rockefeller support, unless it be on an out and out anti-
Rockefeller issue. Besides controlling political bosses, they
control virtually all channels of publicity, including
newspapers, magazines, movies, radios, and they finance
most so-called civic, social service and ‘reform’
organizations in the city. In addition to this, they support
and finance influential politicians by contracts through
various corporations, and most so-called ‘leading citizens’
are on the Rockefeller payroll as attorneys, insurance agents
or in some other capacity.

"They tried to elect LaGuardia mayor in 1929

... and they contributed heavily in 1933 and

1937 to elect and re-elect LaGuardia .. . the

Rockefellers contributed heavily to elect Thomas

E. Dewey District Attorney in 1937

"The same sort of influence is exercised by the 166


Rockefellers in most large cities and in mest states, and

many congressmen, senators and others in high public

office are undoubtedly favored by them or their
corporations, in business."

Operating through various "civic", “reform” and "fusion"
organizations, often set up and largely financed by
themselves, the Rockefellers and their publicity men and
propagandists lobby and create a semblance of public support
for their own enterprises. In order to give themselves a larger
measure of direct control of the local governments, they have
made it a practise to "amend", or rewrite the local basic law,
as they have the Constitution of the U.S. Thus they have given
New York City and the States of New Jersey and New York
new charters, and are now in the precess of doing the same in
Connecticut. This is done under the cloak of an artificially
engineered "popular demand”, naturally in the interest of
"sood government” and "economy". The economies are
chiefly or entirely for the Rockefellers and their interests; and
the governments that they engineer are "sood" only for them
and their radical henchmen of the "social science" crowd.
Their "new social order" turns cut to be the same corrupt old
order, infinitely intensified, with themselves as masters.

A favorite device of the "new social order" in frustrating the
will of the people and gaining control for their crew, is

"proportional representation". By trickery such as "bullet
voting,” it 1s possible for an infinitesimal minority to secure
disproportionately high representation. This favorite device of
theirs was written into the New York City Charter. It resulted
in giving the Communist Party numerous seats on the City
Council which its small minority of voters could not have
gained otherwise. The cost of this betrayal of the citizenry was
enormous, in both time and money. It was abandoned because
of unwieldiness after endless, unheeded public protests.

The new Charter and Rockefeller control have made New
York City virtually insolvent. Within less than a decade the
City budget of five hundred million dollars, which was
assailed by the Rockefeller "reformers" as padded and corrupt,
was almost tripled. Tax rates have risen steadily and the
caliber of services received by the citizens in


tT T


return, such as snow removal, street cleaning, hospitalization,
schools and others, has steadily deteriorated under the
Rockefeller - LaGuardia "reform" Fusion administration and
its Rockefeller-controlled successors. Payrolls have been
padded outrageously and an endless array of drones has been
planted on it.

Thus, the Health Department of New York City has little or
no reason for a separate existence. Most of the services that it
is supposed to render are merely an inefficient duplication of
services that could be efficiently rendered by the Hospital
Department, with which it jealously competes. Such services
are the treatment of venereal diseases, which not infrequently
requires hospitalization for the safety of the patient and his
contacts and for which the Health Department has no
facilities. Nevertheless, under Rockefeller-dictated and con-
trolled Health Commissioners, the facilities of the Health
Department have been tremendously increased by the building
of a score of so-called Health Centers which must go out and
drag in victims in order to discharge their inefficient duplicate
services. They are empty and idle nine-tenths of the time. The
Hospital Department, on the other hand, iş terrifically
overcrowded and has patients suffering from serious diseases
swarming in its often verminous wards and corridors under
conditions that jeopardize their lives. It is constantly faced
with a crying need for enlargement of its facilities that could
be materially increased by the space and funds wasted on the
idle Health Centers.

But the Health Department serves the Rockefellers and
allied interests commercially. The Health Commissioner
controls the milk business of the city and dictates the terms
under which it is carried on. Rockefeller's Milk Trust seeks
and is steadily attaining a monopoly of the milk business in
our cities, through its Borden Co. and National Dairy Products
Co. Therefore, the appointment of Health Commissioners is
dictated by the Rockefellers and they are generally employees
or former employees of their fake philanthropies. The low or
moderately paid and experienced civil-service medical
employees who had been with the Health Department for
years were dismissed. They were replaced in the majority of
instances by utterly inexperienced, freshly graduated
physicians, and

168


often by laymen, from the payroll of the various Rockefeller

"philanthropies” who are dependent on the Rockefellers for
their livelihoods and futures, and can be depended on by the
Rockefellers to do their bidding, no matter what it be. Their
essential qualification is adherence to Marxist “social
science”. This replacement was accomplished by the faverite
trick of the Rockefeller interests that they snidely call
"reorganization".

These "reorganizations" are usually made to serve the
interests of the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis. This is illustrated by
the case of Dr. Leona Baum-gartner, a "liberal" Rockefeller
pawn, recipient of a Rockefeller Research Fellowship. When
she had been graduated from medical school only five years
and was practically inexperienced, she was imported in
viclation of municipal residence laws by the Rockefeller
interests to take over the post of Director of Child Hygiene in
their "reorganization" of the Health Department. She replaced
one of the most widely experienced and illustrious men in the
field, who did not happen te be a Rockefeller pawn or a
Communist. Following her advent the Department abandoned
tried rules regarding the isolation of victims of measles that
had previously been in force to prevent the development of
epidemics of the disease among schoolchildren and the danger
to their health that it implied. The real motive underlying this
abandonment was the effect that quarantine had on school
attendance and the reduction of moneys allowed by the State
of New York to the City of New York for the “educational
system" on the basis of attendance. Less value was placed on
the health and lives of the schoolchildren than on the funds for
"education". The result has been annual epidemics of measles
with a proportionate number of deaths and unrecorded injuries
deliberately inflicted by the conspirators on tens of thousands
of children. For them, the money was more important than the
health and lives of the children. It is characteristic of the
"liberals" in all their activities that they put little value on the
lives of others.

It soon became apparent that Dr. Baumgartner was bent
upon rendering an important service to her sponsors. Under
the pretense of interest in the health of preschool children, Dr.
Baumgartner's division usurped control of the educational
program of

169


the play schools and kindergartens, which it undertook to
direct into channels approved by the Communist Party and so-
called "liberals"; it also undertock to dictate the selection of
"approved" teaching personnel—a usurpation of the power of
the Board of Education. Schools which failed to comply were
put cut of business for supposed violation of constantly
changed Health Department regulations. Finally the Packard
School courageously challenged the conspirators. It took the
case to the courts, which ruled that the activities of Dr. Leona
Baumegartner's department were illegal and enjoined them.

Dr. Leona Baumgartner was promoted for her service to the
cause. She is constantly being built up in the press by her
bosses with the objective of advancing her to the post of their
Health Commissioner and further. Thus the New York Times
of September 5, 1951, gives big headlines to some
psychoanalytic buncombe of Dr. Baumgartner's that was part
of a talk delivered to 250 overworked and miserably
underpaid Health Department physicians who are required to

"examine" millions of schoolchildren in the course of each
year at the rate of one every several minutes. Dr.
Baumegartnet's exhortation to these drudges, that they "stress
aid to emotionally disturbed children", was obvious humbug
intended solely to make the headlines and dupe the
"peasants", and for her own glorification in their eyes.

The “reorganized” Health Department, thus has become
completely prostituted to the Rockefeller commercial
interests. It advertises their brand of milk and urges the sucker
public, the "peasants", to consume ever more and thus make
even higher profits for the Reckefeller Milk Trust. Some of
the Health Centers actually sell their milk. Most of it is
"homogenized", synthetic and adulterated, of a grade that a
conscientious health commissioner would bar from
consumption. It bears little resemblance to the real article.
When it is allowed to stand, it does not sour like real milk, but
becomes putrid. Even if it were real, pure milk, it would not
be the "perfect food" that the Department and its
Commissioner dishonestly represent it to be in order to
stimulate greater consumption and mere business and profits
for the Milk Trust. To avoid any damage to the business of
their milk companies, the

170


Rockefeller-prestituted Health Commissioners no longer warn
the public when the consumption of milk is dangerous
because pollution with streptococci or with Bang bacilli are
causing epidemics of septic sore throat and brucellosis. When
the life of others is weighed in the balance against Milk Trust
profits, it 1s the profits that win out.

Even the really essential function of the Health Department,
vital statistics, is administered in such manner as to swindle
the sucker public. The Health Centers serve as sales agencies
for “industrial” insurance policies that are sold by such
companies as Metropolitan Life Insurance Co., Prudential and
others at exorbitant rates. These policies have been declared
by some courts to be fraudulent because of devices included
in them to permit the company to evade payment of benefits.
By “fixing” vital statistics and by releasing "confidential"
information which the unscrupulous, Rockefeller-dominated
health officers now require of physicians in connection with
death certificates, the Health Department aids the insurance
companies in evading payments to the "beneficiaries" of its
policies. Needless to say, the Rockefeller interests control the
large, key insurance companies and use the policyholders’
monies to finance the expansion of the "Empire".

Thirty years ago, the Health Department included in its
scope a large part of the activities of the Hospital Department
and the present Department of Sanitation. Now its largely
useless activities comprise less than ten percent of its former
functions. But the cost of operation of the Health Department
is more than three times what it was thirty years ago. This
means that for its present Reckefeller-dictated, racketeering
functions, Health Department costs have increased
approximately thirty times.

The same arrant wanton waste and disregard of public
interest characterize every branch of New York City's
government under the Rockefeller "reorganized" and
"reformed" government. Under corrupt Tammany rule, the
Department of Sanitation kept the streets clean and promptly
removed the snow as it fell. Now, though the Department
costs the taxpayer many times what it did under Tammany,
the streets are dirty and snow is allowed to remain in the
roadways to form icy sheets, until it melts. Under
Tammany, respectable citizens

17]


were afforded some measure of police protection and crimes
were recorded even if some were not solved. Now, the Police
Department is too busy divvying up loct and collecting ' ice"
or protection money, from gamblers and criminals; guarding
racketeering unioneers and pickets; playing nurse maid to the
mobs at the fights and ball parks; wooing votes for the
politicians in parades; and acting as royal guards for guests of
the Rockefeller Empire from abroad and lining miles of streets
along the line of parade through the city to Rockefeller's
Union Club —they are far too busy with these activities even
to make a record on the police blotter of such crimes as
burglary and assault upon mere taxpayers and citizens, the
"peasantry". For that reason the FBI has refused to accept the
records of the Police Department of New York City, on major
crime. The Kefauver Crime Investigation Committee merely
dramatically presented to the public, facts that have been
known to it for many years and have been repeatedly
published; the indictment of several score police officers
merely serves to cover up the activities of the tops of the
criminal syndicate operating on a nation-wide scale.

The sole differences made by Rockefeller-instigated
"reforms" and "reorganizations" 1s that the corruption
becomes greater, more insolent and costlier, and that the graft
goes to higher strata of society. How the Rockefellers benefit
from such activities is clearly portrayed in the Saturday
Evening Post publicity series by Joe Alex Morris on the
Rockefellers in the issue of January 6, 1951, as follows:

". when he (John D. Rockefeller Jr.) was approached
with the idea — in which Nelson Rockefeller concurred —
that the time had come for him to abandon his lifetime
advocacy of prohibition, (Ed: which he was largely
instrumental in imposing on the nation} Mr. Rockefeller felt
that things were being carried too far. Liquor had never
been and still is not served in the elder Rockefeller's
household, and he argued that opponents of the Volstead
Act had been guilty of gross exaggeration when they
claimed that the speak-easy situation had become a greater
evil than the saloon. This was a deep religious and moral
conviction. . .

"A story has frequently been told that Nelson 172


persuaded his father to declare himself in favor of repeal of

the Volstead Act by guiding him one evening on a quick

tour of mid-Manhattan where he pointed out in the space of

a few blocks more than a score of speak-easies, all running

ful blast and ignored by the (Rockefeller dominated)

police.

"And pa, ' Nelson was supposed to have said, ‘they're all
on your property.’ " It 1s a Reckefeller tradition that nothing
must interfere with business profits—and certainly not "deep
religious and moral convictions", that serve so well to cover
up ulterior purposes. It requires a lot of explaining to
understand why it is that in a community so completely
controlled and dominated by the Rockefellers, to the extent
that virtually nothing can exist without their ‘consent, there
can exist, the putrid corruption, rampant crime and merciless
looting of the citizenry through the device of taxation, that
exist in New York City

The Rockefeller interests have derived their greatest spoils
from political control of New York City by evasion of
taxation for themselves while benefiting from the wholesale
looting of the rank and file of taxpayers through steadily
increasing assessments and exorbitant, constantly rising taxes.
The Rockefellers and the corporations which they control
have enormous holdings in New York City. In 1938, when
realty values were a fraction of present prices, their own
holdings were estimated as worth “about $600,000,000."
(Rockefeller or God, p. 37). Title to the land on which
Rockefeller Center is built is vested in Columbia University,
and is tax exempt. The assessed value of the buildings and
improvements is relatively very low even though the
Rockefellers, through their political domination, have
arranged to give it an enormously heightened value. This they
effected by having their top Democratic agent in the U.S.
Senate, Senator Robert F. Wagner, introduce and secure the
passage by the 72nd Congress, in 1932, of Public Bill No. 296
which made Rockefeller Center the only freepert in the U.S.!

The implications of the free-port status of Rockefeller
Center are many. And they throw an interesting light on the
modus operandi of the Rockefeller "philanthropes". It means
that merchants located in Rockefeller Center can import

173


merchandise and display it for sale without paying customs
duty. They can do business with a small fraction of the capital
required by their neighbors across the street. This implies
discrimination against other property holders, discrimination
against every other port in the country, and violation of the
Constitution. It enabled the Rockefellers to lure tenants from
other buildings with the inducement of lesser capital
requirements. They went out of the way to offer additional
inducements to inveigle tenants to desert other landlords and
move into Rockefeller Center, such as deliberately lowered
rents, payment of unexpired leases on premises occupied, and
many others.

The vacancies resulting from the wholesale exodus of
tenants into Rockefeller Center from other properties was
equivalent in its effect to "short selling" of New York City
property and sharply depressing the value of property
throughout the country. As a result the depression that then
prevailed in this country and the world was greatly intensified
and prolonged. And the Rockefellers were enabled to grab up,
at bankrupt prices, properties and industries thus depreciated,
while millions were thrown out of work, had their properties
and homes foreclosed, were forced on a dole, or starved. This
sharp and highly profitable business deal has been represented
to the public as a “philanthropic” depression enterprise by the
Rockefeller Goebbels, otherwise known as publicity men. All
this is quite characteristic of the Rockefeller ' "philanthropic"
enterprises.

The tactics employed by the Rockefellers in their
"benevolent philanthropy” at Rockefeller Center were the
basis of at least one lawsuit against them that came to public
attention. It was brought by August Heckscher and was settled
out of court. Its disposition was never made public.

Rockefeller Center is today the business capital of the
world. It numbers among its 1100 tenants many governments.
Many hundreds of the tenants are corporations owned or
controlled by the Rockefellers.

The Rockefellers are the largest holders of New York City
municipal issues, which are tax exempt and a first len on all
the property in the city. Their tactics in driving the city to the
verge of bankruptcy and in steadily and relentlessly increasing


the tax burden through their control of the government,
parallels their tactics in the Federal Government. The
otjectives could be the same in both cases,—personal gains at
the expense of the taxpayers, and a drive to gain direct
ownership and control of everything through bankruptcy.
That is the Lenin formula for Communism and dictatorship.
Bankruptcy is in the offing for New York City and its
property owners, with an annual budget of one billion three
hundred million dollars, that represents an increase of 25%,
or 1951.

Under Rockefeller control, New York City squanders on the
single item of "welfare", which is their favorite enterprise with
other people's money, as much as two hundred million dollars
a year. This amounts to almost half the total city budget of the
late twenties. Their "social service" appointees have used this
vast bocdle fund to maintain their puppet mayors and
administrations in power by buying "relief" votes and to foster
Communism, subversion, improvidence and worse in large
sections of the citizenry. Prostitutes have been maintained by
the Welfare Department, at the expense of the taxpayers, in
luxury in hotels in which they plied their trade, with grants as
high as six hundred dollars a month and payment of summer
storage charges for their mink coats. Bigamists have been
aided by "welfare" grants to both of their families. Relief
families have been maintained for years in expensive hotels,
in idleness enforced by "welfare" regulations, at a cost to the
taxpayer of hundreds of dollars higher than the average
monthly income of provident taxpayers. Carpetbagging
Negroes and penniless Porto Ricans were imported by train-
and plane-loads, colonized in the city, and immediately placed
on relief, before each election of Rockefeller's puppet, Fiorello
LaGuardia. Communist unions of social workers have staged
strikes against reduction of welfare allowances or budgets,
which are frankly used by them to foster Communism. In
May, 1951, in the midst of war, with an actual shortage of
labor prevailing, Welfare Commissioner Henry L. McCarthy
proudly reported in the press that public assistance for the
month of April, 1951, amounted to a mere $12,854,729. The
same newspaper issue that reported McCarthy's figures, also
reported that a couple who had on deposit in a savings bank
more than $12,000,

175


had received another $12,000 in public assistance in the
preceding three years.

During the past two years, the Rockefellers have made a
number of cautious moves to take over direct and open
control of the finances of New York City. The story of the
abandonment of Win-throp Reckefeller's proposed candidacy
for Comp-troellership of New York City has been related.

But the Rockefellers did not give up their scheme te gain
direct control of the Comptroller's office. On April 11, 1951,
Beardsley Ruml was appointed Special Deputy Comptroller
by the Democratic regime. He is Rockefeller's agent who
operated the Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial and
through it launched the Marxist "social science” program for
them, and the "tax expert” who is entrusted to draw up the tax
bills that suit their purposes of looting the taxpayers while
providing loop-holes to exempt themselves.

New York City is merely cited as a typical instance of the
Rockefeller political control of local governments. The
scheme of municipal government contrel was launched in the
early part of the century by the Rockefeller subsidized
Municipal Research Bureau. In time every significant com-
munity in the country, every state, county, city, town, and
many villages came to be as completely dominated by ‘them
and their agents as New York City. Two agencies were set up
for this purpose. The first is the permanently endowed
Institute of Public Administration which is an outgrowth of
the Municipal Research Bureau which maintains the pretense
of being dissevered from Rockefeller control, but is truly the
Department of the Interior of the Rockefeller Empire. The
second is the group of agencies centering about the Public
Administration Clearing House, which are designated by the
number 1313 derived from the building which it put up at
1313 East 60th Street, in Chicago, the establishment and
maintenance of which was the sole function of the Spelman
Fund to which Rockefeller granted $10,000,000 from the
funds of the Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial at the time
of its merger.

Originally launched as the Municipal Research Bureau, in
1906, the Institute of Public Administration became ‘the
agency through which the Rockefellers developed their
political control of New York

176


City, in the guise of a “philanthropic” interest in “good
government". It rapidly became the most corrupt political
agency in the city, and therefore the dominant one. Its
influence was expanded, with the collaboration of other
controlled foundations and interested industrial organizations,
such as the Metropolitan Life Insurance Co., to a national
scope. In 1928 it was rechartered as the National Institute of
Public Administration, but dropped the "National" from its
name when its charter was made permanent in 1931,
presumably because an “international” role was already
schemed for it by its sponsors. At the same time, in order to
mask its identity as one of their controlled agencies, the
Rockefellers in collaboration with the Julius Rosen-wald
Foundation, which they dominated, and a group of associates,
provided an endowment for the Institute. Its brochure states its
purposes and functions as follows:

"The Institute of Public Administration is a research
consulting, and educational organization concerned with
improving public administration. It is incorporated under the
Education Law of New York State, is supported by income
from its endowment and from fees, and 1s independent of
sectarian, partisan, or governmental control. The Institute is
located in New York City where it was founded in 1906 as the
New York Bureau of Municipal Research. Its training
program was established in 1911 as the Training School for
Public Service, the first of its kind in the United States.

"The range of Institute activities has widened considerably
since 1906. In the early years attention was confined to such
matters as the accounting and budgeting systems of local
governments, personnel and salary standardization, zoning
ordinances and real estate assessment, and the operating
problems of police, fire, health, public works and other mu-
nicipal departments. In the 'twenties and ‘thirties emphasis was
extended to a number of broader problems of administration
including the formulation of charters and constitutions, the
reorganization of state governments, and the lessening of
conflict and duplication among different units.”

Its personnel is listed as follows: TRUSTEES Richard $.

Childs, Chairman Carl H. Pforzheimer, Vice
Chairman 177


Henry Bruere, Treasurer

William Tudor Gardiner George 5. Van Schaick
E. Roland Harriman Delos Walker
Herbert Hoover John G. Winant
It is significant that the Truman appointment that brought ex-
President Hoover out of retirement was made in order to
conduct a survey preliminary to the "reorganization" of the
Federal Government. Miss Audrey Davies reports that hen a
revised Constitution for New York State was submitted to the
State Legislature in 1915, it was almost unanimously rejected.
But during the regimes of Governor Alfred Smith it was
resubmitted piecemeal with his support and was "put over".
The New York City Charter, however, guided by Rockefeller
puppets led by Judge Thomas D. Thacher of Rockefeller's
Council On Foreign Relations as chairman, went through
without a hitch, exactly as drawn up by Rockefeller's Institute.

The "1313," its objectives and attainments are clearly
described in the Final Report of the Spelman Fund of New
York, published in 1949. The trustees and officers of the Fund
are listed in the Report, as follows:


Cleveland E. Dodge Charles E. Merriam
Clarence A. Dykstra John D. Rockefeller 3rd
Marshall Field Laurance 5. Rockefeller


William Tudor Gardiner Beardsley Ruml (Italicized-Ceuncil
On Foreign Relations members} The Report relates that the
Fund was created on December 27, 1928, with a capital of
$10,000,000 provided by the Laura Spelman Rockefeller
Memorial, and received later grants of $3,000,000 from the
Rockefeller Foundation. It related as the ultimate objective of
the Fund that it
".. assumed as its major responsibility an exploration of

the possibilities of cooperation with public bodies for the

improvement of public administration.” (p. 3}

The modus operandi of the Fund is stated as follows:

"From the beginning it was determined by the Spelman

Fund that grants would net be made for research purposes

but in the main for the application of research. The principle

was that research would normally be conducted by

academic institutions, while the Fund's beneficiaries would

carry on their practical operations ..." (p. 14) 178


Subsidy or bribery of public officials to adopt the
Rocketeller-serving schemes dished up by Rockefeller-
subsidized and dominated "academic institutions" could fall
into this description. The Report states:
"To facilitate this purpose, an agency known
as the Public Administration Clearing House was

set up (p. 7} The Board of Trustees of the Clearing House
included :


Paul H. Appleby William Tudor Gardiner
Sewell L. Avery Paul G. Hoffman
Newton D. Baker Robert M. Hutchins
Louis Brownlow William L. Levis

Ralph Budd Frank O. Lowden

Harry F. Byrd George Fort Milton
Richard 5$. Childs John Lord O'Brian
Frederick M. Davenport John G. Pollard

Charles G. Dawes Chester H. Rowell
Marshall Field John G. Winant


(Italicized-Council On Foreign Relations members}

In "1313" there are housed a multitude of Rockefeller front
organizations in the governmental field, including the Public
Administration Service, successor to the Municipal
Administration Service, that acts in "advisory" capacity to
other front organizations or to unsuspecting independent
communities. It has also reached out into the international
field through "cooperation" with the International Union of
Local Authorities of Brussels and the International Institute of
Administrative Science. The Spelman Fund made
contributions to those and to special conferences on
governmental planning for conservation and utilization of
national resources (including oil, naturally} in the principal
countries of the world, held at Ardennes, Belgium, in Septem-
ber 1937. In November 1938, negotiations for domination of
the Pan-American field were furthered by the First Pan-
American Congress of Municipalities at Havana. It organized
in 1939 the American Society for Public Administration and
launched its quarterly publication, the Public Review. These
are a few of the endless array of Rockefeller front
governmental agencies, two of the most significant of which
are the Rockefeller-inspired and subsidized National
Resources Planning Board and the Office of Government
Reports, which have been characterized by Representative
John Taber 179


of New York as follows: (C. R., v. 86. Part I. pp. 419-20)

"| want to call the attention of the Congress to an
operation which is going on and which the Executive,
according to his statement in last night's paper, is still trying
to put across, notwithstanding the Congress has failed to
provide any legislative authority for it—two schemes
known as the National Resources Planning Beard and the
Office of Government Reports.

"The first of these outfits is a propaganda outfit, designed
to embark the Government on all kinds of programs which
have never been regarded as Federal functions; to embark
the Government on all sorts of things that will bankrupt the
United States.

"The second of these outfits is an outfit which has been
designed to establish the Executive in great power and to
build up his authority, and increase the trend toward
dictatorship.

"The planning of this Office of Government Reports
came largely through the direction and operation of one,
Louis Brownlow, who was chairman of this so-called outfit.
This Louis Brownlow has a great lot of organizations. I am
going to put them in the Record in detail. Charles Mer-riam,
a professor who formerly served at the Chicago University,
is a member of this National Resources Planning Board and
one of the moving spirits behind it. He is the head of the
Spelman Foundation (Ed: Fund) which has contributed, in
the last six or seven years, a total of $3,953,000 to these
different Brownlow outfits.

"As a result of the recent proposal of the reorganization
of the Federal Government proposed by none other than
Charles E. Merriam and Louis Brownlow, the National
Resources Planning Board has been moved directly into the
Office of the White House.

"I do realize that both of these organizations are a menace
to the welfare of the American people, and they are a
menace to Constitutional government. I feel that the
Subcommittee on Independent Offices of the
Appropriations Committee are to be complimented on
cutting out all appropriations for the National Resources
Planning Board and the Office of Government Reports."

180


Professor Charles E. Merriam boasts (p. 19):

"An important agency largely due to the public
administration group (set up by the Fund) is the Division of
Administrative Management under the Federal Bureau of
the Budget. This Division carries on continuously the
detailed study of the ways and means of administration in
the federal service and constitutes a permanent center and
activity in public administration.

"Another gain is the developing status of important
consultants available fer public service. It is net by accident
that Louis Brownlow was called in by President Roosevelt as
chairman of his Committee on Administration and Manage-
ment; or that Herbert Emmerich and Don K. Price have been
called upon by former President Hoover to assist in the work
of the Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch
of the Government; or that Mrs. Emmerich has been asked by
President Truman to help implement the whole plan of the
Commission during the next two years; or that Donald C.
Stone, first director of the Public Administration Service in
Chicago, became the head of the Division of Administrative
Management in the Bureau of the Budget and later Chief
Administrator for the Economic Cooperation Administration;
or that Frank Bane became the first executive secretary of the
Social Security Board. These are but a few examples.” Thus
do the conspirators brazenly boast of the success of their
conspiracy. But the Report was not expected to attain wide
circulation and was intended to flatter the ego of the Fund's
sponsor, John D. Rockefeller Jr.

The sum total of the consequences to the community of
these Rockefeller "philanthropic" endeavors for "Improving"
our governmental administration is most dramatically
epitomized in the report of the Senate Committee for the
Investigation of Crime that was headed by New Dealer and
Rockefeller henchman, Senator Estes Kefauver. The report
indicated that the government at all levels, national, state and
local, is dominated by a syndicate of crime. Rockefeller's
Spelman Fund boasts, in the words of Professor Merriam, that
it has "reformed" and controls our government at all levels.
Can it be that the criminal syndicate that the Kefauver report
states controls our government, and the Recke-


feller interests that the Merriam report boasts as in control,
are one and the same?

This question is pointed up by several facts. One is the
rewarding of Murray I. Gurfein with “kmghthood" in the
Rockefeller Empire, membership in their Foreign Office, the
Council On Foreign Relations, following his role in the
release of the Mafia boss, gangster, white slaver and dope-
ring overlord, "Lucky" Luciano, through successful
intercession with Rockefeller puppet, Governor Thomas E.
Dewey. Immediately following Luciano's release, the Internal
Revenue agents reported the flooding of the U.S. with
narcotics directly traced to Luciano. A second is the report
made by Italy's Public Health Commissioner, Giovanni
Battista Migliori that U. 5. Communst leaders control the
traffic of narcotics from Europe to the United States, thru
Fastern, Germany.

After four decades of Rockefeller "reform", our government
presents the spectacle of rule by criminal overlords who have
free entry into the White House and associate intimately with
the members of the President's family, as in the cases of the
Roose-velts, Hardings and Trumans. Traitors and subversive
elements persecute and prosecute patriotic citizens who
undertake to expose them, as in the cases of Martin Dies and
Senator Joseph McCarthy. The latter's ousting from the Senate
is demanded by a colleague, Senator Benton, because he had
dared to make an effort to do his duty and to protect the nation
and its security against traitors, and has manifested loyalty to
his country. The brand of "good government” that Rockefeller
has so heavily subsidized, and Professor Merriam states is "no
accident", has reached the point in Louisiana where the
criminal element have so wholly taken the law into their
hands that they have indicted and threatened with jailing the
law-abiding elements who expose and fight them.

This we can not help but agree with Professor Merriam, is
"no accident", but a nefarious conspiracy that threatens an
early end to government by Constitution, law and order. If this
is the situation that he boasts has been brought about through
the activities of the Spelman Fund, as its report claims, its
sponsors have much to answer for to the nation.


182


CHAPTER X


THE ROCKEFELLER "CRUSADES" AND THE
"OIL WAR"


"What an opportunity! Whata privilege! What a duty!"


(John D. Rockefeller Jr. The Christian Church, What Of
Its Future? January 31, 1945)


The twentieth century, to date, has been a continuous era of
intensive war between the rival Rockefeller Standard Oil and
the British oil interests. This war has only focused public
attention at intervals. But periodically, it erupts into physical
warfare in the battlefield; and it has twice involved the entire
world in wars in the past ‘half century,— World Wars I and II

, with World War III] in the making.

The Rockefeller Empire does not engage in the wars
directly. It merely engineers, plans and plots the wars and
then tricks and inveigles nations, or other groups, te fight as
its pawns and mercenaries. Invariably these wars prove
fabulously profitable to the Rockefeller Standard Oil interests.
For they regularly supply cil and other material of war to all
the belligerents indiscriminately; and modern war requires
much oil. Among the nations that have been impressed as
mercenaries in the wars of the Rockefeller Empire are
Germany, France, Italy, Belgium, Zionist Palestine, China,
Korea, Canada, Bolivia, Mexico, Soviet Russia and many
others. Outstanding mercenary of the Rockefeller Empire, and
highly useful and profitable to it, has been the United States
and its "peasants".

John D. Rockefeller Jr. has undertaken to represent these
wars as Crusades in his address delivered on January 31,1945
at a dinner given by the Protestant Council of the City of New
York, entitled The Christian Church, What of Its Future?, in
the following words:

"Not many weeks or months had elapsed after this World

War began before there was presented to our vision a

picture so horrible it hardly seemed that it could be true.

"It appeared that hell had breken loose and that millions of

evil spirits had become incarnate in human form and were

going about the earth com-183


mitting atrocities and acts of cruelty beyond belief.

"But there is another picture which the war has painted. In it
we see millions of men and women who are exemplifying in
their daily lives, in the commonplace fashion, unselfishness,
generosity, loyalty, self-sacrifice and other characteristics
and qualities which command the admiration of the world.
Uncensciously these people are reflecting Christ's spirit.
Whether they know it or not, their inspiration comes from the
God of all good deeds." He stated further (id. p. 11}: "What I
have said thus far is the substance of an address which I made
during the first World War." In short, those who fought, shed
their blood and lost their lives for his oil in the World Wars
were "Crusaders" serving in a Christ-like manner in the
"Church of the Living God," Rockefeller. "What an
opportunity! What a privilege! What a duty!" said John D.
Rockefeller Jr. (id.p.l1} Millions of dead and tens of millions
of mutilated and maimed would have been glad to have been
spared the "opportunity .. . privilege .. . duty" offered them
by pious hypecrisy.

The process whereby the U.S. government, and more
especially the State Department, was converted into a minor
bureau of the Rockefeller Empire at the very beginning of the
century, was cunning, crafty and unscrupulous play en public
eullibility and pristine American patriotism. This has become
its systematic practise. Rockefeller publicity men, supported
by prostituted "scientists" and "educators", represented to the
public through all avenues of publicity, that the U.S. supply of
oil faced imminent exhaustion. They pointed to the heavy and
steadily rising export of petroleum products since the 1860's
(for even in the midst of the Civil War the slogan of the
Standard Oil principals was the same as it is now in the course
of modern wars: "Business as usual"). They alleged then, as
they have repeatedly since, that the oil reserves of the nation
would not suffice for a decade more at the current rate of use.
How false, absurd and designing these representations were, 18
apparent from the fact that after each of those ' "predictions"
our rate of production and our ac-

184


knowledged reserves of oil rose by leaps and bounds. On the
basis of these deliberately and designedly false "predictions",
their oil "experts", supported by the Standard Oil Co. and
allied interests, have insisted that our country must seek to
gain control of foreign oilfields,—naturally, "in our national
interest". These “predictions” served as an excuse for the
corrupt political officials, agents of the Rockefeller-Standard
Oil group to openly turn over to it control of our government,
and more particularly of the State Department and of the
nation's international pelicies. Since 1900, every President,
with the possible exception of Theodore Roosevelt, who was
subservient to the rival Morgan interests, and every Secretary
of State of the U.S., has been openly an agent and spokesman
for the Rockefeller Empire. The subservience of the U.S.
Government to the Rockefeller and allied interests, and
especially of the State Department, since the turn of the
century, was acknowledged in the Federal Trade Commission
Report On Foreign Ownership In The Petroleum Industry,
1923 (p. 39} and was clearly stated in the instructions sent out
by the State Department to its consuls and agents on August
16, 1919, reading as follows:

"Gentlemen: The vital importance of securing adequate

supplies of mineral oil both for the present and future needs
of the United States has been forcibly brought to the
attention of the Department. The development of proven
fields and the exploration of new areas is being
aggressively conducted in many parts of the world by
nationals of various countries, and concessions for mineral
rights are being actively sought. It is desired to have the
most complete and recent information regarding such
activities either by United States citizens or by others.
"You are accordingly instructed to obtain and forward
promptly from time te time information regarding mineral
oil concessions either proposed or granted, sale or transfer
of such concessions, change of ownership of oil property or
important changes in ownership of corporate companies
concerned with oil production or distribution. Information
regarding development of new oil fields or increased output
of producing areas should also be forwarded.
Comprehensive data are desired and reports should not be
limited to points 185


specifically mentioned above, but should include

information regarding all matters of interest affecting the

mineral oil industry which may arise from time to time.

"You are instructed to lend all legitimate aid to reliable and
responsible United States citizens or interests which are
seeking mineral oil concessions or rights. Care should be
taken, however, to distinguish between United States
citizens representing United States capital and United States
citizens representing foreign capital; also between
corporations incorporated in the United States and actually
controlled by United States capital and those companies
which are merely incotporated under United States laws but
dominated by foreign capital." (66th Congress, 2nd Session,
Document o. 272, p. 17) Not infrequently in the course of the
diplomatic exchanges in the "Oil War" the Rockefeller
domination of the State Department found open expression.
Thus U.S. Ambassador to Britain, Walter Hines Page, an
associate of the Rockefellers, as are most of our envoys to St.
James, reported the following exchange between Secretary
of State William Jennings Bryan and Sir William Tyrell,
the special envoy of the British Foreign Office:

"'The Foreign Office has simply handed its Mexican
policy over to the oil barons for predatory purposes’, Bryan
charged in his talk with Tyrrell.

"Mr. Secretary’ Sir William replied, 'you are
talking just like a Standard Oil man . . . you are
pursuing the policy which they have decided on.’

(B. J. Hendrickson, The Life & Letters of Walter

Page, v. l, p. 203)

The State Department has served the Rockefeller Standard
Oil interest with complete and undivided loyalty and without
regard to the interests of the United States and its citizenry,
during the past half century. It can be said with absolute
assurance that whatever occurs in the State Department does
so at the behest of the Rockefeller interests. Thus if the State
Department is filled with Communists and fellow travelers,
one can be certain they are there because the Rockefeller
interests want them there; if records are removed from State
Department files in volume, the same conclusion can be
drawn. This was especially true during the past dec-

186


ade, because the Rockefellers are directly represented in the
State Department in the person of Nelson Rockefeller, as well
as indirectly, through their agents.

The British were not slow to recognize the importance of
oil, in the imperial game. For this realization they did not
require Clemenceau's plea to President Wilson, when in 1917
Great Britain came close to an oil shortage, when he wrote
(Note of December 15, 1917):

"A failure in petroleum supply would cause the immediate
paralysis of our armies and might compel us to a peace
unfavorable to the allies. Now the minimum supply of
petroleum computed for the French armies by their
Commander-in-Chief must be 44,000 tons, and the monthly
consumption is 35,000 tons. This indispensable stock
has fallen today to 28,000 tons and threatens to fall almost to
nothing if immediate and exceptional measures are not
undertaken and carried out by the United States. These
measures must be taken without a day's delay for the common
safety of the Allies, the essential condition being that
President Wilson shall obtain permanently from the
American oil companies tankers with supplementary
tonnage of 10,000 tons ... If the Allies do not wish to lose the
war, ... they must not let France lack the petroleum that is as
necessary as blood in the battles of tomorrow." Nor did they
need the assurance of Lord Curzon that "the allies floated to
victory on waves of oil", American oil provided to both the
Allies and te their enemies indiscriminately by Rockefellet's
Standard Oil Co.

As early as 1882 Admiral Lord Fisher had sought to
impress upon the British government the importance of oil as
a fuel for the British Navy and merchant marine. He
constantly reiterated the statements :

"The use of oil adds 50% to the value of any fleet that
uses it.”

"The use of oil fuel would increase the strength of the

British Navy 33%, because it can refuel off the enemy's

harbours. Coal necessitates about one third of the fleet

being absent refueling at a base . . . With two similar
dreadnoughts, oil gives three knots more speed, and speed
is every-187


thing. Oil for steamraising reduces the engine and boiler-
room personnel over 60%. At any moment during refueling
the oil-engine ship can fight—the coal-burning ship cannot .
Oil does not deteriorate by keeping. Coal does ... It is criminal
folly to allow another pound of coal on board a fighting ship."
(Davenport & Cooke, The Oil Trusts And Anglo-American
Relations, p. 5) The action of the British Government in
the matter of acquiring oil reserves contrasts sharply with that
taken by the U.S. Reflecting British cupidity and
acquisitiveness, traits that they erroneously attribute to the
Scotch, they held undeveloped the oil resources of their own
Empire, and with dog-in-the-manger attitude refused to
develop them and refused to permit others to develop them,
and sought to acquire the oil reserves of other lands. Reflect-
ing a higher level of official ethics, instead of using the wealth
of the nation te roll up tremendous heldings for private
groups, such as the Rockefeller Empire, the British
Government entered inte the oil business as an agent of the
citizens whose wealth was being used for their theoretical
advantage. It took actual partnerships in various oil
enterprises, including Royal Dutch-Shell and Anglo
Persian, which amounted to control. British Controlled Oil-
fields Ltd. is entirely owned by the British Government.
They erred gravely in permitting their cupidity to bring
them into direct conflict with the Rockefeller Empire, and in
dissipating the wealth that they gained from their lucrative oil
ventures 1n Rockefeller fostered, Bismarxian “social service"
activities. They were badly tripped up by the Rockefeller
"philanthropies" and betrayed themselves into the hands of
their mortal adversary, with whom they entered into direct and
bitter conflict.

The battle with the Rockefeller Empire was gen-eraled on
the British side by Sir Henri W. A. Deterding of the Royal
Dutch Co., who was popularly known as the oil "Napoleon".
Rockefeller was nicknamed "Oil King”. Deterding rescued the
Royal Dutch Co. from bankruptcy in a fierce price war with
Rockefeller's Standard Oil Co. in the export field, by inducing
the Paris Rothschilds to make a loan to his company in 1898,
in return for a minority interest. The price war was continued
until 1902, with the new financing and with the aid of the
Shell Transport and Trading Co. and the

188


heavy Russian oil production of the Neobel-Rothschild
interests. This eventually led to a merger of the Royal Dutch
and Shell interests in 1907.

Lord Fisher joined forces with Deterding, and the two
enlisted E. G. Pretyman, Civil Lord of the Admiralty, and
later, Winston Churchill, First Lord of the Admiralty, in
effecting the entry and later expansion of the British
government in the oil business. Churchill reported to the
House of Commons in 1913:

"Our ultimate policy is that the Admiralty should
become independent owner and producer of its own
supplies of liquid fuel, first by building up an oil reserve in
this country sufficient to make us safe in war and able to
override price fluctuations in peace; secondly, by acquiring
the power to deal in crude oils as they come cheaply into
the market . . . The third aspect of our ultimate policy is
that we must become the owners, or at any rate, the
controllers at the source, of at least a propertion of the
supply of natural oil which we require.”

The Oil War was waged in every part of the world where
oilfields were known to exist or were suspected.

The Mexican war was the first shift in the 20th century of
the Oil War to the battlefield, in which the United States
Armed Forces were drafted into fighting an oily Rockefeller
Crusade. The British had carried their assault on the
Rockefeller Standard Oil interests into home territory, the
Western Hemisphere. Lord Cowdray's Mexican Eagle Co. had
acquired more than half of the oil production of Mexico by
1910, in competition with the Doheny and Standard Oil
interests. Diaz, dictator of Mexico for thirty five years, was
overthrown because he supported the British by a revolution
financed by the Standard Oil interests (Senate Foreign
Relations Committee Hearings 1913, Revolutions in Mexico,
pp. 104, 14

Madero, who had sold his lands in Mexico to Rockefeller in
February, 1912, staged the revolution. Oil concessions for the
Standard Oil Co. were part of the deal. Two years later
Madero was ousted by a revolution led by General Huerta,
who was financed by British money. President Woodrow
Wilson rose to the support of his masters, the Rockefeller
interests, and refused to recognize the Huerta

189


regime. The Rockefeller dominated State Department openly
issued orders for the ousting of Huerta and even threatened
war. (We Fight For Oil, p. 50) Sir William Tyrell and
Secretary of State Bryan accused each other of acting
respectively for the Royal Dutch and the Standard Oil Co.

The Wilson administration openly fostered revolution
against Huerta by facilitating exportation of arms and
munitions for the rebels Carranza and Villa, while a financial
and munitions blockade was established against the
government. Panama tolls were used as a device for exerting
political pressure on the British to force them to abandon
Huerta. Vera Cruz was occupied by the U.S. Army and Navy.
Every conceivable device was brought to bear by the Wilson
regime to secure and protect the control of Mexican oil for the
Standard Oil interests. Finally Huerta was ousted and replaced
by Carranza.

The breaking of the held of the British interests in the
Mexican oilfields was solved by the expropriation of all of the
companies, that at the same time solved the problem of the
elutting of the oil market with Mexican oil. Josephus Daniels
and Franklin Delano Roosevelt, as Secretary of the Navy and
Assistant Secretary, played a role in engineering this
arrangement. Several decades later, the Rockefeller interests
recovered the Mexican concessions which they desired by a
decision of the Mexican Supreme Court that was influenced
by the funds of the Committee for Coordination of
Hemispheric Defense administered by Nelson Rockefeller. In
the meantime the Rockefeller interests received the bulk of the
$28,000,000 paid by the Mexican government for the
expropriated properties.

In the Near East at the turn of the century there was laid the
foundation of one of the most fateful phases cf beth World
Wars, by William K. D'Arcy, an Australian, and American
Admiral Colby M. Chester. D'Arcy obtained from the Shah of
Persia in 1901 a concession for all but the northern section of
Persia. He promptly organized the Anglo-Persian (later the
Angle Iranian} Oil Co. with British capital for the exploitation
of the concession. The controlling interest in Anglo [ranian
Oil Co. was purchased for the British Government, after
D'Arcy had arranged to sell it to foreign interests, in order to
prevent loss of control by the British. The con-

190


trol was openly sold to the British Government several years
ater.

Admiral Chester unsuccessfully sought to gain control of
the Turkish oilfields. Sultan Abdul Hamid first gave the oil
concession to the Germans together with one for the
Anatolian Railway Co.; and then reversed himself and offered
to give the concession to D'Arcy's Anglo Persian Co. Before
the Sultan could grant the concession, “liberal” forces were
well financed from abroad to revolt against the Sultan and
depose him. This gave the American Standard Oil interests
another chance to bid for the concession. This time Chester
got it, in return for the financing of the revolution. But before
he could develop the fields, the British Government blocked
the ratification of the deal by forcing the Turkish to recognize
the concessions which Sultan Abdul Hamid had given to the
German interests. The German concession had been taken
over by the Turkish Petroleum Co. which was 75% controlled
by the British Government through the Royal Dutch Shell
group and the Anglo-Persian Co. The Germans had been
outmaneuvered by the British and retained only 25% of their
concession when the deal was consummated in the early part
of 1914.

The Rockefeller interests had been completely shut out and
defeated. But they did not take their defeat lying down. They
fanned German resentment at being outmaneuvered by the
British and given the short end of the deal. They aided and
abetted the German plan to seize control of the entire Turkish
concession through the device of construction of the Berlin to
Bagdad railroad. The Germans were so confident of the
success of this "Drang nach Osten" that they opened the
terminus in Bagdad before the road was built.

In anticipation of the war which they were instigating in
order to seize victory from defeat in the battle for Turkish oil,
the Rockefeller Oil interests made a deal with the German
Government, under which their holdings in Germany were
taken over by the Reich with full compensation. The deal was
made to appear in press reports as an act of confiscation. The
same sort of deal was consummated by the same principals
before World War II, as a sort of established practice between
them, and constituted the basis of a charge of treason, made
against Standard Oil by Sen. Harry 5. Truman.

191


The Germans were materially aided in their waging of
World War I by the Rockefeller Standard Oil interests. They
supplied the Germans with the oil required for the conduct of
the war and enabled them to come within reach of victory. But
trusting neither of their rivals, the Rockefeller interests aimed
at "balance of power” by playing the Germans against the
British. The plan was to let them fight until they had
exhausted each other and then step in and “rescue” the weaker
of the two for a price, using the Reckefeller Empire's satellite,
the U.S., for the purpose. The price was Saudi Arabian oil and
other concessions for the Rockefeller interests.

The manner in which the U.S. was forced into the War was
a masterpiece of craftiness, cunning and deceit, that would do
credit to "Doc" William Rockefeller's best moments. Ludwell
Denny points out in his We Fight For Oil (p.32) :

"Standard met Dutch-Shell expansion in the United
States by stirring up the Washington Government and by
loosing the "British Peril’ propaganda . ..

"The situation was reaching a critical point in 1917. But
the United States entered the Great War. On Washington's
orders anti-British propaganda was suddenly turned into
pro-British propaganda . . . There followed an Anglo-
American oil truce, with Yankee wells and tankers
furnishing 80 per cent of the ‘blood of battle which won the
war.”

Behind this change of front in policy and propaganda was a
deal for the surrender by the British of a share in the Near
East and other oilfields, particularly Saudi Arabia, to the
Rockefeller interests in return for their drafting the United
States into the war to fight and pay for it. President Woodrow
Wilson was a slavish puppet of the Rockefeller-Ryan-Brady
clique, and an intimate and agent of Rockefeller's in-law
munition king, Cleveland H. Dodge, and was dependent on
their pin-money bribes. (Strange Death Of F. D. Roosevelt,
pp.103-4; Lundberg, America's 60 Families, pp. 120-8} His
campaign for reelection at this time, 1916, had as its principal
plattorm the slogan "Keep the U.S. ‘out of the war". As in the
case of Roosevelt twenty three years later Woodrow Wilson
and his bosses already had made the deal with England to
enter the war as an ally. Then within a short time after he

192


was reelected by the duped electorate, their propaganda was

changed to a martial note, and the U.S. was drafted by them

into another, oily Rockefeller Crusade, that was palmed off on

the "peasantry" as the "War To Save Democracy”.

Rockefeller's acquisition of the Saudi Arabian concession cost

the US. 333,734 dead and injured and more than fifty billion
ollars.

Stewart Alsop in his Saturday Evening Post article, dated
July 14, 1951, entitled Stalin's Plans for the U.S.A. quotes the
former Secretary General of the Czech Foreign Office, in the
Communized Gottwald regime, as follows:

"Heidrick sensed that Stalin believed deeply

that the American Government was not really

master in its own house ... partly .. . because of

the ease with which American opinion could be

manipulated.” (p. 108} None should know this better than
Stalin and the Politburo, who have dealt with the
Rockefeller Empire so long and served it so well.

The very planting in Russia of Communism, in the midst of
World War |, through the German General Staff as agents of
the German associates of the Rockefeller Empire, was a signal
service to the latter. For it broke the stranglehold of Royal
Dutch, Nobel-Rothschild and other interests on the Russian
oilfields and cut off the dangerous flow of cheap oil from that
source. It opened the way for possible acquisition of those
fields by the Rockefeller Standard Oil interests.

At the conclusion of World War I, the British with the aid
of Denikin and the White Russians, seized the Russian
oilfields in the Caucasus and sought to set up independent
republics in Georgia and Azerbaijhan, (which were
immediately given recognition by the Allied Supreme
Council), that would give them control of Baku oilfield and
the Batum-Baku pipeline. But the State Department refused
them recognition. As Ludwell Denny reports, in We Fight For
Oil (p. 33, footnote 10) :

"The American attitude is easily explained by

the fear of the Standard Oil that the two British

vassals in the Caucasus would close the door to

the Rockefeller firm. . ." The French newspapers wrote of
these projected republics as the "Oil State", and suggested that
they operate under the aegis of the League of Nations.

193


The Rockefeller Foundation-subsidized Labor Party in
England served the Rockefeller Empire well by raising an
insistent demand for the withdrawal of British troops from the
Caucasus, and prepared the way for its recapture by the
Communists.

At the Genoa and Hague Conferences the Rockefeller
interests demonstrated their mastery of the technique of the
"balance of power" and the extent of their control among the
world powers. They sought primarily to prevent their rivals
regaining control of the Russian oilfields. They did this by
forcing a united stand of the conferring nations against Russia
and for denationalizing the oilfields of Russia. They were
served faithfully by the State Department, with the help of
France and of Belgium which were pawns in the game. In the
meantime, behind the backs of the conferees, the Rockefeller
interests sought to make deals with Russia for monopolistic
control of its oil, while berating their competitors the Royal
Dutch Shell interests, for doing the same.

In the end the Rockefeller Standard Oil interests won out
with a deal described in detail in the chapter on the
Rockefeller Soviet Axis which gave them a large measure of
control, or influence, over Russia and her oilfields. These
deals protected their valuable concessions in Saudi Arabia at
the cost of the security of the United States and the rest of the
wor

In the meantime, the Rockefeller interests also were
instrumental in obtaining the use of U.S. military forces in
blocking the invasion of Russia and the taking over of the
Trans-Siberian railway by the Japs. They smashed Harry F.
Sinclair and his associates, in the Teapot Dome affair, after he
had secured concessions which they sought in Russia and in
the Russian sphere of influence in North Persia.

The British learned nothing from their experience and
jeepardy in World War I. No sooner was it over than they
started once again to wage a more intensive commercial oil
war on the Rockefeller Standard Oil interests and to offer
them strenucus competition and opposition in the quest for
world monopoly of oil. Despite the fact that World War I had
been fought and wen largely with oil provided by the
Rockefeller interests from American oilfields, Sir Edward
Mackay Edgar, Trustee of BCO

194


who represented Great Britain, stupidly boasted in
an article in Sperling's Journal, September 1919:
"The British position is impregnable. All

known oil fields, all the likely or probable oil fields,

outside of the United States itself, are in British

hands or under British management or control,

or financed by British capital”.

Treacherously the British undertock to block the
Rockefeller interests from developing the Saudi
Arabian and other Near Eastern concessions that
had been surrendered to them as the price of the
entry of the U.S. into the war, the objective of the
British-French San Remo agreement for monopoly
of the Turkish and Near East oilfields.

The significance of the oil war was pointed up by the
Federal Trade Commission Report On Owner’ ship In The
Petroleum Industry of 1923. The findings were summarized as

ollows:


"I. The Royal Dutch-Shell group, a combination of the
Royal Dutch Co. and the Shell Transport and Trading Co.
of Londen has world-wide oil investments, including
humerous refineries, an immense fleet of tank ships, and
petroleum production in many lands, which in 1921, was
less than 11% of the world output.

"2. The Royal Dutch Shell group in February 1922
consummated a merger of the principal properties and
investments of the Union Oil Co. (Del.) with its chief
orn subsidiaries in a new company, the Shell Union

1

"3, The Shell Unien Oil Corp. now controls over 240,000
acres of oil lands in the United States; has about 3. 5 per
cent of the total of crude petroleum: owns extensive
properties in refineries, pipelines, tank-cars, and marketing
equipment; and is one of the larger companies in the
domestic petroleum industry.

"4. The Union Oil Co. (Del. } owned about 26 per cent of

the stock of the Union Oil Co. of California, but, to prevent
the Royal Dutch Shell group from gaining ‘control, certain
stockholders of the Union of Califorma organized an
American controlled holding company, which now owns
more than half of its issued stock.
"5. The most important instances of discrimination by
foreign governments against citizens of this country are the
exclusive policies of the Governments of Great Britain and
the Nether-


lands in respect to the oil fields of India and the Dutch East
Indies, and the San Remo Agreement of Great Britain and
France covering the undeveloped oil fields of
Mesopotamia and of the British and French colonies.

"6. Denial of reciprocity of treatment to citizens of this
country appears to exist with respect to the petroleum
industries of Australia, British Borneo, certain African
colonies, British Honduras, British Guiana and Trinidad;
France and French possessions; Italy, and the Netherlands
and its dependencies.

"7, Thus forced to modify its historic policy, Congress in
1920 enacted a mineral leasing law for public lands which
forbids the acquisition of properties by nationals of any
foreign country that denies reciprocity to Americans, in
consequence of which certain applications for petroleum
leaseholds have been demed to the Royal Dutch-Shell
group.

"What further efforts may be made by this combination
to acquire privately-owned petroleum lands or competing
oil companies it is of course impossible to predict, or how
far anti-trust laws may be effective in preventing them.
"The supply of crude petroleum in this country is being

rapidly depleted to meet the requirements of a growing
domestic consumption and foreign trade. The sources of
supply of the domestic industry are concentrated within its
own borders and in Mexico, while those of its principal
competitors are widely distributed throughout the world. It
appears obvious that a nation having widely distributed supply
and storage facilities and owning means of distribution will
have certain advantages in world trade against one having
concentrated supply.” At the very moment that the American
deoughboys were laying down their lives and the wealth of the
people of the U.S. was being squandered for the salvation of
the British Empire and the expansion of the Rockefeller
Empire, the British were making preparations to wage a
devastating commercial and military war on the U.S. and
the Rockefeller Empire. The irony of the situation was
intensified by the fact that the British were financing this Oil
War with the money provided them by the U.S. at
196


the expense of its taxpayers, and by American investors.

For the purpose of promoting this war the British organized
in 1918 the Government owned British Controlled Oilfields
Ltd. (BCO Ltd.) for the specific ckject of smashing
Rockefeller’s Standard Oil Co. In collaboration with the Royal
Dutch and Shell group, BCO Ltd. undertook to gain control ef
the Central and South American lands bordering the U.S. to
the south and surrounding the Panama Canal, which it was
openly suggested could then be seized in a British-American
war with or without the help of Japan. M. Pierre l'Espagnol de
la Tramerye in his book World Struggle For Oil, published in
1923, under the chapter heading "An American Balkanism”,
described the otjectives of the British, as follows:

"The Anglo-Persian Oil is no longer sufficient for Great

Britain, which founded a new company in 1918, the ‘British

Controlled Oilfields', specially commissioned to fight the

Standard Oil... Like the Anglo-Persian, it is entirely in the

hands of the British Government under a system of the

Voting Trust. It seems that an immense tract of oil bearing

territory exists from Mexico to Argentine ... Of these

deposits the BCO Ltd. wishes to gain possession on behalf
of the British Government, thus completing the work of the

Royal Dutch-Shell in Venezuela and in the nei ighberheed of

the Panama Canal. Its concessions actually surround two-

thirds of the Caribbean Sea: they are situated in the States
of Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Panama,

British Guiana, Colombia, Venezuela, Peru, Ecuador and

the Island of Trinidad. The concessions of the BCO are

nearly always on the sea coast—or rather in close proximity
to the sea—which is a considerable advantage. It has
expressly chosen them, on both the Atlantic and Pacific, as

a precaution in case war should break out between Great

Britain and the United States; for even with the help of the

Japanese fleet, the British navy might not be able to seize

the Panama Canal. All its units must be in a position to

replenish their stores of fuel without being obliged to make
the long detour round the Magellan Straits .. . In order to
obtain Costa Rican concessions, Great Britain did not

hesitate to foment revolution in 197


this little Republic. Unable to obtain anything from the
established Government, it helped to place in power the
revolutionary Pres. Tinoco, from whom it got what it
wanted; more than 60,-000 square miles were granted to
BCO. Unfortunately Tinoco has been overthrown; the
regular Government restored to power, hastened to annul
these concessions. Great Britain, to compel it to ratify these
concessions stirred up a war between Costa Rica and
Panama, while she sent the cruiser Cambrian to the coast of
Costa Rica in order to increase the pressure. Events went
against her. Costa Rican troops invaded Panama. A landing
tock place on February 28, 1921, on the Pacific Coast,
south of the Dulce Gulf, the eastern shore of which is
common te both countries, and another less important one
on the Atlantic towards Bocas de la Toro. Panama lost the
territory of Coto. Mr. Alves, chairman of the BCO, set out
in March 1921 for Costa Rica, to study the question at
issue. But the United States stepped in; and Judge White, as
arbitrator, pronounced in favor of Costa Rica. On August
26, 1921, an American naval detachment assisted the Costa
Rican forces to take definite possession of the contested
territory, in spite of the indignant protests of the
Government of Panama against the viclent measures of
which it was a victim. The imbroglio of British and
American affairs around the Gulf of Mexico and the
Caribbean Sea (BCO, Mexican Eagle, Royal Dutch-Shell,
Mexican Petroleum, Standard Oil} makes this region the
Balkans of the oil world."


BCO, Anglo Persian and Royal Dutch and Shell companies
obtained concessions throughout Latin America. Sir Edward
Mackay Edgar exulted in his article in Sperling's Journal, in
1919:

"I should say that two-thirds of the improved fields of

Central and South America are in British hands. In

Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Panama,

Colombia, Venezuela ‘and Ecuador, a decisive and really

overwhelming majority of the petroleum concessions are

held by British subjects. The Alves group (BCO) whose
holdings encircle practically two-thirds of the Caribbean

Sea, is wholly British, working under an arrangement which

insures that perpe-198


tual control of its undertakings shall remain in British

hands. Ne American citizen and no American group has

acquired, or even could acquire any such position in

Central America as that whic enterprise and personality

have acquired for Mr. Alves... Unfortunately for them —

and fortunately for us—their eyes have been opened too

a e Tr
Sir Edward's Growings proved absurdly premature. The State
Department, ever ready to defend the Rockefeller interests,
rose nobly to their defenses. Fortunately for the U.S. its
interests and defense happened to coincide with those of the
Rockefeller Empire. By diplomatic pressure, force and the
happy accident of threatened insolvency of BCO Ltd., many
of its important holdings were acquired by Rockefeller's
Standard Oil Co., including the Costa Rican, through Doheny,
and Colombian, directly. In the case of the Chaco, the grip of
British interests was loosened or broken by a war in which the
Paraguayan Government, financed by the British, openly
charged that Rockefellers Standard Oil Co. was financing
Bolivia, a charge that was later given substance by an increase
of Bolivian concessions to the Standard Oil Co. of more than
two million acres, announced on July 13, 1934.

In the meantime the League of Nations and its mandates
were set up as instruments of the Oil War. The primary
consideration of the series of conferences held at Genoa, the
Hague and elsewhere was oil reserves—of Russia, Turkey,
Persia and all sections of the globe. Rockefeller's Standard Oil
was devotedly represented by the State Department as well as
by the Foreign Office of the Rockefeller Empire. When Great
Britain undertook in its San Remo Agreement with France to
set up a monopoly of Turkish and Near Eastern oil reserves
through their Near East mandates and arrange for their
"permanent British control", (State Dept. Note 11/20/20)
Standard Oil (N.J.} protests voiced by Bedford, its president,
were insistently echoed by the State Department. England was
violently denounced on the floor of Senate with some open
threats of retaliation, and even of war. When the Foreign
Office, in reply to Standard Oil protests, replied that the U.S.
was entitled to no voice in the disposition of the mandated
argas and their resources, because of failure to join the League
o


199


Nations the State Department replied that the U.S. "should
not be dissociated in the rights of peace from the usual
consequences of association in war". The inconsistency of the
State Department's "noble, Christain" pose and attitude of
spurning all advantages of the victory for the U.S. other than
the oil reserves sought by the Rockefeller Empire, elicited
from the British the taunt of "hypocrites", which was wholely
justified. As Davenport and Cooke wrote in their The Oil
Trusts and Anglo-American Relations (p.112)

"One observes that the high-sounding note of the principle
of economic equality (the American "principle" of the Open
Door} has now sunk inte the lower note of the principle of
‘sharing the swag’. How the mighty have fallen! The United
States had originally set a fine example by virtuously
declining to take a mark of German reparations or a square
mile of German colonies, but after four years was found
making an exception to its self-denying ordinance in the case
of oilin Mesopotamia”.

The protests of the State Department on behalf of the
Rockefeller interests were effective. Through Sir John
Cadman, negotiator of the San Remo Agreement and official
of the Anglo-Persian Co., as envoy to Washington, and the
Rockefeller Empire, a deal was made compromising the
matter. Rockefeller's Standard Oil was given control of
Palestine and the right to continue to explore it, subject to a
mandate that was to be given to the British. This constitutes
the background of the subsequent partition of Palestine and
the ousting of British rule in favor of the Zionists, who might
be expected to be more amenable than the British.

Despite this uneasy compromise, the Oil War continued
more bitterly than ever. As Davenport and Cooke stated in
their book, above quoted:

"For the betterment of Anglo-American relations the
British Government fell to bribing Standard Oil: the bribes
were to be paid in the oil of Persia and Mesopotamia . . . Did
anyone suppose that Standard Oil could be silenced by sops
from two of the world's oil fields as long as it did not control
the rest?" How well they understood the character of the
Rockefellers and their Empire is borne cut in the newspaper
headlines of succeeding years, sg


9/6/22 Englebert Graff announces that rivalry of money
kings will cause a war; and that the Rockefeller interests
control three Paris newspapers—Figaro, Matin and
L'Eclair—for the purpose of warping public opinion on
the Continent.

9/2/23 World politics are oil politics says Premier Briand of


France.

3/5/24 See Standard Oil Co. dominating the world.

8/2/24 Big oil drama involves world peace.

9/7/24 World's future depends on oil.

9/14/24 America smeared with oil in Near East.

1/29/25 Tchitcherin says Standard Oil and Royal Dutch
dominate world politics.

2/26/29 France protests world Oil Trust.

11/28/34 Secret war over oil.


Rockefeller's Standard Oil Co. steadily pressed its advantages
in the Oil War in other sections of the globe than these from
which it was barred by Great Britain. This is made clear from
a perusal of newspaper headlines of the period. France and the
Rockefeller Empire: 5/20/20 U.S. protests to France for the
Standard
Oil Co. 10/16/20 Standard Oil merges with French oil
company to form a government monopoly. (Bedford
Petroleum Co.) 10/30/20 Standard Oil monopoly is
disputed. 4/5/21 Standard Oil Co. monopoly upheld. 6/7/21
Standard Oil Co. spends six million francs
to influence press. France served as catspaw of
Rockefeller Empire at Genoa Conference:
3/15/22 "Standard Oil interests are reported to be preparing
to make a fight at Genoa to protect the company's old
concessions, held in the name of Russian Standard Oil Co.
and are seeking French assistance against their French
rivals". (N.Y. Herald)
5/6/22 Secretary of State Hughes assures Standard Oil Co.
that United States would tolerate no agreement which
would exclude it from Russian oil concessions. (N.Y.
Herald) 5/7/22 The press is full of oil to-day. (London
Times}
5/9/22 "As regards the Standard Oil Co., which 201


wields great influence in the United States, it must be
remembered that its acquisition of the oil nghts of the
Nobel Brothers in South Russia some time ago, gives it a
distinct status in Russian oil negotiations. This status
clearly lends point to the support given by the United
States to the French and Belgian attitude in regard to
private property in Russia ..." (London Times}
5/11/51 Standard Oil interests stiffen opposition of French
and Belgians to Rapallo Treaty . . . "consider the present
moment of financial stringency of the Soviet government .
favorable to enable them finally to arrive at some co-
ownership of Russian petroleum deposits .. . Without this
support from America, France, which furnishes the
Pretorian guard for this Trust (Standard Oil Co.} would
hardly dare oppose Great Britain in this manner." (Berlin
Lokal Anzeiger) 5/15/22 America intervened at Genoa in a
sense hostile to the Soviets"... . the plan proposed by
(Ambassador) Child, with the support of Vander-lip and
‘Observers’ of the Standard Oil now at Genoa ... represents
the ... basis on which it will participate in a commission to
be set up at the Hague ..." (London Daily Herald}


The story of the Ethiopian War is that of another oily
Rockefeller Crusade. It began on July 1, 1923, when the press
announced that the Anglo-American Oil Co. a Standard Oil
subsidiary, had obtained an exclusive oil concession in the
northern half of the Harrar Province of Abyssinia. Nothing
more was heard of this concession for more than a decade
despite the urgent need of the Rockefeller interests for a
source of oil for the Mediterranean basin that was close at
hand and did net require costly haulage by tankers, from the
far-off Gulf and Venezuelan ports, or from East India. Behind
the scenes there raged a fierce diplomatic battle. For Ethiopia
holds the source of the Nile and was regarded by the British
Empire as one of its critical spheres of influence. It vigorously
opposed permitting its deadly rival, the Rockefeller Empire, to
gain a foothold there. Under pressure of the British, Haile
Selassie denied permission to the Rockefeller interests to
proceed with the development of the concession that had been
given them. 502


Following negotiations of Sir Francis Rickett, a director of
Rockefeller's Socony Vacuum Oil Co., with Mussolim, in
which it is apparent that the Rockefeller interests assured Il
Duce of supplies of oil for a war on Abyssinia in exchange for
a thirty year monopoly of the Italian oil market and the rati-
fication of their Ethiepian concessions, as well as other
considerations, border incidents on December 9, 1934,
between Italian and Ethiopian troops, in connection with a
dispute over the Italian Somali-land frontier, served as a
pretext for the waging by Italy of an undeclared war. In the
midst of the war, on September |, 1935, the press announced
the text of an Ethiopian concession, negotiated by Sir Francis
Rickett, to the African Exploration & Development Co.,
organized in 1933 as a subsidiary of the Socony Vacuum. The
names of Mellon, Mitchell and Teagle were mentioned in
connection with the deal, and in the following month, October
15, the press linked an Ethiopian arms order to the Rickett
deal. This followed the traditional practise of the Rockefeller
Empire, of playing all ends against center. Shortly thereafter
the British, acting on behalf of the League of Nations offered
Haile Selassie a negotiated peace for surrender to the Italians
of the oil-rich Fafan Valley in the Harrar Province-the original
1923 concession to the Rockefeller interests. This was
rejected on December 12, 1935


In the meantime belated economic sanctions were ordered
by the League of Nations te go into effect November 18,
1935, and continued until July 15, 1936, after termination of
the war. The Rockefeller Empire, which had assured
Mussolini in advance that no effective sanctions would be
applied in respect to that absolute essential of modern war, —
oil—made good on its assurance. On December 4, 1935, the
press announced that the Rockefeller interests would defy the
League and supply Mussolini’ with oil from the Roumanian
fields; on December 12, Socony Vacuum announced the
building of two refineries for Mussolini in Naples; and on
January 8, 1936, it was announced that Italy might get oil
from Germany. The Ethiopian oilfields are now controlled by
the Rockefeller interests through Sinclair Oil Corporation. The
red that tints their end product, ethyl gasoline, might well be
Italian and Ethiopian blood.


203


CHAPTER XI


THE ROCKEFELLER-SOVIET AXIS "... we want to
trade with Russia." Ivy Lee


The Russian Communist Revolution posed a major threat to
world oil monopoly and to the worldwide expansion of the
rapidly growing Rockefeller Empire. By the precipitation of
World War I and by undermining the power and prestige of
the mighty British Empire, the Standard Oil Co. had acquired
the concession to the fabulous cil demain of Saudi Arabia.
But the whole of the Near East and control of Caucasus oil
fields and of Saudi Arabia, lay within the grasp of the
Communists.

The situation presented the horns of a dilemma. It did
contain some elements of good from the viewpoint of the
Rockefeller Standard Oil interests. For the Caucasian and
Persian oil fields had been controlled by Rockefellers’ mortal
enemy in the international field, the British-Royal Dutch-Shell
group. Since the turn of the century their bitter rivalry has
meant incessant strife, bloodshed and war for the lands
involved. The Russian Revolution of 1905-06 had been
precipitated with the aid of financing by Rockefeller's banker,
Kuhn Loeb & Co., with an eye to the oil of the Caucasus and
adjacent lands; and its most intense activities had centered
around the Baku oilfields. They had engineered Mexican
revolutions and the Mexican War to oust the Royal Dutch and
other rivals from Mexico.

Through World War I, the Saudi Arabian oilfields had been
wrested from British control. Now Communist Russia offered
the opportunity to oust the British-Royal Dutch-Shell also
from the Caucasus, Persia, the rest of the Near East and India.
But the moot question was: "Would not the Communists
prove to be more dangerous and more difficult to deal with
than even the British?” The pros and cons were many, but the
possibilities of playing British against Communists were
great.

The British, needless to say, likewise were intrigued by the
possibilities of seizing control of the Caucasian oilfields. They
attempted to do this in 1918 by an expedition of officers,
headed by General Dunsterville, that combined forces
with a

204


White Russian brigade led by General Bitcherakov. They
occupied Baku when the Bolsheviks withdrew, but were in
turn ousted by Turkish forces led by German officers.
Following the Armistice in November, 1918, the British
moved in and took over the oilfields. The British were able
to boast: "In the Caucasus from Batum on the Black Sea to
Baku on the Caspian and from Vladikavkaz southward to
Tiflis, Asia Minor, Mesopotamia and Persia, British Forces
have made their appearance ... Never in the ‘history of these
islands was there such an “opportunity for the peaceful
penetration of British influence and British trade, for the
creation of a second India...” (London Financial News, Dec.
24, 1918) But they were oversanguine and reckoned without
the Rockefeller Standard Oil interests in Caucasian oil.
The British labor movement, which the Rockefellers had
fostered, opposed further military occupation of the Caucasus,
and forced withdrawal of the troops. Denikin took
over, with British support, in August 1919. Two British
vassal states, Georgia and Azerbaijhan, were set up and
recognized by the Allied Supreme Council. The
Rockefeller-dominated US. State Department,
however, refused to recognize them and blocked the turning
over of the Caucasian oilfields to Royal Dutch and Shell.
In February, 1920, the Bolsheviks entered Baku, and in the
following year Georgia turned Bolshevik. It by no means
chagrined the Rockefeller interests to see Royal Dutch thus
shut out, even though it did mean control of the fields by the
Russians.

To establish a semblance of legal title to the Caucasian
fields, the Rockefeller Standard Oil group, in 1920, bought a
half-interest in Nobel & Co.'s production in Baku. This
amounted to approximately 40% of the yield of the field. The
title was a mere mirage, unless the Bolsheviks could be forced
to restore to the owners their properties that had been
expropriated, or "nationalized", in 1918. Shortly thereafter, the
Rockefeller interests also "acquired from the Persian
government a concession to the North Persian oilfields for a
period of fifty years, in conflict with the British interests and
with Soviet treaty claims. A concession had been granted to
Russian interests during the Czarist regime and had been sold
by them on May 8, 1920,

205


to the Anglo-Persian Co., the majority stockholder of which
is the British government.

Both the Russian and the British governments objected
strenuously to the North Persian concessions to the
Rockefeller interests. Thereafter, the Rockefeller Empire's
game has been to play the British-Royal Dutch interests
against the Communists until they could dispose of first one
and then the other. Their's is a chess game, with mankind and
the wealth of nations as pawns. The prize, that they cherish
more highly than the blood and wealth of others, is OIL and
world dominion.

The Rockefeller-dictated State Department policy in regard
to Russia at Genoa was aimed at compelling the restoration to
them of the "nationalized" oilfields. Hughes made it the
condition for recognition. They sought to put Russia into the
position where she would be forced to make restitution, while
at the same time blocking the granting of concessions to their
competitors. It can be said in praise of that policy that it had
the semblance of being in favor of the U.S., even though it did
serve the Rockefeller Standard Oil interests more particularly,
or exclusively. The Royal Dutch Oil Co. had already begun
negotiations with Russia for a monopolistic oil concession,
which Standard Oil Co. was able to block with the aid of its
handmaiden, the U.S. State Department.

At the Hague Conference in June 1922, the same tactics
were successfully repeated. In the following September, a
blockade of Russian oil was organized under the auspices of
the Standard Oil Co. and others through the Groupement
International des Societes Naphthieres en Russie. Behind this
sham front that was designed to hamstring competitors, the
Royal Dutch and Shell interests purchased 70,000 tons of oil
from Russia, and Dodge, an official of the Standard Oil Co.,
went to Moscow to seek concessions.

Two things happened that served to bring about a change of
front among the oil companies. Russia began exporting oil—
330,000 tons in 1922, 771,000 tons in 1923 and 1,360,000 in
1924 through its Naptha_ Syndicate. And she undersold the
oil companies. The Russian Oil Products Co. was retailing
benzine, kerosene and other products in Great Britain at one to
three pennies below the market price. Far more disturbing
than this threat to the price

206


structure of the oil market, from the viewpoint of
Rockefeller's Standard Oil companies, were the activities of
Harry F. Sinclair. Sinclair was a close personal friend of
President Harding, in whose campaign he and his associates
had played a part. He numbered among his business
associates many top political figures, including Will H. Hays,
his attorney and Morgan-allied National Republican
Committee chairman, as well as Archibald B. Roosevelt and
Theodore Roosevelt Jr. The latter was a director of the
Sinclair Refinery Co. At Theodore Jr.'s request, in 1919,
Archibald had been made vice-president of the Sinclair Co. In
the following year Theodore Jr. resigned his post to become
Assistant Secretary of the Navy in the Harding
Administration.

Rockefeller's Midwest Oil Co., a subsidiary of the Standard
Oil Co. of Indiana, and the Sinclair and Doheny oil interests
conspired to gain control of the Teapot Dome structure
adjoining the fabulous Salt Creek oil field in Wyoming, that
had been made a Naval Oil Reserve. This required an
executive order, made on the approval of the Navy Depart-
ment and recommended by the Secretary of the Interior.
Admiral Griffith, on behalf of the Navy personnel in charge,
forwarded a recommendation that leases of Naval Reserve oil
lands should be permitted only with the approval of the Navy
Department. This was transmitted to Secretary of the Navy
Denby through Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Theodore
Roosevelt Jr., former Sinclair Refining Co. director, whe in
turn took it to Secretary of the Interior Albert B. Fall. Fall,
who, it was later revealed, had received a total of nearly half a
million dollars for his "services", and Sinclair, acting for
themselves and the other interests involved, "subtly modified
the clause (requiring Navy Department approval) to give the
Secretary of the Interior full authority to dispose of naval oil
land. Secretary Denby and Assistant Secretary Theodore
Roosevelt Jr. acquiesced in this unusual arrangement.”
(Lundberg, America's 60 Families, p. 205)

Fall issued the lease to the conspirators. Rockefeller's
Midwest Oil Co. relinquished its share to Sinclair and Doheny
for the sum of one million dollars. The Mammoth Oil Co. was
organized to take over the Teapot Dome lease. The
Continental

207


Trading Co. was incorporated in Canada by James O'Neil,
president of Reckefeller's Prairie Oil & Gas Co., Col. Robert
W. Stewart, president of Rockefeller's Standard Oil Co. of
Indiana, and Harry F. Sinclair, as a secret dummy corporation
to purchase more than thirty million barrels of oil from the
Mexia field at $1.50 and to resell it to the organizers'
companies at a profit of 25c a barrel, or a total profit of more
than eight million dollars. These profits were used in part for
the bribery of the public officials invelved in the Teapot
Dome case. The complicity of Rockefeller's Standard Oil Co.
in the Teapot Dome scandal is further revealed by the
conversation between Harry Sinclair, James O'Neil and two
other persons at the Bankers Club of New York in 1922.
One of them asked:

"Suppose there was some future trouble to come up

afterwards, who would take care of it?" "The Sinclair Oil

Co. is big enough to take care of that", answered Sinclair.

"If the Sinclair Oil Co. is net big enough to take care of it,
Standard Oil is big enough to take care of it," O'Neill said.
The Rockefeller interests cunningly avoided, however, any
direct invelvement in turning over the bribes. They thus
prepared the way for their subsequent maneuver that was to
destroy Sinclair as a competitor.

John D. Rockefeller Jr. testified before the Senate
Committee that investigated Teapot Dome, on behalf of Col.
Robert W. Stewart, as a character witness, bestowing on him
the effulgence of his "philanthropic" odor of sanctimeny in
order to impress the "peasants". Subsequently, when it was
brought to light that Stewart had withheld from his company
the profits of the Continental Trading deal. John D. Jr.
professed indignation for the benefit of the gullible
"peasantry", retired Col. Stewart on a meager pension of
$75,000 a year and promoted two of his sons to highly paid
Standard Oil executive positions, to show his "disapproval" of
the Colonel's acts. One wonders what might have been the
fabulous rewards if he had "approved" of Stewart's deeds.

With the Teapot Dome deal in the bag, Sinclair went after
bigger game. Using his influence with the Harding
Administration and recognition by the U.S., that he
represented he could obtain, as a bait,

208


he set out to gain the Near, Middle and Far Eastern
concessions from Soviet Russia and Iran that the oil titans,
Standard Oil and Royal Dutch, had sought in vain. In this
quest, he had the advantages over them of having no prior
claims and of starting with a clean slate.

After Secretary of the Interior Fall had resigned under fire,
Sinclair gave him $35,000 to go to Russia to negotiate oil
leases. (Lundberg, America's 60 Familes, p. 206) In June
1923, a party consisting of Harry F. Sinclair, Albert Fall,
Archibald B. Roosevelt, Mason Day, Robert Law Jr., Wm.
Dewey Loucks, E. R. Tinker, Elisha Walker and Grattan T.
Stanford, with some engineers, went to Moscow to seek a
concession for all the Caucasian oilfields that Rockefeller
considered his property and over which he and Royal Dutch
were battling fiercely. In November 1923, a provisional
agreement for the exploitation of the Baku and Grosni
oilfields by a company in which Sinclair and the Russian
government had equal shares, was signed in Moscow by
Mason Day. Final ratification was to be effected in ninety
days. (Fisher, Oil Imperialism, pp. 156-161} On December 20,
1923, Sinclair got from the Persian government a provisional
agreement on a concession for the North Persian oilfields in
the Russian sphere of influence, for which the Rockefeller
Standard interests had received a concession in 1921, which
had not been ratified. The circumstances under which Sinclair
obtained this concession are concisely stated in a letter dated
May 3, 1922, sent by Mr. A. C. Veatch, vice-president of the
Sinclair Exploration Co., to the Federal Trade Commission, as
follows:

"Gentlemen: In July of 1921, following up a suggestion
of the Secretary of Commerce (Herbert H. Hoover}, the
Sinclair Company began its negotiations with the Persian
authorities for an oil concession over the five northern
provinces, which are stated by the Persian government to be
free of any prior claims.

"These negotiations have been continued up to the
present date, during which period the Sinclair Company has
had active opposition from a combination of interests of the
Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey and the Anglo-Persian
Company of London.

"To refer again to the competition the Sinclair 209


Company has encountered in endeavoring to obtain the

concession, we wish to state that early in 1921 an oil

concession over the area referred to was signed between the

Persian government and the Standard Oil Company, but in

order to become legal this required the ratification of the

Persian Parliament.

"While this ratification was pending, Sir John Cadman, a
director of the Anglo-Persian Co. of London, came to the
United States and while there, entered into an agreement with
the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey to share on a 50-50
basis with the latter company, the Persian concession when
obtained.” On August 16, 1923, Sinclair was given a mon-
opolistic concession of the oilfields of Northern Sakhalin
Island by Soviet Russia. It was then occupied by the
Japanese, who were exploiting the fields. The concession
was implicitly conditioned on the recognition of Russia by the
U.S. before 1927, which Sinclair and his colleagues had
assured; and on the good offices of the U.S. State Department
in inducing the Japanese to withdraw from Sakhalin Island.
The State Department and its Secretary, Charles Evans
Hughes, a Rockefeller attorney, never got around to
bringing pressure to bear on the Japanese to withdraw from
Sinclair's concession, despite the fact that Sinclair was the
only American interest involved and that the State Department
directives had ordered its agents to do their utmost to help
American interests in their quests for oil abroad. Obviously,
the directives meant "certain Interests only"—the
Rockefeller interests.

Shortly after the granting of these concessions to Sinclair,
there began to occur a series of incidents that were of the
utmost value and importance to the Rockefeller Standard Oil
interests in their struggle for the concessions. First, was the
death of President Warren G. Harding, suddenly and under
strange and highly suspicious circumstances that were never
exhaustively investigated. This meant that Sinclair had lost
control of the government which enabled him to assure Russia
of recognition in return for his concessions. President Calvin
Coolidge, who succeeded Harding, favored the Rockefeller
interests and was keenly alert to the significance of their cil
and Empire.

210


Then, at a time most opportune for the Rockefeller interests
in their rivalry with Sinclair, the Teapot Dome affair, which
had never been a secret and had been common knowledge
from the start, but had never been regarded as werthy of
exposure by the Rockefeller-contrelled press, suddenly and
for reasons not difficult to surmise, began to stir its interest.
The Denver Post attacked the Teapot Dome lease, but
dropped the matter when its owners, Bonfils and Tammen,
were paid $250,000 by Sinclair. (Lundberg, America’s 60
Families, p.205} Then the St. Louis Post-Dispatch began to
publicize the case editorially. A Senate investigation was
demanded by Senator Burton K. Wheeler, a Rockefeller
warhorse, and by Senator Thomas J. Walsh. As a result of the
investigation, Sinclair's friends, Attorney General Daugherty
and Secretary of the Navy Denby were ousted. (Assistant
Secretary of the Navy, Theodore Roosevelt Jr. who had
played a dominant role in the affair, was whisked off to a
Philippine post, se as to preserve the halo that clung to the
Roosevelt name in the minds of the "peasants".} Fall, Sinclair
and Doheny were indicted. Fall was found guilty. Sinclair and
Doheny wen acquittals; but Sinclair went to jail for six
months for contempt. The Rockefeller interests, that had been
involved and had profited from the deal to the extent of a
million dellars paid them by Sinclair, were never indicted, for
reasons that can be surmised.

The Teapot Dome scandal robbed Sinclair of the influence
which he needed to make good on his Russian deals that
required early recognition of the Soviet Communist regime. It
also impaired his credit, so that he was not in a position to
raise the hundreds of millions that his deals required. Rumors
got around that the Sinclair compames had fallen into the
hands of the Rockefellers, which they did subsequently. The
results were that all of Sinclair's Asiatic concessions were
cancelled and the Rockefeller Standard Oil interests were rid
of their most dangerous rival.

The Russian oil situation had become menacing to
Rockefeller's plans for world monopely. It became obvious
that the Bolshevik regime was not going to collapse and that it
would be impossible to force it, by boycott or other forms of
pressure, to return expropriated property. It was also evident

211


that there would not be the expected delay in resumption of
Russian oil production. On the contrary, Russian exports of
oil were rising to large proportions and constituted formidable
competition, especially through price-cutting. In 1925 Russia
was providing all of Italy's fuel oil and was rapidly cutting off
Standard Oil from that market. The navies of Great Britain,
France, Italy and Greece were being supplied with oil by
Russia. By April 1925, Standard Oil itself, now allied with
Royal Dutch and Shell, had purchased 290, 000 tens of
kerosene and gasoline from Russia and had become a regular
customer. The Rockefeller Standard Oil interests had even
proposed the purchase of the entire output of all the Russian
fields for a period of three to five years.


The Rockefeller interests were most concerned about the
control of Turkey, which was then rapidly being penetrated by
the Russians. For, control of Turkey and its dependencies
meant control of Saudi Arabia, the prize for which World War
I had been engineered. The Rockefeller interests were frantic
in their anxiety to get Turkey under their control and keep it
there. They could secure that control and hold it only with the
acquies-cense and cooperation of Soviet Russia. The Rocke-
feller group then proposed to pool their interests in Turkey
with the Soviet Naphtha Syndicate in a partnership monepely,
and to sell there only Russian oil. So anxious had they become
to effect a deal, that they were now willing to accede to any
terms; and they went out of the way to court the favor of the
Communists.


In March 1926, Vacuum Oil Co. entered into an agreement
with the Russian government monopoly, the Naphtha
Syndicate, for the purchase of 800,000 tons of crude oil and
100,000 tons of kerosene, primarily in order to ingratiate itself
with the Russians. This was the first direct, commercial
postwar transaction between the Soviet Government and the
Rockefeller Standard Oil interests. The terms of this
agreement and of the subsequent agreements entered into by
the Rockefeller interests and Soviet Russia have never been
published. It was well known, however, that the monetary
price paid by Standard Oil fer the oil was most favorable and
low. Price was no otject to the Communists.


212


World conquest on the basis of the plans laid down by Lenin
was for them the prime consideration, and the oil deals were,
for the Soviets, merely bait and the means to that end.
Bearing in mind this fact and the subsequent course of events,
however, it is not difficult to arrive at reliable conclusions
concerning the terms that were demanded by the Soviets and
accepted by the Rockefeller interests.

Recognition of Soviet Russia by the United States, implicit
in the Sinclair deals, was obviously a fundamental term and
the basis of negotiations. By crushing Sinclair and throwing
him inte jail, the Rockefellers had proved to Russia their
complete and absolute control of the U.S. Government and
their ability to make good their agreements involving
recognition, so eagerly sought by the Bolsheviks.

Recognition implied an acceptance or tolerance of the
Marxist ideology and of Communism in the U.S. But
inevitably the cunning and scheming Communist bosses, from
Stalin down, would and did seek with singular devotion to
purpose, to further the forcing of Communist propaganda and
rule, wherever and whenever they could. Surrender to their
terms would mean to engage in intensively fostering
Communist propaganda, the second condition.

Recognition, however, was sought only as the first step
toward Communist world conquest. It was the open sesame to
industrialization of Russia, the third condition imposed. For
world conquest Russia must master the best and most modern
technology. Where could that be found except in the U.S.?

A regular demand of the Soviets in any deal they make or
alliance they enter into, is that they dominate and eventually
take over. Recognition and propaganda are merely steps in the
direction of infiltration and control of the government of the
allying power. Surrender to Soviet terms means, as a
consequence, to become a satellite through the device of a
"Popular Front". A "Popular Front" in Communist language
means a Communist government. The setting up of a
Communist-controlled government in the United States is the
ultimate Soviet purpose of any deal that the Rockefeller
Standard Oil interests could have entered into on

213


the basis of surrender to the Soviets in exchange for control
of their oil.

Money for their purchases and propaganda was directly
needed by the Bolsheviks. The opening of the American
market to their exports of raw materials, in addition to oil,
was implied in the desire for recognition,

The major part of the benefits and returns of any deal, to
begin with, and eventually outright ownership, are the best
terms that anyone can expect of the Communist leaders, or
brigands. They regard every contract as a temporary
expedient, as a "scrap of paper” that must be torn up as soon
as they are in a position to do so. In any deal on Turkish and
dominated Arabian oilfields, for instance, the Soviets
certainly demanded that all the oil produced must eventually
be theirs.

Such demands by the Kremlin would be expected by the
suppliant Rockefeller Standard Oil interests. For they are
exactly the same terms which they themselves would have
laid down had the roles been reversed. And their intent would
be equally treacherous. They invariably plan to ravish anyone
who yields to them. Such is the philosophy of the force
majeur.

Finally, since both of the contracting interests aimed at
world conquest and dominion, there was undoubtedly an
initial agreement to divide the world between them, as a
beginning. The initial division of the world required by
Lenin's formula for world conquest, epitomized by him in his
dictum—"Whoe rules Asia, rules the world",—weould give
Asia and the Eastern Hemisphere to the Soviets and leave to
the Rockefellers the Western Hemisphere. It might also be
expected that such a world partition would respect the
demands of Pan Slavism, Russia's traditional goal.

Bearing in mind the terms which the Kremlin, holding the
upper hand, would be expected to demand a priori, it is
interesting to see how fully such demands have been met by
the Rockefeller Standard Oil agencies and their
"philanthropies", industries, dependencies and the lands
dominated by them, in short, by the Rockefeller Empire; to
observe what loyal allies they have been in the Rockefeller-
Soviet Axis; and to study how they have compelled us, the
United States, to pay the

214


costs of their commitments with our lives and fortunes.

As soon as the ink had become dry on the Standard Oil
contract for the purchase of Communist oil, the entire
Rockefeller propaganda machine was put to work to twist
public opinion to conform with Rockefeller purposes. All of
the tremendous power, which had been exerted to damn the
Communists and stir hatred against them, was turned
overnight to the task of building up in the U.S. a love of
Communism and Russia for the purpose of creating a
favorable atmosphere for recognition of the Soviets.
Rockefeller profits are always a "holy cause", and a basis for
a Crusade. On March 27, 1926, the New York Times
announced under a Paris dateline:

"The Standard Oil Company of New York and the Vacuum
Oil Company have just completed negotiations with the
Soviet Government of Russia for the purchase of 190,000
tons of refined oil at $17 a ton, or a total of more than
$3,200,000." On the following day its front page announced:


"IVY LEE MOVE TO AID THE SOVIETS


"Ivy L. Lee, the best-known and most expensive of
publicity agents, who among other activities is the ‘adviser
on public relations’ of the Standard Oil Company, has
begun to display keen interest in the recognition of the
Soviet Government of Russia by the United States. Mr.
Lee, it was learned yesterday, 1s so greatly interested that he
has sent out a series of ‘confidential letters' to prominent
men in relation to the matter, among them to the former
Secretary of State Elihu Rect".


The letter to Root, who had served faithfully and
indiscriminately both the Morgan and Rockefeller interests,
like the balance of Ivy Lee's voluminous correspondence on
the theme, was obviously merely a sounding board for the
publicity campaign under way. His pleas were many and
varied. But one of them is outstanding because it has become
the keynote of Rockefeller Empire dogma: "the advantages of
‘internationalism’ vs. the disadvantages of ‘isolationism’, as
seen, of course, from the view-
215


point of his masters. He frankly stated on their behalf:
"From our point of view, we want to trade with Russia”.


"Internationalism For Profit" and “Love Those
Communists" became the theme songs of every activity of the
Rockefeller Empire. Like Bismarck before them, the
Rockefeller interests had come to recognize in Marxist
Communism and Socialism, power patterns which could be
used to delude the "peasants" and made to serve their own
imperial ambitions. Communist fronts were given their
support and Rockefeller-controlled "philanthropies”, social-
service agencies and “educational” institutions were converted
to Communist propaganda outlets. New fronts, hundreds of
them, were created and sponsored, fostered and financed by
the Rockefellers, their associates and allies, in order to build
up sentiment in favor of Soviet Russia and recognition of the
Bolshevik regime.

Ivy L. Lee took seriously the assignment he was given by
his employer, John D. Rockefeller Jr. and his Standard Oil
Co., to manage pro-Bolshevik propaganda and to teach the
Communists all that he knew of the art of propaganda and
public relations. The Soviets, and Hitler in the following
decade, learned so much that made their poisonous
propaganda effective, from Rockefeller's agent, wily Ivy Lee,
that there can be only one explanation for their failure to set
up memorials to him— ingratitude.

Following a two-week trip to Russia in May, 1927, as
representative of the Rockefeller Empire, Lee was the first of
a steady stream of its emissaries who, in the following decade,
travelled to Russia as their guests cr as guests of the Soviets,
to return as agents of Red propaganda. After his return from
Russia, Ivy Lee wrote and published a masterpiece of
propaganda in favor of Russian recognition. The first edition
was privately printed and circulated under the title, The
USSR, An Enigma. And six months later a revised edition was
published by the MacMillian Co. under the title, Present Day
Russia.

In the preface of the book, Lee states that the purpose of his
"mission to Moscow" was to get first-hand information on the
state of mind of the >16


rulers of Russia and to survey their propaganda methods. (pp.
vi and vii) He pretends that he made his trip with an open
mind in regard to the wisdom of trading with Russia. But it is
a matter of record that his employers had made their deal with
the Soviets and were trading with them on a vast scale at the
time; and that he had already committed himself in favor of
trading with Russia and aiding the Communist regime. The
only purpose of this trip and his book therefore, was to serve
the interests of his employers’ allies, the interests of the
Rockefeller-Soviet Axis.

He reports that he gathered from his interview with Karl
Radek, master of Communist propaganda and President of the
Sun Yat-Sen (Chinese} University in Moscow, a number of
important points to guide him in fulfilling the assignment
given him by his employers—to serve the Soviets as
consulting propagandist, in much the same manner as they
later assigned him as consulting propagandist to Hitler and the
Nazis. He learned from Radek that the latter despaired of
succeeding in Communist propaganda in the U.S. because of
the prosperity that prevailed among the working classes; and
that only in case of a depression did he hope to make any
headway. (p. 123} He also was told that it was the object of
the Communists to gain control of the hordes of Asia and
China as the first step in their conquest of the world. (p. 125)
But he found that the "Bolshevik propaganda was, in itself,
perfectly futile” (p. 124) and was largely confined to "training
a very large number of people in the philosophy and technique
of revolution.” These were his guides in harnessing the
Rockefeller fortune and "philanthrepies" to the service of their
allies, and in facilitating the progress of Communism.
Naively, for the record, he describes his otject as the defeat of
the purpese of his clients. He points to the menace of
alignment by Bolshevist Russia with the distressed hordes of
Asia as the potent reason for attracting Russia to the West,


"The men who do the business of the world now shape the
destinies of the world", he points to Russia as the supreme
challenge to the business man, and the failure of diplomacy.
He poses the question: Is not business as usual the best road
back to "normalcy" and the elimination

217


of the menace of a Bolshevist alliance with Asia?

The boek was obviously written with tongue in cheek, to
delude the public into accepting recognition and trade with
Russia, while the conspirators proceeded with their plan to
make good the terms of their deal with Russia and to
precipitate the very menace which he pretended to be seeking
to avert. The Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial had
already begun to finance the Institute of Pacific Relations, a
Communist espionage agency dedicated to the carrying out of
Russia's plan to attain world conquest through control of
China, India and ultimately the balance of Asia. The
depression, which Radek envisaged as essential if
Communism was to make any headway among American
workers, was engineered and already in preparation.

The Memorial had undertaken, under the aegis of Beardsley
Ruml, to foster the spread of Marxism, Communism and
Socialism in the U.S. and the world, by financing numerous
agencies devoted to the Red okjective of bringing about a
"new social order" through the so-called "social sciences”.
Among these agencies, the financing of which by Rockefeller
got under way only after the deal with the Soviets for their oil,
are the following:


Russian Student Fund Russian Zemstves and
Institute of Pacific Re- Town Relief Commit-
lations tees
American Council of Council on Foreign Re-
Learned Societies lations
Conference of Social American Council on
Sciences Education
International School of Economic Foundation
Geneva Londen School of Eco-
National Research Coun- nomics & Political
cil Science
Social Science Research Peoples Institute of New
Council York
Institute of International Spelman Fund of New
Education York


Ivy Lee's process of creating a favorable sentiment for the
recognition of Russia, as required by the Rockefeller-Soviet
deal, involved fulfillment of another condition of the deal,—
fostering the spread of Communism in the U.S. This required
no break in the avowed policies of the Rockefeller Empire

218


and "“philanthropies", as laid down by Rockefeller and
Reverend Gates in the General Education Board Occasional
Letter No. 1—totalitarianism. How perfect a totalitarian state
was Communist Russia and how uncomplicated was the
process of doing business with Moscow, was admirably clear.
Ivy Lee dilates upon it in his book. He points out in the
preface that Soviet Russia is a dictatorship controlled by a few
men, which makes it possible te come to an understanding of,
and with, the nation even in so brief a period as the ten days
he spent in the country to qualify as an expert on its affairs
and write his book. In fact, the Rockefeller support of
Communist totalitarianism was the natural outcome of the
confluence of two streams of development of totalitarian
thought and activity. One was that of Bismarck and Germany.
Bismarck had fostered Marxism, the recrudescence of the
primitive remedy of need since the days of primordial man, as
a device for promoting the vast-scale crime he contemplated,
conquest of the world. The second confluent development was
the equally vast-scale crime contemplated by Rockefeller and
Reverend Gates through the use of the same device in the
guise of religion and sham "benevolence" and "philanthropy".

The conversion of our educational system to Marxist
propaganda, as in Germany where it had been launched
originally by Bismarck through the German government and
its universities, as "social science”, had' made considerable
headway. Harvard University, where the influence of German
Marxist propaganda had appeared earliest, prior to the end of
the 19th century, had advanced so far in the conversion of
education to unadulterated subversive propaganda that its
class of 1927 alone, included three now notorious Reds:
Frederick Vanderbilt Field, now in jail for contempt of court
in connection with traitorous Communist activities, and
Joseph Fels Barnes, both editors of the traitorous Amerasia
magazine and members of the equally treasonous Institute of
Pacific Relations, as well as policy-making members of
Rockefeller's Council on Foreign Relations; and Lawrence
Duggan, former colleague of Nelson Rockefeller and Alger
Hiss in the State Department, of Rockefeller's Institute of
International Education and of his Council on Foreign
Relations. Subsidized by the Rocke-

219


feller philanthropies, Professor Felix Frankfurter of Harvard
made a cause celebre of the Sacco-Vanzetti case, one of the
first popularly exploited, frankly Communist causes. The
Rockefeller interests and their "philanthropies” found ready to
hand a host of subversives bred by their own and Bismarck's
program, and merely tock over and merged the various
schools of subversives into a vast treatcherous machine for
catrying out the purposes of the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis,
under the leadership of their Council on Foreign Relations,
that became in effect the Foreign Office of the Rockefeller
Empire.


In China at the same time, the Rockefeller interests were
doing their utmost to further the objectives of their Axis
partner, the Soviets, by intensively propagandizing
Communism in China itself, supplementing the efforts of
Radek's Chinese University in Moscow. The Rockefeller
interests and "philanthropes" have controlled education in
China since their initial activities about 1913 in connection
with their quest for concessons for oil. The major part of some
$35,000,000 of Rockefeller "benevolences", that China
received, flowed inte propaganda that was called “education”.
The prize educational institution financed by the Rockefellers
in China was the missionary Yenching University in Peiping,
rightly regarded as the Harvard of China. It is a true
counterpart of Harvard in its Marxist Communist character.

The president of Yenching U. was Dr. John Leighton
Stuart, a staunch advocate of the policy of the State
Department Communists of betraying the Chinese Nationalist
Government by forcing Chiang Kai-shek to include
Communists in his government in a "coalition" that so
regularly precedes complete Kremlin control. He was recom-
mended by Rockefeller to his State Department agents as
American Ambassador to China, and was dutifully appointed
by General Marshall. (Headlines, v. II, no. 2, p. 8) This act,
as well as the entirety of Rockefeller- directed sponsored and
financed China activities, clearly indicates ‘direct personal
responsibility for the policy of turmng over China to the
Soviets in compliance with the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis
accord.

Rockefeller's Yenching University staff is loaded


220


with Reds and pro-Communists, including the
following:

Dr. Randolph Sailor, who frequently addresses pro-Red
Chinese meetings arranged by Communist front
organizations, and his wife, who has nothing but praise for
the Communists.

Dr. Lucius Porter, who frankly favors the Chinese
Communists and, in company with Mrs. Paul Robeson, was
a keynote, speaker at a Communist conference at the Hotel
Brevoort in N. Y. C. called to demand recognition of the
Chinese Communist Government and its seating at the
United Nations.

Dr. William Dryden Phelps, who contributed to Soviet
Russia Today a letter praising and supporting the Chinese
Communists.

Donald G. Tewksbury, who is a frequent speaker at
meetings favoring recognition of Chinese Communists, and
is active in the Committee For A Democratic Far Eastern
Policy, organized by Red Frederick Vanderbilt Field.

Dr. T. C. Chao, dean of the School of Religion, who
heads the movement to "reform" Christianity in China and
to ally the Christian Church with the Communist
Government, in much the manner as was done, with
Rockefeller support, by the Federal Council of Churches of
Christ in America.

Thomas A. Bisson, who was formerly editor of Amerasia
and is a champion of the Chinese Communist cause. The
College of Public Affairs of the University, that is liberally
supported with Rockefeller funds, had on its faculty the
following Reds:

Dr. George E. Taylor, who is co-author of the play, The
Phoenix And The Dwarf, that glorified the Chinese
Communists, and was employed in the U.S. State
Department and the OWL

Michael Lindsay, British Communist, who became
public-relations officer of the Chinese Communists at
Yenan.

Maxwell 5. Stewart, who was formerly a teacher at the
Moscow Institute, and an editor of the Moscow Daily News,
and is a founder of the Communist Party front, Friends of the
Chinese People, and a neterious Communist fronter. The
Harvard-Yenching Foundation, that receives Rockefeller
Foundation support, provided for the


following champions of the Red cause:
Owen Lattimore, who represented it in Peiping
in 1930-31. John K. Fairbanks, whe championed Lattimore
in the McCarthy expose, and advocated the
Chinese Communist cause. Theodore H. White, pro-
Chinese Communist


author of Thunder Over China.


There can be ne serious question of the fact that
Roeckefeller's Institute of Pacific Relations was a very
effective espionage agency of the Soviet government, the only
government officially an adherent of the organization, that
served the Kremlin loyally and well, especially in China and
India. Among the organizers of the Russian Council of the
IPR was A. 5. Swandze, brother-in-law of Joseph Stalin.
Many persons, including Alexander Barmine, former
brigadier general in the Soviet military intelligence service,
Louis F. Budenz, former editor of the U.S. Communist Daily
Worker, Elizabeth Bent- ley, former Communist spy, and
Freda Utley, former British Communist author, who was
employed in the Russian Council of the IPR itself, have at-
tested to the service that the Institute and its editors, ‘including
Owen Lattimore, Philip C. Jessup, Thomas A. Bisson and
others, have rendered the Soviets, and to the completely
Communist character of the IPR. It is a matter of record that
Sorge and his fellow spies of the IPR knew in the summer of
194] that the Japanese planned to attack Pearl Harbor, but
they were quite careful to withhold the fact from the
American public so that their employers’ plans would not be
upset.

The officers and personnel of the IPR's dominant
"American" Council have been most effective agents in
carrying out the policies and conspiracies of the Kremlin in
Asia. Prominent among them have been Alger Hiss, now in
jail for perjury in connection with treason on behalf of the
Rockefeller-Soviet Axis (though his mentor and adviser, John
Foster Dulles, top statesman of this Axis, is still dominant in
the State Department as “Special Adviser” to— or boss of —
the Secretary} ; Owen Lattimore, labelled “top Communist
agent" by Senator Joseph McCarthy; and Philip C. Jessup,
U.S. Ambassador at Large and top representative of the State
Department, especially in Far Eastern affairs, now

222


appropriately appointed American delegate to the UN. All of
these men have been ranking members of Rockefeller's
Foreign Office, the Council on Foreign Relations. To their
number has been added, officially in the past year, though he
has been their agent from the start, General George Catlett
Marshall, formerly Chief of Staff and Secretary of State, and
then anomalous Secretary of "Defense". Dean Acheson
collaborates with them fully, and John Stewart Service,"
political adviser to Chiang Kai-shek from the State
Department, was one of their number.

Freda Utley, in her Last Chance In China (p.193) has
described how the top officers of the Institute of Pacific
Relations, Lattimore and Carter, went to Moscow "for help
and advice". She comments:


"To hear these Americans submit themselves to cur (the
Kremlin's} dictates on theory and policy was amusing, if
not sad.'

The traitorous officers of Rockefeller's Institute of Pacific
Relations had served the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis
extraordinarily well. This was made perfectly clear in the
testimony before the House Un-American Activities
Committee given by Muitsusada Yoshikawa, special
investigations chief of the Japanese Attorney General's Office,
and by Major General Charles A. Willoughby, Allied
Intelligence Chief at Tokyo, attached to General MacArthur's
staff, as reported in the New York Times in a special dispatch
by John D. Morris on Aug. 9, 1951. Yoshikawa testified that
Richard Sorge and his spy ring, comprising several members
of the Institute of Pacific Relations, "acted in 'dual capacity’,
as spy and as active propagandist for a Japanese strike
southward, so that Russia could withdraw defense troops from
Siberia” and the Japanese military machine would be turned
against the U.S.

Majer General Willoughby testified that the collaborators of
the executed Red spy, Sorge, from the ranks of Rockefeller's
Institute of Pacific Relations had been "hired in the (United)
States and unloaded on Tokyo", or, in other words,
specifically hired by the IPR and its bosses for their treason.
These agents included the following:

Agnes Smedley, a notorious American Communist agent

and propagandist, about whom Willoughby released a

special intelligence report which the Communists in the

State Department 223


disavowed, following an insolent threat to sue for libel,

made by her. Yoshikawa also identified Smedley as a

member of Sorge's spy ring.

Gunther Stein, a German Communist, Chungking
correspondent of the Christian Science Monitor and
London Daily Telegraph, who wrote regularly for the IPR's
publications, Pacific Affairs, Far Eastern Survey, and
Amerasia. He was arrested in France, November 14, 1950,
for espionage. His writings, according to the testimony
introduced into the records, were widely promulgated by
the

Kinkazu Saionji, the adopted grandson of a Japanese
prince.

Horsumi Ozaki, No. 2 man in the Sorge spy ring, who was
executed with him. With Saionji, Ozaki represented Japan at
the Yosemite National Park conference of the IPR in 1936. In
the same manner there had been planted by the IPR in
General MacArthur's headquarters a number of its agents,
including the following:

Thomas A. Bisson, Yenching U. pro-Communist
associate of Owen Lattimore, who later became editor of
Amerasia. He was identified by Dr. Karl Wittfogel, an
erstwhile German Communist, before the Committee, as a
Communist.

Miriam $5. Farley, who wrote to her superiors in the IPR:

"I have been put to work doing the political section of
MacArthur's monthly report. There will be a_ certain
sporting interest in seeing how much | can get by with.”

Andrew Grazdenzev.


This treachery suited the purpose of the Rockefeller-Soviet
Axis perfectly. In the first place it turned the Japanese from
attacking their natural and vulnerable enemy, Russia, and
from seizing the Russian oil fields. Directly after World War
I, U.S. and Allied troops had been used in conjunction with
White Russian forces to shut the Japanese out of Siberia at the
instance of the same Standard Oil interests, as their avowed
policy, that was once again served by the ‘activities of their
IPR espionage agents. Secondly, by precipitating the attack on
Pearl Harbor, these plotters had brought about the war
between the U.S. and Japan that they had sought, through their
agent Henry L. Stimson with: 4


out success of President Hoover but with perfect success, of
Franklin Delano Roosevelt. They succeeded in getting
American troops to rescue the Standard Oil property in China
that was being despoiled by the Japanese. They also insured
the delivery of China and Asia to their Soviet ally, by
eliminating Japan, the only power in the Orient that could
block the way.

It might appear that in so doing the Rockefeller Empire
would lose oil-concessions and reserves in the territories
turned over to the Soviets. But there is considerable evidence
that the long-standing a-greement on the subject of oil
between the members of the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis is the
strongest bond that ties them together. The Kremlin took over
the Standard Oil concessions from China, after it had been
betrayed to the Chinese Communists by the activities of the
IPR and other agents of the Rockefeller Empire, in and out of
the State Department and the U.S. Government. The Kremlin
specifically required that the terms of the concessions that it
received from the Chinese should be absolutely identical with
those given the Standard Oil companies. This makes it hard to
escape the conclusion that the Kremlin was acting as an agent
of the Rockefeller Empire in taking over the concessions, and
that such action is one of the basic terms of the Rockefeller-
Soviet Axis accord.

At home, in the U.S., the Rockefeller Foundation tock over
from the General Education Board and the Laura Spelman
Rockefeller Memorial the assignment of promoting
Communism under the cover of "social science” and
"humanities". The country's educational system, every
important vehicle for transmission of information and event-
ually even the Federal Government itself became parts of a
huge conspiracy of betrayal. Our schools, colleges and
universities, especially those supported by the Rockefeller
Foundation, became "schools for treason" that turned out an
army of traitors who have not hesitated to betray our country
at every possible opportunity. Each of the tens of thousands of
graduates in the "social sciences”, became an added pressure
for a "managed", or Marxist, economy. For their training iş
designed to enable them to earn a living only in "managing"
the lives and affairs of others! This implies elimination of
Constitution and our republic. They are the most

225


powerful lobby and pressure group for a Marxist regime,
which they camouflage with the name "New Deal" and "Fair
Deal"; for only under such a regime can they earn a
livelihood, and only under a frankly Communist and
totalitarian regime can they hope to attain the full
development and power for which their training was designed.

Ivy Lee and his employers turned their energies in earnest
to “creating in the U.S. an atmosphere favorable to the
recognition of Russia". This became the principal function of
the Foundation, that always sails the course dictated by
Rockefeller interests. Stalin could have no occasion to find
fault with the Rockefeller Standard Oil group for failing to
live up to the very letter of their agreement. With the support
of Reckefeller-dominated "philanthrepies", some of the most
dangerous Communist fronts were set up for the subversion of
the American "peasants". The more "educated" they were in
the Rockefeller-supervised thought-control machine, the more
readily they succumbed; which accounts for the far higher
percentage of traitors exposed among the "educated" than
among the rank and file. No accredited Communist agent or
dangerous subversive failed te secure support from the
foundations, no matter how remote the bearing on the Marxist
cause.

No activity that serves Soviet Russia's interests has been
regarded as too minor for Rockefeller support, no Communist
agent beyond its pale. This is illustrated by the case of Hanns
Eisler, brother of Gerhardt Eisler, top Communist agent in the
U.S. until he jumped bail and fled the country to Germany,
where he became a high Communist official in the Soviet
zone and one of the chief antagonists of the American
Occupation officials. When Hanns Eisler was ordered
deported from the U.S. by immigration authorities as a
Communist, at the expiration of his visa, obtained as a
"visiting lecturer", Alva S. Johnson, director of the Marxist
New School For Social Research, and Eleanor Roosevelt
interceded with James L. Houghteling, Roosevelt cousin and
Commissioner of Immigration, to stay Hanns Eisler's
deportation indefinitely. The Rockefeller henchman arranged
to have the Foundation provide for Eisler with a $20,160
grant. The Rockefeller Foundation announced this grant in the
1940 report as follows:

226


"NEW SCHOOL FOR SOCIAL RESEARCH
"Music In Film Production


"The Foundation made a grant of $20,160 to the New
Scheel for Social Research for experimental studies of
music in film preduction during the two year period
beginning February 1, 1940. These studies are under the
direction of Dr. Hanns Eisler, a member of the School's
faculty and a well-known composer of musk for motion
pictures. His studies will deal with the possibility of
utilizing new types of musical material in film productien .


"The work will culminate in the preparation and recording
of different musical scores for various types of visual
content. These recordings will be deposited in the Film
Library of the Museum of Modern Art (Ed.:
Rockefeller Museum) where they will be available to pro-
ducers and students of the motion picture.” The "new type of
musical material" to which the report refers were the works of
Communist composers of the breed of Eisler himself,
composer of such edifying Communist popular songs as
We Must Be Ready To Take Over, and of other "composers"
who turn out the brand of sound effects dictated by Stalin and
the Politburo as conducive to the cause of revolution and
"proletarian" rule. A number of purposes are served by these
activities, aside from compliance with the entente of the
Rockefeller-Soviet Axis. First, they serve to pervert
American taste and to enjoin submission and regimentation,
even of taste, as part of the process of poisoning the "peasant"
minds. Second, they flatter Communist "kultur" in the same
manner as Nelson Rockefeller did Latin American through
his Museum of Modern Art. Third, they provide a source of
income for the Soviets to pay for their propaganda and their
all-out war on us, through a steady stream of royalties paid to
their licensing agency.

For the purpose of grooming their traitorous Communist
agents for service in the U.S. Government and planting them
in key posts, where they could work their treason as
bureaucrats and masters of the American pecple, many
Rockefeller-controlled agencies collaborated. Top
Rockefeller agency, the

227


Communist-riddled Council on Foreign Relations, openly
beasts, as stated in the chapter on that organization, in its
annual reports, that it has planted innumerable agents in
policy-making Federal posts, for which it trains them.

The Rocketeller Foundation allocated considerable sums to
its heavily subsidized Council of Learned Societies for the
specific purpose of compiling lists of “specialists” for
appointment to various Government posts. Of these sums,
$31,000 was earmarked for assembling data and drawing up
recommendations on personnel in the humanistic fields. As
might be expected of the Rockefeller "philanthropies", the
man selected to head this activity, Mortimer Graves, had a
long, Red, pro-Communist record.

During the war it was common knowledge that Graves was
responsible for planting in key, Far East policy positions in
the Government large numbers of Reds, especially those from
the Institute of Pacitic Relations.

It was through agencies of these types that the Rockefeller
Empire was able to build up the New Deal and Fair Deal
Administrations as "Popular Front" Communist regimes that
complied with their deal with Soviet Russia. Even during the
period of the Korean War, their complete cooperation con-
tinues under the sham pretense of opposition to Communism,
that has become the Party line since Communism has grown
unpopular because of the Korean War.

The attainment of the ultimate goal sought by the
totalitarian conspirators of the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis, their
complete domination of the U.S. and ultimately of the world,
all gained at the expense of the American taxpayer, has been
the true purpose of the New and Fair Deals. Their treacherous
and seemingly "crazy" pattern can be understood fully only
when examined from this viewpoint. In a letter to Elihu Root,
protesting his opposition to recognition of Russia, Ivy L. Lee
stated:

"What I would like to see, however, 1s a condition brought
about under which you, and men like you, would think it
wise to accord such recognition". Lee recognized
prevailing prosperity, especially among the workers, as one
of the chief obstacles to ng


fulfillment of the conditions laid down by the Soviets. He
expresses the idea succinctly in his interview with Radek on
the topic of Bolshevik propaganda in the U.S.A., published in
his Present Day Russia (p.123). He pointed out that Commu-
nist propaganda could net make headway against the high
wages and the automobiles of the American workers; but
better results could be expected if there were depression and
trouble in the land.

It was not long before the conditions for which Lee wished,
were brought about. The steck-market crash of 1929 was
skillfully engineered by huge withdrawals of gold from the
Treasury. The first shipment of gold, by the Chase National
Bank to France, preceding the break, was reported to be
$500,000,000 in gold bars, withdrawn at the prevailing rate of
$20 an ounce. The Rockefeller-dominated banks reimported it
in 1934 and redeemed it at $35 an ounce after they had
profited hugely from currency manipulation in France and
England and had arranged its revaluation here.

The depression that was such a horror for the country and
the capitalist world was an era that was tremendously
profitable for the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis, in many directions;
and they did their utmost te prolong it and profit from it in the
fullest measure. The misery and grinding poverty of the
period, as Radek and Ivy Lee had foreseen, turned the
unthinking to acceptance of the quack remedy of Marxism and
its progressive slavery, that parades as "managed economy",
and that was offered them by the Rockefeller- subsidized

"social scientists". The relatively unknown consequences of
Communism, equal poverty for all except the overlords, that
were misrepresented to the people through every avenue of
Rockefeller Red propaganda, through numerous agencies and
"oshilanthropies” and later through the Government itself,
lured the moronic mob. The mob lacked the intellectual
capacity to discern that beth the prevailing order and
Communist totalitarianism are identical, both of them scarcity
economies; that for the rank and file it merely meant jumping
from the frying pan of depression and deflation into the fire of
wat and inflation. It became a simple matter to sell the

"peasants" on recognition of the Soviets abroad and a
"Popular Front", New Deal, "progressive" dictatorship at
home.

229


All moves were planned well in advance by the
conspirators. They made no effort to disguise the fact that
"they planned it that way". Thus the Rockefeller Foundation
report of 1935 announced the setting up of planning agencies
designed to be taken over and incorporated into the
Government. The report noted (p. 218) : “increased reliance
upon the expert and technical adviser (in the field of in-
ternational relations} by governmental authorities is the most
significant development of the past decade. The Foundation
has been in a position te make such services available in a
number of instances, and there have been some notable results


Symbolic of the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis is the
juxtaposition of the Foreign Office of the Rockefeller Empire,
the Council on Foreign Relations, and the building that houses
the Soviet UN delegation headed by Nelson Rockefeller's
friend, Andrei Gromyko. They are located on opposite sides
of the west corner of Park Avenue at 68th Street, New York
City, a short distance from Reockefeller's home. On the
southwest comer stands the Harold Pratt home, built by a
scion of Rockefeller'’s partner. After his death, it was turned
over to Rockefeller's Council by the widow, to avoid payment
of taxes. On the second-floor front, facing 68th Street, is a
large council room in which stands an immense horseshoe
table covered with green cloth. On the far side of its center
stands a huge armchair that serves in the capacity of a throne.
It is there that are held the conferences that determine the fate
of nations and the world; that plot and dictate the policies
adopted by Washington and the State Department to Dean
Acheson or anyone whe happens to be the Empire's puppet
Secretary of State, who sits at the foot of the table to receive
his instructions. It was the scene of Alger Hiss' mest glorious
moments as premier of the Rockefeller Empire, before his
office was transferred to the Lewisburg Federal Penitentiary
as jailbird No. 19137 for perjury in connection with his
treasonous activities on behalf of the Rockefeller Empire, that
placed him in a position from which all its wealth and power
could not extricate him though the policies he advocated are
catried on by others of his associates. No flag has ever been
seen by us hanging in front of the building. This may
symbolize its "internationalism". Or it may mean

230


that the Rockefeller Empire is not yet ready to break out its
banner, which we humbly suggest very well might be the
flying Pegasus flag of the Sccony Vacuum Oil Co., or the
Esso emblem.

Directly opposite the headquarters of the Rockefeller
Empire, on the northwest corner, stands the mansion build
by Percy Pyne, of the National City Bank. It was
purchased, according te rumor, by Rockefeller interests and
turned over to the UN Soviet delegation, to house Gromyke
and his staff. It is constantly surrounded by dozens of cars
bearing UN plates, provided at the expense of American
taxpayers. Over the huge fireplace at the end of the
immense reception hall, hangs a portrait of Lenin. The hall
has been the scene of celebrations following the bloody
retreat of American forces in Korea, and also after the
dismissal of General MacArthur. On festive occasions the
Red hammer-and-sickle flag flies from its flagpole; but
never an American flag. That is one corner of the land
where nothing patriotic or American 1s tolerated. It is the
hub of the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis.


LAURA SPELMAN ROCKEFELLER MEMORIAL FUND


APPROPRIATIONS
L919 1920 1921 1922
RFTICTOWMS ORGANTZATTONS—
Bartist Home for the Aged 50-000
Rantier TInion of Western Canada In ri In nore iw 1 rer
Chins Cantinivarinn Carrnitree 11 ity 4731
Thterchurch world Movement 200.000


a ru _Bantict Miceian | Sariens 24 800
Noth Vapist" Convention, Gen'l Board of 12.500 800000 450.000 300.000
Promotion


rh pa njer Laveen Nar'l Vem ` eS Oe O ere

omens Baptist gregn 195100 ary 25,000 37,500 62.600
Society, Jubilee Fund
EDUCATION
Friersency Fund for Near Fast Cnlleses if SRI
Pennles Trsrinire of New York, UU 1 nn 1 rrr 1 A
Women's Union Christian Colleges in the Orient
Sa RESEARCH AND 250.000 350.000
Asst. for the Siy of Negro Life and History 5.000
Stare Charities Aid Assn KALLI 25 TWH
SOCTAT. WET FARF ORC ANTZA TIONS
ATCP. LOLOL) 15000 LODO
Baw Serre nf America L an W LE A W
Commission en Trterracial Coomeration 25.00
Narional Tirhan Taone 3500 2 SH KALLI R DHI
New York TIrhan Tease 250 3S 4
Salvation Army 3740 42 400 Al 24h 40 M
Silver Rav Assn 13469 ROR
YMCA Trrernarional Committee SMH 116973 IMIA KALLI
PUBLIC HEALTH
ATCP 2 074 151 FQR 45 554 AR IRQ
Henry Srreer Serlement KALLI PAT 25 100
New York Academy of Medicine R 20A
New York Tuhereningis Assn 18 na Ie ry


United Hospital Fund of New York City 5.000 25666 37.500 15,000


CHAPTER XII


THE LAURA SPELMAN ROCKEFELLER
MEMORIAL


Rockefeller Speeds Marxist "Science" &
Internationalism


To emphasize the synchronization of the reversal of the
attitude of the Rockefeller Empire toward Soviet Russia, the
origin of the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis, and the undercover
speeding up of its support and dissemination of the Marxist, or
so-called "social", sciences, consideration of the Laura Spel-
man Rockefeller Memorial has been deferred to this point.

It has been related how Rockefeller, in connection with the
Colorado Fuel & Iron strike, undertook to rehabilitate himself
in public opinion by engaging the Rockefeller Foundation in
the field of labor relations to carry out his plans of regi-
mentation of workers under the guidance of W. L. Mackenzie
King; but that instead of allaying, it merely stirred up public
resentment. In 1917, as a consequence, the Rockefeller
Foundation dropped its "social science" plans. But this move
was merely a temporary expedient to disarm suspicion.
Rockefeller established the Laura Spelman Rockefeller
Memorial shortly thereafter. Its true purpose proved to be the
carrying out of his labor relations and "social science"
program. During the first years of its existence, the intent to
use the Memorial to seduce and take over control of labor or-
ganization was masked by a “charity” front. During the years
when the spotlight of publicity rested on it, the Memorial
operated as a strictly "charitable" device and merely
contributed to various organized charities that Rockefeller
dominated or sought to take over. This pose of "charity" is
well illustrated in the list of principal grants made by the
Memorial in the years 1919-1922. (p. 231)

In 1923, when its activities were no longer front page news,
the Memorial began to divert its funds to the support of
Marxist and Communist causes, and the "social sciences.” In
1923, it granted $50,-000 for the support of the Russian
Student Fund Ine., that was renewed annually until 1927. In

232


1924, $85,940 was appropriated for fellowships in the
"social sciences", $115,000 for the London School of
Economics and Political Science, $490,000 for the
Robert Brookings School of Economics and
Government, and $445,000 for the Social Science
Research Council Inc. The diversion began in earnest in
1926, in which year the Memorial began its support of
the newly formed Institute of Pacific Relations and of
the Council On Foreign Relations, simultaneously with
the consummation by the Standard Oil companies of
their deals with Russia, when the Rockefeller-Soviet
Axis got under way. How rapidly the grants for the
"social science” propaganda subsidy grew can be seen in
the table below, listing some of the more important
ones, for the years 1923-1928.


LAURA SPELMAN ROCKEFELLER MEMORIAL FUND


APPROPRIATIONS
: . 1923 1924 1925 1926 1927 1928
Couneil on Education 7.500

Assn. for the Study of Negro
Life and History 37.800
Columbia Universin— _ [81500 63.000 20H}
Columbia Univ. Council for 75,000
Research in the Social Sciences
Columbia Univ. Teachers College $0,000
Fepanaric Faarndatian | . on win
Fellowships in the Social Sciences: 20.000
for Armer. Students
for Furnnesn Smidents _ Aa QA

eutsche Hochscule fur Politik 50.000
Hamburg Tnst. of Intemational 20.000


Affairs

Harvard Universine

nst. gg “Rousseau of Geneva
titertiat] Mioration, Sery.


nitertational Philosophical
Congress


and = Political Scierice


Natl Negro Business League


233


140000 290 Oe 15


15,000


55000 30000 30.000 23.000
7500


ristitute of Pacific Relations LODDO 45.000 | LO.000

pon feren of Feonnmine 12. 00
etroit ‘Bureau oF Govern mental 50.000 25,000

Ren ar Publ T ion of l l
ept o ic Trstruction o

he Canton of Geneva 13.000

Frnnnmir Fenn fla rinn ` 25 mi 25 WW 125 H

London School of Economics LLS000 155.000 875.000 LOCI


Howard University KAELL
nsitute for Sozial und 60,000
Staatswisserschaften | `
ristitute for Economics & 18.000
History at Copenhagen

nistitute of Trternat]. Education 240,000


15,000


Natl. Institute of Public
Adrrinigtratiqni

Marl Uirhan Teame

New York Urban T.easue .
New York School of Social
Work

Noarthivegrern Universipy
Notgereingchaft des
Deutschen Wisergchaft
Regents of the Uni. of
State of N.Y.

Robert. Brookings Grad-
uate School of Econotiics &
Governmert

Russian Zemstvos and
Towns Relief Corn.

Russian = Student Fund
Tre.

Salvation Arr

Spelman Fund of M. Y.
Social Science Research
Council Ine.

Stanford University `
YMCA College at Chi-
cago
United Hospital Fund of
New York
University, of Ga., State
College of Agriculture
niv. of Towa, Child
esearch Stattion

niv af Minnesara

Tinty of North Carolina
Univ. of North Carolina
School of Public Wel-
L
T
T


2 ac


niv af Stockholen
niv of Toronta


niv of Viroinia
Vanderbilt Universiny
Yenching University


192R 1924


SELLI GALLI
GAUL 4 fh


62,500


490.000


56.000 60,000


50000 50-000


445,500
62.500


QT SO
30,000


19245


ITA
SALLI


10 i
16-500


50.000


65.000


15,000


12,000
L 18.600


240 nN
150


75.000
AA Te


1927
65.000
410
125.000
94 non
30.000


87.000 spop
25,000


219.500 1.834.500
260.000


15.000 80.000


Ue


IR? ant
125.000 750.00)


1928


46.4600


10-000
50.500
2,281,250


LOL000000
166.000


TIA HW
an nnn


140,000


In 1928 the Memorial was merged with the Rockefeller
Foundation completely, except for a grant of ten millions to
establish the Spelman Fund, which has been described. The
organizations supported or established with the Memorial


funds became


he key agencies, the social science centers, of


the Rockefeller Empire's totalitarian conspiracy, as has been
related in connection with the Rockefeller Foundation. So it
was that the Foundation sneaked into the field of political


propaganda, th


rough the Memorial, in spite of the provisions


of the law denying tax exemption to foundations thus engaged,


circumventing


effectuating the Empire's deal with the Soviets.

The Marxist complexion of the Memorial's activities is
clearly indicated by its substantial grants to Harold Lagki's
London School of Economics and Political Science. This was
the haven of the Fabian Socialists and of Marxists ranging
further to the left, including the Communists; and it was their
principal forum and propaganda agency in the


234


enlightened public resentment; and it set about


English-speaking world. The initial grant made in 1924 was
$115,000. This was supplemented by an additional $875,000
grant in 1927 and by another of $100,000 in the following
year. The total support of this hotbed of Communism and
Socialism amounted to more than a million dollars by 1929.
Since the staff of the school comprises the leaders of the
British Labor Party, it is apparent the Rockefeller interests
were buying control of the Laborites with the Memorial
grants.

When the Memorial was merged with the Rockefeller
Foundation, in 1928, the latter continued to support the
School. The grants listed in the Foundation reports are as
ollows:


Laura Spelman Rockefeller


Memorial .......000. cee $1,090,000.00

1929 Building extension ............... 15,594.69
Research Fund oo. 20,000.00

1930 Research Fund ow... 19,438.75
1932 Building 0. ccececne eee 55,806.81
Research Fund — .......cceeeeees 21,054.69
1933 Research w...ccccccccssssesessseeseees 39,094.65
Building wo... ceee eens 241,351.99

1934 Research oo... ccecseeceeeeseees 26,494.41
Building oo... ccccccccceeseessseees 33,274.04

1935 Departmental Development ....... 12,477.84

Research oo... ccececcceeeeseeeeceees 9,052.50

1939 General Expense .........0..0cccee 51,250.00

1949 General Expense .....00 cee 50,900.00
Total $1,685,820.37


By 1926, the Memorial was launched on an intensive
program of fostering the Marxist "social sciences" in both the
educational and political spheres throughout the world. It
subsidized the Institute for International Studies at Geneva
with $100,000 in 1926; the Social Science Research Council
with $1,834,500 in 1927 and $165,000 in 1928; the American
Council of Learned Societies with $15,000; the Fellowship
Program of Social Sciences with $250,000; and the Institute of
International Education with $240,000.

In charge of this phase of their activities the Rockefellers
placed Beardsley Ruml, who had garnered his Ph.D. from the
University of Chicago, after a year with the Carnegie
Corporation of New York. Following the merger of the
Memorial with the Foundation Ruml was made Dean of the
Social 335


Science Division of his master's University of Chicago and
Professor of Education. In 1934, he became treasurer of R. H.
Macy and Co. Inc. and in 1945 became chairman of its board
of directors. He is a director of Muzak Corp. and of a number
of theught-contrel enterprises controlled by Senator William
B. Benton of the firm of Benton & Bowles, which has been
closely identified with Rockefeller and New Deal activities.
These include Encyclopedia Britannica Films and
Encyclopedia Britan-nica Co. He is trustee of Rockefeller's
Museum of Modern Art; director of the Rockefeller
subsidized National Bureau of Economic Research that so
strongly influences the policies of our government from
behind the scenes; and director of the General American
Investors Co. that is headed by Rockefeller's former son-in-
law, David M. Milton. Both Ruml and Benton are members of
the Foreign Office of the Rockefeller Empire, the Council On
Foreign Relations, in which Alger Hiss and his associate,
Owen Lattimore, play key roles.

Ruml is also the author of tax bills that are so helpful to his
masters. He conceived the withholding device whereby the
taxes are exacted from pay envelopes, which throws the onus
of collection on the employer. Oil producers pay taxes on only
a small fraction of their earnings; and they pay nothing on
overseas earnings. From 1928 to 1933 Ruml was a trustee of
the Rosenwald Fund, acting with its head, Embree, former
vice-president of the Rockefeller Foundation, during a period
when the Rosenwald Fund became as notorious for its support
of left wing and outright Communist organizations as is the
Rockefeller Foundation. Ruml was associated with Hutchins,
Benton, Shuster and Nie-buhr, all of Rockefeller's Council On
Foreign Relations, and with MacLeish in the "Commission On
Freedom Of The Press." This Commission has advocated the
adoption of complete theught contrel, by censership of the
press on behalf of the totalitarian conspirators. Ruml was a
member of a group of Rockefeller associates, that seized upon
atom-bomb hysteria as an excuse for a "Committee to Frame a
World Constitution". Ruml and his Rockefeller subsidized
associates, have been the guiding “geniuses” of the New Deal
and Fair Deal. Their activities have been directly supervised,
as in the United Nations, by the Rockefellers.

236


CHAPTER XIII


THE COUNCIL ON FOREIGN RELATIONS "FOREIGN
OFFICE" OF THE ROCKEFELLER EMPIRE The “Invisible
Government" After the Rockefeller Empire had entered into
its accord with Stalin and the Seviets, it required an agency
that would not be suspect to serve in carrying out the terms of
the Rockefeller Soviet pact, and to supplement and support the
drive launched for it by Ivy Lee. For this putpose the
Rockefeller interests selected the Council on Foreign
Relations, an organization of which some of their group were
members, notably, Ivy Lee, John Foster Dulles, Henry
Harkness Flagler and the Pratts.
The Council on Foreign Relations was launched in 1919 at the
Paris Peace Conference. The Rockefeller Empire had
emerged tremendously wealthier and more powerful from the
war which had been engineered and launched at a cost to us of
tens of thousands of lives, hundreds of thousands of maimed
and tens of billions of dollars of our wealth, and at even
greater sacrifice to other lands. They had attained the
objective for which had been incited the holocaust, control of
the Near East and ownership of the Saudi Arabian concession.
The situation was aptly summed up by Harold Nicholson in
his book PEACE MAKING (p. 352-61} in passages cited
by the director of the council in its twenty-fifth year report, as
follows: "Friday May 30, (1919) A dinner ... to discuss
formation ... of an Anglo-American Institute of Foreign
Affairs. Bob Cecil supports it. He said ‘There is no single
person in this room who is not disappointed with the terms
we have drafted. Yet England and America have got all they
want and more; far more. Our disappointment is an excellent
symptom; let us perpetuate it." "

The report tells the following story of the origin of the
Council:

"In Spring 1919, a group of men at the Peace Conference in
Paris concluded that facilities were badly needed in their
respective countries for the continuous study of
international relations.


"Conversations between Gen. Tasker H. Bliss, Col. E. M.
House, Prof. Archibald Cary Coolidge, Whitney H.
Shepardsen, Dr. James T. Shotwell and others of the
American delegation, and British officials such as Sir Robert
Cecil, Lionel Curtis, Sir Valentine Chirel, Lord Eustace
Percy and Harold Temperley, led to a dinner meeting at the
Majestic Hotel, Paris. on May 30, 1919.

"It was formally agreed that an organization
should be created for the study of international
affairs. The first two resolutions set forth the
proposed form and substance of the undertaking:

"RESOLVED

"That those present undertake to form an Institute entitled The
Institute of International Affairs Founded at Paris in 1919
comprised at the outset of two branches, one in the United
Kingdom and one in the U.S.

"That the purpese of this Institute should be to keep its
members in touch with the international situation and enable
them to study the relation between national politics and the
interests of society as a whole.’

" . . It seemed unwise fo set up a single institute with
branches. One group therefore established the British (now
Royal} Institute of International Affairs, London; and the
other group, returning to the U.S., merged with an informal
body already in existence (Union Club), which was known as
the Council on Foreign Relations. The Council had been
organized in 1918 in New York City and welcomed on a
number of occasions, distinguished foreigners coming to
America in connection with the conduct of the war.

"The purposes of the Council are set forth as follows:

"to afford a continuous conference on international questions
affecting the U.S. by bringing together experts in statecraft,
finance, industry, education and science.

"to create and stimulate international thought among the
people of the U.S., and to this end,

"to co-operate with the government of the U.S. and with
international agencies coordinating international activities by
eliminating, in so far as possible, duplication of effort, to
create new bodies and to employ such other and further 238


means as from time to time may seem wise and proper." (The
Council on Foreign Relations. A Record of 25 Years.)
The report describes the Council's financing as follows: (id. pp.


60-1)


"no endowment. .. Derives financial support from four sources:


1. Dues and contributions


1 1


2. Proceeds from sale of publications 1,287,850

3. Grants from Foundations for research 1,134,700

4, Interest on investments 172,650"
Approximately one third of the income of the Council was
derived from foundations, all of it devoted to "research". With the
exception of approximately $200,000 obtained from the
Rockefeller dominated Carnegie foundations, all of these grants
were derived from the Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial and
the Rockefeller Foundation in the form of a steady annual stream
of grants, as follows:


1927 Laura Spelman Memorial $150,000
1929 Research American Foreign policy 36,000

1930 " " " " 36,000
1931 " " " " 36,000
1932 " " " " 36,000
1933 " " " " 25,000
1934 " " " " 25,000
1935 " " " " 25,000
1936 30,000
1938 $9,000
1939 44,500
1940 73,375
1941 57,000
1942 War & Peace Studies 70,700
1943 " " " 60,800
1944 74,908.90
1945 60,000


1946 Preparation of History of World
War IT (to prevent debunking) 139,000


1947


60,000


1949 Study of problems of aid to


Europe 50,000


Total = $1,164,283.90


It is notable that the Laura Spelman Rockefeller


239


Memorial grant followed hard on the heels of the Rockefeller
Stalin pact, and that the subsequent support assumed the form
of annual grants instead of endowment. Obviously, annual
grants provide a more direct and continuous method of
control of a subsidiary orgamzation than does endowment.
Thus did the Rockefeller interests gain and hold domination
over the organization that they proceeded to make their top
political agency, their Foreign Office, without creating any
suspicion of this situation. For such an agency is far more et-
fective if it is regarded as independent. The Rockefeller
interests, therefore, avoided publicizing their control of the
Council. On the other hand, the Rockefellers deviated from
their practise of requiring contributions from others as the
price of their support. They did not wish to share their control
of the Council with others. The Council, like its subsidiary
Institute of Pacific Relations, 1s peculiarly a Rockefeller
agency.

Membership in the Council on Foreign Relations has been
attainable from the start, only by invitation. Originally it had
included leaders of American industry, commerce, banking,
politics and the press, as can be seen in the 1925 membership
list. In 1925, the membership was weighted in favor of
internationalism. It contained a sprinkling of Marxist
"liberals", such as Bruce Bliven, Walter Lippmann and
Simeon Strunsky, of the leftist press; bankers of the same
leaning, such as the Kuhn Loeb group who were identified
with the Rockefeller interests, and acted for them, including
Otte Kahn, Mortimer L. Schiff, Felix M. Warburg and Paul
M. Warburg, and William Averell Harriman of Brown Bres.
Harriman Co., as well as more conservative and American
Walter E. Frew; and the J. P. Morgan & Co. crowd, sitting on
both sides of the fence, with "liberal" Thos. W. Lamont, R. C.
Leffingwell, Dwight W. Morrow, Edward R. Stettinius and
the Davisons, side by side with Albert H. Wiggin, George B.
Baker and Herbert H. Lehman. The Wilsoman Democrats
were represented by Col. Edward M. House, the agent for the
powers behind the throne in the Wilson regime, John W.
Davis, Wall Street and Rockefeller attorney who was defeated
presidential candidate, James W. Gerard, former ambassador
to Germany; and the Republican regime by Ogden L. Mills,
Secretary of the Treas-

240


ury, Elihu Rect, Secretary of State in the T. Roosevelt regime,
Henry W. Taft and George W. Wick-ersham, U.S. Attorney
General in the Taft regime. The legal fraternity and the bench
were represented by the Chadbournes, Frederick R. Coudert,
Paul D. Cravath, Judge Learned Hand, and Archibald G.
Thacher; Wall Street, by Jules B. Bache, Clarence Dillon,
Samuel Goldman and Sam A. Lewisohn and E. R. A.
Seligman; trade and industry by George Blumenthal,
Newcomb Carlton, president of Western Union, T. Coleman
DuPont, leftish Edward A. Filene, Arthur Curtiss James, the
Strauses and the Strausses, Gerard Swope, Myron C. Taylor,
Wm. H. Woodin and Owen D. Young. The Rockefellers were
represented directly by their publicity man Ivy L. Lee, their
kinsman John Foster Dulles, and the Standard Oil Co. by
Henry Harkness Flagler and the Pratts. Such an organization
could prove to be an invaluable front.

With assumption of control of the Council by the
Rockefellers, the character of the membership changed
sharply and strangely.

Communist agents, pro-Communist proteges of the
Rockefeller interests, Reds of all complexions, "liberals" and
frank, subversive high priests of the Marxist "social sciences”,
and New Dealers swelled the membership list, assumed key
roles in the Council's activities and filled its conferences and
publications with pre-Communist propaganda and the Party
"line". The ringleaders of the Rockefeller financed
Communist espionage agency, the Institute of Pacific
Relations, including its former, Soviet-decorated Secretary,
Edward Clark Carter, Philip C. Jessup, and the editers of its
publications, including the notorious Amerasia magazine,
Owen Lattimore, Wiliam W. Lockwood, Joseph Barnes and
self-proclaimed Communist "leader", Frederick Vanderbilt
Field, who was justly retired to a Federal penitentiary for his
activities, became the leading spirits of the Council and filled
its forums and its publication, Foreign Affairs, with their
propaganda.

It was Alger Hiss, however, who became the outstanding
member and leading spirit in the Council on Foreign
Relations. His role was virtually that of Prime Minister of the
Rockefeller Empire and the head of its Foreign Office. His
services to the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis earned him the
accolade of 4]


both the Rockefellers and Stalin. With it went, ex officio, the
policy making rele of the U.S. State Department in the
Roosevelt regime, the power to dictate the foreign policy of
the U.S. (a mere subsidiary of the Rockefeller Empire) and,
with the approval of Stalin, the authorship of the Yalta pacts
and the United Nations charter.

The rabidly pro-Communist members of the State
Department and of other Government services are honored for
their distinguished services to the Rockefeller Empire and the
Axis, by membership in the Council. Outstanding among
these are Dean Acheson, the late Edward Stettinius, Philip C.
Jessup, W. Averell Harriman, Ralph J. Bunche, Senator
William B. Benton, Justice Felix Frankfurter and many others.
These take their place with the Amerasia galaxy, beside the
Rockefellers, Nelson A., John D. 3d and David, and such
luminaries as Marshall Field, Harold Stassen and General
Dwight D. Eisenhower, as indoctrinators of the Council's
membership and dictators of its policies.

In effect the Council on Foreign Relations has become an
assembly of the top Rockefeller agents, associates, and
collaborators in business, industry, banking, politics and other
less creditable activities, who have served the Empire or the
Axis or both, well and loyally. It bears the same relation to the
Rockefeller Empire as do the higher orders of knighthood to
the British Empire—an accolade for distinguished service. Its
membership, by invitation, can be regarded as equivalent to
decoration.

Many of the members of the Council were claimed openly
as their agents by the Rockefellers in the publicity that they
released through William $8. Dutton to Collier's in the issue of
April 28, 1951, (p. 78) as a build-up. Among these are: Karl
T. Compton, Rebert G. Sproul, Harold W. Dodds, Owen D.
Young, Walter 5. Gifford, former Chief Justice Charles Evans
Hughes, former Ambassador to Great Britain, Lewis W.
Douglas, John Foster Dulles, Dr. Thomas Parran, U.S. High
Commissioner John J. McCloy, Douglas $. Freeman and
Times publisher, Arthur Hays Sulzberger.

It is obviously the function of the Rockefeller dominated
Council to establish contact of the radical and subversive
elements with the State Department and with the highest
officials for the purpose of indectrinating them, influencing
their policies in the 54


totalitarian sense required by the objectives of the Rockefeller
Empire, and gaining entry into the government to directly
further those objectives. This scheme met with complete
success.

Pretense is made of study and research in all phases of
international relations that especially interested the
Rockefeller Empire. They were undertaken with Rockefeller
grants. The leaders of the research were generally puppets
who could be depended upon te guide the "study" and
"research" to the desired and predetermined conclusion, and at
the same time to brief the membership and the participating
public officials in the manner desired by their sponsors.
Foreign Relations Committees in as many as twenty-four
cities, also subsidized by the Rockefeller Foundation and
Carnegie Corporation, were used in the same manner to
indoctrinate and brief local agents and unsuspecting
accomplices. The Council, with its Committees and allied and
subsidiary organizations thus constituted a gigantic lobby and
pressure group serving to influence and warp the nation's
policies. It is a lobby, however, that boasts that Secretary of
State Cordell Hull himself and other high government officials
participated in its activities; that holds in its membership
Secretary of State Dean Acheson.

It vaunts the fact that top government officials come to it for
"suidance and advice”. And it relates in its Annual Report of
the Executive Director, 1949-1950 (pp. 40-41): "At 10 :a.m.
on June 9, some thirty-five men took their places at the horse-
shoe table in the large meeting room of the Council .
During the morning, afternoon and evening, they devoted
themselves to consideration of the advantages and
disadvantages of bipartisan collaboration in American foreign
policy. To provide expert testimony at their daytime
discussions they had as guests Ernest A. Gross, Deputy
Representative of the United States to the United Nations, and
former Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional
Relations; Benjamin Cohen, former Presidential Assistant at
the White House; Francis Ù. Wilcox, Chief of Statf of the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee . . . "At their dinner
session they were joined by a score of Council members
for an informal 'seminar' on the conference theme
(bipartisan

243


collaboration} with the Honorable Thomas E. Dewey,
Governor of New York, serving as discussion leader.
Honorable Thomas K. Finletter, Secretary of the Air
Force, presided.”

It is a lobby that stands above the law and actually beasts of
its lobbying activities with impunity. It boasts about its shady
lobbying tricks and of its control of the foreign policy of the
United States, in its annual reports. Thus in his; annual report
for 1948- 1949, its executive director crows (p. 3

"The front page of the New York Times on * February 16,
1949, carried the familiar index: "WORLD NEWS
SUMMARIZED". One of its items read as follows, ‘Sixty
percent of "leading citizens” independently polled felt that
the country had a 'meral commitment to give help to the
free nations of Europe.’

"Who were those ‘leading citizens’? Whe sought their views
and for what purpose?

"Answers to these and other questions were found in the
Times' accompanying dispatch. It was a story that figured
on the front pages here and abroad, the recapitulation of
the findings of a Council (en Foreign Relations}
publication, ‘Military Cooperation with Western Europe"!

"In October, 1948, the Council had begun work on an
inquiry addressed to the members of the twenty-two
Foreign Relations Committees. Previous inquiries,
resulting in printed reports ‘American Policy Toward
Germany’ and 'The Marshall Plan As An American Policy’,
had been widely circulated and had received favorable
comment.

"For its new study, the Council again wanted to sound out
Committee members on an important problem of
American foreign policy. The issue of American military
aid for Western Europe was selected, and the resulting
survey set forth the views of Committee members on the
relation of the United States to the Brussels Treaty Powers
and to other European nations, the implementation of the
Vandenberg Resolution, and on the nature and extent of
American military aid. FROM PRIVATE AND
OFFICIAL SOURCES THE COUNCIL CONTINUES TO
ACQUIRE EVIDENCE OF THE REACH AND
USEFULNESS OF THESE INQUIRIES."

The Council further brags, in the report of its


executive director for the year 1949-1950, of its success in
infiltrating our government with its members and agents, as
follows (pp. 39-40

"The primary purpose of Council discussion groups is to keep
members informed of the course of events in the field in
which they are particularly interested, and to give them an op-
pertunity to deepen their knowledge. But very often the
groups serve, as well, as training ground for members called
upon to serve the government in important positions. SUCH
INSTANCES ARE TOO NUMEROUS TO RECORD HERE,
but members who have recently undertaken official posts
include: Thomas K. Finletter, a director of the Council whe
has been active in various discussion groups and who became
Secretary of the Air Force on April 14, 1950; Philip C. Jessup,
a former Group Chairman, who was named Senior Adviser to
the Secretary of State on March 9, 1950, Charles M. Spofford,
for two years Chairman of the Council's group on Western
Europe, who was appointed Deputy U.S. Representative on
the North Atlantic Treaty Council on June 22, 1950; and
George N. Shuster, a member of the Committee on Studies,
who became State Commissioner for Bavaria on April 17,
1950." The director was over-medest in stating the distinction
and qualifications of the distinguished, or shall one say
notorious, members of Council appointed to these posts.

The executive director of the Council was also guilty of
understatement when he wrote: "Such instances (of Council
members being appointed te high government positions} are
too numerous to record here.” So consistently have high,
policy-making positions in the government been filled from
the ranks of Rockefeller's Council that it can be called the
invisible government of the United States. This is strikingly
illustrated by the Office of Price Stabilization. Its original
head was Alan Valentine, a Rockefeller Foundation
subsidized professor and non-resident member of
Rockefeller's Council. When he was ousted in response to
public dissatisfaction with inaction of his office, Washington
went no further than Eric Johnston, a resident member of the
Council, for his replacement.

Within the months preceding the publication of 245


this book, four policy-making appointments were made by
Truman: General Dwight D. Eisenhower, as head of SHAPE,
Robert A. Lovett, as Secretary of Defense, Edwin A. Locke
Jr.. as Administrator for the Point 4 program in the Near East,
and George F. Kennan as interim Ambassador to Russia. All
of them with the exception of Lovett are members of
Rockefeller's Council on Foreign Relations. Lovett is a
Trustee of the paramount agency, the Rockefeller Foundation.
Kennan was president of the East European Fund of the Ford
Foundation, that also is dominated by the Rockefeller
interests.

The membership of Rockefeller's Council on Foreign
Relations interlock it with the control of every important
"philanthropic" foundation, and a host of Rockefeller agencies
and fronts that serve as a huge propaganda agency and lobby
that promote the cause of the Rockefeller Empire and the
Axis. Though the same group of their agents, members of the
CFR, constitute the core of all of these organizations, their
controlled press represents their propaganda as the considered
views of the nation at large. On April 19,1951, for example,
their official gazette, the New York Times, reported under the
headline Survey Confirms Policy On Soviet, that 765
prominent citizens (all members of local Committees on
Foreign Relations subsidiary to the CFR and financed by the
Rockefeller interests} in twenty-four of the nation's largest
cities "approved the broad policy of ‘containment’ of Soviet
Russia, even at the risk of war with that nation" and urged that
"we should not change our attitude on issues abroad, just to
lessen our commitments . . . essential to the security of
America as to other free nations.” This report was "edited",
according to the Times, by Joseph Barber, R. C. Leffingwell,
Hamilton Fish Armstrong, John W. Davis, Lewis W. Douglas,
Thomas K. Finletter, W. Averell Harriman, Philip D. Reed
and Myron C. Taylor, for the CFR.

William Fulton, in a series of articles in the Chicago
Tribune in January, 1951, described how the multitude of
organizations headed by the Council on Foreign Relations,
including the Carnegie Endowment For International Peace,
the English Speaking Union, the Foreign Policy Association,
the American Association for the United Nations, Freedom
House, the Institute of Pacific Relations

246


and a host of others, cooperate through their interlocking
directorates and supplement each other's "internationalist"
propaganda. The Washington Times Herald, another
newspaper of the patriotic, McCormick chain commented
editorially on Fulton's series in its issue of January 10, 1951,
as follows:

"These organizations cultivate a pious pretense of
existing to 'study' foreign relations. This function is easily
stretched into advocacy of the Administration's foreign
policy in detail and in general. These  old-line
interventionist agencies are backed up from time to time by
newly created propaganda fronts when it is thought that
additional heat must be generated to put over some
particular world-saving enterprise. The Committee To
Defend America By Aiding The Allies was typical of this
sort of activity when the effort was under way to put the
United States into World War II.

"The Administration's present hysteria concerning Russia
has led to the formation of two new committees, one called
the Committee On The Present Danger and the other The
Crisis Committee. The formula is to gather together a group
of windbags who have publicity value through corporate,
banking, legal or academic connections and to assail the
public with manifestos...

"The efforts of these propaganda media are to raise
sufficient noise so that legitimate public opinion will be
blanketed by highly organized clamor from the other
direction. A relatively few people, speaking through a
considerable number of microphones, can create a fictitious
impression that there is a ‘public demand’ for policies which
lack appeal to the great body of people, who have no such
convenient propaganda organs to make their desires heard.
"Some of the cruder smear jobs are left to letterhead

organizations which specialize in character assassination at a
price, while volunteers can always be counted on to step
forward from among tthe professional union bosses to do the
same job..
If misery and ruin of the Republic were the avowed
okjectives of these ENEMIES WITHIN THE GATES, they
could not have adopted 247


doctrines and methods better calculated to achieve that

disloyal purpose .

On December 9, 1950, courageous, patriotic and American
Chicago Tribune, one of the few newspapers that has dared
attack and expose the Council on Foreign Relations (though it
has omitted to point out its Rockefeller control) in an editorial
entitled BLOOD ON THEIR HANDS, replied to a release
made by the Council locally through its Chicage subsidiary,
that sought to throw the blame on their opponents for the
situation revealed by General MacArthur's statement that in
Korea "we face an entirely new war", as follows:

"There is not a word in all this to suggest that what has
happened in Korea is the direct consequence of a line of
pelicy (often spoken of as internationalism or
interventionalism) which has had the support of the Council
on Foreign Relations .

"Thanks to these policies, 300,000 American boys lost
their lives in the 1941-45 war and 5,600 more have been
listed as killed thus far in Korea. All that the members of
the Council can show in Europe in return for the sacrifices
is the substitution of Russian for German tyranny and
menace; and all that has happened in Asia is the
substitution of Russian domination of all of China for
Japanese domination of a part of it.

The decision to send Americans to fight in Korea was
taken ... by Harry 5. Truman pursuing a policy of
intervention strongly favored in principle by most of the
members of the Council.

"The members of the Council are persons of much more
than average influence in the community. They have used
the prestige that their wealth, their secial position, and their
education have given them to lead their country toward
bankruptey and military debacle. They should look at their
hands. There is blood on them—the dried blood of the last
war and the fresh blood of the present one." A more true,
more eloquent and more patrictically American editorial it
would be hard to find. It supplements the equally plain-
spoken statement in the same tenor made by Senator Harry
Shippe Truman in 1942 in regard to the activities of another
key Rockefeller agency: "YES IT IS TREASON"


248


COUNCIL ON FOREIGN RELATTIONS—Member.


Abbink, John Ackerman, Carl

- Adams, Charles E. Adler,
Mej. Gern.

Julius Ochs Apar, Herbert
Albrecht-Carrie, Rene Aldrich,
Winthrop W. Allen, Douglas
Hedden Allen, Frederick, L.
Alley, James `E. Altschul,
Arthur G. Altschul, Frank
Andersont, Arthur M. Angell,
James W, Arrmsitong,
Harnilton Fish Atkin, T. Ç.
Raymond Auldt, Brorwell
Backer, Geotpe Bakhmeteff,
Boris A. Baldwin, Hanson W.
Ballantine , Arthur A. Barber,
Joseph Barehoorn, Frederick C.
Barkin, Solomon Barnard,
Chester T. Barnes, Joseph
Barnouw, Adriaan J. Barrett,
Edward W. Bastedg, Philip _
Beat, Gerald F. Bechtel, Edwin
de T. Becker, Neal Dow
Beckhart, Berjamin H. Behn,
Sosthenes Bell, Elliot V.
Benton, William B. Berle,
Adolf A. Beukerna, Col.
Herman Bidwell, Percy W.
Bienstock, Abratiarr L.
Bierwirth, John E. Bilkey, H.
Edward Blair, Floyd G.
Bogdan, Norbert A. Bogie,
Mord M. Bonsai, Dudley B.
Boomer, Robert de Forest
Booth, Willis H. Braden,
Spruile Bradley, Albert
Bradley, Phillips Brady,
Wiliam Q., Jr- Braxton, Carter
M. Brett, George P., Jr.
Brophy., Gerald B. Brown,
Franklin Q. Brown, Walter L.
Brownell George A. Bruce,
James Brundage, Percival F.
Bryan, Frederick P. Bryson,
Lyman Bullock, Hugh Bunche,
Ralph J. Bundy, McGeorge
Burker, Arthur H. Burker,
Ellsworth Burden, William A.
M. Burgess, W. Randolph
Burlingame, Dr. Ç. Charles
Burlingtarn, Charles ©
Buttenwieser, Ber Jarin J.
gajn, Charles, Jr. Caldwell,

Robert J. Campbell, H.
Donald Catnpbell. John Ç.
Canby, Henry Seidel


Frauen, oy BS Canfield,
ratikliti

Carroll, Mitchell B.
Eats Ralph M. Carter,
Arthur H. Carter, Edward Ç.
Carter, William, D.
hadbourne. William W.

ati erlati, Joseph P.
Chanler, L. Smyvesant, Tr.
Chanler, William 5. Chaplin,
Howard M. Chapman, John F.


Chase, Harry Woodburn Chase,


wW. Howard Cheney, Ward
Childs, Richard >, Childs,
n omas W. Chinlund, Edwin
E Clark, Alfred Ç. Clark,
Evans ark ree G.
Cohn, Dr. Alfred le,
Charles Wt Collado, oa.
Collier, Barron, Jr. Cook,
Alfred A. Cooper, Franklin $.
Cooper, Tohn C, Tr. Cousins,
Norman Cowles, Gardner
rane, Jay E.
Črispell, Reuben B. Crocker,
tuart Wf. mee Lincoln
rossman, tC
urtis, Jolin L,
Rc, Noyes F.
Norris avis. Francis B., Jr.
Davis, -
Maleon W Davis,
P Davis, Pierpont W.
George W. Davison, H.
Davison, W. Phillips Dean,
Arthur H. Debevoise, Ela
Whitney Debevoise. ]
M. De Krafft, Willian Delano,
Wiliam Adams De Vegh,
mrie De Vries, Henry P.
Dewey, Chester R. pexter,
Byron Dickinson, Jol
Diebold, Williari, ie Tillon,
Č. Douglas Dillon, Clarence
odee, Cleveland E.
Dolbeare, Frederic R. Dollard,
Charles Donovan, Hedley
Donovan, William J. Dorr,
Goldthwaite H. Dorr, John Van
Dorwin, Oscar John
Douglas, Lewis W. Douglas,
Percy L. Draper, William H..
r. Drum, Lt. Gen. Hugh A.
Dubinsky. David Thee. gines
erry an, Stephen es
Alleti Ww


249


armich ael, Oliver


1949 Resident


Dulles, John Foster Dunn,
Arthur Drvioht, Richard E.
Eagleton, Clyde Eaton,
Frederick M. Eder, Phanor J.
Edey, Maitland A.
Eichelberger, {lark M.
EISENHI
GEN, DWIGHT D. Eliot,

Me}. George Fielding
Elliott, A. Randle Elliott, L.
W. Victor Emeny,
inmet, Christopher
Enstrom, Willam N.
Evans, Roger F. Eveleth,
George S$., Jr. Fairless,
Ber jamin F. Farley, Edward
P. Faust, Walter


Field, Frederick ¥. Field,
Marshall Field, Williarn
Ospood, Jr. Fife, Robert
Herndon Finkelstein,
Lawrence $. Finletter.
Thomas K. Fischer, John
S. Fisher, Henry J. Flager,
Harry Harkness Fletcher,
Henry Florinsky, Michael
Folks, Horner Foote, Wilder
Ford, Nevil Fosdick,
Reymond B.. Foster, Austin
jal
Franklin. George $. Jr.
Fraser, Alexander
Freudenthal, David M. _
Friedman, Elisha M. Friele,
Berent Friendly, Henry J.
Fry, Varian Gallatin, Terres
P Gamble, Sidney D.
Gannett, Lewis Gardner, John
W. Garside, Charles Gaston,
George A_ Gates. Arternus
L. Cates, Samuel E. Qaud,
Wiliam $.. Jr. Gavigati,
piliam M, gay, Edward
Gerard, Jammes W. Gibson,
Aish Gifford, "alter 5.
Gilchrist, Huntington
Gillespie, $. Hazard, Ir,
Goodrich, Carter Goodrich
Leland M. Gordon, Albert H.
Grant, Mej. Gen. U. S. 3rd
Gray, Williare Steel, Jr.
Grazier Joseph A.
Ee cae Heman Grepe,
ritim, Peter Craver,
Kile Guggenheim, Har
Gugenheim, Solorneri
Guinzberg, Harold K.


Gunther, John Gurfein,
Murray T. Harrilton,
Thomas J. Hammond, Paul
Hancock, Jobn M. Harding’,
Charles L. Harmon, Francis
S. Harper, Harry H., Jr-
Harriman, E. Roland
Harriman, W. Averell
Harrison, George L.
Harrison, Wallace K.
Haskell, Broderick Haskell,
‘ohn Haskell, Toseph F.
Haskins, Caryl P. Hasler,
Frederick E. Hayes, Alfred
Hayes, Carlton, JH. |
Hazard, John N. Heñperin,
Michael A. Heineman,
Dannie H. Helm, Harold H.
Henderson, Alexander T.
Herod, Williarn R. Herring,
Pendleton Hess, Jerome S.
Hill, Jobn A. Hiss, Alger
Hochschild, Harold
Hochschild, Walter Holland,
Wiliam L. Horner, Sidney, Jr-
Hoskins, Harold B. Houghton,
Arthur A., Jr. Houston,
Herbert $. Howard, Graeme
K. Hu hes, Jobn C. Hume,
Dr. Edward H. Hunt, Tames
Ramsay, Tr. Hunt, Lawrence
Hurt, Richard C.
Clarence E, Hupp per, Roscoe
H. Hyde, Charles

Hyde, Henry B.
ohn J. Tgelin, O'Donnell


nm


Wiliam H. Jaretzki, Alfred,

r Jay. Nelson Dean
ennings, B. Brewster Jessup,
atin K. Jessup, Philip C-
ohngon, Edward F. Johnson,
oseph E. Johnson, Robert L.
oinston, Eric Johnston,
Henry R. Josephs, Devereux
C. Kane, R. Keith Kelley,
Nicholas Kempner, Fredrick
E. Kerr, Walter B., Tr.
Kettarieh, F. A. Kies,
William $. Kine, Frederic R.
Kingsbury, Dr. John A.
Kinkaid, Adm. Thotnas C.
Kirk, Grayson L. Klots, Aller
T. Krioke, L. Werner
Knowles, John Ellis Kuhn,
Arthur K. Lada-Mocarski, V.
La Farge, Francis W.
Lamont, Thomas $.
Lancaster, William W.


ackson, Wiliam E. Jackson,


Lane, Arthur Bliss Lane,
Clayton Langsam, Walter
Consuelo Larmor, Sigurd $.
LaRoche, Chester Larson, Jens


Eliott H.
Let rnat,

Robert Le
Leiper, Rev. Heri
obn © Lesueur,

Lewisohn,
Sam A. Li
Harold F.
Lindsay,
Walter Lissitzyn, Oliver J.


Leffingwell, R. C.
Herbert H. Lehman,
n, Frederick D.

5. Leslie,
arry

Frank Lewisohn,
htner, MI. C. Linder,
jridquist, Warren T.


Wiliam A. Loeb,
hin, L. pening,
Sheridan A. Lord, George de
Forest Lubin, Tsador Luce,
Henry R. Luitweiler, J. G.
MacDuffie, Marshall
Maclntyre, Malcolm A.
Mackay, Jarnes A. MacVeagh,
Ewen C. Malfry, August
aguire, Walter N. Mallory,
Walter H. Manghip, Paul
Markel, Lester Mathews, Hirarri
A. Matthews, Thomas $.
Maximov, Andre May, George
M. May, Stacy Mayer, Gerald
M. McAuliffe. John McCain,
Charles $. McCarice, Thomas
McClov, Fain J. McCollum, L-
F. McCoy, Mej. Gen. Frank R.
McDonald, James G. McGraw.
ames H., Jr. McKay, Vernon
McKeever. Porter McKim,
Robert J. McKittrick, tees
‘Laughlin, Dona


Paul V. Mead Nelson P.
Megaro. Gaudens Merz, Charles
Meyer, Clarence E. Meyer,
Cord, Jr. Meyer, Eugene
Milbank. Albert G. Millis,
Walter Mills, George S. Mills,
Henry E. Minor, Clark H.
Montague, Gilbert H. Mooney,
ames D. Moore, Edward F.
Morgan, Henry $


250


Frederick Lasker, Albert D. Lee,


Franklin A. Lippmann,


Grover Logan,


McLean, Donald H.. Tr MeNutt,


Morgan. Junius $.
Morgan, Shepard
Morgan, Thoas A.
Morris, Ray
Mosely, Philip E.
Mott, John L.
Muir, Malcolm
Munroe, Vernon, Je.
Murphy, Grayson M-P., Jr.
Murrow, dR.
Nadler, Marcus

Visi “Alexander C.


Reber aT `
Nolan. Mej. Gen, Dennis E.
Norton enry Kittredge
arles Phelps. TT
tin B.


_ Charlton
Joden, Alfred
Olds, Irving Sands
. John E.
Frederick


Lith gyw
Packard. Arthur W.


Paine, Ralph D., Tr.
Paley, Williarn $.

Parker, Philo W.

Parsons, Geoffrey Patechin,
Robert H. Patterson, Robert
P. Payson, Charles Shiprrarn
Peardon, Thomas P. Peaslee,
Amos J. Peffer, Nathaniel
Pfeiffer, Curt G. Phillips.

oseph B. Pierson, Warren
Lee Pike, H. Harvey
Plirpteri, Francis T. P.


Frederick Potter, Warwick
Powell, Robert 1. Powers,
Joshua B. Powers, Thomas
F. Pratt, H. Trving, Jr.

Pratt, Rear Adri. Wir. Y
Pulling, Edward Rabi, Tsidor
. Rangon, Williatn L.
Redmond, Roland L. Reed,
Philip D. Regan, Edward F.
Reid, Whitelaw Reston,
ames B. Rice, A. Hamilton
Rich, Raymond T.
Richardson, Dorsey
Richardson, Gen. R. G. Tr.
Riepelman, Harold Riley,
Edward ©. Ripley, Joseph
P. Robbing,

Very Rev. Howard C.
Roberts, George Roberts,
Georee B. Robinson, Geroid
T Robinson, Leland Rex
ROCKEFELLER, DAVID


ROCKEFELLER,


ROCKEFELLER,

NELSON A. Rodgers, W.
S 3. Rogers, James Grafton
Rogers, Lindsay Roosevelt,
Gegrpe Erlen Roosevelt,
Nicholas Root, Elihu, Jr. Root,
Oren Raper, Elmo Rosenperg,
armes N. Rosenstiel, Lewis
Rosenwald, William Ross, John
Ç. Ross, T.J. Rouse, Robert G.
Royce, Alexander B. Rublee,
George Rur), Beardsley
Russell, Frank F. Russell,
William F. Sachs, Alexander
Sachs, Howard J. Saltzman,
Charles E. Sargent, Noel
Sarnoff, David Sawin, Melvin
E. Schaffner, Joseph Halle
Schapiro, J. Salwyn Scherman,
Harry Schiff, Joho WI.
Schilttuis, Willer C.
Schoenperle. Victor Schubart,
William Howard Schuyler,
Robert L. Scott, John Seligman,
Eustace Sharp, George C.
Sharp, Walter R. Shaw, L. M.
Shepardson, Whitney H.
Sheperd, Howard C.
Irvine H. Shields, Murray
Shirer, William L. Shorwell,
James T. Shuster, George N.


ACHESON, DEAN Allen,
Frank G. Allyn, $. C.
Anderson,

Capt. George W., Jr.
Armour, Norman Auld,
George P Aydelotte, Frank
Baker, George P. Baker,
Lisle, Jr. Ball, George W.
Bass, Robert Perkins Bauer,
Harry J. Baumer,

Lr. Col. Wiliam H.
Baxter, James P., 3rd Belin,
F. Laramot Bell, Laird
Bennett, Martin Toscan
Betts, Col. Thomas J.
Bingham, Barry Black, Lt.
Col. Edwin F. Blakeslee,
George H. Bliss, Robert
Woods Boothby, Albert C.
Borchard, Edwin MI.
Bowers, Claude G.


Simpson, John L. Slater, John
E. Sloan, Alfred P., Jr. Smith,
Blackwell Smith, Hayden N.
Smith, J. Hopkins, Jr. Sreall, J.
Barstow Sonne, H. Christian
spang. Kenneth M. Spence.
enneth M. Spofford, Charles
M. Sproul, Allan Stall Forth,
Frederico Stanley, Harold
Starr, Cornelius
Steffansson, Vilhjaleaur Stern,
Siegfried Stevenson, T.
Kennedy Stewart, Rev.
George Stewart, Robert
MeLean Stimson, Henry L.
Stone, Shepard Stowe,
Leland Stowell, L. ©. Straus,
ack T. Straus, Ralph |. Straus,
Robert K. Strauss, Lewis L.
Strelow, William R.
Sulzberger, Arthur Hays
Sweetser, Arthur Swingle,
William $. Swope, Gerard
Swope, Gerard, Jr. Swope,
Herbert Bayard Tarnenbaum,
Frank Taylor, A. Wellin ton
Taylor, Myron C. Th
Archibald Thacher. Thomas
DO. Thayer, Charles W. Thayer,
Robert H. Thayer, Walter M.
Thomas, Eugene P. Thomas,
H. Gregory Thornburg, Max
W. Tibby, Jobn Tinker,
Edward L. Tomlinson, Roy E.


NON-RESIDENT MEMBERS
Bowie, Robert R. Bowrnan,
salah Brodie, Bernard
Brown, Sevellon Brown,
Winthrop G. Bruce, David
K. E Bullis, Harry A.
Bullitt, William C. Bundy,
Harvey Byrne, James
MacGresgr Cabot, Henry B.
Caldwell, Robert G. Case,
Everett N. Chafee, Zechariah,
r. Chapin, Selden Chatfield-
Taylor, Wayne Cherrington,
Ben M. Cheston, Charles $.
Childs, Marquis Clayton, W.
L. Cohen, Ber jamin Y.
Colby, Charles W. Cole, R.
Taylor Collyer, Jotin L.
Compton, Karl T. Conant,
ames B


25]


Tompkins, B
Traphasen, J. È -Trippa 7
Juan Terry Truesdell, Me].
Gen. Karl Truslow,
Francis Adams Tweedy,
Gordon B. Yan Dusen,
Rev. Henry P. Van Kirk,
Rev. Walter W. Villard,
Oswald Garrison
Voorhees, E. M. Walker,
Elisha Wallace, Schuyler
C Warture, Eric M.
Warbure, Frederick M.
Warburg, James P. Ward,
Thomas E. Wardwell,
Allen Warfield. Ethelbert
Warner, Edward Wasson,
Donald ‘Wasson. R. Gordon
Watson, mas

Webb. Vanderbit Welch
Alfred W.
Wertheim, Maurice West,


WhelDley, Medl ey Q. B.
Whidden, Howard
nimer, Jotit H
Whitridge, Aragi
Wilhams, Jobn H. S
Wiliams, L. Wi., Jr. Willits,
oseph H. Wilson, Orme
Wilson, Philip Danforth
Winston, Garrard B. Wolf,
Georse W. Wolman, Leo
Wood, Bryce Wood.
Willis Delano Woodruff,


Woolley, Clarence M.

Woolley, Knigl gnt,

Boykin t C Wreht Harry

N. Wright, J K.

zune f Philip Zurcher,
Arnie.


Conrad, Gen. Bryan
Coolidge, T. Jefferson
Capeland,

Larnmot Du Pont
Cotting, Charles E.
Cov, Wayne Creighton,
Albert M. Crocker,
William W. Crotty,
Horner D. Culbertson,
William $. Curtis,
Edward P. David,
Donald K. Davidson,
Carter Davis, Elmer
Davidson, Adm. Ralph
Dawes, Charles G. Day,
Clive Dennett, Tyler
Deuel, Wallace R.

Dickey, John $. Dodds,
Harold W. Dodge,
Bayard Denhatn, W. B.
Drummond, J. Roscoe
Dunn, Frederick $. Dye,
Alexander Y


Earle, Edward MI. Eddy,
Wiliam A. Einstein, Lewis
Elliott, Byron K. Elliott, W. Y.
Elliston, Herbert B. Ernerson,
E. A Fairbank, John King Fay,
Sidney B. Feis, Herbert
Ferpuson, John H. Field,
Marshall, Jr. Field, Robert M.
Fisher, Adrian $. Fisher, Edgar
. Flanders, Ralph E. Fleming,
Lammar, Jr. Fletcher, Henry P.
Follis, R. G. Folsom, M.
Forbes, W. Cameron Ford, Guy
Stanton Ford, Thomas K. Fox,
Warm T.
FRANKFURTER, FELTX
Fuller, Carlton P. Galbraith, J.
Kenneth Gallup, George
Gardiner, Arthur Z. Garner,
Robert L. Gaus, John M.
Giffin, Col, Sidney F. Gleason,
$. Everett Goldenweiser,
Emaruel A. Grace, Engene G.
grsham, Philip L. Grant,
Willam W. Grant-Srruch, U.
Gray, William Latimer Green,
oseph C. Greene, Jerome D.
Grew, Jogesh Ç. Griswold A.
Withney Hall, Melvin Hamlin,
Chauncey J. Hansell, Brig,
Gen. H. $. Hansen, Alvin H.
Haring, ©. H. Harrison, Leland
Harsch, Joseph C. Hartney, W.
Hauck, Arthur A. Hepburn.,
Adm. Arthur]. Herskovits,
Melville J. Herter, Christian A.
Hill, George Warts Hofer,
Philip Hoffman, Paul G.
Holborn, Hejo Holmes, Julius
C. Hoover, Galvin B. Hoover,
Herbert Hopkins, Ernest M.
Hopper, Bruce C. Hornbeck,
Stanley K. Hoskins, Halford L.
Howe, Walter Bruce Hudson,
Manley O. Hunt, Bishop
Carleton Hutchinson, B. E.


Trelis, Jarnes


Johnson, Herschel V. Johnson,


Nelson T. Kennan, George F.
Kenneil, Walter B.
Kindleberger, Charles P. King,
Stanley Kittredge, Capt. Tracy
B Klapper, Paul Kraut,
Oswald W. Labouisse, Henry
R Jr. Landis, James M.
Langer, Wiliam L. Latourette,
Kenneth $. LATTIMORE,
COWEN Lawrence, David |
Laylin, John G. Lee, Dwight
E. Leith, Charles K.
Letnnitzer, Mej. Gen. L. L.
Lichtenstein, Walter
Lilienthal, David E. Lincoln,
Col. G. A. Lingelbach,
William E. Lockwood,
William W. Loomis, Robert
H. MacMurray, J. Y. A.
MacVeagh, Lincoln Maddox,
Willian P. Magruder, Brig.
Gen. John Malin, Patrick
Murphy Marbury, Willam L.
Martin, William McC, Tr.
Mason, Edward 3. Mayer,
Ferdinand L. McClellan,
Wiliam Ç. McFarland, Ross
A McGuire, Constantine E.


McKee, Frederick C. McLaren,


Walter W. Messerstrith,
George $. Miller, Edward G.,
Je. Miller, Francis P. Miller,
Hunter Moore, Hugh Morgan,
George A. Mumford, Lewis
Munro, Dana Q. Myers,
Denys P. Nason, Joh

Nitze, Paul H. Rollen. Cvrard
S. Nover, Barnet Oakes,
George W. Oge, Frederic A.
Oldh


art,

Rt. Rev. G. Ashton
Oppenheimer, J. Robert
Pantzer, Kurt F. Pasvolsky,
Leo Patterson, Ernest Minor
Perkins, Milo Petersen,
Howard C. Phenix, Spencer
Phillips, Wallace B. Phillips.
Willian Pierrepont, Seth Low
Pooue, L. Welch Poland,
William B. Poletti, Charles


252


Read, Conyers. ts Rhoads,
Charles J. Riefler,
Winfield W. Robertson,
Andrew W. Rosenwald,
Lessing J. Ross, Michael
Schlesinger, Arthur M., Jr.
Schmitt, Bernadotte E.
Scott, Wiliam Ryland
Scroges, Willian Q.
Seymour, Gharles Sharpe.


MarS Sheean, Vincent
Snr Harold F. Sidlo,
Thomas L. Sills, Kenneth
C, M. Smith,
Alexander H Henry
D. Sontag, Raymond J.
Spaatz, Gen. Carl
Sprague, O. M. W. Sproul,
Robert G. Sprout, Harold
Staley, Eugene Stassen,
Harold E. Steinhardt,
Laurence A. Sterling, J. E.
Wallace Stettinius,
Edward R., Tr. Stevens,
Harley Stillman, Chauncey
Stine, Oscar C. Strausz-
Hupe, Robert Swihart,
ames W. Switz, Theodore
M. Taylor, Mej. Gen.
Maxwell Thomson, Jatnes
L. Tuck, William Hallar
Tyler, William R. Upgren,
Arthur R. Utley, Clifton M.
Valetitine, Alan Yan Cleve,
Thomas C. Yan Slyck,
DeForest Yiner, Jacob
Wadsworth, Eliot Walsh,
Rev. Edrnund A, Wariger,
Walter Weeks, Edwar
Welles,  Surnner Welles,
Herman B. Whipple, Cal.
William Whitaker, Arthur
P. White, Francis White,
ohn Campbell Wilcox,
lair Wild, Pa Se S. Jr,
Wilde, Frazar
ohn C. Williams, Rater
W. Wilmerding, Lucius, Tr.
Wilson, Edwin B. Wilson,
George Grafton Wisner,
Prane G. Wolfers, Arold
oolbert Robert Gale
Wright, Quit riar,
Theodore P. Wristoti,
Henry Mf. Yarnell, Rear
Adm. Hary


CHAPTER XIV


SOME ROCKEFELLER CFR STARS
And State Department Agents


"I will not turn my back on Hiss..."
Secretary of State Dean Acheson's Loyalty Pledge


Lack of space precludes the possibility of even listing the
endless array of agents of the Rockefeller Empire and of the
Rockefeller Soviet Axis in Government posts. Therefore only
a few of the mest outstanding of them can be given in any

etail.


ALGER HISS

Alger Hiss was born in Baltimere, Md., November 11,
1904. He was graduated in 1926 from Johns Hopkins with an
A.B. degree and obtained his legal education in that
outstanding school for treason, Rockefeller-subsidized
Harvard Law School; he received his LL.B. in 1929 as a
classmate of that "bleeding heart", callously self-confessed
Communist, Lee Pressman. As in the case of so many of the
subversive or traitorous Harvard products, he was placed by
his subversive propagandist teachers, including Felix
Frankfurter, in the post of secretary to Supreme Court Justice
Oliver Wendell Holmes.

Hiss then was employed by the firms of Choate, Hall &
Stewart in Boston, and Cotton & Franklin in New York City.
In 1932 Hiss joined the International Juridical Association, a
legal seminary for the Communist Party's International Labor
Defense, headed at that time by Mrs. Carol Weiss, later
attorney for Gerhart Eisler and other top Communists. In 1933
Hiss was lured to Washington to participate in the New Deal
Popular Front government, built up by the cunning activities
of Rockefeller's Ivy Ledbetter Lee, with all of the wealth and
power of the Rockefeller enterprises and “philanthropies"
behind him. In Washington, Hiss joined the many agents that
had been preduced in the schools and universities of the
country by the Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial, the
General Education Board and the Rockefeller Foundation
through the "social sciences" that were nothing more or less
than straight Marxist propaganda twisted to serve the purposes
of the totalitarian conspirators. Among these agents were Lee
Pressman, who was primarily, responsible for inducing


Hiss to enter government service, Tommy Corcoran, Jerome
Frank, Nathan Witt, Gardner Jackson, Charles Kramer, John
Abt, Gregory Silvermaster and Hal Ware.

Already a left-wing Marxist, Hiss promptly found his way
into a Communist cell set up in the government by Hal Ware,
an agent of the Comintern. Hiss rapidly came to the fore in the
Roosevelt Popular Front. While serving as Assistant General
Counsel of Wallace's Agricultural Adjustment Administration,
1933-35, he was simultaneously planted and served as legal
assistant to the special Senate Committee investigating the
munitions industry in 1934-35. This assignment was obtained
for him by Gardner Jackson. When the Communist cell in the
Department of Agriculture was ousted for political
expediency, Hiss alone was left behind by arrangement of Lee
Pressman, as a "feeder and pipeline". This earned for him the
reputation of being a renegade Communist among the
uninformed members of his cell and in the Party, which un-
doubtedly paved the way for his eventual denouncement and
conviction.

From the AAA, Hiss was transferred, at the request of
Solicitor General (ater Supreme Court Justice) Stanley Reed,
to the Department of Justice; and in 1936 he was invited by
Assistant Secretary of State Francis B. Sayre, son-in-law of
President Woodrow Wilson,, one of Hiss' law professors at
Harvard, to come over to the State Department as Sayre's
assistant. By this time Hiss was deeply involved in espionage,
as was amply attested by witnesses at his later trials. In 1939,
Hiss was promoted in the State Department to the post of
assistant adviser on political relations.

This promotion came at about the time that Whittaker
Chambers, former Communist underground courier, and Isaac
Don Levine exposed Hiss as a Communist spy. The exposure
was made indirectly to President Franklin Delano Roosevelt
through many channels, including Marvin H. Mceln-tyre,
Presidential secretary. McIntyre was so well aware of the
Popular Front character of the Roosevelt regime that he
refused to transmit the information to Roosevelt. He amusedly
suggested that it be given to the Assistant Secretary of State in
charge of State Department security and personal adviser to
the President, Adolph A. Berle. When Berle

254


passed this gratuitous information to the President, the fact
was so well known to him that instead of being alarmed at the
presence of Communist spies and agents in the State
Department at the critical period of the Hitler-Stalin alliance,
Roosevelt told Berle "to go jump in the lake, only in coarser
language". (Seeds of Treason, Toledano & Lasky, p. 83).

Likewise, William C. Bullitt, former Ambassador to Soviet
Russia, undertook to inform Roosevelt of the dangerous
Communist espionage ring in the State Department. Roosevelt
was so well aware of the situation that he "laughed and told
him not te worry”. Walter Winchell, who, in view of his
vaunted intelligence service, was naive indeed, to believe that
the President was not aware of the Communist character of
his Popular Front "New Deal" and the oily deal that had
provided for its set-up, met with a similar brush-off when he
undertook to warn Roosevelt of the dangerous espionage.

President Roosevelt was fully aware of the Communist
character of his entourage, that had been dictated by the
Rockefeller agents of the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis. The
leaders of the fake opposition were equally aware of it.
Senator Warren Austin and Governor Thomas E. Dewey, the
latter a perennial Rockefeller puppet candidate, were both in-
formed of the situation but refused to act to expose the
traitors.

In 1941, pro-Communist Dean Acheson, then newly
appointed Assistant Secretary of State, was warned by the
Department's security officer, Adolph A. Berle, about the
known Communist connections of Denald Hiss, brother of
Alger, a member of the Acheson firm, requested by Acheson
as his assistant; and he had been informed of Alger's
connection with the Hal Ware cell. But it is obvious that he
approved of it.

John Foster Dulles, Rockefeller's kinsman and State
Department bess, Hiss informed the Senate investigating
committee, had been his adviser and mentor throughout his
Communist career. Hiss was rewarded for his treacherous
work in support of the Communist cause and Rockefellerism
by rapid promotion to key posts in the Department that
handled matters vital to the success of the Rockefeller-Soviet
Axis. In 1944, Hiss was rapidly promoted, first to the post of
Special Assistant to

255


the Director of the Office of Far Eastern Affairs, so vital for
Lenin's plot for world conquest by Communism through
control of Asia and China; then he was made Special
Assistant to the Director, and Deputy Director, of the Office
of Special Political Affairs, and executive secretary to the
Dumbarton Oaks Conference. This prepared the way for his
"mission for Moscow" as adviser to Secretary of State
Stettinius and President Roosevelt, or his double, at the Yalta
Conference in the sell-out of Asia to Stalin in return for Saudi
Arabian oil for the Rockefeller Empire.

With the approval of both parties of the Rockefeller-Soviet
Axis, Hiss was chosen Secretary General of the United
Nations Conference on International Organization at San
Francisco, where concrete form was given to the sell-cut
initiated at Yalta. At San Francisco, he worked directly under
the eyes of Nelson Rockefeller and John Foster Dulles,
representing the Rockefeller Empire as he placed the
mechanism of world domination in the hands of his masters
and betrayed the destinies of the U.S. inte their hands. To
make sure that the people of the U.S. would have no voice in
deciding their fate, he wrote into the rules of the UN a pro-
vision that gave its Secretary General absolute power to
appoint all UN employees from the peoples of the member
nations, thus robbing our nation of what little protection a
loyal body of representatives might afferd.

Never at any time during his career in the State Department
was there any doubt of Hiss' notoriety as a Communist. The
FBI had a complete dossier on his Communist activities and
all his superiors in the Department had been put on notice of
his affiliation with the Party. Confirmation of this came even
from abroad in the form of the confessions of Igor Gouzenko,
Soviet code clerk in the Ottawa office of Col. Nikolai Zabotin,
Soviet military attache te Canada, and in statements made
directly to an FBI operative, to the effect that the Soviets had
an espionage agent in 1945, who was an Assistant Secretary
of State of the U.S. A fifty-one page report of these findings
was submitted to President Truman and amusedly circulated
among the agents and queers of the State Department by its
"security" officers. The State Department traitors were so
arrogantly confident of their con-

256


trol that they made no effort to suppress the report.

During this time, Alger Hiss was one of the key members
and indoctrinators of Rockefeller's Foreign Office, the
Council On Foreign Relations, virtual Premier of the
Rockefeller Empire and key man of the Rockefeller-Soviet
Axis. For his service to that Axis, he was rewarded by John
Foster Dulles, David Rockefeller and their associates with the
position of ‘president of the Carnegie Endowment For
International Peace, which was made a special berth for him
in 1947 by the provision of a $20,000 annual salary and a
large expense account. At that very time he was under
investigation by the FBI and under fire in the State
Department. Probably it was hoped that in this manner his
prestige would be so enhanced that he would be placed
beyond the reach of the U.S. authorities, even though he was
marked by the Communist Party for one of its periodic purges.
Confidently, John Foster Dulles brushed aside the charges of
Larry $. Davidow and Alfred Kohlberg cf Hiss' "probable
Communist record". The conspirators might have carned the
day with perfect effrontery, if Hiss had not perjured himself.
For ironically, Hiss was convicted for perjury, not for treason.

Frantic efforts were made by the conspirators to save their
key man. Hundreds of thousands of dollars were spent by the
Empire in his defense. His attorney in the first trial, Lloyd
Paul Stryker, is reported to have been paid more than
$100,000 as a retainer. John Foster Dulles and Supreme Court
Justices Felix Frankfurter and Stanley Reed appeared as
character witnesses for him in the first trial, when it appeared
that the prosecution could not muster adequate proof.
However, discretion became the better part of valor when it
became apparent in the second trial that the charges could be
sustained, and it was manifestly unwise for Dulles and his
Rockefeller Imperial bosses to become too closely identified
with a perjured traitor; and Dulles medified his original
testimony.

At the time of his conviction Alger Hiss was still top man in
Rockefeller's Council On Foreign Relations and Institute of
Pacific Relations, president, on leave, of the Carnegie
Endowment For International Peace, member and director of
the executive committee of the Association For The United
Nations, chairman of the executive committee of

257


the Citizens Committee For Reciprocal World Trade, and
trustee of the Woodrow Wilson Foundation and the World
Peace Foundation. In those capacities he was intimately
associated with Nelson A. Rockefeller, David Rockefeller,
John D. Rockefeller 3rd., Owen Lattimore, Philip Jessup,
Thomas K. Fin-letter and many other "notables", whose
names were carefully kept out of the trial.

The source of the hundreds of thousands of dollars spent in
the legal defense of Hiss, in the employment of the same
wiretappers who were later employed by Clendening Ryan on
behalf of Win-throp Rockefeller's "Fusion" candidacy in New
York City and on the successive appeals made by Hiss, need
not be asked. It is quite apparent that the bosses whom he
served so well with his treason, could net afford to let him
down. His services were needed in carrying out their plans.
His enforced "retirement" as Jailbird No. 19137 in the Federal
Penitentiary at Lewisburg, however, has not defeated those
plans. His assistant in the State Department, Joseph E.
Johnson, a member of Rockefeller's Council On Foreign
Relations who had resigned when a leak to Russia of top
secret information was traced to the Division of International
Security Affairs, is carrying on in his place as president of the
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.


FREDERICK VANDERBILT FIELD Frederick
Vanderbilt Field is another highly significant cog in the
Rockefeller Red organization, has played a useful role as an
agent of the Rockefeller Soviet Axis Far Eastern conspiracy.
Like Alger Hiss, he is now a martyr of Rockefellerism,
temporarily ' retired" to a jail cell, not for treason against the
U.S. but for contempt of court “for refusing to reveal the
obvicus source of the collateral furnished by the Civil Rights
Congress as bail for four, fugitive, convicted, top Communist
agents.

Field is a star product of Bismarck's Marxist propaganda
drive merged with Rockefeller "educational philanthropies”.
He graduated from Harvard, a muddled Marxist, in the class
of 1927, with two other Rockefeller Red stars, who followed
the same career, Laurence Duggan and Joseph Barnes.
Duggan paid the death penalty for his "deviation", after
testifying before the House Un-American Activities
Committee on the Rockefeller sponsorship

258


and direction of the Red Institute of International Education,
of which he was director, by a mysterious plunge from his
sixteenth story office window. Barnes accompamed Field
when he went to extend his Marxist muddling under Harold
Laski at the Rockefeller subsidized London School of
Economics and Political Science. Barnes later married Field's
first wife.

On their return from Europe, both Field and Barnes found
employment promptly with the Rockefeller Soviet Axis
Institute of Pacific Relations. They had been prepared for their
iebs by their training in the Rockefeller subsidized schools,
under Felix Frankfurter and Harold Laski, and fitted perfectly.
Field boasted:

"My job there (the IPR} was something I am

proud of; it was actually a job on which I could

have supported my family on my own.” Rockefeller agents
are well paid. Not needing the salary, Field returned it,
$100,000 in all, to the IPR. The job carried with it
membership and dominance in Rockefeller's Council on
Foreign Relations.

In the following year he married and took his honeymoon
on an extended trip to Europe and Russia, as secretary to the
American delegation te the Kyoto conference of the IPR. He
went in company with John D. Rockefeller 3d who was secre-
tary to James G. MacDonald, chairman of Rockefeller's
Foreign Policy Association, one of the members of the
delegation. In the atmosphere of the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis,
all of Field's muddling cleared up, and he adopted the power
pattern of Communism and the Axis as his creed. In his
executive post and his editorial activities in the IPR, at the
side of John D. 3rd and Owen Lattimore, Field became one of
the key Rockefeller Empire Far Eastern agents, doubly
valuable because of his acceptance by the Communists.

Field followed closely each bend in the Communist Party
"line", supported many Communist organizations, and served
as emissary for Communist spy, Whittaker Chambers. Jointly
with the Kremlin, he financed through his American People's
Fund the Jefferson School of Social Science, the official
Communist Party "school for traitors" in New York City.
With Owen Lattimore and other Rockefeller subsidized
members of the editorial staff of the IPR publications, he
organized Amer-


259


asia, and published from the IPR office that Communist,
espionage publication "front". During the period of the Hitler
Stalin Pact, he resigned his staff position in the IPR and
organized the American Peace Mobilization, to agitate against
American entry into the war. He picketed the White House
until, immediately after Hitler's invasion of Russia, he made
an about face to follow the Party “line” and stridently
propagandized for our entry into the war as a champion of the
Soviets. Though he resigned as trustee of the IPR in 1947, he
still continues to implement its Far Eastern policy as a key
member of the Foreign Office of the Rockefeller Empire, the
Council on Foreign Relations. It is not difficult to discern
whom he protected when he refused to name the contributors
to the Civil Rights Congress bail fund for the top Communist
conspirators and traitors.


OWEN LATTIMORE

Owen Lattimore, an English-schooled Tientsin newspaper
man who, according to affidavits in the hands of the FBI, led
several pro-Communist student uprisings there, was launched
on his career with the support of the Rockefeller dominated,
Red Social Science Research Bureau, Harvard-Yenching
Institute and J. 5. Guggenheim Memorial Foundation. He
devoted himself to the cause of the Soviets in Mongolia and
other sections. He was then brought back to spearhead the Far
Eastern activities of the Rockefeller Soviet Axis thru the Insti-
tute of Pacific Relations and the Council on Foreign
Relations. He was a member of the Red cell that operated the
IPR for the Axis according to Budenz, and became editor of
its Pacific Relations, and founding editor of its Soviet
espionage front, Amerasia. In effect he became the
undersecretary of the Foreign Office of the Rockefeller
Empire on Eastern Affairs, and one of the top indoctrinators
of their agents in the CFR, the IPR and the State Department.
His numerous publications consistently pursued the line of the
Rockefeller Soviet Axis, or led it.

Budenz testified Lattimore was assigned by the Politburo to
misrepresenting the Chinese Communists as "agrarians” who
had no interest in Marxism, and to other key assignments.
These involved appointment to ostensibly minor official State
Department posts, including: Reosevelt-appointed per-

260


sonal advisor to Chiang Kai-shek in which post he was in
excellent position te accomplish the betrayal of China to the
Communists; Deputy Director of Pacific Operations of the
Office of War Infermation, where he furthered the cause of
the Chinese Communists’ by packing his division with
Communist Chinese personnel from the New China Daily
News; “adviser” to Vice-President Henry A. Wallace on his
mission to China; and UN Point 4 representative to
Afghanistan.

Lattimore's interest in Tibet, involving the entertainment of
a Lama in his Baltimore home, was followed shortly by
betrayal of Tibet to the Chinese Communists. It will be
interesting to watch what his interest in Afghanistan, coupled
with the sending of Standard Oil experts there, will evolve.

As is usual for Rockefeller Soviet agents, Latti-more was
planted in a university post in the Walter Hines Page School
of Diplomacy, at Johns Hopkins, where he indoctrinated, or
“trained”, embryo diplomats for R. 5. Axis assignments in the
State Department. With his star pupil, John Stewart Service,
according to affidavits produced by Sen. McCarthy, Lattimore
was accomplice in the Amer-asia espionage case that involved
the theft from the State Department and other Government
offices, of seventeen hundred secret documents (for trans-
mission te Communist agents) that jeopardized the secrecy of
our codes and endangered the lives of tens of thousands of
Gls. As is so often the case of Rockefeller-protected agents,
neither Lattimore nor Service were even indicted for the
crime. Instead, Service was promoted immediately after his
arraignment, and Joseph Grew, the State Department official
who demanded the prosecution of the malefacters, was
ousted. Six years later after numerous phoney
"Investigations", as a result of aroused public sentiment,
Service was discharged in December, 1951, as a “security
risk",

As an officer of the IPR, Lattimore made Red
"pilgrimages": to Moscow, in 1937, with Stalin-decorated
Edward C. Carter, where they "were obviously receiving
instruction from the Seviet Government regarding the line
which the Institute ought to follow"; and to Chinese
Communist headquarters at Yenan, in 1937, in the company
of the Red fellow editors of Amerasia, where "they were
greeted by Communist spy, Agnes Smedley" of the

261


Richard Sorge ring. And he was addressee subsequently of
correspondence directly from Red spy Sorge, whose ring
operated out of the IPR in precipitating the Pearl Harbor
attack.

In view of his record, it is difficult to understand what
otjection Lattimore could offer to Sen. McCarthy's charge
that he was a top "Soviet agent”, unless it is now the
Communist Party line for its agents to deny their affiliation.
Certainly no avowed Soviet agent could have served the
Communists to better advantage.

When Sen. McCarthy's charges finally did come to a
hearing before the packed Tydings Committee, tremendous
pressure was brought to bear to protect Lattimore from
exposure. None of the above stated record and other data
which McCarthy turned over to the Committee and to the FBI
to prove that Lattimore "was or had been a Communist" was
permitted in evidence. At no point was there brought out the
intimate association of Lattimore with Alger Hiss, with the
Amerasia, crowd, including Philip J. Jaffe and Frederick V.
Field, or his membership and influence in Rockefeller's Coun-
cil on Foreign Relations and Institute of Pacific Relations.
Instead he was permitted by Tydings to use all his vast skill in
the peculiarly Communist art of "smearing" and befuddling
with dialectics, against his accuser, McCarthy, and to convert
the hearings to placing the latter on trial instead of himself
answering the serious and well substantiated charges brought
against him. The substance of his meagre reply to the charges
was the same as that always advanced when one of the agents
of the Rockefeller Empire comes under fire: the cry of “witch
hunt", "guilt by association" and "smear".

All of the wealth and influence of the Rockefeller Empire
and its Council on Foreign Relations, with their control of the
press and all other avenues of communication and publication
were brought to bear to protect Lattimore and to discredit
McCarthy.

GENERAL DWIGHT DAVID EISENHOWER

Dwight David Eisenhower was born at Denni-son, Texas,
October 14, 1890. He graduated from the U.S. Military
Academy with a B.S. degree in 1915 and served as a
lieutenant colonel in the Tank Corps, in World War I. He
graduated successively from the Army Tank School, in 1921;
the Command and General Staff School, in 1926; from the
War

262


College, in 1929; and from the Army Industrial School, in
1932. On June 24, 1942, through influence the source of
which is now apparent, he was jumped many points by
President Roosevelt and made his "yes-man", "Commanding"
General in the European Theatre of Operations. On November
8, 1942 he became Allied Commander-in-Chief in North
Africa; and on December 31, 1943, he was appointed
Commanding General of Allied Forces in the European
Theatre of Operations. In 1945 he became Commander of
U.S. Forces in Germany.

Eisenhower consented to the encirclement of his command
by potentially hostile Russian forces in Berlin, where they
could be trapped and held as hostages at the will of the
Soviets. It is hard to understand any loyal officer so betraying
his command.

Inactivated, Eisenhower, like other Rockefeller political
hacks, was retired to the presidency of a university, Columbia.
There he did nothing to clean out the Communists on the
faculty that make it a hotbed of subversion. Instead, he chose,
in 1949, to associate with the exposed Communist agents and
traitors ‘of Rockefeller's Council on Foreign Relations. There
iş truth in the adage: "A man is known by the company that he
chooses".

Eisenhower was the natural choice of the Rockefeller
interests to head their UN ferces in Europe te carry out their
program. A loyal American would not be a party to
withholding idle reinforcements and supplies, by shipment to
Europe, from troops under fire in Korea.

Eisenhower is being groomed as the conspirators’
"bipartisan", or Fusion, presidential candidate in their move to
rob the nation of any voice in the Government and to set upa
military dictatorship, as forecast in their "Hopley Plan", a
prelude to their final "1984" program.

As early as June 7, 1947, Drew Pearson announced that
Eisenhower conferred with Paley, of Columbia Broadcasting
Co., Watson, of International Business Machines and John D.
Rockefeller Yr., in regard to the Presidential nomination in
1948. I pointed out in my Strange Death of Franklin Delano
Roosevelt (p. 310}:

"This confirms the indication of his appointment, with the
support of the General Education (Board) to the pest of
president of Columbia University —


that he is planned as an entry from the Rockefeller stables in
the Presidential Sweepstakes."

Though Eisenhower creditably, or possibly as a disarming
maneuver, pointed out the menace to a republic of a military
man as President, it might be expected that he will take his
orders from his Rockefeller bosses and subversive agents, and
accept the nomination, to rob the nation of any choice other
than acceptance of Rockefellerism.


DEAN GOODERHAM ACHESON "... betrayer of

America. ." (Sen. Jenner}

Dean Gooderham Acheson, after serving as secretary to
Supreme Court Justice Louis D. Brandeis, following training
at Harvard under Felix Frankfurter, was sponsored by Sen.
Millard Tydings (son-in-law of pro-Communist Rockefeller
henchman, Joseph E. Davies), for the post of Sclicitor
General, but was given by Roosevelt the Under-Secretary of
the Treasury appointment in the Popular Front "New Deal”.
As set forth in the Congressional Record of May 16, 1933, p.
3483, Senator Couzens of Michigan opposed Acheson's
confirmation on the ground that his firm had many clients,
including the Standard Oil and Rockefeller interests, who
would have income tax refund cases that would come up
before him, and he questioned that Acheson could be
impartial.

By way of rebuttal and defense of Acheson, Tyd-ing
revealed his ties with Communists, saying:


"It has not been said, but should be said that Mr.
Acheson has represented the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics. It might be contended that because he
represented modern Russia, that because the Soviets have
been his clients, therefore he is a ‘Red’ or ‘radical’ or
unfitted to hold the office to which he has been nominated."


Acheson, a member of Rockefeller's Council on Foreign
Relations, belied Tydings' statement by becoming, in the eyes
of the Soviets, according to a repentant spy courier, the
ringleader of the Rockfeller Empire agents in the Department,
acting on behalf of the Rockefeller Soviet Axis in the
furtherance of the Lenin program for the Soviet conquest of
China and Asia. He championed the Hisses—Donald who was
his law partner, and Alger >64


who later became his superior in the Rockefeller Foreign
Office—and disdained the advice of the Department's security
officer Adolph Berle, that they were Communists and security
risks. He surrounded himself with champions of Communism
and Rock-efellerism. From Rockefeller's CFR and IPR, he
drew Owen Lattimore, John Carter Vincent, Lauch-lin Currie
(named by Communist spy courier Elizabeth Bentley as
"feeder" of confidential and top secret information directly
from the White House, where he was assistant to Roosevelt}
and Philip C. Jessup, Chairman of the Pacific Council of the
IPR, champion of Frederick Vanderbilt Field and Alger Hiss,
sponsor of the American Russian Institute and other
Communist and front agencies and Ache-son's "adviser" and
Ambassador-at-large; and others of the same breed.

In 1950, Earl Browder formerly head of the Communist
Party in the U.S. revealed in his testimony before the Tydings
Committee, that he and his adjutant, Robert Minor, had been
invited on Octeber 12, 1942, to the State Department by
Acheson to confer with him, Lauchlin Currie and others; and
that he had been asked by them to render service as a State
Department courier in the transmission to Chinese Communist
leader Mao Tse-tung through Madame Sun Yat Sen, of the
information that they had changed the policy of the U. $. and
would ne longer support Chiang Kai-shek in his fight on the
Communists, but that instead, they viewed the Chinese
Communist cause with favor, and they intimated that support
for it would be forthcoming. This was one of the first overt
steps in the betrayal of American interests in China that is
now costing us so heavily in lives and fortunes.

After the Amerasia case was "fixed", Grew who had forced
its prosecution, was dismissed; and Acheson, whose
associates were the guilty parties, was promoted. PM, the
Communist propaganda sheet, exulted over Acheson's
appointment:

"Now the State Department policy has a better appreciation
of what the Soviet Union wants.” It was true. Acheson, with
the aid of his associates, Lattimore, Vincent, Hiss, Currie and
others, hastened te deliver China and Japan to the
Communists. In Japan, they were blocked by MacArthur in
spite of their planting of Communist agents on his staff, where
some of them still remain. This miscarriage


265


of their plans probably will be corrected, by the "peace"
activities of the Rockefeller overlord of the State Department
Reds, John Foster Dulles.

In bold pursuit of his policy of betrayal to the Rockefeller
Soviet Axis, Acheson on June 19, 1946 urged the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee to set up a ten-year "Lend-
Lease” program for arming and supplying the Chinese
Communist Army. Failing in this, he and his fellow
conspirators undertook to circumvent Congress, and through
General George Marshall, as their agent, to accomplish the
supplying of the Communists and the betrayal of the
Nationalists, as is related elsewhere. This is the purpose for
which they suppressed General Wedemeyer's report. All the
plans that Acheson originated in the State Department, "Lend-
Lease", UNRRA, the Marshall Plan, the Atlantic Pact and the
Point 4 program, were designed for that same purpose. This
was also the purpose of the shipment of a gift of a hundred
million bushels of wheat to India for transshipment to her
Soviet ally and Communist China. As a reward therefor,
Rockefeller's Standard Oil Co. (N. J.) has been given a virtual
monopoly of the oil market in India, with the acquiescence of
the Soviets, who will be supplied with their cil through that
channel.

Acheson has never tired of serving the Rockefeller-Soviet
cause. As Under-Secretary of State, he approved a loan to the
Polish Communist government headed by David Rockefeller's
teacher and friend, Oskar Lange. Acheson's law firm,
Covington, Burling, Acheson & Shorb, whose partners
Burling and Donald Hiss were registered as agents of Com-
munist Poland, handled the loan.

Sen. McCarthy's exposure of treason and perversion in the
State Department created an emergency for Acheson and his
Red clique, that threatened their control of the Government. It
was met by reversal of Acheson's announced policy of
abandoning South Korea, that deliberately launched us on the
Korean "police action". The Korean betrayal has firmly
resaddled the conspirators in office. The tens of thousands of
Gls lost in the process mean nothing to the sadistic plotters.
The crushing taxation which it has served to excuse, hastens
their attainment of a U.S. and world-wide dictatorship.

Acheson has matched Gen. George Marshall as the best
Secretary of State and collaborator


that the Soviets and the Rockefeller Empire have ever had. He
has persistently protected Soviet spies and agents; and his
refusal to turn his back on his convicted superior, Alger Hiss,
is now proverbial. For that reason the demands for his
dismissal by Congress, by the nation and by the veterans
organizations, the American Legion and the Veterans of
Foreign Wars, are futile.

The American veteran has not yet awakened to the
realization that he is regarded by the conspirators as "peasant"
and mere cannon fodder to be expended in Rockefeller
Crusades. Not even his vete gives him any weight in their
consideration, sc completely have they corrupted the
electorate and engineered the theft of elections. He 1s a mere
robot who has been disfranchised and is beneath their
contempt. Consequently it is natural that his demand for
Acheson's dismissal has gone as unheeded as the demand of
large sections of the press and of the people at large. "Fixes"
that invelve the lives and wealth of the citizenry have assumed
the status of unimportance, as contrasted with "fixes" of so-
called "sport events", that have been whipped up to satisfy the
public's entire capacity for indignation.

JOHN FOSTER DULLES
"For democracy 1s, of course, a luxury. It invelves
inefficiencies and weaknesses, and it is incompatible with
the attainment of maximum national effort."

This statement, made by John Foster Dulles, (Rockefeller
kinsman, married to Janet Pomeroy Avery, cousin of John D.

Grand Vizier of the Rockefeller Empire, its "bipartisan"
wÀ to the nation and Senior Statesman assigned te supervi-
sion of the State Department) before the Foreign Policy
Association on March 18, 1930, aptly describes the totalitarian
bent of his clan. Chairman of the Board of Rockefeller's
Foundation, he has devoted his life to their service, as their
top agent and counsel.

Starting at the top of the international diplomatic scale as
secretary of the Hague Peace Conference, when a nineteen
year old Princeton student, he consistently has represented the
Empire in "top drawer" capacity. In the years following World
War I, he became identified with their I. G. Far-benindustrie
and German banking interests, from

267


the start. And from the start he participated in the dealings of
the Rockefeller Soviet Axis.

His indiscriminately totalitarian bent and faithful adherence
to the interests of the Rockefeller Empire are attested to by his
organization and support of America First and his intense
isolationism prior to Dunkirk and Hitler's invasion of Russia,
and his pro-Communism. It is evinced in his book War,
Peace, And Change published in 1940, in which he undertook
to justify, on behalf of the Rockefeller Empire, the

"expansion" of their Nazi and Fascist collaborators, and even
of the Japanese.

This book by Dulles offers the public a word of caution in
regard to his activities. In it he assumed a role that has been
assigned to him repeatedly. He undertook to throw our
country off guard by assuring us that there was no danger and
no reason for alarm, at the very time the conspirators were
planning an attack upon us. He wrote:

"There is no reason to believe that any totalitarian states
separately or collectively, would attempt to attack the United
States . . . Only hysteria entertains the idea that Germany,
Italy, or Japan contemplates war on us.” Again in 1950, Dulles
repeated the performance by appearing at Seoul to throw the
South Koreans off guard by assuring them that there was no
danger of an invasion from the north, at the very time that the
conspirators had launched the invasion. Once again, in a
special article written by him and distributed by the NEA
Service, on Friday, December 14, 1951, that is an outline of
one that is scheduled to appear in Foreign Affairs the official
publication of Rockefeller's Foreign Office, the CFR, Dulles
reassures us that we can stop the Russian Imperialism that his
crowd have done so much to foster, by adopting some new
methods that he proposes. Under the circumstances, a natural
reaction is "Beware of the Greeks bearing gifts!" and "Where
are they planning to hit us next?"

Dulles is regarded as the Rockefeller Empire's dispenser of
patronage and guardian of the subversive, pro-Communist cell
in the State Department. The New York Times quoted Dulles
on July 25, 1950, as acknowledging to a group of Republican
Senators that he was well aware of the existence of a group of
Communists in the State Department who


268


were working to betray China, and incidentally the U.S.,
the Soviets. He said:

I do admit that at one time there was a group that felt a

dose of Communism would do some countries good." Alger
Hiss informed the Senate Investigating Committee that his
sponsor, adviser and mentor throughout his career had been
John Foster Dulles. The entire Dulles family, including his
brother Allen, his sister Eleanor, and Rhea Foster, have been
extremely active in the Rockefeller Soviet Institute of Pacific
Relations. Dulles and David Rockefeller, as Trustees of the
Carnegie Endowment For International Peace were
acknowledged to have made Hiss president of that
organization.
Despite all shows of conflict between the U.S. and the USSR
that have been staged for the diversion of the "peasants", there
has never been any rift in the lute of Reckefeller-Soviet
relations, thanks to the "diplomacy" of Dulles. He has always
been most punctilious in discussing with Soviet
representatives all moves planned, and arranging for their
collaboration. He makes no secret of it. This is startlingly
demonstrated by the contemptuous report made by Dulles in
his maiden address in the Senate (to which he had been ap-
pointed by Rockefeller puppet Gov. Thomas E. Dewey, to
whom he dictated his "bipartisan" foreign policy, as supposed
"adviser"), on July 12, 1949 (Congressional Record, p. 9276}.
Dulles stated that he had attended the Paris Conference of
Foreign Ministers, in company with Philip C. Jessup, as
"adviser" to Dean Acheson; and that there he had discussed
with Andrei Vishinsky, among others, the matter of a let-up of
the "Cold War". It had been decided by them that such a let-
up must not occur because it would not be wise on the ground
that:

"Some fear that any relaxation of the East-West tension
would bring a corresponding relaxation on the part of the
American people, and therefore they needed to be artificially
alarmed.” On July 15, 1949, Sen. William E. Jenner, of In-
diana, was reported by the N.Y. Times (7/16/49, p. 4, col. 3)
to have

strongly and personally challenged Sen. Foster Dulles

and called upon Sen. Dulles ... to rise and give an

explanation of his remarks at 269


the Big 4 Foreign Ministers Conference in Paris that the U.S.
public be kept artificially alarmed. The suggestion was
rejected, and Sen. Dulles sat silent and smiling. Dulles later
told reporters that it was suggested at the conference, but
would net tell who offered the suggestion. He just
chuckled and made no reply." Needless to say, the remark
was merely a contemptuous restatement of the policy of the
Rockefeller Empire, made by its agent, which Sen.
Jenner aptly summed up as follows:

"In other words . . . they take the position: 'Tell the
American people only what you want them to know; but lead
them down the road to bankruptey ... Keep them living from
crisis to crisis, from emergency to emergency.’ " An
emergency in 1950, the conviction of Alger Hiss for perjury in
connection with treason and the consequent intensification of
the warranted distrust of Dean Acheson and his betrayal of
China to the Communists, required some action. John
Foster Dulles was put back inte the State Department in
official capacity as "bipartisan" and "Republican" to neutralize
the criticism from Republican quarters. This was done under
the most extraordinary circumstances.

On April 6, 1950, the New York Times, the official gazette
of the Rockefeller Empire announced on page 1 that President
Truman would appoint John Foster Dulles “as top policy
adviser in the State Department probably with the rank of
Ambassador at Large". Simultaneous announcement appeared
on page 4 of the Times of Dulles’ appointment as the
Chairman of the Board of Trustees of kinsman Rockefeller's
Foundation. The vein of the reports indicated that John Foster
Dulles had served the Rockefeller Empire so loyally since
1935 that he was being rewarded with a promotion in one of
its subsidiaries, the State Department. A special dispatch to
the New York Times made it clear, however, that the order for
this promotion had come from powers above and behind the
Government. It was apparent that President Truman, wintering
at Key West, had not yet received his orders from his
Rockefeller Empire bosses; for he denied any intention of
appointing Dulles to the State Department, Ambassador at
Large or any other appointment.

270


On the following day, Truman had received his orders, and
the appointment of Dulles as Foreign Policy Adviser was
announced by the State Department, not by Truman. Dulles’
activities since that appointment make it quite clear that he,
and not Acheson, is the boss of the State Department, acting
in his capacity of top agent of the Rockefeller Empire and its
Foreign Office, the Council on Foreign Relations.

In line with his pelicy of keeping the nation “artificially
alarmed", Dulles presented it with the wholly unwarranted
Korean war that was deliberately precipitated by pre-
arrangement and with full premeditation. It was no
coincidence that John Foster Dulles, Foreign Policy Adviser
of the State Department, was present in Seoul in his
customary role of putting the South Koreans off guard with
false assurances of "security", at the very time that the North
Korean Communist and Chinese Communist Armies were
invading South Korea. How little faith he had in his own
treacherous assurances is indicated by the fact that he
hurriedly fled by plane, without awaiting the Communist
cohorts for whom he and his confederates, of the State Depart-
ment and the Rockefeller Empire, had eased the way and
"opened the gates". The Korean "police action" relieved the
most dreaded "emergency" for the conspirators, their ousting.

The harmony that Dulles maintains with the Soviets for the
Rockefeller Empire is further illustrated by the Japanese
"peace" negotiations. Dulles, acting as a one man State
Department, arranged a treaty of peace with Japan that will
serve the purposes of the Empire. Before he left for Japan, the
New York Times of January 15, 1951, reported that Dulles
had conferred with Jacob A. Malik, Soviet delegate to the
United Nations. Acting on behalf of the Rockefeller Empire,
and completely mindful of the agreements of the Rockefeller-
Soviet Axis, Dulles, according to the Times, sought to advise
Russia that the object of his visit to Japan was wholly
exploratory.

Despite loud and widely publicized threats of a fight on the
treaty by the Seviets, to divert the "peasants", the Russian
delegation made merely a token demonstration at its signing
so as to prevent popular appreciation of how well satisfied
they were withit. The Rockefeller Empire is equally


271


well satisfied with it, making the sentiment in the Rockefeller
Soviet Axis unanimous. But we "peasants" might well ask
ourselves, after this Dulles deal as after the others: "What
disaster does it forebode for us?”

Dulles, son of a Watertown, New York, minister, has been
one of the principal agents of the Rockefeller Empire on the
religious front, and one of the "leaders" of the subversive
Federal (alias National} Council of Churches of Christ in the
U.S. (alias America). The totalitarian nature of this “leader-
ship" was aptly described by George Dugan of the Amencan
Council of Christian Churches, atruly American organization,
at its meeting in Philadelphia reported in the New York Times
of October 30, 1948, that charged that John Fester Dulles:
"Has been for fifteen years ‘an effective tool of extremely
radical and pacifist’ church leaders associated with the Federal
Council and World Council.

"These he labeled . . . ‘cooperative fronts for world
Socialism.” In conclusion, Dugan and the Council vigorously
attacked Dulles personally, as stated in the Times article:

"The Council also called on its adherents to oppose the
appointment of John Foster Dulles to either the position of
Secretary of State or representative of the United States in
the United Nations.”

Dulles, in collaboration with Alger Hiss and Nelson
Rockefeller, was one of the active principals, representing the
Rockefeller Empire in the creation of the United Nations.
Dulles subscribes to any and every form of subversion of the
sovereignty of the U.S., or its surrender to any foreign power
or agency. It is understandable that the direct or indirect
control of such powers and agencies by the Rockefeller
Empire would naturally imply complete and absolute
surrender of U.S. sovereignty to the Rockefeller Empire. In
line with this pelicy, Dulles advocates and supports the
"Union Now" scheme advocated by Streit and other British
agents and Anglophiles. Originally it merely demanded return
to England as a colony, and sought to make of George
Washington a traitor and of Benedict Arnold a patriot. In its
more recently evolved form it has prepagandized, in addition,
for an Atlantic Pact

272


as a device to attain its objectives. John Foster Dulles wrote a
laudatory introduction for an exposition of the latter form,
written by Justice Owen J. Roberts, John Schmidt and
Clarence Streit, and published under the title of The New
Federalist by Federal Union Inc. with the support of such pat-
riots as Senator Estes Kefauver, J. William Ful-bright, and
Edward J. Thye, and Representatives James Wadsworth,
Walter B. Judd, and Thomas E. Burke. Their names are listed
in a full page advertisement of Federal Union Inc., its
publication Freedom & Union, and The New Federalist that
appeared in the New York Times, August 29, 1950. The
advertisement has the effrontery to represent George
Washington as advocating the plans of these schemers and
propagandists for Union Now, a return of the U.S. to Britain
as a colony.

The true character of the "Union Now” program was
dramatically emphasized by a quotation read by Walter
Trohan, of the Chicago Tribune, to Sen. Estes Kefauver, one
of the conspirators’ Presidential ‘candidates, on the American
Forum TV program on December 23, 1951, as follows:

"I am now led to devote my life to the reunion

of the British Empire ...” It was written in 1780 by Benedict
Arnold. Trehan shily suggested that Kefauver's platform 1s
identical with that of Benedict Arnold. And it is also the
platform of all of the conspirators’ puppet candidates.

All this makes one marvel at the strange people that
undertake to represent true, patriotice Americans. With John
Foster Dulles, a kinsman, attorney and agent of the
Rockefeller Empire as the "bipartisan" dictator of the policies
of our government, strange things have come about, and even
stranger things can be expected.

As senior member of the law firm of Sullivan and
Cromwell, that has played a stellar role in “dollar
imperialism", Dulles, and his brother, have profited
handsomely from these foreign entanglements.

The roles played in the Rockefeller Empire by the rest of
the members of the CFR would make quite as interesting
reading, but that will take another book.


273


CHAPTER XV


ROCKEFELLER'S INSTITUTE OF
PACIFIC RELATIONS
Soviet Espionage & Propaganda Agency "Who controls
Asia, controls the world."—LENIN


The Institute of Pacific Relations is a most vital propaganda
agency for the Communist conspiracy of world conquest. One
of the basic tenets expressed by Lenin was: "Whe controls
Asia, controls the world". For Asia holds more than half the
population of the world and is rich in resources. Lenin's
conspiracy is identical with that of Hitler's Professor
Haushofer,—conquest of the world through domination of the
Eurasian land mass.

The negotiation of the deal entered into by Standard Oil
companies with the Communists for surplus Russian oil,
which constitutes the charter of the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis,
was under way in 1925-26. The virtually simultaneous
organization of the Institute of Pacific Relations (IPR) for the
purpose of carrying out the most important and basic aspect of
the Communist conspiracy, the conquest of Asia, under
Rockefeller auspices and with the financing of the Rockefeller
Foundation, might well have been an impertant element in the
deal. For no one propaganda agency has contributed more to
the success of Lenin's Asiatic conquest plot than has the IPR.
When the House Committee listed the American Council of
the Institute of Pacific Relations as subversive and
Communist, it put the case most mildly.

The dependence of the IPR on Rockefeller is made clear by
the appended list of grants to it which total more than
$2,000,000 over a period of 25 years.

As in the case of the Council on Foreign Relations, the
Rockefeller interests insured subservience of the Institute of
Pacific Relations to them by the device of annual grants,
instead of endowment, that could be vaned in accord with
how well the Institute served them.

The IPR American Council was represented in 1927 at the
signing of the constitution of the IPR by Ray Lyman Wilbur,
then president of Leland Stanford University, later Cabinet
officer under Hoover and member of Rockefeller's Foreign
Office, the Council on Foreign Relations. Associated

4


with him were Henry $. Pritchett, of the Carnegie Foundation
for the Improvement of Teaching and member of the Council
on Foreign Relations; Leo Welman, Director of Research of
the Amalgamated Clothing Workers’ Union and member of
Rockefeller's Council on Foreign Relations; Stephen P.
Duggan, Director of the Rockefeller-subsidized Institute of
International Education and member of Rockefeller's Council
on Foreign Relations; Edward Clark Carter, secretary of the
Y.M.C.A., and of THE INQUIRY, later Director of the
subversive Russian American Institute that has been labeled a
direct agency of the Kremlin, decorated for his treacherous
services for the Soviets with the Order of the Red Banner of
Labor by Stalin in person, President of the Russian Relief, and
secretary general of the IPR, and member of Rockefeller's
Council on Foreign Relations. It was Carter whe, with the full
weight of Rockefeller influence behind him, acted to found
the Institute at a Honolulu conference in 1925. But he was
soon joined by other Imperial agents and dupes who served to
disguise the subversive character of the enterprise.

In its 1930 Report (p.228}) the Rockefeller Foundation

acknowledged its key and dominant role in setting up the
Institute:
"These (IPR) activities were first given substantial assistance
through a grant by the Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial."
Though Rockefellers launched the IPR, for obvious
propaganda purposes they preferred to represent (R.F. 1930
Report, p. 252) that "It was established by the peoples of the
Pacific area to promote cooperative study of their mutual
relations and is an unofficial body centering its activities in
biennial conferences. An International Secretariat is
maintained at Honolulu to coordinate studies and researches
undertaken by various national groups in preparation for the
conferences. The governing body, called the Pacific Council,
consists of one representative from each national
organization or council. A monthly journal, Pacific Affairs,
is published in addition to the proceedings of the conferences.
Though the organization operates entirely in an
unofficial capacity, it has become an effective mechanism
for promoting 275


international understanding by competent and expert
discussion.” In its 1933 report (p. 263) Rockefeller expatiates
further on the glories of his IPR, as follows: "The Institute of
Pacific Relations seeks to advance international
understanding, particularly in the Pacific area. Its work
is carried out through the Pacific Council and through the
national councils in the nine countries contributing to its
general budget, namely the United States, Australia, Canada,
China, Great Britain, Japan, the Netherlands, New Zealand
and the Philippine Islands." Though the US.S.R. did not
join the Institute until a later date, she was amply represented
from the very start by Communists and fellow travellers who
comprised the bulk of the membership of the American
Council, of which the 1935 Rockefeller Foundation report
boasts: (p. 222)

"It is the strongest of the national groups making up the
membership of the Institute of Pacific Relations, and
assumes the responsibility of leadership in financing the
secretariat of the Institute and the biennial conference, and in
stimulating research and publication. The American
Council works closely with universities and other research
and educational organizations.” It is understandable, however,
that the Rockefeller reports claim no credit for support of the
notorious pro-Communist AMERASIA magazine, the editors
of which were arrested on charges of wholesale
misappropriation of secret government documents. As chief
supporters of the American Council of the IPR the
Rockefellers inevitably gave support to AMERASIA. For as
Jag) oseph McCarthy pointed out (C.R., March 30, 1950, p.
".. Far Eastern Survey, the publication of the American
Council of the Institute of Pacific Relations for a long time
occupied offices adjoining the official offices of AMERASIA
; .. In order to get into one office, one went through the
other—almost a sort of joint venture’. As a matter of fact,
AMERASIA occupied the offices of the Institute of Pacific
Relations with its official publications, FAR EASTERN
SURVEY and PACIFIC RELATIONS. The offices were
located in "6


a row of brownstone buildings owned by Carter's Y.M.C.A.,
extending from 121 te 129 E. 52 Street, New York City,
reputedly donated by the Rockefellers. The partitions and
walls of the buildings had been knocked out so that they all
communicated, in order to mask the identity of control, an act
that is so characteristic of the Rockefeller propaganda setups.
And to create an appearance of independence, the magazines
used the different street numbers of the same building as their
addresses.

"Joint ventures", quoting McCarthy, they were indeed.
AMERASIA was in reality an unofficial publication of the
IPR that served as a semi- official outlet for its Russian
Council. Aside from enjoying the offices provided with
Rockefeller funds, the magazines shared an array of Red
editors and authors in common. In matters controversial, they
were all written in the same vein, the policy of the
Rockefeller-Soviet Axis.

PACIFIC AFFAIRS listed Frederick Vanderbilt Field as

editor in 1933 and in 1934 Owen Lattimore became editor,
with W. L. Holland, Bruno Lasker, F. N. Petroff of Moscow,
Norman Cooper, Sidney, Arnold Toynbee of London, G de T
Glazebrook of Toronto, Roger L. Levy of Paris, Samitato
Uramotsi of Tokyo, J. H. Boeke of Holland and D. K. Lieu of
Shanghai as associate editors. In December 1936, the foreign
associate editors were dropped and Owen Lattimore became
sole editor with Catherine Porter as managing editor. The
frontispiece carried the notation:
"Articles in PACIFIC AFFAIRS do not represent views of
either the Institute of Pacific Relations or the National
Councils of which it is composed. The Editor of
PACIFIC AFFAIRS is responsible for the selection of authors
and the acceptance of articles." The address of the PACIFIC
AFFAIRS editorial office is given as 129 East 52 Street,
whereas that of AMERASIA was 125 East 52 Street. But the
manuscripts of the editors of AMERASIA found their way
into the office of PACIFIC AFFAIRS even before Lattimore
took over exclusive control. Thus its pages were graced with
articles from the pens of AMERASIA editors Lattimore,
Field, Cyrus H. Peake, Ch'ao Ting-chi and Harriet Moore
prior to 1936. The AMERASIA editors were also listed as
staff members of the American Council of


IPR. But when Lattimore took over, the editors of
AMERASIA really "went to town" in the pages of PACIFIC
AFFAIRS and their articles occupied ever more space. Staff
members of the American Council of the IPR and editors of
AMERASIA, William W. Lockwood who at the same time
was acting editor of FAR EASTERN SURVEY, David H.
Pepper who was also Research Assistant for the FOREIGN
POLICY ASSOCIATION, and Kate L. Mitchell swarmed in
its pages. The marnage of AMERASIA and PACIFIC
AFFAIRS was complete. The same AMERASIA editors
managed to secure steady publication for their propaganda
output in FAR EASTERN SURVEY even when their asso-
ciate, William W. Lockwood, was not its acting editor.
Eleanor Lattimore made the grade in 1948, and in 1943,
Frederick Vanderbilt Field reported on the IPR's Mont
Tremblant Conference. The difference in address did not
constitute any barrier to an identity of ideclogy of the three
publications of the IPR financed so liberally by Rockefeller.

Their "protection" would serve to explain the failure of the
Department of Justice to prosecute the persons involved as
spies and traitors in the AMERASIA case that was called by J
Edgar Hoover and the FBI "a one hundred percent airtight
case”, (C.R. March 30, 1950, p. 4437}
Soviet Russia 1s the only government that is a member of
Rockefeller's Institute of Pacific Relations. Russia joined in
1931. George Sokolsky reported (N.Y. Journal American,
3/14/51): "It was announced that the Russian Council of the
Institute had been formed, (at the time of the Hangchew-
Shanghai conference of the IPR, held between October 2 and
November 2, 1931) with Dr. Fedor N. Petrov as chairman.
This is the beginning of active and direct Soviet participation
in the affairs of the Institute of Pacific Relations". By curious
chance the Rockefeller Foundation reports omit mention of
this incident that made the Rockefellers the principal sponsor
of another official Communist agency, the IPR. Ner do they
boast of the fact that A. 5. Swandze, brother-in-law of
Joseph Stalin, was one of the organizers of the Russian
Council.

In the report of the Banff Conference of the IPR, held
August 14 to 26, 1933, which Russia did not


278


attend, the following explanation was offered: lack of
recognition of the Soviet Gevernment by the Goverment
of Canada and the United States, and passport regulations
that fall short of according visitors from the Soviet Union
complete equality with representatives of other countries,
prevented this proferred co-operation from materalizing.
The Pacific Council, in taking cognizance of this situation,
not only expressed deep regret but determined to make sure
that the time and place for the next conference, in 1935,
should be chosen with full regard for the wishes of this
eet member group.” (Journal American, April 10,


Laurance 5. Rockefeller represented the family interests at
the conference, as secretary of the American Council of the
IPR, in company with Frederick Vanderbilt Field, Benjamin
H. Kizer, Harriet Moore, Kate Mitchell and Owen Lattimore,
editors of AMERASIA, ‘and Joseph Barnes, Mrs. F. V. Field,
Philip Jessup and Henry R. Luce. Newton D. Baker was
chairman of the American Council. John D. Rockefeller 3d
attended the Kyoto IPR conference as secretary to James G.
MacDonald of Rockefeller's Foreign Policy Association.

Freda Utley, who was formerly a member of the British
Communist Party, was employed by the Russian Council of
the Institute of Foreign Relations in Moscow. She reported to
Senator McCarthy (CR, 3/30/50, p. 4446) that she met Owen
Lattimore in Moscow in 1936, when he was there in company
of E. C. Carter as delegate of the IPR for the purpose of
briefing by the Politburo. She stated that she was not admitted
to the secret meetings beween the Russian Communist leaders
and the IPR delegates. But she stated that it was common
knowledge at the Moscow Institute "that the Soviet
government was paying a large sum as its contribution to the
Institute of Pacific Relations”.

The evidence of Freda Utley in regard to Lattimore and
Carter was confirmed by another affidavit, as follows:

"I met and got to know Owen Lattimore in the spring of
1936 in Moscow when he and E. C. Carter were very
obviously receiving instructions from the Soviet
Government con-279


cerning the line which the Institute of Pacific Relations ought
to follow". Under these circumstances it is scarcely surprising
to find that the IPR served as agents, spies and agents
provocateurs for its principal supporters, the Rockefeller
Empire and Soviet Russia. Proverbially, "the man who pays
the piper calls the tune". The Soviets called the tune mighty
insistently, as is evidenced by the pilgrimage of Owen
Lattimore, editor of IPR publications, and Roosevelt's and the
New Deal State Department's "top authority on the Far East,”
to Chinese Communist headquarters in Yenan. This was
reported, quoting Senator McCarthy's report to Congress (C.R.
3/30/50, p. 4446}, in

".. an article by Philip J. Jaffe entitled "CHINESE
COMMUNISTS TOLD ME' which appeared in the NEW
MASSES of October 12, 1937. "In this article Jaffe gives
considerable detail about his travels in China with T. A.
Bisson and Owen Lattimore, giving details as to their stay at
the Communist Foreign Office at Yenan, and being greeted on
their arrival at Communist headquarters by Agnes
Smedley." This devotion of the IPR to the interests of the
Rockefeller-Soviet Axis, however, did not preclude its serving
also as an espionage agency in other directions, especially
when it served the interests of its masters. Correspondence of
the IPR seized in the barn of E. C. Carter's country home at
Lee, Mass., throws interesting light on such espionage. The
records make it clear that the IPR was the center of a vast
espionage ring, serving the interests of its masters, as. they
might vary, following each twist and turn of the Party line.
Orders were issued disposing of a vast number of agents, from
Owen Lattimore and Philip Jessup up and down the line. They
indicate that the IPR played its part, in the network of
Rockefeller agencies, in engineering the precipitation of
World War I] and our involvement in it.

Thus in a letter from E. C. Carter, secretary general of the
IPR, to William W. Lockwood, one of the editors of Amerasia
who was active in numerous Communist fronts, including the
National People's Committee Against Hearst and the Amer-

280


ican Committee for International Studies, and Director of the
Woodrow Wilson Institute, Princeton University, 18 a
discussion of "basic work (by) many groups and individuals”
in the international field that clearly is a combination of
espionage and propaganda, which it is suggested could be
enhanced by the following assignments:

"Bring over R. H. Tawney so that he may appraise, criticize
and interpret the Corbett project, contribute to it and at the
same time make a critique of the plans of other serious
groups on this continent. "Bring Ushiba, Saionji or Yokota
in order that we may have someone from the very insides
of Japan closely in touch with current thought in the
Japanese army, the bureaucracies and the universities.
"Bring von Trott from Berlin to be associated with Corbett,
Sansom, Tawney and others and hold him here until a
week before America enters the war ..."


Saionji was a key member of Sorge's Red spy ring. These
letters make it clear that Rockefeller's [PR controlled the spy
ring that instigated the attack on Pearl Harbor, and that they
knew in advance, to the very day, when it would occur and
involve us in the war.


Von Trott is more adequately identified by Carter
in a letter to Owen Lattimore on October 29, 1940,
as one of their agents, as follows:

"Adam von Trott has found that the best way of advancing

the interests of the IPR these difficult days in Germany has

been to join the staff of the Foreign Office to promote Far

Eastern studies. As a member of the Foreign Office,

therefore, he is ineligible to be a member of the

international secretariat and his name should be deleted
from the last pages of Pacific Affairs.” The treatment that

Carter suggested extending to

Russia was entirely different:

"Send Harriet Moore to the USSR to go through all
government party writing on postwar problems and
supplement this by interviewing party and Pelitbure
chiefs."

In the case of Russia it was not a matter of espion-
28


age but conferring and receiving instructions and orders
through a trusted war horse of the Party. The regard in which
the Kremlin held the IPR espionage activities was related by a
former Communist general on the basis of conversations in
1935-1936 with a top general in the Soviet intelligence, in an
affidavit that Sen. Joseph McCarthy gave the FBI and
Congress (CR, 3/30/51, p. 4445) : "The thing that particularly
disturbed Russian intelligence was that they had difficulty in
getting Russian agents into the Far East because of the
suspicion of the Japanese and the Chinese at that time .. . the
head of the Russian intelligence told... that they were having
excellent success through the Institute of Pacific Relations,
which the Soviet intelligence, through Communists in the
United States, had taken over. In connection with this he
particularly mentioned Owen Latti-more and another
individual... The (latter} individual has not been connected
with the State Department, but did spend some time with
Lattimore in the OWI... "The former Red army general('s) .

. testimony will further ‘be that in the course of visits to other
European capitals, he had received approximately the same
information about the IPR and also about Lattimore .." When
it served the interests of its masters, the [PR did not hesitate to
act for other foreign powers, as in the preparation of Japan for
its attack on Pearl Harbor. It served the conspirators well by
forcing the U.S. into World War II without a declaration of
war by Congress. This stery 1s well told in an article entitled
IPR-TOK YO AXIS by Shep-pard Marley, that appeared in the
December 1946 issue of PLAIN TALK and is quoted from the
Congressional Record of March 30, 1950. (p. 4462) : "The
Japan Council of the IPR Served the interests of aggression. A
dispatch of December 7, 1945, by Frank Kelley, then in
Tokyo as correspondent for the New York Herald Tribune,
describes how in Japan the IPR was used as a front for
imperialist purposes. Prince Fumimaro Konoye, whe was
Premier of Japan during much of the crucial period between
the renewed war on China in 1937 and the attack upon Pearl
Harbor 4 1/2 years 282


later, took a deep interest in his country's IPR chapter. He put
his personal trusted aides into the key posts in the Japanese
IPR, which was supported largely with funds contributed by
the very industrialists who helped the militarists plan and
catry out wars of aggression throughout the Pacific area. It
was Konoye who had ordered the preparation of a report
explaining Japan's need for expansion because of population
pressure. This report was read to the IPR international
conference of 1936, which was held in Yose-mite National
Park, in California.

"The chief secretary of the Japan Council of the IPR,
according to Mr. Kelley in the Herald Tribune, was
Tomohike Ushiba, Konoye's private secretary. Through
Ushiba, Prince Konoye kept in touch with Edward C. Carter,
then chief of the IPR's international secretariat, so that he
could keep watch on American State Department policies.
Far-Eastern experts, such as abound in the IPR, must surely
have known that Prince Konoye was among the leading
exponents of Japanese aggression for many years before
Pearl Harbor. Yet there is no evidence that the Institute ever
took any steps to prevent its use as a front for the
dissemination of propaganda in the United States and for the
gathering of inside political and military information about
this country.

"Considering the semiofficial status which the IPR has
acquired in the policy-making branches of the Federal
Government, the Congress owes it to the country to
investigate the history of the organization, its obscure foreign
links, its unduly complex administrative set-up, and its
alliances with pro-Soviet and pro-Communist elements both
at home and abroad.

"The intricate nature of the administrative set-up of the
Institute makes it ideal for control by a few well placed
persons. Small wonder then that many of its leading and
most prolific writers are dependable fellow travelers who
faithfully follow the tortucus path Stalin sets—even if they
have to slow down around the sharp turns of Soviet policy.
283


"The Institute's activity seldom reaches any large section of
the public directly, and few persons know that it exists. It is
doubtful if 1 out of 1,000 of the parents of boys who fought
their way across the Pacific, from Guadalcanal to Okinawa,
has ever heard of this organization. Yet in Government
circles, including those where America's high policy in the
Pacific is determined, the influence of the Institute of Pacific
Relations has been enormous and is apparently growing.

"During the recent war, the Institute supplied many agencies
with experts on the Far East. Four IPR staff members worked
for the China section of the UNRRA. Three others did
research for MacArthur's headquarters on Japanese
reconstruction. William L. Holland was the head of the OWI
in China. Owen Lattimore was President Roosevelt's gift to
Chiang Kai-shek for a time and President Truman's special
adviser to Mac-Arthur as well as Far Eastern head of OWI.
The IPR supplied lesser lights to the OWI, OSS, and the
State Department. Not all of these workers whe joined
Government agencies were Communists or fellow travelers.
The IPR, however, frequently provided research specialists
who were interested mainly in the furthering of Stalin's aims
in the Far East.

"Many IPR trustees reached positions of considerable
importance. In 1941, Lauchlin Currie was President
Roosevelt's special emissary to China. William C. Johnstone
worked on a special assignment for the State Department.
George E. Taylor was director of the OWlI's Far Eastern
Section and later in the State Department's Office of Inter-
national Information and Cultural Affairs. Benjamin Kizer,
(former editor of AMER-ASIA) a Spokane lawyer, headed
the UNRRA in China.

"The Institute's aid to the Government was not limited to
supplying experts of varying degrees, for the Government
bought 750,000 IPR pamphlets for soldiers in the Pacific and
Asiatic theatres. Schools, too, have been influenced by IPR
publications, especially the 284


series published jointly with the Webster Co. of St. Louis,
designed for a 14-year-old reading level. In three and a half
years this series sold over a million copies.

"Another way in which the [PR influences public opinion is
through the newspapers and periodical press. As the IPR
itself does not tire of saying, no one seems to know anything
about the Far East. The harried editorial writer is
immeasurably pleased, then, when he sees on his desk a neat
publicity release and a copy of an article on some aspect of
Chinese politics which he can now proceed to discuss.

"Like most associations into which the Communists and
fellow travelers have moved, the IPR reveals certain
inconsistencies and pecularities of policy that can be
explained only by the ideological affiliations of its most
important figures.

"Operating more cleverly in IPR than in most groups they
have entered, the Communists and their friends have been
able to keep the reputation of this outfit pretty clean. But
evidence of their work is easily noted when one takes the
IPR material in bulk and breaks it down inte two types—the
controversial and noncontroversial. What has buffaloed most
readers of IPR bocks, pamphlets, and periodicals is that so
much of the stuff is of a very scholarly nature, not at all on
sukjects that arouse the emotions any more readily than do
articles on Chinese pottery. Yet in the last decade or so at
least two out of every three articles in IPR's two journals—
Pacific Affairs, quarterly, and Far Eastern Survey,
biweekly—on such het subjects as Chinese politics, the
Soviet Union, and the general political situation in the Far
East, with respect to those two countries and the United
States, have been written by such staunch defenders of Stalin
as T. A. Bisson, Owen Lattimore, Harriet Moore, Laurence
Salisbury, and others not too numerous to mention in due
time.

"It may be claimed that by selecting excerpts and quoting out
of context any writer can be shown to believe almost
anything. This 1s 285


frequently true. Yet the weight of the evidence that links the
IPR to the Communist line is too great to pass off with such
platitudes. The writings of the fellow travelers and outright
Communists in IPR publications constitute only a small part
of the total IPR material—but they constitute its most vital
part, and they deal with the sutjects that are most significant
for American foreign policy, international relations, and
public education.” The key personnel of the American Council
of the IPR who are represented as giving leadership to the
entire organization, comprised what Louis F. Budenz exposed
as a Communist cell. This cell constituted the backbone of
AMERASIA, which in reality was one of the subsidiary
publications ‘of the IPR. This cell, according to Budenz,
included Frederick Vanderbilt Field who, he stated, was to
his knowledge a "Soviet espionage agent", and Owen
Lattimore, both members of Rockefeller's Council on
Foreign Relations. Lattimore, according to Budenz's
testimony, was
".. commended (at a meeting of the American Politburo)
by Frederick Vanderbilt Field and Earl Browder for the
fact that he had been responsible for placing a number of
Communist writers in the organs of the Institute of Pacific
Relations of which he was then editor.

"In 1937 ... at a meeting called by Earl Browder, it was
brought forward that we were now under instructions not to
name the Chinese Communists as Red Communists, but we
were to begin to represent them, as Browder said, as ‘North
Dakota Non-Par-tTsan Leaguers'’. "Field was present at that
meeting and made a report, at which he commended Mr.
Latti-more's zeal in seeing that Communists were placed as
writers in ‘Pacific Affairs'. Mr. Browder also referred to
that, and it was agreed that Mr. Lattimore should be given
general direction for organizing the writers representing the
Chinese Communists as agrarian reformers... "... at a
regular meeting of the Politburo, at which Mr. Browder was
present (in 1943) it was officially reported that Mr. 286


Lattimore, through Mr. Field, had received word from the
apparatus ‘that there was to be a change of line on Chiang Kal-
shek. "It was decided that the line was to attack Chiang Kal-
shek. Asa matter of fact, an article was discussed to be put in
one of the organs of the Institute of Pacific Relations— and it
did so appear—by T. A. Bisson, declaring that Nationalist
China was feudal China, and that Red China was democratic
China.” Other subversives and fellow travellers identified with
the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis and associated with Lattimore,
Field, Carter, Bisson, all of Rockefeller's Council on Foreign
Relations, include:

Alger Hiss, now in jail (instead of executed) where he
ought to be joined by his sponsors and accomplices,
convicted of petjury in connection with treason; and a
member of Rockefeller's Council on Foreign Relations.

Philip C. Jessup, who was chairman of the Pacific
Council of the IPR in the years 1938-42, when the scheme
was hatched for turning over China and Asia to the Soviets
in accord with the purposes of the Rockefeller-Soviet
Axis; who as Senior Adviser to the Secretary of State and
as Ambassador- at-Large has played a stellar role in
carrying out the conspiracy; and who is a member of
Rockefeller's Council on Foreign Relations.

Lauchlin Currie, who as assistant and adviser to
President Roosevelt, played the important role that has
been recounted, has been named by ex-Communist spy
courier Elizabeth Bentley as one of her sources of
important espionage data; and who is a member of
Rockefellers Council on Foreign Relations, and employed

s "adviser" to the Republic of Colombia.

S philip Jaffe, Lattimore's fellow editor of Amerasia, who
pleaded guilty to charges regarding secret records and was
fined a mere $2500; uncle of the wife of one of China's top
rank Communists, who was Lattimore's IPR confidential
secretary; and himself labelled a Communist agent by
Budenz.

Lt. Andrew Roth, a liaison officer at the 287


State Department from Naval Intelligence, who was
associated with Jaffe in the AMER-ASIA case, but was never
prosecuted therefor. Subsequently he was provided by the
State Department with an American passport and went to Asia
to engage in pro-Communist, anti-American propaganda.

John Stewart Service, pupil of Owen Latti-more, pro-
Communist aid to General Stilwell, who in 1945 was ordered
out by Ambassador Patrick J. Hurley; who on his return was
arrested for complicity in the Amerasia affair anent secret
documents together with Jaffe and Roth, but was never
prosecuted therefor; whe was subsequently assigned to a post
of strategic value to the conspirators, State Department
Foreign Service officer in India, merely to be recalled for a
rehearing of his case, on the basis of charges made by Senator
McCarthy, by the Loyalty Review Board in 1950, cleared by
it once again, but relieved of his pest in 1951 and finally
ousted.

John Carter Vincent, State Department intimate of Dean
Acheson, Lauchlin Currie and Owen Lattimore, who as head
of the Interdepartmental Committee on Japan Policy, played
his part in the conspiracy; who subsequently was appointed
Ambassador to Switzerland but was relieved of his post in
1951 by Truman.

Laurence Duggan who was associated with Alger Hiss and
Sumner Welles in the State Department and then became
Director of the Rockefeller-subsidized propaganda agency, the
Institute of International Education; who died, as have so
many others associated in this conspiracy, in a highly
suspicious plunge from the window of his sixteenth-floor
office, after being questioned about his activities by the House
Un-American Activities Committee; and whe was a member
of Rockefeller's Council on Foreign Relations.

Agnes Smedley, author, who was accused of being a Soviet
spy by General MacArthur's intelligence officers, denied the
charges, but on her recent death in 1950, left her entire fortune
to the Communist Party.

Harry Dexter White, top adviser to 288


Secretary of the Treasury Henry Morgen-thau, who like
Duggan, died mysteriously after being questioned by the
House Un-American Activities Committee.

The report of the Rockefeller Foundation for 1936 makes it
clear that the role of the Institute of Pacific Relations is to
serve as ringleader and master conspirator in Far Eastern
activities for the large group of organizations, schools,
colleges, universities and other institutions subsidized by it for
the avowed purpose of creating a “new Cinternationalist')
social order" and world-wide "managed economy” required,
by the Marx-inspired "social sciences”. It reports a Foundation
grant of $30,000 for the purpose of setting up an AMERICAN
CO-ORDINATING COMMITTEE, the function of which is
to make the conspiracy and propaganda of the IPR a part and
parcel of the activities of the balance of the agencies and
lobbies maintained or supported by Rockefeller "philan-
thropy". The key agencies specified are the following:

Council on Foreign Relations

Social Science Research Council

Foreign Policy Association

American Council of Learned Societies

American Council on Intellectual Cooperation These
organizations all interlock membership and officers with the
IPR and dominate the wide array of Rockefeller controlled,
subsidized or influenced agencies that serve as
"internationalist” fronts. Indeed it would be difficult to say
which had the wider array of fronts, the Rockefellers or the
Soviets. And the difficulty is further enhanced because so
many of beth have been Rockefeller subsidized and con-
tolled. They all serve as [PR "transmission belts", and many
overla

The Institute of Pacific Relations propagandists have
responded to exposure of the subversive character of the
organization by protests alleging that they have cleaned house,
eliminated the acknowledged subversives and changed their
officers. Thus on March 23, 1951, the IPR released to the
press a story that was published in the New York Times of
that date about the election of new trustees. These included
Joseph E. Johnson, president of the Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace; Sidney D. Gamble, president of the
Princeton Yenching

289


Foundation; and J. E. Wallace Sterling, president of Leland
Stanford University. Joseph E. Johnson was Alger Hiss's
assistant and "alter ego" in the State Department.

This statement was obviously issued with tongue in cheek.
For all of them are Rockefeller puppets and members of
Rockefeller's Council on Foreign Relations where they are
indoctrinated by Owen Lattimore, Frederick Vanderbilt Field,
T. A. Bisson, William W. Lockwood and others of the
AMERASIA crew, who still preach the Rockefeller-Soviet-
Axis program, and dominate the IPR and the entire web of
Rockefeller propaganda agencies by remote contrel from the
master agency, the Council. Furthermore two of them, Owen
Lattimore, dignified with the pest of Director of the Johns
Hopkins School of International Relations, and William W.
Lockwood, dignified with the post of Assistant Director of the
Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International
Affairs,—in which posts they have unique opportunities to
implant their subversions and treachery in youngsters who are
in training for State Department and Government posts,—are
still members of the Board of Trustees of the IPR, as can be
seen in the list of trustees published in the March 1950 issue
of NEWS OF THE IPR. There is no public record of either
one of these former editors of the pro-Soviet espionage and
propaganda agency, AMERASIA, and associates of self-
confessed spies and traitors, ever having renounced their
earlier associations and convictions. The moral of the story
seems to be that if you are a good Rockefeller Red you need
fear no harm; but eventually you will be made a top educator
and be given opportunity to subvert rising generations, train
them for betrayal and lure them on to self destruction as
victims of their own treason and mercenaries in Rockefeller
Crusades.


ROCKEFELLER GRANTS TO
THE INSTITUTE OF PACIFIC RELATIONS
Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial


1926 IPR $ 10.000

1927 TPR LLDD
Rockefeller Foundation

1929 TPR Honolulu For general prograrr.. veneeeeeecuneeceseneeeee

IPR Honolulu For research in social sciences.

1930 TPR Honolulu

TPR Honolulu For research in social sciences.

1931 TPR Honolulu For general program  ....... -

PR Honolulu For research in social sciences eeens.


290


932


RRR


933


934


plas eieae char cl
we aad


9361?


wo wo

Lal Lal

-1 TI

ene
EERE


wo
oo
on


wo
oo
p=}


Honolulu For research in social sciences..


R
R Banff Conference cee eee
R American Council General expense


R Chinese & Japanese Seminars, Columbia U ..
Honolulu General expense


American Council


inese Language Serninar, Yale University
R American Council


Experiment in Intensive Teaching of Chinese


Honolulu General Program .


American Council a-
Honolulu For General progran
Honolulu For research in social scieru
American Counci) International telations E]


Honolulu Research, international relations
Russian Languape Serinar, Harvard U ......
Russian Language Seminar, Columbia U..


Honolulu Research, international relations
American Council, General expenses..
Honolulu General expense...
Honolulu, Research, social sciences
American Council ..

jan Language Seminar, “University ‘of Califo
ese Language Seminar, University of Chicago


Honolulu General an


Honolulu, General Expense and Research
nternational Secretariat, Study of Tssues .


American Courecil ~
nternationa] Secretariat
Honolulu


£


E E
bh =
Bd daaa


$
3


£ £


E E
-A
T NCR aclecl


$


949


thoug


Translation of Chinese ‘Source Material -.
American Council


American Council
American Council ..
Arnerican Section .
Translation of Chinese Source Material -.
American Council


American Council


American Council


R Translation of Ch
American Council


American Council


General Budget .
960 TPR American Council General expenses


titertiational Secretariat
Honolul, General expense.


nternational Secretariat. Study
Honolulu, General expense and Research


nternational] Secret
Horglulu


Honolulu .......
nternational Secretariat
Honolulu ...
Honolulu


Honolulu


Honolulu --.-.-.


Honolulu


Honolulu General expenses...


Hho hs heh Go hh


ho i Th BO ae ae bha— hog


aa


ps
a AI AN Si A D BLA SALA AS ADD AG aD a


e ht


STADS TAN D D


TITT T A TT TT HT oN ee ee eee


ba
~4


La
=


La
=


SSS SSS SS SAS
“ «=:


~400
=


fa
oo


Total $2, 167,433.88

It is quite fitting that General George Catlett Marshall,
Secretary of Defense, should be a member of the Board of
Trustees of the subversive Institute of Pacific Relations even


h he has not made the grade of the Empire's top policy-


making organization, the Council on Foreign Relations. For
without the support of its bosses Marshall would never have
obtained his promotion; and without his blind execution of
their treacherous orders, they never could have fulfilled the


Rockefe


Iler-Soviet
291


Axis's agreement to deliver China to the Soviets.

The story of Marshall's promotion is well told by Walter
Trohan in the March, 1951, issue of the AMERICAN
MERCURY magazine.

"After the war Pershing made Marshall his aide-de-camp

while Pershing was Chief of Staff.

"Up to the early thirties Marshall's career was one of slow
but steady progress ... Pershing, a retired but influential
old dog of war had promised te have him made a brigadier
general. But here Marshall met his first failure.

"True to his promise, Pershing called upon Douglas
MacArthur, then Chief of Staff, and asked that his protege
be made a general. MacArthur was ready to oblige, but
insisted that the promotion go through regular channels.
Pershing agreed, confident Marshall could clear the
hurdles. Friendly examination of the Marshall record
showed what his superiors regarded as insufficient time
with troops. MacArthur proposed to remedy this by giving
him command of the Eighth Regiment at Fort Screven,
Ga., one of the finest regiments in the Army.

"Marshall was moved up from leutenant-colonel to colonel,
but his way to a general's stars appeared to be blocked
forever when the Inspector General reported that under
one year of Marshall's command the Eighth Regiment had
dropped from one of the best regiments in the Army to one
of the worst. MacArthur regretfully informed Pershing that
the report made promotion impossible. Te this day
Marshall is uneasy in the presence of MacArthur.

"In 1936, after MacArthur had been succeeded by General
Marlin Craig, Pershing tried again. But this time, knowing
that the Army would never make Marshall a general, Per-
shing went directly to the White House. He persuaded
Roosevelt to promote Marshall; and three years later when
Roosevelt was looking for an agreeable Chief of Staff, he
chose Marshall over twenty senior major generals and
fourteen senior brigadiers.

"Marshall is, therefore, a ‘political general’..." 292


Marshall served as a pliant tool of the conspirators in
engineering the betrayal of our country into involvement in
World War II without a declaration of war by Congress, and
in the tragedy of Pearl Harbor. He has acknowledged that he
deliberately withheld from the commanders at Pearl Harbor
intelligence, that was available well in advance, of Japan's
plans to attack it, and that he had ordered them to alert only
for sabotage. In other words, Marshall has confessed to
sabotage of the defenses of the nation in time of war. Men
have been executed as traitors for lesser offenses and dere-
lictions. Twenty-five hundred men and a fleet were sacrificed
in the Pearl Harbor deal. The role played by the crew of the
Institute of Pacific Relations in this has yet to be revealed in
its entirety.

Strange indeed was the tale that Marshall told Congress of
not knowing where he was on the eve of the attack on Pearl
Harbor, at a time when he knew that the nation was in grave
danger. But this defection obvicusly suited the purpeses of the
conspirators.

In 1943, it is reported, he was more anxious to arm Russia
than to equip cur own troops. At Teheran he agreed to the
sell-out to the Communists of Poland and Czechoslovakia. He
agreed to giving Russia control of the country to the west of
Berlin and marooning American forces in that city in a
strategically untenable position, with their supply lines
running through territory held by the Communists. This act
runs counter to all dictates of intelligence, aside from
considerations of elementary military tactics. It virtually has
placed American troops in a position where they can be held
as hostages by the Communists, a situation that can be created
as readily by the Russians as was the Berlin Blockade,
whenever they are ready to cut loose. No paid Russian agent
or avowed traitor could have rendered greater aid to the
Soviet forces.

At Yalta Marshall collaborated with Alger Hiss in
delivering Asia to the Communists after Japan was about
ready to surrender. Despite the refusal of the Soviets to aid
our forces in the Pacific, Marshall's anxiety to “cooperate
with the Russians" was so intense that he approved of giving
to Russia every strategic point, including Manchuria, Port
Arthur, Darien, the Kurile Islands and southern Sakhalin.
Following the close of the yar. in Decem-


ber 1945, Marshall was sent to China by the agents of the
Rockefeller-Soviet Axis in the State Department with
instructions drawn up by Jehn Carter Vincent and Dean
Acheson, to compel the Chinese Nationalists to yield to the
Communists, whom they had on the run and were defeating
badly. In spite of the warning of Col. Ivan D. Yeaton, who
was assigned to the Communist headquarters at Yenan, that
the Chinese Communists were collaborating with the Kremlin
and controlled by it, Marshall forced upon the Nationalists a
truce, under the threat of withholding American aid. He
compelled Chiang Kai-shek to cut his forces down to fifty
divisions.

To get around Congress's refusal to accept the program for
arming the Chinese Communist Army by "lend lease",
proposed by Dean Acheson, Marshall served as recruiting
agent for the Red Army and ordered the transfer of Nationalist
troops to the Communist forces so that they could be paid and
fed with funds appropriated by Congress for the support of the
Nationalist Army. He also promoted "an agreement... under
which American officers would be training and equipping
rebel Chinese Communists units at the very time they were
ambushing our marines and when Communists the world over
were waging a war of nerves upon the United States . . .”
(C.R. March 30, 1950, p. 4438).

Marshall dictated the prolongation of the Nationalist-
Communist truce, that he had ordered, for a period of fourteen
months, giving the Communists a chance to reorganize their
Army with U.S. funds and supplies. Then Marshall compelled
Chiang to allow a force of 500,000 Communists to move
through the impregnable Kalgan Pass to approach Pekin; and
repeated the treachery to permit the approach of the
Communist Armies to Hankow.

In the meantime, the Soviet agents in the State and
Commerce Departments withheld delivery of military supplies
and equipment assigned to the Nationalists. The dumping of
the Army surplus intended for the Nationalists into the Indian
Ocean at the order of Lauchlin Currie, assistant to President
Roosevelt, member of Rockefeller's Council on Foreign
Relations and the IPR, and named by Elizabeth Bentley as a
feeder of Communist spy channels, who is now carrying on in
the Republic of

294


Colombia (N.Y. Times, April 9, 1951} as an “adviser,” has
been mentioned. The supply to the Communists of essential
war materiel has flowed continuously through such devices as
"lend-lease", UNRRA, the Marshall Plan, the Atlantic Pact
and the Point IV program. The situation parallels the arming
of the Germans and the Japs prior to World War II, by the
same principals.

As a reward for delivering China to the Communists, that
has proved so costly and disastrous for the U.S., Marshall was
promoted to the post of Secretary of State; for he served the
Rockefeller-Soviet Axis well. His first official act was to
appoint his masters' agent, who had previously directed his
treacherous mission to China, Dean Acheson, his chief of staff
with “complete authority to cleanse the Department",
presumably of non-Communists.

Marshall sent General Albert C. Wedemeyer to China to
report on the situation in 1947. Wedemeyer courageously
reported the truth and urged blocking the advance of
Communism in China. This report was not to the satisfaction
of Marshall and the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis. It was
suppressed and Wedemeyer shelved.

The so-called "Marshall" Plan was written by Rockefeller
Reds, promoted and propagandized by Rockefeller's Council
on Foreign Relations and its subsidiary agencies, and actively
pushed in Congress by the Rockefellers personally. It was
another tap on the U.S. Treasury and a device for looting the
American people for the benefit of the Rockefeller Empire
and its allies, on the pretense of aid to Europe, while at the
same time leading the nation further on the road to bankruptcy
and dictatorship. Marshall who was a mere pawn, as usual,
knew little of its nature.

It is in connection with the Korean affair that Marshall has
rendered the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis a most signal service
that has brought the plottings and plannings of the Institute of
Pacific Relations to its most advanced state of fruition. The
conviction of Alger Hiss, attacks on Acheson and other pro-
Communists in the government and insistent demands for the
reopening of the AMERASIA case and the consequences it
involved, had created a very real "emergency" for the
conspirators that threatened their entire program. Resentment
also ran high

295


throughout the country at the delivery of China to the Reds by
the State Department. Elections were in the offing. It was
imperative that, in the words of John Foster Dulles, the
American public be kept “artificially alarmed", if the scheme
to attain dictatorship through looting by taxation, bankruptcy,
defeat and confusion of the nation was to succeed, —and at
the same time the deals with the Kremlin carried out. Korea
served the purpose. Marshall furthered the scheme by
advising Truman to send troops to Korea.

To promote their plot, Marshall was appointed Secretary of
Defense. A more incongruous appointment could not be
conceived; but so completely 1s the public duped that it met
with little public protest or indignation. Marshall's first act
was to rush to regiment the nation, under the cover of this
emergency deliberately created for the purpose, into a military
dictatorship, in the pattern of the Hopley plan. Anna
Rosenberg, Rockefeller employed and subsidized “labor
relations counsellor” and agent, with a record of appointment
to the NRA dictatorship plot by self-confessed Communist
agent and CIO attorney, Lee Pressman, was appointed by
Marshall to the great delight of all subversives and
Communists, to head the new totalitarian drive. When her
appointment. came under attack Nelson Rockefeller offered to
appear in person before the Senate committee considering the
appointment, on behalf of his minion.

The Institute of Pacific Relations can boast with even more
justification than can any of the units that comprise the vast
spiderweb of Rockefeller-Soviet intrigue, even the Council on
Foreign Relations, that the present sad plight of our country is
what it is, because "they planned it that way.” For though the
CFR planned and directed the intrigues and betrayals, the IPR
executed them. It played a stellar role in making a success of
Japan's rearmament and its attack on Pearl Harbor. At the cost
of a quarter of million casualties and hundreds of billions of
dollars to our country it insured to its masters control of
Eurasia. And the fulfilment of Lenin's plans, they speeded up
by infiltrating our Government and effected them through the
agency of our State Department and the traitorous activities of
their agents.

Wherever the Institute of Pacific Relations has 296


turned its activities in the Orient it has stirred up unrest and

subversion, and has paved the way for Soviet intrigue. In

Mongolia, ‘China, Philippines, Indonesia, Burma, India, Indo-

China, Thailand, Pakistan, Tibet and Iran, the story has been

monotonously the same. Owen Lattimore's Joint U.N.-IPR

mission to Afghanistan likewise ferbedes its betrayal to the

Soviets as did his traffic with Tibet. The Institute paces the

schedule of the Soviets in the Far East, adopted by the Asiatic

Com-minform of May 1949, which is as follows:

1. Conquer China, Hainan and Formosa.

. Infiltrate and conquer Indochina and Burma.

. Infiltration and riots in India, Pakistan and Philippines.

. Infiltration and riots in Japan with the eventual purpose
of taking Japan out of the American sphere, for which
the way was being prepared by Dulles’ peace parley with
Japan and the suggested withdrawal of American troops,
and by MacArthur's dismissal.

5. Win over Afghanistan. Owen Lattimore, who has
expressed himself as being entirely in sympathy with the
Soviet plans for Afghanistan was nevertheless
recommended to the United Nations by the State
Department for a joint mission with the IPR for working
out the program of Rockefeller's Point IV program in
Afghanistan. Apparently the plan, as usual, is to make
Afghanistan a richer plum for the Soviets.

6. Infiltration and nots in Iran with the objective of taking
it over with its oil. To facilitate this, pro-Soeviet
Ministers were to be appointed.

Due to its sponsors' control of our Government and State
Department, the IPR has been completely successful in
fulfilling their agreements and delivering over to the Soviets,
China and much of Asia.

The Institute of Pacific Relations and its allied web of
Rockefeller subsidized organizations are merely agencies of a
vast conspiracy. The agencies could not have continued to
exist and to carry on their work without the subsidy of the
Rockefellers and their fake "philanthropes". In most cases
they could not have come into existence without their
financial suppert and cooperation. The Rockefellers cannot
plead ignorance of the traitorous activities of these
organizations that they have so lavishly

297


La bo


supported. For it is spread all over the public records where
anyone whe has an iota of intelligence can not fail to
recognize it. Any plea of lack of control over the agencies
which they established and financed is obviously sham. For
there is nothing in their charter or in the law which bars them
from stepping in and taking ever control of them. The sham is
further confirmed by the personal and active participation in
those activities by the Rockefellers themselves and the record
of their sympathy with the subversive causes in question.

It is equally a sham to pretend to investigate and expose
these traitorous organizations and their agents but to omit any
mention of the principals and the financiers who make
possible their existence and activities with financial, political
and moral support ; to imprison or execute traitors and spies
who were propagandized, groomed and trained for their
treason in the schools, colleges and universities; and to permit
te roam at large as honored citizens the arch-conspiraters and
masterminds who subverted the educational system of the
land and of the world, and used as pawns, the deluded fools
and venal traitors spawned thereby; or to pillory and oc-
casionally imprison gamblers and fixers in so-called sports for
the manipulation of fixes that involve only the money of those
who voluntarily choose to gamble while holding in high honor
the criminal master conspirators who gamble in an atrociously
fixed game with the lives and fortunes of other people and
jeopardize the very existence of the the nation.

Unless these conspiraters are rapidly and relentlessly
exposed and apprehended and prosecuted to the full extent of
the laws on treason, and their traitorous conspiracy scotched,
this country is faced with extinction, and it and the world are
doomed toe unteld centuries of serfdom.


298


AMERICA N COUN CTL INSTITUTE OF PACTFIC RELATIONS NATIONAL
PEICERS AND TRUSTEES At the Annual Meetng of Mernbers held on February 21,


. OFFICERS
Chairman, —Cerard Swape Treasurer — Donald B. Straus
Vice-Chairrmnen — Walter F. Dillingharn Executive Gecretary— Clay Lare
Richard E. Fuller Assistant Secretary—Katrine R. C.


Greene Robert Gordon Sproul l
BOARD OF TRUSTE


Edward W. Allen —Attorrey: Allen, Froude, ESilen & DeGarmo, Seattle.
l*Rayriend B. Allen —President, University of Washington, Seattle.

. Ballard Atherton —Vice-President, Mutual Telephone Company, Honolulu.
| Joseph W. Ballantine —The Brookings Institution, Washington, D pe

night Bingerstatf —Chairmar, Department of Far Eastern Studies, Cornell U.
+ Borton —East Asian Institute, Columbia University, New York.
Stuart P. Brock —Departinent of Research and Education, Congress of Tndus-


_ trial Orpen i7atiors, Washinton. DC.
H. Clifford Brown —Vice-President, Chicago Bridge & Iron Co. New York.

* Lincoln ©. Brownell —Assistant to the President, American Bank Note Company,
George T. Carerori — Publisher, San Francisco Greg icle.

*Fdward C Carter —Provost, New School for Social Research, New York.
oseph P. Gharnberlain — Professor of Public Law, Columbia University, New York.


Dwight L. Clarke —President, Occidental Life Trsurance Company of California,
Chas. F. Glise —President, Washington Securities Company, Seattle.
Arthur G. Coons —President, Occidental College, Log Angeles


George B. Cressey Chairman, Dept. of Gogia, Syracuse University.
*Walter F. Dillingham —President, Oahu kailway_& Land Company, Honolulu,

Brooks Etmerry President, Foreign Policy Association, New York.
Rupert Emerson Professor of Government, Harvard University.

John K. Fairbank sor of History, Harvard University.

G. W. Fisher Executive. Vice-President, Bishop Trust Company, td.,
Richard È. Fuller Director, Seattle Art Wuseurn. `

*Hollis Powers Galo facturer, formerly in banking; during World War TT,
director, American Red Cros


th China: also UNRR

China and_ Office of Strate rvices.

L2thatles K K. Gamble irector, Standard-Vacuurn H] Company, New York.
Martha A. Gerbode


Trustee, World Affairs Council Northern California,


LLL
F.
e
a
3


$|
km
5
E


zn

un
=

ae


L. Carrington Goodrich —Departrrenit of Chinese and Japanese, Cs Columbia University.
ohu P. Herber — President, Jotin P. Herber Company y, Seattle.

. Hero President, Tnternatiqnal General E ecttic compan Nar York.
ohn R. Hersey Author: "Bell for Adano" "Hiroshima"; "


Secretary General. Tnstitute of Pacific Relations.

Professor of Sociology. Yale le University. New Haver.
Attorney: Graves, Kizer & Graves, Spokane.

Wice- “resident, Levi Sras & Ca San Francisco.
Executive Secretary, American TPR, New York.

President, Atnerican Hawaiian Steamship Company.
Director, Walter Hines Page School of Trtertiatioral Rela-
tons, Johns Hopkins niversity, Baltimore.

Herber: $. Little —Attorney: Little, Leader, LeSourd & Palmer, Seattle.
\#Wiliam W. Lockwood —Agsistant Director, Woodrow Wilson School of Public and
titernational Affairs, Princeton Universi


Wiliam L, Holland
Raymond Kennedy
Ber jamin H. Kizer
Daniel E. Koshland
Clayton Lane
*Lewis A. Lapharr
| Owen Lattimore


Charles F. Loornis —Secretary, Hawaii Group, American TPR.
2*. B. Marshall —Dhirector, India Section, Standard-Vacuurr Oi] Co., New York.
George C Marshall — Former Secretary of State, Chairman, National Red Cross.
. Secretary of Defense.
arles E. Martin —Professor of Political Science, University of
ash ity .
Frank E. Midkiff —Trustee: Bernice P. Bishop Est Estate, Karnehameha Schools and
Punatiqu School anolulu.
. Morden Murphy —Assistant Vice President and Chief, Far Eastern Section,
Batikers Trust Compan ork.
Emmet O'Neal Attorney, Washinaton. mA ere S. Ambassador
He Fi pines
Henry F. Shoemaker —Vice President At penes Barclay & Company, Seattle
ames H. Shoemaker —Vice President, Bank of Hawaii, Honolulu.
Grese M. Sinclair — President, University of Hawaii Honolulu.
Robert Gordon Sproul —President, University of California, Berkeley.
Donald B. Straus -Manas ement: Employee Relations, Ine, New York
* Gerard Swope —Former President, eneral, Electric Company.
Chairman, Arnericari TP
| George E. Taylor —Director, Far Eastern Instimte, University of Washinton.
*Donald G. Tewksbury — Professor of Gor reparative Educatign. Teachers College,
Columbia University, New York.
| Sumner Welles —Writer and Cornmentator, Former Under Secretary of State.
Brayton Wilbur —President, Wilbur-Ellis Company. San Francisco.
Herbert J. Wood — Professor of History, State College of Wash ington, Pullman.
Heaton L. Wrenn —Attorney, Anderson, Wrenn & Jenks, Honolulu.
guise L. Wri — Director, Chicago Council on Foreign Relations.


Member, Eh ative Çornrrittee, American T.P.R.
i Member Council on Foreign Relations 2 Standard Oil Co.


299


CHAPTER XVI
ROCKEFELLER AND RELIGION


Federal (alias National) Council of Churches of Christ in America
(alias, U.S.A.) "The Christian Church. What of its future? It would be the
Church of the living God—John D. Rockefeller


The role of religion in clothing the ruthless activities of
John D. with sanctity and enhancing his reputation as a
worthy citizen, anteceded that of "philanthropy" by several
decades. For mous hypocrites a religious pose was in America
of the latter part of the 19th century as important a business
asset as is now a Dun and Bradstreet rating. The pose of "a
God-fearing man" bolstered credit and repute. In addition,
churches were in those days almost the only social
organizations in the primitive communities, and rare
diversions in an otherwise drab, hand-to-mouth existence.
Church-going afforded these whe sought them social and
business contacts that were enhanced by active participation in
church affairs. Nevins, in his biography of Rockefeller
reports:

". still another preoccupation was religion. Cleveland
was a highly religious community, full of churches .. .
Evangelistic emotion pervaded the public schools of
Cleveland. Prayer meetings were frequently held in the
schoolroom after hours and were led by ministers and
teachers ... "Perhaps John D. Rockefeller had his share in
some such wave of revivalism. At any rate, he and Will
continued the steady churchgoing which they had begun in
Owego, becoming regular attendants at the Erie Street
Baptist Church. "And vigorously did John give himself to
its work... John was publicly baptized in the fall of 1854
... "Not long after John was made clerk of the church, an
unusual responsibility for a mere youth, and indicative of
the impression of maturity and responsibility that he gave
to others. Before many years passed he was teaching one
of the largest classes in the Sunday school.” (JDR, v. 1.,
pp. 88-89)

"As a bright high-school graduate, a faithful 300


attendant, a most staid and responsible young man, John soon
took a prominent part in all church activities. He threw
himself into them with characteristic single-mindedness. As
we have said, the church offered this unemotional youth an
outlet... while it also offered his mother, brothers and sisters
the best part of what social life they enjoyed. "Indeed it is
difficult now for many Americans to realize how important a
social institution the church—with its two Sunday services,
its midweek service, its suppers, men's societies, sewing
clubs—then was in most towns of thirty thousand.” (id. p.
119) However, as Nevins relates, despite the devotion, the
tithes-giving and the intense church activity, John D.'s
character cleaved sharply into the temporal and the spiritual;
and he did not permit the charity of the latter to spill over into
the former, a characteristic that distinguishes the family. It 1s
probably erroneous to assume that his religiosity played any
role in his "philanthropic" activities, which were largely
business ventures profitably engaged in for the specific
purpose of redeeming an evil reputation acquired in spite of
religious pose. John D. Rockefeller Jr. followed in his father's
footsteps in the field of religion. He likewise taught Sunday
school to the accompaniment of considerable publicity. But
he came under the influence of the school of “higher
criticism” of the Bible at Brown University and veered
away from the Fundamentalist faith of his father. About
1919 he shifted "in religious attitude toward the 'new' or
‘liberal’ theology which pragmatically decried fundamentalism
and sectarianism in Protestantism. Fundamentalist
ministers such as John Reach Stratton accused him of seeking
to standardize education and religion through GERMAN
RATIONALIZATION". (Your Life Is Their Toy, Chedney
Press, 1940, pp. 75-76} Stratton was shrewd and discerning,
and perceived the influence of Bismarck's Germany, and of
the Marxism which he fostered, as a dominant factor in John
D. Rockefeller Jr.'s thinking and action. John D. Jr. had come
under the influence of the made-in-Germany "social sciences,”
and became a powerful factor in swinging both churches and
community to the left, both through subsidy of lay and
religious education, and throu gh grants to


political organizations and movements.

It is notable that with the exception of grants to mission
colleges, more particularly in China, and a hundred thousand
dollar grant to Riverside Church in N. Y. C. Rockefeller
Foundation made ne grants for religious purposes until 1947.
This contrasts sharply with the steady flow of large sums into
the subsidy of the Marxist "social sciences" and "inter-
nationalism". Indeed all grants given since 1947 have been
either for the support of “higher criticism of the Bible," or for
the promotion of "internationalism" and the "social sciences"
in church circles. They are reported in the Rockefeller Foun-
dation annual Reviews as follows:

Rockefeller Foundation Appropriations For
Church Affairs

1947 Commission of the Churches on International Affairs,
New York. Expenses of preparing for holding
international conferences, $15,000

1948 Federal Council of the Churches of Christ in America.
Program of its Department of Church and Economic
Life, $100,000

1949 Society of Biblical Literature and Exegesis,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Expenses involved in
organizing a cooperative Critical Apparatus of the New
Testament, $12,500

The Federal Council of Churches of Christ in America has
been used most regularly by the Rockefellers personally to
further their interests in church circles. John Foster Dulles,
their kinsman and Number | agent, for many years has
dominated the Council, as is attested in the resolution adopted
by the Executive Committee on September 20, 1949.

The same FCCCA report lists a grant of $30,000 from the
Rockefeller Foundation “for the Study Project of the
Department of the Church and Economic Life"; a $500 grant
from the Rockefeller Brothers Fund Inc. for general purposes
and another $500 for "International JUSTICE AND GOOD
WILL-COMMITTEE ON POLICY"; and a $500 grant from
the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai Brith "for general
purposes”.

The extent of personal activity of the Rockefellers in the
FCCCA is out of proportion to their meagre personal financial
contribution. For many years ne conference or meeting of the
Council was complete without an address by Dulles or one of
the Rockefellers. In one such address before the Protestant


Council, New York City, on January 31, 1935, John D. Jr.
suggested that the future of the Christian Church is the
Buddhist and Roman concept of "the Church of the Living
God", with an intimation that he would make a good god.

But few of the matters advocated by the Rockefellers in the
Federal Council were of the religious category. Most of them
have been political and characterized by efforts to shield with
a cloak of sanctimony, and to convert to holy causes and "Cru-
sades” current political and commercial ventures extending
the realm of the Rockefeller Empire; or to further the interests
of the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis. Thus under the Rockefeller-
Dulles domination, the FCCCA slavishly endorsed their New
Deal, their World Wars I and II Crusades, higher taxes, their
United Nations, their UNRRA, their Marshall Plan, the use of
the atom bomb, the support cf the Korean War, and their
program of appeasement of Soviet Russia. Dulles has openly
advocated submission to Russia and bowing to Stalin's
dictates in addresses to the Council's meetings and to the
Rockefeller Foundation subsidized International Church
Conferences.

Most recently, on April 25, 1951, Nelson A Rockefeller
addressed the Buck Hills Falls conference of the Council, as
chairman of the International Development Advisory Board,
in support of the Rockefeller Empire's latest scheme for
looting the American taxpayer and the U.S. Treasury for its
commercial and political interests, the Point 4 Program. He
presented this commercial device as a "Crusade," an attack
"on the global scourges of hunger and disease".

"Hunger poverty, disease and ignorance", he said,

"constitute a far more lasting threat than the aggression of
Soviet imperialism.”

The Council adopted a resolution advocating the program.

The Rockefeller Empire is an old hand at using religion and
missions in promoting its commercial interests. It was highly
successful in so doing, for instance, in China. Religion 1s
merely another, but very powerful, propaganda device that can
be used to delude the "peasants" and to profit themselves.

It really matters not what is the religion, provided that it has
a sufficient following. At a special thanksgiving convocation
of the Jewish Theological

303


Seminary, on October 21, 1950, Nelson Rockefeller, Attorney
General J. Howard McGrath and Roger W. Straus, co-
chairmen of the National Conference of Christians and Jews,
received honorary Doctor of Laws degrees. Rockefeller
called on religious and educational leaders to supply the
moral urge for the peace drive and to support the UN. (N. Y.
Times, Nov. 22, 1950)
Like Rockefeller's Institute of Pacific Relations and most
other Rockefeller dominated organizations Rockefeller's
Federal Council of Churches of Christ in America has been
branded repeatedly by government agencies, subversive and a
Communist front. Thus the Intelligence Department of the
U.S. Navy reported on April 1, 1935, as follows: "From a
comprehensive survey of Communist activities in the United
States at the present time, a classification of organizations
active for the Communist cause is as follows: "C,
Organizations which while not openly advocating the ‘force
and violence’ principles of the Communists give aid and
comfort to the Communist movement and party. Among the
strongest of these are: . . . " {b} The Federal Council of
Churches of Christ in America: This is a large radical, pacifist
organization. It probably represents 20,000,000 Protestants
in the United States. However, its leadership consists of a
small radical group which dictates its policies. It is always
very active in any matter against national defense.” (C. R.,
Aug. 17, 1935, p. 13053) At about the same time the
following sworn testimony was given before the Dies
Committee: "The radical affiliation of the Federal Council of
Churches of Christ is a subject of extensive discussion.
Apparently, in lieu of primarily promoting Christianity among
its several members it more represents a huge political
machine and appears to meddle in radical politics. Its direc-
torate indicates that it interlocks with many of the most radical
organizations”. How mild and charitable this testimony was, is
indicated by the appended chart of officers and leaders of the
Council, and the following quotations from publications and
literature.

The views expressed and published by many of the past
presidents of the Council have been far


to the Left. Thus Rev. Albert W. Beaven, in 1933, signed with
44 others the letter of the National Religion and Labor
Foundation to President Roosevelt urging him to socialize
America. It read: "We hold that there can be no recovery so
long as the nation depends on palliative legislation inside the
capitalistic system". He also sponsored the Emergency Peace
Campaign.

Dr. Ivan Lee Holt, in 1936, earned the commendation of the
official Communist paper, the Daily Worker, in the following
terms: (Daily Worker, Jan. 7, 1936, Memphis headline} "The
Methodist Young People's Conference, with 5000 delegates in
attendance, took a sharp turn to the Left in its closing
sessions. The Seviet Union was highly praised by Ivan Lee
Holt, president of the Federal Council of Churches of Christ
in America. "Dr. Kirby Page, noted fighter for peace, told the
convention that young people should resist the compulsory
Reserve Officers Training Corps— even if it means expulsion
from college. "Dr. Holt defended the Soviet Union from
attack. He declared that the aim of the dictatorship of the
proletariat in Russia was the establishment of a better life.
The Russian government does not purport to do this through
exploiting someone else, but through raising the general level
of all. Itis difficult to find youth anywhere in this world more
devoted to the cause of Christ than you'll find in Russia
devoted to ‘Stalin and his new social order’.

"He warned the older generation that 'amongst

most of the youth of the world today there is a
desire for a change, many preferring revolution.
Youth is willing to die for a new order. We
adults have made our mistakes. We have given
youth a broken-down machine and no tools."

In many official pronouncements, the Federal
Council has attacked free enterprise, capitalism and
the American way of life, and has baldly advocated
Socialism.

A large number of the clergy affilated with the Federal
Council constantly preach that Communism is an advanced
form of democracy; that it is the desirable next step in the
forward progress of our society; that Communism and
Socialism are the "new social order" and express more nearly

305


than capitalism the true brotherhood of man; that they bring us
closer to the realization of the ideals expressed by Christ in the
Sermon on the Mount; that Russia is the land where all social
and economic problems have been solved, where inequality,
poverty and want have been abolished.

While seme affiliated with the Federal Council are
undoubtedly members of the Communist Party, most of those
who have been actively aiding and abetting Socialism and
Communism are fellow travelers rather than actual members
of the party.

However, it must be remembered that fellow travelers are
more dangerous to America than outright Communists. It is
generally they who lend an air of respectability to the vicious,
debased movement that is Communism, and it is they who
bring into Communist fronts the innecents and dupes witheut
whose aid, encouragement and financial support the front
could not exist. It has been well said that a fellow traveler is a
Communist without courage—one who believes in the
principles of Marxism but lacks the intestinal fortitude
publicly to join the party.

Under our code of laws one who aids and abets a criminal
is just as guilty as the one who commits an overt crime. Any
one, be he minister or layman, who knowingly aids and abets
the God- hating enemies of America and Christianity is just as
guilty and just as un-American as a Communist.

The following are representative views expressed by
FCCCA leaders:

"Is it not probable that the greatest event of the 20th
Century thus far is the Soviet Revolution and all it has meant
to human welfare?” (Prof. Jerome Davis, long-time member
of the Federal Council inner circle. }

"When the Western world was floundering in an unjust and
competitive order... God reached out and put his hand on the
Russian Communists to produce a juster order and to show a
recumbent church what it has missed in its own gospel.” (E.
Stanley Jones, Federal Council-spensored preacher and
speaker. }

"The Christian religion is not a suitable religion for today.”
(Eduard C. Lindeman, Federal Council Commission on
Research, and editor 1939 and 1940. }

"The Soviet Union is progressing and growing up
economically and politically since the time of the


Czars, while capitalist society is starving and going down."
(Harry F. Ward, broadcast May 21, 1946.)

"Denominationally, I am a Presbyterian; religiously a
Unitarian; and politically, I'm a Communist. I'm not preaching
to make people good or anything of the sort. I'm in the church
because I can reach people easier that way and get them or-
ganized for Communism." (Rev. Claude C. Williams, a
confessed Communist Party member, Director of People's
Institute of Applied Religion, and intimate of prominent
Federal Council personalities. }

Rev. Harry F. Ward is an outstanding exception among the
ministry of the FCCCA. He has the full courage of his
convictions. He has been a steady contributor to the columns
of the official newspaper of the Communist Party in the U.S.,
the Daily Worker, and has hewed close to the Party line, and
has been claimed by them as one of their own crew. In his
position of Professor of Christian Ethics of the Union
Theological Seminary, New York, he was in a position to
subvert several generations of the American ministry with his
pro-Seviet teachings.

A sample of the "religion" of the minister of the gospel who
accepts Marxism as his creed, is Thomas A. Bisson cited by
Sen. Joseph McCarthy (CR. 3/30/51, p. 4454) as follows:

"He writes to the head of a Protestant missionary council
advising against giving aid in... ‘rehabilitating the Red-
ravaged districts'."

"In a postscript he wrote, 'I would strongly advise every
prospective missionary to China to read Chinese Destinies
by Agnes Smedley' (notorious Communist agent and
spy a”

So notorious have the Communist activities of the Federal
Council of Churches of Christ in America become that the
organization and its membership found mistrust rendered their
propaganda ineffective. Following the habit of the
Communists, who adopt aliases and change the names of their
organizations when they are exposed, on November 28, 1950,
the FCCCA changed its name to the National Council of
Churches of Christ in the U.S.A. and issued a false statement
to the effect that a hew-organization had been formed.
Unfortunately, it is a case of "a rose by any other name."

The $100,000 grant made by the Rockefeller Foundation to
the FCCCA for its Department of Church and Economic
Life, coupled with the previous

307


$15,000 grant for international church conferences, were
designed to carry the churches invelved even further into
politics and to the Left. Under the tutelage of Nelson
Rockefeller and John Foster Dulles it has served that purpose.
This is made clear by the press release of The American
Council of Christian Churches—an organization of
Protestant churches that seeks "to offset the modernist social-
ist influence of the FCCCA", headed by Rev. William Harllee
Bordeaux—on the second conference on the Church and
Economic Life held, with Rockefeller financial support, at
Detroit in the spring of 1950. It read as follows: "Radicals
among churchmen and labor leaders had their way at the
second conference on the Church and Economic Life
sponsored recently in Detroit by the Federal Council of the
Churches of Christ in America. Conservatives, who con-
stituted a very small minority among the 460 delegates
attending, battled against the powerful drive of those who
would take us closer and closer toward a "Welfare State’, but
after four days of futile struggle they akjectly surrendered—
without even bringing in a minority report. "Economic
proposals which came out of the study section were approved
in plenary session by a vote of 202 to 15. Few voted against
Welfare State proposals as: l. Federal aid to public
education everywhere in the U.S. 2. Secialized medicine. 3.
An increase in Social Security payments. 4. Tax regulation as
a major measure to achieve equitable division of income.
Strong sympathy was shown for Cooperatives, and it was
further approved: ‘We also suggest the study of such
government cooperatives as TVA, as one method of
utilization of our national resources'."

The FCCCA presents the usual pattern that prevails
wherever Rockefeller influence gains predominance, 1.e.
interlocking with the Foreign Office of the Rockefeller
Empire—the Council on Foreign Relations. Only three of
their number are dignified with membership in that top
agency. They are:

Rev. Reinhold Niebuhr, Professor of Applied Christianity

and Dean of the Union Theological Seminary; and editor of

the periodicals Christianity And Society and Christianity

And Crisis. Rev. Henry P. Van Dusen, Professor of

System-308


atic Theology and President of Union Theological

Seminary, of Associated Board of Christian Colleges in

China, of American Association of Theological Schools

and of Union Settlement Association, chairman, Study

Committee of World Council of Churches; Trustee,

Princeton University, Ginling College, Nanking Theologic

Seminary, Yenching University, Milbrock School, Smith

College, Little School; director, United China Relief,

Freedom House, Council For Democracy and many others

of the same brand.

Rev. Walter Van Kirk, Federal Council Secretary, radio

commentator on Religion and the News, consultant to
American Delegation to United Nations Conference, San
Francisco. Though Rockefellers’ religious activities have been
largely or exclusively in the field of fostering in religious
circles the very Marxist and Communist causes that aim to
destroy religion, they are nevertheless regarded as "good
Christians". This reputation for religiosity which they have
intensively fostered, has served to shield them completely
from exposure and condemnation for their anti- religious work
in fostering Communism and for their other malodorous
activities. This has happened despite the fact that they have
made no effort to hide their support and sponsorship of
subversive agencies and their complete aversion to patriotic,
nationalist activities, as contrasted with their wholehearted en-
dorsement of “internationalism”. Thus Elizabeth Dilling
peinted out the Rockefeller Red activities in the 30's in her
books, The Red Network and Roosevelt Red Record and Its
Background. In the latter volume she reported:
"Because of its sinister activities and close connections with
the Roosevelt regime, the Sccialist-Communist League for
Industrial Democracy, of which the Worker's Alliance is a
section, is of interest... "The L.LD. National Advisory
Council on Radio and Education is financed according to the
current report of the Council by John D. Rockefeller Jr. and
by the Carnegie Foundation." (pp. 21-22} But her attitude
toward Rockefeller's key activities in the support of Marxism,
Communism and other subversive movements is revealed on
page 166 in her discussion of- subversive activities in Interna-


tional House, which reads, it was "donated by 'sap' John D.
Rockefeller Jr.". She fails to list Rockefeller among her key
supperters of Communism in America. If Rockefeller is
merely a "sap" for financing and fostering the rise and spread
of Communism, why stigmatize and prosecute Hiss and other
agents of his as traitors? Under the law, an accomplice before
the fact is as guilty as the perpetrator of a crime. Rightly
President Truman labelled Hiss a "red herring". Senator
Truman once had the courage to label the Rockefeller-
Standard Oil crowd as traitors; and he well knows that Alger
Hiss was merely their agent.

It is unfortunate that too many folks who pretend to defend
the Constitution, and human freedom that is bound up in it,
are more interested in venting religious bigotry, and profiting
from it, than they are in the great cause to which they render
lip service. For otherwise their forces would not be diverted
by the cry of "good Christian" and a display of religiosity, to
the mere chasing of “red herrings”. The battle for Constitution
and Republic can only be wen 1f the cloak of pious sham and
hypocrisy assumed by the conspirators is torn aside, and the
arch-traitors are exposed, divested of their powers, and
prosecuted to the full limit for their nefarious activities. Many
tens of thousands of lives and endless human misery would be
spared thereby.


THE CHURCH BODIES WHICH CONSTITUTE THE FEDERAL COUNCIL
OF CHURCHES


National Baptist Convention

Northern Baptist Convencion

Church of the Brethren o.

General Council of Congregational Christian Churches

Czech-Moravian Brethren

niternational Convention of Pisciples of Christ

Evangelical and Reformed hure

Evangelical United Brethren Church

Five Years Meeting of the Friends in America

Religious Sociery of Friends of Philadelphia and Vicinity
e Methodist Church

African M. E. Church

African M. E Zion Church

Colored M. E. Church in Arnerica

Moravian Church

Presbyterian Church in U. $. A

Presbyterian Church in U. $S.

Protestant Episcapal Church

Reformed Church in America

Rotarian Orthodox Church of America

Russian Orthodox Church of North America

Seventh Day Baptist General Conference
Syrian, Antiochian Orthodox Church of North America

Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Arnerica

United Lutheran Church (Consultative Body)

United Presbyterian Church

United Church of Canada


310


FEDERAL COUNCTL LEADERS WHO HAVE HELPED COMMUNIST ORGANIZATIONS
Henry A. Atkinson, 9 10, 29, 39, 4, 45

36. qE gen World Alliance for Int. Friendship thru Rel. Roswell P. Barnes—l0, 15, 23. 24,
Federal Council Secretary John C. Benmett—34, 36, 4

Prof appn Theglopicel i Serminary, New York W. Fussell Bowie—3. 4, LL. 13, l4, 15, 19,
Prof., Union Theological seminary. New York Hugh Chamberlain Burr—24, 37, 39, 42
Secy.. Rochester (N. Federation of Churches George A Buttrick—23, 24.37. 40
Minister, Madison Ave. Presbyterian Church, New York J. Henry Carpenter—l7, 21, 28. 40,


Federal Council Secretary Sarnuel McCrea Cavert—24, 87, 40, 36
Federal Council Secretary Allan Knight Chalmers—l, Ll, 15, 23, 24, 26,86, 87.40, 42, 45,


46

pg Minigter BY way Tabernacle Congrepaational Church, N. Y. C. Winifred Chappell—3, 7, 8. 10,
Secy. sf gthodist Federation for Social Action Jerome Davis—l, 2.6. 7, 10, 15, 18. 19 20, 22,

23, we 36, 28.29. 86,

Former Prof., Yale Divinity School 37, 39, 40. 42, 43, 46

Mark A. Dawbher—9, 14,38, 40

Secy.. Home Missions Council. New York Harold E. Fey—l. 23, 24. 36, 42, 48

ASSOC. Editor, The Christian Century, Chicago Harry Emerson Fosdick. .1, 23, 34, 26, 29, 45

Ret. Former Prof. Union Theological Seminary, New York J. H. Franklin—40, 45

Pres. Etnertius Crozer Theological Serrinary, Chester, Pa. Charles K. Gilbert—l1, 19, 28. 40.


Protestant Episcopal Bishapof New York L. O. Hartrnan—l. 5, 7,8. 19, 80. 86. 87, 40, 44
Methodist Bishop Tvan Lee Holt—l9, 23, 87, 44
Methodist Bishop, Former Pres. Federal Council Walter M. Hortor—g2. 86, 40
36 Prot geeni in (Ohio) Divinicy School Wiliam Lloyd Imes—7, &. 10. 16, 17. 20.25, 26, 34,
Secy.. New York State Council of Churches
F. Ernest Joh nsot—l7, 28
Federal (council Secretary
Edgar DeWitt Tones—7, EN $l, 37
Minister Emeritus, Woodward Christian Church, Detroit E. Stanley Jor Fores. 45
Federa] Council Preacher and Missionary John Paul Jornes—l 2.
Minister, Union Church of Bay Ridge Benson Y. Landis—l?
Federal Council) Secretary Henry Smith Leiper—l. 4, LU, 26, 38
Secy.. World Ak Churches, New York Eduard C. Lindernan—l, 7.8, 10, 13, 15, L9,


2


pad


46


44


28. 24, 36, 27, 29,83
Prof., Columbia University 39, 46
Halford E, Luccock—2, is (6, 19, 24, 30. 34. 86. 87, 40, 43. H, 4g
a Prof, Yale Divinity School Francis J. MeConnel—l, 2, 3. 4,3, 7, 7.8. UL 13, L4, 15, 19. 28, 29,
o Si de Ag IGET 88, 40 42 BB 46
Methodist Bishop, Former Pres. Federal Council J. Howard Melish—3, 7, 11. 12.32. 87, 4


Suspended Rector P.E. Church of the Holy Trinity, B’klyn. Abraham J. Muste—l, 13, 15, “in.
24, 26, 28, 36, 46
Secy., Fellowship of Reconciliation James Myers—l_ L1. 17, 24 38, 39. 4
age Council Secretary Reinhold Niebuhr—5. 7. 15, [7, 23, 34. 28, 86, a7, 89, 42.43, 45,


Prof., Union Theological Şeminary, New York
G. Brotrley Oxtarrni—l, 9, 4. 30,32, 84, 36. 37,40. 46

Methodist Bishop, fpr Pres. of Federal Council
Kirby Page—l. 6, 15, 23, 24, 28. 36, 42, 46 .

Author Lecturer, former Minister, Disciples of Christ Edward L. Parsons— l, 3, 4, 5, 9, LL 13,
14, 15, 23, 27, 32, 43.34. 37


Prot., Emse. Bishop of Calif. (Ret.) 40), 44. 45
Edw. McNeil] Potear— l4, 23, 32, 84. 86, 38, 40,41, 45

Former President, Çolpate- -Rochester Divinity Schoo) William Scarlet—l. L1. 16, 86. 40

Protestant Episcopal Bishop of Missouri


311


Robert W. Searle—l7, 23, 24,26, 36 ,

oo rector, Protestant Council of New Fark City Guy Emery Shipler—2. 3,4. 5, 7, L1, I4. 19,
Editor, "The Churchman" Ralph W. Sockrnar—l0, 23, 24,
Minister, Christ ryh yf Methodist) New York William B. Shofford—l, 3, 5. 78 LL 12,


13. 14, l6. 19. 2

_ B2, 34, 87.40. 42. 48
For 25 yrs. Exec. Secy., Church Lea. for Ind. Demey. (Ret) Worth M. Tippy — 7, 19, 30
Former Secy. Of Federal Council Channing Tabiasg—3, 4.9 16, 21, 32, 34. 38, 40
Director, Phelps-3tokes Fund, New York City Willard E. Uphaus— å, 10, 12, A34. p ae
Exec. Secy., Natl. Religion & Labor Foundattion Henry P. Van Duser-—3, 15, 36, 46
President, Union Theological Seminary, New York Walter Van Kirk 10. 15, 23. 6
Federal Council Secretary Harry F. Ward— l, 3.5.6. 7.8. 10. 13, 14, 1920-22733, 24, 27 28.


29.
30), 32, 34. 35. 37,38, 40. 41.43.44
Prof. Union Theological Seminary, New York (Ret'd.) Luther A. Weigle—15, 19, 36. 37, 45,


Dean, Yale Divinity School


LIST OF A FEW COMMUNIST, COMMUNIST FRONT AND SOCTALIST.
SUBVERSIVE ORGANIZATIONS


American Civil Liberties Union CF
American Committee for Democracy and Intellectual Fredom CF
American Corririttee for Protection of Foreign Born
American Comittee to Save Refugees CF
American Friends of Spanish Democracy CF
American Fund for Public Service (tthe Garland Fund) CF
American League for Peace and Democracy C
American League Against War and Fascism ©
American Round Table on Tndia CF
American Youth Conaress, C
Church League for Industrial Democarcy $ (now Episcopal League for Social Action)
. Citizen's Cornmittee for Harry Bridges
Citizens' Corcirittee to Free Ear) Browder C
Civil Rights Conaress Ç .
Committee on Militarism in Education CF
Conference on Constitutional Liberties in Arnerica CF
Corsumers' Nationa] Federation CF
Consumers’ Union CF _
Coordinating Cornrnittee to Lift the Spanish Ermbareo CF _
Conference on Pan-American Democracy C (or Council for Pan-American Democracy)
Council on African Affairs C -
Cultural and Scientific Conference for World Peace CF (Waldorf Astoria Conference
sponsored by the National .
Council of Arts, Sciences and Professions)
23. Emergency Peace Mobilization CF
24. Fellowship of Reconciliation CF
25. Friends of the Abraham Lincoln Brigade CF
26. Greater Mew York Ernergency Conference on Tralierable Rights CF
27. Joint Anti-Fascist Refugee Committee C
28. League for Industrial Democracy $
29. League of American Writers ©
30. Methodist Federation for Social Action CF
3l. Michigan Civil Rights Federation G
32. National Couneil of American-Soviet Friendship ©
33. National Emergency Conference for Democratie Rishts CF
34. Natonal Federation for Constitutional Liberties
34. National Negro Congress C
36. National Religion and Labor Foundation CF
37. North American Cornrruttee to Aid Spanish Democracy CF
38. People's Institute of Applied Religion C
39. People's Lobby CF
40. The Protestant (formerly known ag the Protestant Digest) C
4l. Schanper Defense Cotnrnittee C
42. Socialist Party $
43. United Christian Council for Democracy UF
d4. Washington Cotneruttee to Lift the Sparis
45. World ‘Tomorrow Poll $
46. War Resistera League UF
C—Cormirmunist $—Socialist CF—Comrnunist Front UF-United Front


312


b GTS Le Let pg m SISO ATA aie Let —


ee


Embargo CF


CHAPTER XVII


ROCKEFELLER "FREES" THE PRESS COMMISSION
ON "FREEDOM" OF THE PRESS


"The Council On Foreign Relations is concerned that the debunking
campaign following World War I shall not be repeated'—Rockefeller
Foundation Report, 1946.


Once Rockefeller had learned the unwisdom of expressing
his contempt of the American "peasants" and had discovered
the necessity of courting their goodwill in order to carry
through his imperial schemes, every means of publicity,
propaganda, and thought-contrel was impressed into service.
Initially, dependence for press coverage was placed in the
contacts of Ivy Ledbetter Lee, who was recommended to
Rockefeller for the purpose by Arthur Brisbane. The complete
reliance and dependence of John D. Jr. on Ivy Lee is
graphically portrayed by the fact that the story of his recent
second marriage, to Mrs. Allen, was released by Lee's firm.

In line with the Rockefeller policy of controlling directly
all agencies on which they place dependence, it was merely a
matter of time and opportunity when the Rockefeller interests
would gain control over all important channels of publicity.

In 1922, Englebert Graff announced that the Rockefeller
interests had taken over three Parisian dailies—Le Matin,
Figaro, and L'Eclair—in connection with their deal for
monopoly of the French oil market and their purpose of
controlling French oil diplomacy.

The optimum opportunity for seizing control of the
Ametican press, as well as of many other industries, was
created by the financial crash of 1929 and the purposefully
prolonged panic and depression of the 1930's. Contracted
advertising expenditures brought about a slump of advertising
revenues and reduced the leading publications in the country
to the verge of bankruptcy. Thus, Curtis Publishing Co. stock
went begging at about a nickel a share; and hundreds of
thousands of shares changed hands at that level. Crowell
Collier's stock sold for little more. Control of most of the
leading publishing houses was purchased for a mere pittance.
The Hearst publications, the International News Syndicate,
King Features, and other organizations of the chain were taken
over for reorganization at about

313


the same time by Rockefeller’s Chase National Bank.

Rumor has it that control of the New York Times, in which
Rockefeller's henchman George Foster Peabody, already had
an interest, was taken over by the Rockefeller interests in the
names of nominees, for a consideration of $17,000,000 when
the death of its proprietor, Julius Ochs, necessitated raising
funds for inheritance-tax and other payments. The New York
Times is now the official organ of the Rockefeller Empire, in
much the same sense as the London Times is the official
organ of the British Empire.

There exists a curious interlocking of the Rockefeller
"philanthrepies” and their subsidiary agencies with the Times.
Thus since 1939, Arthur Hays Sulzberger, publisher of the
Times, has been a trustee of the Rockefeller Foundation. An
array of the editorial staff of the Times are members of the
Foreign Office of the Rockefeller Empire, the Council on
Foreign Relations. These include Arthur Hays Sulzberger,
Julius Ochs Adler, Charles Merz (editor in chief, former editor
of the radical New Republic, and foreign correspondent of
Collier's) Hanson W. Baldwin {military editor), Shepard
Stone (Sunday staff}, Henry R. Lieber-man (correspondent in
China who was awarded a Council fellowship financed by the
Carnegie Corporation}, the late Simeon Strunsky, Lester
Markel (Sunday editor), W. H. Lawrence, John B. Oakes and
James B. Reston. Lester Markel and John E. Kenton are
officers of the International Press Institute set up by the
Rockefeller Foundation with its satellite Ford Foundation.

The Communist cell in the Times had its own publication,
Hard Times.

A sufficiently large number of dailies, members of the
Associated Press, have come under their control to assure
domination. Significantly, the AP offices occupy a building in
Rockefeller Center.

The Communist PM was financed by Marshall Field,
trustee of Reckefeller's Spelman Fund, and by the Payne
Whitneys. Rockefeller's kinfolks, the Harknesses, financed
Time Inc., assuring their domination of the publications Time,
Life and Fortune. Whittaker Chambers, the former
Communist agent who exposed the treason of Alger Hiss, is
by ne means the only Communist, past or present, on the

314


staffs of those publications. It has long been a topic of
conversation that one of the prime qualifications for a position
with Time Inc. was membership in the Communist Party; and
that it was a sine qua non for employment on Fortune. How
important a role a position on the staff might play in Com-
munist commercial espionage is discernible from the fact that
industrial firms valued a write-up in Fortune so highly that
they were willing to reveal to it their most secret and
confidential data.

Ralph McAllister Ingersoll resigned his post as publisher of
Time, to which he had been promoted after serving as
associate editor of Fortune and general manager of Time, Life,
Fortune, Architectural Forum, and The March Of Time, to
become associated with Marshall Field and others, as pub-
lisher of the Communist newspaper PM. He relates in his
autobiography published in Who's Whe, as his claim to honor:

".. resigned (from Time Inc.) to organize

and finance company subsequently to publish

PM (New York daily evening newspaper),

founded the Newspaper PM and editor since 1940...

interviewing Marshal Stalin, 1941 .

Ingersoll so insistently demanded of his readers that they
volunteer to fight in defense of Stalin and the Soviets, that an
irate reader challenged him to do so himself and "needled"
him inte doing it. He announces in his biographic sketch that
he returned to resume publication of PM. Ingersoll
exemplifies the spirit that prevailed on the staffs of Time Inc.
during his tenure there, and that has persisted since.

Russell Wheeler Davenport, of Fortune and Life,
spearheaded another aspect of the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis
political activities, fake opposition to their New Deal. He
reports himself to have been the coordinator of the
extraordinary pre-convention campaign that made New Deal
Democrat, Rockefeller puppet, "One World" (Rockefeller's}
Wendell Willkie the "me-too", fake opposition, Republican
candidate in the 1940 presidential election, with the object of
ensuring the U.S. entry into World War I] that had already
been pledged to England. In this maneuver they attained the
superlative in thumbing their noses at the American
"peasantry".

Henry Robinson Luce, China-born son of a missionary,
product of Yale and Oxford niver-


sities, who, with Briton Hadden, founded Time Inc. with
Harkness Standard Oil money and became editer and
publisher of Time, is, as might be ex pected, in the ranks of the
key agencies of the Rockefeller Empire—its Foreign Office,
the Council on Foreign Relations, the Institute of Pacific
Relations, Yenching University of which he is a director,
Encyclopedia Britannicia Inc. and others. He was the front
through whem they financed the Commission on Freedom of
the Press, that proposed to abolish the unalienable human
rights assured by the Constitution and the Bill of Rights and
advocated the same type of freedom of the press as is enjoyed
by Pravda in Russia and La Prensa in Argentina, a press that
would be "responsible"—to the rulers of the Rockefeller
Empire.

The same situation prevails in the only other news
magazine upon which the bulk of the nation is dependent for
its contact with world news—the New Deal sponsored
Newsweek.

Rockefeller thought-control apparatus has been particularly
cunning in maintaining in the press, as in politics, a semblance
of opposition and rivalry. But even a casual examination of
the situation reveals that the “opponents” represent the two
sides of the same side; their two parties are one party made to
appear as two; and their "bipartisanship" is a completely
transparent device for promoting the interests of the
Rockefeller Empire. Consequently, there never emerges to
public notice the question: “Is it constitutional, or desirable to
scatter American troops about the world to serve other lands?"
The controversy that comes to public ken is: "Shall we send
one army or ten armies to Europe?"

The Rockefeller interests have been careful to cover up
their trail in the ownership and control of publications by a
maze of nominees, dummy corporations, and interlocking
directorates. Thus, Collier's lists three corporations as owners,
while a fourth, unlisted corporation actually owns and
operates the publication. A E. Winger, director of Crowell
Collier, interlocks it with Rockefeller's Chase National Bank,
of which he is chairman of the board of directors. Thomas E.
Beck, chairman of the board of Crowell Collier, interlocks its
directorate with the Rockefeller-dominated Metropolitan Life
Insurance Company. 316


The conspirators arrange subsidy of publications that carry
their propaganda line through the ECA, the Marshall Plan,
and other devices. Hundreds of thousands of dollars of those
funds are spent for the purchase of Time, Life, Fortune,
Collier's and other magazines for free distribution in Eurasia.
The New York Times special airmail edition that costs 25c a
copy 1s mailed daily, at the expense of the taxpayers, to every
member of Parliament and every high British official, as well
as to the officials of other lands.

The influence of the tremendous amount of advertising of
concerns dominated by Rockefeller on the publications not
directly controlled by them, cannot be overemphasized.

The highly laudatory articles on the Rockefellers that have
appeared in numerous magazines during the past year, in
Collier's magazine, the Saturday Evening Post, the Police
Gazette (Feb. 1951} and many others, present the amusing
spectacle of the Rockefellers telling the world how good they
are. No doubt they believe with Ivy Lee and his pupil, Joseph
Goebbels, that if a lie is repeated often enough, the "peasants"
eventually will believe it.

During the same period the Rockefellers seized control of
all important media of mass communication. In connection
with the construction of Rockefeller Center, they acquired a
controlling block of the stock of Radio Corporation of
America, as well as of Radio Keith Orpheum. By such deals
and through domination of such New Deal agencies as the
Federal Communications Commission, they gained control of
the key radio networks; their control is exercised directly, and
through agents and associates. Through American Telephone
and Telegraph Co. and its subsidiaries—Bell Telephone
Laboratories and Electrical Research Products— and a patent
pool with General Electric Co., RCA, and others, that effected
a monopoly of motion- -picture sound devices, the movie
producers were mercilessly tied up, looted to ‘the point of
virtual bankruptcy, and then taken over by the Rockefeller
interests.

Public-epinion polls and public-opinion researches are
highly effective propaganda devices. There exists among the
less intellectual and moronic elements, that preponderate in
every community, a powerful desire to conform. This has


been especially highly intensified in communities that have
known the doubtful blessings of Reckefeller's "educational
philanthropies", which have well served the original purposes
of its founder— of teaching the "peasants" to do "perfectly",
from the viewpoint of the Rockefellers, the things that
previously they did "imperfectly" from the same viewpoint.
Let the public know that Nincompoop Dummy is the
candidate chosen by the majority of folks polled, and they
will generally rush to vote for him unless they have been
conditioned to resist the suggestive force. For it is human to
like to pick a winner and to ride him to victory. The presence
among the pawns and puppets of Rockefeller's Council On
Foreign Relations of George Horace Gallup, founder of the
British and the American Institutes of Public Opinion which
operate the polls that so often influence profoundly the
sentiments and votes of the public, is of great significance.

Unionization plays an important role in warping beth press
and theatre to the purpose of the conspirators, and in silencing
opposition more effectively than any open censorship. Thus
the wholely subversive and Communist Newspaper Guild
took over the press of the nation through unionization of its
editors, reporters, and other help. By steadily higher and
exorbitant wage demands, and other preposterous exactions,
the Guild forced a large proportion of the press that opposed
Rockefeller's "New Deal" or exposed Communist henchmen
and conspirators, either out of existence or into submission.

In New York City the Sun, one of the oldest, best, and most
fearless newspapers, was forced to close its doors after
campaigns of exposure of Communist infiltration of the
national government and exposure of water-front union
racketeering and murder. Numerous of its employees, Guild
members, lost irreplaceable lifetime positions; but the expose
was stopped and the conspirators protected. The New York
World-Telegram and The Sun that had taken over the Sun
after it was shut down and merged, campaigned strenuously,
under the courageous editorship of Lee Wood for a thorough
investigation and prosecution of the conspirators in the treason
of the Rockefeller-subsidized Institute of Pacific Relations
publication, Amerasia. The Guild struck and threw its
members out of work, 318


during a trying period of inflation, for two months and risked
throwing them out of work permanently. It did so for the
ostensible purpose of securing a relatively minor salary
increase that never could repay their strike losses, but for the
actual purpose of protecting the conspirators and serving the
Rockefeller-Soviet Axis. But when the official Communist
daily, the Daily Worker, began to totter, the Newspaper Guild
virtually forced its members there employed to give it
financial assistance and support by returning te the
publication a large part of their salaries, which was, to all
effects and purposes, dues to the Communist Party.

It is seriously open to question whether the Newspaper
Guild, that controls the editorial writers and reporters of the
nation, has not served Seviet Russia and the Communist cause
more loyally than have even the employees of the Soviet news
service, Tass, whe infest Washington and the nation and
openly carry on their espionage activities.

Major General C. A. Willoughby, former chief of of
intelligence under Gen. MacArthur, accused a group of Guild
members, including Drew Pearson, Hal Boyle, Joseph Alsop,
Christopher Ran, and Hanson Baldwin and Time, Newsweek,
and U. $. News and World Report of injuring our national
interests by "Inaccurate, biased and prejudiced" reporting of
the Korean War. He charged that their versions of high
command strategy gave aid comfort to the Reds. The
conspirators’ pressure for MacArthur's dismissal was exerted
thru these agents.

The Equity Actors Association and stage and motion-
picture unions and racketeers and rackets associated with
them, have played a parallel role in the legimate stage and in
the motion- -picture field. They have imposed such utterly
unwarranted and absurd restrictions and unconscionably high
costs as to restrict productions solely to those conspirators that
undertake to produce for their own propaganda purposes.

The great majority of plays that have been produced on
Broadway in the past two decades have been outright
Communist, New Deal propaganda, written by Communists,
produced by Communists, acted by Communists, reviewed by
Communists, but financed by wealthy conspirators and, in
some instances, by the New Deal with taxpayers’ moneys.


Thus, "Goodbye My Fancy", written by crimson Garson,
preduced by fellow-traveler Sam Wana-maker, and acted in
by him and Madeleine Carrell, was pure and unadulterated,
party-line propaganda and part of the Communist phoney
"peace drive”. The Newspaper Guild critics, pro-Communist,
with exceptions, lauded it to the skies, lured in the gullible
public and made a financial success of it.

When I sued to recover the price paid for tickets, on the
ground that Communist propaganda was misrepresented as
entertainment and comedy, the court ruled that I had to prove
the Communist intent of a Sam Wanmaker, though it refused
to order him to appear in court in response te a summons
issued by the court. The Guild reporters made the unwarranted
dismissal of the complaint, on technical grounds, the occasion
for boosting the popularity of the play. Likewise the stupid,
costly musical, "Brigadoon", which was frankly Communist
and labor-unien propaganda, with a labor organizer as its
hero, and Irish mythology as a vehicle, was built up by the
critics, as a masterpiece of art and theatre, and made a huge
financial success of forcing Communist prepaganda on the
audience in the guise of "theatre". The foundations have aided
and abetted in this perversion of art to Communist
propaganda.

The control of beok publication has been a relatively
simple matter. For few houses account for the output of
beoks, and even fewer for their large-scale distribution. A
vertical set-up, involving editors and publishers, jobbers and
distributors, reviewers and retail booksellers and clerks, made
possible the suppression of almost all books that failed to hew
close to the line laid down by the conspirators.


But these methods of purchase, subsidy and perversion fall
short of perfection and absolute control. They are relatively
inefficient and fail to eliminate completely the possibility of
release of material disturbing or menacing to the conspirators
and their plans. The Rockefeller Foundation made a number
of clumsy stabs at solving this preblem of censorship by
financing the publication of encyclopedic works that were
intended to stand as defini-fields that would blanket out
dissenters.


The Rockefeller Foundation, jointly with its sub-
320


sidiary Carnegie Foundation, subsidized the Encyclopedia of
the Social Sciences. Edited by Alva S. Johnson, president of
the Reckefeller-subsidized, Red, New School For Social
Research that gave haven to such notorious Communist agents
as Hanns Eisler, the Encyclopedia is largely, if not entirely,
written by such notorious Marxists as Max Beer, Oscar Jaszi
and Harold Laski. It defines the "social sciences” so largely,
or exclusively, in terms of Marxism as to be a Marxist,
Socialist, or Communist tract.

The rewriting of encyclopedias and works of reference
along Marxist, Communist "liberal" lines has been undertaken
on a vast and systematic scale. Thus Encyclopedia Britannica
has been turned over for that purpose to Rockefeller's
University of Chicago, under joint ownership or tutelage of
Rockefeller's associate, Senator William Benton. Likewise,
dictionaries are being systematically revised along lines of
Marxist dialectics, to conform with the semantics prescribed
by the Communist "party line”.

Even more striking in the frankness of the expression of
intent of censorship, suppression, and thought control is the
instance of History Of World War II, the subsidy for which by
the Rockefeller Foundation is reported in its Annual Report of
1946 (pp. 188-9) as follows:

"The Committee on Studies of the Council on Foreign
Relations is concerned that the debunking journalistic
campaign following World War I should not be repeated
and believes that the American public deserves a clear and
competent statement of our basic aims and activities during
the second World War. What is contemplated is not a
nationalistic treatment, but rather a history, with the issues
and problems presented by an American historian for an
American public.

"The author, Professor William Langer of Harvard

University, during the war was the Director of Research and

Analysis Section of the Office of Strategic Services, where

he had exceptional access bearing on foreign relations. On a

leave of absence, Professor Langer will establish head-

quarters at Cambridge, Massachusetts. He will go to

England to consult with Professor Arnold Toynbee, who is

presently writing a history of 321


the war and peace settlements based primarily on records

available in Britain.

"The Rockefeller Foundation provided $139,-

000 for expenses over a four-year period for the

preparation of this history."

The History, essentially a study of our relations
with other nations and with world problems altered
or developed by the war, will subordinate actual
operations and military aspects.

Needless to say this "history", which is candidly intended
to be internationalist propaganda that will shun all aspects
that might foster patriotism to serve Rockefeller interests, will
prescribe the line to be followed by textbooks used in the
Rockefeller-controlled "educational" system and press.

The true significance and full purport of this “history” grant
is made clear by Professor Harry Elmer Barnes in his
pamphlet, entitled The Struggle Against the Historical
Blackout, published by himself and distributed from his home,
Stonewold, Cooperstown, New York. This pamphlet is all the
more significant because Professor Barnes was once, a "fair
haired child" of the conspirators he exposes, and he taught in
most of the leading universities in the country that are
dominated by their “educational philanthropes". This
distinguished historian says of his erstwhile sponsors:

"It may be said, with great restraint, that never since the
Dark and Middle Ages, have there been so many powerful
forces organized and alerted against the assertion and
acceptance of historical truth as are active today to prevent
the facts about the responsibility for the second World War
and its results from being made generally accessible to the
American public. Even the great Rockefeller Foundation
frankly admits (Annual Report, 1946, p. 188} the
subsidizing of a corps of historians to anticipate and
frustrate the development of neo-Revisionism [Ed.: mean-
ing the publication of the truth] in our time. And the only
difference between this Foundation and several others is
that it has been more candid and forthright about its
policies. Charles Austin Beard summarized the implications
of such efforts with characteristic vigor:

‘The Rockefeller Foundation and the Council on Foreign

Relations .. . intend to prevent, if they can, a repetition of

what they call in the 322


vernacular the debunking journalistic campaign following
World War I. Translated into precise English this means that
the Foundation and the Council [Ed.: or the Rockefellers] do
not want journalists or any other persons to examine too
closely and criticize too freely the official propaganda and
official statements relative to "our basic aims and activities”
during World War II. (PP. 8-9)

"In bringing about the sad state of the world today, the
entry of the United States into two World Wars played a
larger role than any other single factor. (p. 4)

"While the first World War headed the United States and
the world toward international disaster, the second World War
was an even more calamitous turning-point in the history of
mankind. It may indeed have brought us—and the whole
world—into the terminal episode of human experience. It
certainly marks a transition from social optimism and
technical rationalism into the "Nineteen Eighty-four’ pattern of
life, in which aggressive international policies and war scares
have become the guiding factor, not only in world affairs, but
also in the domestic political and economic strategy of every
leading country of the world. The police state has emerged as
the dominant political pattern of our times, and military
socialism is engulfing both democracy and liberty. (p. 3}

"In all essential features, the United States has moved along

into the 'Nineteen Eighty-four’ pattern of intellectual life. In
Nineteen Eighty-four, the author implies that historians in that
regime have to be hired by the government and forced to
falsify facts. In this country, and it is also true of other
nations, many professional historians gladly falsify history
quite voluntarily, and with no direct cost to the government.
The ultimate and indirect cost may, of course, be a potent
contribution to incalculable calamity. (p. 3)
"A state of abject terror and intimidation exists among the
majority of professional American historians whose views
accord with the facts on the question of responsibility for the
second World War ... It is no exaggeration to say that the
American Smearbund, operating through 323


newspaper editors and columnists, "hatchetmen" book
reviewers, radio commentators, pressure group intrigue and
espionage, and academic pressures and fears, has
accomplished about as much in the way of intimidating ‘honest
intellectuals in this country as Hitler, Goebbels, Himm-ler, the
Gestapo, and the concentration camps were able to do in Nazi
Germany.

"Moreover the gullibility of many ‘educated’ Americans has
been as notable as the mendacity of the ‘educators’. In
Communist Russia and Nazi Germany, as well as in Fascist
Italy and China, the tyrannical rulers found it necessary to
suppress all opposition thought in order to induce the majority
of the people to accept the material fed them by official
propaganda. But in the United States, with almost complete
freedom of the press, speech and information down to the end
of 1941, great numbers of Americans followed the official
propaganda line with no compulsion whatever. This is a
remarkable and ominous contrast, especially significant
because it has been the ‘educated’ element which has been the
most gullible, taking the population as a whole. [Editor's note:
It is interesting to note that the educator recognizes that
"education" has become thought-contrel but being too close to
the picture, fails to recognize the forest for the trees, fails to
discern that the Rockefeller, and other, "educational
philanthropies” were designed to ‘bring this about. |

"The opposition te Revisionism—that is, to truth in the
premises—stems in part from emotional fixaton on the
mythology built up after 1937, and in part from personal
loyalty to President Roosevelt and the naturally resulting
desire to preserve the impeccability of the Roosevelt legend . .
There is of course a powerful vested political interest in
perpetuating the accepted mythology about the causes, issues,
and results of the second World War, for much of the public
policy of the victorious United Nations since 1945 can only
make sense and be justified on the basis of this mythology.

"In the United States it has been made the
ideological basis of the political strategy of the
party in power and has also been accepted by
many outstanding leaders of the opposition party.


It has been essential to gain support for the economic policies
which have been used to ward off a depression, with its
probably disastrous political reverberations. Powerful pressure
groups have also found the mythology helpful in divert-ing
attention from their own role in national and world calamity.

"In addition te the opposition of public groups to the truth
about responsibility for the second World War, many
professional historians and other social scientists have a
personal interest in perpetuating the pre-war and wartime
mythology. One reason why historians opposed the truth
relative to responsibility for the first World War and the main
issues therein was that so many of them had taken an active
part in spreading the wartime propaganda and had alse worked
for Colonel House's Committee in preparing material for the
peace-making. A considerable number of them went to Paris
with President Wilson on his ill-fated adventure. Naturally,
they were loath te admit that the enterprise in which they had
played so prominent a part proved to be both a fraud and a
ailure

"Today, this situation has been multiplied many fold.
Historians and other social scientists vertably swarmed into
the various wartime agencies after 1941, especially the Office
of War Information and the Office of Strategic Services. They
were intimately associated with the war effort and with the
shaping of public opinion to conform to the thesis of the pure
and limpid idealism and ethereal innecence of the United
States and our exclusive devotion to self-defense and world
betterment through the sword. Hence, the opposition of
historians and social scientists to truth about war
responsibility and the obvious results of the War is many
times greater teday than it was in the years following the close
of the first World War.
"The ‘blackout boys' have net rested content with smearing
those who have sought to tell the truth about the causes of the
second World War. They have now advanced to the point
where they are seeking to smear those who told the truth
about the causes of the first World War. At the meeting of the
American Historical Association in Boston in December,
1949, two papers were 325


read that endeavored to undermine the established
revisionist writings regarding the prelude to that conflict.
Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., in an article in the Partisan
Review, has even gone so far as to attack those who have
written in a revisionist tone on the causes of the Civil War.
The next logical step will be to attack the revision of
historical opinion relative to the causes of the American
Revolution and te find that, after all, "Big Bill’ Thompson
was right in his views of that conflict and his threat to throw
George V inte the Chicago Ship Canal. In other words,
Revisionism, which only means bringing histery inte accord
with facts, now seems to be rejected by the ‘blackout boys'
as a mortal sin against Clio, tthe Muse of their subject. HOW
THE HISTORICAL BLACKOUT OPERATES
"The methods followed by the various groups interested in
blacking out the truth about world affairs since 1933 are
numerous and ingenious, but, aside from subterranean
persecution of individuals, they fall mainly into the following
patterns or categories: (1) excluding scholars suspected of
Revisionist views from access to public decuments which are
freely opened to ‘court historians' and apologists for the
foreign policy of President Roosevelt; (2) intimidating
publishers of books and periodicals, so that even those who
might wish to publish books and articles setting forth the
Revisionist point of view do not dare to do so; (3) ignoring or
obscuring published material which embodies Revisionist
facts and arguments; (4) smearing Revisionist authors; (5)
contending that, whatever the devious deceptions practiced by
President Roosevelt and his supporters from 1937 to 1941, all
this was more than justified in the interest of veritable national
self-preservation;, (6) contending that the Revisionism after
1918 undermined peace and that any revival of it after 1945
will prevent peace in our time; and (7} maintaining that
successful deception of the populace is the cornerstone of
sagacious statecraft under our present system of government."
The conspirators have materially improved upon the technique
recommended by Machiavelli for the maintenance of power in
The Prince by supplementing it with thought-control by
"educational philan- 326


thropies” that render the "peasants" incapable of thinking
except as their rulers wish them to think. Like their
Communist associates, they spurn morality and ethics as
absurd signs of weakness and for them the Ten
Commandments are ridiculous rules intended merely to
enslave the "peasantry". The "Grand Lie" uttered whenever it
suits their purpose for the maintenance of their power is their
constant practise. They utter alternately and indiscriminately
lie and truth on the same topic, unabashedly contradicting and
belying themselves. They have no fear of insulting public
intelligence with their lies, because the "peasants" have
submitted to "molding" at their hands to the point where the
great majority of them are bereft of intelligence or initiative;
and those that are not, are robbed of a voice by control of all
avenues of mass communication.

This is well illustrated by the matter of the recognition of
the Communist Chinese Government and of seating it in the
UN debating arena. Truman, Acheson, Jessup and their entire
Rockefeller Red coterie in the State Department and Govern-
ment, repeatedly went on public record as advocating
recognition of the Chinese Reds. When that cause had been
made unpopular among the "peasants" by the Korean "police
action", not too many months later, the entire mob of the Red
officialdom just as publicly belied their published statements
and asserted that they had always opposed such recognition.
Those who rightly accused them of shiftiness and lying, were
subjected to concerted gang-smearing that is the conspirators’
habitual practise. This technique is well illustrated by the
"McCarthyism" smear campaign that was intended to protect
the treacherous crew against exposure, by intimidation and
vilification of the would-be patrict. The attack on McCarthy
for repeating the exposure of Communists in the State
Department and attempting to rise to the defense of our
country, a dread offense in the eyes of the conspirators, is a
chain attack on him through every one of the channels of mass
communication which they control, in succession. Millions of
dollars of the conspirators’ funds, most of it tapped by devious
devices from the pockets of taxpayers via the Treasury, have
gone into the campaign. With a fine contempt for public
intelligence, their pandering columnists

327


started the ball rolling by openly announcing the plan of the
attack. Starting in the Daily Worker, the New York Compass
and the New York Post, the "proletarian" media, its tide rose
to fill the columns of the prostituted press in higher echelons,
the New York Times, Time, Life, Fortune, Collier's and even
the fashion magazines, as well as all channels cf radio,
television, burlesque, the stage and movies. Thus a group of
Red playwrights joined forces in producing Maxwell
Anderson's "Barefoot In Athens", a "McCarthyism" chorus in
Greek setting. The Rockefeller Red puppets in McCarthy's
own Republican Party, Senators Smith, Saltonstall, Morse and
others of that breed, have joined in the subversive conspiracy
to intimidate patriots. Unlimited funds are afforded the
conspirators’ agents by the foundations by such grants as the
Rockefeller Foundation's “history” grant to foster historical
lies and its "study" of civil rights in investigations of
subversive activities” to harass and discredit investigators of
un-American activities.


The exploitation of "sports" and the gambling associated
with them, in order to divert the "peasants", has been one of
the most important tools of the conspirators. It serves the same
purpose in the so-called democracies that the circus did in the
Roman "New Deal" and the mass disciplines and military
reviews in the Communazi dictatorships. The nation's press
systematically devotes more space to the so-called sports than
it does to the nation's affairs and policies by which men eat or
starve, work or idle, live and die. When the political scene
becomes particularly ugly, as during the Korean "pelice
action", or the exposure of Communist agents and spies in the
State Department, the conspirators can always manage to dig
up one of their systematic sport "fixes" for the press, to fill the
headlines. They can manage to work up more indignation
among the thought-controlled mob over a basketball gambling
"fix" than over the needless sacrifice of a battalion of troops in
Korea.


When the "fixes" do not suffice, the “peasants” are also
regaled with the traditional soporific gangster continuity, a la
the Kefauver Committee, by press and television. And from
time to time, new “thrills” are cooked up by the conspirators
to divert shallow minds that have been taught to avoid


328


thinking and te live only for transient "thrills" and
excitements.

Attainment of the ultimate goal of absolute control of
publication and thought was the task assigned to the American
Commission On Freedom Of The Press, which in the words of
Kenneth E. Olson, Dean of the Medill School of Journalism of
Northwestern University,

".. arrogating to itself an official status which it never had,
comes forth with ‘findings' which have no basis in fact .
produces a new philosophy which destroys "the
concept that American citizens have any unalienable
basic rights and sets up the claim that freedom to print is the
property of the government to be granted or withheld from
individual citizens at the government's will ..." This passage is
quoted from the introduction to the scholarly, masterful
presentation of this conspiracy by Frank Hughes in his
Prejudice And The Press, which the Devin-Adair Co.
published as a patriotic service in 1950. Were the activities of
the Pulitzer Prize Committee as devoted to the cause of
patriotism as they are to that of subversion, this book would
have automatically received its prize.
The Rockefellers avoided launching this attack on the freedom
of the press directly. The Commission On Freedom Of The
Press was financed by a grant of $200,000 from the
Rockefeller controlled Time Inc. and $15,000 from the
Encyclopedia Britannica Ine., in which Rockefeller influence
is not unknown, to the University of Chicago as an agency
that would serve to lend prestige to the scheme. The
members of the Commission were the following: Robert M.
Hutchins, chairman, is the former boy prodigy Chancellor of
Rockefeller's University of Chicago, the "brain truster”
entrusted to supervise the writing of the Constitution of the
Empire, as head of the Committee To Frame A World
Constitution, that came forth with its efforts, in 1947, as a
pattern for the United Nations. He is director and chairman of
the editorial board of Encyclopedia Britannica Inc., in which
he is associated with Henry R. Luce and William Benton. His
ideas, activities and the associates with which he chooses to
surround himself, make it obvious that his sympathies are
indiscriminately totalitarian. Incapacity for consistency and
329


intellectual honesty are revealed by the contrast between his

attitudes on "freedom" when it concerns him, in the form of

"academic freedom" for himself only, but not for his

faculty; and as it concerns others, in the form of "freedom

of the press", and the measure of freedom assigned to the

community at large in his "World Constitution" which is a

pattern of dictatorship. For his "academic freedom" he

demands no limitation, free license. For himself he
specifies, with arrogant conceit, that “Academic freedom is
simply a way of saying that we get the best results in
education and research if we leave their management to
people whe know something about them. Attempts on the
part of the public to regulate the methods and content of
education and to determine the otiects of research are
encroachments on academic freedom" (The Higher Learn-
ing In America, p. 20). For all others, including the press,
freedom is to be restricted by "duty" ‘and ' ‘accountability”,
as in "Freedom of the press for the coming period can only
continue as an accountable freedom ... it becomes an
imperative question whether the press can any longer be left
to the unregulated initiative of the few who manage it".

Hutchins has been very cagey about joining Communist
fronts openly. Ex-Communist Louis Budenz has testified that
"leading persons” in the field of education were under
Communist Party orders to conceal their membership and
infiltrate the field of education. Hutchins, however, openly
acknowledged his radicalism to the Trustees of the University
of Chicago before his appointment to the post of Chancellor.
And he did join several Communist or front organizations,
including:

l. Moscow State University.

2. Bureau on Academic Freedom cof the National
Council of Arts, Sciences and Professions, that demanded
the reinstatement of the three U. of Washington professors,
who had been ousted for membership in the Communist
Party or affiliations with its causes.

3. American Civil Liberties Umon—en advisory board
of the Chicago chapter.

Under his “educational” guidance a legislative committee
found that the University of Chicago had become a den of
Communism, crime, and vice, that

330


culminated in the horrible Heirens case, in which a young
child was murdered by a student.

Zechariah Chafee Jr., vice-chairman, Professor of Law,
Harvard University. In 1920, he published a bock entitled
Freedom of Speech in which he showed an appreciative
insight into the meaning and value of "freedom" as defined
in the Constitution and the Bill of Rights. But shortly
thereafter the Rockefeller influence, as exerted by
Beardsley Ruml in direction of the Marxist "social
sciences” and totalitarianism, made itself felt and changed
the intellectual atmosphere at Harvard. And with it,
Professor Chafee changed his tune and joined the ranks of
Rockefeller's Council on Foreign Relations as another of
the "brain trusters" of the Empire. In line with its policies,
he then identified himself faithfully with every turn and
twist of the Communist party-line and signed and
sponsored, in the company of notorious Communists,
numerous manifestos, letters, and other releases of the

arty

John Maurice Clark, Professor of Economics at the
Rockefeller-subsidized University of Chicago and
Columbia University, member of Rockefeller's ‘National
Resources Planning Board, consultant to the NRA, and
attached to the OPA. The Marxist trend of his thought 18
indicated in his work Social Control of Business.

John Dickinsen, Professor of Law, University of
Pennsylvania, partner of William G. McAdoo, (Wilson in-
law and later New Deal Senator}. He is a Rockefeller New
Deal “brain truster" who became Assistant Secretary of
Commerce and then Assistant Attorney General in charge
of anti-trust investigations. He is a member of Rockefeller's
Social Science Research Council and his Council on
Foreign Relations.

Wiliam Ernest Hocking, Professor of Philosophy,
Harvard University. He is listed as a member of the editorial
board of The Protestant, which the Un-American Activities
Committee described as "one of the most remarkable
vehicles of straight Communist propaganda in existence”.
He has been identified with a number of other Communist-
front activities.

Harold D. Lasswell, Professor of Political Science,
University of Chicago, lecturer at the Marxist New School
For Social Research, and 331


now Professor of Law at Yale University. His record of
Communist activities parallels his Rockefeller-subsidized
roles and includes:

l. Chicago Workers School of the Communist Party—

lecturer.

2. American Civil Liberties Union.

3. War Communications Research Laboratory,
director of a research program financed by the
Rockefeller Foundation with a three-year grant of
$8 1,800, the otjective of which was te root out
any opposition to Rockefellerism by a process
conceived by Lasswell and named "content analy
sis", another of the pseudo-sciences of the "social
science” group. In these activities he was assisted
by Communist fronter and Wallace supporter,

Professor Frederick L. Schuman of the Univer
sity of Chicago and by a group of others of the
same breed, including Goodwin B. Watson and
William E. Dodd, Jr., who were dismissed from
government services by an act of Congress be
cause of their association with dangerous sub
versives.

Archibald MacLeish, who calls himself poet but has been

called by the 1948 California legislative committee
investigating un-American activities, one of the "noted
Communist Party liners." MacLeish was head of the Library
of Congress to which $90,000 was contributed by the
Rockefeller Foundation for the support of his activities. In
1940 he was made Assistant Secretary of State; in 1941,
Director of the Office of Facts and Figures; in 1942,
Assistant Director of the Office of War Information and
American Delegate to UNESCO, of which he became
chairman. MacLeish is a member of Rockefeller's Council
on Foreign Relations and has been connected with the
Social Science Research Council.
Charles E. Merriam, Professor of Political Science at
Rockefellet's University of Chicago, who favors "planned
collectivism". He was affiliated with the American Society
for Cultural Relations with Russia which is listed as an
"American propaganda agency for the Soviet System." He
was also an official of the NRA. He was appointed by
President Truman to the Loyalty Review Board. He is
closely identified with the Rockefeller Empire, including
the following top policy-making bodies: 332


Spelman Fund—trustee.

x Social Science Research Council.

3. National Resources Planning Board, which he was
instrumental in organizing for the Rockefeller interests with
Louis Brownlow, and into which the Rockefellers have put
$3,953,000. It succeeded to the point where it successfully
supplemented the activities of the Rockefeller Institute of
Public Administration in realizing proposals for a
reorganization of the government in Washington, to suit the
Rockefeller dictatorship plans, and actually moved into the
White House. Representative John Taber of New York called
it a "menace to the welfare of the American people and ... a
menace te Constitutional government."

4. Council on Foreign Relations.

Reinhold Niebuhr, Professor of Applied Theology, Union

Theological Seminary, an exchange professor with Britain
under the Rockefeller plan by which the Rockefeller interests
brought to the U.S. to propagandize his schemes, Sir William
Beveridge, "cradle to grave", "social security” advocate,
whose plans have done so much to undermine the British
Empire. Niebuhr's Communist-front activities are discussed in
detail in the chapter on the Federal Council of Churches of
Christ in America. He is a member of Rockefeller's Council
On Foreign Relations.
Robert Redfield, Professor of Anthropology at Rockefeller's
University of Chicago. He is Director of the American
Council On Race Relations and was associated with Louis
Adamie, Mary McLeod Bethune, and other notorious
Communists; Charles Dollard, president of the Carnegie
Corperation, who appeared before Congress as a friend of
Alger Hiss; Will W. Alexander, former vice-president of the
Rosenwald Fund, who was named before Congress by Lauch-
lin Currie as an intimate of Gregory Silver-master in
connection with the investigation of the Washington spy
rings; and Edwin R. Embree, late president of the Rosenwald
Fund and vice-president of the Rockefeller Foundation. The
Rosenwald Fund joined forces with the Baptist-inspired Laura
Spelman Rockefeller Memorial, under the guidance of
Beardsley Ruml, in festering Negro Communist race
propaganda and agitation. He was also on the advisory board
of 333


the Guggenheim Foundation, which has a long record of

grants, accerding to investigating committee reports, to

Reds, including Granville Hicks, Louis Adamic, Langston

Hughes, and Carey Me Williams. He also has been affiliated

in various capacities with the Social Service Research

Council and has been trustee of the Carnegie Institute of

Washington and the Social Science Foundation.

Beardsley Ruml, Rockefeller's principal agent in
promoting Communism and the subversive "social
sciences” in the educational world, launched through the
Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial, as has been related
in another chapter in connection with that organization. He
has been trustee of the Spelman Fund and of the Julius
Rosenwald Fund. During his tenure as Dean of the Social
Science Division of Rockefeller's University of Chicago,
Communist activities of members of his faculty and of the
students became so notorious as to precipitate a legislative
investigation of the University in 1935. He is a member of
Rocketeller's Council on Foreign Relations and a top "brain
truster" of the Rockefeller Empire.

Arthur M. Schlesinger, Professor of History of Harvard
University, who has been identified with numerous
Communist and front activities. He is adviser to
Rockefeller's Colonial Williamsburg, member of the Social
Science Research Council, and member of the Council on
Foreign Relations.

Schlesinger writes for the "Sunday" (it appears on
Saturday} edition of the Red New York Post, a column
entitled History Of The Week that aptly illustrates his concept
of historic truth. It consists of a mixture of New Deal and
other shades of Communist propaganda. Currently it is
harping on the present Party "line", McCarthyism.

George N. Shuster, President of Hunter College, an
indiscriminate totalitarian who discerns the ideologic
identity of Nazism and Communism and subscribes to both,
is a member of the Council On Foreign Relations, was
placed in Bavaria, where he has been doing a through Job or
restoring Nazis ‘to control. He is proving himself an
outstanding proponent of Rockefellerism. The personnel of
the Commission On The Free-334


dom Of The Press as well as its sponsors, Henry R. Luce and
Senator William Benton, stand out clearly as Rockefeller
associates, “brain trusters", and pawns of the Rockefeller
Empire, and beneficiaries of their "philanthropies". Luce,
Benton, Chafee, Dickinson, MacLeish, Niebuhr, Ruml,
Schlesinger, and Shuster are all members of Rockefeller's
Council on Foreign Relations. Dickinson, Leigh, Lasswell,
MacLeish, Merriam, Redfield, Ruml and Schlesinger are all
identified in various capacities with Rockefeller's top level
propaganda agency, the Social Science Research Council.
Benton, close associate of Nelson Rockefeller and on his
advisory committee as Coordinator of Inter-American Affairs,
was vice chairman of the board of the Committee for
Economic Development. Merriam was one of the organizers
of Rockefeller's top level "planning" agencies, the National
Resources Planning Beard.

Hutchins, Hocking, Redfield, Niebuhr, and Ruml, of the
Commission On Freedom Of The Press, were also members
of the Committee to Frame A World Constitution that drew
up the initial Constitution for Rockefeller's United Nations.
All of them have benefited from Rockefeller "philanthropy"
and have shown their willingness to follow direction; and all
of them prospered accordingly. It truly can be concluded,
therefore, that the schemes which they promote represent the
intent and purpose of their Reckefeller masters.

The objective of the Rockefeller imperial interests that
emerges again, more clearly than ever, from the report of the
Commission On Freedom Of The Press, is a dictatorship that
will eliminate all human rights that have been assured by the
Constitution and the Bill of Rights, including freedom of the
press. This they justify by Marxist dialectics. It is the same
pattern of freedom presented by Pravda.

The same concept of freedom of the press has been written
into the "Bill of Human Rights" of the United Nations by a
subcommission on which Professor Chafee and Senator
William Benton sat with that distinguished "libertarian" Jacob
M. Lomakin, Soviet consul-general in New York City.
Lomakin was expelled from the United States following an
attempt to kidnap Mrs. Oksana Kasen-kina and force her
return to Russia, which resulted in her jumping out of the
window of his consulate 335


in an effort to escape his "libertarianism". Freedom used in
this sense is obviously a semantic distortion of the werd that
makes it synonymous with slavery. The latest step of the
conspirators to protect themselves from exposure, has been
the agitation being conducted to muzzle the members of
Congress so that it will net be pessible for them to bring the
conspiracy to the attention of the public. The first move was a
resort to typical Communist smearing of Senator Joseph
McCarthy, who dared to repeat charges that had been made
before against traitors, Communists, and other subversives in
the government. McCarthy is being repaid for the limited
measure of courage which he showed in exposing some of the
lesser conspirators, (while remaining strictly silent on the
topic of the top conspirators which the author has repeatedly
called to his attention with ample proof} by being held up by
the President himself and by known traitors, to the ridicule
and scorn of the moronic element of the nation who swallow
this palpably false propaganda. "McCarthyism" has become a
word of opprobium and scorn for any patriot who dares to
expose the conspirators and seeks to defend and protect the
nation.

Subversion in our laws and courts, packed by the
conspirators, has made it a crime to label Communist a person
who by his very act and association proves himself an
accomplice of the Communist Party, unless oft non-existent
party-membership cards in the name of the person can be
produced, or the person openly confesses himself to be a
Communist. The conspirators have created for themselves a
special privilege and thereby have constituted themselves a
class above and beyond the law who are free to continue their
crimes against the nation, immune to exposure, except by the
most daring members of Congress. Now even the members of
Congress are threatened by the conspiracy. The members of
Congress would be sukject to the same persecution as was
Mrs. Hesta McCullough when she correctly labelled two
notorious supporters, accomplices of the Communist cause, if
the schemes of Senators Hunt and Benton, supported by the
Administration, were carried out.

This scheme would destroy what little voice the
Representatives of the nation have in Congress. At present the
members of the House are allowed, as

336


a rule, only one minute for comment on a matter under
discussion, when recognized by the Speaker. In the case of
some critical legislation, recently, only half a minute was
allowed each member for discussion of the bill, by a rule
adopted by the majority of the House.

To make the muzzling of the Congressmen even tighter,
another wrinkle has been added to the regulations of
Congress. A Congressman may not even publish the remarks
and discussions that he would have made, if allowed, in the
Congressional Record, except by unanimous consent of the
members. Any one member of Congress, in alliance with the
conspirators, or one of ther number, could completely
muzzle the Congress, if Senators Hunt, Benton, and their
accomplices can catry through their scheme.

But the conspirators have at their disposal still other tricks
for silencing those who might still dare them or manage to get
by with criticism and exposure of them. The only member of
the Congress who in recent years has dared expose the Rocke-
feller control of our Government is courageous Senator
George W. Malone of Nevada; and the only newspaper in the
country that dared publish his expose was the Chicago
Tribune, in its issue of April 25, 1949, that has been quoted.
Since then, Senator Malone's name has been virtually barred
from mention in the Rockefeller-controlled press. There has
been set up in regard to him a wall of silence that generally
means political death. The only mention of him in the national
press since that date has been an attack on him for using the
privilege of franking his remarks and telegraphing them to the
press, practices that are used by all members of Congress
under their privileges, and are constantly being used on a
wholesale scale by the critics and conspirators themselves.
More recently it has been announced that Rockefeller and
allied money would be poured into Nevada when Malone
comes up for re-election, to secure his defeat; and that a
woman, secretary of his fellow Senator from Nevada, is being
groomed by the conspirators to run against him.

The censorship imposed by President Truman on the
nation's press 18 another step in carrying out the conspirators’
plans fer muzzling it. Annoyed by the exposures of corruption
and subversion in the

337


Government, Truman berated the press for "jeopardizing
national security" by publishing releases made by government
departments themselves. His attitude was that of the
Commission on Freedom of the Press, that a "responsible"
press should publish nothing displeasing to the rulers. Oddly
enough, Truman's "security" motivated censorship was
designed solely to withhold information from the nation, and
not from the enemy. For a representative of the Kremlin's
press, Tass, was present at the conference. He has not been
barred by ‘Truman from getting the press releases of the
departments of his own Administration that he alleges
jeopardize national security, and from transmit-tin the
information to the Soviet Union.

The penultimate in press censorship and suppression has
been attained in the last few years, by a cartelization of the
paper and pulp industry that has resulted in one of the most
absolute monopolies in history, and has run the price of
newsprint from $60 per ton to as high as $250 per ton, when it
can be bought. George Sokolsky commented wisely on this
and other phases of the conspiracy ina Don R. Mellett Lecture
at the University of Syracuse, on May 8,1947, on The Free
And Responsible Press, as follows:

"It is interesting to nete, for instance, that the OPA never

took a single step to protect the newspapers of this country

from the abuse of the price of newsprint by an alien cartel .

The price of paper, the high cost of labor, high taxes, force
weaker newspapers either to fold or sell to chains. Some
newspapers have folded because they were unable to obtain
newsprint or could not pay the exorbitant prices charged by

a monopolistic alien cartel. A government which demands

freedom of press in countries that have never known free-

dom of anything, has taken not a single step to safeguard the
freedom of its own press by protecting the flow of paper
upon which its newspapers are printed. Small newspapers in
small cities find it difficult to remain solvent, and therefore
free, with newsprint at $90 a ton, if they can get it at all. To
this must be added not only the high cost of newspaper
labor but also feather-bedding procedure in the printing
trades which large newspapers meet with difficulty and
some smaller newspapers cannot meet at all. 338


"For example, there is a trick in newspaper production
called "Bogus' and the name is correct. It consists in setting
copy which is never used, the newspapers paying out
hundreds of thousands of dollars every year for this purpose.
Such bogus copy is set, a proof is taken, and the whole thing
is thrown away. It is utter and complete waste. But it obeys
the union rules." However sage and true Sokolsky's
statements are, they do not represent the whole truth. The
alien cartel 1s dominated by the Rockefellers through
the alien powers in question. The Chairman of the Paper
Industry Board is John D. Rockefeller 3rd. The uniens in
question have been especially fostered by the Rockefeller
interests through our government, for the very purpose of
effective control of the press, which it now serves. This
illustrates the profits that have accrued to the Rockefellers
from their fostering of labor unionism as a device for
regimentation of the people and of control of monopolization
of industries through monepely ef labor. It fits perfectly
into the totalitarian and syndicalist plot of the
Rockefeller Empire.

Leaving nothing to chance, the Rockefeller Foundation,
conjointly with its satellite Ford Foundation, has financed the
setting up of the International Press [nstitute and the American
Press Institute, as has been related, for the regimentation of
the press. In order to insure foreign news that suits their
purposes, Rockefeller's Council On Foreign Relations, with
the aid of their satellite Carnegie Corporation, have
undertaken to reward foreign correspondents who serve them
well with lucrative fellowships. The Advisory Committee of
the Council that selects the fellows and supervises their work
were reported to be the following members of the Council:
Gardner Cowles of Look; John K. Jessup of Fortune, Walter
Kerr of the New York Herald Tribune; Grayson Kirk of
Columbia University; Eugene Meyer of the Washington Post;
Edward Murrow of the Columbia Broadcasting System; and
Shepard Stone of the New York Times. In 1949-50
fellowships were awarded to the following: Henry R.
Lieberman, the New York Times correspondent in China. who
has covered Nationalist and Communist areas, including Man-
churia and Sinkiang; and Robert Clurman, chief


correspondent and manager for the United Press in the
Netherlands East Indies. In 1950-51, the fellowships were
awarded to the following: Fitzhugh Turner of the Washington
bureau of the New York Herald Tribune, formerly
correspondent in the Middle East and Palestine, for a study of
Russian imperialism; and William J. Boyle, of the Vienna
bureau of the United Press, for a study of modern European
story.

They have yet to selve the problem of preventing the
publication, independently, of exposures such as this. Thus far
such exposures constitute little annoyance to them, because of
two factors: first, their control and censorship of the press and
most other avenues of advertising and publicity bar these
books from wide circulation; and second they have learned to
trust to the moronity of the rank and file of the average public
whom they have "conditioned" through the decades to be
completely disinterested in such "minor" matters as national
policy, which often determines whether they live or die, and
so completely absorbed in such “vital” issues as the
universally "fixed" sports and in the deified motion-picture
stars, that they have no time for anything else. The more
"intellectual" and "educated", or thought-controlled, of the
mob have been so completely indoctrinated and conditioned
that with a show of bigotry and intolerance, they refuse to be-
lieve the truth when it is presented to them. Therefore, the
conspirators realize, it is only the exceptional individual who
is interested enough to read and profit from a presentation of
the truth, like this volume. And such individuals are an
infinitesimal minority and count for so little in our land, that
they can be ignored. Therefore, a volume such as this,
however true, has been of little concern to them.


340


CHAPTER XVIII


THE "TROJAN HORSE"
ROCKEFELLER'S PHILANTHROPY TRUST A Cesspool Of
Subversion And Perennial Campaign Fund


Philanthropies, social-service activities and charities are
political weapons of the first order, if those who control them
are minded to use them for political purposes. They have the
popular appeal of appearing to give the public something for
nothing. And it is netorious that no one wants to shoot Santa
Claus. Bismarxism, Communism and New and Fair Dealism
have made foundations their most powerful weapon. They are
lobbies of the highest effectiveness, entirely outside and
above the law, a law unto themselves. The propaganda and
political campaigns waged by foundations excel in effective-
hess any party political campaigns, because they are waged
continuously, year in and year out, with unlimited funds and
without any of the legal restrictions imposed upon political
parties. These restrictions in the use of political campaign
funds were impesed primarily through the efforts of the
foundations, which thus cunningly intensified the influence of
their own lobbies.

The Marxist New and Fair Deals could not have come into
power and retained it for so long a period without the
continuous propaganda, campaigning and lobbying for their
measures by the Rockefeller-contrelled foundations and
associated organizations, with all the great wealth, influence
and prestige they possess. Not even the Government itself can
wield as great an influence, because in politics the purchase of
influence carries the limitation of the stigma of corruption, as
it does in the world of business and commerce; but in the field
of philanthropy and social work it is "accepted practice” to
bribe public officials with retainers, jobs and favors, because
of the false inference that their lobbying is done in the public
interest.

This corrupt use of pseudo-philanthropy in politics is as old
as human history. Shrewd members of Congress, back in the
days before so many of them had come under the influence of
the "philanthropic" lobby, recognized the menace of the pro-
posed Rockefeller Foundation. In 1910to 1911,

341


they refused to grant a charter to it on the ground that it would
constitute a menace to the nation. On January 26, 1917,
Senator Chamberlain of Oregon, stated on the floor of the
Senate, in a wisely accurate and prophetic vein:

"The Carnegie-Rockefeller influence is bad. In two
generations they can change the minds of the people to make
them conform to the cult of Rockefeller or the cult of
Carnegie, rather than to the fundamental principles of
American democracy.” Senator Martine, of New Jersey, said,
on another occasion:

"I hope that the United States may be spared from living on
contributions from Rockefeller and Carnegie". Many other of
the shrewder members of Congress were wise and discerning
enough to speak in the same vein. Their attitude was in sharp
contrast with the akject and craven subservience to the
Rockefeller interests of the large majority of the members of
present-day Congresses that defile Washington and echo the
historic remark of servile, "bipartisan" Senator Arthur H.
Vandenberg at the 1945 San Francisco U.N. Conference:

"Anything Rockefeller wants is O.K." This sentiment,
unfortunately for the nation, represents the views of all the
members of our present-day Congresses with the exception of
one or two men, notably Senator Malone of Nevada. They are
the only true Americans representing the country in these
times of disaster wrought by the conspirators. In 1911, there
were still Americans in the majority on the floors of Congress.
They rejected the granting of a charter to the Rockefeller
Foundation by an overwhelming vote.

Monopoly is the keynote of Rockefeller enterprise. It is
quite natural that when John D. had discovered the publicity,
propaganda, thought-contrel and commercial value of pseudo-
philanthropic foundations, he should seek to gain a
monopolistic control of them and of allied organizations.
Besides, self-interest dictated that he would seek to eliminate
that bugbear to the Rockefeller mind, the waste that would be
involved in a battle of foundations promoting opposing or
differing causes. Carteliza-tion of philanthropy, of propaganda
agencies parading as philanthropies, of commercial pseudo-

342


philanthropies, and of charities that feed on the generous
impulses of mankind was, from that viewpoint, a desirable
objective.

John D. Rockefeller attained the first step in the direction of
a merger of "philanthropies” in 1908, when Andrew Carnegie,
an in-law of William Rockefeller, was given a trusteeship by
Rockefeller on the General Education Board. This initiated the
merger of the two richest groups of "philanthropies" of the
time, following a period of several years of collaboration
between Rockefeller and Carnegie personally through social
and golfing contacts. (Nevins, JDR, v. 2, p. 592) It was not
long before the Rockefellers and their underlings were
appointed to the boards of the various Carnegie philanthropic
organizations and dominated them.

At the present time, the Rockefellers are represented
personally in the Carnegie Endowment For International
Peace, a significant set-up in the international field, by David
Rockefeller, as trustee; and the chairman of its board of
trustees is their kinsman and agent, John Foster Dulles. The
two of them were largely instrumental in the appointment of
Alger Hiss to the post of president of the Carnegie
organization, and with their puppets and agents dictated its
policies, propaganda and powerful lobby. Through their
agents appointed to the board of each and every one of the
Carnegie foundations, they now control them all. This
domination has been tightened up by interlocking of a
majority of these trustees with the Foreign Office of the
Rockefeller Empire, the Council On Foreign Relations.

Under Rockefeller control, the activities of the Carnegie
Endowment For International Peace have completely belied its
name and violated the purpose for which it was chartered, by
propaganda for our involvement in war—in 1914-1917, ‘and
again in 1940, when its President Nicholas Murray Butler
campaigned for our intervention on behalf of England. Also,
in vielation of the law, it was the organizer of the campaign
for the three billion dollar gift to England; and it published
and distributed 300,000 copies of a propaganda pamphlet
designed te influence the Congress, by Robert M. Gulick Jr.,
entitled Fifteen Facts On The Proposed British Loan. As the
reader undoubtedly suspects by now, the "loan" was merely
another device for looting the

343


taxpayers to fill the treasury of the Rockefeller Empire.

It is ironic that the control of the pro-British Carnegie
organizations should have fallen into the hands of the
Rockefeller interests who are effecting the destruction of the
British Empire, and that it should be subverted to their
purposes. But in this they share the fate of every important
foundation in the country. Through their drafting of the laws,
through control of the governmental agencies and courts
involved, through seduction, bribery or other form of
procurement of personnel skilled in the administration of
foundations, through flattering offers of "cooperation" with
the newer foundations that ends up in eventual control, or
through court action, as in the case of the Frick Museum, “the
Rockefeller Empire has gained control of every important
foundation and subverted them all to the uses and purposes of
the Empire. Their control of the educational institutions of the
country, especially in the field of the "social sciences", in
which 15 included the administration of philanthropies, ‘has
been a material help in this cartelization of the philanthropies.

A mere detailing of the extent of the interlocking of the
trusteeships of the foundations on the one hand, and their
interlocking with the Rockefeller-dominated, and ‘subversive
and Marxist political and propaganda agencies and
Government agencies on the other hand, gives some slight
inkling of the extent of the menace of the Philanthropy-
Charity-Social-Service Trust.

Of the total of 151 trustees listed, 37 interlock the
trusteeships of two or more foundations each, 109 interlock
membership with Rockefeller's Council On Foreign Relations,
eight or more interlock with the Institute of Pacific Relations,
and four were editors of Amerasia magazine. The character
and tenor of these trusteeships is indicated by the fact that
Alger Hiss Was interlocking trustee of the largest number of
these organizations at the time his "patriotic" career was
interrupted by a jail sentence for perjury in connection with
treason. Hiss's trusteeships included the presidency of the
Carnegie Endowment For International Peace, trusteeships of
the Woodrow Wilson Foundation and the World Peace
Foundation, and membership in Rockefeller's Council on
Foreign Relations and the

344


Institute Of Pacific Relations. His “sponser, patron and
mentor", John Foster Dulles, was "runner-up" with four:
chairman of the beard of trustees of the Carnegie
Endownment For International Peace, trustee of the
Rockefeller Foundation, member of the Council On Foreign
Relations and of the Federal (alias National) Council of
Churches of Christ in America (alias U.S.} Others, who rival
these in the number of their foundation trusteeships, are Karl
T. Compton, Cleveland E. Dodge, Douglas 5. Freeman,
Walter 5. Gifford, Robert Gordon Sproul, W. W. Waymack
and Harry Merritt Wriston.

Making use of the generous impulses of mankind has
become a big and important aspect of the business enterprises
of the Rockefeller Empire that overlooks no exploitable
human failing or weakness. It gives them two advantages: it
places the control of enormous wealth in their own hands to
be used as they choose; and it keeps that wealth out of the
hands of possible rivals in the quest for power and
domination. Since these moneys flow directly inte their
control, it is not surprising that their agents have written into
the law, provisions that exempt from taxation the moneys that
flow into their “philanthropic”, "social service’ and
"charitable" organizations.

On August 13, 1951, the National Planning Association, an
organization that has been subsidized by the Rockefeller
Foundation, released a pamphlet written by Rockefeller "tax
expert" Beardsley Ruml, im collaboration with Theodore
Geiger, entitled "The Five Percent”. It deals with a clause in
the Federal tax laws Ruml was instrumental in having inserted
for his masters, that permits corporations to deduct 5% of their
total net income "for approved expenditures for educational
scientific and welfare purposes." It can be assumed that
expenditures are "approved" by agents of the Empire planted
in the Treasury Department, whose approval must be had for
all such matters as setting up tax-exempt foundations or
researches—a key device in the process of gaining control of
all foundations. Ruml, an eld hand at the commercial use of
pseudo-philanthropies, naively let the cat out of the bag by
pointing out the profits of these "philanthropies" to the donors,
as follows:

".. many corporations which contribute to

scientific research gain access to industrial and 345


technologie applications as a result of that research, which

may more than repay the expenditures.

"The expenditures create a highly favorable atmosphere for
the corporation within its other business activities—for
example, its sales promotion work and its labor relations—
have a much better chance of being successful.” The real uses
to which these "research funds”, as well as the activities of the
National Planning Association, are put when "approved", can
be discerned from the fact that Beardsley Ruml's collaborator,
Theodore Geiger, was exposed as a Communist by Professor
William Canning before the McCarran Internal Security
Committee hearing on August 16, 1951. The taxpayers’
moneys are used te supplement the foundations’ wealth in
fostering Communism in the guise of “social science" re-
search.

The subversive character of the activities and of the key
personnel of Rockefeller's Council On Foreign Relations and
of their other “philanthropies" and their multitudinous
subsidiaries, allies and fronts, has been detailed in other
chapters. The political complexion and efficiency of the var-
ious Rockefeller foundations has been recounted. How true
this state of affairs is in the other foundations of the Trust can
be illustrated by listing the Board of Trustees of some of
them. The italicized are New Deal officials and the starred,
notorious Left Wingers and Marxists.


SPELMAN FUND


Cleveland E. Dedge Charles E. Merriam*
Clarence A. Dykstra John D. Rockefeller II]
Marshall Field* Laurance $. Rockefeller


William Tudor Gardiner Beardsley Ruml
TWENTIETH CENTURY FUND


A. A. Berle Jr. Paul G. Hoffman

Francis Biddle* Ostuald W. Knauth
Bruce Bliven* Robert M. LaFollette Jr.*
Chester Bowles* Morris E. Leeds
Benjamin V. Cohen” Robert 5. Lynd

Henry $. Dennison James G. McDonald
John H. Fahey Charles P. Taft*

H. Chr. Sonne W. W. Waymack


346


WOODROW WILSON FOUNDATION


Mrs. Barry Bingham Archibald MacLeish*
Joseph E. Davies* Hugh Moore

John §. Dickey Edward R. Murrow
Cleveland E. Dedge James B. Reston
Thomas K. Finletter Mrs. Ruth Bryan Rohde
Mrs. Raymond B. Fosdick Francis B. Sayre

Douglas $. Freeman Arthur Sweetser
Alger Hiss* Henry A. Wallace*
Grayson Kirk William W. Waymack
Mrs. Henry Goddard Leach Sumner Welles

Herbert H. Lehman* Mrs. Quincey Wright


The mechanics of control and subversion of foundations
that are not directly dominated is currently illustrated by the
developments in the Ford Foundation. This Foundation was
established in 1936 by Edsel Ford with a gift of $25,000, and
was rapidly enriched by gifts from Henry and Edsel Ford and
their estates. Its stated purpose was to receive and administer
funds for scientific, educational and charitable ends, to further
the public welfare. Its methed of operation was to extend
grants to other organizations for their maintenance and
operation. In December 1947, it showed capital assets of
$204,855,975.65; total expenditures of $1,060,064.93; and
grants of $982,185.67, but published no report. It had only
tive trustees: Henry Ford II, President; Burt J. Craig, Secretary
and Treasurer; Karl T. Compton, who is chairman of the board
of Massachusetts Institute of Technology that has been so
liberally subsidized by the Rockefeller-controlled foundations,
interlocking trustee of the General Education Board, the
Rockefeller Foundation, the Edison Foundation and the Alfred
P. Sloan Foundation, a member of Rockefeller's Council on
Foreign Relations and noted in educational circles as a
"liberal"; Donald K. David, who is dean of the Harvard
Scheel of Business that is controlled by the Rockefeller-
dominated foundations, a familiar Harvard brand of "liberal"
and a member of Rockefeller's Council On Foreign Relations;
and Benson Ford.

Hard-headed Henry Ford had been quite successful in
keeping beth Wall Street and the Rockefeller interests out of
his enterprises. But Henry the Second, far more naive than his
erandfather, succumbed to political pressure exercised through
inheritance-tax and Treasury bureaucrats and had


opened the door by way of the Ford Foundation to the agents
of Rockefeller, peddling their dictatorship conspiracy as

"social science”. It is safe to predict that this will lead the way
to his eventual loss of control of the enterprise he has
inherited. For, although the Ford Foundation holds only 3,-
089,908 shares of the Class A, non-voting stock of the Ford
Co., ways will be discovered by the conspirators to give it,
and their agents in it, control of the enterprise. By 1950, the
process was already under way. By this time, the value of that
stock alone was reported by the Foundation to be $417,-
137,580, mere "chicken feed" in these days of squandering of
tens of billions of dollars of taxpayers’ money, but still one of
the largest boodle funds available in the nation, in the form of
a tax-exempt foundation, that can be converted to subversive
political propaganda by the conspirators.

The breach made by Compton and David, representing
Rockefeller-contrelled “philanthropy” was considerably
widened by enlargement of the board of trustees, through the
addition of:

John Cowles, president of the Minneapolis Star

& Tribune Co., trustee of the Foreign Service

Foundation and member of Rockefeller's Council

On Foreign Relations.

Charles E. Wilson, president of the General

Electric Co., and trustee of the Foreign Service

Foundation, and Fair Deal official. In addition there were
added a host “learned professors", officers of universities
heavily subsidized by the Rockefeller “thought control”
organizations that parade as "philanthropes", who are
dependent upon the Reckefeller-controlled Carnegie Founda-
tion For The Advancement Of Teaching for their pensions and
who must do as they are bid.

These submissive "learned professors" were organized into
a "study committee” to serve as "Independent consultants to
the Foundation". This was required by the Treasury
Department before it would make a final ruling on the tax
exemption of the funds left to the Foundation.

This learned group of professors was permitted by the
poewers-that-be to dictate how the Ford fortune should be
spent. But even learned professors must eat; and to attain the
positions they held they must have learned long since that the
easiest and only way to insure steady eating is to


prostitute themselves to the Rockefeller thought-contrel
machine that dictates to the schools and the Government what
shall be taught and by whom, and to do its bidding. It is not
surprising, therefore, that this "study group" emerged after
two years, on September 26, 1950, with their report that re-
quired the Ford Foundation to follow the purposes laid down
by the Rockefeller interests for all foundations, to support the
Marxist New and Fair Deals with their funds and thus to
provide a half-billion-dollars perpetual campaign fund for the
Socialism and/or Communism of the Democratic Party and
the advancement thereby of the Rockefeller Empire.

Their report dictated “five areas for action" to the
Foundation, which surprisingly happen to be the same
categories into which the Rockefellers classify the activities
of their Foundation, except that the “social sciences” are
divided into two categories.

Thus the Ford Foundation was either seduced or
blackmailed through Treasury Department "acceptance" into
constituting itself a perpetual and perennial campaign fund for
Rockefeller's Marxist New and Fair Deal and the Democratic
Party that carries it out. The program which these "independ-
ent consultants" imposed on the Ford Foundation was
Rockefellerism. Carrying out of this deal was insured by the
appointment of the New Deal ECA Administrator, Paul G.
Hoffman, as president of the Foundation at a salary of
$100,000 a year, announced in the New York Times,
September 27, 1950. Robert M. Hutchins, former Chancellor
of Rockefeller's University of Chicago, head of the Red
Commission on Freedom of the Press and Committee to
Frame a (Socialist) World Constitution, whose record is cited
elsewhere, was appointed Vice-Director. Hoffman has served
the Rockefeller Empire sufficiently well to merit membership
in Rockefeller's Council on Foreign Relations.

At the time of Hoffman's appointment, the New York Times
announced that the Foundation would promptly launch an
intensive campaign for the political activities dictated by
"learned professors" and "independent consultants", especially
in the various "areas" of the "social science" program urged by
them. It was announced that: "Its disbursements will be in the
field of social sciences,


349


with Mr. Hoffman having ‘enormous powers’ in the
apportionment of the fund .

The available liquid resources for this campaign fund, that
can be expended for steady propaganda and campaigning, year
in and year out, and with no regard to the Hatch Corrupt
Practices Act, was announced by the Foundation to be
$68,791,847, as of the end of 1950. Used in connection with
the 1952 Presidential election campaign, it would probably
make the total Foundation election boodle fund the largest in
the history of the country. It would probably prove sufficient
to saddle the Democratic Party and its program of Marxist
Rocke-fellerism on the nation for at least another four years—
and their totalitarian rule.

The New York Times announcements that have been
recounted were preceded on September 21, 1950, by one of
the "scoops" for which Walter Winchell is so renowned. He
announced in the New York Journal American:

. the Ford Foundation will distribute its

$80. 000,000 tax exempt fund in the field of social

science—particularly the training of men for

government services." Eliminating any doubt as to the
influence of the Reckefeller Foundation over the activities of
the Ford Foundation, the report stated:

"Winchell said the Foundation 'studied the

werkings of the Rockefeller Foundation and

others, before deciding to devote its wealth to

social sciences rather than medicine or other

physical sciences'.’

With Hoffman in control, no time was lost in launching the
Ford Foundation in an intensive thought-contrel and
propaganda campaign. The first step was announced on
February 20, 1951, in the New York Times, under the
headline, Ford Foundation Sets Up Educational Study. The
Foundation announced the creation of a Fund For The
Advancement Of Education, with an initial grant of
$7,154,000. The chairman is none other than Frank W.
Abrams, chairman of the board of Rockefeller's Standard Oil
Co. of New Jersey. The president is Professor Clarence H.
Faust, dean of the college and of the graduate library of
Rockefeller's University of Chicago, who had been
transplanted in 1947 to Leland Stanford University as Dean
of the

350


Humanities and Sciences. The board of trustees include the
following:

Barry Bingham, president and editor of the Couner—
Journal & Louisville Times, owner and operator of radio
station WHAS, member of the board of overseers of
Harvard U. and member of Rockefeller's Council on
Foreign Relations

Ralph J. Bunche, director of the Division of Trusteeship
of the United Nations, trustee of the Phelps-Stckes Fund
and member of the Council on Foreign Relations

Walter Lippmann, auther and journalist and member of
Rockefeller's Council on Foreign Relations
Owen J. Roberts, former U.S. Supreme Court Justice and

rabid “internationalist", who has publicly proclaimed his
desire to haul down the American flag and replace it with an
“international” U.N. banner A fund for adult "education" was
announced as one of its first activities in the N.Y. Times of
April 24, 1951. Adequate secrecy for the activities of the
Foundation that could not stand the light of day was provided
by its announced policy of leaving publicity on grants to the
discretion of the grantees. Censorship of the press on an
international basis was the next venture of the Ford
Foundation, in the form of the International Press Institute.
It was entered into in collaboration with the Rockefeller
Foundation, that had never been brazen enough to openly
launch such a venture, but now saw the opportunity to do so
through one of its less suspect agencies. The purposes of the
Institute stated in the Times announcement on April 10,
1951, are aa follows:

"First, the furtherance and safeguarding of the freedom of
the press, by which is meant free access to the news, free
expression of views, free publication of newspapers; second,
achievement of understanding among editors and so (Ed.:
good rhetoric is apparently of no interest to these
distinguished editors} among peoples; third, the promotion of
free exchange of accurate and balanced news among
nations; and fourth, the improvement of the practices of
journalism.” There is no record that the ultra-Red Newspaper
Guild which herds the newspaper staffs of the nation, and
especially that of the New York Times,

351


in the service of Communism, Russia and the Rockefeller-
Soviet Axis, had the slightest word of protest against the
Institute, in spite of its rigid control of all activities and
organizations breaching on newspapers. Within a short time
the Times announced "seminars" on newspaper topics held by
the American Press Institute, Columbia University.
Television, which has such tremendous potentials for
propaganda, subversion and political control, was the field of
activity next entered into by the Ford Foundation. On June 13,
1951, the N.Y. Times announced that the Ford Foundation had
launched, in cooperation with the National Association of
Radio & Television Broadcasters, a study to determine "how
commercial television can contribute to 'a better level of
educational, informative and more culturally mature
programs” in the form of an experimental and radio workshop
to prepare special programs and offer them to sponsors. James
Webb Young, consultant to the Foundation, is quoted as
stating that commercial broadcasting would have great social
significance and that:

"It is this powerful stream of commercial broadcasting
which in my opinion, will be the real impact of television on
this country—on its level of information, its emotional
maturity and on its unconscious behavior patterns." This
powerful weapon of propaganda, thought control and
subversion, the conspirators openly propose to control
through the Ford Foundation: "In the workshep it would
undertake to produce, probably on film, programs with a
content in line with the foundation's purposes .. ." Once again
it is curious to note that the Communist elements, usually so
active and vociferous in all matters that touch on
propaganda, have raised no objection te this program. It
must be quite to their hking. The reason may be discernible
in a broadcast made by a Columbia Broadcasting System
panel on Sunday, August 19, 1951. The participants were
Representative Reva B. Bosone (Democrat, Utah}, Rev.
Paul C. Payne of the crimson Board of Christian
Education and George H. Shaw, former Assistant Secretary
of State. They refused to lay the blame for destruction of the
morality of the nation's youth on the perversion and
subversion of the educational system of

352


"educators" who openly teach in our schools and through fall
avenues of publication that morality is an anachronistic
bourgeois forble, weakness or vice; or on the wholesale
corruption, perversion and treason of public officials. These
callous propagandists and perverters of the truth followed the
line laid down by the Communist Party and by President
Truman in his speech before the American Legion and by the
Democratic National Committee, in preparation for trick
campaign oratory and for pulling the wool over the eyes of the
"peasants". They laid the blame for the immorality on the
exposure of corruption, treason, perversion and immorality,
especially in the course of political campaigns. They call the
exposure of such corruption, treason, perversion and other
immorality, "character assassination", until the day that the
party involved is thrown behind bars; and they apparently feel
that the offenses do not exert an evil influence even then,
except in the process of exposure and prosecution. In short,
the damage is not in the crime but in its exposure. It is a new
version of the old idea held by the criminal, that the only
crime is being caught.

This cry of "character assassination” sounds strange
coming from the mouth of Harry Shippe Truman, the vestige
of the courageous American Senator who, in 1942,
"assassinated" the character of Rockefeller's Standard Oil Co.
his present day bosses, with the truthful charge of treason. It
sounds even stranger coming from the mouth of a clergyman
in defense of Senator Tydings and his shameful protection of
subversion and treason.

The Rockefeller-dominated Trust has made it impossible to
set up any sizeable fund or foundation for the fostering of
Americanism or the support of the Constitution. The
Constitution is an anathema to the conspirators and is never
mentioned by them in any of their programs. Any
organization for Constitutional education invites the fury of
the conspirators and all the persecution and presecution which
their puppet public officials can bring to bear. But in the case
of the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, another technique was
used, one that has become the standard among the
conspiraters in blocking the philanthropic intent of true
Americans.

353


the nation by the Rockefeller-subsidized tou


In 1934, Alfred P. Sloan, then president of General Motors
Corp., member of Rockefellers Council On Foreign
Relations, announced a gift of ten million dollars to establish
the Sloan Foundation for the purpose of effecting

". a broader as well as a better understanding of the
economic principles and national policies which have
characterized American enterprise." He appointed his
brother Hareld Stephenson Sloan, whe obtained his M.A. of
Columbia U. in economics, in the year 1926, and became
associate professor of economics at the N. J. State
Teachers College, visiting professor of economics at New
York University and lecturer at Columbia U., vice-president
and executive director of the Sloan Foundation. He occupied
this post until 1945.

Under his directorship, the Sloan Foundation was
reincorporated as the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Inc.
(Delaware}. The foundation became a hotbed of Marxist
"science", otherwise known as “social science”, and the
"Americanism" that it promulgated was Soviet Americanism.
To what extent New Deal pressure was responsible for the
subversion of the Foundation is not known. But the Treasury
Department has been capable of ruling that to foster
Americanism is "to engage in propaganda", a ruling that
would bar the Foundation from tax exemption. But it never
has been known to rule that spreading Communist and New
Deal propaganda is "to engage in propaganda".

The board of trustees of the reorganized Foundation, which
was unquestionably dictated by the Reckefeller interests
through the Treasury Department, as indicated by its
personnel, included:

Karl T. Compton, trustee of the General Education
Board, Rockefeller Foundation and Edison Foundation and
member of Rockefeller's Council On Foreign Relations

Lewis W. Douglas, trustee of the Rockefeller Foundation
and General Education Board, member of Rockefeller's
Council On Foreign Relations, former Ambassador to St.
James Court and president of the Mutual Life Insurance Co.

Rev. Harry F. Ward of the Union Theological
Seminary and the Federal Council of Churches
of Christ in America, a steady contributor to the
official Communist publication, the Daily Worker,

354


and notorious pro-Communist and joiner of Communist

front organizations

John L. Pratt, kinsman of Rockefeller's partner, George
Whitney, President of J. P. Mergan & Co. and trustee of
Consolidated Edison Co.

Alfred P. Sloan Jr. Assisting Director Sloan, as
"educational" director, was Miss Eunice Fuller Barnard who
was a member of two organizations listed by the Department
of Justice as "subversive and Communist": 1. The Joint Anti-
Fascist Refugee Committee which supported the activities of
Gerhardt Eisler as ranking Soviet agent in the U.S.; and 2.
The Conference on Pan American Democracy. The out-
standing achievements of the Foundation under this direction
were:
l. Public Affairs Committee Inc. which was supported

with grants that totalled $379,947.20

2. Institute of Post-War Reconstruction, with $59,212.

3. Educational Film Institute, with $75,000, for the
production of Communist films with musie by
Rockefeller protege, Hanns Eisler. The Public Affairs
Committee was described by

the House Committee on Un-American Activities as "an
organization which issues higher quality pamphlets on
subjects related to those adopted for propagation by the
Communist Party.” Its founders were:

Evans Clark, one of the first employees of the Soviet

Information Bureau in the U.S., director of the Twentieth

Century Foundation, and member of Rockefeller's Council

on Foreign Relations. Frederick Vanderbilt Field, whose

record as a sponsor of Communist causes and membership
in Rockefeller's Council on Foreign Relations is recounted
in these pages.

Maxwell §. Stewart, editor of the Committee's
publications, who was identified by Louis F. Budenz as
a Communist Party member on the authority of Earl Browder,
taught at the Moscow Institute, was associate editor of the
Moscow Daily News, and has fifty-two citations for affilia-
tions with subversive organizations. It is not surprising that
the Public Affairs pamphlets, written by such authors as
Maxwell $. Stewart, Carey McWilliams, Morris Ernst, Harold
Loy Ickes, Ruth Benedict, Gene Weltfish, Robert E. Cush-

355


man and Dr. Charles E. A. Winslow are rated as Red
propaganda and reading recommended by the Communist
Party. The pamphlet written by Benedict and Weltfish,
entitled Races of Mankind was barred from circulation among
the Armed Forces after protests by the House Military Affairs
Committee against its Communist propaganda.

Under the secretary-generalship of Henry Allen Moe,
director of the American Association of Rhodes Scholars,
trustee of the Rockefeller Foundation and of Rockefeller's
Museum of Modern Art, the John Simon Guggenheim
Foundation has supplied fellowships and support almost
exclusively to Communist fellow travelers selected by the
Standing Committee headed by Dr. Linus Pauling, a frequent
sponsor of Communist-organized protests and fronts. Among
the Fellows are:


Louis Adamic Newton Arvin Teeey Bacon
Carleton Beals Albert Bein Bessie
Mare Blitzsteini Kenneth Burke Harrier Bucktraster
ack Conroy Aarot Copland Adolph Dehri
Angner Enters Kent eth caring, Hallie Flannagan
Mordecai Gorelik Willam Gropper Albert Hal et
losephine lerbst Granville Hic bram L. Harris
Maurice Hindus Langston Huptes Kolfe Himn es
‘oe Jor Otto Klinebers Gwen Lattimore
Douglas S. Mogre Carey McWilliams Lewis Murrifor
Alexander North Max Nerrad Saul K. Padover
Nathaniel Peffer Bernard Reiss Earl Robinson
pidoni Schneider Harry Slochower Maxwell $. Stewart
T Tippett Genevieve Tagoard Charles R, Walker
Fatman igor Richard Wright Willam E. Zeuch
Not included in the above list is one notable, Professor


Margaret Schlauch, who left the U.S. to become a teacher in
Communist Poland.

The Rosenwald Foundation, under the directorship of
Edwin R. Embree, former vice-president of the Rockefeller
Foundation, and avowed Marxist, persistently engaged in
Communist agitation, especially among Negroes. Dr. J. W.
Holley, Negro educator and founder of the Albany State
College for Negroes, called the Rosenwald Foundation one of
the principal agencies fostering hatred of the whites by a
campaign that accused them of robbing the colored folks of
their rights. It contributed, with Rockefeller's General
Education Board, te the Bethune College for Negroes that is
headed by Mrs. Mary McLeod Bethune, who is listed in the
Califorma Un-American Activities report as one cf the "well
known Communists". It also supported liberally the American
Council on Race Relations,

356


on the board of which Embree served with Mrs. Bethune and
Will W. Alexander, a vice-president of the Rosenwald
Foundation named by Lauchlin Currie, as friend of Nathan
Gregory Silvermaster, who was accused of complicity in
Communist spy ring activities. The Council was also
supported by the Rockefeller Foundation and the Carnegie
Corporation, and the president of the latter served on the
Council's board.

The Foreign Service Educational Foundation that
undertakes to indoctrinate men who wish to enter, or are in,
the Diplomatic Corps, in 1950 turned over to Owen
Lattimore's pro-Communist control its School of Advanced
International Studies, to be merged with his Walter Hines
Page School of International Relations at Johns Hopkins U.
that has been liberally subsidized by the Carnegie Corporation
and the Rockefeller Foundation.

Instances of subversive activities of a host of foundations
merged into a Foundation Trust by the Rockefeller interests,
can be cited endlessly. Enough has been related to make it
clear that they are a grave menace to the nation, a power
above and beyond our government, the adjunct of an invisible
super-government that boldly and baldly engages in
subversive political activities and undertakes to impose a
dictatorship on our country. In their political activities the
foundations that comprise this Trust violate the provisions of
the laws that make their existence possible by according them
tax exemption on the condition that they refrain from political
activities. By failure to comply with the law, this group of
foundations provide the immediate instrument of their
destruction. For it 1s inconceivable that the courts will hold
that in their pro-Communist political activities they were
engaged in “education” and not in politics. By mere
enforcement of the law this social cancer can be and should be
destroyed.

It remains to be seen if these foundations and their sponsors
are more powerful than the nation that created their right to
existence. There is delicious irony in this situation, that
provides that the selfsame Marx-inspired tax laws that the
conspirators promoted to impoverish the nation and enrich
their sponsors, shall serve to destroy them and rid the land of
their menace.

One fact emerges from a study of the founda-357


tions. Directly or indirectly they are all controlled by the
Rockefeller interests. Under the provisions of the law and its
administration, no important foundation can exist without
their acquiescence, that is not subject te their control.


FOUNDATION CODE
L. Foundation For Economic k Near East Foundation Education l
Triternational Ladies! Garment
2. American Foundation Workers Union
3. Carnegie Corporation of N. Y. tet Tnstitute of Tor! Educational Tre.
4. Carnegie Endowment for Toe’ n American Association of Univer-Peace
sity Women, Fellowship Fund
5. Carnegie Institute of Washington o. National (Federal) Council of z
6 Carn ele Foundation For The Churches of Christ in U. $. Advancement of
Teach ng (America) _
7. Filene Foundation Tne. and e World Student Service Fund Edward Filene
Good Wall Fund q. Pepi Cola Scholarship Board
8. General Education Board r. Hertzler F oun dation
9. Rockefeller Brothers Fund s. Field Foundation
D. Rockefeller Foundation t Tndustrial Areas Foundation
L. Spelman Fund of New York u. Turrell Fund i
2. Twentieth Century Fund v. Gugeenheitn Mernorial
3. Woodrow Wilson Foundation w. Textile Foundation
4. World Peace Foundation x. Institute of Pu ie. Administration
5. New York Community Trust z. Walter Hines Page School of Tnt'l
6. Ford Foundation Relations, Johns Hopkins U.
7. Council on Foreign Relations A. Amerasia editor
$. Institute of Pacific Relations B. William Ç. Whitney Fund
9. Chicago Cornmunity Chest C. Miibank Fund
b. phelps- stokes Fund E. Rosenwald Fund .
c. Psychiatric Foundation F.F. D. Roosevelt Memorial _
d. Russell Sage F qundation G. Leasing Rosenwald Foundation
e. Foreign Service Education H. Same as h.
Foundation T. Lavanburg Foundation
f Clayton Foundation K Institute of Investment Education
e. Edison Foundation i Farm Foundation
h. Alfred P. Sloan Foundation M. Old Dominion Foun dation
L William Alanson White Foundation N. Social Science Foundation
j Grant Foundation O. Commonwealth Fund


358


:
;


pri

oa

a

SSSSS55555
j : i

prines

E


1
ioe Tae
2 Lerner, Max i>
< i < 18A,
be H Ze
ii. 7 wu ia
3,5 P z a
ate g a
th D, 17 10v E,
A 8 di:
. Rikianh, i 16». Co
vealed i
ts a
+" Hi s, 10
si 1G 15 C 17 N
: t 17
Oois E te 11, 13, k, w a
H deii i&u,


Er ee F
1a,


Frags pagaprereperptg"


xp
a
?


oak
eas


È i
Riga "Y
A 17 d
8, 4, 10, 1 A 10,5 P,
* 1
z My i | farra
Rer h n W. ira 1a,
ie pag Sumner 3
i 4 E .
ni E peu eu


CHAPTER XIX


ROCKEFELLER'S "POPULAR FRONT"
The "New" And "Fair" Deals.


The Roosevelt "New Deal" regime was the fulfillment of
the pledge of a "Popular Front” government in the U.S. that
the Rockefeller Empire had cbvicusly made to Stalin as one
of the bases of their pact. It was composed almost entirely of
Rockefeller-Soviet Axis agents, who had planned it as "social
science", and of other types of puppets of the Rockefeller
Empire and its “philanthropies”. It is absurd to speak of the
Communist spies and agents who have been exposed in high
posts in Washington as “infiltrators". They were the very
backbone of the New Deal, planted there from the start to
serve the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis in its global conspiracy.
From the very start of the regime, after removal of a large
number of employees from government posts by Roosevelt, at
the behest of the conspirators, on the pretense of "economy",
which had been a sham campaign platform, the government
was packed with hundreds of thousands of Rockefeller Reds
spawned in the Rockefeller-dominated "educational" system.
Rockefeller-subsidized professors, especially the peddlers of
the bogus "social sciences", and their students, whose training
fitted them only for some task in a "managed economy", a
euphemism for Communist or other forms of Marxist
dictatorship, and whe consequently constituted an ever
growing pressure group supporting the Rockefeller-Soviet
Axis, became the priests of the "new social order" —the New
Deal.

Surrender of control of the destinies of the nation to the
professors who constitute the vaunted "brain trust",
consequently means surrender to the type of totalitarianism
dictated to them by the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis. They must be
ever-ready to betray their country to that Axis. This is
eloquently attested to by the fact that the great majority of the
traitors who have been exposed in the past decade have been
professors and their students. Hiss and Field of Harvard,
Coplon of Columbia, Gillars of Hunter College, Pressman of
Cornell, Dr. Ponte-corve and numerous others attest to the
subversive influence of the Rockefeller-subsidized or
dominated universities. The presidents of most of our leading

360


universities are included in the membership of the Rockefeller
Empire's Foreign Office, the Council on Foreign Relations,
where they are indoctrinated by such characters as Owen
Lattimore, Frederick Wan-derbilt Field and William W.
Lockwood, former editors of Amerasia and Alger Hiss, all
champions of Marxism, and by others of equal calibre and in-
clination. Soviet interests could not be expected to suffer, at
their hands, in a conflict of interests with the U.S. Among the
university presidents thus indoctrinated are General Dwight
Eisenhower, President of Columbia University, Harold
Stassen, President of the University of Pennsylvania, Karl
Compton, President of Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
James Bryant Conant, President of Harvard University, John
Sloan Dickey, President of Dartmouth, Isaiah Bowman,
former President of Johns Hopkins, Robert Gordon Sproul,
President of the University of California and numerous others.
Through them the educational system of the nation is
impressed into the service of the Reckefeller-Soviet Axis.

In 1926, the Rockefeller interests started grooming Franklin
Delano Roosevelt for the role of puppet, depression President.
He was an incompetent who had never been able to earn
enough te support his family; who had started off as a Ku
Klux Klan candidate for the N. Y. State Senate, trading on the
Roosevelt name and its appeal to the "peasants"; whose wife
was trusted by the Kremlin as one of the original agents of the
Bismarxian school of Marxism in the U.S.: who had suffered
from an attack of encephalomyelitis, falsely described as
infantile paralysis, that had left him with the stigma of high
suggestibility so aptly described by his wife in her
autebiegraphy and by others, and gave him the reputation of
being a good politician because he acquiesced with all who
spoke with him but that made him completely pliable by
agents planted at his side, —this Roosevelt recommended
himself highly to the Rockefeller interests as the prospective
Charley McCarthy, the “perfect dummy" to serve as
spokesman in putting over their totalitarian conspiracy, and in
fulfilling their Soviet agreement. Through their collaborator,
George Foster Peabody, they made him a present of Georgia
Warm Springs, with a quarter-of-a-million dollars mortgage
attached, that was too large for him te

361


handle witheut their help. In the following year, they bribed
him to accept the New York gubernatorial nomination to the
tune of more than $800,-000, as related by Ernest K. Lindley,
his publicity man, in the official campaign biography, under
the cover of a philanthropic sham. That sham was completely
exposed by me in 1935 in my book, Rackets, Social Service
And Medical, and in 1940 in Your Life Is Their Toy.

Franklin Delano Roosevelt might not have been placed in
the White House by the conspirators, if President Hoover had
not been a Quaker and turned down the proposal made to him
on their behalf, by Henry L. Stimson, Rockefeller puppet
Secretary of State under Hoover, to declare war on Japan for
the purpose of rescuing Standard Oil property that was being
consistently wrecked by the Japs in the course of their
invasion of China. According to Professor Harry Elmer
Barnes in his pamphlet, The Struggle Against The Historical
Blackout (6th ed., p. 43):

"Henry L. Stimson openly played his Lucifer hand in Far
Eastern diplomacy. He tock Hoover to the mountain top and
.. he did make it evident that Mr. Hoover could recoup his
political fortunes and have every prospect of reelection in the
autumn if he would make war on Japan. But Hoover would
have nothing to do with the idea. A year later Mr. Stimson had
a rendezvous with Mr. Hoover's newly elected successor at
Hyde Park and had no difficulty in selling him his bill of
goods. Roosevelt's recently published letters show he took the
initiative in bringing about this momentous conference with
Stimson on January 9, 1933. From about that time onward Mr.
Roosevelt had an ‘ace in the hole’ whenever he needed a
foreign war to rehabilitate his political prospects at home. He
played the ace in the summer and autumn of 1941. But as
James Farley has revealed (Ed.: James Farley's Story, p. 39),
Roosevelt discussed the possibility of immediate war with
Japan in his very first Cabinet meetings of March, 1933."
Stimson was rewarded by Roosevelt with the post of Secretary
of War. He mentions his agreement with Roosevelt on war on
Japan in his autobiography, On Active Service in Peace And
War, (p. 301}. Professor Barnes is wrong in his as-


362


sumption that Roosevelt delayed playing his ace until 1941.
He began playing it promptly following his inauguration. On
the day of his inauguration vainglorious Franklin Delano
Roosevelt told his friends, in an expansive moment, that he
wanted to be a wartime president. He was compelled to delay
his war because Japan was not prepared to fight us, and
Congress was not in any mood to declare a war. Public
opinion had been aroused against war by one of the typical
Communist “peace” propaganda campaigns that was actively
financed by the Rockefeller interests, and was intended to lull
the U.S. into complete disarmament.

The first obstacle was surmounted by the Rockefeller-
Soviet Axis by American-planned and financed rearmament
of Japan, in which the Standard Oil companies played a
significant role. After the Panay incident, the Rockefeller
interests made the Mitsuis their exclusive agents in Japan and
conquered territory in Asia. The second impediment was
overcome by Roosevelt and his fellow conspirators, as
pointed out by Charles A. Beard in his work, President
Roosevelt And The Coming Of The War, and by the author in
The Strange Death Of Roosevelt, by goading Japan into
attacking the U.S. at Pearl Harbor. In this treachery, as has
been related, Rockefeller's Institute of Pacific Relations
played the dominant role. This was the reason for the delay in
the Japanese war for which Roosevelt hankered so long.

In the meantime, Roosevelt very materially aided the
Rockefeller Empire in bringing on the war between Germany
and England by engineering the upbuilding of the Nazi Party
in Germany and inducing the British to enter World War II
after the invasion of Poland, for the purpose of smashing beth
of the other Empires. How little Roosevelt was interested in
the fate of Poland is demonstrated by his subsequent sell-out
of the Poles to Stalin. But they were for him as good a pretext
as any for bringing on the war that he sought to immortalize
himself. Jesse Jones, in his book, Fifty Billion Dollars,
confirms my earlier statement that Roosevelt deliberately
sought, instigated and precipitated World War II

Every measure of national or international import, as well
as the minor local ones, championed by the "brain trutsers” in
the New and Fair Deals 363


have served the purposes of both the Rockefeller Empire and
Soviet Russia. When Stalin stood at the side of Hitler, they
and their students championed “isolationism”, pacifism,
Buchmanism, and the America First movement, which was
discredited by the influx of both the Communist and the Nazi
elements—with the purpose of keeping the U.S. out of the war
and serving the interests of the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis. That
is the true significance of the vaunted membership of
Ambassador Philip Jessup and of Senator William Benton in
America First, which was advanced in the press as disproof of
the Red complexion of both. It proves exactly the reverse. For
support of America First by subversives served Soviet
interests quite as effectively as did Frederick Vanderbilt
Field's Communist-front Peace Mobilization, in the
propaganda for keeping the U.S. out of the war.

But as soon as the Rockefeller interests had effected their
deal with the British for Saudi Arabian oil in exchange for
their bringing the U.S. inte the war, and as soon as Hitler's
forces were turned against their Soviet allies, these
subversives fairly shrieked their insistence that America enter
the war. The Communist Party line then publicly coincided
with the interests of the Rockefeller Empire, and
"internationalism" became the shibboleth of both. Philip
Jessup and Senators Arthur Vanden-berg and William Benton
were in the forefront of the changelings.

This open alliance with the Soviets prepared the way for the
conspirators to begin frank subsidy by the U.S. taxpayers of
the industrialization and modernization of the armaments of
Russia. Every “international” plan proposed thereafter
contained tribute by the American taxpayer to the Kremlin.
"Lend Lease" provided over ten billion dollars worth of
armaments and supplies, including an entire fleet of naval
vessels. The United Nations Relief And Rehabilitation
Administration, which was almost entirely financed with
American taxpayers’ money, was converted into a device for
financing Communist Russian infiltration and conquest of
many nations. Communist agents, under the direction of
Herbert H. Lehman, were placed in charge of the distribution
of this American aid in such lands as Czechoslovakia,
Rumania and Poland that the Axis agreements turned over to
the Seviets.

364


But the lion's share of the money and supplies went to Soviet
Russia itself.

The New Deal and its Fair Deal successor have been made
to serve the domestic purposes of the Rockefeller Empire as
effectively as it does the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis in the
international field. The industrial monopolies which they
control are fed from the Treasury and the public's purse. Their
Milk Trust's monopoly was extended, and even in depression
the price of milk was tripled. Their monopely of food has
been widened, with the cooperation of the truckmen's unions,
to the point where they maintain a constantly high price even
for produce, throughout the nation the entire year.

The seizure of industries which they did not control and the
setting up of new monopolies assumed a fresh pattern under
their New Deal. No longer was it necessary for them to resort
as individuals to the racketeering of the South Side
Improvement Company type and risk public indignation.
Their agencies, the Government and the unions, do their dirty
work, undermine the industries which they seek, smash them
so as to force out the investing public and form them into
monopolies to be taken over.

When these things are done by the "New Deal" they have
the complete support cf the very radical and labor elements
which would rail at them if done by private enterprise for
itself. By some curious quirk of mentality akin to faith, they
are happy and content when these crimes are committed for
the benefit of the same private cartels, through public
agencies, by themselves as agents, at public expense. For the
"liberal" or radical does not seek to remedy evil situations. He
merely seeks to be master of them himself. He is motivated
not by principle but envy and unprincipled greed. That was
the Machiavellian idea that lay behind the Rockefeller support
of Communism and its incorporation in the New Deal
mechanics for attaining monopoly and dictatorship.

The NRA (National Industrial Recovery Administration}
and the Federal Securities Act with its provision barring
holding companies, and enhancing the Federal Reserve
Board's power to regulate money, constituted the initial effort
to accomplish a complete cartelization of all industries.

The NRA was openly a device for setting up rac-365


nopolies or giving legality to existent monopolies, in their
own interest, in every industry. It specifically suspended the
Sherman- Clayton Anti-Trust Act and permitted each industry
to organize itself under an absolute code authority. The plan
had been suggested by the U. 5. Chamber of Commerce.

The man who controlled the Code Authority wielded
dictatorial powers over an absolute monopoly. The rules
promulgated by the Code Authority had the force of law for
beth industry and the nation. It fixed prices, controlled
production, licensed producers, admitted or barred
newcomers from the industry, set conditions of competition,
prescribed the amount of space and the machinery that could
be used; and also possessed police and judicial powers and
could put violators in jail. As a sop to Labor, a minimum
wage of $12 to $145 per 40 hour week was provided and
Section 7A recognized the right of collective bargaining. In
other words the NRA created a syndicalist or corporate state
in the U.S. at about the same time as had Mussolini and
Hitler, whose sponsors were the same as these of the NRA.

The SEC established by the Federal Securities Act, is a
device for tightening the monopoly of industries by control of
financing. Its power to block new financing is absolute.
Likewise its order to wipe out investments in railroad and
utility securities is final. But it offers stockholders absolutely
no protection. Numerous securities that have been passed on
by the SEC and marketed, have been wiped out within a
period of one or two years. On the other hand numerous
worthwhile and essential enterprises have been barred from
financing. Its effect on the mining industry for instance, has
been devastating; and as a consequence the U.S. is becoming
constantly less self-sufficient in strategic minerals and metals.

In short the SEC was never intended to serve the interests
of the investor, but was planned to foster the purposes of the
monopolies. This is quite manifest in its utility securities
activities. In this group of securities alone, the SEC has wiped
out, in a decade, more of the public's investments than all of
Wall Street's swindles of a century past.

The conspirators’ monopoly of all sources of power and
energy, as comprehensive as their American Telephone and
Telegraph Company in its field, that will extend from the
Arctic to Tierra del Fuego,


366


looms very large. They control the currency and banking
system as well as the government and have acquired even
greater strength through the enhanced powers they have given
themselves through the Federal Reserve Bank. They were
confident that they were safe in permitting others to develop
the power systems with moneys invested by the public. Then
by manipulating a depression and by retroactive laws written
for the purpose, they robbed their rivals of their work and the
public of their investments. That is the purpose of the
abolition of helding companies and the power over utilities
incorporated in the Federal Securities Act.

The SEC has directed a looting of the public of its
investments in utilities that is fully comparable with those
perpetrated by the Nazis and Communists. By dishonest and
wholly illegal and un-Constitutional acts that have been
supported by corrupted and packed courts, the conspirators de-
liberately depressed and manipulated the market for utility
securities by its orders and rulings. The TVA was used for the
malevolent purpose of smashing the market in utility
securities. On the day that the ruinously low rates for TVA
power were to be announced, the press and the nation were
kept waiting for Commissioner David E. Lillienthal from
10:30 A.M. until after the markets had closed. In the
meantime a terrific wave of short selling hit the utility bonds
and stocks that depressed them terrifically. Washington phone
calls to Wall Street were particularly heavy that day,
especially from the Reconstruction Finance Corporation
offices. There can be no question that the announcement of the
TVA rates was a prearranged signal for a "killing" in the
market by the conspirators. These maneuvers cost the
investing public hundreds of millions of dollars. The market
for utility securities was smashed, and they dropped steadily
thereafter.

The Federal Reserve Board has ably aided and abetted the
swindling of the public by manipulation of margin
requirements. Repeatedly it has forced the public out of stock
desired by the powers-that-be by raising margin requirements,
at the bottom of he market, just before large upswings were
planned.

The conspirators then bought up at their own price, or
virtually stole, a particular class of security in each company.
It was a simple matter for them


367


to dictate that the particular class of security which they had
cornered shall be given complete control of the utility in
question, all senior securities shall be retired and junior
securities wiped out, without regard to earnings or values.

It is safe to predict that when the nation's utility companies
will have been “simplified in structure" (a euphemism for
"stolen") they will be, in due time, merged into a nation-and
continent-wide Power Trust, under the domination of the
Rockefeller Empire and its allies.

The public has been looted, under the direction of the
Interstate Commerce Commission, during the Roosevelt
Administration of many more billions through another
industry, through the railroads. The Roosevelts, the Delanes,
the Rockefellers, the Harrimans and numerous others of
America's rulers are heavily interested in railreads.

The Interstate Commerce Commission which they
dominate, exercises absolute control over the minutest details
of the operation of the railroads and their rate structure. It is a
simple matter for them to boost the earnings of the railroads
when they own their securities, and to wipe out the earnings
and force them into receivership after they have unloaded the
securities on the public. This is done periodically.

The I.€.C. dictates the terms for lifting of the recei verships,
subject to court approval.

The Supreme Court decision in the Chicago, Milwaukee
and St. Paul Railroad case has introduced several new

"principles" into American jurisprudence, that contrast oddly
with what has been regarded as honesty and sound law
consonant with it.

The railroad had been in 77b receivership for several years
following a period of earnings that were fixed by the I.C.C. so
low that it could not meet its fixed charges. After the onset of
hostilities in Europe, the earnings of the road rose rapidly to a
point where all arrears on bends could be paid off in full cut
of cash on hand and leave the company more than adequate
capital for its future operations —in short the road became
completely solvent and highly prosperous. If it were required,
refinancing could have been arranged readily.

If this condition should arise in the affairs of a private
individual in bankruptcy, he would be deemed guilty of fraud
if he failed to pay off his in-

368


debtedness in full and thus secure discharge from bankruptcy.
But in the case of the railroad, the Court ruled that the
company is net bound by the ethical or legal principles that
apply to individuals. Instead of ordering the corporation to
pay off its indebtedness and secure its discharge from
receivership, as it wished te do, the Supreme Court did the
reverse. It ordered the railroad to do what would be ruled as
fraudulent on the part of a private individual, i.e. to refuse to
meet its obligations in full, to wipe out the major part of its
debts, to defraud its creditors and stockholders, and to settle
even mortgage and other protected claims at a fraction of
their face value.

The legal support of fraudulent bankruptcies by the highest
court of the land is a new "principle" in American
jurisprudence.

But an even stranger departure is the reason assigned by
the Court for its decision.

The Court acknowledged that the railroad was completely
solvent at the time of the hearing. But it assumed the role of
oracle and undertook to predict that after the war the earnings
of the road would drop and it would ne longer be solvent. For
this reason it ordered a fraudulent settlement to be
compounded by the Company. Subsequent events proved the
Court a false prophet. The earnings of the road continued very

igh.

In this act the Supreme Court has given divining and
fortune-telling greater weight in our law than it ever had even
among the Romans at the time when these procedures were
part of their faith and practice. It has returned American
jurisprudence to a status as primitive as that of Medieval law,
with its "trial by ordeal". It has nullified the entire code of law
that has been built up to protect honest commercial practice.
For it is a matter of record that few enterprises survive for
more than a generation and most of them terminate bankrupt;
and under this decision the Courts could safely divine that the
majority of debtors will eventually be bankrupt and order
them to defraud their creditors, as in the St. Paul case. The
decision has wiped out billions of railroad investments. It is
another of the New Deal devices to "distribute wealth” in
certain favored directions only.

The NRA proved unwieldly and unmanageable. While it
was highly successful in wiping out tens of


thousands of small businesses, it failed to permit the wrecking
of larger units, the control of which the conspirators sought.
The report brought in by the NRA Board of Review and
signed, among others, by Clarence Darrow, found that the
NRA was being used to foster monopoly. Senator Borah
made the same charge on the floor of the Senate. The
Supreme Court was called upon to declare the NRA un-
Constitutional, which it did on the perfectly correct ground
that it was an abdication of its Constitutional powers by
Congress. Unfortunately, though this is equally true of
virtually all of the New Deal, the packed and biased court has
seen fit to so rule only when it serves the interests of the
rulers.

The most amazingly ingenious and ingenuous sham
incorporated by the Dynasty in its New Deal is its mechanism
for regimenting labor under their own aegis through "labor
leaders" and its use for establishing monopelies that are
entirely within the law. Wagner's subservience to the
Rockefeller-Standard Oil interests makes it clear that the
Wagner Labor Relations Act is designed to serve their
purposes. It epitomizes and points up the war of Labor on
Capital in se truly a Bismarxian sense that Wagner has earned
for himself the title of "America's Bismarck", a noble title for
a pawn.

The Supreme Court decision wiping out the NRA was
mock obeisance to public sentiment against monopolies in
restraint of trade, through control of machinery, that has been
built up through decades. With equal diligence there had been
built up by Marxist agencies and pseudo "liberals" a sentiment
in favor of union monopolies of labor. It required little
astuteness to discern that industry could be monopolized even
more completely by control of labor than by control of
machinery.

The fostering of labor unionism on a vast and
unprecedented scale by the Rockefeller Empire is completely
understandable. By doing so they have completely regimented
labor under their own control through their own appointed
agents provocateurs and dictators, more pleasantly labelled
"labor leaders". This they have done through the Wagner
Labor Relations Act and other "New Deal” labor legislation,
which have robbed workers of their freedom and their right to
work at a vocation of their own choice. This right they have
farmed out


370


to the goons, racketeers, ward heelers and zealots, the “labor
leaders” who are their vassal agents. They would be more
correctly named "Labor Barons", for they serve in the same
capacity as do barons in feudal states.


Under the franchise of the Wagner Act the Dynasty
extended to the Labor Barons a series of so-called "rights" that
flagrantly violate the rights that are supposedly guaranteed to
the nation at large by the Constitution and the Bill of Rights.
These special "rights" of the Labor Barons include the
following among others:

l. The "right" to extort from vassal workers a private tax
for the privilege of working.

2. The “right” to dictate who may work, when he may
work, and to virtually enslave the worker.

3. The "right" to practice blackmail and extertion on all
employers and industries, and to levy unlimited assessments
on them.

4. The "right" to wage unlimited class warfare on the rest
of the community for their own special interests and to
sabotage the nation at large.

5. The "right" to mercilessly profiteer, to exploit
communities and to deprive them of the very necessities of
life, whenever it suits their purpose.

6. The "right" to betray the country and to traitorously
traffic with its enemies—as is instanced by the negotiations of
John L. Lewis with Hitler, and the CIO-PAC betrayal of our
nation to Communism and Russia.

7. The "right" to conspire to restrain trade.

8. The "nght" to disrupt industry and to destroy whole
industries.

9. The “right” to bring whole communities, and if they
desire, the whole nation, to verge of starvation by strikes and
sabotage.

10. The "right" te throw out of work and deprive of a
livelihood, employees of whole groups of industries
whenever, however, and as often as they choose.

ll. The "right" to precipitate inflation, panic, depression
and unemployment on as wide a scale as they choose.

12. The "right" to destroy the Constitution and the
government and to deliver the United States to foreign
powers.

13. The “right” to engineer staggering taxation

371


on the community at large while they themselves are taxfree.

14. The "right" to bribe and corrupt public officials, and to
buy elections.

The Labor Barons and their henchmen—gangsters, goons,
ex-convicts, convicts and "intellects"
have extended these "rights" on the pretense of giving
"protection", in the true gangster or baronial sense, to workers.
The more moronic element believe that the unions provide the
higher wages, the employment and the standard of living that
now prevail. It requires only a very mediocre memory to
reveal how false is this claim.

Labor unions rose to relatively as great power in World
War l and its aftermath, as they now enjoy. They then did net
prevent depression and unemployment, or provide for it. On
the contrary, they forced wages during the post-war era to
such extortionate heights, and restricted production so much,
as to force collapse of commerce and industry and to price
workers out of their jobs. They forced an inflation so high that
the unions themselves called a buyer's strike against the
purchase of the very merchandise produced at the higher
wages.

With unions equally strong in the 30's and now, the
difference in the situation accounts for higher employment at
this time. Industry was prostrate in the 30's and could provide
no employment. It is strong and prosperous now, and
therefore provides jobs. Strong industry provides employment.
Strong and arrogant unions weaken industry and destroy
employment.

The Labor Barons deliberately collaborated with the
Dynasty and precipitated the depression of the 30's. The
objective of the right wing Labor Baron is te control or
destroy; and many of them have gained control of industries in
their domains. The objective of the left wing and subversive
Labor Baren is to destroy the U.S. Government and to create
an American Soviet over which he hopes to be Commissar.

To cover up their crimes, the Labor Barons employed
prostituted professors of economics and statisticians to throw
dust in the eyes of the public and to falsely place the blame for
the depression on capitalists and industry. The latter have been
too stupidly disorganized to refute the false charges levelled
against them.

372


What is more disastrous for the nation, is the fact that these
"economists" who are prostituted to Labor Barons and most of
them frankly Communists, have deluded the public into taking
larger doses of the same quack medicine that killed the golden
goose of prosperity in the 1920's—ever higher wages. for ever
less work. Their pretended purpose is "pump priming" and
"increasing the purchasing power of the workers". At a time
when the United States and the world at large are crying for
greater production of the necessities of life, they are imposing
a shortening of the work-week and a restriction of production.
This is clearly a part and parcel of their wrecking program of
Communization of the United States through national
bankruptcy. As might be expected, the result of their activities
is a rapidly mounting inflation.

Pretendedly in the interests of the workers, the vassals of
the Labor Rights, the "padrones" extend the following so-
called "rights":

l. The "right to work"—when, as, and if the Labor Baron
wishes them to work. As a corollary to the "right to wor
there is claimed the "property right" in a job. This means in
principle that when an employer gives a man a job, that man
acquires a share in the business, which is tantamount to
confiscation of the employer's property. This is one phase of
the idea that has been incorporated into our law, to the effect
that any man who gives employment to another man and
provides him with a living, is an enemy of society, a criminal
suspect who is guilty of any and every crime until he proves
himself innecent; and that he must be hounded, harassed and
penalized at every turn.

2. The so-called "right to strike" consists of the right to
violate the Constitutional rights of the others— the "right" to
deprive the owner of the use of his property, the "right" to
restrain trade, the "night" to use force and vielence on the
person and property of others, the "right" to assault, maim and
murder, the "right" to deny others the "right te work" and earn
a living, the "right" to endanger the health, safety, and lives of
whole communities, and numerous other wrongs and crimes
that when perpetrated by or under the direction of a Labor
Baron are strangely converted, by a perversion of our laws,
inte "rights".

The "right te strike” is neither used nor intended 373


primarily to benefit the worker. So-called organizational
strikes, called by almost all Laber Barons annually under
normal circumstances, are intended to assert the authority of
Labor Barons over their vassal workers, to force them into line
and to pay arrears in dues and special assessments including
those levied for the strikes in question. They are primarily
directed against the workers; and only secondarily against the
employer and community.

Strikes are sources of revenue for the Labor Baron. They
serve to dramatize him and put him before the public.
normal times strikes are the Labor Baron's chief function. The
union member, or serf, loses wages during the period of
strikes and can only be the loser. But the Labor Baron has
asserted his authority and gained for himself notoriety and
added income.

3. The "tight to collective bargaining” which means the
"neht" of coercion, blackmail, extortion and hold-up of
industry through their agents, the Labor Barons, in the
pretended interest of the worker. These holdups of industry
continue until high wages completely wipe cut profits, shut
down or bankrupt industry, and destroy employment. At the
same time they force steady inflation. Ultimately they serve
merely to impoverish the worker. Wages can not be paid by
industry that has no earnings for any length of time.

With the launching of the NRA the Federal Reserve Board
and other banking pressure for prolonging the depression had
been relieved slightly. Business began to pick up. The failure
of the NRA to accomplish its purpose called for resumption of
the depression. Roosevelt was put into service to mouth
vigorous attacks upon business to smash the stock market and
prolong the depression.

The attitude of the nation and of Congress made it apparent
that dictatorship and industrial monopoly could be attained
only by the Lenin formula of national bankruptcy. The
squandering involved in prolonging the depression, in the
Agricultural Allotment Plan, in Relief, and in other
deliberately wasteful measures had not irreparably damaged
the solvency of the nation. Only war, civil and external, could
accomplish this. War war also required at attain world-wide
Imperial scheme. In the international sphere World War II
solved that problem. Labor agitation served as a civil war.


374


CHAPTER XX


SUPREME ROCKEFELLER CRUSADE-WORLD
WAR ID"... We work our own good will ..."


G.E.B. Occasional Letter No. 1 Rockefeller & Gates


The most extensive and devastating of the Rockefeller
Crusades, and one that has been most profitable to them, was
World War IL. With it, they "killed many birds with one shot”.
For it won for them their Oil War in many sections of the
world and set them on the road to victory in others.

World War I, as has been related, did not solve for the
Rockefeller Empire the problem of control of the Turkish,
Arabian and Iraman oil reserves, because of the effective
oppesition and rivalry of the British Empire. In the meantime,
the Japanese Empire threatened with destruction the
Rockefeller Standard Oil interests in the Far East. And Ger-
many menaced with a process for synthesizing oil; but this
was of minor significance, because the Rockefeller interests
controlled Germany and mere particularly the German Dye
Trust, LG. Farben-industrie, that developed, this process.
Russia had been taken care of by the deals described in the
chapter on the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis.

The pressing problems were elimination of the British
Empire as a rival, which, it was now realized, could be
effected only by its dismemberment and destruction, and the
subduing and conquest of Japan. These were the top problems
on the agenda of the Rockefeller Empire in the period
between the formation of the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis and the
success in precipitating World War II to accomplish both
those purposes. The cunning with which these two widely
separated ventures were woven into the pattern of a single
"Crusade" is unmatched in all cognate history. And the role
played by the U.S. State Department in these conspiracies of
the Rockefeller Empire portrays how fully the former has
become the tool of the Rockefeller interests.

Mosul, one of the causes of the British - German conflict
that led to World War I, together with other sections of
Turkey, Arabia and the Near and Middle East, continued to be
a major source of conflict between England and the
Continental powers on the one hand, and between England


and
375


the Rockefeller Empire on the other. To seize those fields, the
British launched their campaign at Gallipoli in World War I,
and lost. In exchange for French help in the Near East, Britain
offered Syria and a quarter interest in the Turkish Petroleum
Co. That was the same interest that had been given the
Germans in 1912 in exchange for their claim based on the
concession for the Anatolian Railway and the nght to drill the
Bagdad-Mosul oilfields which Sultan Abdul Hamid had given
them in 1904. This deal was confirmed in the San Remo
agreement between Britain and France in April 1920, which
stipulated that the Rockefeller Standard Oil interests were to
be excluded.

President Woodrow Wilson, personally, Secretary of State
Colby and U.S. Ambassador in London, John W. Davis.
vigorously protested the exclusion of American interests from
the Mosul field, echoing the protest of Walter C. Teagle,
president of the Standard Oil Co. of N.J., published in the
New York Times of November 18, 1920. Senator Kellogg and
the other members of Congress openly threatened war on
England and other reprisals.

Characteristically, the British proceeded despite the San
Remo Agreement, to eliminate the French from the situation
by stirring up a Turkish invasion of Syria, by inspiring Emir
Feisal to proclaim himself King of Syria and stir up a revolt
in Lebanon. France retaliated by signing a treaty with Turkey
in October 1921, acknowledging that Mosul belonged to the
Turks, thus nullifying the San Remo Agreement. Britain
countered by claiming Mosul fer Iraq and making Emir Feisal
King of Iraq.

In December 1921, the British made a deal through Sir
John Cadman, signer of the San Remo Agreement, with
Standard Oil for a fifty-fifty division of the Mesopotamia and
Palestine oilfields and a quarter interest for Standard in the
Turkish Petroleum Co. (the French share} in exchange for a
similar deal on the North Persia fields for which the
Rockefeller interests had been given a concession by the
Persian cabinet earlier in the year. This prepared the way for
withdrawal of Standard Oil opposition that had been exerted
through the State Department te the granting by the League of
Nations of mandates over Palestine and other regions

376


to the British. Following this deal in favor of the Rockefeller
interests, the State Department lost its zeal in its protests for
an Open Door in the Near East in spite of the fact that another
American group, led by Admiral Chester, had a valid claim to
the concession, thus belying the declaration of Secretary of
State Hughes that he stood "tor American rights generally and
not for any particular interest".

In the meanwhile, the British and French sought to fight
out their claims through a war between the Greeks, supported
behind the scenes by the former, and the Turks, supported
secretly by the latter. The British and their Greek mercenaries
lost. But when shortly thereafter, the French wanted to take
over the Ruhr and its industries, and required British support,
a deal was made by them to stand together against the Turks
at the Lausanne Conference, in reseizing the German Turkish
concession for the Turkish Petroleum Co. But the Ruhr oc-
cupation was sabotaged. The French blamed the British and
refused to support them against the Turks. The Turks then
defied the British and refused to sign the treaty.

The Turks thereupon gave Admiral Chester a 99-year
exclusive railway, mineral and oil concession. The State
Department refused to give Admiral Chester effective support
in carrying out the deal, and the Rockefeller interests blocked
the financing of his Ottoman-American Development Co.
which he had organized for that purpose. This deal was
effective, however, in enabling the Turks to abolish the extra-
territorial rights of foreign powers and to retain the
Dardanelles and the Bosphorus. The British made a deal with
the Rockefeller and French interests to share the Mosul
oilfields and acquired final title to the fields by way of the
second Lausanne Conference, in 1923, and of the award by
the League of Nations Council in 1925 of Mosul to Iraq, under
British mandate.

Immediately thereafter a controversy broke out between the
British and the French over the route of the pipeline to be
built. The French wished it to course through Syria, and the
British, through Palestine, as part of the British Chemical
Trust's plan for exploitation of the potash of the Dead Sea and
other Palestine resources.

The Standard Oil Co. was satisfied with this deal, 377


as a beginning. The Lamp, official publication of the Standard
Oil Co. of New Jersey, editonalized: "For the first time there
has been negotiated what promises to be a practical Open
Deer pelicy in which four great nations take equal participa-
tion in one field." (April 1926) The State Department
headed by  Rockefeller's agent, Secretary Charles Evans
Hughes, was content with his version of the Open Door that
shut cut most American interests but satisfied the Rockefeller
and Mellon cliques.

An interesting phase of the deal was the part that religion
had played in it. The play for Mosul had originated in Admiral
Chester's visit to Turkey on behalf of the massacred
Armenians; and the Near East Relief had played a significant
role in the maneuvers. But when the Turko-American Treaty
was presented to the Senate for ratification, Vahan
Cardashian, attorney for the Armenian Republic, presented
the following charges to the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee:

What ... is the motive, the purpose behind the Turkish
policy of the Department of State?
"I charge that it is oil.

"An Administration which has surrendered legitimate
American rights and then has the impudence to fill the air with
itrelevancies, wild insinuations and falsehoods to divert
attention from its disgraceful policy; an Administration which
has deliberately trampled upon the Constitution of the United
States in its conduct of foreign relations—such an
Administration, I charge would not hesitate, and has not
hesitated, to sell out the Armenian people and their homes for
oil, in the interest of a privileged group .. ." For the
Rockefeller interests this compromise was merely an
expedient. They never settle for a part as long as there is any
possibility of getting the whole; and any compromise, for
them, is merely an opportunity to stab their partner in the
back. In that respect they resemble their British adversaries,
whe used the compromise te prevent the Rockefeller
interests from effectively developing their share of the
deal, Saudi Arabia.

The Rockefeller interests turned to their pawns in World
War I, the Germans, to set the obstructive British Empire on
its heels. As bosses of the ger-


man Dye Trust, L.G. Farbenindustrie, they controlled German
industry and the German government. On October 30, 1930,
for instance, the press announced that the Standard Oil Co.
had purchased the German alechel monopoly. Inevitably, they
played a large role in the rise of Hitler and exercised a large
measure of control over the Nazi Party and its policies.

The resurrection of German nationalism and militarism was
acrafty move toward the destruction of the British Empire and
its elimination as a bitter adversary in the control of the oil
reserves of the world. Just as in the 1920's, after the
Rockefeller interests had entered into their entente with
Russia, they assigned Rockefeller's top publicity man, Ivy L.
Lee, to advise the Russians on their propaganda and publicity
and to build up favorable public opinion in the U.S. Ivy Lee
was also assigned by the Rockefellers, in July 11, 1934, to
serve their I.G.Farbenindustrie as publicity agent and to advise
Hitler on the rearmament of Germany. It was announced that
for this service the Rockefeller interests were paying Ivy Lee
the sum of $25,000 a year. Walter C. Teagle of Standard Oil,
and Edsel Ford were on the LG. beard. On August 14 of the
same year, it was announced that Standard Oil Co. of New
Jersey had acquired 730,000 acres of oil land from the North
European Oil Corp., built extensive refineries in Germany for
the Nazis and supplied them with oil, for which they were
later paid, in June 1936, with 40 mililon harmonicas and a
number of ships.

The Rockefeller interests played a major, and possibly a
key, role in setting Hitler and the Nazis loose on the world.
Hitler's Mein Kampf echoed the views of John D.
Rockefeller's associates, advisers and spokesmen on the topic
of social organization and human, or inhuman, relations. The
medieval, feudal type of dictatorship that is the essence of
Nazism, was laid down as the pattern of perfect government
for the U.S. and the world in his blueprint of the New Deal,
The American Rich, by Rockefeller's associate and fellow
member of the Union Club, Hoffman Nickerson, as related
elsewhere. In that work is laid out the pattern of subversion
and wiping out of all semblance of human freedom, the
concept of a superior race ordained to rule a nation of divided
minorities, whose

379


racial stock eventually was to be purified by the elimination of
"foreign" elements, especially the Jews. This anti-Semitism
suited the purposes of the Rockefeller interests, because the
directors of the operations of their fierce opposition in the
British Empire, namely, the Royal Dutch and Shell and the
Anglo Persian and British Controlled Oilfields, were the
Samuels family, the Rothschilds, the Monds the Sassoons, and
other Jewish families.

Rockefeller's associate, Alexis Carrel, of the Rockefeller
Institute, “scientifically” suggested the ruthless murder of
"undesirable" and "inefficient" humans, whose existence he
regarded as exemplifying that "waste" which the Rockefeller
mentality so abhors. He published his views at full length in
his book, Man, The Unknown. When Hitler tock over France,
Carrel turned there to help put his ideas inte operation, with
the cooperation of the Nazis and at their invitation.

It should be noted at this point that much of the bond of
inhuman sympathy between Hitler and Stalin can be attributed
to Rockefeller and his agent, Ivy Ledbetter Lee. It was their
entente that paved the way for the Nazi conquests.

It was net until Hitler had arrived at Dunkirk, that the
British awoke to the realization that unless they knuckled
down to the Rockefeller Empire, their own Empire would face
destruction. An agreement was hurriedly reached whereby the
Rockefeller interests were given a free hand in the
development of Saudi Arabia in exchange for their
dragooning the United States into the war to fight it and pay
for it, prompt conveying of the British merchant marine by the
US. "Navy, and the intensive launching of the sardonically
labelled Lend-Lease program whereby the wealth of the U.S.
was poured into the laps of England and her allies.

Though Hitler could have crossed the channel in a matter of
hours, and invaded England, some force deterred him and
caused him to turn against Germany's ally, Soviet Russia, in a
suicidal invasion attempt. The role played by the Rockefeller
and I.G. interests in influencing this decision has yet to be
fathomed. But it is clear that since they dominated Hitler and
the Nazi party, they did play a role.

The problem of dragconing the United States into the war
was complicated by a decade of intensive pacifist propaganda
that had been fostered by Nazi,

380


Communist and allied Rockefeller-Carnegie forces. It was a
simple matter to issue an order for a change of front to their
agents in Congress. Their agent who led the Republican
Senate minority, Senator Vandenberg, shifted overnight from
the position of leader of the pro-American forces, then
labelled “isolationist” because they sought to serve and protect
our own country, to the position of leader of the
"internationalists", who were intent upon serving the
Rockefeller interests in the international field.

Because the Constitution specifically states that Congress
alone can declare war, and because the members of Congress
did not dare violate the pacifist sentiment of their electorate
for fear of failure of re-election, it was necessary to find some
way of forcing the country into war without a declaration by
Congress, that is, by attack upon the United States by some
power. The Rockefeller Empire had anticipated this
contingency and arranged to have it serve their interests in
another section of the world.

In the struggle with British interests for contrel of the
Chinese oil market, the Standard Oil Co. loaned China 15
million dollars in February 1914, in exchange for a concession
for a period of 75 years, for development, in partnership with
the Chinese government, of the provinces of Shensi and Chi
Li. To pave the way for these commercial interests, the
Rockefeller Foundation launched an intensive propaganda
campaign in China in the guise of "education", with medical
activities for window-dressing. The concession “aroused bitter
opposition, both among the Chinese and among foreign
powers, including England and Japan.

By the 1920's the Secony-Vacuum-Standard Oil
subsidiaries had gained a virtual monopoly of the market for
oil for the lamps of China. The tale of this trade is well told in
Vera Teasdale's Oil For The Lamps Of China. It was a
monopoly dear to the heart of Rockefeller, of the type he
sought to extend te the whole world. Kerosene was sold at
exorbitant prices in tiny amounts to fill gift lamps distributed
by the Company. But if ever the rich Chinese oil resources
were developed, such fantastic prices for kerosene even in
beautiful tin cans, would be out of the question. It was
essential for the monopoly and price structure that no oil be

38]


produced in China. The Soongs and the Nationalist
Government saw to that. Blunt General Smedley Butler of the
United States Marines, after his retirement roared, "All I ever
did for twenty-five years in China is watch Standard Oil
cans."

All went well until the war lord of Shansi Province granted
a concession to the Japs to drill fer oil. The Japs found cil
aplenty. This was a serious threat to the Standard Oil
monopoly in China. The Chinese Nationalist Government was
ordered to seize the war lord if necessary, cancel the conces-
sion and oust the Japs. This was done in 1927.

The Japs did not take kindly to cancelation of their cil
concession after spending a hundred million yen on it. Nor did
they feel kindly toward the Rockefeller-Standard Oil crowd,
whom they knew to be responsible. They vowed to come back
and seize China, if necessary, to get their oil.

The Japs made good their threats and proceeded to seize
China beginning with the first Shanghai incident in 1931. And
they did not forget the role played by the Rockefeller-Standard
Oil crowd in the cancelation of the concessions. They avenged
themselves wherever they went, by destroying Rockefeller-
Standard Oil property first.

An illustration of how far the Japs went in destroying
Rockefeller-Standard Oil property is the Panay incident. The
gunboat Panay was the only representative of the United
States Navy in the China seas. For six years it plied the
Yangtze River during the Jap invasion of China but was never
molested. Suddenly one day in 1937, the news was blazoned
to a shocked world that the Panay had been shelled by the
Japs. It has never been told that the reason the Panay had been
shelled was that it was conveying two Standard Oil tankers.
That, the Japs would not tolerate.

The efforts of the Rockefeller-Standard Oil group to protect
their property took three directions. First, in Apnl 1938,
within a short time after the Panay incident, they made the
Mitsuis of Japan, who with the Zaibatsu dominated Emperor
Hirchito and Japan's policies, their exclusive agents in North
China and all conquered territory in Asia. This placed the
Rockefeller-Standard Oil group in a position to influence
Japan's policies.

But it has always been a Rockefeller policy never to be
satisfied with half a loaf when they can get


a whole loaf at no expense to themselves. To accomplish the
destruction of Japan, it was necessary to bring the American
Army to the rescue of their property in China. But it would
have been futile for the Rockefeller-Standard Oil interests to
ask Congress to declare war on Japan because it was
destroying their property in China.

They did, however, make an effort to get the U.S. to declare
war on Japan in the early 1930's. When Roosevelt proposed
launching the Rockefeller Crusade on Japan, shortly after his
inauguration, at his first full Cabinet meeting, he was talked
out of an immediate declaration of war as unwise, by his
counsellors. Even their numerous agents in Congress could
net afford to vote for a war on such grounds. Te avoid
committing political suicide, they would have to reply: "Go
fly your own kite.”

If, however, Japan could be induced to attack the U.S.—
that would be a different story. To accomplish this purpose, it
was imperative that the American public have no suspicion of
the significance to the Rockefeller-Standard Oil interests of
Japan's aggression on China; and they never were told.

Through their control of the Navy and the Government,
they were able to prevent any leaks from these sources. When
Admiral Yarnell, Commander of the Panay, threatened to
return to the United States and tell the American public of the
indignity of the United States Navy being used as a convoy
for tankers, he was retired; and learned better than to open his
mouth on the subject.

The appointment of Joseph Grew, nephew of John Pierpont
Morgan, as Ambassador to Japan was dictated. The plan was
to induce the Japs to attack the United States. Grew rapidly
earned for himself the name of "friend of Japan." He was of
invaluable assistance in aiding their armament. Standard Oil
literally poured oil into Japan. Wright Aeronautical and other
aviation manufacturers built plants and supplied unlimited
numbers of engines and planes. American munitions flowed
into Japan in a steady stream. Literally all the scrap on the
American market, including the Sixth Avenue El of New
York City, were shipped into Japan. The United States
generously supplied Japan with everything she needed for


war.
383


Despite the growth of her armaments, Japan could not
screw up sufficient courage to attack the United States. The
conspirators were impatiently waiting and working to bring
about an attack on the United States that would force
Congress to declare officially the war that Roosevelt already
was waging unofficially. Admiral Richardson, whe was Chief
of Staff of the Pacific Command, testified before a Senate
investigating committee that President Roosevelt had
expressed the wishful thought, at a White House luncheon,
October 8, 1940, that "the Japanese sooner or later would
make a mistake and we would enter the war.” Promptly
thereafter, Admiral Richardson protested once again the
splitting of the Pacific Fleet and stationing it at Pearl Harbor,
which had been done against his advice, in view of the intent
expressed by Roosevelt to take steps leading to active hostili-
ties. When Admiral Richardson insistently urged preparing
the Pacific Fleet to protect itself, he was relieved of his
command and replaced by Admiral Kimmel. The Navy
deliberately was barred by Roosevelt from preparing for war.

Rockefeller's Institute of Pacific Relations agents working
under Sorge precipitated the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor
that the conspirators sought in order to bring the U.S. into the
war. The IPR's agents, Agnes Smedley and Guenther Stein,
collaborated with Richard Sorge, Soviet master spy in Japan,
in diverting the attack the Japanese were preparing to make on
their rational foe, the Soviets, from the Soviet Union to the
U.S. and the British. So successful was their work that as early
as October 1941 the conspirators knew that the Japanese
definitely planned an attack on Pearl Harbor.

"At the instance of his bosses, Roosevelt followed his
childhood yearning to play with warships and naval warfare.
He took over, indirectly, command of the Pacific Fleet.
Roosevelt did everything that might be calculated to induce
the Japs to attack the fleet at Pearl Harbor. He stationed the
vessels within the Harbor, where they could be bottle-necked
and could net possibly be defended. He ordered disregard of
any and all warnings of danger and attack that were picked


up.
"The Japanese were told in effect: ‘Destroy the United
States Fleet at Pearl Harbor, and you have
384


won the war at the start’. In the meantime, the Japanese who
itched to attack were goaded to fury in the field of diplomacy.

"This deliberate plan to induce the Japanese to attack the
United States was common knowledge in diplomatic circles,
but it has been regarded as a breach of "ethics" to mention it.
But Capt. Oliver Lytteton, Minister of Production in Winston
Churchill's wartime cabinet, stated before Parliament on July
20, 1944:

‘Japan was provoked into attacking America at

Pearl Harbor. It is a travesty on history to say

that America was forced into the war.’

"This is the import of a statement made by Eleanor
Roosevelt, as usual sharper in tongue than in wit, in an
interview given Kathleen McLaughlin, published in New
York Times Magazine, October 8, 1944: 'December 7, was
just like any other D-Day to us. We clustered at the radio and
waited for more details—but it was far from the shock it
proved to the country in general. We had expected something
of the sort for a long time.’

"Her statement is exceptionally significant. D-Days are
known in advance to the high command. This D-day was
known beyond any question to Roosevelt and his entourage.
Roosevelt had on his desk many hours before the attack, a
decoded message sent by the Japanese to their envoys in
Washington, known as the "East Wind Rain" radiogram,
which stated that Japan planned to attack Pearl Harbor on the
following day. But he deliberately betrayed the nation and its
defenders and failed to warn them. On the contrary, they were
under orders to disregard outside danger signals.

"This means that the rulers and their pawn, President
Franklin Delano Roosevelt, had courted and precipitated a Jap
attack, then deliberately withheld the warning from the armed
forces and prevented them from defending themselves. Why?
For eight long years the conspirators had worked, prayed and
waited for the attack. They would not risk its miscarriage or
effectiveness. The motto of the conspirators might have been:
‘Onl is thicker than blocd.'

"It was not their own blood that was shed and for them the
price was cheap, the blood of 2500 men and a fleet of
battleships paid for by the American people. The lives
meant nothing to them. The

385


jeopardy in which they deliberately placed the nation was, as
usual, of little concern to the internationally entrenched
scoundrels." (The Strange Death of Franklin Delano Roosevelt
pp. 233-5.)

Effecting a split between Hitler and Stalin was as simply
arranged as had been their alliance. It involved treachery
against a partner; but conspirators are not squeamish folks. At
home in the U.S., Hitler's attack on Soviet Russia resolved a
difficult problem "for the Rockefeller interests and their New
Deal. It healed the breach between them and the Communist
elements, caused by our entry into the war following Pearl
Harbor, and aligned the Reds of all shades solidly behind the
war effort and all the attendant schemes. One of the most
important consequences for the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis was
that it offered a complete and simple selutien of the problem
of rearming the Soviets at the expense of the American
"peasants", by means of that grand give-away, "Lend Lease”.
The war solved the problems of cartelization of industry in
which the NRA had failed, of more complete regimentation of
the “peasants”, of looting them more speedily by rapidly
pyramided taxation, and paved the way for a totalitarian state
in wartime, that would "gentle" the nation into accepting
dictatorship.

Our entry into the war assured the Rockefeller dominated
Aramco the nght to develop Saudi Arabian oil for Standard
Oil of California's and Texas Company's joint venture, Caltex.
When King Ibn Saud demanded royalty payments amounting
to $30,000,000, Caltex employed James A. Moffett, Vice-
President of Standard Oil of New Jersey who had been
appointed by Roosevelt to the post of Housing Administrator,
to use his influence to get the Government to pay for holding
the concession. Moffett had no difficulty in arranging this
"New Deal" for the Rockefeller interests. For his success, he
alleged in lawsuits which he brought against the Companies i in
1947, he was promised a total commission of over
58, 000, 000.

The $30,000,000 which the United States Treasury gave
Ibn Saud for the support of himself and his 450 wives and
their progeny, to maintain the Roeckefeller-Standard Oil
interests in his good graces, cost the American people twenty
cents a head. In addition King Ibn Saud got a "loan" of
$25,000,000 of taxpayers’ money from the Export-Import
Bank to

386


build a railroad from his capitol across the desert to his
summer palace at Rayadh, and numerous gifts from the
Ametican taxpayers ranging from multi-million dollar
airplanes to sight-seeing tours to the United States for himself,
his many princes, and their numerous retinues.

For the millions of taxpayers' money poured into his lap by
the United States, King Ibn Saud did offer to them in return, a
very suggestive, ‘and under the circumstances, a premonitory
and appropriate token gift. He presented America's Queen
Eleanor (Roosevelt) with a jewel becrusted, solid gold crown.
Eleanor accepted this crown with peculiar alacrity, but it was
given little publicity.

After they secured payment for their concession by the
United States Treasury, the Rockefeller Empire then ordered
their New Deal agents in 1941 to begin the construction for
them of a pipeline in Saudi Arabia at the expense of the
American taxpayer. This required the diversion of pipe sorely
needed for the war effort and for the heating of homes on the
Eastern seaboard that were without fuel and heat.

A bill was introduced in Congress appropriating
$165.000,000 for this Rockefeller-Standard Oil chore. The
outery against the bill was so great that it was dropped.

In the following year President Roosevelt gave the
Rockefeller interests the $165,000,000 out of special, secret
appropriations given him by Congress for use in the war
effort, for which he was required to render no accounts. It was
used for surveys and preparatory work for the pipe line. In
addition the United States Army was assigned to do part of the
task and te build an airfield and base at Dharan. Under the
contract with Ibn Saud, the base was turned over to Saudi
Arabia in February, 1949, shortly after its completion at the
cost of more than six millions to the United States taxpayers.

Two drafted United States soldiers who were kept in the
service after the termination of the war to labor on the fields
protested to Congressman Philip J. Philibin whe denounced
this "quasi-ptivate" undertaking for the Rockefeller Empire at
the cost of the American public, with drafted American
soldiers. The air base is close-by the oilfields.

A number of gross misrepresentations were in-387


volved in the negotiations with the New Dealers to induce
them to take the burden of Saudi Arabian concessions off the
shoulders of the Rockefeller-Standard Oil interests, according
to testimony before a Congressional committee investigating
the deal. First, it was misrepresented that the oil was fit for
use by the US. Navy. The Naval Laboratory reported,
however, that the oil was of inferior grade and unsuited for
use in Navy boilers. Though it was condemned, its purchase
was arranged for by oilman, Admiral Andrew F. Carter, then
executive officer of the Army-Navy Petroleum Board and
now employed by Overseas Tank Corporation a subsidiary of
Caltex Company, Aramco's owner. The purchase was made
by his brother, Admiral Wiliam J. Carter, Chief of the
Bureau of Supplies and Accounts. In charge of the price
negotiations were Lt. John Walsh, now employed by the
Standard Oil of New Jersey and Lt. D. Bodenschatz, now
with General Petroleum Company. What use the Navy made
of this inferior oil, if any, has not been revealed.

Aside from the false representation regarding the quality of
the oil and its value te the Navy, misrepresentation was made
regarding the price that would be charged the Navy fer it.
Despite the fact that the U.S. taxpayers financed the deal, the
price that the Navy was to pay was the same as would be
charged to British Navy; 40 cents a barrel for fuel oil, and 75
cents a barrel for Diesel oil. Instead the U.S. Navy was
charged $1.05 for fuel oil and $1.68 for Diesel oil, more than
double. Senator Brewster, chairman of the Senate Investi-
gating Committee stated that these prices involved an
overpayment of $68,000,000.

The ownership of the Saudi Arabian concession was vested
in the Standard Oil of California and the Texas Company,
through a jointly owned company. Caltex. The operating
company is a subsidiary, the Arabian-American Oil Company,
called briefly Aramco. The Caltex Company, sold a 40%
interest in the field to the Standard Oil of New Jersey and
Secony Vacuum Oil for a sum stated as more than a quarter of
a billion dollars.

Aramco is now shipping from Ras Tanura more than
850,000 barrels of oil a day, and the shipments are rapidly
increasing. The value of the shipments amounts to an income
of almost two million dollars a day for the Rockefeller
Empite. The cost of this 388


oil to them is very low. The profits to the Standard Oil of
California, the Texas Company, the Standard Oil Co. of New
Jersey and Secony Vacuum on the Saudi Arabian oil are
enormous. But they are completely exempt from taxes on
those profits. Thus the Treasury Department has aided the
Rockefeller Empire in evading taxes on profits made on
moneys given it by the American taxpayers.

The cost of the Rockefeller Empire's Saudi Arabian oil to
the American people is tragically high. It cost them two World
Wars, hundreds of billions of dollars, tens of thousands of
lives and hundreds of thousands of maimed and crippled—the
expense of obtaining the oil fields for the Rockefeller Empire.
If the U.S. had paid the Rockefeller Empire ten times as much
as their profits from the fields, it would have gotten off
cheaply. For it would have saved its citizens the untold
miseries of the wars and billions of dollars.

As the price for permitting the Rockefeller Empire to
remain in undisputed possession of their Saudi Arabia prize,
the Soviets have dictated the policies of the U.S. in recent
years, and the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis has consistently
sacrificed the interests of the U.S. while making its taxpayers
foot the bills.

World War II was waged as dictated by the Rockefeller-
Soviet Axis. The U.S. provided arms and equipment under
"Lend Lease" for the Soviet troops, while our own troops
were not adequately equipped. These items were furnished in
such profusion, especially by way of Iran, that there came a
point when the Soviets refused to accept any more unless
Harry Hopkins and Roosevelt would arrange to send over
specialists to show them how they could be stored in the open
fer ten years without deterioration. The New Dealers
complied. But American-donated trucks, planes, engines,
machinery and equipment of all varieties were stacked high
on Persian docks and on the desert and left to the elements to
deteriorate, while at home they were in such extreme shortage
as to interfere with our war effort.

At the same time, the conspirators deprived our troops in
the Pacific of essential equipment and reinforcements, for
lack of which they were repulsed and tens of thousands of
G.I. lives lost. The conspirators, guided by Rockefeller-Soviet
Institute of

389


Pacific Relations and State Department agents, were bent on
keeping the U.S. from winning the war until such time as the
Soviets could barge in and claim the spoils—all of Asia and
the Pacific isles, regained by U.S. forces at enormous sacrifice
of lives, and needlessly lost as a result of the conspiracy.
Meanwhile, the Soviets were maintaining an entente with
Japan and actually supplying the Japanese with war material
we had supplied to them as our "ally". American airmen who
were compelled to land on Russian soil were interned and
their planes confiscated.

In Europe, a similar situation prevailed. Stalin demanded
invasion of Europe and a second front, though our troops were
not adequately equipped because of shipments to Russia. The
conspirators used Russia's necessity to fight an invader as a
pretext for propaganda to further the ckjectives of the
Rockefeller-Soviet Axis by building up Russia as the defender
and protector of the "democracies". They did so in spite of the
fact that even honest Bolsheviks were willing to acknowledge
openly that victory would have been impossible for the
Soviets without the self-sacrificing aid given her by the U.S.
Instead, they presented the U.S. in cur own press and the
world as "slackers" whe impeded the "noble battle that
Russia, the ‘greatest of democracies’, wages for us". They
compelled us to accept Stalin's order to invade Europe by the
costher and more dangerous route, across the English
Channel. A trans-Mediterranean invasion, striking the "soft
underbelly of Europe", through the Balkans, could have been
made at an early date and at infinitely lesser cost. It was
barred by the conspirators for the same reasons that it was ad-
vocated by Churchill, because it would have interfered with
their division of the world with the Soviets, would have shut
them out of Yugoslavia and thwarted their pan-Slavic goal.

American and allied troops were barred by General
Eisenhower, under orders from his conspirator-bosses, from
taking all of Germany, so as to permit the Soviets to seize
Berlin and Eastern Germany, with its strategic industrial and
mineral resources. This bit of treachery that has cost us cur
victory in Europe and left us at the mercy of the Soviets, left
American troops isolated in West Berlin, as hostages to the
Soviets, whe could be cut off and

390


wiped out by the Russian horde at any time it would suit their
purposes. A vestige of intelligence would have excluded such
a breach of elementary military tactics, it was dictated by
treachery. Such episodes as the Berlin blockade, suit the
purposes of both members of the Axis, as is related
elsewhere.

In the Pacific, General MacArthur was petitioned for peace
by the Japanese, on the same terms that were accepted
eventually, seven months before the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis
partners would agree to their acceptance. Months before the
armistice, on May 29, 1945, Rockefeller's puppet, General
George C. Marshall, blocked, at the behest of the pro-Soviet
bloc in the State Department, which included Acheson and
MacLeish, with Elmer Davis of the OW]—all of Rockefeller's
IPR—the sending of a peace ultimatum to Japan,
recommended by Mac-Arthur and endorsed even by the
clique's henchman, Henry Luce. This was reported to the
Senate McCarran Committee by former State Department
executive, Eugene H. Deoman. He stated that the o-ject was
to allow Truman to connive at Potsdam to give the Soviets a
pretext for breaking their non-aggression pact with Japan, and
permit the Russians to invest Manchuria. This opened the way
for the delivery of China to the Communists, that has proved
so disastrous to us. (the Freeman, Nov. 5, 195 1}

At Teheran, and again at Yalta, there was confirmed the
Rockefeller-Soviet Axis program of partition of the world that
allotted Eastern Europe and all of Asia, except the Near East,
to the Soviets. In accord with their plan of destroying the
British Empire, the Rockefeller interests, acting through the
U.S. State Department, marked Iran fer eventual surrender to
the Soviets, at Yalta, right under Churchill's nose. President
Roosevelt, or his double, mouthed the Empire's agreement,
alternately with mouthings of the non-existent Atlantic
Charter that "guaranteed" autonomy to the very states
assigned to the Soviets.

At Yalta Molotov and Alger Hiss (of Rockefeller Empire's
Foreign Office, the Council on Foreign Relations, and of the
Institute of Pacific Relations), with the approval of Stalin,
drew up the United Nations Charter. And Alger Hiss was
there appointed Secretary General of the Conterence to


391


Organize the United Nations by the Reckefeller-Soviet Axis
partners.

The drepping of the atom bomb on Japan was a needless act
of brutality perpetrated upon a defeated and suppliant enemy.
But it served the conspirators well in intimidating the U.S.
into continuing and expanding war expenditures, in fear of the
exaggerated frightfulness of our own bombs. In the meantime
the conspirators facilitated the leak of much atomic-energy
material and information to the Soviets through Axis agents
and spies, when it was not directly supplied to them by Harry
Hopkins, Averell Harriman and other New Dealers.

To further insure continued high expenditures and a steadily
increasing tax burden for the American "peasants", the Soviets
and the Axis agents fostered propaganda demanding American
disarmament and recall of troops from beth the European and
the Asiatic war theatres. This propaganda also had as its
objective the facilitating of the division of Eurasia on the basis
of the Axis plan, by gradual, stealthy expansion by the
Soviets. With this latter purpose as a goal, Rockefeller's Insti-
tute of Pacific Relations and State Department set about
delivering China to the Soviets. The Soviets tock over
Manchuria and rifled it immediately after the Japanese
sutrender. As has been related, the Chinese Nationalists were
forced by the Rockefeller-Soviet agents to yield to the
Communists, at the very time that the former were badly
defeating the latter. Aid appropriated by Congress for the
rearming of the Nationalists was treacherously withheld by the
agents in strategic U.S. Government posts. Lauchlin Currie,
assistant to President Roosevelt, ordered dumping in the
Indian Ocean of whole boatloads of surplus munitions shipped
to the Chinese Nationalists. The State Department, as a
Rockefeller-dominated agency, left no stone unturned to make
good on the agreement to aid the Seviets in attaining the first
goal set by Lenin in the world conquest of Communism,
conquest of China.

In order to facilitate the process, the arms cast aside by the
disarming U.S. were sold as surplus, and the great bulk of it
found its way, directly or indirectly, to Russia. Much of it was
being shipped to Russia at the very moment that Congress
was appropriating billions of dollars for its replacement.

392


The Soviets demanded that "Lend-Lease", pledged to her by
the U.S. for the war effort, be delivered, though the war was
over in the belief of the rest of the world. Instead of disarming
as it demanded of the U.S., Soviet Russia continued to expand
its military establishment, largely, if not entirely, at the direct
and indirect expense of the American taxpayers, at the behest
of the Rockefeller Empire and its agents. They launched the
United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration,
almost entirely at the expense of American taxpayers, to serve
the Soviets in penetrating Poland, Czechoslovakia and other
lands that they later engulfed. Under the direction of Herbert
H. Lehman, of Rockefeller's Council of Foreign Relations,
numerous Soviet agents were placed in charge of UNRRA to
facilitate the process.

Loans to foreign lands by the sale of their bonds had been
exposed after World War I as a gigantic swindle perpetrated
by American bankers who had profited hugely from them.
Most of them rapidly dropped in value to mere fractions of
par, or became worthless. Congressional investigations re-
vealed that the major portion of the "loaned" money had never
reached the lands for which the bonds were issued. It had
stuck to the “sticky” fingers of domestic bankers. The
wariness of the American investing public and the Johnsen
Act forbade a repetition of the bond sales. The Rockefeller
interests circumvented these obstacles by forcing the
American public to donate their earnings and wealth, for the
same purpose for which they had been induced te voluntarily
invest after World War I, by the mechanism of compulsory,
tax-financed government "loans" to the same lands. These
countries are never expected to repay because the bulk of the
funds flowed directly into the coffers of the Rockefeller
Empire. Much of this money financed delivery of material of
war, oil and supplies to Soviet Russia directly—and much
more went indirectly — by virtually all of the lands
supposedly receiving the aid, despite the pretense that the
object of the loans was Ho fight Communism". This
represented tribute paid by the American public on behalf of
the Rockefeller Empire to its Axis partner.

The mechanics of these loans is made clear by the Greek
"loan" of $400,000,000 "to fight Commun-

393


ism". If fighting Communism was the true object of this loan,
the purpese would have been served better by shipments of
arms and munitions from our huge war surplus. For wars are
still fought with shells and net with dollar bills. If it was the
intent to step Communism, the U.S. would not have sent some
of its notorious Reds to Greece for that purpose—headed by
New Dealers, Griswold and Eleanor Roosevelt's kin,
Ambassador MacVeagh. For when the program began, there
were but a few scattered bands of Communist guerillas in
northern Greece. But after several months of "stopping
Communism” and the expenditure of the whole loan, a
Communist government controlled all of northern Greece. But
just as if it had been prearranged, the Communists stopped
short of the Mediterranean life-line of Saudi Arabian oil.

The "loans" to England total many billions of dollars. These
"loans" were largely of the nature of a subsidy to the British
Labor Government as an agency of the Rockefeller Empire.
The funds which do not flow into the coffers of the
Rockefeller Empire, in payment for oil and other items,
largely subsidize Britain's trade with Iron Curtain countries.
The Labor Government steadfastly refused to abandon its
Soviet trade and frankly acknowledged that it was carried on
with moneys supplied by the U.S. This traffic is particularly
outrageous since the onset of the Korean "police action", as
the bulk of it goes to the Communists for slaughter of Gls.

The Marshall Plan, the Point 4 program and the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization were conceived and organized
by the Rockefeller interests for the same purpose, as related
elsewhere. They have proved enormously profitable to the
Rockefeller Empire and helpful in building up the military
power of the Iron Curtain lands and North Korea.

The tale of the treachery of the Rockefeller-Standard Oil
interests in connection with this Crusade of theirs is not
complete with the mere accounting of their trading with the
enemy and providing him oil and war material. They were
indicted in the second year of World War II by Assistant
Attorney General Thurman Arnold, for deliberately blocking
the preduction of synthetic rubber. Under their influence,
Jesse Jones had persistently refused to stockpile crude rubber
and tin for the oncoming war despite the obvious need

394


and the demands of the military. Such stockpiling would have
involved a violation of an agreement with the Dutch-British
cartels under which the Rockefeller-Standard Oil interests
participate in East Indies oil preduction. But in this war emer-
gency, the British and Dutch interests were identical with
ours, and they undoubtedly would have welcomed cur
stockpiling rubber and tin under these circumstances.
Nevertheless none was stored.

The Rockefeller-Standard Oil interests and their Chase
National Bank owned and controlled the majority interest in
the German Dye Trust. It is interesting that the name of
Rockefeller did not appear in the indictment.

The Standard Oil of New Jersey pleaded that their
agreement with I. G. Farbenindustrie barred their permitting
the use of synthetic rubber patents by the United States or the
Allies. In effect they pleaded guilty to conspiring with
Germany to prevent the use by the U.S. Government of
synthetic rubber processes. Without the synthetic rubber
prepared by these processes, the war inevitably would have
been lost. Caught red-handed in their "treason" they pleaded
guilty to the indictment. They agreed to release the patents
and processes for use by the U.S. barely in time to save the
situation. Far more binding and protective is loyalty to the
Rockefeller-Standard Oil Empire than to the U.S.A. The
conclusion that the defeat of the Allies would have made no
difference to the conspirators 1s sustained by the fact that they
had extended their full support and cooperation to Hitler and
the Nazis. Thurman Arnold was relieved of his post shortly
after the incident.

Senator Joseph C. O'Mahoney of Wyoming, discussing tthe
Saudi Arabian deals of the Rockefeller Empire in a radio
interview, Feb. 2, 1947, stated:

"It iş but a step from giant combinations of this kind to an
authoritarian state." Commenting on the situation, Senator
Harry Shippe Truman, kinsman of the Rockefellers (Winthrop
Aldrich's daughter, niece of John D. Jr., is named Lucy
Truman Aid-rich) called it "Treason".

In these machinations, the Sidney Hillmans, Harry
Hepkinses and their ilk, were mere puppets and stooges of the
Rockefeller Empire—ted herrings drawn across the trail.

395


CHAPTER XXI


ROCKEFELLER'S UNITED NATIONS
"Internationalism" And The Rockefeller-Soviet Axis


"An internationalist is one who is prepared unreservedly,
unhesitatingly and unconditionally to defend the U.S.S.R." J.
Stalin (New Leader, March 11, 1950)


The plan of the United Nations was written at Yalta by
Molotov, representing the Soviets, and by Alger Hiss,
representing the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis and the Foreign
Office of the Rockefeller Empire, the Council on Foreign
Relations, and incidentally, also, the State Department. Alger
Hiss' membership in the Hal Ware Communist cell in the State
Department (Toledano & Lasky, Seeds of Treason, p. 46} and
the invaluable service he and his associates had rendered the
Soviets in their official capacities, had won Stalin's trust;
Stalin advocated Hiss’ appointment as Secretary General of
the projected San Francisco Conference for the Organization
of the United Nations. Hiss was equally trusted by the
Rockefeller interests.

The United Nations is an outgrowth and direct successor of
the defunct League of Nations. The League of Nations was a
Rockefeller Empire agency. It was so completely under
Rockefeller domination that Socony-Vacuum director and
agent, Sir Francis Rickett, was able to assure Mussolini that
the League of Nations would never exercise any effective oil
sanctions against Fascist Italy if she would invade and seize
for Standard Oil the oil fields in the Harrar province of
Abyssinia, which was the real prize of the Italo-Ethiopian
War. Rockefeller's agent, Raymond B. Fosdick was Under-
Secretary of the League of Nations.

It was the natural intelligence and the patriotism of the
American public, which led it to reject the surrender of U.S.
sovereignty to the League of Nations, that impelled the
Rockefeller interests to barrage the country with
internationalist propaganda, initially through the Laura
Spelman Rockefeller Memorial under the direction of
Beardsley Ruml, and then through the Foundation which took
it over. They proceeded to seduce, pervert and corrupt our
school system to turn out generations


of vipers and potential and actual traitors.

The discrediting of the pretense that the League of Nations
(or any other organization under our present economic setup}
would serve to prevent war, compelled its scrapping at the
outbreak of World War II. Immediately thereafter, however,
the same agents undertock to organize a new, fake peace or-
ganization, the United Nations. So complete is the basic
identity of the two organizations that in many instances
persons occupy the same positions in the United Nations they
held in the League of Nations.

In some cases the kinfolks of the older generation of
League of Nations agents now occupy positions of trust in the
United Nations. An instance is Miss Dorothy Fosdick, of the
Division of International Organization of the State
Depattment, who attended the San Francisco Conference at
which the United Nations was organized, as Assistant to the
Secretary General, Alger Hiss.

Following the agreement reached with the British at
Dunkirk, the Rockefeller propaganda machine and lebby had
gone into high speed for "internationalism", the attainment of
"One World", that is, a Rockefeller- dominated world. Under
the direction of Harold Stassen of Rockefellers Council on
Foreign Relations, they engineered the nomination of their
"One World" pawn, Wendell Willkie, to "oppose" their pawn
Franklin D. Roosevelt in the 1940 Presidential campaign. This
made the election a "heads I win, tails you lose" proposition
for the carrying out of their deals. In the meantime, their
controlled press agitated more intensively for

"internationalism" and U.S. entry into the war. The Time-
Life-Fortune group, for example, headed by Henry R. Luce of
Rockefeller's Council on Foreign Relations, and financed by
the Standard Oil crowd through Harkness, editorialized
persistently in 1941 on the theme of "a young and rising inter-
national party preparing to do political battle for a future
world." The press at large joined this group in singing long
and loudly the Rockefeller-Soviet, Marxist, "internationalist"
theme song.

The story of the origin and purposes of the United Nations
from the viewpoint of the Rockefeller Empire is related in a
Headline Books pamphlet entitled Uniting Today For
Tomorrow, The United Nations In War & Peace, published by
Rockefeller's Foreign Policy Association in October, 1942.

e

397


authors of the pamphlet are both propagandists closely
identified with the Rockefeller Empire. Grayson L. Kirk 1s
Acting President of Columbia University, Professor of
Government and member of Rockefeller's Council on Foreign
Relations. Walter R. Sharp is Professor and Chairman of the
Department of Government at the fiery-Red College of the
City of New York, and also is member of Rockefeller's
Council on Foreign Relations.

The authors relate that the Joint Declaration by United
Nations was signed by 26 countries on January 1, 1942. The
signatories agreed to employ their full resources "against
those members of the Tripartite Act and its adherents with
which such government is not at war," and “not to make a
separate armistice or peace". The preamble of the Declaration
embodies the mythical "Atlantic Charter". The intent of the
powers behind the scene, the authors state, was to make as
many international commitments for the U.S. as possible for
the purpose of holding the UN together after the war and in
order to avert the fate of both the Fourteen Point program
presented by President Wilson and of the League of Nations,
which were rejected.

There is considerable presumptive evidence in the report on
Yalta that have reached the public eye, more particularly in
the Stettinius report contained in his book Roosevelt and the
Russians, that prior to the Conference a deal with Stalin on
Saudi Arabia had been sealed and delivered. Stettinius states
that at Yalta there were repeated and acrimonious discussions
on Iranian oil and concessions (pp. 43-44, 65-66, 87, 193-
195). In sharp contrast thereto, nothing was said about Saudi
Arabian oil in spite of the fact that "Roosevelt" stressed his
anxiety about the Saudi Arabian situation and his desire to
meet with King Ibn Saud (pp. 72, 257, 278, 289-290).

It is inconceivable that Stalin and the Russians would have
failed, in view of Russia's extreme oil shortage, to seize upon
Saudi Arabia as a bargaining point unless a deal had been
consummated previously that would insure the Soviets of part
or all of the oil produced there. The nature of the deal leaked
out subsequently in a release by the State Department and
published exclusively in the May 18, 1948, edition of the Wall
Street Journal. It divided the world with Stalin on a line that
assured

398


the Rockefeller Empire of Saudi Arabian oil and a "life line"
for its transportation through the Mediterranean, as a
condition for werld peace.

The critical state of the negotiations for Saudi Arabian oil
made it necessary that the Rockefeller interests be represented
by agents who were trusted implicitly by themselves as well
as by Stalin. Alger Hiss fully justified the confidence which
the Rockefeller Empire and Stalin placed in him. Eight-
hundred-and-fifty-thousand barrels of oil a day, produced with
moneys almost entirely derived from the U.S. Treasury, are
yielding the various Standard Oil companies and their
associate, the Texas Co., a tax-exempt, gross daily income of
approximately a million-and-a-half dollars a day; and that is
just the beginning of their profits from the tax-exempt use of
American taxpayers' money. Although the full extent of the
treachery at Yalta has not yet been revealed, it has been fully
established by the course of events that it involved betrayal to
the Soviets of the bulk of Europe and Asia and sell-out of
China and northern Korea to the Communists to be used by
them, as planned by Lenin, with the aid of Communist traitors
planted by the cabal in the U.S. government, to slaughter
American troops and exhaust our military might, to prepare
the way for direct attack on Alaska, after American forces had
been diverted and dispersed around the world.

Under the terms of the Yalta agreement, the Rockefeller
Standard Oil interests provide the oil essential for these
conquests, directly or indirectly, from Saudi Arabia, entirely at
the expense of the U.S. taxpayers. The Treasury pays several
times over for each barrel of oil delivered to the Communists
in Korea and elsewhere through the Marshall Plan.

The secret Saudi Arabian deal was the very foundation of
the sell-out at Yalta; and its terms stipulated in effect that the
Rockefeller Standard Oil interests were to act in Saudi Arabia
merely as producers of oil, largely, or entirely, at the expense
of the U.S. taxpayer to provide fuel for world conquest by
Communism. This is the obvious explanation of the immunity
of the Saudi Arabian oil fields from Communist harassment
and seizure.

At Yalta, the plan of this conspiracy was laid out in the
pattern of organization of the United

399


Nations. It was put into operation at the San Francisco
Conference for International Organization that, in the spring
of 1945, launched the UN.

From the very start, the Rockefeller-Soviet brand was stamped
all over the United Nations. The U.S. delegation to the San
Francisco Conference virtually was entirely a Rockefeller
delegation. The family was directly represented by Nelson
Rockefeller and by John Foster Dulles, who served the U.S.
State Department as "adviser". Oddly enough, Nelson
Rockefeller's name is omitted from the official list of
delegates published by the UN. Rockefeller's Council on
Foreign Relations and its host of subsidiary organizations
were profusely represented in the delegations and fully justify
the Council director's boast that they control the policies of the
U.S. and of the world. They were represented by the following
characters, all of whom are listed in the official UN
publication, United Nations Conference On International
Organization, (vol. 1, Document 639, entitled "Delegates and
Officials, United Nations Conference On International
Organization,” pp. 65-75} as follows: Alger Hiss, Assistant
Secretary of State CFR*

Secretary General Edward R. Stettinius Jr., Secretary of
FR


opiate, Delegate Commander Harold E. Stassen, USNR,
Delegate Leo Pasvolsky, Special Asst. to Sec. of CFR
State for International Organization and Service
Affairs, Adviser to UN Delegation Isaiah Bowman,
President of Johns Hop- CFR kins U., Special Adviser
to Sec. of State and UN Delegation Hamilton Fish
Armstrong, Director of the CFR Council on Foreign
Relations, editor of its FOREIGN AFFAIRS, Special Ad-
viser to Sec. of State and UN Delegation John Foster
Dulles, Adviser to UN Dele- CFR

gation John J. McCloy, Assistant Sec. of War, CFR
Adviser to UN Delegation Admiral Arthur J. Hepburn,
Chair.Gen. CFR Board U.S. Navy, Adviser to UN
Delegation

400


Arthur Sweetser, Dept. Director of OWI, CFR
OWI Attache to UN Delegation Wilder Foote, Asst.
to Sec. of State, CFR

Asst. to Chair, of UN Delegation Charles Noyes, Asst.

to Sec. of State, CFR

Asst. to Chair, of Delegation Edward G. Miller Jr.,

Special Asst. to CFR

Asst. Sec. of State Dean Acheson John E. Lockwood,
Dept. Director, CFR American Republics Affairs,
State Dept. Joseph E. Johnson, Asst. Chief of Div., CFR

Int. Security Affairs State Dept. Ralph J. Bunche, Assoc.

Chief of Div., R
Depend. Area Affairs, State Dept. Lt. Bernard Brodie, USNR,
Div., of Int. CFR Security Affairs, State Dept. (*CFR—
Council On Foreign Relations} The Asiatic section of the
State Department was represented among the advisers to the
Delegation exclusively by members of Rockefeller's Institute
of Pacific Relations: Joseph W. Ballantine, Dir. of Div., Far
FR

Eastern Affairs, State Dept. John Carter Vincent, Dir.
of Chinese
Affairs, State Dept. Striking indeed, is the omission of the

name of Nelson Rockefeller from this list. For on May 10,
1945, Drew Pearson, who is most friendly to the Rockefeller
interests and a spokesman for them, in an article copyrighted
by Bell Syndicate Inc., made ultra-clear the boss role played
by Rockefeller at the Conference, as follows:

"SAN FRANCISCO. —The play-by-play account of
what went on behind the scenes after the Conference
reluctantly voted to admit Argentina can now be revealed.

"After Stettinius forced a public vote on the issue despite
Russian requests for delay, he found himself criticized by
some of the press and public. Upset, he hastily called a closed
meeting of the U. S. delegation, charged with tension. "Young
Rockefeller eulogized the way Stet-.. tinius had handled
himself.

"This country is fortunate to have its affairs in his
hands", he praised.

"Asst. Sec. Jimmy Dunn started to chime in, 401


but was interrupted by shrewd Hamilton Fish Armstrong, key
U.S. adviser:

"'I am very disturbed by all this. I think we ought to call
the press in and explain the American position. We are being
called Fascists. Stettinius is being put in an unfair position.’

"Harold Stassen, of Minn., who had been cool to
Argentina's admission, interrupted: ‘And what are you going
to tell the press?"

"John Foster Dulles said: ‘It's very important that the public
does not view our delegation as reactionary.’


"Again Stassen interrupted: "Why must we be apologetic
about something discussed fully here, then voted on and
passed? The important thing is to work together. We can't
avoid all differences between nations and people.’


"Stassen emphasized that there was justification for the
American view, even if he didn't entirely endorse it himself. If
there were no arguments, there was no use of a conference.

"Stettinius thought Stassen's statement so good that he
ought te broadcast it.

"Dunn protested the Russians were holding up the
Conference by refusing to permit Argentina to take up the
chairmanship of a sub-committee. He launched upon an anti-
Soviet tirade in no uncertain terms.

"Rockefeller endorsed Dunn's idea about giving Argentina
a place on a Conference committee, saying:

"We must treat Argentina as well as anyone else.

""'T agree’, chimed in Michigan's Sen. Vanden-berg. 'Now
that we've invited them, we must treat them right.

"Stassen could not go along with them, saying: ‘It's bad
enough we let them in without giving them honors.’

"Vandenberg retorted, 'ANYTHING ROCKEFELLER
WANTS IS O.K.'

"Dunn suggested that the U.S. delegation slip Argentina
inte the first committee vacancy. Stettimius demurred.

"'T've gotten into enough trouble over Argentina already', he
observed.” (Copyright 1945 by Bell Syndicate Inc. Reprinted
402


by special permission of the author and the N.Y. Mirror.}

The story of the extreme agitation of the Rockefellers to
keep the UN in New York under their thumb is graphically
related as the climax of the Joe Alex Morris series, The
Rockefellers, in the Saturday Evening Post in the issue of
January 13, 1951. (p. 121)

Although the Rockefellers preferred not to be openly
identified with the UN, they overtly dominated every move of
its founding. They anxiously sought this symbol of unity for
their community of interest with the Soviets. They did not
hesitate to emerge into the open to anxiously insure that the
UN headquarters would remain in the U.S., under their thumb.
Stoian Gavnilovitz, Yugoslav chairman of the Marxist
headquarters subcommittee sought to take over a fifty-square-
mile site in Westchester County, N.Y. and Connecticut that
would have constituted an ideal military and naval base within
instant striking distance of every strategic industrial and
military target on the east coast. When this plan was rejected,
they threatened te recommend, quite logically, that the UN
take over the League of Nations quarters in Geneva. This
would have saved our taxpayers many millions of dollars. It
would have eliminated the grave security risk of the UN
headquarters now used as an espionage and propaganda base.
It would have averted the outrage constituted by the surrender
of sovereignty by our country over U.S. territory, the United
Nations site in mid-New York City and the indignity of extra-
territoriality, which even prostrate China spurned as an
affront.

But John Rockefeller Jr. would not have it otherwise. He
rushed in to offer to the UN his cherished Westchester country
estate at Pocantico Hills. Then, he rushed out to buy for it an
eight-million-dollar site in the very center of New York City,
which he turned over to the UN as a gift. But as Homer long
ago advised: "Beware of the Greeks bearing gifts”.

The UN is an ideal “international” front for the Rockefeller
Empire and for the Reckefeller-Soviet Axis. It is the prototype
of the parliament for the Rockefeller Empire conceived by
Hoffman Nick-erson in his American Rich,—a_ mere
"advisory body", whose advice need not be heeded, a debating


403


society—all talk and no action—for allowing the "peasants"
to let off steam.

Another motive of the Rockefeller Empire's interest in the
United Nations was revealed by their spokesman in the State
Department as world-cil control. This was embodied in a New
York Times special article, published on August 17, 1946, re-
porting a broadcast on the National Broadcasting Company's
"University of the Air’. The State Department "experts",
loaned it by the Rockefeller Standard Oil interests, proposed
an International Petroleum Authority under the United
Nations. Naturally this was represented to be in the interest of
the U.S.—to relieve its oil "shortage", and net in the interest
of the Rockefeller Empire—to increase its monopoly and
profits. The following month, on September 6th, 1946, a
variant of this scheme was offered by Howard A. Cowden,
President of the Consumers' Cooperative Association.

Regulation ef world oil production by the Big Five Oil
companies—Anglo-Iranian, Royal Dutch Shell, Standard Oil
of N. J, Caltex and Gulf—was announced to be an
accomplished fact on December 29, 1951, by Elmer Patman,
observer of the Senate and House Small business Committees.
Walter J. Levy, of the London School of Economics, who had
been planted by Socony Vacuum in the ECA to arrange the
financing of Rockefeller controlled refineries around the
world with Marshall Plan funds, was named by Patman as the
"front" for the oil cartel and "the most influential oil
economist in the world”.

Pending world-wide dictatorship by the Empire, they have
brought about an oil cartel under the auspices of the UN. The
Rockefeller entente with Russia in opposition to England,
came out inte the open at the Paris Conference on September
21,1946, when the U.S. voted with Russia and the Slavic bloc
against the British Empire on Roumanian oil. The same
community of interests was responsible for their custing of
Churchill when, after his speech before Parliament
announcing that he "would not preside over the dissolution of
the British Empire", he began blocking afresh the
development of Saudi Arabia. Churchill was promptly ousted
and the Marxist Labor Party, that stands so close to the Soviet,
was put In power.

On the domestic scene, the UN serves the Rocke-404


feller Empire most effectively in carrying out on a world scale
the totalitarian and imperialist aims of their "philanthropies",
as expressed by Gates and Rockefeller in Occasional Letter
No. 1 of the General Education Board. Our Republic, with the
Constitution, the Bill of Rights and the Federal and state
governments, sets up numerous barriers to the dictatorship
which the Rockefeller Empire seeks. Although the
conspirators have succeeded in breaking down many of these
barners, including the Constitution, over a period of decades,
that process is slow for the impatient conspirators, especially
when the wooing and winning of electorates is involved. The
conversion of our Republic to a dictatorship would be greatly
facilitated by transferring its sovereignty to a totalitarian
agency that is beyond the reach of the voters.

To accomplish this legally and in compliance with the
Constitution, would require only one step that would involve
the voters only indirectly. That step would be the adoption of
an Amendment to the Constitution that would destroy the
fundamental character of our Government by surrendering the
sovereignty of the nation to an “international” union, or
federation. In this international union, U.S. citizens would
have neither vote nor voice. They would be taxed without
commensurate, or any, representation, and eventually could be
enslaved thereby. For the United States with its 150,000,000
citizens would be hopelessly outveted by the hordes of Asia's
billion, and Russia and every other invidious enemy or "ally"
would be free to despoil and enslave us through legislation we
would be powerless to stop.

Thus the purpose in fostering the United Nations and
kindred organizations is to attain with one fell swoop, by
remote control, the dictatorship which two World Wars, a
devastating depression, and the New and Fair Deals with the
NRA, bureaucracies, (mis) managed economy and numerous
synthesized " emergency” devices have failed to bring about.

The UN has meant imposing upon the U. $. and such other
lands as have been foolish enough to adhere to it, an
irresponsible supergovernment, control of which implies
dictatorial domination over the lives, wealth and destinies of
the citizens. This is clearly illustrated by the decision handed
down on April 25, 1950, by the California State District


Court of Appeals in the case of Sei Fujii, a Japanese.
California has on its statute books a law that bars the
ownership of land to certain Orientals. That law has been
declared Constitutional by the U.S. Supreme Court In the Sei
Fujii case the court ruled that ratification by the United States
of the UN Charter invests the Charter with force of a binding
treaty which overrides laws which conflict with it, thus
superseding and scrapping U.S. law and the Constitution.

To serve the purpose of the conspirators, both the UN
charter and constitution, with its "Bill of Rights”, were written
by a horde of Rockefeller-Soviet Axis agents in the various
UN committees and commissions, with the aim of slyly
destroying the U.S. Constitution and converting the nation to a
dictatorship. ruled by the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis. Its
provisions for freedom of the press, for instance, have been
written in the vein of the recommendations of the Rockefeller-
dominated Commission on Freedom of the Press, when they
are not identical with those recommendations. They prepare
for destruction of that freedom under the pretense of
preserving it. Its provisions for freedom of religion are
similarly written, with "sleeper" clauses to facilitate
destruction of religion on some such pretext as "national
security”.

The New York Times ina special dispatch from Geneva on
April 23, 1951, reported:

"A number of leading representatives of labor, religious
and cultural groups are beginning to wonder whether the
efforts to draft a United Nations covenant of human rights
may not in the end de more harm than good to actual
human rights.”

But ratification by the U.S. of the UN charter is treason of
an order worthy of Alger Hiss. For although the Constitution
provides for partial surrender of their sovereignty by the states
to the Federal Government, the states have not yielded the
right to transfer their sovereignty to any other power. The only
conceivable circumstance under which the citizens and the
states would be compelled to yield their sovereignty to any
other power would be under duress of ignominious defeat in
war that would render our nation incapable of defending itself
and protecting its sovereignty. Not even Germany and Japan
have been willing, in their defeat,

406


to surrender their sovereignty to their conquerors. Nor have
we, as victors, asked it of them. But the conspirators at home
are forcing on the U.S. terms that they have not dared to
demand of even our defeated enemy—alyject surrender of our
sovereignty to a foreign power, Rockefeller's UN. They have
even imposed on the U.S. the grant of extraterritorial rights,
demanded by Stoian Gavrilovitz and his committee of
Communists, to the UN area in the midst of New York City
that was so hurriedly offered to them by Rockefeller. Even
prostrate and war-torn China refused to grant extraterritorial
rights to the U.S. or any other nation, on the grounds that it
was an affront to her sovereignty. But thanks to Rockefeller's
"shilanthropies" we have become more supine and degenerate
than China, in this and other respects.
There Can Be No Room For Doubt That Ratification Of The
United Nations Charter By The Delegates Of The United
States Is Absolutely Unconstitutional, And Is Susceptible Of
Interpretation As Treason. On This And Other Grounds, The
People Of The U. $8. Should Compel Immediate Withdrawal
Of Our Nation From The United Nations And The Annulling
Of Extraterritorial Rights Granted The UN In Violation Of
Our Constitution. In this illegitimate, high-handed and
treacherous manner, the Rockefeller interests have contrived
through the UN, to bring about the "new social order" which
was the primary purpose of their "philanthropes". The
behind-the-scene bosses of the UN have become the dictators
of the U.S. and of the world. But they now share that power
with Soviet Russia. When Stalin told an interviewer that
Americans are no longer masters in their own house, he might
have said also, and quite truthfully, that through the UN he is
more master of the United States than is its citizenry.

Joseph Stalin denned "internationalist" as follows:

"An internationalist is one who is prepared unreservedly,
unhesitatingly and unconditionally to defend the USSR."
(New Leader, March 11, 1950) In Stalin's sense of the word,
the UN has served "internationalism" perfectly. Stalin-
trusted Alger Hiss worked well at Yalta and at San Francisco,
to fashion the UN into an ideal weapon for the

407


Soviets. No longer do their espionage agencies have to depend
upon their Rockefeller-financed Institute of Pacific Relations
for their dirty work. The U.S. Treasury-financed UN is
infinitely better equipped to serve their purposes, and bring
the ultimate objective of the Axis world conquest, infinitely
closer to attainment, at no greater cost to it than mere words
and debate. Soviet Russia sits at the UN table with the very
powers she seeks to destroy, fully protected against any action
against her own aggression by the ever more numerous votes
of her satellites added to her three votes; and by the power of
veto. Side by side with Hiss, at Stettinius' elbow, was Dalton
Trumbo, a notorious Red of the Stalinist breed. Like Hiss, he
supplied Stettinius, who was hopelessly beyond his depth,
with ideas which, needless to say, were pro-Communist, and
entirely to Stalin's satisfaction. Trumbo also ghosted
Stettinius' speeches at the Conference. In this pesition, the
Kremlin is enabled to render impotent any nation that might
wish to check its plan of expansion by subversion and
engulfment, and to block any inclination to arrest its predatory
activities. It uses the UN as a shield. UN debates serve as a
sounding board for its propaganda that has played an
important role in its conquests of large sections of the globe
by subversion and infiltration. Under the protective shelter of
the UN, Soviet Russia has extended her dominicn to almost a
third of the people of the world. It has gradually expanded to
take in the Eurasian lands that Rockefeller-Soviet Axis deals,
ratified by the U.S. State Department and confirmed at
Teheran and Yalta, have assigned to Communist Russia and
aided her in acquiring.

Under the guidance of Alger Hiss's worthy successor Trygve
Lie, a Norwegian Red, and the personnel which he was
empowered to employ for the UN delegations, the UN has
served also as an espionage center. Fulton Lewis Jr.
reported on January 18, 1951, that "29 high-ranking officials
of Communist parties in foreign countries were then working
at the UN headquarters in New York" according to the records
of the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency. He reported
further, as follows: "Some 90 U.S. citizens working for the
UN have Communist-front records sufficient to bar them
completely from jobs in the Federal Government. 408


"Yet they represent this nation at the UN.” Arrangements
for the hiring of employees of the UN delegation, initiated by
Alger Hiss, gave the sole right of passing on the
qualifications of the candidates to the Secretary General.
Though Try-gve Lie has ousted some of his appointees on the
ground that they are Communists of the wrong complexion,
he has consistently approved only Reds for UN posts, and it
is now packed with Reds of all shades, spies, traitors and
foreign agents.

Following the delivery of China into the hands of the
Kremlin by State Department employees and other agents
from Rockefeller's Council on Foreign Relations, Institute of
Pacific Relations and other subsidized fronts, the clique led
by Dean Acheson originally collaborated with Soviet Russia
and Great Britain in seeking te give the Communists another
vote in UN councils, by turning over to them to seat of
Nationalist China. In late 1951, the tide of public opinion
aroused by exposures, such as those of Senator McCarthy,
and by the chicanery of the Chinese Communists in_ the
Korean armistice negotiations, forced Acheson and his clique
to pretend to oppose seating them in the UN. The move was
proposed by the British Labor Government, which was
dominated by the Rockefeller Empire, that has heavily
subsidized the Fabians and the Labor Party. Dean Acheson,
likewise was a Rockefeller-Soviet Axis spokesman in this
matter. This illustrates the well-developed technique of using
foreign governments as catspaws for pulling their chestnuts
out of the fire. The same technique was used in their
dismissal of General Douglas Mac-Arthur, when he
undertook to upset their conspiracy by offering to defeat the
Chinese Communists and Russia itself, if necessary.

One of the most dangerous uses to which the UN has lent
itself, in the hands of the Kremlin, is its use as a military
device. Through the UN, the Kremlin blocked the

bombardment of concentration and supply centers in
Manchuria. Through the UN, it managed to stall for sufficient
time to secure reinforcements and supplies when trounced and
facing defeat, on the pretense of seeking an armistice. By the
UN, Marshall Plan and NATO, which aided Britain, their
undercover ally, the Soviets have been supplied with jet
engines and planes, and their plans, that were developed at
the expense


409


of U.S. taxpayers and are so far superior to those that the
English have supplied the UN forces and to our own, that on
November 11, 1951, General Vandenberg, as head of our
airforce announced that all of the UN planes and jets recently
built and currently being built are already obsolete and are
being destroyed by the Russian airforce. Through the good
offices of our pretended allies in the UN, the Kremlin has
been able to block the use against her forces and bases in the
Korean Crusade, of the atom bomb, for whatever use and
value it may have i in warfare; and has ‘managed to maintain its
position of using the UN itself as a super-esplonage agency
that sits in the inner councils of the very powers it 1s engaged
in destroying. Meanwhile, the Soviets are rapidly gaining
enough voting power for Iron Curtain lands, and through
secret allies such as India, to paralyze and take over the U.S.
and the balance of the world without firing a single shot.

The UN constitution, Bill of Human Rights and all of the
several conventions being drafted by various agencies, many
of them subsidized by the Rockefeller Empire and its puppets,
are all being deliberately designed for the purpose of betraying
the U.S. and fercing upon the land the "new social order" of
totalitarianism. Thus the Committee to Frame the World
Constitution comprised a part of the same group of
Rockefeller's University of Chicago and Council on Foreign
Relations agents that constituted the Commission on (or to
betray) Freedom of the Press: Hutchins, Hocking, Niebuhr,
Redfield and Ruml, joined by U. of Chicago's Red professors,
Richard P. McKeon, Mortimer J. Adler, Rexford G. Tugwell,
Wilber G. Katz, James M. Landis, Charles Mcllwain and
Guiseppe A. Borgese. Borgese, an ‘Italian Red refugee and
close personal friend of Senator William Benton, was
entrusted with the actual process of drafting the "Constitution"
that was brought out in 1947, as a pattern for the UN to
follow. In the writing of this brutalitarian "Constitution",
which might better be termed a license for slavery, a
deliberate and absurd effort was made to effect a
"compromise" between the U.S. and Soviet constitutions. Se
delighted were the Reds with this document, that its adeption
by the U.S. was made one of the planks in the platform of

410


Henry Wallace's Rockefeller-subsidized Communist front, the
Progressive Party.

Mrs. Anita McCormick Blaine, a distant kinswoman of the

Rockefellers and a heavy supporter of Communist causes,
including the Communist newspaper, Compass, donated
$1,000,000 for a foundation for world government that seeks
the adoption of this "Constitution For World Government”. It
is administered by two "liberal" former professors of
Rockefeller's University of Chicago, Stringfellow Barr and
Scott Buchanan.
All the World Federalist groups have similar inspiration. Cord
Meyer Jr. and Clark M. Eichel-berger, leader of two of the
groups, are of the membership of the Foreign Office of the
Rockefeller Empire, the Council on Foreign Relations.
Supreme Court Justice William O. Douglas, who swore to
uphold the U.S. Constitution in his oath of office, is vice-
president of the United World Federalists, dedicated to
breaking down our Constitution, and surrendering the
sovereignty of our country to the Rockefeller-Soviet-
dominated and inspired UN "world power". The safety and se-
curity of the country required his impeachment and removal
from the Supreme Court bench.

So sly, intensive and powerful has been the drive of the
conspirators, led by the United World Federalists Inc. and the
Rockefeller-supported agencies, that by June 1949, twenty-
two state legislatures had voted for an Amendment to the U.S.
Constitution that would turn over our nation to a world
government by Rockefeller's UN, rob us of our sovereignty
and nationality, and betray us inte the hands of the
Rockefeller-Soviet Axis. A group of  ninety-three
Congressmen sponsored a concurrent resolution in the House
of Representatives:

"It is the sense of the Congress that it should be a
fundamental ckjective of the foreign policy of the United
States to support and strengthen the United Nations and to
seek its development into a world federation open to all
nations with denned and limited powers adequate to
preserve peace and prevent aggression through the en-
actment, interpretation and enforcement of world law."

The list cut acress party lines and contained fifteen of the
twenty-four members of the Foreign Affairs Committee.
(marked with * table 1, p. 412)

411


UNITED NATIONS CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT SPONSORS BY
STATES, SHOWING PARTY AFFILIATION


Alahama Smathers (D)
Battle (D) * Bennett (D)
Arizona
Patten (D) Lanham (D)
Wheeler (D)
Haya M) Minois
Mille (D)
Trimble (D) ae Sie
Mack (D)
Anderson (R) Velde (K)
(D) Yatəs (D)
Boina (0) na
Jackson (R)*  Sasobs (D)
D) Noland (D)
a M m
Beoddor (R) Mier (R)
Welch (R)
Donohue (D)
Aspinall (p) Fureolo By
Carroll (D) Herter Pes
Lodge {R)* Henneiy (D)
Ribleoff (D)* wr
Woodhouse (D) F m}
Beton: iD) Blatnik (D)
a
Sikes (D) Judd (R)*


The names of these “patriot
mind by their electorates. It is


* Missouri
Halling (D) Burke (D
Karst (D) osser Pr
orys (R)
Montana Pennsylvania
Mansfield (D)* “Buchanan (D)
S Baring (D} Da X, (D)
ven
Hampshire Eberharter (D)
Cotton (R) Fultom (R)®
Granahan (D)
Aachincioss (R) Richards (D)*
Cuse (R) Tehat D)
yen, E, Tana
Rodina {D) Teague (D}
Towe (R) Bosone (D)
New York Granger (D)
Byrne (D) sinia
Caller (D) Gary (D)
Davies (D) sp {D>
eler (D) Stanley (D)
avita (R)*
Klein (DB) Jackson (D)
Keating ~ Mitcha (Dp)
Multer (D) Tollefson (E)
Powell {D} Woat Yi
Riehiman (R) iD)
Taurielio (D) Wisconsin
North Biem!Ner D
Chatham (D)* Zabloeki (D) "


ic Americans" should be borne in
notable that the subscribing states


were predominantly-Democratic and New Deal. It is fortunate for
the nation that many of the states have withdrawn their support from


it alerted to the nature of the
American Revolution.


conspiracy by the Daughters Of


One of the most nefarious aspects of this UN conspiracy is the


propaganda to root out patriotis
with "internationalism", in the $


feller-Foundation-dominated New Yo


m in the schools, and to supplant it
talin-Rockefeller sense. The Rocke-
k School Board adopted in


December 1950, over the protests of numerous citizens and patriotic
groups, a resolution which provided for flying the UN flag above


the Stars and Stripes.
In conclusion, the fact is in
device is a suicidal, paralyzing


ble that the United Nations
ore of the Rockefeller Soviet Axis


escapa


that aims to destroy and engulf t
and of the wo


World. The only cause the "Uni


betrayal of our United States.


rld into a totalitarian “One Wo


he governments of the United States
rld", a Rockefeller
ted" Nations are united in ig in the
It has served in the cause of


"internationalis
destroyed or it will destroy us.


m“ of the Rockefeller Soviet brand. It must be


412


CHAPTER XXII


ROCKEFELLER'S MARSHALL PLAN & POINT 4
PROGRAM


The "Cold War" And The Korean "Crusade"


The so-called "Cold War" is obviously a cautious
expansion of the Soviet Empire to invest the lands ceded to it
by the Rockefeller Soviet Axis pact. Likewise, the Korean
"Crusade", or "police action", serves to carry out the pattern
of the same pact. In no other manner can there be explained
many of their very strange aspects.

First, the Kremlin has made no move to disturb the
Rockefeller interests in their peaceful possession of the
enormously oil-rich Arabian Empire, in spite of its need for
ol

Any inclination te doubt the existence of an understanding
between the members of the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis will be
dispelled promptly by an examination of the map of Asia
Minor. It will be noted that Soviet Russia borders Turkey for
hundreds of miles, and that there exists no real barrier that
would block the Soviet seizure of Turkey, Arabia, Palestine,
Iraq, and all the puppet states that have been set up in that
region. It would be absurd to propose that the $600,000,000
fund levied on American taxpayers "for the rearming of the
Greek and Turkish armies" sufficed to make Rockefeller's
Saudi Arabian oil secure from the hordes of the Soviet Army,
that outnumbers the total population of those countries.

Certainly, it did not create, nor does there now exist in that
region, the military might that would step the enormous, well-
trained Soviet Army. There is only one answer to the
question: "What stops the Kremlin from seizing the plentiful
Arabian oil that it needs so direly?" The answer is quite
obvious. The Soviets are receiving that oil at no cost, or at a
price that is less than the cost of production by themselves, on
the basis of an alliance with its producers, the Rockefeller
Empire, which has thus secured immunity for its holdings.
This brings up the next question: "Who is paying the grasping,
ruthless sham philanthropists for that oil?” By now the answer
should be obvious to the dullest.

On May 13, 1948, the Wall Street Journal carried 413


on its front page in a special dispatch by Ray Crom-ley, the
substance of the agreement reached at this conference,
confirming substantially the secret agreement reached at
Yalta, some three years earlier, between Stalin and Edward
Stettinius and Alger Hiss, whe, with "Roosevelt", represented
the Rockefeller Empire. The dispatch was a release by the
Rockefeller puppet agency, the State Department, of a
pretended "warning" to Russia, under the headlines Nexus For
Russia, U.S. Diplomats Sketch a "Line" Which Soviet Shall
Not Cross. In effect, the "line" divided the world between the
Rockefeller-Soviet allies into the Western and Eastern zones.
The "line" runs to the west of Finland and Sweden, through
mid-Germany and Austria, along the Yugoslav Adriatic coast,
across northern Greece and Bulgaria, north of the Bos-phorus
and Turkey and along the eastern border of Persia to the
Persian Gulf, the Gulf of Oman and the Arabian Sea. It was
drawn to leave the Rockefeller Empire in control of its Saudi
Arabian oilfields and its line of supply through the Mediter-
ranean ; and it gave to the Soviets, Finland, Sweden, East
Germany, Czechoslovakia, East Austria, Yugoslavia,
Macedona, Poland, Rumania, Bulgaria and all of Asia with
the exception of Turkey and Arabia. The correspondent
naively explains:

"The weakness of the Iranian defense line— and the
importance of Near East cil—are major reasons why military
men and diplomats want no bad flare-up in Arabia." He
discreetly fails to mention that Near East oil is important
primarily to the Rockefeller interests. But he makes it clear
that it is the crux of the situation. He makes it clear that Iran
and its oil, concerning which there is now such a pretense of
concern, was relegated to the Soviets, in line with the
confirmed policy of the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis to despoil
and destroy the British Empire. China, which the Rockefeller
"philanthropy" agents, operating through the State
Department, have played the key role in delivering to the
Soviets, was assigned to the Soviets together with Japan,
Indo-China, Indonesia, Burma, Ceylon, India, Tibet and
Afghanistan, where Rockefeller agent Owen Latti-more has
been as curiously active as he was in China before its betrayal.
The pro-Communist activities of Nehru in India and the
appointment as

414


U.S. Ambassador to India of Chester Bowles, the former
partner and associate of pro-Communist Senator William
Benton, who is intimately identified with Alger Hiss and
Nelson Rockefeller, and with Rockefeller's Institute of Pacific
Relations, presage an early delivery of India to the Soviets.
Tibet has already been delivered to the Communists,
following the activities there of Owen Lattimore and of the
same clique. And Afghanistan, that has been likewise the
object of Lattimore'’s attentions and the interest of Standard
Oil agents, will no doubt scon follow suit.

Four significant events followed closely on the conference
between Nelson A. Rockefeller and Andrei Gromyke, upon
which it probably had an important bearing. First was the
Berlin Blockade, which paved the way for arresting the
dismantlement of the Rockefeller dominated I.G. Farben-
industrie plants, the release of its officers from jail and its
restitution te control of West Germany under the guidance of
its Rockefeller attorney, John J. McCloy, as American High
Commissioner. The second was the delivery of China to the
Communists through the activities of the agents of
Rockefeller's Institute of Pacific Relations in and out of their
puppet State Department; and their proposal to wipe out the
Nationalist Chinese Government completely by seating the
Communist "Popular" Government in the UN, that would
imply turning over to the latter all the assets of the former that
are held abroad. These acts have been disastrous for the
nation, and the second has cost the blood of more than
180,000 GIs, the lives of almost 70,000 of them and the
spectre of national insolvency through the third, the Korean
War that was thereby made possible. It was a fulfillment of
the conditions laid down by the Rockefeller Empire through
the State Department and published in the Wall Street Journal
dispatch, as "the price of peace."

Proof of the fact that an agreement on such a partition of the
world existed prior to Yalta and the termination of the war is
clearly revealed by the withdrawal of our troops before Berlin
in order to yield it to Soviet troops, in the European theatre of
war. And in the Pacific, seven months before the termination
of the war the Japs offered General MacArthur surrender on
the same terms as were accepted at its termination; but the
offer was

415


rejected by Roosevelt and his Rockefeller-Soviet Axis bosses.
The war in the Pacific was deliberately prolonged until after
Stalin had been induced to agree to permit us to terminate it,
after he had the Soviets make a token entry into it as the basis
for claiming Far East lands. Obviously the Rockefeller-Soviet
partners sought on behalf of Stalin, to exhaust our forces in
the process of conquering terntory for the Soviets. The
dropping of the atom-bomb on a people pleading for peace
was a needless, brutal psychologic gesture that was designed
by the conspirators more to intimidate folks at home than to
defeat the already defeated Japs. In this it is proving more
lastingly effective than the Orson Welles Invasion From Mars
broadcast that they staged later as a test of the gullibility of
their thought controlled Americans.

Third, in sharp contrast with the Saudi Arabia situation,
Iran, with a larger population and army, and a smaller oil
potential and production, is being cautiously stripped from the
British Empire, and drawn under the Iron Curtain by the
propaganda and agitation of the Communist Tudeh Party, with
the sly, dissembled support of the Rockefeller Empire,
through its agents and emissaries, including Averell Harriman,
and its puppet State Department. Their pretended concern over
the situation has served as a cover-up for dollar loans to
Mossadegh's Iranian Government, that may amount to a
hundred million or more to begin with, to enable it to carry on
without the revenues derived from the Anglo-Iranian Oil Co.
operations. Naturally, the American “peasants” will be forced
to pay out this money on behalf of the beggarly Rockefeller
Empire, through taxes and the U.S. Treasury. Sicken-ingly
melodramatic Mossadegh, who alternately blusters and sobs,
and makes blatant public exhibitions of his cowardice in
fainting spells and hospital visits, is giving the "peasants" a
show for their money.

It is also apparent that the present Iranian situation is
merely what was planned between the Rockefeller-Soviet
Axis partners even prior to Yalta — speeded up by the
impediment placed in the way of delivery of Saudi Arabian oil
to the Soviets. The Rockefeller Empire has no direct interest
in Iranian oil. In pursuing its consistent policy of being willing
to give away other peoples’ money and

416


property, its puppet State Department had already published
its intent to yield Iran to the Soviets.

Fourth, the Reckefeller Empire is supporting the Kremlin in
the various phases of the "Cold War" and the Korean
"Crusade", directly and indirectly, at the expense of the
American taxpayers, through the UNRRA, the Marshall Plan,
the Point 4 program and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization. With the usual cunning of the schemers, all of
these plans are being presented to the "peasants" as devices
for "stopping Communism”.

The Marshall Plan and its continuation, the Point 4
program, and the North Atlantic treaty are completely
transparent plans for subsidy of the partners of the
Rockefeller-Soviet Axis. They were conceived in the 1930's
by the Rockefeller-subsidized "social scientists" and promoted
by their Foundation, and their Council on Foreign Relations.
They were labelled with the names of their pawns, Marshall
and Truman, and were dictated to the members of Congress,
who passed them without pretense of a debate. In an address
before the "78-79" club of Congress, in 1946, I predicted that
it was planned to use the Marshall Plan in the same manner as
the OPA — as a principal agency of Communism — to
paralyze the flow of commodities through normal channels of
industry in order to force inflation and chaos in business, with
the purpose of furthering Communism and dictatorship in the
U.S.; and also to subsidize Soviet Russia. In The Strange
Death of F.D.R., I repeated the prediction (p. 272}.

The Committee for the Marshall Plan that propa
gandized the "peasants" through all the mass
channels of information and misinformation con
trolled by the Rockefellers and their allies, from an
office at 537 Fifth Avenue, New York City, in addi
tion to the Rockefellers personally, comprised the
familiar list of Rockefeller agents, puppets and
pawns of the Foreign Office of the Rockefeller
Empire, the Council on Foreign Relations. Its per
sonnel include the following:

Hamilton Fish Armstrong George H. Blakeslee


Isaiah Bowman John W. Davis
Stephen Duggan Allen W. Dulles
Charles H. Mcllwain Reinhold Niebuhr
George Shuster Charles Seymour
Henry L. Stimson Henry W. Wriston


Nelson A. Rockefeller 417


The following Trustees of the Rockefeller Foundation were
members of the "national council” of the Committee:
Karl T. Compton John 5. Dickey
Robert G. Sproul Arthur Hays Sulzberger
Winthrop W. Aldrich On December 13, 1949,
the Chicago Tribune published an editorial bearing the
caption Rockefeller Profits From The Marshall Plan. This
editorial was based entirely on the reports of the ECA
Marshall Plan, records of the first 45-day period of operation.
It points out that the Rockefeller family, the demonstrated
bosses of all Standard Oil Companies, played the key role in
getting the Marshall Plan through Congress and are cashing
in on it handsomely. It quetes from the ECA report the
following instances in which Rockefeller's Standard Oil
companies, or their subsidiaries, collected several times from
the American taxpayer for the same products in connection
with Marshall Plan deals:

Anglo-American Oil Company Ltd., 100% owned
British subsidiary of the Standard Oil Company of New
Jersey, purchased from two other wholly owned
subsidiaries of the same company, the Esso Expert Corp.
and the Standard Oil Export Corp., $7,258,332 worth of
products that were paid for by the U.S. taxpayers out of
ECA funds. The transaction which was in effect merely a
transfer of the products from one department to another of
Standard Oil, netted it two profits at the expense of the
taxpayers.

Standard Francaise des Petroles, a French company 83%-
owned by the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey,
bought $4,020,210 worth of products from the Esso Expert
Corp, a wholly owned subsidiary of Standard Oil, in the
same type of deal.

Other subsidiaries of the Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey,
throughout the world engage in the same type of transactions
with their mother companies at the expense of the American
taxpayers. Les Raffineries de la Vacuum Oil bought from
Secony-Vacuum Oil Co., its parent company, $2,-249,877
worth of products under the same conditions. The
appointment of Paul G. Hoffman, former Studebaker
Co. executive, protege of Bernard Baruch, Rockefeller
henchman and member of the


418


Rockefeller Empire Foreign Office, the Council on Foreign
Relations, as head of the ECA, assured the Rockefellers of
direct and full control of its activities.

The banks controlled by the allied Rockefeller and
Roosevelt interests, the Chicago Tribune editorial states, have
an exclusive monopoly of the profitable letter-of-credit
business arising out of these plans, and in the financing of the
exports made under them.

The nations in the name of which the Marshall Plan was set
up saw little of the funds or benefits from them. A large
proportion of the billions levied on the U.S. taxpayers never
left the country, but was transferred directly or indirectly from
the U.S. Treasury to the coffers of various Rockefeller-con-
trolled corporations here or abroad, as stated in the Chicago
Tribune editorial and the ECA reports. As a consequence,
most European nations have manifested little interest in the
Marshall Plan. In France for example, ECA officials were
instructed by their superiors to create the appearance of
enthusiasm for the plan and to instigate a demand in the
French press for the passage by Congress of the necessary
apprepriations bill. Few French newspapers, other than those
controlled by the Rockefeller and allied interests, even
mentioned the story. They were not interested in the Marshall
Plan because they were getting little or nothing out of it.

It is only the lands in which the Rockefeller interests seek
further expansion, or have an axe te grind, that are given
direct and visible benefits from the Marshall Plan, for the
purpose of influencing acceptance of the deals in question.

The Rockefeller Empire itself has been the largest supplier
to the Communist forces in Korea of an absolute essential for
modern war—oil. The North Korean forces could not have
launched the war without the oil provided them by
Rockefeller's Cal-tex Co. from Saudi Arabian oilfields,
entirely at the expense of American taxpayers through the
Marshall Plan. That cil has made it possible for the enemy to
operate its tanks, planes and other equipment that slaughter
our Gls. It has made the Korean War an extremely profitable
venture for the Rockefeller Empire.

Within a month after the Korean War got under way, it
leaked out that Rockefeller's Caltex Co. was


419


supplying the enemy with their oil. The matter became so
ugly a public scandal that puppet Secretary of State Dean
Acheson was compelled to go through the form of ordering
his Rockefeller Empire bosses to stop the treasonous trade.
This meant, according to Rockefeller's Caltex employees, a
complete standstill and loss of their highly profitable business.
For the Rockefeller interests were paid for each barrel of oil
three times by U.S. taxpayers, and made three profits. The oil
is produced originally at the expense of the taxpayers by the
Arabian American Oil Co., known as Aramco, a subsidiary of
Caltex. Aramco was paid for the oil which it delivered, by the
ECA. Caltex shipped the oil to Hong Kong in tankers, at the
expense of the U.S. taxpayers, through the ECA, and sold it te
a British subsidiary of Rockefeller's Standard Oil Co. Caltex
was paid for the oil by the ECA. The Hong Kong company
delivered the oil to the Chinese Communists and North
Koreans and was paid for it out of the British Marshall Plan
funds, by the ECA. The Caltex employees were trained in
methods of billing and paper work in a special course given
by the ECA in Washington at expense of the taxpayers.

Shipment of oil to the enemy was promptly taken over by a
British subsidiary of the Standard Oil Co. in Hong Kong, still
at the expense of the U.S. taxpayer, through the ECA. The
tankers engaged in the trade, many of them built at the
expense of the U.S. taxpayer, were transferred to Panamanian,
Greek, Norwegian and other foreign registry, and the trade
continued under foreign flags, at the expense of the ECA.
When the facts leaked out several months later, aroused public
sentiment once again compelled puppet Secretary of State
Dean Acheson to go through the motions of “bringing
pressure to bear” against the "British" traders to discontinue
the shipments of oil. Thereafter the shipments have been made
by companies that are less directly controlled by the
Rockefeller interests, from other parts of the world, such as
Venezuela. This oil keeps the war going.

It is a matter of record that the Marshall Plan and North
Atlantic Treaty countries transship the bulk of the material
which they receive under the plans, or their equivalents, to
Russia and the Iron Curtain countries. They fabricate raw
materials which they receive, that are in short supply in the


420


U.S., into military equipment and munitions, and export them
to Russia and Korea. The sixteen Marshall Plan nations have a
total of ninety-six trade pacts with Russia and her satellites, in
connection with this treacherous commerce.

Fulton Lewis Jr. reports that he toured all of Western
Europe seeking in vain the heavy tractors and combines which
were shipped there by the ECA. He noted that there were no
sections that he visited where they could be used. Had he been
permitted to visit the collective farms of Russia, he would
have discovered that they had all been transshipped by our
Western European "allies" to Russia.

The North Atlantic Treaty countries are demand
ing of the U.S., arms, equipment, cruisers and
other material of war for the purpose of "resisting
ageression by Russia”, and at the same time are
shipping to Russia all their production of those
items that is made possible by the Marshall Plan
aid they are receiving. Thus the October, 1951,
issue of Shipping World reports that Marshall Plan
countries are building the following ships for Soviet
Russia at the present time:


Denmark 10 whalers

8 trawlers 2 suction dredge hulls
Italy Belgium

2 passenger-cargo 8 cargo ships

ships 7 trawlers

Netherlands Sweden

3 cargo ships 1? trawlers

6 tankers 2 tankers


In connection with the hubbub about atomic bombs, there
naturally comes to mind the question of the bearing of the
Rockefeller Soviet Axis on the leakage of information on the
bomb and of raw material for its manufacture. Major Jordan
testified that Harry L. Hopkins’ name played a role in clearing
both information on the development of the bomb and actual
shipments of processed uranium. Hopkins serve the Axis
loyally as one of its top Washington agents. A large number of
the scientists connected with the development of the bomb
were identified with institutions subsidized by the Rockefeller

"ohilanthrepies". Many of the college presidents who went on
record publicly as favoring the release of atomic energy
information to the Soviets are members of the Rockefeller
Empire Foreign Office, the Council On Foreign Relations, and
were


421


there identified with and indoctrinated by Alger Hiss and with
the editors of Amerasia Owen Lattimore, Wiliam W.
Lockwood, Thomas A. Bisson and Frederick Vanderbilt Field
and others of the same tinting. David E. Lilienthal, Chairman
of the Atomic Energy Committee who approved of its grants
for research work in the field to known Communists, is
likewise a member of Rockefellet's crew. William Wesley
Waymack, a fellow member of the AEC was a member of the
Beard of Trustees of Rockefeller's American Institute of
Pacific Relations and of the Rockefeller subsidized, Marxist
National Planning Board, and was identified with numerous
other subversive or Communist front organizations, including
the Russian War Relief Inc. and the Council for Democracy,
as well as a member of the Executive Committee, with John
Foster Dulles and David Rockefeller of the Carnegie
Endowment For International Peace that appointed Alger Hiss
its president, (in which capacity Hiss became his associate),
and a member of the Red Twentieth Century Fund. Rear
Admiral Lewis Lichtenstein Strauss, the other member of the
AEC, who opposed its subsidizing acknowledged Commu-
nists in atomic energy researches but was overruled and
resigned, member of Kuhn Loeb & Co. who has been
appointed financial adviser of the Rockefeller Bros. Ine., is
also a member of Rockefeller's Council on Foreign Relations.
This situation makes thoroughly understandable the fact
that the Marshall Plan, the Point 4 program and the North
Atlantic Pact all have operated to strengthen and rearm Russia
while depleting and weakening the U.S. As in the case of the
UNRRA, Russia and the "Iron Curtain” countries are re-
celving, directly or indirectly, a lion's share of Marshall Plan
aid and are being very materially supported through it in their
Korean War, however involuntarily, by the American
taxpayers. Indeed, the promptness with which Russian
overtures for an armistice followed the adoption by Congress
of measures, such the Kem Bill, that ordered the withholding
of all aid from nations that traded with Russia and her
satellites, make it appear probable that all the oil, munitions
and supplies for the North Korean and Communist forces
were being supplied, directly or indirectly, by the Rockefeller-
Marshall conspiracy against the U.S. and its taxpayers.


422


One can not wonder that the Rockefellers, especially
Nelson, are wildly enthusiastic about the Marshall Plan. It has
poured billions of dollars of American taxpayers’ money into
their pockets through the firms which they control. It has as-
sured their control of governments and concessions
throughout the world. It has discovered for them new and
fabulous sources of wealth, such as the new oil fields drilled
with Marshall Plan funds by one of their subsidiary
companies in French Equatorial Africa, which they now seek
to exploit at the expense of the U.S. taxpayer through the
extensions of the Marshall Plan which they have promoted,
the MSA and the Point 4 program.

The most insolent and grandiose of the conspiracies to
make the American taxpayer support with his money and life
the expansion of the Rockefeller Empire and of the
Rockefeller-Soviet Axis, is the Point 4 program. This
program, as has been related, was launched by John D.
Rockefeller 3rd in 1948, on his return from Africa, on a
mission supposedly on behalf of the Rockefeller Foundation
that quested the welfare of the Hottentcts that are so dear to
the heart of Henry Wallace and the rest of the crew of
Rockefeller Reds.

Point 4 is an essential part of the program of the
Rockefeller-Soviet Axis. It was laid down as such by Earl
Browder, in his book Teheran, Our Path In Peace And War,
published in 1945:

"America can underwrite a gigantic program of
industnialization of Africa to be launched immediately ...
p. 53)

"Our (U.S.) government can create a series of giant
industrial development corporations, each in partnership
with some other government or group of governments and set
them to work upon large scale plans of railroad and highway
building, agricultural and industrial development, and all-
round modernization in all the devastated and undeveloped
areas of the world ..." (p. 79} John D. 3d dictated the program
to Truman. Truman dictated it to Congress. Congress
subserviently adopted it without any question of the orders it
had received, other than a few feeble protests about a “global


It is not difficult to understand the interest of the
Rockefeller-Soviet Axis in the Point 4 program for the
development of Africa. For the Soviets the

423


plan presents a number of immediate advantages. They are
trading heavily with the British and French colonies in Africa.
A development of its industries would make Africa an even
more important source of military supplies and material. It
would build up the continent at the expense of the U.S.
taxpayers, hasten the financial debacle that would lead to the
U.S. downfall, while at the same time building up Africa and
make it a prize worthy of the conquering efforts of the Rocke-
feller-Soviet Axis. Their agents are already at work preparing
the way for both of these accomplishments. Ralph Bunche, the
Urban League and a host of other agencies subsidized by them
are simultaneously agitating the F.E.P.C. program, inciting
race friction in the U.S. and actual race warfare and ricts in
Africa.

John D. Rockefeller 3rd's praise of Bundle's prediction of
an Asiatic Communist pattern of "upheaval", or revolution, in
Africa at the Urban League's dinner to the winner of the Nobel
Peace Prize has been related. The job they are doing is prov-
ing very effective in all sections of Africa. In the industrial
and mining sections of the Union of South Africa, they are
breeding totalitarianism and hatred of the white, and stirring
up race riots that are directed initially against the ‘Hindu immi-
grants. In the uranium-mining sections of Katanga, they are
adapting their metheds to the customs of the natives. They are
concentrating on indectrinating the powerful tribal witch
doctors and making them the agents of hate and revolution.

Nelson Rockefeller's Point 4 program has been in the hands
of trusted Communist agents from the very start and in it he is
catrying forward the objectives of the Rockefeller-Soviet
Axis, closely associated, as usual, with pro-Communists and
Communists and Communist agents, in and cut of the State
Depattment. The Executive Director of the Secretariat of the
Inter-Departmental Committee on Scientific and Cultural
Cooperation which is the official title of the Point 4 program,
is Haldore Hanson. Haldore Hanson has a long record as a
Communist, starting with the editorship of a Chinese
Communist magazine in Peiping. Collaborating with Haldore
Hanson and Nelson Rockefeller in the Point 4 program in
Afghanistan is Owen Lattimore, whose earlier activities in
Asia, on be-

424


half of the State Department and the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis,
were so successful for the Soviets, that the Communists took
over the country without a struggle.

Nelson Rockefeller's Point 4 Program is doing its best to
make the world, and the U.S., safe for Communism. It is
engaged in the Marxist enterprise of providing social security
in Egypt, whose king can insure the permanent and absolute
security of death by arbitrary edict to any and all of his
subjects, at the expense cf the U.S. taxpayers, as was
announced on May 1, 1951. It is building ports and
developing mines and oil fields in Africa for the Rockefellers
and providing them with the irrigation prcjects, for which a
large part of undeveloped Califorma, Nevada, New Mexico
and other sections of the U.S. languish. It is rapidly getting
around to Henry Wallace's favorite enterprise of providing
"milk for the Hottentets", with Marxist dialectics as a flavor,
at the expense of the world's greatest sucker, the U.S.
taxpayer.

The immediate urgency and the direct impetus to
Rockefeller's Point 4 program for Africa was revealed in a
center-page photographic spread in the Sunday magazine
section of their official journal, the New York Times, on
September 23, 1951. Under the headline Africa Strikes Oil, it
relates in the legends of the photographs that oil has been
found in French Equatorial Africa, in the Ogoue River basin
of Gabon territory, about 150 miles from Port Gentil on the
Atlantic coast. The oil was found after four years of
exploration by the Societe des Pet-roles d'Afrique Equatoriale
Francaise. It relates that the company was French government
financed, but states that the $207,000 dollars that the French
government furmshed was U.S. Treasury, E.C.A. and
Marshall Plan funds. Rockefeller's Standard Oil entered into a
partnership with the French government in the 1920's, as
related elsewhere, that made them equal partners in the French
oil monopoly.

On November 24, 1950, President Truman dutifully
appointed Nelson A. Rockefeller chairman of the Advisory
Board on International Development, to plan aid for the
underdeveloped areas of the world, more specifically of
petroliferous Africa, and to implement the Rockefeller-Soviet
Axis scheme. In making the appointment, Truman left it
osten- 425


sibly to the Board, but actually to Rockefeller, to decide "the
type and size of programs . . . desirable for the United States
to undertake in this field.” This was, in effect, a carte blanche
to Nelson and the Empire.

On March 11, 1951, the Rockefeller report, or order, was
handed to Truman in the name of the Board. It recommended
that $500,000,000 should be appropriated by Congress to
launch the program. To secure additional power, scope, funds
and personnel, it recommended a merger of all overseas
economic activities including the Marshall Plan's Economic
Cooperation Administration, the State Department's Institute
of Inter-American Affairs that Nelson Rockefeller had
launched, and the Technical & Cooperation Administration,
among others.

The "opposition" in Congress had not one word to say
against the utter un-Constitutionality of the Point 4 proposal.
Part of the explanation is probably the fact that the law firm of
the leader of the "opposition", Sen. Rebert A. Taft, has
represented the Rockefellers in such affairs as Abby Rocke-
feller Milton's and her husband's Charleston Shipyard deal
that tapped the U.S. Treasury. Taft evidently heard "his
master's voice” and was as eager to approve of this outrageous
criminal raid on the U.S. Treasury as any other of the
Rockefeller puppet, "bipartisan" agents in Congress. He
rushed to volunteer his support of it so that it could be in-
cluded in the press reports carrying the Rockefeller proposals,
obviously by pre-arrangement, in order to block effectively
any protest or opposition. The Associated Press report quotes
him as saying, as "leader" of the fake opposition in Congress:

"I have no objections to Point 4 assistance so

long as it is conducted on a limited basis and

isn't a global giveaway.” Sen. Taft echoed, in effect, the
famous words of Sen. Arthur Vandenberg:

"Anything Rockefeller wants is O.K." Evidently Taft
does not mind a "small" violation of the Constitution, when
his firm's client, Rockefeller, is the beneficiary.

With the opposition thus bowled over, the Rockefeller-
Soviet Axis Point 4 program was adopted in record time by
Congress. In the midst of the Korean War that was taxing the
resources of

426


the nation and piling up staggering costs and taxes, a Point 4
appropriation of $500,000,000, for subsidizing further the
Rockefeller interests, was passed by Congress with literally
ne opposition, to help speed the insolvency of the nation and
its taxpayers:

Since his appointment Nelson Rockefeller, who in the
words of Joe Alex Mortis, his biographer, seeks "to get a
good return on his investment", has devoted a large part of his
time and energy to promoting his Point 4 Program.
Indefatigably he races around the country speaking before any
or-gainzation that will listen to the promotion of his Point 4
business. He demanded of Congress for Point 4
$19,000,000,000, plus a greatly agerandized Marshall Plan.
After placing agents in key positions Nelson resigned in
December 1951.

After the outbreak of the war, there was loud public protest
against the continued shipment of "Lend Lease" material to
Russia by the boatload. A demand was made in Congress for
discontinuance of the shipments that would inevitably
reinforce Russia in her war on us. The Rockefeller-dominated
State Department and other agencies, promptly opposed a
boycott of the shipments on the absurd ground that it would
violate an agreement made with Russia for the supply of
material for the waging of World War II, the hostilities of
which were already ended. The innumerable breaches by
Russia of agreements with us and the Korean War constitute
ample ground for stopping the shipment of supplies. When
union longshoremen refused to unload Russian imports, both
Dean Acheson and President Truman condemned them for
their intelligent and patriotic boycott.

The Rockefeller agencies, including their puppet State
Department, have bitterly fought any measure that sought to
cut off U.S. taxpayer support to the Soviets or their purveyors.
The only conceivable explanation of their acts is that the
Rockefeller Empire is pledged to the Soviets, as an instigator
or ally, to supply them with all material for their conquests
and the Korean War. The immunity of their Saudi Arabian
oilfields from Soviet molestation and agitation, as compared
with the inspired disturbances in Iran and Egypt bears out this
view.


427


CHAPTER XXIII


AMERICA BETRAYED
WHAT LIES AHEAD?
WHAT CAN WE DO ABOUT IT?


In his Rockefeller publicity in the Saturday Evening Post,
toe Alex Morris stated that in the plans of the Rockefellers
or the U.S.


".. even a casual observer can see a pattern emerging. . .
Just what that pattern will finally show, remains to be seen


"What pattern will finally show" can be predicted with a
large measure of assurance on the basis of past record, present
performance, and publicly avowed ideas and plans. New
"Crusades" will be provided for the "peasants" to offer them
an opportunity for blood-letting and an outlet for their ex-
uberant energy and surplus production of men and things; and
primarily to further the modern equivalent of the Holy Grail,
world conquest and world oil monopoly. Attainment of the
intermediate otjective will be marked by "THE DECLINE
AND FALL GF THE UNITED STATES" as predicted by
Joseph and Stewart Alsop, cousins of Eleanor Roosevelt, in an
article of that name published in the Coronet magazine in
May 1948. They predicted that this would have been
accomplished by 1954, with the setting up in this country of
an absolute dictatorship that would align the country at the
side of the other dictatorships that have been brought into
being throughout the world under the Marxist "social
sciences". This prediction by the Alsops was not based on
guesswork but on their full and accurate knowledge of the
conspiracy; for they are of the inner circle.

This pattern will be the fulfillment of that conjured by
Rockefeller and his almoner, Gates, in the Occasional Letter
Ne. 1 of Rockefeller's General Education Board: a feudal
society in which the "peasants" are reduced to the status of
serfs, or slaves, on the pretense of offering them "security".

The pattern of the American dictatorship was drawn up
officially in the Hepley Plan For Defense Against Enemy
Attack that was designed to mobilize and regiment 15,000,000
men and women, and was submitted to Secretary of Defense
Forrestal

428


in November, 1948. This dictatorship plan was prepared by
the conspirators to be carried out in the guise of a defense
measure in the midst of the “artificial alarm", in the words of
John Foster Dulles, created by the first "military emergency".

To reduce resistance to it and to prepare the way for its
more ready national acceptance, the conspirators arranged to
have the plan adopted first in New York State, their usual
procedure. Governor Thomas Dewey, is a trusted Rockefeller
errand boy, who was openly ordered by the Rockefellers per-
sonally to run for reelection after bribery of candidate Hanley
to withdraw. He has been for more than a decade, chief tool in
putting up phoney opposition and "bipartisanship" on the
national scene, and is regularly employed by them to "run
interference” for their administration in Washington. He
demanded the passage of the bill as an “emergency” Defense
Bill, in the war of nerves that the conspirators are waging on
the American public, the "peasants", centering around the
atom bomb.

The pattern is further revealed by the issue of Collier's that
has been described, on the “approaching war with Seviet
Russia."

The complete pattern, in the opinion of such students as
Professor Harry Elmer Barnes, will be that portrayed in
George Orwell's novel "1984"— complete and abject slavery
under inhumanly brutal dictatorship.

The smashing of the British Empire and the control of the
oil reserves and markets, that has been the objective of the
Rockefeller Empire for more than half a century, has become
an accomplished fact. This is demonstrated by the ousting of
the British from Iran threugh the activities of the Rockefeller-
Soviet Axis; by the virtual monopoly by the Standard Oil Co.
(N.J.) and ‘associates of refining and marketing in India,
following the appointment of their agent, Chester Bowles, as
U.S. Ambassador to India and the shipment there of grain
valued at $190,000,000 with numerous other grants of
millions, after India deliberately undertock to betray the U.S.
to the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis; and by the concession
renegotiated by the Rockefeller's Standard Oil Co. indirectly
thru Glenn McCarthy, with an Egypt incited to revelt against
British rule.

429


The enemy in our midst has woven a web of conspiracy for
half a century. It is well on its way to accomplishing its
purpose of replacing our Republic with a totalitarian
monarchy of the "1984" pattern, and to use it to attain a world
conquest with the aid of the Seviets and of even less highly
organized gangsters such as the Mafia. What can we do to
save our country, ourselves and our fortunes ?

The preblem is complicated by the fact that so many of us
accept the conspirators’ propaganda that “security” is to be
preferred to freedom, even though it means serfdom. Inertia
leads many to accept rule imposed on them by more
aggressive, unscrupulous and ruthless elements. They are
satisfied so long as their bellies are filled, their other animal
cravings satisfied and they are diverted. Lacking these, they
generally revolt. But there is grave danger that once the
conspirators have destroyed freedom, modern techniques of
enslavement devised by "social scientists" are so cruel, brutal
and barbaric that any attempt at revolt would be doomed. To
avert such a fate, immediate action must be taken te undo all
the treacheries that have been perpetrated.

It would be unwise to be deluded by the "Freedom"
movements mockingly launched by the conspirators. They are
intended to divert attention from their destruction of our
freedom at home by making a noisy pretense of restoring
freedom to others.

The Constitution, as it originally stood, without its negating
amendments, and the Bill of Rights are the instruments that
endowed us with the large measure of freedom which we
alone among the nations long enjoyed. They were drawn up,
as a compromise, by a group that included some of the wisest,
sincerest philosophers that ever assembled to draw up a
blueprint of human organization. That blueprint was the first
written expression of the concept that freedom, for which
mankind had fought and died from the beginning of time,
shall be the basis of government. Despite the fact that it was a
compromise that has never been given full expression, or has
actually been negated, in our laws that should have carried out
its letter and spirit, it had assured our people the freedom that
made our country what it is.


430


The Constitution is the chief obstacle to the plan of the
conspirators. For this reason they call this eternal philosophy
"obsolete"! With slyness, cun-ning and stealth they
perpetually seek to pervert and erode it—by amendments.
laws, "legal" decision, evasions and “established”
practises. Their objective is to destroy it principally by the
strategy of demented Karl Marx who speciously, but plaus-
ibly, undertook to convince mankind that the devices that
spelled abject slavery for centuries mean "security" and
improvement on freedom.

The United Nations "Treaty" was entered into as has been
related by the conspirators for the avowed purpose of thereby
turning over to themselves our sovereignty, annulling the
Constitution and superseding it as our basic law with a UN
charter that will better serve their totalitarian objectives.

Our Constitution and law require, as has been related, that
the conspirators be condemned, that all commitments to the
UN in which they have treacherously involved us must be
denounced, and our troops withdrawn from foreign lands
without and more delay than is consonant with their security.
The conspirators’ “revolution by stealth and deceit" must be
undone as rapidly as possible. For the menace to our security
and solvency are grave. And day by day, more of our men are
falling, victims of the most shameful betrayal in history.

Mindful of the adage: "Whom the gods would destroy, they
first make mad", the conspirators have perverted the nation's
minds through control of "education" and mass
communication. We must open our ears, eyes and minds to the
things that they do not want us to know, and suppress. Educa-
tion, especially in the formative ages, must be made
nationalist, patriotic and pro-Censtitutional. For if the mind is
warped in childhood te reject freedom and the Constitution
that gave birth to it, and to accept the slavery of
Rockefellerism, we are lost. We must eliminate censorship
from all channels of mass information and make them
common carriers of political thought, sutject solely to the
limitation of loyal support of the Constitution. Censorship of
radio and television, reinforced by limitation of station
licenses sutject te political approval, are especially menacing.
For stations are compelled to broadcast the conspirators’
subversive propaganda


43]


as “non-controversial"” and loyal views that upheld the
Constitution are barred as "controversial".

The Constitution gave our government the form of a
democratic republic, a representative government in which,
theoretically, all citizens have the right to vote. The
conspirators have expressed their intent ultimately to rob the
people, openly, of their franchise. Stealthily, they already
have robbed the nation of its power to choose their
representatives, and of any effective representation, by seizing
control of all parties' nominating machinery.

For decades the candidates for important offices have been
a “parade of Rockefeller dummies". The voters had no real
choice at the polls, for the candidates of both parties were
pledged to betray the nation into new Rockefeller "Crusades".

Voting machines that can be fixed as readily as the slot
machines turned out by the same manufacturers, trick the
voter and have made voting futile. All pretense of real
opposition between the parties has been adandoned.
Nominations are held by the parties, successively, in the same
meeting places, for the acknowledged purpose of "saving
expenses"—that are obviously defrayed by the same
individuals. The nominations of "opposing" candidates are
obviously idle gestures of the conspirators for contemptuous
diversion of the “peasants”.

In 1952 the conspirators are trying to give the nation a new
version of "Hobson's choice", by imposing their puppet Gen.
Dwight D. Eisenhower on both major parties as "bipartisan"
candidate” who could rapidly prepare the way for dictatorship
if elected. To guard against miscarriage of their plans, all
other nominees are also theirs.

Robert A. Taft, for instance, is bogus leader of the fake
"opposition". He is of the Roosevelt-Delano Dynasty, that has
placed more than a dozen of its members in the White House,
has played the role cf America’s Royal Family, and has
mistuled and mulcted the country for more than a century
before the Rockefeller Empire joined forces with it. Like his
father, he derives from Rockefeller's Ohio Republican
machine, built by Mark Hanna. His record reveals him as a
weak, ineffective rubber stamp of their New Deal. His
"opposition" requires merely slight modification, for the
record.


Taft's law firm has been counsel to Jack Kroll, 432


National Chairman of the CIO-PAC:; and apparently his
record has been quite satisfactory to the radical CIO. The
"fight" on him was part of the sham of grooming him as star
of the fake “opposition”. A basically sound bill drawn up by
Hartley, he did his best to emasculate for the CIO. The law
that bears his name upholds the violations of the Constitution,
the Bill of Rights, justice and honesty that prevail in labor law
and practise. The Taft Hartley Act is the Magna Charta of
labor bosses and racketeers and protects the labor agitators
and the apestles of class warfare in their illicit power.

Taft served Abby Rockefeller Milton in connection with
the Charleston Shipyard and its lucrative dealings with the
Government during World War II. He also served as Trustee
of the Rockefeller-dominated Carnegie Endowment For
International Peace, the refuge of Alger Hiss. He ranked as a
Rockefeller “internationalist" long before “bipartisan” Sen.
Vanderberg somersaulted to become bellwether of their cause
in the Senate. Now, with "internationalism" become
unpopular, Taft shams "opposition" to it but he shrinks from
"isolation-ism", the conspirators’ smear for nationalism and
patriotism. He is merely a bit less "Internationalist" and not
willing to go “all out" in betraying the country.

On January 1, 1951, Taft announced that he opposed the
sending of troops to Korea and Europe by Truman as un-
Constitutional, and that he would fight it to the last ditch. He
sounded like a good American, a patriot who would not
blench at tthe "isolationist" smear. But on the next day he
backed down and agreed to a bit of un-Constitutionality, and
the sending of troops to Europe. Day by day he backed down,
until eventually he advocated a Eurepean-treop program
exceeding the original proposal.

His New Deal Rockefellerism emerged in his bill to
socialize medicine and his housing bill in which his name was
coupled with that of Rockefeller's chief New Deal agent, and
staunch friend of the subversives, Sen. Wagner—the Taft-
Ellender-Wagner Bill. He also supported the conspirator's
Federal Aid to Education Bill.

Taft's Presidential nomination would spell extreme danger
for our Republic because it would bolster the Roosevelt-
Delano Dynasty's pretensions


to divine right te rule the U. 5. His case would be the second
in the Dynasty of father succeeding son to the Presidency, the
Adamses being the only other instance.

The "Parade of Rockefeller Dummies" has brought "One
World", UN delegate Harold Stassen to the front, offering
himself as a Presidential "joker" Xmas gift to the nation. His
proposed platform is Rockefellerism modified by
opportunism. He plans to make his Cabinet more completely
than ever a Rockefeller agency by recruiting it from
Rockefeller's Foreign Office, the Council on Foreign
Relations, with such of their puppets as Ralph J. Bunche and
Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower, to carry out policies dictated by
Alger Hiss, Joseph E. Johnsen, Frederick Vanderbilt Field and
Owen Latti-more, on behalf of the Rockefeller-Soviet Axis. In
his every public act and utterance, Stassen has proved himself
completely subservient to his Rockefeller masters, their
“trained seal" in their bogus "opposition", a rubber stamp of
their "New Deal" and a betrayer of our country. If our
Constitution and our nation are to survive, he and all his breed
must be ejected from public life. Gen. MacArthur and other
real Americans whom he proposes to use as deodorants for his
breed, should spurn this agent of the very forces that they are
fighting.

Eisenhower, Stassen, Warren, Taft and all candidates of
both the Republican and Democratic parties, nominated by
the conspirators, will run, like Sen. Estes Kefauver, in the
words of Walter Trohan, on a "Benedict Arnold platform."

The nation must repudiate all of these candidates of the
group whom Harry Shippe Truman accused of "treason". It
must seize the nominating power from the conspirators,
however completely they have stolen it from the nation. If it is
impossible to secure amendment of the laws in regard to
nominations, the public can resort to "write-ins" for
Presidential and other candidates. The situation is critical. It
must be done now or never.

Control of nominations must be taken out of the hands of
private cliques and given to the people, if our franchise is not
to rival in absurdity the one-party tickets of the Soviets. Any
honest loyal American who seeks to serve the nation would be
preferable to any of the candidates groomed by the
conspirators, and should be given an equal op-

434


portunity to offer himself and his program to the nation.
Nomination and election campaigns should be financed by
the Treasury, to avoid moneyed dictatorship, and monarchy.
Public officers who betray their trust and fail to uphold the
Constitution must be impeached under its provisions.

Freedom of life and other property mghts assured by the
Constitution and Bill of Rights, have been destroyed by the
conspirators. The Constitution gives the nght te draft life and
property for the defense of the U.S. only. For more than three
decades, men have been drafted, denied the freedom of life,
and met death in the battlefields around the world, and the
nation bled by taxation, primarily for the expansion of a
hostile power, the Rockefeller Empire, and the support and
defense of its allies, in violation of the Constitution.

Private property rights assured by the Constitution have
been completely abrogated by the conspirators and the wealth
of the nation confiscated in various manners. Farmers have
been denied the use of their land for crops. Their losses were
subsidized by the nation as a whole, because they constitute a
vociferous majority. But property owners, who are a minority,
have been forced to subsidize lower rents for the public, under

"rent control”, by outright confiscation of their property and

other rights, by bureaucratic edict from which there is no
appeal, in complete disregard of honesty, principle or the
Constitution, —robbed as effectively as if a gun were held to
their heads.

The slyest methods that the conspirators have adopted for
looting the nation is Karl Marx's program of progressive
income tax, which they have incorporated into the
Constitution ‘by the 16th Amendment, and inheritance taxes.
An income tax can be the most just form of taxation if it is
made to comply with the Constitution and if it is honestly
administered by law, not by bureaucratic edict. As proposed
by Karl Marx, and as adopted in our law, it is a device for
confiscation of wealth and forcing a revolutionary ' ‘new social
order

Under its provision neither income nor capital belong to the
citizen except by consent of Congress, whose power of
taxation is unlimited. Capital is being confiscated by legal and
bureaucratic interpretation of capital gains as current income.
The nation has not suspected the extinction of property

435


rights until recently because the conspirators have gone slowly
about the process of confiscation of wealth, until now it is
faced with such wholesale looting by taxation that extinction
of property rights is obviously imminent unless the
Amendment and law are revoked.

As might be expected, the conspirators have exempted
themselves from income tax and inheritance tax looting, by
loopholes they have written into the laws and regulations.
They have provided tax exemption for their bogus
"foundations", for oil drilling, for earnings on foreign
holdings, for their labor goons and racketeers and their union
rackets, and an endless array of other devices the use of which
they reserve to themselves. Through nepotism and corruption
this income tax thievery has been converted into a means of
rewarding friends and oppressing enemies. Blackmail of
citizens by bureaucrats and their criminal associates is a
natural outgrowth, and plays an important role in maintaining
conspirators in power. The effectiveness of income tax in
oppression and looting of the nation is enhanced by making
evasion of income taxes the most heinous crime.

To make the tax more palatable to the "peasants", it has
been made "progressive", or "soak the rich", class legislation
that initially exempted a large section of the nation. The
exempted were too shortsighted to realize that it would be
merely a matter of time before they also would be victimized.
In a special dispatch to the N. Y. Times on January 4, 1952,
the Treasury issued another false attack designed to deceive
the public in regard to the protection of property rights by
limitation of taxes, directed against the Committee for
Constitutional Government and the American Taxpayers
Association. It falsely alleged that limitation of taxes would
merely, benefit the rich.

For national salvation the entire income tax thievery and
fraud must be wiped off the statute books. There must be
written into the Federal and State Constitutions a limit of total
tax assessable by the government of 10% of income.
Multiplicty of taxes and hidden taxes must be abolished.
Excise taxes on poisons, such as liquor and tobacco, that leads
officialdom to encourage victimization of the public, alse
should be abolished as unethical, as well as futile. For in most
instances these taxes

436


serve only to support the parasitic bureaucrats that administer
them; and in more than one instance that cost amounts to
more than the tax collected.

"The power to tax is the power to destroy” is an old adage,
that is eternally true. Limitation of that power will do much to
protect our government and ourselves from destruction by the
enemies in our midst. The power to intensify tax looting in

“emergencies” and wars is often the reason why the plotters
precipitate wars, as in the case of Korea. In the words of John
Foster Dulles, wars serve the purpose of keeping the nation

"artificially alarmed" and creating “justification” for
intensifying the looting. In this, the maneuvers of the
Rockefeller Soviet Axis have served so well that the tax
looted from the country during the Truman Administration, in
the years 1945-51, have mounted to more than the
$260,000,000,000 tax levied by the Federal Government in
the century and a half prior. In the meantime the conspirators
have placed an ever larger number of employees on the
Government payroll and made so large a proportion of the
citizenry dependent upon it that their Marxist goal of making
everyone the servant of a totalitarian State is rapidly looming
1n sight

More subtle than even the income tax device for looting
nations, is the control of currency. In these matters the
Rockefeller Empire has been guided by the principal German
agents of the Bismarxian conspiracy, Felix and Paul Warburg,
sons of M. M. Warburg, representative of the Rothchilds and
banker for the German governments, including Hitler's. The
Warburgs became partners of Rockefeller's bankers, Kuhn
Loeb & Co. at the beginning of the century, directly after their
arrival in this country from Germany. With the ceoperation of
the Rockefeller interests, represented by Senator Aid-rich,
they promptly set about creating the Federal Reserve Bank as
a private corporation that, in violation of the Constitution,
controls our currency system, and through it, manipulates and
steadily absorbs the wealth of the nation for the conspirators,
and dominates the industry, commerce and policies of the
nation.

A quick understanding of the extent of the looting that can
be accomplished by this control of the currency system by the
conspirators, without going into the technicalities of the
mechanism, can be

437


conveyed by one simple statement, to wit: The same
conspirators, with the same mechanics that they are
employing in the U.S., engineered the devastating inflation in
Germany that wiped cut the wealth of the citizenry and
destroyed their freedom. They also planted revolution and
Communism in Russia. Every device and method that they
employed in those countries has been adopted in their
domestic conspiracy. Every move that they make in their pre-
tense of fighting inflation is deliberately designed to increase
it and to hasten the debacle.

The staggering taxation, which they pretend will cut the
purchasing power of the people and prevent inflation, is the
most powerful factor in increasing inflation. Taxes are an
integral part of cost, often multiplied many times. The
increased revenue from taxes also increases the amount of
money available for spending by the government itself, the
most powerful factor in speeding inflation. On the other hand
the conspirators block increased production, the only final
deflationary force, even more directly, by rigid restrictions of
production. To these devices they add the tremendous costs of
a vast bureaucracy, of welfare and social security trickery, of
increased wages fostered for their own advantages through
class, “labor” legislation and "collective bargaining”, deficit
financing and by enormous and steadily rising appropriations
for "defense", the Point 4 program and Marshall Plan and
pretense of "fighting Communism” in Korea and Europe, most
of which flows directly into the kitty of their gigantic swindle,
and to the bolstering of the Soviets.

The value of ruinous inflation for the success of the
totalitarian conspiracy was pointed out long ago by both Marx
and Lenin. In one stroke the "new social order" can be
attained by individual and national bankruptcy. Inflation by
manipulation of currency, the squandering of the wealth of the
nation, deficit financing and ruinous taxation must all be
checked and the plotters ousted, if we are ever to recover our
freedom and survive as a nation.

The solution of the currency problem is not a difficult one,
if there arises a will to solve it. The solution lies in exactly the
opposite direction from the measure imposed on the nation by
the conspirators. It lies primarily in the direction of
stimulating maximum production of the necessities of life, a


438


surplus economy instead of the present restriction of
production and scarcity economy. Such maximum production
is only feasible if provision is made for stabilizing the value
of what is produced, and for storing it for long periods against
time of need. It is the solution that Joseph offered Pharaoh,
according to the Bible—the lesson that the conspirators do not
wish their puppet economists to teach. The device has
succeeded under normal conditions as applied to gold, in the
form of the gold standard. It inevitably will succeed as well in
maintaining the monetary value of other staples if the
monetary standard is rationally extended to include all staples.
Coupled with true freedom of employment that would
eliminate all need for labor unionism and associated rackets
that are operated in the pretended interest of the workers, it
would enable us to attain the form of government that was
envisaged by the wise authors of our Constitution. For a
detailed discussion of an obvious solution of this problem, the
reader is referred to the author's books, Your Life Is Their Toy
and The Strange Death Of Franklin Delano Roosevelt.

The conspirators are rapidly converting government into a
totalitarian tyranny. They are making our Government a
device for harassing, oppressing, looting, and for executing
citizens in wars cooked up by them. We are further from the
Constitution and the Bill of Rights than the country was at the
time of the Declaration of Independence.

Normal intelligence and regard for the security of the nation
demands that only loyal, native-born citizens should be
eligible for public office. For persons whe would not feel
some allegiance to the land of their birth, could not be
expected to be capable of allegiance to their land of adoption,
and they should be rejected, therefore, for citizenship. On the
other hand, persons whose loyalty is divided, cannot be
regarded as wholly dependable in conflicts involving the two
countries. They, therefore, should be ineligible for public
office.

Restricting public office to native-born, provably loyal
citizens would serve to eliminate the presently widely
prevailing practise of foreign governments sending their spies
and agents here to become "naturalized", and to serve them in
the capacity of bogus "American" citizens, often in top,
policymaking capacities. Lauchlin Currie, for instance,


439


actually held public office before he became a citizen. He was
planted in the White House as Assistant to President
Roosevelt, where he was in a position to influence our
national policies, and did so, to our sad disadvantage.

Our enemies defy us with impunity and our so-called
"allies" and "friends" betray us, confident in the knowledge
that their highly placed spies and agents, in our government
and in the UN, will protect them from reprisals and render us
impotent.

All public officers whose loyalty comes under the slightest
question, must be driven out and prosecuted te the full limit of
the law. Execution for treason must be restored to practise.

It is a sad commentary on the state of the nation that it is
the women, led by the brilliant and courageous Vivien
Kellem, and the patriotic, truly American housewives of
Marshall, Texas, who alone have had the courage to revolt
against the conspiracy that is rapidly betraying our country to
ruin and destruction. Even sadder is the picture of the
rejection of Kellem's candidacy for public office in favor of
subversive puppets of the conspirators.

Unless the rank and file of the nation can be awakened and
induced to slough off their excitement over forms of
amusement such as so-called "sports", ball games, "fixes",
movie stars and television and comics, and devote their
energies wholeheartedly to fhe measures that spell their
survival —life or death—our outlock is black. If, however, the
nation can be as completely aroused, as are those intelligent
and courageous women, past performance indicates that he
cowardly conspirators will run for cover. Chameleon-like they
will try to change color, much as they have when confronted
with the nation's change of sentiment regarding Commu-
nism—they now all pretend to be "Socialists" or American
Democrats for Action. The nation would be imbecilic indeed,
if it permits itself to be deceived by those turnceats.

As for the master conspirators, and their ill-gotten gains,
their fate can be entrusted to an aroused American public. The
lives that they have cost our people can not be recovered. The
wealth can be regained by the nation.


ANOTHER BOSTON TEA PARTY IS LONG
OVERDUE!
440


A CALL TO ACTION IN AMERICAN EDUCATION By Fred
H. Johnson
whet many years American education has been infected by
"educational" conspiracy to "change our, social order" the
backbone of which is the "social studies" or "sciences", which
scramble together history, geography, civics and economics,
with a left wing twist.

"Socialization of the individual” is the aim of the social
studies stated in the 1936—14th Year Book of the Dept. of
Supetintendence of the Rockefeller subsidized NEA (p. 6),
and the taking of private property for public purposes without
compensation is called "basic and imperative", (p. 8)

This continued teaching of legal larceny is a flagrant
violation of the keystone of civil liberty embedded in the Ten
Commandments, our Federal, and State Constitutions.

Constitutional taking of property by due process of law,
without compensation applies to punishment only, for the
Fifth Amendment, adopted 1791 says: "No person... shall be
compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against
himself, nor be deprived of life, liberty or property without
due process of law," after which comes "nor shall private
property be taken for public use without compensation.”

Our Constitution embodies the principle of civilized
government which is protection of life and property, not
distribution or control, at home or abroad, in accordance with
the ideas of the Rockefellers and their associates.

The bias of great wealth in Rockefeller and allied tax-
exempt foundations is all on the side of the "social sciences",
which discard moral law and established principles, putting
everything but Socialism to the clinical test.

Orgamzations such as the National Council for American
Education. The Friends of the Public Schools and the
Educational Reviewer, are bucking the subversive tide with
small contributions from patriots, and are the targets of a
lavishly financed smear campaign waged by the NEA, its
puppets and allies whe pay no taxes.

The struggle to restore Constitutional principles and our
national sovereignty is crucial. Every patriotic American must
pitch inte this fight against Rockefellerism and the "socialist"
studies in his home school district.
