VOLUME 2, NUMBER 3 
THE FOURTH DECADE 
■4^ 
MARCH, 1995 
14.

6H411.

\ 
15.

2H283.

/ 
16.

McWatterj^'ade no mention of the policemen entering 
the b^is: The search of^hre bus was doubtless part of a 
routine procedure, inji/blving the systematic search of 
every bus in the arra.

The authorities no doubt had a 
surplus of police^ manpower and therefore they could 
afford to send some of the extra ones to these marginally 
useful tasks.

•' 
t 
17.

Dallas Polite Radio Log, 23H867-869.

For more infor- 
mation qn the search of the library, see "The Arrogant 
Suspect," in the January 1995 issue ofThe Fourth Decade.

18.

16H9;?2.

19.

Jerry d Rose, "DoubJgja^enrtmifiaSfced: A Reconstruc- 
tion" ThetKTrg'Decade.

Sept.

1987, p.

13j Dr.

Rose made 
a telephone call to Cecil McWatters or^ November 21, 
1983.

McWatters said that he saw OsVvald on TV and at 
the police station prior to the line-up.' As Dr.

Rose pointed 
out in his article, any familiarity vvith the appearance of 
the accused before a line-up invalidates any identifica- 
tion obtained from it.

20.

Jones said that the police kept McWatters up until 1:00 am 
Saturday or Sunday morning.

They must have had a 
difficult time straightening out the details in the bus story.

21.

16H971.

22.

2H280.

23.

WR626.

/ 
24.

WR621.

25.

WR604.

26.

WR626.

Bookh6ot's(WR621) and Fritz's (WR604) memo- 
randa on Oswald'sseCOfK(^story are essentially the same 
as Kelley's.

j 
27.

For a good treatment of the^ippit case, see Henry Hurt's 
Reasonable Doubt (Holt, Ringbart, Winston, New York: 
1985), pp.

139-169.

MACNEIL'S NEWSHOUR 
by 
jerry Organ .

As the only Nova Scotian in Dealey Plaza on November 22, ‘ 
1963, Robert MacNeil's activities hold special interest for me.MACNEIL'S NEWSHOUR 
by 
jerry Organ .

As the only Nova Scotian in Dealey Plaza on November 22, ‘ 
1963, Robert MacNeil's activities hold special interest for me.

\ 
In the November Fourth Decade, William Weston goes far in 
challenging MacNeil's purported brush with Oswald, explor- 
ing the conspiratorial implications" of the newsman's story, 
Weston describes MacNeil as a "reporter on the White 
House staff," perhaps to imply he was officially directed.

In 
fact, since midsummer 1963, MacNeil was the number two 
White House correspondent for NBC News.

On this, his "first 
big presidential trip," MacNeil was covering the Texas tour 
along with Washington cameraman David Weigman.11] 
The Wild Goose Chase 
Weston writes: "Several police officers and spectators were 
running up a grassy slope toward a tree-lined wooden fence, 
apparently in pursuit of a gunman." However, photographs of 
the aftermath tell a different story.

Witnesses who would later claim shots came from the fence* 
area (Jean Hill, the Newmans, Malcolm Summers, Sam Hol- 
land, Beverly Oliver f?I) never point or immediately move 
toward the fence corner.

The Wilma Bond slides reveal just 
one officer raced up the knoll, triggering the stampede of 
curiosity seekers.

^ 
One of the most enduring legends in conspiracy lore is that 
this policeman was Bobby Hargis, the motorcycle officer 
assigned to the left rear of the limousine.

Critics take a morbid 
delight in describing how the impact of debris from the fatal 
shot induced him to run up the knoll.I2l 
Mark Lane was one of the first to nominate Hargis as the * 
officer who rushed to the railbridge, based on his testimony: 
"I ran up to this kind of little wall, brick wall up there to see if 
I could get a better look on the bridge, and, of course, I was 
looking ail around the place at that time."|3I 
Hargis was actually referring to having momentarily run to 
the retaining wall, not the overpass abutment.^ 
One of the most enduring legends in conspiracy lore is that 
this policeman was Bobby Hargis, the motorcycle officer 
assigned to the left rear of the limousine. Critics take a morbid 
delight in describing how the impact of debris from the fatal 
shot induced him to run up the knoll.I2l 
Mark Lane was one of the first to nominate Hargis as the * 
officer who rushed to the railbridge, based on his testimony: 
"I ran up to this kind of little wall, brick wall up there to see if 
I could get a better look on the bridge, and, of course, I was 
looking ail around the place at that time."|3I 
Hargis was actually referring to having momentarily run to 
the retaining wall, not the overpass abutment. (4] Bond's first 
picture of the aftermath — taken within 20 seconds of the last 
jerry Organ 
P.O. Box 76 
Neil's Harbour, N.S. Canada B3A 4L3 
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---VOLUME 2, NUMBER 3 
THE FOURTH DECADE 
MARCH, 1995 
shot shows Hargis "just returning to his parked cycle," as 
does a film sequence by Mark Bell.(5) The Richard Bothun 
photograph captured Hargis after remounting his cycle.[6] 
The policeman leading the wild goose chase was identified 
thirty years ago by the Warren Commission: Officer Clyde A.

Haygood.fZ] 
Haygood was still on Main when he heard shots, and 
apparently responded to the sight of people sprawled on the 
Knoll.

Haygood testified: 
"Some of them were pointing back up to the railroad 
yard, and a couple of people were headed up that way, 
and I immediately tried to jump the north curb.

I left my 
motor on the street and ran to the railroad yard."[8] 
Pictures disclose several photographers from the motorcade 
were drawn to the Newman family, described by Trask as the 
"most obvious focal point in the confusion of the moment." 
One of these cameramen (MacNei I's comrade Dave Weigman) 
captured Haygood from that site as he cruised past.[9] Photo- 
graphs by Life's Art Rickerby and a film sequence by Malcolm 
Couch show a black couple with a child fled along Elm as the 
officer rode down the street.

[10] 
At 12:35, Officer Haygood radioed that a bystander thought 
shots came from the Depository.

Within two minutes, he 
transmitted: 
^ "Get some men up here to cover this building, this 
Texas School Book Depository.

It is believed the shots 
came from there.

If you're facing it on Elm Street 
looking toward the building, it would be the upper- 
right-hand corner, the second window from the 
end."[11j 
Haygood's quick specification of the Oswald window readi ly 
explains why critics have preferred to nominate Hargis as the 
officer on the Knoll.

On the Knoll 
The Newmans' predicament and Haygood's disorientation 
misled much of the crowd then rushing over from Houston and 
Main, a circumstance long exploited by manipulativecritics.If you're facing it on Elm Street 
looking toward the building, it would be the upper- 
right-hand corner, the second window from the 
end."[11j 
Haygood's quick specification of the Oswald window readi ly 
explains why critics have preferred to nominate Hargis as the 
officer on the Knoll.

On the Knoll 
The Newmans' predicament and Haygood's disorientation 
misled much of the crowd then rushing over from Houston and 
Main, a circumstance long exploited by manipulativecritics.

MacNeil's Immediate assumption was that Haygood was after 
an assailant.(12l 
Adding to the confusion was the "high unison soprano wail" 
described by MacNeil: the sirens of the aborted motorcade on 
Stemmons, yet another inducement for latecomers to overtake 
the Knoll.

Harry Cabluck, a Fort Worth Star-Telegram photographer 
aboard the bus MacNeil left, captured the lanky newsman and 
some teenagers running along Elm as the solitary Haygood 
nears the abutment.[13] 
Cabluck's next picture depicts Haygood as he climbs the 
abutment post.

[14] 
Reaching the juncture of the railbridge and stockade fence, 
MacNeil remained long enough to observe police begin 
entering the railyard "to search the tracks and two trains."[15] 
MacNeil and the teenagers in the Cabluck picture are pictured 
in the Frank Cancellare photograph Weston refers to.f16] 
The reporter then "ran along the top of the Grassy Knoll, 
lookingforaphone,"leadinghimtotheDepository.MacNeirs 
hasty dispatch was logged in at 12:34 by NBC in New York.

Long on conjecture and miscues, the bulletin is gold to 
Weston, who contends It "adds weight to the evidence" of a 
frontal assassin.

Agents of Subterfuge 
Weston presents a litany of familiar bogus "Secret Service 
Agent" sightings, to which he adds the man Oswald encoun- 
tered in h(§T[ig^What began as a common misperception has 
been inflated into mythical proportions.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Long on conjecture and miscues, the bulletin is gold to 
Weston, who contends It "adds weight to the evidence" of a 
frontal assassin. Agents of Subterfuge 
Weston presents a litany of familiar bogus "Secret Service 
Agent" sightings, to which he adds the man Oswald encoun- 
tered in h(§T[ig^What began as a common misperception has 
been inflated into mythical proportions. Robert Croden maintains the "police officers [plural?] who 
rushed the Knoll In response to the shots" were deterred "by 
men who claimed to be Secret Service agents."[17] Harrison 
Livingstone (no stranger to hyperbole) romantically writes: 
"Men flashed Secret Service identification to Dallas police- 
men [?] and others who ran up the Grassy Knoll."[18] 
The basis for this fanciful account turns out to be Officer 
Joseph M. Smith, who never rushed up the Knoll. Smith instead 
arrived at the parking lot from the intersection of Elm and 
Houston, where he was assigned to traffic duty.[19] Smith 
investigated that area because a woman yelled to him: "They 
are shooting the President from the bushes."[20] 
In the parking lot some minutes later, he approached a man 
whose credentials Smith "did not examine closely."[21 ] Like 
Harkness, Weitzman and Craig, Officer Smith merely as- 
sumed some of the plainclothes detectives inundating the area 
(many on the order of Chief Curry and Sheriff Decker) were 
with the agency. Civilians were also prone to this fallacy. Arnold Rowland 
supposed a casually dressed man he saw with a rifle at a 
Depository window was "a Secret Service man."[22| Could 
Oswald have made a similar wild assumption based on 
MacNeil's appearance and White House press badge? 11

--- PAGE BREAK ---VOLUME 2, NUMBER 3 
THE FOURTH DECADE 
MARCH, 1995 
The Right Place at the Right Time 
Martin Shackelford and Gary Mack have disputed Gerald 
Posner's support for MacNeil, claiming Oswald instead en- 
countered WFAA Program Director Pierce Allman.

In a foot- 
note, Weston cites CD 354 as proof of Allman's certainty.

This 
document actuallyreveaIs that Allman (and a co-worker who 
was with him) refused to identify Oswald as the man they 
encountered; nor could Allman recall flashing his press 
pass.

[23] Last fall, Mac Nell stated the man he encountered 
"probably was Oswald."(24] 
To counter MacNeil's consistent recollections, Weston 
places tenuous substance in a hearsay account by Secret 
Serviceman Thomas Kelley.|25) Assuming Kelley recalled the 
details accurately, Oswald (who lied repeatedly during inter- 
rogation) could have embellished aspects of the incident to 
make his assumed identification of the man seem more certain 
(not unlike Jean Hill).

We have only Oswald's word that the 
man verbally announced his official station and produced "a 
book of Identification." Weston takes literally the assassin's 
use of the term "young," but Oswald thought the man old 
enough to be a Secret Service Agent.

MacNeil writes: "I am 
blond.

My hair was very short then and I was wearing a White 
House press badge he might have mistaken for Secret Ser- 
vice."[26] 
Weston claims MacNeil and Oswald both described en- 
counters outside the Depository, near the front entrance.

But 
a careful reading of Oswald's statement indicates he "about to 
leave" the building, while MacNeil has always specified he 
first spoke to someone after going "through the door." 
The Three Calm Men 
Weston makes much of MacNeil's failure to include the 
Oswald encounter in his November 30,1963 statement to the 
FBI.[27] 
Oswald himself mentioned the incident just once, in confi- 
dence to a Secret Service Agent whose presence may have 
triggered the recollection.My hair was very short then and I was wearing a White 
House press badge he might have mistaken for Secret Ser- 
vice."[26] 
Weston claims MacNeil and Oswald both described en- 
counters outside the Depository, near the front entrance.

But 
a careful reading of Oswald's statement indicates he "about to 
leave" the building, while MacNeil has always specified he 
first spoke to someone after going "through the door." 
The Three Calm Men 
Weston makes much of MacNeil's failure to include the 
Oswald encounter in his November 30,1963 statement to the 
FBI.[27] 
Oswald himself mentioned the incident just once, in confi- 
dence to a Secret Service Agent whose presence may have 
triggered the recollection.

MacNeil admits he thought this 
detail inconsequential until Manchester phoned him in June 
1965.

With typical abandon, Weston jumps to extravagant con- 
clusions in his interpretation of MacNeil's description of three 
men he encountered Inside the Depository.

By virtue of their 
"eerie calmness," Weston purp>orts the trio was "performing 
some indispensable part" of the "assassination plot."[28] With 
such reasoning, Oswald's cool demeanor when confronted by 
Officer Baker would represent empirical proof of his guilt.

More likely, the three men were employees at the Deposi- 
tory, calling acquaintances with the tragic news.

It Is also 
possible that MacNeil who had just completed a hectic 
week - - - misstated the sequence of events.

Thus the second 
"man nearer the door'"was actually the first he spoke to, a 
cautious Oswald trying to be Inconspicuous.

Groping in the Dark 
Weston draws conclusions based on the wildest of specula- 
tions, leading to stinging charges of complicity against many > 
of Oswald's fellow workers.

Speculation: Electrical power loss in the Depository from 
12:25-12:33.

Resolved: This purported outage did not affect the rooftop 
Hertz clock sign or the Coke machine on the second floor.

As 
John S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Resolved: This purported outage did not affect the rooftop 
Hertz clock sign or the Coke machine on the second floor. As 
John S. Craig has noted, Geneva Hine was no doubt referring 
to the indicator lights on hertelephone console. (29) Returning 
from a brief sojourn, Hine recalls going "straight up to the desk 
because the telephones were beginning to wink; outside calls 
were beginning to come in." 
The reason the west elevator the only one of the two 
freight elevators that could be summoned - - - failed to respond 
to Truly's call was because Jack Doughtery was in the process » 
of using it.(301 Why would conspirators risk detection by 
disabling the elevators? They could not have predicted that a 
police officer would rush into the building with someone 
knowledgeable about the elevators. Like Oswald, any con- 
spirators would have used the rear stairway to escape, which 
is faster than the sluggish elevators and provides alternate 
routes. Weston maintains police officers searching the building 
ordered floodlights because the Depository was "again plunged 
into darkness by a second power shutoff."[31] In fact, the 
upper floors of the building where the police search 
concentrated - - - were used for the storage of book cartons and 
left dimly lit; light from the windows supplemented the low- 
wattage bulbs. In connection with this, Weston has cited the accounts of 
several people who reported a loss of power to the freight 
elevators, ignoring the fact that not one of them had experi- 
ence using the ancient devices. They likely failed to close the 
gate properly or manipulate the controls correctly. Weston has also referred to the testimony of Victoria Adams, 
12

--- PAGE BREAK ---VOLUME 2, NUMBER 3 
THE FOURTH DECADE 
-C" Y 
MARCH, 1995 
who, after leaving the building for a few minutes, tried to 
summon the passenger elevator only to discover "the power 
had been cut off."(321 However, Inspector Herbert V.

Sawyer 
had taken that elevator to the fourth floor, possibly locking it 
in place while he searched that floor between about 12:34 and 
12:37.(331 
Speculation; The brown coat man was seen standing next to 
a gunman on the fifth floor.

Resolved: Weston places unwarranted stock in Carolyn 
Walther s recollections.

It Is almost certain that the man 
Walther saw with "his forearms on the window" just as 
someone in the crowd said 'Here they come'" was Harold 
Norman, seen doing the same in the Robert Hughes film.[34] 
Walther's "machine gun" was an embellishment after the fact 
(like Jean Hill's white dog and "Secret Servicemen").

Walther s "brown sultcoat" man was Bonnie Ray Williams, 
shown in the film to Norman's right in the same window.

Bonnie Ray moved to the far edge of the adjoining window by 
the time of the Dillard photographs.[351 Researcher Dale K.

Mygrwecen^ disproved^he opposition that boxeTv^e 
rearranged in the Qsvya|d windo\v.j[36| 
Speculation: Billy Lovelady and William Shelley were seen ^ 
near the freight elevators at about 12:31.

Resolved: Lovelady and Shelley witnessed the initial stages of 
the parking lot search, which took a few minutes to organize.

They entered the building no sooner than 12:34.[37| 
Victoria Adams and Sandra Styles, who witnessed the 
assassination from a fourth floor window, claimed to have 
used the rear stairway within a minute of the shots.

JFK shows 
Oswald overtaking the two women.

Since they did not en- 
counter Truly and Baker in the stairwell, nor recalled seeing 
those two men on the first floor, the women undoubtedly used 
the rear stairway sometime after Truly and Baker passed the 
fourth floor.JFK shows 
Oswald overtaking the two women.

Since they did not en- 
counter Truly and Baker in the stairwell, nor recalled seeing 
those two men on the first floor, the women undoubtedly used 
the rear stairway sometime after Truly and Baker passed the 
fourth floor.

(38) 
Adams and Styles arrived on the first floor just as Lovelady 
and Shelley entered through the back entrance.

The two men 
received their assignment to guard the elevators when Truly 
returned.

Speculation: Oswald came down from the second floor at 
12:35.

Resolved: About two minutes after the shooting, Mrs.

R.A.

Y^Reid encountered th^sass^n the second floor open area on 
his way to an exit that would have taken him downstairs.

MacNeil's encounter places the^^gitiv^ur^^ near the front 
exit on the first floor about a minute later.

Speculation: Oswald speaks to foreman Shelley outside for 10 
or 15 minutes.

Resolved: The basis for this contention rests entirely on 
statements made by Oswald as recorded In a November 25 FBI 
report by James Bookhout.(39] As noted above, Shelley re- 
mained with Lovelady well after the assassination; about the 
time Weston has Oswald meeting Shelley outside, Truly 
assigns him to guard the freight elevators.

Speculation: Oswald leaves the area in a Nash Rambler 
station wagon at 12:45.

Resolved: Only Deputy Sheriff Roger Craig thought the man 
who ran down the hill was Oswald.

Pictures by Jim Murray 
and William Allen appear in Cover-Up showing such a car, 
but Craig is seen on north Elm, contrary to his statements 
where he places himself on south Elm.

Craig's veracity can be 
gauged by his claim to have confronted Oswald with the 
observation — an encounter denied by Captain Fritz — and 
"Mauser" identification.(401 
Efforts to discredit Mrs.

Bledsoe and William Whaley fail to 
recognize that both witnesses volunteered their information.

Oswald's shirt pocket contained the bus transfer with 
McWatters' distinctive punchmarks.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bledsoe and William Whaley fail to 
recognize that both witnesses volunteered their information. Oswald's shirt pocket contained the bus transfer with 
McWatters' distinctive punchmarks. During interrogation, the 
 ^assassin conceded he had obtained the transfer and (hen taken ^ 
a cab to his rooming house. MacNeil's NewsHour 
As with Best Evidence, William Weston's methodology- -- 
fantastic speculation based on eyewitness impressions and 
wilful acts of miscomprehension leads to an Improbable 
scenario. At its worst, such abuses deflect attention away from 
serious Investigation and harms the general credibility of the 
critical community. The MacNeil-Oswald encounter Is a logical extension based 
on mutually corroborating accounts that conform to time 
restraints. But could a young, brash reporter, intent on amassing facts, 
have innocently purported to be a Secret Service agent? Although the enormity of the event led to unprecedented 
pool coverage among the rival networks, the initial instinct 
was to get the scoop. The classic example is that of UPl's 
13

--- PAGE BREAK ---VOLUME 2, NUMBER 3 
THE FOURTH DECADE 
MARCH, 1995 
Merriman Smith who seized his pool car's only radiophone, 
then purposely stalled Jack Bell of AP by dictating the same 
take repeatedly.

Bell eventually wrenched the phone away only to discover 
the line dead.

When gunfire and sirens erupted, Mac Neil rushed to get an 
edge on his competition, although he thought the incident a 
harmless protest.

The NBC correspondent pridefully writes: 
"New York told me I had been ahead of the AP and the 
UP!

with my first bulletin but it had taken them five 
minutes to get it on the air,"[41] 
MacNeil went to extraordinary lengths to reach Parkland, 
where he "was vastly relieved to be back in the right place to 
be covering the story." Now aware of the severity of the 
President's condition, MacNeil's competitive urges relaxed 
somewhat: 
"I was the only reporter in the White House press corps 
who knew where the shooting came from and I filled 
the others in."[42] 
Realizing his first bulletin from the Depository contained 
misinformation, the reporter "played it very carefully with 
NBC, cautioning them not to say more than we knew." That 
afternoon, NBC behaved the most responsibly, twice awaiting 
verification of newswire reports before major announce- 
ments.

The network would not have another scoop until it 
carried live Tom Pettit's famous coverage of the Oswald 
transfer.

MacNeil spent the weekend "retracing Oswald's steps." By 
Sunday evening, his report "had more eyewitnesses" than DA 
Henry Wade.

MacNeil "and another NBC reporter stayed behind for 
about a week In Dallas doing our own amateurish investiga- 
tion." 
MacNeil's own career as author and NewsHour co- 
anchor — does not reflect impetuous character.

MacNeil is 
adamant: "I certainly did not identify myself as a Secret 
Serviceman!"[43] But Oswald bestowed on him that designa- 
tion, marking one of the case's earliest misconceptions.MacNeil "and another NBC reporter stayed behind for 
about a week In Dallas doing our own amateurish investiga- 
tion." 
MacNeil's own career as author and NewsHour co- 
anchor — does not reflect impetuous character.

MacNeil is 
adamant: "I certainly did not identify myself as a Secret 
Serviceman!"[43] But Oswald bestowed on him that designa- 
tion, marking one of the case's earliest misconceptions.

Oswald's human error can be forgiven, but substituting his 
words with the most evil possible connotation is culpable.

If 
researchers genuinely seek understanding and closure, then 
common sense and leniency would make better starting 
places.

Notes 
1.

Richard B.

Trask, Pictures of the Pain, (Yeoman Press, 
1994), p.

361.

2.

Robert Groden, The Killing of a President, (Viking Studio 
Books, 1993), pp.

47-48; Harrison Livingstone, Killing 
theTruth, (Carroll & Graf, 1993), pp.

326-27; Jim Marrs, 
Crossfire, (Carroll & Gaff, 1990), p, 73; Gary Shaw and 
Larry Harris, Cover-Up, p.

134; Josiah Thompson, Six 
Seconds in Dallas, (Berkley, 1967/76), pp.

129, 247.

This 
view was also adopted by Robert Blakey and Gerald 
Posner.

The debris was not blasted back to Hargis' posi- 
tion.

Much of it was deposited over the Connallys, while 
skull and bullet fragments were driven to the front of the 
limo.

The Zapruder film shows other matter was expelled 
slightly forward and upward.

(Trask, p.

124, citing 1975 
CBS/ltek report) Because the limousine was traveling 
forward at 16 feet per second, much of the suspended 
matter was thought to have fallen behind the car.

Hargis 
simply rode into the field of debris as It descended.

(Posner, p.

316) 
3*.

Rush to judgment, (Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1966), p.

42, citing 6 H 295.

4.

Trask (p.

208) cites an undated Dallas Times Herald 
interview with Hargis, in which the officer states he "ran 
to the north side of Elm." Officer H.B.

McLain reported 
Hargis fell before crossing Elm.--- PAGE BREAK ---

208) cites an undated Dallas Times Herald 
interview with Hargis, in which the officer states he "ran 
to the north side of Elm." Officer H.B. McLain reported 
Hargis fell before crossing Elm. (Gary Savage, JFK First 
Day Evidence, (The Shoppe Press, 1993), p. 370) 
5. Trask, pp. 209, 268. Bond slide: see Trask, p. 208; 
Groden, pp. 45 center, 50 bottom (Groden erroneously 
credits this picture and a Hughes frame on p. 206 to Bell); 
Shaw, p. 5 top. Bell: see Trask, p. 268; Groden, p. 47. Life, 
November 24, 1967 (pp. 94-95) has images from both 
photographers. That Bond's first slide vvc^jaken some 20 
seconds after the last shot long enough for Hargis' 
dismount and return can be demonstrated by the 
presence of James Aitgens, who crossed Elm after photo- 
graphing the limousine entering the Underpass. A Bond 
slide (Trask, p. 211 top) reveals Hargis and his cycle long 
gone, as the officer and his followers race up the Knoll to 
the railbridge. Hargis testified he thought shots might have 
come from the overpass, perhapsiofluenced (as so rnany 
have been) by the^sJioxleQfihejdo^ ^ap. After 
riding through the Underpass, Hargis returned to the 
scene. At 12:34, he radioed: "A passerby states that shots 
came from the Texas School Book Depository." (David 
14

--- PAGE BREAK ---VOLUME 2, NUMBER 3 
THE FOURTH DECADE 
MARCH, 1995 
Lifton, Best Evidence, (Carroll & Graf, 1980/92), p.

365) 
6.

Trask, p.

156.

7.

Report of the Warren Commission [hereafter Warren 
Report], (Bantam, 1964), pp.

83,572.

William Manches- 
ter and David Lifton somehow combined Haygood with 
Hargis.

8.

Trask, p.

210, citing 6 H 297-98.

Willis 6 (Trask, p.

175; 
Croden, p.

50 left center; Shaw, p.

137) shows Haygood's 
white helmet beneath the Fort Worth sign.

Willis 7 (Trask, 
p.

176; Groden, p.

51 center) depicts him nearing the 
abutment.

Towner 3 (Groden, pp.

51 bottom, 54) shows 
his abandoned motorcycle as followers — Including the 
naive MacNeil — trail Haygood, and the first Press Bus 
enters the Underpass.

9.

Trask, p.

375; on page 426, Trask prints a Couch film clip 
showing the view Haygood had when he entered Elm 
Street.

Trask indicates the front of his cycle likely appears 
in the extreme right of the Bothun picture (p.

156).

10.

Trask, pp.

403, 427; Shaw, pp.

154-55.

A film sequence 
by Robert Hughes also captured Haygood dismounting as 
spectaTors ftoodlhe area.

(Trask, p.

266) 
11.

Lifton, pp.

365-66; Warren Report, p.

572.

Groden (p, 53) 
and Savage (p.

407) attribute this transmission to #22: 
Patrolman L.L.

Hill.

Lifton relates "the tape and Haygood's 
own testimony established that this is incorrect," assign- 
ing the error to the FBI transcriber.

(Lifton, n.

on p.

366) 
12.

I have based MacNeil's activities on Chapter 13 of his 
book, The Right Place at the Right Time (Little, Brown & 
Co., 1982) and an interview he gave on CBC Morning 
News, CBC Newsworld, Noverriber 22, 1993.

13.

Trask, p.

333; Shaw, p.

134^ Ajond slide (T^k, p.

210; 
Croden, p.

51 top; Shaw, p.

9T1OP) depiHs MacNeil on 
the siriewAik just ahf^ad nf P^f>QQ RIK MacNeil is also 
visible In a film sequence by jt^my D^melT^hich Trask 
describes on page 423.51 top; Shaw, p.

9T1OP) depiHs MacNeil on 
the siriewAik just ahf^ad nf P^f>QQ RIK MacNeil is also 
visible In a film sequence by jt^my D^melT^hich Trask 
describes on page 423.

Darnell's three brief b/w film clips 
immediately follow the Zapruder film segment in "Who 
Was Lee Harvey Oswald,?" PBS, November 16, 1993.

Richard Trask suggests the running man in the suit "is 
quite possibly Dallas Morning News reporter Kent Biffle, 
who was a passenger in the car between Cabluck's and 
the next bus." In a January 24, 1993 letter to me, Robert 
MacNeil positively identified himself_as,^e man in the 
Cahl uck picture.

14.

Trask, p.

334.

The fence section through which critics like 
Livingstone and Grant Leitma contend an assassin fired is 
completely boarded.

15.

MacNeil, p.

208.

This observation dissolves Gary Mack's 
view that the railyard held just a "solitary passenger car 
[with] no switch engine or any other train for hundreds of 
feet in either direction."(Decade, July 1994, p.

19) As 
proof, Mack cites the Mclntire pictures which (as usual) he 
doesn't publish.

Thankfully, Mclntire' second picture is 
gushed on page 472 of Pictures of the Pain, revealing 
a light commuter two-car train next to the three Katy 
business cars.

This juxtaposition is confirmed by an aerial 
photo taken that afternoon.

(Trask, p.

350) 
16.

Trask, p.

405; Groden, p.

49.

17.

Groden, pp.

47, 60.

18.

Livingstone, p.

82.

19.

Robert Blakey and Richard Billings, Fatal Hour, (Berkley, 
1981/92), p.

101; Marrs, p.

74.

Smith had his back to the 
Depository and could venture no opinion^as to the source 
of shots because strong echo eff^ 
20.

Thompson, p.

163, citing 7 H 535.

Possibly, this woman 
mistook as assailants the black couple who fled from the 
retaining wall comer just after the fatal shot.

21.

HSCA Report, (USGPO, 1979), p.

184.--- PAGE BREAK ---

HSCA Report, (USGPO, 1979), p. 184. In 1978 interviews, 
Weitzman, Harkness and Ronald Fischer "stated that they 
had surmised that any plainclothes individual in the 
company of uniformed police officers must have been a 
Secret Service agent." (HSCA Report, p. 184, n. 25 on p. 625) FBI Agent James Hosty told the Committee that Frank 
Ellsworth, a local ATF officer with the Treasury Depart- 
ment, had identified himself as a Secret Serviceman, a 
claim Ellsworth subsequently denied. According to a 
1967 interview by Mark Lane with Secret Service Agent 
Abraham Bolden, rumors that "an unauthorized person 
had used Secret Service credentials in Dallas on Novem- 
ber 22" prompted a service-wide credential check on 
November 27. (A Citizen's Dissent, (Holt, Rinehart & 
Winston, 1968), p. 193) 
22. Trask, p. 572, citing 7 H 351. 23. CD 354 (late January 1964 interviews with James Powell, 
Terry Ford, and Allman) appears in Thompson, pp. 412- 
13. 24. On page 209 of The Right Place at the Right Time, 
MacNeil recounts exiting the Depository, where a hysteri- 
cal woman drew her attention to his press badge. 25. Kelley's report, dated November 29,1963, was published 
in the Warren Report (pp. 562-65). 15

--- PAGE BREAK ---VOLUME 2, NUMBER 3 
THE FOURTH DECADE 
MARCH, 1995 
26.

MacNeil, p.

213.

27.

Concerning this omission, MacNeil wrote me: "It was 
certainly in the account I wrote several days after the 
assassination and published as a chapter in my book The 
Right Place at the Right Time." 
28.

George O Toole also applied undue speculation to 
MacNeiMs FBI statement (The Assassination Tapes, (Pent- 
house, 1975), pp.

227-28).

OToole theorized the two 
lights on the office phone noticed by MacNeil indicated 
Oswald was on the second floor receiving a call from his 
Bureau contact" on the first floor phone — a conjecture 
presented in the JFK travesty.

However, Mrs.

Reid did not 
observe Oswald using a phone in the open office area on 
the second floor, nc^did the lunchroom contain a tele^*'' 
phone.iS 'J 
29.

Third Decade, March 1993* p.

22.

* 
30.

Warren Report, p.

143.

This could explain why Doughtery 
failed to notice Oswald passing through the fifth floor.

31.

"The Fifth Floor Sniper," Third Decade, May 1993, p.

31.

32.

Third Decade, March 1993, p.

23.

33.

Warren Report, p.

146.

34.

Thompson, pp.

299-302.

Excel lent blowups of the Hughes 
film appear in Frontline (1993).

35.

Perhaps this explains the "radically different configura- 
tion of images in the extreme southeast window of the fifth 
floor than that which is depicted in the Dillard photo." 
(Third Decade, May 1993, inside front cover) Weston is 
equally adventurous with his claim that the Dillard pic- 
tures were taken during the March 20, 1964 reconstruc- 
tion.

(May 1993, p.

26) However, the recreation photo- 
graphs all show overcast conditions, while those of Dillard 
show the Depository's facade in full sunlight.

Weston 
finds it odd that Williams and Norman are depicted in the 
Dillard photographs "looking at nothing in particular 
[and] waiting for something to happen." Even odder Is that 
Weston had written on the preceding page (May 1993, p.26) However, the recreation photo- 
graphs all show overcast conditions, while those of Dillard 
show the Depository's facade in full sunlight.

Weston 
finds it odd that Williams and Norman are depicted in the 
Dillard photographs "looking at nothing in particular 
[and] waiting for something to happen." Even odder Is that 
Weston had written on the preceding page (May 1993, p.

25) that the rush of people up the Knoll impelled "them to 
make the headlong dash to the westend window." This 
outside activity had yet to materialize when Dillard took 
his pictures, so the men had no reason to leave their 
position.

36.

Secrets of a Homicide: Exploring the jFK Assassination," 
Video Toaster User, November 1994, pp.

41-42.

37.

Posner, p.

264.

38.

Warren Report, p.

144.

39.

Bookhout's report, described by Weston as "little known," 
appeared in the Warren Report (pp.

556-67).

40.

Posner, p.

259; Warren Report, p.

151; Savage, pp.

159 - 
65.

41.

MacNeil, p.

210.

42.

Ibid., p.

211.

When MacNeil entered the Depository, he 
encpunteredj^ in one5T 
its^wlndows.

(p.

208) 
43.

Letter of January 24, 1993.

AN INDIANA RIFLE UPDATE 
by 
Sheldon Inkol 
The following information comes from "The Indiana Rifle," 
an article I had published in the July, 1993 issue of The Third 
Decade.

A man checked into a seventh floor room at the Terre Haute 
House Hotel the night of November 25, 1963, registering 
under the name of Harry L.

Power and giving a false San 
Antonio address.

The hotel was across the street from the 
Democrat and Republican headquarters in Terre Haute.

An 
unspecified threat was made against "a local official" and, on 
the morning of November 26, security was tightened around 
Governor of Indiana Matthew Welsh in Indianapolis.

The 
man left the hotel the next day, leaving a disassembled 7.65 
mm German Mauser behind.

Subsequent investigation re- 
vealed that Harry L.

Power had been in the Army, and was a 
top marksman and an outspoken member of the Young 
Communist League.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Subsequent investigation re- 
vealed that Harry L. Power had been in the Army, and was a 
top marksman and an outspoken member of the Young 
Communist League. The Terre Haute police suspected that 
someone might be using the name as an alias. According to 
Frank Riddle, Terre Haute's Chief of Police at the time, the FBI 
tried to link Power's presence at the hotel to a local political 
rally held near the hotel that night, and Power was also 
suspected of being involved In an attempt on the life of 
Sheldon Inkol 
54 Raglan 4ve., #74 
Toronto, Ontario 
Canada MSC 2L1 
16