Information Officer 7637 Old Iteceiver Uoad
EmbasaJ of the U.S.S.R I’eederick, l-ld.

21702
16 Above K St., HW 7^2/91
Washington, D.C.

Dear Sir,
Today's Washongton Post review of the John Uostello book on tlie kudolph liess flight,
assisted by tlie KOD, prompts this letter and my hope that there may be more suoh coopera-
tion in bringing more of what is historically Important to light.

I am the author of the first book on the Warren Commission, "Whitewash: the Report
on the Warren Heport," of five additional books on the JFiZ assassinAtlon and its offi-
cial investigations and of one book on the assasslniitlon of Dr.

Meu*tin .^uther king, Jr.

Unlike all the other books on these tragedies, mine do not tlieorlze "solutions" but
are entirely factual.

Based on official records they leave it beyond question that these
assassinations were the end product of conspiracies.

But they do not mislead and misinform
readers by presenting conjectures as fact about who was responsible for these crimes.

These crlmds were never really investigated officially and wore never Intended to be
investigated officially.

I have an abundance of official documentation and there is no
conjecture at all in this.

Iftider the l''reedom of Information Act I filed about a dozen lawsuits against various
government agencies.

As a result ^ have about a tliird of a million pages of records that
had been withheld officially.

Congress amended this Act in 1974, making an explicit legl-
adatlve history of the fact tlmt the investigatory files exemption was amended over one
of my earliest such suits, fhis is what opened FBI, CIA and other agency files to us.

Because I believe that this Act makes me surrogate for tlie people, to the degree
my age, 76, and my impaired health makes possible, ^ permit access to these records to
others who have a serious Interest in them.

When I die all these records will be a permanent public archive at local Hood College.Because I believe that this Act makes me surrogate for tlie people, to the degree
my age, 76, and my impaired health makes possible, ^ permit access to these records to
others who have a serious Interest in them. When I die all these records will be a permanent public archive at local Hood College. Because the crimes were never really investigated officially tliere are no viable
leads to be followed by others in an effort to determine who was behind these crimes. lihis also results in lingering mysteries. Of these ^hat is of special interest to me
is what is not known about Lee Harvey Oswald, the officially-designated lone JFK assassin. I have learned more and other about him that is officially represented from the official
records J have obtained some of which were alleged not to exist. In his private writings
he was both anti-USSR eind anti-American Communist Party.And although it is not reflected
able volume of records, far, far from all, that reflect a series of spurious "reasons"
for not permitting him to defect. You are, of course, welcome to all such information I

--- PAGE BREAK ---er-
able volume of records, far, far from all, that reflect a series of spurious "reasons"
for not permitting him to defect. You are, of course, welcome to all such information I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9
have tel thiSy including; cojjdLss of then. After he was able to defect he was Interviewed by
the PiJI several tines. The copies of these FBI reports I have quote Nosenko, among other
things, as saying that the aGB records he exanined at the tine of the assassination
indicate that the KGB suspected that he was an American "agent in plqce" or "sleeper
Agent" and that he was overtly anti-Soviet when lie libed at Minsk. Nosenko also told the
FBI that Usuald was there under some surveillance,
Ny interest is in liaving access to these records fcf only to leave a more complete
record for history.
Your government may have wondered at the time wl\y our govemnent did not request
all of its records relating to Oswald. I have some records that to me provide the answer
and suggest tlie reasons: tliey were not wanted.
Coinciding in tine with the CIA's receipt of copies of the FBI's reports on these
Nosenko interviews including what state above about the KGB's suspicions and Oswald's
political expressions, Nosenko's treatment was radically changed from princely to sub-
human, as you probably know^ for about three years.
T|;je current Tom Mangold book, "Cold Warrior," on the late James Angleton, suys the
oppsoite and is knowingly incorrect in this. Why ho is incorrect on tliis I believe is
apprent on reading the book.
If you would lil:e me to expand on any of tliis or to document it, to the degree of
my physical capabilities i will do so,
I do hope your government will look with fabor on my request.
However, I read only fi^oglish.
I thank you for any help you may provide.
Should you or any of your associates wuit to
examine my records, we are not much more than a
half-hour past Rock^yillee