COMPLIMENTARY
ATRANDOM
BOOKS
AND BOORPEOPLE FROM RANDOM HOUSE·SUMMER 1995
NORMAN MAILER AND THE KGB TAPES
GEORGE FoREMAN's HARD-HITTING BoOKLIST ·KENNETH TYNAN's LETTERS
JAN MoRRIS IN LoVE · CHARLES McCARRY's WASHINGTON INTRIGUE
THEODORE ROSZAK MEETS FRANKENSTEIN · GAIL SHEEHY's NEW MAP OF LIFE

--- PAGE BREAK ---

RATINC OUR NATIONAL OBSESSIONS:
We are foreverfascinatedwith
giants and giant-killers.But how
does the “desperately unpleasant”
O.J. Simpson case compare to our
“number one obsession,”alleged
Kennedy assassin Lee Harvey
Oswald?“There’s a great deal at
stake in terms ofrace relations,
says Norman Mailer,“but nothing
in terms of political forces"
AMERICA'S
OBSESSIONS
NORMANMAILERTALKSABOUTLEEHARVEYOSWALD,JFK,THEKGB,
O.J.SIMPSON,ANDTHENASTYNINETIES
ANINTERVIEW BYSEANABBOTT
an especiallyfrantic technical rehearsal,and
soon enough a small door opens near the ceil-
whereNormanMailerlives,andonerealizes
ingand apair of legs descends a ladder-it's
that this daily ascentmust be one ofthe secretsMailer's sonMatthew,emergingfrom his sleep-
toMailer’s enduring vigor.He stands at the rail-ing loft. (Matthew, a special-effects artist,has
ing, a smiling, beneficent presence, a man who
contributed two ghouls to the apartment, a pair
obviously enjoyswelcominggueststohis aerie,
,of realistic-looking skeletonswithwithered,
with its sweeping view of lower Manhattan and
putrefyingflesh thatloomoverthetableinthe
NewYork Harbor.The streets outside are
dining area.“We call them The Family,”his
deserted on this frigid February morning, but
father confides with a laugh.) Mailer,who has
Mailer's apartment is a constant hurlyburly of
lived here for thirty-two years, gazes across the
family members and assistants coming and
wideexpanseofwaterandmuses onthe trans-
going. It is not unlike being in a theater during
formation of the southern tip of Manhattan,
12
AT RANDOM

--- PAGE BREAK ---members and assistants coming and
wideexpanseofwaterandmuses onthe trans-
going. It is not unlike being in a theater during
formation of the southern tip of Manhattan,
12
AT RANDOM

--- PAGE BREAK ---

now a virtual wall of metal and glass."There investigators have long been frustrated in their
used to be small buildings at the water's edge,
attempts to obtain information on Oswald from
with taller buildings rising gradually behind
the Soviets.
them. You might have thought you were in the
Mailer first visited Russia in 1984 and was
mountains. Now you know exactly where you
invitedbackin1986withotherprominent
are-corporateAmerica."
Western intellectuals to attend a conference
In his writing and in his life,Mailer has long
hosted by Mikhail Gorbachev. Through the
battled the sensibility that would renderMan-e
efforts of investigative reporter Lawrence
hattan identical to Dallas. He rightfully occu-
Schiller, Mailer was given exclusive access to
pies the position of Distinguished Man of Let-
theKGBmaterialonOswaldduringasix-month
ters,and hehasproduced some ofthe essential
research-fest to Russia in 1992-93.Mailer and
works of themodernist canon,among them
Schiller alsointerviewed the people who had
The Naked and the Dead, Why AreWeinViet-
known and befriended Oswald, along with
nam?, The Armies oftheNight,OfaFire on
the KGB agents whose assistants had spied on
the Moon, The Executioner's Song,and his
Oswald through a peephole in his Minsk
strange masterpiece, the gorgeous and sublime
apartment and recorded his frequent spats
Ancient Evenings. Mailer returns to book-
with his Russian-born wife,Marina. Oswald's
lengthnonfictionfor the first timein sixteen
Tale “depends upon the small revelations of
years with Oswald's Tale: An American Mys-
separate points of view,” Mailer writes, and the
tery (Random House, May),a massive study of
result is the richest psychological portrait we
Lee Harvey Oswald that is based on Mailer's
have yet had of the maddeningly enigmatic Lee
UPI
access to secretKGBdocuments concerning
Harvey Oswald. In Oswald's Tale Norman
Oswald's two and a half years (from 1959 to
Mailer has mounted a “search for the nature
1962) in Russia. This crucial period in Oswald's
6ofthemanwhoascendedtothesummitof
life has always been oneofthe central mysteries
our national obsessions [and] became our
of the Kennedy assassination, and scholars and
FirstGhost."
SUMMER1995
13d's
6ofthemanwhoascendedtothesummitof
life has always been oneofthe central mysteries
our national obsessions [and] became our
of the Kennedy assassination, and scholars and
FirstGhost."
SUMMER1995
13

--- PAGE BREAK ---AT RANDom: Toward the end of your novel Harlot’s
language, trying to find people for interviews can take up
Ghost the topfigures in the CIA are sitting around in a
almost all your time.

Schiller arranged the meetings.

We'd
panic after the Kennedy assassination, and John
interviewour subjects together withLudmila.Shewas
McCone[CAdirectorfrom1961to1965]exclaims in
very opinionated and had her own ideas on everything,
frustration,“Whois this Oswald?"Is Oswald’s Tale
but we did listen to her carefullybecause sheknew an
your way of answering this question before moving on
awful lot about her country.

Of course, it did take three
to thesecondvolume of Harlot'sGhost?

times as long to do an interview in Russia as it did in
NORMAN MAILER: Well, Id had my own idea of who this
America--one hour for the English,one hour for the
Oswald was.

I was having fun with McCone.

Really what
Russian, and one hour for arguing with Ludmila.

it came down tois Ihad
[Laughs.] We would
always had great curios-
often pose a question
ity about Oswald and
and she'd say, “I sim-
what the story might
ply refuse to ask them
be.

And I also wanted
thatquestion in that
toknow alot more
manner.

It will offend
aboutRussia and the
them too profoundly."
KGB since the second
The query might have
part of Harlot's Gbost
been something on the
is going to be about that,
order of “When was
and I felt a little inade-
yourfather arrested?'
quate to deal with it
That's not theway you
in any depth.

So then
ask a question in Rus-
Lary Schiller came along
sia.You say,“Could
-andof courseI'd
you name the year that,
done TheExecutioner's
looking back upon it,
Song, among
other
MINSK INTHEGLOOM OFWINTER:
was a time that you
books, with Larry—-and
Mailer in the working-class neighborhood where he
would call the year of
said,“Listen, we can get
livedwhile researching Oswald’sRussian life
our troubles'?"
accessto theKGB.Would
you like to go over there and do a book on Oswald's
AR:You had to edge your way to specificity.It will offend
aboutRussia and the
them too profoundly."
KGB since the second
The query might have
part of Harlot's Gbost
been something on the
is going to be about that,
order of “When was
and I felt a little inade-
yourfather arrested?'
quate to deal with it
That's not theway you
in any depth.

So then
ask a question in Rus-
Lary Schiller came along
sia.You say,“Could
-andof courseI'd
you name the year that,
done TheExecutioner's
looking back upon it,
Song, among
other
MINSK INTHEGLOOM OFWINTER:
was a time that you
books, with Larry—-and
Mailer in the working-class neighborhood where he
would call the year of
said,“Listen, we can get
livedwhile researching Oswald’sRussian life
our troubles'?"
accessto theKGB.Would
you like to go over there and do a book on Oswald's
AR:You had to edge your way to specificity.

life in Russia?”I loved theidea ofit becauseI thought it
NM:Just about always.The Russians had a well-founded
would do two things at once—-it would satisfy my
aversion to specificity, it could get you nowhere, specificity.

curiosity on Oswald, and it would also get me beefed
up for the second volume of Harlot's Ghost.

AR:That'sinteresting,becauseyou note at thebegin-
ning of thebook that the definite and indefinite
AR:How did Schiller get access?

articles arenot employed inRussian,nor is theverb
NM: You have to understand, Schiller is the man who
"to be." Its a much more direct way of speaking.

interviewed O.J.

Simpson.Schiller has to be one of the
NM: Much more direct.All the more reason to be evasive.

most skillful investigative reporters in the world today,
and he knows a hundred different ways of obtaining
AR:Whatwas itlike tolivetherefor six months?I saw
access.

Larry had produced and codirected [for Tv ］ Peter
the pictures ofyour living quarters in Minsk, which .

.

the Great back in the eighties and had developed all sorts
I'm atalossforwords.

of contacts in Russia over the years.

He also had a transla-
NM: The pictures look elegant.--- PAGE BREAK ---

of contacts in Russia over the years. He also had a transla-
NM: The pictures look elegant. [Laughs.] No, it was kind
tor with whom he was close, a formidable young lady
of drab.I was paying two hundred bucks a month for the
named Ludmila Peresvetova, whom he later married. I
apartment. Every apartment in Minsk was more or
think she helped him to convince theKGBestablishment
less the same. A luxury apartment was an apartment that
that they could doworse than open theirfiles as a way of
had four rooms.But the rooms were always small,the
underlining that the old KGB was changing.Remember
furnishings were almost always the same. You never
that in 1992 the KGB was relatively open; the Communist
found anyone who was living very poorly, you never found
coup against Gorbachev had failed the year before. anyone who had any wealth—-it really was a society of
relative equality. I happened to be living in a workers
AR:How did you and Schiller divvy up the work? apartment house,but I only found that out in an odd way:
Mailer
NM: We work together very well because he's good at all
One day, a woman who was being interviewed by us was
the things I don't do that well. He gets people organized
Church
for interviews. I'd get bogged down in the administration. up, and we went on together to Ludmila's hotel, where
When you're in a foreign country and you don't speak the
ethe interview was to take place. I was curious about my
E
14
AT RANDOM

--- PAGE BREAK ---eup
neighborhoodandasked thewoman aboutit,and she
eweregilded with a late-afternoonbronze.

Ve'd
said, “Oh, it was quite a shock when I saw where you were
was
living.” She meant that invidiously.

I, a well-known
AR: Did you get to see Oswald's apartment?

ing,
author, was living in a disreputable neighborhood.

It
NM: Yes.

His apartment was tiny.

The living room was
van
turned out it was a working-class neighborhood.

Now,
about the size of a good prison cell, maybe twelve by nine.

hree
the apartmenthouseIwas in was just as good as any other
He lived in the nearest thing toanelegant neighborhood,
din
apartment house in Minsk.

Everybody lived at the same
though.

Minsk had some fine old buildings, built in a
the
level.

In fact, workers very often made more rubles a
nineteenth-century style, with pillars.When the city was
nila.

month than the doctors.

But what had become a substi-
rebuilt after the war, its core was fashioned to a degree
ould
tute for money was snobbery, there absolutely was a class
after Leningrad.

Then, as housing needs grew, the apart-
tion
system, but it was based on culture.

To the degree you
ments got drabber until in the last circle around the city
im-
were cultivated,you belonged to a higher class.It had
there are endless high-rises.

You could think you were in
nem
nothing to do with how well you lived.

some of the drearier portions of Queens or Co-op City in
that
the Bronx.

Just part of the general uglification of the
end
AR:How did she know that just driving by?

world that modern architecture has produced.

Hly."
NM: Although all the apartment houses were equal,
nave
workers were generally housed near their factory, so they
AR:There seemed to be a lot of sexual repression in
the
could walk to work.

About the only way you could tellyou
Minskin Oswald’sday.Is this still thecase?Hly."
NM: Although all the apartment houses were equal,
nave
workers were generally housed near their factory, so they
AR:There seemed to be a lot of sexual repression in
the
could walk to work.

About the only way you could tellyou
Minskin Oswald’sday.Is this still thecase?

was
were in a working-class neighborhood was that on Friday
NM: If you could take all the fundamentalists in America,
ed?"
and Saturday night the eighteen- and nineteen-year-olds
andimplantRussianintothemovernightsothatthey
you
would get drunk outside,and that was fun,because they
would have absolute command of the language, and ship
Rus-
were tough but they weren't vicious,and you could
them over there—not now,but in the old days--they
uld
kid around with them—-"Ya, Americansky"—which
would have been so much happier than they ever were in
hat,
intrigued them.

America.

Sex was puritanical, and the streets were always
it,
safeunder communism.You mightbe arrested and sent
you
AR: Living as an American under these circumstances,
away for twenty years, but that was another matter.

rof
doyouthinkyou hadagoodsenseofhowOswaldlived
Certainly if you wanted to walk through a park at night
whenhewas there?

there was no problem.And although there was no active
NM: Staying in Minsk gave me quite an idea of why
church as such, my God, those people were more
Oswald wanted to leave.

The weather was the most per-
law-abiding and more familial than any average sort of
ded
vasive element.It's some of the toughest weather you're
Americans you're going to meet.

ty.

ever going to find.Not because it's extreme.You don't
have any heroic feeling that you're battling the elements.

AR:WasMinskimportanttoOswald'sdevelopment?ever going to find.Not because it's extreme.You don't
have any heroic feeling that you're battling the elements.

AR:WasMinskimportanttoOswald'sdevelopment?

gin-
It's not much colder than New York, but it's darker.The
Hewassenttherewhenhewas twenty;heleftMinskat
nite
sun almost never shines.There was one stretch of three
twenty-two.These areformativeyears.Would hehave
erb
weeks where I saw the sun come out through a haze for a
become a different Oswald if hehadn’t gone toMinsk?

half hour on one afternoon.

For the rest of those three
NM:Most of us have various kinds of imbalance
ive.

weeks, the skies were cloudy from morning to night, and
within ourselves.

That imbalance either festers and
of course Minsk is further north than NewYork.

It gets
becomes larger,orit diminishes,depending to a degree on
saw
dark earlier.

As winter came on, it would turn dark
how much luck we have in our lives.

Do we find the right
by about three P.M., and it wouldn’t get light in the
kindofjobor theright situation or therightmarriage or
morning until nine.

So you do begin to live in a northern
the right whatever—whatever is most important to us?

ind
gloom.And Oswald was a southerner.Must have
Very often, such luck will take care of much of that imbal-
the
felt it doubly.

He always complained about being
ance and we'll end up having rather interesting and slight-
or
cold.But it's more than that.The gloom of the weather
ly jagged lives, perhaps, but we don't crash.

hat
was extraordinary.

My guess is that if Oswald had gotten what he expect-
the
ed to get when he went to the Soviet Union, he would
ver
AR:It sounds hellish.

havehadadifferentkindof life and it might have
ind
NM: The one thing that relieves Russia is the feeling
been more interesting.He might still have crashed,but
of
you get occasionally when you finally do see something
I doubt it.--- PAGE BREAK ---

My guess is that if Oswald had gotten what he expect-
the
ed to get when he went to the Soviet Union, he would
ver
AR:It sounds hellish. havehadadifferentkindof life and it might have
ind
NM: The one thing that relieves Russia is the feeling
been more interesting.He might still have crashed,but
of
you get occasionally when you finally do see something
I doubt it. ers'
beautiful—-it is so beautiful that it knocks you out.It's like
Mailer
ay:
meeting someone who's incredibly ugly and then they
AR: What did he expect to get? vas
smile and for one moment you see all their beauty in that
NM:Well,he wanted to be famous. He had enormous
me
smile.And you're overcome.So by the same token,when
desire to gain world recognition.No small ambition
ere
the sun came out for half an hour on that one day—God,
there.Part of his tragedy
wasthatimmense
my
but Minsk became a beautiful place.All the buildings
sambition when his qualifications were at best mediocre. >0M
SUMMER 1995
15

--- PAGE BREAK ---ven now,thirty-two years later,sheis
THE HAUNTING
players on a bigger stage:While Oswald
still angry with him.He had no right
dreamed of captivating the world's atten-
to abandonher.Mostof thedetails of
tion,Marinayearnedforamoresophisti-
their marriage have long since faded
cated,cosmopolitan life.Oswald was a
from her memory,and only a few, stray
foreigner,and inprovincial Minsk,he
images remain:the red dress she wore on
attractedattention.LittledidMarina
the night of their first encounter at the
know then just how much attention her
Trade Union Palace in Minsk;his smell,
future husbandwould attract.

whichatfirst shefoundsoacrid,sonause
LikeMailer,Marinais curious about
ating.And that fateful night,their last
Oswald;like Mailer,she sees him as a
night together, when he wanted her so
mystery.But she values peace over
much and she refused him.The night of
understanding."If we go through Lee's
November 21,1963 still haunts her.

character,I myselfwould like tofind out:
MarinaOswald’spastweighsheavily
Who is he?Washereally thatmean of a
onher.But after thirty years of inter-
person?-which I think he was-—-but it's a
views and interrogations,she has difficul
hard roadfor me to takebecauseI do not
ty distinguishingher own memories
OFMARINA
want to understand him.I'm mad at him.

from what shehas heard andread.Living
Very mad at him, yes.

on a ranch in Texas with her second husband, she turns away
Mailer doesn’t hide his sympathy for Marina.“She sits ina
most inquiring visitors and is eager to forget the past.from what shehas heard andread.Living
Very mad at him, yes.

on a ranch in Texas with her second husband, she turns away
Mailer doesn’t hide his sympathy for Marina.“She sits ina
most inquiring visitors and is eager to forget the past.

chair,atinywomaninherearlyfifties,herthinshoulders
For Norman Mailer,Marina made an exception.The
hunchedforwardinsuchpainofspiritundersuchamass of
authorhad embarked onaquest todiscoverwhoLeeHarvey
guilt that one would comfort her as one would hug a child,
he writes.“What remains of what was onceherbeautyare
Oswald’s character,Mailer believes,thatone canknow
her extraordinary eyes,blue as diamonds,and theyblaze
whether he shot PresidentKennedy,and whether he was
withlightasif,indivinecompensationforthedeadweightof
capable of acting alone.

all thatwill not cease tohaunt her,she has beengranteda
The picture ofMarina and Lee thatMailerpresents in
sparkfrom the hour of an apocalypse others have not seen.

Oswald’'s Ghost is that of a querulous but not ill-suited pair.

Perhaps itis thelight offered tovictimswhohavesuffered
Phenomenally ambitious,bothbelieved they should be
like the gods.

Joy deMenil
AR:He was dyslexic,but an avid reader.And he aspired
AR:Notevenabouthistourofdutyasamarine
tobeawriter.

in Japan?

NM: Exactly.

Now, he expected that the Russians would
NM: They were terribly vain about the amount of knowl-
welcome him, and he would become a world celebrity,
edge they had about American military activities in Japan
and he'd be a spokesman.

Instead, they sent him off to
and the Far East.When Iwent over toRussia Iwas
Minsk, to work in a factory, to be observed, which he knew
certain that they had debriefed him in depth and directly.

or didn't know.He probably did know.Even the KGB
It was hard for me to believe that this was not the way
couldn't tell you whether or not heknew he was being
'they had done it.

But I got to understand a little more
observed.

about the KGB.

They are more conservative than the FBI.--- PAGE BREAK ---

about the KGB. They are more conservative than the FBI. The one thing he wasn't prepared for was the distrust
that the Russians had for him.They didn't know what to
AR:That ishard tobelieve. make ofhim.Was he sincere?In which case they had to
NM:Well,we've been brainwashed about the Evil
take care of him, treat him properly. Or was he some new,
Empire and have an impression of these incredibly malign
exotic CIAimplantation?Had the CIA decided to send
people who spent all their time killing. Actually what you
oversomeonewhowasnotwhollybalanced,andwhodid
found was a huge number of bureaucrats who were very
not have the credentials to be an agent? But who nonethe-
proud to be in the KGB because it was the most intelligent
less was so bizarre that his presence would reveal by Sovi-
organization in the Soviet Union, and even in the old days
et reaction to him how they functioned? Now, the KGB
they were the only ones who ever received any real knowl-
used to do a lot of that.Working in foreign countries,
edge, because they had to have more understanding than
they would create various sorts ofprovocative situations to
otherSoviets as towhat the situationmightbeinother
countries.But they were incredibly conservative.There
try was functioning. They assumed the CIA was doing
was very little to gain by being audacious. If you were bold
that.It was a real possibility for them.So,they decided
and you messed up, that was going to injure your career
that they would not do anything but observe him. They
profoundly, whereas if you kept doing the proper thing
wouldn'tinterviewhim.They wouldn't debrief him. and the safe thing, you could count on rising steadily. So
16
AT RANDOM

--- PAGE BREAK ---stuntman you could ever meet.

Why are people stuntmen
overwhelming damage because, as you write, “the
obfuscationandparanoia whichfollowed the assassina-
It's because that's their cure.They're brave enough and
tion...would contributeimmensely to the sludge
bold enough to see a cure there, and to exercise it.If you're
and smog of the world’s spirit." The real tragedy, I
a good enough rock climber, sooner or later you always
think,is thatKennedy did notlive to establish his
have to face something that you're not going to be able to
greatness,to fix it firmly in place.

Oswald,in effect,
bring off.So,in that sense,Oswald joins the fold.He is a
delivered the carnal Kennedy.And the smog.

spiritual rock climber, as was Kennedy.

Kennedy had the
NM:Whenever welive with a question that's important
imagination to see that he could run for president and
to us and we cannot answer it, we have an obsession.

The
win.Quite an imagination, considering how conservative
nature of an obsession is that we keep coming back to the
America was in the fifties.

same question and there's no answer.

In
MAILER'S LIST
relation to the psyche,it's like a black
AR: But Kennedy has been so horri-
hole in space, and the assassination of
bly diminished,reduced today to
The Naked and theDead,1948
PresidentKennedy created a number of
tabloid status.Now it seems we've
Barbary Shore, 1951
obsessions.What kind of president
been offeredup the carnal Kennedy
would Kennedy have made?

We'd all
somany times thatwe can’teasily
The Deer Park, 1955
know more if he'd ended as a great pres-
remember a heroicKennedy.Ithink
AduertisementsforMyself,1959
ident, a good president, or a failure.We
of Kennedy in bed with MarilynMon-
like answers to our questions, even if
Deathsfor the Ladies,1962
roe more often than I think of him in
they are unpleasant answers.

And we
the Pacific with a strap in his mouth.

ThePresidential Papers,1963
never got that with Kennedy.

Why is that?ThePresidential Papers,1963
never got that with Kennedy.

Why is that?

Do we live in such mean-
An American Dream,1964
Then, we have the enormous ques-
spirited times?

Cannibalsand Christians,1966
tion,Did Oswald do it by himself or
NM: Oh, we do.

Meanspirited times.

I
not?

And if he did, the question that's
can't remember a period that's as mean-
Why Are We in Vietnam?, 1967
still unresolved is how much did the FBI
spirited as this one.

Not in America.

The Armies oftheNight,1968
and the CIA have to do with tipping the
My God.

The eighties was meanspirit-
balance in him?I would say that
ed enough, but the nineties is going to
Miamiand theSiege
ofChicago,1968
the CIA,in the person of George De
put it to shame.

Mohrenschildt, debriefed him very care-
Ofa Fire on the Moon, 1970
fully.

If you begin to look at it in the
AR:Does Kennedy's loss of stature
The Prisoner of Sex, 1971
simplest human terms,his best friendis
have something to do with that?

ExistentialErrands,1972
somebody who is debriefing him and he
NM: Well, you're talking about an ide-
doesn't even know it,but he has to sense
ological war which has been going
St.George and
the Godfather,1972
unconsciously that there's more going
on between the Democrats and the
on here than a simple friendship.

He's
Republicans ever since Roosevelt, and
Marilyn,1973
being used.

Terrible damage can be done
it's getting more intense every year as
The FaithofGraffti,1974
to someone psychologically if they are
the stakes get higher.

One aim in
The Fight, 1975
being debriefed.It is the equivalent of
that ideological war is to reduce the
living with a mate who's unfaithful.

Kennedys.

So long as that family had
Genius and Lust, 1976
And then there's the question of how
stature, then the Democratic party was
The Executioner's Song, 1979
much the FBI had to do with all that was
stronger.

This is just long-range bom-
going on in New Orleans.

That question
bardment.Every bit of power and
OfWomen andTheirElegance,
is still unanswered.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This is just long-range bom-
going on in New Orleans. That question
bardment.Every bit of power and
OfWomen andTheirElegance,
is still unanswered. There's a very good
1980
influence that the Republicans have in
possibility that Oswald was working as
the media has been directed toward
Pieces andPontifications,1982
an agent, a paid agent, for the FBI—in
reducing the Kennedys over the decades. Ancient Euenings, 1983
COINTELPRO,which I get into in the
Not that the Kennedys haven't con-
Tough Guys Don't Dance, 1984
book.[cOINTELPRO was a secret echelon
tributed to it themselves occasionally. within the FBI, set up in part to place
Harlot's Ghost, 1991
subversive elements within organiza
AR:You reach the conclusion that
tions like the American Communist
Oswald may be viewed in tragic terms because he
party.]It can't be proven but there's every indication that
dared something, he was a protagonist, he mattered. they wouldn't have let someone as useful as Oswald slip
This helps us deal with the death of Kennedy,because
by. Some of the things he did are hard to understand
otherwise, you say, we are reduced to absurdity if it
unless he was a provocateur. For instance, he'd write let-
turns out that a giant was felled by a dwarf. But it seems
ters one day apart to the Communist party and the Social-
a small relief. It seems to me that Oswald has done
ist Workers party. That's like writing a letter to the IRA
18
AT RANDOM

--- PAGE BREAK ---and to the British forces in Ulster on successive mornings,
Oswald invent the dangerouslonerforus?

telling each group you want to join them.

Wouldn't you
NM: Oh, there have always been dangerous loners.

assume you have some sort of game going on with activity
like that?Because Oswald was sophisticated enough
AR:No,I mean as a media figure,the fact wehave this
politically to know the difference.

So there's evidence that
guy on film.

It seems that he is the defining character.

the FBI and the CIA were involved with him,and of course
NM:I think the worst way to look at him is as“the dan-
there's the secondary supposition that the moment the
gerous loner,” because that assumes that no matter what
assassination occurred, they clamped down completely on
happened to him he was going to perform an assassina-
any possibility of ever being implicated because it could
tion or do some incredible dastardly deed, and that's too
have destroyed either organization,or damaged
1it
simple.Hewasn't a man wholived independently of the
irreparably.After all, they were holding explosive secrets.

life around him.He participatedin thelife around him.

Like how many times had the CIA tried to kill Castro?

He was not a passive soul, but an active element.

When
Therewasalottobelost
he got arrested in New
there.

So in that sense,
Orleans for handing out
whether Oswald did it
pamphlets for the Fair
alone or not,the secondary
Play for Cuba Committee,
questions are still immense.

what does he do when he's
But, I seem to have lost my
RORMAN MAILER
in jail but call the local FBI
point of departure.

man to come over?

Now,
no matter how you inter-
AR:Well, we were talking
pret it—-and you can in
about...

several different ways——-no
THT: ARUMES OR'THE NNGHT
NM: Smog.

Part of the
one of those motives is
Wailer
.s
smog is precisely that there
passive.

This is a man who
norman mailerharlot's ghost
are so many questions and
is trying to change the
obsessions about Oswald.Part of the
one of those motives is
Wailer
.s
smog is precisely that there
passive.

This is a man who
norman mailerharlot's ghost
are so many questions and
is trying to change the
obsessions about Oswald.

given, step by step, with a
Oswald is our number one
series of audacious moves.

obsession--unless
O.J.

The idea that he is a man
Simpson is now replacing
who just broods and
him.And if you compare
broods and then goes out
the two, what I find so
and pulls a trigger is not
demoralizing about the
what I believe happened.

Simpson case is that finally
Don't forget he was work-
it's not an interesting or
ing with his rifle, dry-fir-
exciting case other
rthan
ing it for a half year.

My
whetherO.J.isinnocent or
idea of a dangerous loner
guilty.

There's a great deal
is someone who is not
at stake in terms of future race relations, but there's noth-
 connected to anything.

Oswald was poorly connected and
ing at stake in terms of huge political and government
adversely connected to any number of phenomena, politi-
forces engaged in covert internal activities.

cally, but he was a participant, not a cork washed by the
waves.

The intent of Oswald's Tale, you see, is not to solve
AR:I think there’s alot at stake.If O.J.

Simpson is
the case--that'sbeyond mymeans-
-buttodelineatefor
acquittedI think therewill be an explosion of moral
the reader what kind of man he was (that is to say,what
outrage, an uprising that will tear the whole system
kind of character Oswald would be in a novel),and there-
apart, or at least I like to imagine that there will be.

by enable the reader to start thinking about which plots,
NM: I think there's going to be an uprising no matter how
conspiracies, or lone actions Oswald would have been
it turns out.I think it's a desperately unpleasant case, but
capable of, as opposed to all the ones he would never fit.

it doesn't open the large questions that Oswald does.--- PAGE BREAK ---

by enable the reader to start thinking about which plots,
NM: I think there's going to be an uprising no matter how
conspiracies, or lone actions Oswald would have been
it turns out.I think it's a desperately unpleasant case, but
capable of, as opposed to all the ones he would never fit. it doesn't open the large questions that Oswald does. With Oswald we have to ask, To what degree has the
AR:You said earlier that part of the purpose of writing
government been responsible directly or indirectly for the
Oswald'sTalewastobeefupforthesecondvolume of
assassination of the president? Harlot's Ghost.So what's the status there? NM: I've started working on it. Ill let you know. AR: We can talk about Oswald as a person placed some-
[Laughs.]
where in an organization, somewhere in its depths, but
he's also intriguing if we see him as a dangerous loner
who is not connected to these larger forces. Did
Sean Abbott is the associate editor of At Random. SUMMER 1995
19