Dear Bud, / 4/15/dO
Wo teven t moved. Wo have tho fourth adiireoe aice wo've boon hero - street nurabera.
Ity/toubtxe'flle is skimpy. It oonsists of eouo of the rooordy you aentiou and uhat
Gary Stewjcwte for Bonn •'ones' newsletter. If ho had n follow-up I probably didnlt
seo it b:because I don't subscribe*
Hecuuoe of the Jxsroin angle I wrote Les Payne but he did not reply. 1 sup eoe
your reference to tfe..uday is to its work on The Horoin Trail, of wldch Dos was port.
Have you spoken to i nrchetti? People cnisdalng against tha drug traffic?
Da Voajoly night know Oonothing but I've always suspected that the CIA hod him
doubled, ^appears to have boon strongly op.csod to the SDiJCE aido-Une of drugs and
acu&jling. He is pretty far right, too, so any "liberal" would interest bin.
A fow sug cations on your mono if you ever do it over*
3DIJCE is not the i'ronch Secret Service (p*1). It is ono of their intelligence
agencies, exterior.
We don't really know wliat the FBI told Alderson (p. 3). Batter is it what he says
they acid, and I doubt that any agent who wuntod to keep his Job would liave aai.d ttet
"they believed Souotre killed JSK." Ttere are those this night turn off.
vour 8th question is "Bow much of the Souotre/Merts story was passed along to the
War. on Comission? Have you asked tl* Archives? If they have any still classified
records you know it is something other than what you have. If his name was nontionod
they should have a file on him.
I don't recall seeing his nano in any FBI records I'vo read.
Don't to too hopeful because while to moeto eono of tlio prerequisites to could
not have done the job for any spookory and if te free-lanced it one of them offed him
for it. Ss he'd hove expected.
Couple of days ago I cane aocrosn on FBI (1974) list of Held offices by the
abbreviations, which con be confusing. I enclose a copy.
A friedd has a copy of Case for Conspiracy, by liicbual ''ewtou, on the >ing assassi-
nation. Snow anything aLout him? It is a heavily-flawed pet boiler, xetestee w^th a
bit of theorising. He wrote and asked pertaiaidon to quote x nuos-ilp, in t977,diun, he
said, he had it 2/3 done, alao node some pawuiaea te didn't icoep. I'd not asked.
Be volunteered, as I'd forgotten until X Just choctcud my file. Odoly, be gave general
delivery as his address in Nashville, lad. f