Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2010/07/30 : CIA-RDP90-00806R000200970101-1
STAT I


NEW YORK TIMES

ARTICLE APPEARED 13 OCTOBER 1981

ON PAG E A—/


£z~€.LAMen Linked \
T o Overseas Selling i
Of Sensitive Systems


. This article is based on reporting' by
Philip Taubmanand JeffCerth and was ,.
writtenbyMnTaubman. . :

Special YortThne*

WASHINGTON, Oct 12— Two former
agents of the ■ Central Intelligence-
Agency joined forces with a small Calk
forcia electronics company in the 1970*5
in an effort to maxfcet sensitive Ameri-
can technology abroad, according to
current and former company executives
and company documents. .

The former agents, Edwin P. Wilson
and Frank £1 T erpil, were indicted last
year on charges of illegally shipping ex-
plosives to Libya and are now fugitives',
living abroad. ’ >

The California company, the Stanford
Technology Corporation, apparently
provided a legitimate base for some of
Mr. Wilson’s and Mr. Terpil’s question-
able transactions. * v (

For example* they used the name of a
Stanford Technology subsidiary, with-
out the knowledge of company officials,:!
to negotiate a deal to train terrorists in
Libya and to sell military supplies to Idi
Amin, then the leader of Uganda, ac-
cording to Federal investigators and
former associates of Mr. Wilson.

For its part; Stanford Technology,
which had no association with Stanford
University, hoped that the former
agents would use their intelligence con-
nections to generate business and gain
Government approval for the compa-
ny’s exports, company officials saidj
Mr. Wilson and Mr. Terpil had left the
C.I.A. by the time they joined Stanford
^Technology as salesmen, but they said
*they still worked for the agency, and
-company officials say they believed it.

1 The relationship between the com-
pany and the former agents did not, in
•the end, lead to much business for ei-
ther, and Stanford Technology execu-
•tives now say Mr. Wilson and Mr..Terpil
'created more trouble than business. But
'the relationship illustrates a twilight
area of international commerce where
some of the world’s most sensitive and
secret technology is traded purely for
profit, with only limited control by the
..Federal Government

The authorities say they are con-
■ cemed about the apparent inability of .
the Government to monitor and prevent
» the unauthorized export of American.


military technology and to control the
activities of its former agents. These
issues are now being investigated by th "
House Select Committee on Intelli-


gence.

Stanford Technology had offices in
Sunnyvale, Calif., in the heart of the Sili-
con Valley, where some of the nation’s
most sophisticated electronic and com-
puter hardware is designed and manu-
factured. Earlier this year, as part of a
reorganization, the company became a
subsidiary of Analog Devices, a large
electronics manufacturer. There is no
evidence that Analog Devices knew of
“Mr. Wilson’s and Mr. TerpU’s associa-
tion with Stanford Technology.

Before the two agents became affili-
ated with Stanford Technology the com-
pany had already engaged in transac-
tions that raised foreign policy and ex-
port questions. '

In 1975, Stanford Technology sold Iran
a sophisticated electronic surveillance
system that Shah Mohammed Riza
Pahlevi planned to use to spy on the
communications of his top military
commanders, according to former em-
ployees of the company. American intel-
ligence officials later said the equip-
ment should not have been approved for
export because of its advanced technolo-
gy.

The principal owner of Stanford Tech-/
nology, an Iranian businessman, oper-
ated a company in Teheran that pro-
vided Iranian Government officials with
instructions about how they could dis-
guise sophisticated electronic equip-
ment like the surveillance system sold
by Stanford Technology and avoid ex-
port licensing problems in the United
States by assembling the systems out-
side America. The owner declined to be
interviewed.

Radar Deal Sabotaged

Also in 1975, Stanford Technology put
together a proposal to bid for a Turkish
contract for an advanced radar warning
system. At that time American arms
sales to Turkey were banned because
the Turks had invaded Cyprus, using
United States-supplied military equip-
ment in violation of a pact on how those
arms were to be used, A company engi-
neer who worked on the Turkish pro-
posal said that, in light of the ban, he
sabotaged the deal by watering down
the proposal so it would be unacceptable
to the Turks.

After Mr. Wilson and Mr. Terpil be-
came affiliated with Stanford Tech-
nology in 1976, they arranged for Stan-
ford Technology’s parent corporation in
Switzerland to construct a building to
house computers in Libya. The con-


I — 17

port of sensitive electronic warfare
equipment from Stanford Technology to
Egypt, according to a former associate
of Mr. Wilson. He also arranged for the
Iranian owner of StanfordTedmology to
meet with the same C.f.A. official, ac-
cording to a former company employee.
The deal was never struct
• Some of Mr. Wilson’s and Mr. Terpil’s
transactions involving Stanford Tech-
nology were done without the knowledge
of company officials. For example, they
used the marketing subsidiary of Stan-
ford Technology, Intercontinental Tech-
nology Inc., to conclude their deal to
train terrorists in Libya, according to
Federal investigators, and they eventu-
ally drew up the contract on the affili-
ate's stationery.

Richard T. Ashcroft, president of In.
ternational Imaging Systems and head
of Stanford Technology before the name
‘ change, minimized the involvement of
Mr. Wilson and Mr. Terpil in the compa-
ny’s affaire. "Stanford Technology
never obtained a contract through Wil-
son," he said in an interview.

Mr. Ashcroft acknowledged that Mr.
Terpil had generated business for Stan!
ford Technology. »' ■ < . ■

Subsidiary’s Involvement Denied

L John N. Adams, a vice president of In-
ternational Imaging; said in an inter-
. view that the American&ased subsidi-
ary of his company was not involved in
deals with Mr. Wilson and Mr. Terpil
that were consummated and that other
questionable transactions were handled
by Stanford Technology’s parent com-
pany in Switzerland, the Stanford Tech-
nology Corporation, S.A."-
A Federal investigation of Mr. Wilson
and Mr. Terpil; which includes inquiries
into possible bribery of Government of-
ficials, the use of Army Special Forces
veterans to train terrorists in Libya and
the possible involvement of Mr. Wilson
in the attempted assassination of a.
Libyan student in Colorado last year,
has hot focused on the Stanford Tech!
nology connection, according to Justice
Department officials.

1 Senior officials in the Reagan Admin-
istration, including Secretary of De-
fense Caspar W. Weinberger, say they
are increasingly concerned that the
i transfer of technology abroad may un-
I dermine American superiority in mili-


ComusmEp ’


Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2010/07/30 : CIA-RDP90-00806R000200970101-1
