4/13/70 
Mr, Rlrron Alexendroff, ?r98ideBt 
Columbia College 
640 R, Lake Shore Drive 
Chicago, 111. 30611 
Dear Hr. Alexandra ff. 
Thank you for your letter of April 15. 
With the considerable attention the recent activities of Sherman 
Skolnick, the subject of my le-tor of April 8, received in the electronic and 
printed nreea, 1 assumed you would know of them. In some papers of wuicli I have 
clippings, there was flout-page, banner-headline attention. 
a® nay or raay not have involved your college and his clasa in a suit, 
spurious In cnoracter and irresponsible beyond my capacity to describe, filed in 
federal court. u<* most certainly did in a broadcast on villaV, Skokie, about 3/HO/ 
* regret I cannot supply you with a tape of this broadcast beceuue the station 
he a not responded to my litters. I: you get a tap# and can suply m with a dub, 
1 would appreciate it. 
In both esses and in other ways Mr. Skolnick plagiarized my materials, 
from e book, n0 knar whot he woo doing, knew this was from a book, obtained then 
by subterfuge. 
“y concern ia for the dsmwge don9 me by ^hia plagiarism and more, 
for the enormous damage done the cause of truth end the search for it by this 
publicity-seeking fraud he Lss pulled, ff the too-mrny evil things done in fete 
field by self-seekers, I think none can begin to cooper® with the evil of this 
one. It Is so bad, so permeated by the moat egregious error, so fantastically 
iS© per at ad from reality, I really cannot begin to describe It, to you in. forms 
thet- Can efiequately reflect it. The potential for barm remaining in this so- 
called, "suit" Is also very serious and very greet, especially if thero is the 
opportunity for official response to it end that is followed by the kind of soversa 
publicity that should be anticinoted. From this Skolnick may emerge in the simulated 
role of martyr, but thoaa doing serious work sn thet work will ba irreparably 
fsmsged. If he were a paid agent of corrupt government, he could not better have 
performed in such capacity. 
Sincerely, 
Harold Waist-ergt thoaa doing serious work sn thet work will ba irreparably 
fsmsged. If he were a paid agent of corrupt government, he could not better have 
performed in such capacity. 
Sincerely, 
Harold Waist-erg

--- PAGE BREAK ---

COLUMBIA COLLEGE 
FOUNDED 18M • THE COMMUNICATION ARTS 
540 NORTH LAKE SHORE DRIVE • CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 60611 • PHONE 467-0300 
OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT 
April 15, 1970 
Mr. Harold Weisberg 
Coq d'Or Press 
Route 8 
Frederick, Md. 21701 
Dear Mr. Weisberg: 
Reference is made to your letter of April 8, 1970. I am perplexed by the 
charge of your letter which states that some "open theft" of your materials 
has taken place and that this institution is culpable or involved. 
Apart from this your letter does not mention the subject of the theft. What 
specifically purports to have been stolen? In short, what is this matter 
all about? I would appreciate your illumination. 
Sincerely, 
MA/ep