Dear Js, 3/9/73 
If it In easy to be suspicious where the is no cause for it, it is not easy not to 
be suspicious about commercial representation of commercial interest in assassination 
books* Thus this inquiry to see if several names mean anything to you* They don t to me* 
Jim Lesar told me of a man in New fork who was interested in all assassination books* 
I did nothing* Jim then gave me the man&s name, office and home phones and addresses and 
told me the man wanted me to call collect.

I dia, yesterday.

First I phoned his office* 
Jim having said the morning was better for that, I call in the morning* They didn t know 
if he'd be in.

He was at home and accepted the call* 
We talked close to a half hour.

I felt I’d best let it be known what kind of nut I 
am and what the problems are, but he was not in any way deterred.

He did not pry and was 
content with generalities.

It may interest you to know that he says Lane and Freed are in LA working on a 
movie script, allegedly non-fiction.

He has been trying without sucess to reach them.

He says of the Trmnbo script that it is fiction and he does not know with whom, if anyone, 
Trumbo is working.

His chief interests seem to involve audiou-visuals, including movies.

He finally said he thought the best thing might be for him to come here.

Daniel 
having no aversions to lion, he got an invitation and the suggestion that he permit time 
for several non-assassination properties that have commercial prospect.

As I think you know, I deal openly with everyone, including those I may not trust.

This way 1 manage to aojd reflecting distrust, (in my last letter to Dione I pointed 
out, I think correctly, that she had no idea what conclusions I had reached.

She had 
said I jumped to many wrong ones.

I think I am right in this, that neither she nor anyone 
to whom she talked could have had a reasonable idea.) Bexides, some time there is no choice.She had 
said I jumped to many wrong ones.

I think I am right in this, that neither she nor anyone 
to whom she talked could have had a reasonable idea.) Bexides, some time there is no choice.

What interested me is that this man seemed to have no real interest in what did have 
good commercial prospect.

He listened but that is all.

More provocative than interesting.

Most go for So, I thought I'd give him some bait.

I have turned over to the wife of 
a friend at Bantam what they think will maice a movie and a beautiful book.

Bantam i3 a 
fairly well-known outfit, so I told this guy he could get an appriisal of my judgement 
in such matters by Bailing the Bantam friend, whose name and phone I gave.

Several hours 
later he had not done it, which need mean nothing, but it surely doesn’t reflect excitement.

He might want a better estimate of me that he deduced from WHITEWASH.

His phone could be his office.

I heard another phone ringing and several times 
he stopped to answer it.

As it now stands, he will ran me in about 10 days to make an appointment for coming 
here, is not pressed for money because rather than drive he'll fly and then rent a 
car.

The drive is 4-5 hours and the drive in his own car will cost less than £kx£ 
the rental car at the airport, mush less than the one-way fare.

Of course, aside from 
waiting and stacking time and baggage checking, if any, and the time to get and return 
the car, ana getting to the airport, he can save perhaps two hours each way.

In reality 
he’ll save little time flying.

That works for donwtown D.C.

only.

I hardly pays to use 
the pane to downtown Baltimore from downtown NYV with the Metroliner.

There can always be the dedicated guy.

Odd I haven^t met one in publishing or among 
agents.

When I lost my first the next six wouldn t even talk.

When the Sat.

Eve.

Post 
sent ihe to one with a deal set, that one wouldn't even talk to me.

I lost my first by 
mentioning the subject, etcetcetcetc..So, this one could be the exception.Post 
sent ihe to one with a deal set, that one wouldn't even talk to me. I lost my first by 
mentioning the subject, etcetcetcetc..So, this one could be the exception. Neither this man, Phil Gauldston, 3 Robbins Lane, Great Neck, L.I., nor his company, 
Rollins & Jaffa, 13 W 57» is in LMP. Most but not all agents are. Sp, this could mean 
their primary interest is not books. It could also mean more. My Bantam friend* never heard 
of either. Jim heard of Gauldston through Bud. does not know how they and Bud got together. If they approached Bud, it is not encouraging. In time, I'll know. G has no special pub- 
lishers in mind. However, if he is for real about visuals, and if he is for real and not 
for spooking, things can be possible.