The wives of "enemies of the people" did not escape repressions either -
E.M. Kondiain was arrested 10 days after the death of her husband and
sentenced by the decision of the "troika" special meeting) to 8 years in the
camps, the same term was given to O.P. Barchenko on 23 July 1938 (she was
serving in Akmola camp of wives of traitors of the motherland).
About the closest associate of Barchenko Y.V. Strutinskaya we know only
that in 1937 she lived somewhere near Maykop - information that was
reported to the investigation by A.A. Kondiain, who may have been in
correspondence with Strutinskaya.
Two years before his arrest, according to the story of E.M. Kondiain,
Barchenko fell seriously ill - a phlegmon had formed on his leg, and doctors
strongly advised him to go to hospital. Otherwise, they said, you can die, but
Barchenko objected to this: "I will die when I will no longer be needed for
their work," and began to treat himself, as he had done before, alcohol
compresses. Soon the dangerous disease receded, Barchenko's words turned
out to be prophetic - in 1937, he, and together him and thousands of other
scientists, were unnecessary to the Soviet, or rather, Stalinist science. It was
the Kremlin master who eventually passed a death sentence on Shambhala,
though not the Shambhala that Buddhist legends tell about and that Barchenko
was searching for, but its complete antipode - the anti-Shambhala created by
Soviet propaganda.
The death of the scientist inevitably entailed the loss of everything he had
created in the 1920s and 1930s. As I was informed in 1999 in the Central
Archive of the Federal Security Service of the Russian Federation, personal
documents, various correspondence and a monograph (thesis) seized during
the arrest of A.V. Barchenko
"Introduction to the Methodology of Experimental Effects of the Volumetric
Energy Field" (and with them probably other works including a treatise on the
ancient science "Dunhor" and a book of memoirs "In Search of the Lost
Truth") were destroyed in 1939.
As A.G. Kondiain (A.A. Kondiain's daughter-in-law, already mentioned
by us) reports, "all his (i.e., A.A. Kondiain's) belongings were confiscated,
and his study room, which remained sealed for a long time, was then occupied
by strangers. The rest of the flat, where his mother, sisters, and then Oleg
Alexandrovich (Kondiain's son) and his brother lived, was in 1942.ich remained sealed for a long time, was then occupied
by strangers. The rest of the flat, where his mother, sisters, and then Oleg
Alexandrovich (Kondiain's son) and his brother lived, was in 1942.

--- PAGE BREAK ---for a long time, was then occupied
by strangers. The rest of the flat, where his mother, sisters, and then Oleg
Alexandrovich (Kondiain's son) and his brother lived, was in 1942.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

was completely destroyed by a direct hit from a long-range shell, So perished
also those things that remained confiscated"[(349)(])".
It is true that the cases cited above involve the loss of personal
things and archives. But there is still official documentation, settled in state
(departmental) archives, for example, the materials of Barchenko's Viemov
laboratory. These materials could shed light on Barchenko's neuroenergetic
research, but their traces have not been found so far.
And yet we know something about these studies. As a prisoner in cell 76
of Lefortovo prison, Barchenko wrote a letter to the People's Commissar of
Internal Affairs N.I. Yezhov on 24 December 1937 - immediately after the end
of the investigation. In it, he tried to draw the attention of one of the most
odious Soviet leaders to the exceptional value of his scientific work:
"... in my time I succeeded in discovering a physical phenomenon not
accounted for, not described by modern science. To the development of this
discovery I had been devoting most of my life interests and time since the
beginning of the revolution. At the time of my arrest I was completing the
organisation of a laboratory at the All-Union Institute of Experimental
Medicine with the aim of deepening the practical verification of my scientific
constructions, which had already been fundamentally experimentally
successful in 1935, in my former laboratory at the MPEI, in my home works.
From the materials taken during my arrest, it is known that for certain reasons,
about two years before my arrest, I was forced to destroy some of the
scientific material, including drawings highlighting the ways of practical
application of my discovery". And further Barchenko informs Yezhov: "... by
the time of my arrest I had fully theoretically and to a large extent
experimentally worked out to a degree enabling immediate collective
experimental verification, the following provisions:
1) as a result of the study of the question of energy factors of the structure
of vital matter, specific ways of energy regulation of life activity of protozoa,
including bacteria, have been discovered. The development of these pathways
can arm modern science with an extremely powerful weapon both in the line
of therapy and in the line of defence against biological methods of warfare;n discovered. The development of these pathways
can arm modern science with an extremely powerful weapon both in the line
of therapy and in the line of defence against biological methods of warfare;

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2) as a result of elaboration of the same question... the ways of energy
regulation of hyperplasia (cell overgrowth), not considered in modern science
in the fight against malignant tumours, were discovered. As a result of parallel
elaboration of the question about factors of increased resistance of vital
substance, a specific mathematical
projection-
geometric
mechanism, providing the selection of the most
favourable architectural and building constructions, including allowing to find
the key to antiseismic buildings;
3)
not by virtue of mystical miraculousness, but by virtue of the fact that
vibrational-vortex (quantum-wave process) and..., <skip of text> the
unaccounted features of which are revealed by my discovery, are the universal
root of all cases of speciation of   energy without exception.   Practical
application   discoveries   in the
principle is universal."[350]
What is behind this suicide confession of the scientist, what universal
"discovery" he tried to save for mankind - we can only speculate. The mystery
of Dr Barchenko remains unsolved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---is behind this suicide confession of the scientist, what universal
"discovery" he tried to save for mankind - we can only speculate. The mystery
of Dr Barchenko remains unsolved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I
Nosleword
Once again on Ancient Science and Modern Science
nstead of putting an end to this book, I ask myself once again who Dr
Barchenko was - an innovative and visionary scientist whose quest for
new ways of doing science, as a
no matter how we treat them today, were interrupted by the Great Terror? Or
maybe B.C. Brachev, the author of the book "Freemasons and Power in
Russia" (Moscow, 2003), is right, who tends to see him as a pseudo-scientist
and a "pseudo-scientist".
"(351)([)(351)(]) I find it hard to agree with this assessment, however. Adventurism
in the popular sense of the word implies unprincipled actions for the sake of
achieving any profit, which can hardly be blamed on Barchenko. Many facts
of his biography indicate just the opposite - his exceptional integrity. Thus, in
a letter Barchenko G.Ts. Tsybikov, written in early 1927, we read:
"...for 10 years [I] did not hesitate in my speeches to government and
party leaders to openly emphasise my fundamental divergence from party
ideology and tactics on a number of the most fundamental issues,  example on
religion, the family, education, the basic tactical point of view
parties whether or  the ends justify the means."[(352)(]).
Barchenko, it seems to me, belonged to the type of people who are usually
called obsessed. Such people have always existed everywhere, including in
Soviet Russia, especially in the 1920s - the "heroic twenties". Obsessed with
his Idea (with a capital letter!), he strove with all his might to realise it - to
return to mankind the lost true knowledge. (The title of his memoirs - "In
Search of Lost Truth" - also speaks of this.) One can agree with B.C. Brachev
that Barchenko's behaviour in the late 1930s, when he insistently sought
meetings with Voroshilov and Stalin, was notable for its apparent inadequacy,
but this is how obsessed people behave - inadequately. Such a man was
Giordano Bruno, Barchenko's favourite hero. Following his example,
Barchenko remained to the end.for its apparent inadequacy,
but this is how obsessed people behave - inadequately. Such a man was
Giordano Bruno, Barchenko's favourite hero. Following his example,
Barchenko remained to the end.

--- PAGE BREAK ---adequacy,
but this is how obsessed people behave - inadequately. Such a man was
Giordano Bruno, Barchenko's favourite hero. Following his example,
Barchenko remained to the end.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

faithful to his principles and his Idea, which led him to the Bolshevik Calvary.
Another question is how to treat Barchenko-scientist and his very
unorthodox
research?
B.C.
Brachev
notes
Barchenko's
insufficient
professional training ("an undergraduate medical student"), but this fact alone
does not tell us anything. It is worth remembering the genius K.E.
Tsiolkovsky, who was an absolute self-taught, and by occupation only a
school teacher, which did not prevent him from creating the world-famous
"Study of world spaces by reactive devices". Barchenko, as we know, also
owns an original work ("Introduction to the Methodology of Experimental
Effects of Volumetric Energy Field"). However, since it is not preserved (or
preserved, but inaccessible to us), we cannot give it an objective assessment.
Nevertheless, we can make some general conclusions, although far from final,
about the nature and methods of Barchenko's work.
First of all, attention is drawn to the unusually wide range of his research,
covering "all fields of science and arts" (in the words of E.M. Kondiain):
astronomy, chemistry, physics, medicine, biology, botany, geology,
architecture, music theory, etc. Such scale is explained by the specificity of
the problem, on which Barchenko worked together with the mathematician
and astronomer A.A. Kondiain - "to confirm with the achievements of modern
science the provisions and universal laws of ancient science". As far as we
can judge, Barchenko and Kondiain wanted to link together all natural and
socio-historical processes on Earth, which have a cyclical nature, with
planetary "categories" and solar activity ("rhythms   of the Sun"),   using
for   this   a certain   esoteric
"diagram of correspondences" (universal scheme). This work in many
respects echoed the work of A.L. Chizhevsky, who laid the fundamental
foundations of heliobiology in the same years. We also know about
Barchenko's experimental research in the field of biophysics (where he used
the same RS to process the obtained results) and parapsychology.
How valuable from the point of view of today's science are all these
studies? It is not easy to answer this question, because we do not know with
certainty what the universal scheme representedogy.
How valuable from the point of view of today's science are all these
studies? It is not easy to answer this question, because we do not know with
certainty what the universal scheme represented

--- PAGE BREAK ---om the point of view of today's science are all these
studies? It is not easy to answer this question, because we do not know with
certainty what the universal scheme represented

--- PAGE BREAK ---

- archaeometer of St. Ives d'Alveydre, its modification or something else - and
how Barchenko and Kondiain worked with it. In any case, such work,
assuming a priori the existence of some "universal unified law" ("world
universal regularity", absolute Truth) underlying the universe, seems at first
glance completely unthinkable within the framework of modern strictly
positive (analytical) science. That is why Barchenko had a conflict with the
leadership of the scientific department of Glavnauka, who opposed his
"synthetic" method and declared their intention to fight against "axiomatics in
all its forms". Barchenko, as evidenced by his first letter to Tsybikov, tried to
defend his views, to prove, referring to the classical formulations of Lenin and
Engels, that Ancient Science is deeply materialistic and its basic provisions do
not contradict the Marxist theory (the doctrine of matter). Thus, for example,
he argued that Marxism essentially recognises the existence of a "world
universal regularity" (in the form of the laws of nature) and actually leads to
the mastery of it by mankind. Or that the "sacred numbering" of universal
science fully fulfils one of Lenin's basic demands - to prevent the separation
of   physical   phenomena   from the   mathematical   expressing them
formulae.[(353)(])
At the same time, we know from E.M. Kondiain's report that RS worked
in practice, allowing Barchenko and Kondiain to successfully process both
purely statistical data and laboratory material: "the picture turned out to be
slender". Was it really so? And is the occult science of numbers - the theory
of numerical emanation (Kabbalistic or any other) applicable in modern
scientific cognition at all? The majority of scientists will most likely answer
this question negatively, but probably there will be those who think otherwise.
Speaking about RS, one cannot but ask another question - whether the
knowledge of the ancients was really so "huge and powerful", as Barchenko
believed and as some of his current followers, those who believe in the
existence of the northern ancestral homeland of mankind (Sperborea) and try
to confirm with modern scientific data the universal laws of the Ancient One,
claim
science (e.g., the doctrine of the "sevenfold structure of the universe"[354])?and of mankind (Sperborea) and try
to confirm with modern scientific data the universal laws of the Ancient One,
claim
science (e.g., the doctrine of the "sevenfold structure of the universe"[354])?

--- PAGE BREAK ---borea) and try
to confirm with modern scientific data the universal laws of the Ancient One,
claim
science (e.g., the doctrine of the "sevenfold structure of the universe"[354])?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In recent decades - in Russia and in the West - there have appeared many
interesting publications devoted to the most mysterious monuments of ancient
and ancient history. Their authors make attempts to decipher the information
(astral, geometrical, mathematical, etc.) embedded in these monuments. Thus,
it was possible to establish that in the pyramid of Cheops (the Great Pyramid)
various geometrical symbols including proportions are encoded
"golden section"; the structure of its angles, edges and faces, according to
A.V. and A.A. Zinovievs, "forms an integral esoteric system, conjugated with
the results of astronomical observations."[(355)(]) Te
The same scientists, unfamiliar with U.S. Barchenko, say, practically his own
In other words, about the "universal logical and mathematical law", presented
in its entirety in the amazing creation of ancient Egyptian architect-scientists
unknown to us.
Indeed, many extant ancient monuments (megalithic observatories-
sanctuaries of Stonehenge and Arkaim, Egyptian and Indian pyramids,
Mesopotamian ziggurats, ancient temples and other buildings, various devices
for calculating time, such as lunar-solar calendars, etc.) testify to a very high
level of knowledge of our distant ancestors. Thus, the research of English
palaeoastronomer Alexander Tom showed that in the late Neolithic - early
Bronze Age the North-West of Europe was covered by a whole network of
megalithic observatories for observations of both the Sun and the Moon. It is
now generally recognised that Upper Palaeolithic man (15 and more thousand
years ago) used a developed calendar system (lunar and lunar calendar
system).
solar calendar).[(356)(]) At the same time, the ancients also had extensive
information about correlative links between planetary configurations (solar
activity) and biophysical processes on earth. B.M. Vladimirsky and L.D.
Kislovsky in their work
"Archaeoastronomy   and   history   culture"   even   admit,   that the
"the empirical knowledge of our ancestors on the problem of cosmic
influences on the biosphere was probably broader and deeper than ours."
[357]
But especially deep was the knowledge of the ancients in the field of
invisible "subtle world" connected with human consciousness and psyche.
An example of    such    knowledge    can    serve as an example.ly deep was the knowledge of the ancients in the field of
invisible "subtle world" connected with human consciousness and psyche.
An example of    such    knowledge    can    serve as an example.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ledge of the ancients in the field of
invisible "subtle world" connected with human consciousness and psyche.
An example of    such    knowledge    can    serve as an example.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Ancient Indian yoga is a "science of the spirit" containing information about
the human being and his integral psychoenergetic system. Those who have
mastered this discipline perfectly acquire paranormal - "superhuman" (from
the point of view of an ordinary person) abilities, so-called "siddhis". With the
help of yoga, by intuitive and contemplative method, Indian forest hermits-
sages ("rishis") were able to penetrate beyond the visible, substantive shell of
things and cognise supersensible, invisible phenomena and
"to create - "synthesise" - a harmonious and holistic picture of the world,
where everything is connected with everything - atom and galaxy, man and
universe. This higher, cosmic vision of the Unified World was beautifully
expressed by them in philosophical and religious texts
"The Upanishads.
Indian yoga and similar spiritual practices of other peoples[(358)(]) which,
however, cannot be reduced only to psychotechniques in the narrow sense of
the word) have a very ancient origin.
Each represents a centuries-old tradition of passing on knowledge
- This is the case in the ancient world. Such closedness, hermetic nature of
knowledge in general is characteristic of the ancient world. Thus, in Egypt,
one  acquire any knowledge only in special temple schools under the guidance
of priests. Such schools were called "houses of life" ("per ankh").
Barchenko's "house of Egyptian science and philosophy". Here sacred texts
were read and copied, collections of papyri of various contents were kept and
various sciences and arts - medicine, astronomy, mathematics, architecture,
etc. - were taught. It was also the place where students were given the
innermost esoteric knowledge.
Interestingly, speaking of the contemplative-synthetic Ancient Science,
Barchenko associates it not only with the Kalachakra, but also with the
"Yoga as a religious-philosophical doctrine and psycho-technique developed
in the Indian subcontinent during the Vedic period (conventionally - the Vedic
period). This viewpoint is at odds with modern science, which believes that
yoga as a religious-philosophical doctrine and psychotechnique was formed
on the Indian subcontinent during the Vedic period (conventionally, in the 1st
millennium B.C.). (It is believed that yogic psychotechnique owes its
emergence to the religious experience of the legendary Vedas mentioned
above.ring the Vedic period (conventionally, in the 1st
millennium B.C.). (It is believed that yogic psychotechnique owes its
emergence to the religious experience of the legendary Vedas mentioned
above.

--- PAGE BREAK ---d (conventionally, in the 1st
millennium B.C.). (It is believed that yogic psychotechnique owes its
emergence to the religious experience of the legendary Vedas mentioned
above.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

sages-rishis). Barchenko was undoubtedly sympathetic to the Hindu idea of
"Brahman" as a cosmic primordial, impersonal absolute underlying the world,
In his own interpretation it is
"universal world law," in other words, God, Like Giordano   Bruno,
Barchenko   understood   God   most likely   most likely   as a
"the innermost essence of the cosmos", in the words of the philosopher I.I.
Lapshin. And therefore, "the comprehension of this Divine beginning for the
wise man is possible only through scientific thought, scientific creativity,
accompanied by the greatest enthusiasm,"[(359)(])
The emergence of perfect knowledge (based on the synthesis of science
and religion)   Barchenko,   like   and   other   occultists,   associated
with the
"pre-flood" civilisation, which he calls "prehistoric culture". Despite its
obvious "unscientificness", the theory of the "first humanity" (D.S.
Merezhkovsky's term) or a pracivilisation that hypothetically existed on Earth
10-12 thousand years B.C. is becoming popular again in our time. To this
theory researchers, as a rule, resort when faced with facts inexplicable from
the point of view of modern science and technology (for example, the
construction of the Egyptian pyramids). How justified, however, are their
references to "pracivilisation"?
In principle, it is quite acceptable to speak about the existence in the
deepest antiquity of a certain syncretic pra-culture, which included religion,
philosophy, art and science, and about its subsequent differentiation, division
into separate parts. The famous French ethnographer and psychologist L.
Lévy-Bruhl believes that primitive man possessed "mystical" and "pralogical"
thinking, subject to the "law of partisanship" (belonging between beings and
objects), governing associations and connections in his consciousness. "For
primitive thinking there is only one world," he writes. - 'All reality is mystical,
as is all action; consequently, mystical is also every
perception".[360(]) At the same time, the orientalist historian I.M. Diakonov
notes that the perception of the world by ancient man, who still lived in an
undivided unity with nature, "was in many senses more emotional than ours
(although this emotionality was not realised as something separate from
cognition)". In antiquity, when the rational means   of cognition   were
little   developed,   argues   he,ional than ours
(although this emotionality was not realised as something separate from
cognition)". In antiquity, when the rational means   of cognition   were
little   developed,   argues   he,

--- PAGE BREAK ---though this emotionality was not realised as something separate from
cognition)". In antiquity, when the rational means   of cognition   were
little   developed,   argues   he,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The worldview had "an emotional and metaphorical character, was very
closely connected with myth, with ritual, with cult...". The study of the
ornamentation of Neolithic and early Chalcolithic (8-3 millennia BC) pottery
also allows us to notice that ancient man had an unusually developed sense of
rhythm: "In Palaeolithic images we hardly feel rhythm. It appears only in
Our materialistic science usually portrays man of that remote epoch as a very
primitive and crude creature, completely subordinated to the power of natural
elements. This image, however, seems very distorted. In any case, your
ancestors did not have environmental problems because they were in much
better harmony with nature than we, its "conquerors". According to the
opinion of   St. Petersburg   religious scholar   E.A.   Torchivov,   archaic
The "savage" - by his mental organisation was not coarser, but much finer
and more sensitive than the modern civilised man, which made him capable of
transpersonal experiences, which are the basis of any religious experience.
"Archaic man, due to the significantly greater openness of the uncreated
realms, not yet burdened with a thick layer of civilisational forms, habits and
stereotypes and not yet experiencing such pressure from the side of creation,
its manifestation (manifestation of the uncreated. - A. A.), including in the
form of   transpersonal   experiences,   were   significantly   more
Frequent, and common enough."[362].
Prehistory - the time BEFORE the birth of the first civilisations in
Mesopotamia, Elam, Egypt and India - is one of the darkest periods in the
history of mankind, containing many riddles and mysteries. First of all, it is
not clear how there was a "leap" from the Stone Age to the Metal Age, from
primitive society to class society, from savagery to civilisation - what
scientists call the "Neolithic Revolution". We do not know, for example, how
hieroglyphic writing appeared in Egypt - there is a completely inexplicable
gap between it and the rock paintings in the Nile Valley. The link between the
times - BEFORE and AFTER - seems to be severed. The psyche, spiritual and
creative world of the man of "prakultura" is equally mysterious to us,
"era   BEFORE"   (its   conventional   boundaries   -   between   10th
and   3rdems to be severed. The psyche, spiritual and
creative world of the man of "prakultura" is equally mysterious to us,
"era   BEFORE"   (its   conventional   boundaries   -   between   10th
and   3rd

--- PAGE BREAK ---he psyche, spiritual and
creative world of the man of "prakultura" is equally mysterious to us,
"era   BEFORE"   (its   conventional   boundaries   -   between   10th
and   3rd

--- PAGE BREAK ---

millennia BC). What was the hypothetical Ancient Science (using the term of
d'Alveydra and Barchenko)? And where, at what point on earth did it
originate - in ancient Egypt (as occultists believe), in India or somewhere
else? In his time (1970s), the famous researcher A.M. Kondratov put forward
a hypothesis, according to which in the Indian Ocean between Sri Lanka and
Madagascar in ancient times there was a huge island-mainland Lemuria. It
was here, on Lemuria, according to Kondratov, that the writing system that
gave rise to the most ancient Oriental scripts was formed, the oldest
civilisation on our planet was formed - the ancestral home of the civilisations
of Elam, Dvurechia and Hindustan; here, perhaps, was the "cradle" of
Europoid Melanchroes and "man of reason" (homo sapiens), the formation of
the most ancient humans, as well as anthropoids, primates and monkeys, and
the doctrine of the "homo sapiens" was born.
Tantra and yoga.[(363)(])
And here is how the already mentioned A.V. and A.A. Zinovievs, who to
a great extent share the views of occult science, imagine pracivilisation: "... it
is the most ancient society, which left no written monuments, but whose life
and activity led to the emergence of astral knowledge on different continents.
The proto-civilisation transmitted (verbally and practically, through cult
formulas and the language of mythology, sacred signs, alphabets,
chronologies, through the architectonics of the Great Stupas and Pyramids) its
experience and its achievements, which allowed new peoples to rise to higher
stages of culture and, having experienced ups and downs, to leave their
indelible trace in history. Protocivilisation laid the foundation of historical
time, created an invisible,    but    solid    foundation    of dynamic
development.
of humanity."[(364)(])
This knowledge, inherited by the new (post-Flood) humanity, however,
was largely lost in the course of the progressive ("civilisational") development
of society, when the dominant way of cognition of the world becomes the
logical-discursive method, which is the basis of modern "analytical-
experimental" science. It is well known about the destruction of a huge
number of ancient monuments due to various cataclysms - natural (geological)
and social. Speaking about the latter, one cannotexperimental" science. It is well known about the destruction of a huge
number of ancient monuments due to various cataclysms - natural (geological)
and social. Speaking about the latter, one cannot

--- PAGE BREAK ---e. It is well known about the destruction of a huge
number of ancient monuments due to various cataclysms - natural (geological)
and social. Speaking about the latter, one cannot

--- PAGE BREAK ---

do not recall the loss of hundreds of thousands (!) of Egyptian and Greek
papyri as a result of the fire of the Alexandria library and the sacking of the
sanctuary of Serapis, the almost complete destruction of the monuments of the
Mayan culture by the Spanish Inquisition, or the destruction of the "stone
monuments" of pre-Christian Russia, for example   on   Solovetsky   islands
(so   called   "Babylons",
"labyrinths" and "pyramids"). As for the few extant mysterious structures,
such as the Egyptian pyramids and the Great Sphinx, the megalithic
observatories
of
Stonehenge
and
Arkaim,
they
remain
largely
incomprehensible   to   us,   because   we   do not   have   the key   to
them.
"decoding" - reading the original information.
The theory of pracivilisation allows us to take a new look at ancient
legends and myths, which seem to modern people to be nothing more than
beautiful fairy tales - about the "golden age", about the Great Flood that
destroyed the "first mankind", about sunken islands - continents - Atlantis and
Lemuria, as well as about "happy countries"
- about Hyperborea and Shambhala. However, let us not forget that such a
theory is still no more than a hypothesis.
Let us now turn to Barchenko's parapsychological research. His
experiments on the transfer of mice at close and distant distances and the
examination of "sensitives" - people with paranormal abilities (Lopar "emers"
and shamans) - have not lost their relevance today. Although, again, we can
only judge about them in absentia, from third-party reports. It is in
parapsychology, which Western science began to study only in the 19th
century, that we encounter the "forbidden"
The knowledge of the ancients, stumping modern science.[365] In this
connection, one cannot fail to mention the amazing experiments of a group of
American psychologists-transpersonalists led by S. Grof, which   allow   a
glimpse   into   the inner   world   of the "archaic
human beings."[(366)(]) During "transpersonal experiences" during so-called
psychedelic or "LSD sessions," Grof's patients acquired extrasensory
perceptual abilities (telepathy, clairvoyance, clairaudience, clairaudience,
predicting the future, leaving the body, seeing at a distance, etc.), including
experiencing mystical
"expansion of   consciousness"   -   state,   at   which   consciousnessudience, clairaudience,
predicting the future, leaving the body, seeing at a distance, etc.), including
experiencing mystical
"expansion of   consciousness"   -   state,   at   which   consciousness

--- PAGE BREAK ---ce,
predicting the future, leaving the body, seeing at a distance, etc.), including
experiencing mystical
"expansion of   consciousness"   -   state,   at   which   consciousness

--- PAGE BREAK ---

expands beyond the Ego and transcends the boundaries of time and space. As
a result, the subjects gained access - through psychic channels - to new
information about various aspects of the material world, something that,
according to the scientist, "violates the most fundamental positions and
principles of modern mechanistic - Newtonian-Cartesian - science". (Note in
passing that S. Grof singles out in a separate category "the experience of
meetings with superhuman spiritual entities", from whom a person usually
receives "messages, information and explanations through various psychic
channels", which, perhaps, gives us a clue to the phenomenon of theosophical
"mahatmas" - "spiritual guides from a higher plane of consciousness").
The evidence from the study of altered states of consciousness, according
to Grof, points to "an urgent need for a fundamental rethinking of
fundamental concepts about human nature and the nature of reality". At the
same time, they encourage us to turn to the knowledge and experience of "the
great ancient or Eastern spiritual traditions," such as various forms of yoga,
Kashmiri Shivaism, Tibetan Vajrayana, Zen Buddhism, Taoism, Sufism,
Kabbalah or alchemy. "The wealth of profound knowledge about the human
soul and consciousness accumulated in these systems over millennia has not
been adequately recognised in Western sciences, nor has the
was perceived by it and not studied".[(367)(]) The Russian scientist A. Martynov
says the same thing, claiming that the knowledge accumulated by mankind in
the past, "outside the framework of positivist science", has completely fallen
out of modern man's sight. People have ceased to understand the language in
which it is expressed. "The ancient endeavour to link the discrete with the
continuous has become incomprehensible." The reasons for this state of
modern knowledge, according to Martynov, "lie in the excessive prevalence
of logical thinking in the process of acquiring new knowledge, while it cannot
but be surprising that at the dawn of our civilisation a constellation of great
thinkers were able to comprehend exactly the continuum essences, using the
intuitive channel as the main channel of comprehension of truth. It is the
attempt at a continuum, integral comprehension of modern discretised
knowledge that leads to the clear   feeling   that   these   conclusions   have
already   been   formulatedof truth. It is the
attempt at a continuum, integral comprehension of modern discretised
knowledge that leads to the clear   feeling   that   these   conclusions   have
already   been   formulated

--- PAGE BREAK ---attempt at a continuum, integral comprehension of modern discretised
knowledge that leads to the clear   feeling   that   these   conclusions   have
already   been   formulated

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Our great predecessors: it is simply inherent in mankind not only to acquire
new knowledge, but much more often to forget the old ones, as soon as they
do not fit into the stereotype of thinking imposed by the next social structure".
[368]
In our time - at the turn of the millennium - a very definite   work   is
already underway to   create   a new   scientific   paradigm   -.
The New Age scientific and philosophical programme "New Age" emerged in
the USA at the end of the 20th century. For example, in the USA at the end of
the 20th century there emerged a scientific and philosophical programme
"New Age", which gives a qualitatively new understanding of man and the
world as a single anthropocosmic whole on the basis of a synthesis of
quantum-holographic ideas, transpersonal psychology and traditional Eastern
systems of thinking. Similar developments are also being carried out in Russia
- let us name for example the evolutionary and cosmic   paradigm,
formulated   on   basis   of the works of
"Russian cosmists" (V.I. Vernadsky, K.E. Tsiolkovsky, A.L. Chizhevsky,
etc.). A.V. Barchenko with his idea of a universal "synthetic science" should
certainly be included among these scientists-innovators.
One of the leading Russian ufologists, Doctor of Philosophy V.G.
Azhazha, expressed the best about the essence of the Ancient Science and its
fundamental difference from the modern science. (Ufology is a scientific
trend that studies the phenomenon of UFOs and its impact on the
biotechnosphere).
"At the beginning of humanity's development on Earth, the system of
thinking was one: thinking directed towards a true worldview. Therefore, the
logical and spiritual components of the thinking process were inextricably
linked. At that time there was no division into religion, philosophy and
science. It was a single system of comprehension of the truth of the world
order. That is why Egyptian priests 5000 years ago were true integrators of
knowledge of mankind of that time. Having created such system of thinking,
mankind entered the era of knowledge accumulation (the period from 4400
BC to 2200 BC).
Further, the system of comprehension of truth is dissected into a logical
system of thinking and a mystical (spiritual) system. By this dissectionaccumulation (the period from 4400
BC to 2200 BC).
Further, the system of comprehension of truth is dissected into a logical
system of thinking and a mystical (spiritual) system. By this dissection

--- PAGE BREAK ---eriod from 4400
BC to 2200 BC).
Further, the system of comprehension of truth is dissected into a logical
system of thinking and a mystical (spiritual) system. By this dissection

--- PAGE BREAK ---

marked the beginning of the era of knowledge loss (the period from 2200 B.C.
to Christ).
Further the dissociation intensified - logical and spiritual thinking came
into contradiction. Science became completely based on the logical system,
and religion - on the spiritual system of thinking, which led to antagonism
between science and religion. This marked the beginning of the era of militant
ignorance of mankind (the period from the Nativity of Christ to the present
day). Humanity today lives in the final phase of militant ignorance. The basis
of the intellect of modern man is logical thinking. To acquire knowledge, a
modern man must study dozens of sciences, read hundreds of books,
expending huge physical, mental and intellectual forces, spending tens of
years of his life, spending large material resources. And the Egyptian priest,
being a person spiritually highly developed, having developed in himself the
abilities of instantaneous illumination (occurring on the information-energetic
level of a person, but in no way on the physical level), could instantly receive
knowledge greater than a modern scientist during his whole life. At the same
time, a person receives knowledge of such volume and clarity that he has
neither doubts nor the need for any additional speculations and physical
experiments.
All great discoveries have been made as an act of insight by the
brilliant scientists of our planet."[(369)(])
Based on years of study of the fascinating ufological
V.G. Azhazha also makes an attempt to create a new paradigm, or model of
the world. According to the scientist, the universe is based on "three whales":
the mind of the Universe (controlling core), information and energy.
Information and energy are the first bricks of the material world. The
Universe consists of multi-material worlds. There are thin-material worlds,
there are dense-material worlds, where energy is compacted. There are solid-
material worlds, like our physical world of Earth, where energy is in a
superdense state. However, matter is not the first cause of all things, or even
the cause. Matter is the result of the work of the Universe mind, information
and energy, i.e., where energy is in a
superdense state. However, matter is not the first cause of all things, or even
the cause. Matter is the result of the work of the Universe mind, information
and energy, i.e.

--- PAGE BREAK ---a
superdense state. However, matter is not the first cause of all things, or even
the cause. Matter is the result of the work of the Universe mind, information
and energy, i.e.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

is a consequence. Our material (physical world) is a world of consequence.
"The world of causes is in the system of information-energy flows of the
Universe. The world of the first causes is in the Universal Mind, which forms
information, programs the Universal processes and reorganises the energy, the
flows of which implement these processes according to the programme".
"Our official science today," writes V.G. Azhazha, "proceeds from the
fact that matter is primary. And the whole scientific apparatus is directed to
the study of this "primary" substance. All the experimental power of modern
science is directed at matter: we tear it, saw it, melt it, dissolve it, bombard it
in accelerators, and all this is done in order to get to the reasons of the world
order - to the Truth.
Our scientific thinking and all of our scientific methods are directed
matter, i.e., consequence. No matter how subtle our experiments,
measurements and calculations are, no matter how much effort we put into
our science, we apply them to effects. Naturally, as a result, we have only
corollaries. All truths obtained by our science are relative. Today science
claims that it is the truth, tomorrow new results (facts) are obtained
experimentally - and it is no longer the truth. Again theories are developed
that put forward new truths, and so on ad infinitum. Our materialistic thinking
in principle cannot lead us to the Truth. But it is and exists regardless of
whether we know about it or not. Modern science, studying the consequence
(matter), answers the question "how?", but not in the
to be able to answer the question "why?"
Azhazha also speaks of the need to revise our ideas about the genesis and
eublution of man. Life on Earth, he believes, could not have arisen by chance,
"by itself," as Darwinists claim. The emergence of life was systematic and
directed. Darwin believed that man is the crown of evolution, the result of
thousands of years of natural selection, in the course of which "from a simple
unintelligent monkey turned into a reasonable being". But studies in recent
years indicate that modern man is the descendant of terrestrial primates only
half, namely - on the "male line". On the female , according toy turned into a reasonable being". But studies in recent
years indicate that modern man is the descendant of terrestrial primates only
half, namely - on the "male line". On the female , according to

--- PAGE BREAK ---onable being". But studies in recent
years indicate that modern man is the descendant of terrestrial primates only
half, namely - on the "male line". On the female , according to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

According to American scientists, we are descended from one individual
female, i.e. mankind has one common, albeit unknown,
"foremother." "Continuing research in this direction, anthropologists more
often come to the conclusion that man is indeed a creation, only not of
evolution, but again of some kind of intelligence, the nature of which we do
not yet understand." According to the theory of involution - contrary to
Darwin's theory of evolution, "living forms did not improve by natural
selection, but degenerated from a more advanced species to the present-day
man and apes. Neanderthals were one of the descending branches of the
involutionary tree, in this case a dead end. In that case, they are, like all other
hominids, conventionally speaking, our cousins and mates in misfortune. And
their common ancestors, whose glittering cities are hidden in the oceanic
abyss, have left a legacy of their own.
memory in legends and myths."[(371)(])
Azhazha, by the way, also tries to give a modern reading of the Bible, as
d'Alveidre and Barchenko did in their time. Thus, the enigmatic phrase "In the
beginning was the Word..." from the Gospel John becomes clearer to us if we
read "information" instead of "word". Here are some more examples:
"For a long time I was shocked by the phrase: "...and God created the
firmament...And God called the firmament heaven." I thought it was absurd.
How can the sky be the firmament? Now I understood that the closed vortex
information-energy flows, formed into energetic universal cells of the "bee
honeycomb" type, formed the firmament - the rigid energetic structure of the
Universe. Universe
- is a solid, not a void (vacuum) as we believe today.
I was puzzled by Genesis chapter 1 verse 7: "And God created the
firmament, and separated the water that is under the firmament from the water
that is over the firmament..." What are these two waters that are separated
from each other, and why is it necessary to separate them? This perplexity
continued until two information bases in the universe were discovered. One -
the informational basis of biological processes and biological life in the
Universe - is water (H20). The second - the informational basis of intra-stellar
processes in the Universe - is lithium water (Li20).ational basis of biological processes and biological life in the
Universe - is water (H20). The second - the informational basis of intra-stellar
processes in the Universe - is lithium water (Li20).

--- PAGE BREAK ---logical processes and biological life in the
Universe - is water (H20). The second - the informational basis of intra-stellar
processes in the Universe - is lithium water (Li20).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Dozens of times I have read but not perceived the phrase: "As above, so
below, as on earth, so in heaven". For dozens of years I have passed by the
great wisdom contained in this short phrase. And that wisdom is that the entire
universe is built on the same laws. Everything animate and inanimate (from
our present point of view), everything solid, liquid and gaseous is built and
lives according to the same universal laws. Mankind, not understanding (or
not accepting) this biblical wisdom, has gone aside in its development. Not
knowing the Truth, we have torn science to shreds. For each object of study
we have created a different science. These sciences have different approaches,
methods and regularities. The tragic result of this stratification is that we have
started
feel only now."[(372)(])
In the light of these new - by no means unquestionable - ideas of V.G.
Azhazha and other scientists,[373] we should probably consider Barchenko's
scientific occult searches, his attempts to combine the incommunicable in the
naive and utopian in some ways, and definitely innovative in others.
Barchenko's goal was to produce a synthesis of scientific ideas about nature
and man, to show that at the heart of the Universe lies a universal unified law,
not yet learnt by modern - analytical - European science, but well known to
the ancients.
The "contemplative-synthetic" science of the East, which possessed the secret
of yoga, the secret of all-pervasive and all-encompassing numbers and
rhythm, the secret of time. The law behind which lies the Truth lost to
mankind. Similarly, modern scientists are searching for the principles of
simplicity and unity in the physical knowledge of our super-complex world,
and who knows if they will not eventually arrive at those simple truths
possessed by Ancient Science. The closest thing to a Barchenko scientist,as far
as
it seems to me
it seems to me,
is the
heliobiologist-"sun worshipper" A.L. Chizhevsky, who also dreamed of a
synthetic unification of the sciences. Four years after Barchenko's death, he
also ended up in the Gulag, and then his main work (the book
"Morphogenesis and evolution from the point of view of electron theory")
died - sad parallels with the fate of Barchenko.
I would like to finish this book with the remarkable words of A.L.
Chizhevsky about modern scientists who reject in their arrogance and
ignorance the seemingly "unscientific" knowledge of the ancients:ould like to finish this book with the remarkable words of A.L.
Chizhevsky about modern scientists who reject in their arrogance and
ignorance the seemingly "unscientific" knowledge of the ancients:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

"We are blind in our modernity. By mocking what the thought of our
ancestors nurtured and suffered over, we ourselves, with our apodictic truths
of the age, become the objects of ridicule of future generations; incomparably
more ridiculous is he who has allowed himself to laugh at the hard work in
search of truth. Alas, it will not be half a century before all the beliefs and
aspirations of the present day will become the
"history." There are only a small number of immutable truths that are destined
to survive for millennia. And who would dare to say that, having undergone a
series of transformations, human thought will not return again to those
original philosophical concepts,
with which she was sick at the dawn of human history."[(374)(])

--- PAGE BREAK ---dergone a
series of transformations, human thought will not return again to those
original philosophical concepts,
with which she was sick at the dawn of human history."[(374)(])

--- PAGE BREAK ---

O
NNNNOJENNE 1
Brief autobiography of A.V. Barchenko
Board of the Pedagogical Academy
16/V 1919
A student of the 2nd Pedagogical Institute, Alexander
Vasilyevich Barchenko, who lives in
10th line of Vas. O-va in , 41, sq. 12
APPLICATION
After graduating from the classical (b. 2nd St. Petersburg) gymnasium, I
entered the medical faculty, where I attended lectures for two and a half years
(at the University of Kazan and the University of Yuryev). For want of funds I
had to leave the university and first entered the service of the Ministry of
Finance, and then took up literary work, which for 10 years has been my
exclusive means of livelihood.
I have always worked as a populariser of biology and geography in
various popular-scientific metropolitan and provincial publications. In
addition to magazine and newspaper articles, my book (a collection of
geographical pictures and stories) "Waves of Life" published twice. My
geographical story for older youth "Ocean-Feeder" (from the life of
Murmansk industrialists), which was published as a separate edition in
addition to the magazine, is now in its second edition.
I had to go round and round most of Russia and some places abroad as a
tourist, labourer and sailor.
Along the way, I supplemented my own education by reading textbooks as
part of a university science course and working in private laboratories.
In 19I he applied for state examinations at the Faculty of Natural
Sciences, but as a participant in the war he lost this opportunity. From 1918 he
was a student of the Higher one-year courses at the 2nd Pedagogical Institute.
He received a scholarship and fulfilled all the announced works (exam on
general science).

--- PAGE BREAK ---1918 he
was a student of the Higher one-year courses at the 2nd Pedagogical Institute.
He received a scholarship and fulfilled all the announced works (exam on
general science).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

biology and a credit essay on the methodology of natural science). The
courses were disbanded at the end of January due to a limited number of
students, and I found myself as a scholarship student of the Institute in the
Biology Department.
It is impossible for me to take a four-year course within the boundaries of
a programme I am quite familiar with. Having specialised in literary work on
geography, having completed a full semester at the geography department of
the b. Higher one-year courses at the 2nd Pedagogical Institute, I intend to
devote myself to pedagogical activity as a teacher. Having specialised in
literary work on geography, having attended a full semester of the geography
department of the 2nd Pedagogical Institute, and intending to devote myself to
teaching as a teacher of geography in the future, I ask the board to admit me
to the list of scholarship students of the Pedagogical Academy in its
geography department.
1919 April 14th
Alexavdr barchewko.
I enclose herewith the certificate of the rector of the 2nd Pedagogical
Institute.
(attributed)
In addition to this, I also passed a test on stratology at the Higher One-
Year Courses. I took an exam in geology with crystallography at the Voyevo-
Medical Academy (I got half a grade).
In 1918, he gave a series of public lectures in Tevishev Hall on the history
of natural history. In the same year, he gave a law course
"The History of Ancient Natural History" wa private courses of teachers at
the Physical Institute of Solyago Gorodok.
I will not hesitate to provide additional documents in support of the
above.
Alexavdr barchewko.
ZA SN6. . 2990. On. 1. D. 10C. Nl. 5, 6,6 6.
RSFSR

--- PAGE BREAK ---nstitute of Solyago Gorodok.
I will not hesitate to provide additional documents in support of the
above.
Alexavdr barchewko.
ZA SN6. . 2990. On. 1. D. 10C. Nl. 5, 6,6 6.
RSFSR

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Commissariat of National Education 2nd
Petrograd Pedagogical Institute 12 April
1919.
(K. Marxa Pr.6 84-in)
APPROVAL
It was issued to A.V. Barchenko that since 1918 he was a student of the
Higher one-year courses at the 2nd Pedagogical Institute in the natural-
geographical department. Barchenko passed the exam on general biology,
announced in December, receiving a mark "very satisfactory", and provided a
credit essay, announced on the course of methodology of natural science,
completed quite successfully.
In view of the disbanding of the course Barchenko is now listed among
the students-fellows of the institute and received a scholarship at the rate of
500 rubles per month for January and February.
1919 April 12.
Rector of the Institute N. Rozhkov.
ZA SN6. TaM ibid. N. 2.

--- PAGE BREAK ---the institute and received a scholarship at the rate of
500 rubles per month for January and February.
1919 April 12.
Rector of the Institute N. Rozhkov.
ZA SN6. TaM ibid. N. 2.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

O
NNNOJENNE 2
Letters of A.B. Barchenko to V.M. Bekhterev 1920-1923.
Barchenko to V.M. Bekhterev 1920-1923.
Letter 1
1920.XII.19.
Petrograd
Vasilievsky Island, 1 liya, 40, sq. 21
Honourable Vladimir Mikhailovich!
I have just returned from Murman and travelled to Moscow.
Unfortunately, I couldn't find there the one you were interested in.
 book Dr Black. It's sold out to the last set.
I enclose herewith the only copy of my own copy of Dr Black. I'm afraid
you'll be very disappointed with it. It is adapted for the purpose of
popularising certain scientific novelties especially among the older youth.
As for the preparations of ocean fauna requested by the Institute for Brain
Research, the case is as follows: the preparations require utensils, which must
be stocked in Petrograd. If the Institute has the utensils, please see to it that I
am supplied with them before my departure (4-5 January). If the Institute has
no crockery, its directorate favours to supply me with a demand to Glavsteklo.
In this case I will be able to deliver the preparations you are interested in not
later than half of February.
The report on "The Soul of Ancient Teachings in the Field of View of
Modern Natural Science," which I was to make, according to the Institute's
invitation, on 22 November, I can give between the first and fourth of January
or in the middle of February. Please discuss what would be more convenient
for you and, if it is not too difficult for , inform me as soon as possible so that
I can orientate my departure from Petrograd and my arrival in February - ad
hoc.
Concerning questions of interest to you from the field of ancient science
and the application of some of its methods to the study of the area,

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd my arrival in February - ad
hoc.
Concerning questions of interest to you from the field of ancient science
and the application of some of its methods to the study of the area,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I have found out everything I could, including the form and scope of my
participation in this work, which is available to me.
If you are still interested in this side of the matter, please do not hesitate to
inform me - I will be at your service at any time before your departure.
Now let me burden your attention with this. A few minutes ago Vera
Knyazkova, the very patient whom I endeavoured to send to you for cure and
with whom I was with you. According to her, she is absolutely despairing of
the possibility of attracting the attention of the doctors to herself in an amount
that would enable her to leave the hospital more or less soon, in which she,
who does not consider herself sick, has been languishing for a month and a
half. According to [V. Knyazkova], her sister Nina, from unknown motives,
with inexplicable persistence swears to the doctors using her that all the words
of her, Vera Knyazkova, are morbid delusions and morbid lies. Depending
this statement, the doctors, according to V. Knyazkova, have completely
changed their attitude to her and ignore her statements as delusional.
Completely despairing to achieve more attentive attitude by legal way, V.
Knyazkova decided on an extreme step - to run away from the hospital and to
beg me, as rendered to her in due time warm participation, that I personally
contacted you and paid your attention to her personally.
Having taken a coat from one of the patients, Knyazkova quietly left the
hospital in the evening in the dark and came to me. I must state in good
conscience that Vera Knyazkova  now so calm and sensible and so logically
reasoned in her behaviour that there is no reason, at least no obvious one, for
forcibly restricting her liberty. Therefore, I considered it an elementary duty
of humanity to give her shelter in my family until morning. I, together with
people who were complete strangers to me, had at one time witnessed Vera's
sister Nina to be considerably more morbid and nervous than Vera
Knyazkova. With those persons I witnessed Nina Knyazkova accusing Vera
with swearing and shouting of lies and delusions, which accusations Vera was
perfectly calm aboutmorbid and nervous than Vera
Knyazkova. With those persons I witnessed Nina Knyazkova accusing Vera
with swearing and shouting of lies and delusions, which accusations Vera was
perfectly calm about

--- PAGE BREAK ---han Vera
Knyazkova. With those persons I witnessed Nina Knyazkova accusing Vera
with swearing and shouting of lies and delusions, which accusations Vera was
perfectly calm about

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In front of our eyes she refuted it, operating with facts. Therefore, I am
deprived of the possibility not to trust Vera in her stories about the influence
of her sister Nina on the doctors of the hospital, drawing, by necessity, data
for anamnesis from the mouth of Nina Knyazkova.
In view of the fact that Vera Knyazkova definitely, and without assuming
any responsibility, assures that Dr Triumfov[375] persistently inquires of her
"what she was saved and treated with by Dr Barchenko",
and Dr Myasishchev [376(]) proposed the question to her: "Why are you sure
that Dr Barchenko did not hypnotise you?", and in view of the fact that I have
not, in fact, experimented with the hypnotism of either Vera Knyazkova or
anyone else, I see myself compelled to put an end once and for all to the ill-
explained interest of completely unknown and unfamiliar persons in my
humble personality, For the present purpose I, together with Vera Knyazkova,
at the same time as I sent you this letter, I sent it to the Extraordinary
Commission, to the investigator who is conducting an enquiry into the strange
company that invaded my family, introduced Vera Knyazkova into it, and,
apparently, has not left me to this day.
In order to give us a solid and exhaustively competent account of Vera
Knyazkova's condition, I respectfully ask you to allow me and the chief
investigator C.K. Rix to visit you at your flat on one of the next days, when it
will not be too burdensome for you.
Please do not refuse to inform me, through the bearer of this letter, at what
day and hour it would be more convenient to see you.
Please accept the assurances of my sincere, profound esteem. Ready for
service,
Alexavdr barchewko
ZA SN6. . 2265. Op.1. %. 65. N. 128-129 6.
Letter 2
Petrograd
1921.1.8
Vas. o-v, 1 liwiya, 40, flat 21e accept the assurances of my sincere, profound esteem. Ready for
service,
Alexavdr barchewko
ZA SN6. . 2265. Op.1. %. 65. N. 128-129 6.
Letter 2
Petrograd
1921.1.8
Vas. o-v, 1 liwiya, 40, flat 21

--- PAGE BREAK ---ces of my sincere, profound esteem. Ready for
service,
Alexavdr barchewko
ZA SN6. . 2265. Op.1. %. 65. N. 128-129 6.
Letter 2
Petrograd
1921.1.8
Vas. o-v, 1 liwiya, 40, flat 21

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Honourable Vladimir Mikhailovich!
I am sending you the "provisions" summarising my report. On the third
day I sent them to the Institute, but the messenger did not find anyone there,
and I did not know to whom to pass them on.
If you have nothing against it, I think it is possible to avoid
correspondence and sending out "regulations" altogether.
At the meeting of the 10th, I will first read the "provisions" in their , and
then I will propose each paragraph separately from the sheet of paper for
discussion. However, the order of discussion is, of course, entirely up you.
Now let me trouble your attention with the following. I am obliged to
leave for Murmansk no later than the 16th. I shall not be able to return to
Petrograd until the end of February. I shall leave Russia, in any case, whatever
personal advantages I may derive from it, as soon as there is a legal
opportunity to do so. I have reason to hope that such an opportunity will
present itself to me not later than the middle of summer. I will not be able to
return to Russia before 10 years. It seems to me unacceptable to waste a
month and a half unproductively under such conditions.
Therefore, if the point of view I have highlighted in my report seems
serious to you, I would ask you now to enter into a discussion of my further
attitude to research in the area of your interest.
The following seems to me to be an acceptable form of [co-operation] in
this direction.
If on the 10th my "defence" of my "provisions" against objections
impresses you with seriousness, you might not refuse to establish some
concrete connection between me and the Institute by offering the Conference
my co-operation as an assistant in the department as you deem suitable for
such work.
I do not need any salary or rations for this position. I only need to be able:
1) to conduct systematic work within specific frameworks, in contact with
people whom I fully trust; 2) to argue before my Naval superiors in
Murmansk Political Department my trips to Petrograd   and   on   [Kola]
peninsula   (for   invitations   of thein contact with
people whom I fully trust; 2) to argue before my Naval superiors in
Murmansk Political Department my trips to Petrograd   and   on   [Kola]
peninsula   (for   invitations   of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---ple whom I fully trust; 2) to argue before my Naval superiors in
Murmansk Political Department my trips to Petrograd   and   on   [Kola]
peninsula   (for   invitations   of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In addition to the work that is involved in the development of the research
plan, we have to carry out a number of research projects in the Lopar camps
of percipients of interest to our work and transport them to Murmansk and
Petrograd. You know the childish inclination of modern administration to
clerical forms. If my relations to the Institute are not legalised in a fixed form,
I will not have leisure to work on the question you are interested in and I risk
getting stuck in Murmansk at the moments most convenient for contact with
those working in Petrograd. Especially as all my ties with Petrograd (family,
flat, etc.) will be liquidated by the 16th for the transfer to Murmansk.
On my arrival from Murmansk in February, I will present to the Institute
meeting or to the group you will bring together, a detailed    draft    of the
body,    provided for    clause    XXIX.
"provisions". This body may be formed either directly within the Institute or
as a section within your Commission. In either case, the body is headed by
you and works under your direct supervision. At that time I will also submit a
detailed work plan for the coming year and a draft motivated report on the
allocation of funds for the work.
On my next visit in a month and a half, I will present detailed research
plans for each site, by then already personally fixed.
At the end of May I will have an opportunity to come to Petrograd for a
month and a half or two months. I will personally help you in equipping the
"magic" laboratory, deliver to you the objects for research and, if you allow
me, I will personally take part in setting up the experiments.
In July I hope to be able to travel legally from Russia to the East. I have
about 2 years to spend in a certain point, which is only 460 versts from the
Russian border, from where the mail runs quite regularly. Thus, I will have an
opportunity to keep a lively and regular communication with you 2 more
years and, God willing, I will have an opportunity to invite a suitable person
from the group united by you for direct observations on the place of
phenomena, which cannot be reproduced in the European environment. Why -
you yourself will clearly understand when you become more familiar with the
mechanism of the phenomena.ions on the place of
phenomena, which cannot be reproduced in the European environment. Why -
you yourself will clearly understand when you become more familiar with the
mechanism of the phenomena.

--- PAGE BREAK ---phenomena, which cannot be reproduced in the European environment. Why -
you yourself will clearly understand when you become more familiar with the
mechanism of the phenomena.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

By the time I am allowed to go further away and our liaison becomes the
use of rare occasions, you and your united group will have become so familiar
with a field that is still completely dark for Europe that your independence in
research will not pose a risk to the people and the body that will entrust you
with certain methods.
Before the 16th of January I would ask you, if you agree in principle with
the plan I propose, to gather at my place (for on all these days I can be free
only after 7 p.m.) a group of persons to be involved in the work (not more
than two persons, except you), whom you trust unconditionally. To this group
I will try to illuminate as fully as possible the colouring of the current I serve,
my attitude to this current and the motives that make this current come into
contact with you. This is already necessary because you have deigned to
initiate me into your idea of "initiation" in the person of the kindest Dr
Ryabinin.
This makes it incumbent upon me to illuminate to you my personal
attitude towards what is known in Europe as "initiations" and to share with
you specific information on the subject.
This is, in general terms, the framework within which I might be able to
be of assistance to you in researching the question you are interested in. It is
not within my competence to extend or modify them.
It goes without saying that all my work, travelling, etc. will not involve
any costs for you or the Institute. In time you will realise that there can be no
other work in this direction but gratuitous work.
In view of repeated precedents, I have to be extremely cautious in my
personal communications. I must therefore inform you that from now on only
those letters and documents which are undoubtedly mine are to be regarded as
bearing the seal below. A person who enjoys my full confidence must read
this seal as I will read it to you personally, if it interests you.
I respectfully apologise for having abused your attention, and beg you to
believe my sincere exclusive esteem.
Ready for service,this seal as I will read it to you personally, if it interests you.
I respectfully apologise for having abused your attention, and beg you to
believe my sincere exclusive esteem.
Ready for service,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Alexavdr barchewko.
ZA SN6. TaM same. N. 1C0-1C1 o6.
Letter 3
Petrograd
Krasvykh Zorya Street
(former Kamevostr. pr.).
Honourable Vladimir Mikhailovich!
I have been in Petrograd for a week. But the troubles with residence
permits and flats have so far prevented me from paying my respects to you, at
least in writing.
I have left Murman for good. By the way, I am enclosing a formal
document, covering the picture of that expedition, in which I took the liberty
of inviting you to participate in the summer.
I shall be in Petrograd, at any rate, not later than May. If the formalities
for obtaining my departure are completed earlier, I shall leave in April.
I left Murman to fulfil these formalities.
I have accumulated some material on the sanitary and hygienic conditions
of the region, including some figures on Murmansk epidemics, and the
organisation of medical work. Also some touches on the survey of "Lopar
scare". In addition to this quite interesting material on my survey, as head of
the expedition, of the island of Kildin (Arctic Ocean) and the depths of
Lapland, which has not been explored by anyone so far (the area of the largest
mountain lakes Umb-yavier and Luyavier).
I have about 100 transparencies in my possession based on images taken
by our troop.
If you have nothing against it, I could make a report at the Institute under
the title, approximately: "In the land of sorcerers and polar auroras". I put the
approximate programme of the report at the end of the letter. The report will
take an hour and a half or two hours in size. I have at my disposal an excellent
projection lantern with all accessories.

--- PAGE BREAK ---of the report at the end of the letter. The report will
take an hour and a half or two hours in size. I have at my disposal an excellent
projection lantern with all accessories.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I can, however, make the report only in 16 days, at the earliest, for in
addition to the trouble of repairing the flat I am cruelly busy with urgent work
secured in advance.
If you have no objection, kindly notify me, at least a week and a half in
advance, of day and hour; and if you wish to make such a report or not, please
do not fail to notify me as soon as possible, for some preparatory steps are
necessary.
I should be very happy to have the honour of seeing you before the report
when you please. I myself will stay for a week in the flat of my close friend,
the astronomer Alexander Alexandrovich Kondiain, until the repairs to the flat
I have occupied are completed. I am registered as a permanent tenant in the
colony of the Tibetan Mission, in Novaya Derevnya, at the Lamaite datsan
(temple).
If a letter is sent to me at the address given in the heading, kindly warn the
messenger to hand the letter directly to me, or to any of my family, or to
Condiain, by going upstairs to the flat (49) indicated, for I am not known to
the House Committee.
In the Tibetan colony (Blagoveshchenskaya, 15) you are welcome to
inquire about me not at the manager (some very dishevelled, rather
suspicious-looking "mechanic" Sansero - supposedly "a great admirer of
Buddhism", but upon careful examination he has very vague ideas about
Buddhism), but directly at the Abbot of the Datsan, Lama Jigmita Dorzhiev,
or at his servant Chigmita Badmaev in a small wing in the courtyard of the
Datsan.
The superintendent Sansereau is employed at the Erickson factory, behind
the Moscow outpost, and comes to the colony once or twice a week, late in
the evening, and his letter to me would certainly get lost.
Permit me, in the same letter, to bring again my respectful thanks for your
unfailing attention and for your extraordinary courtesy and consideration in
inviting me this summer.
I have not had an opportunity to reply to your letter, as you did not specify
the exact date of your return to Russia. (Your letter says: either in September
or around Christmas.)
I myself did not return from the last itinerary of the expedition until
October, and up to the time of departure I was incredibly busy with the work
of handing over thetember
or around Christmas.)
I myself did not return from the last itinerary of the expedition until
October, and up to the time of departure I was incredibly busy with the work
of handing over the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

materials and their systematisation.
Once again, please accept my respectful thanks and best wishes.
Highly revered,
A.barchewko.
[Barchenko's seal]
I take this opportunity to inform you that my personal stamp, which
you are familiar with, is no longer in my possession and I am no longer
responsible for the documents certified by it from this date.
6/XII 922
ZA SN6. TaM same. N. 148-149 6.
Letter 4
11/2 November 1923
Kamewwoostrov. pr.
9/2, sq. 49
Honourable Vladimir Mikhailovich!
On the basis of my somewhat formal connection with the Brain Institute
and the attention you have kindly given to some of my research endeavours, I
presume you would be interested to be informed of the concrete results of my
troubles in Moscow.
I inform you: a) The Glavvauka's response to my research is recorded in a
protocol, from which I am forwarding you an extract in the form of an official
certificate (see attachment to the letter. - A.A.);
b) I will organise the laboratory, depending on the convenience of
supplying it with equipment, in one of the suburbs of Moscow, from where I
will come to Petrograd every month to coordinate with the work of my
collaborators Kondiain, Petrelevich, etc., and for contact interviews with
Vasily Pavlovich [Kash-kadamov] and Alexei Konstantinovich [Borsuk]. If
you have nothing against it, I will

--- PAGE BREAK ---aborators Kondiain, Petrelevich, etc., and for contact interviews with
Vasily Pavlovich [Kash-kadamov] and Alexei Konstantinovich [Borsuk]. If
you have nothing against it, I will

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I could come into closer contact with the Institute in the form of some kind of
fixation of my work, for example in the laboratory of Vasily Pavlovich, if he
expresses a wish;
c) Officially, I am now a senior researcher at the Moscow Glavnauka;
d) in parallel with the steps of the Glavnauka, some large representatives
of Moscow scientific circles have taken concrete steps to put me in touch with
Chicherin, to whom the Glavnauka has also communicated its attitude to my
work, in order to secure funds and permission for our trip to Central Asia this
summer.
Alexei Konstantinovich has informed me that you have expressed a wish
to see me and my staff and to arrange an exchange of ideas along the lines of
last year. You are welcome. Tomorrow I will talk to A.K. and suggest to him
to organise, if you nothing against it, such an interview before my departure
until the 8th of November, so that I could acquaint you all in a more detailed
and concrete form with the direction of research and with those data of
Oriental naturphilosophy, the materials for which I will have to take to
Moscow.
You will not fail to inform me then of the desired day and time of our
interview.
Please accept the expression of my sincere honour. Ready for
service,
A.barchewko.
ZA SN6. TaM same. N. 161-161 6.
Annex to the letter
Secretwho.
Copy for Acad. yekhterev. RSFSR
People's Commissariat
for Education of the
Acad. cewtre
Head of the Directorate of Scientific Institutions 27.C.1923

--- PAGE BREAK ---nnex to the letter
Secretwho.
Copy for Acad. yekhterev. RSFSR
People's Commissariat
for Education of the
Acad. cewtre
Head of the Directorate of Scientific Institutions 27.C.1923

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6 36/D
Moscow, Volkhovka, 18.
tel. 2-68-81, 27-38
Synopsis
The Special Commission of the Glavvauka, with the participation of
its head Dr Petrov and Prof. Timiryazev, having become acquainted in
several meetings with the researches of biologist A.V. Barchevko in the
field of ancient (eastern) waturphilosophy, considered these researches
to be fully serious and purposeful not only in the field of ancient
(eastern) waturphilosophy.barchevko's research in the field of ancient
(eastern) waturphilosophy, recognised this research as completely
serious and important not only in scientific, but also in political terms,
and decided to deepen and support the research of A.V. barchevko by
means of a number of meetings. barchevko by promptly providing him
with funds from the Glavhauka credits for organising a biophysical
laboratory and preparing the material reported by barchevko for
publication.
Head of Glavvauka F. Petrov.
With the sublive verwo for the secretary (signature).
ZA SN6. TaM ibid. N. 160.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ory and preparing the material reported by barchevko for
publication.
Head of Glavvauka F. Petrov.
With the sublive verwo for the secretary (signature).
ZA SN6. TaM ibid. N. 160.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

R
NNNNOGENNE C
A.V. Barchenko's thoughts on medicine
(From the notes of E.M. Condiain)
European medicine, like all European science, is analytical. It analyses
symptoms, signs of disease, tries to treat these signs of disease, while
Ancient Science treats
human organism. The human organism is a harmonious whole, even the
condition of a single cell affects the overall condition of the organism.
Specialisation of European medicine has led to the fact that a narrow
specialist, knowing only his speciality, forgets that he is dealing with an
organism, where all its parts, all its organs are interconnected and
subordinated to unified laws. It is necessary to treat not the signs of disease,
and the body. The human organism has all the necessary properties to resist
any disease, any infection, for this it is only necessary that a person has a
healthy, harmonious aura (electromagnetic field). In a normally developed
person living in normal conditions, away from iron, the electromagnetic field
surrounding him is impervious to any germs. If still a person is ill,  is only
necessary to help the organism, to strengthen it to fight the disease. The
organism itself has all the necessary capabilities to fight the disease.
A.B.'s first unconditional condition and demand was to remove all iron
from the room. The main thing - iron beds and spring mattresses. Iron
demagnetises the organism. A.V. made a wooden bed for himself and Olya.
Covered it with plywood. They slept on sheep's wool felts.
Some ways of treatment A.V. Barchenko
In the spring of 1922 in Murmansk, A.V. cured Grigory Grigorievich
Kolosov of the last stage of tuberculosis. A.V. took Kolosov from the hospital
in a hopeless condition. The doctor gave a receipt that he refused to give up
the patient. A.V. gave him 10 fresh raw chicken eggsthe last stage of tuberculosis. A.V. took Kolosov from the hospital
in a hopeless condition. The doctor gave a receipt that he refused to give up
the patient. A.V. gave him 10 fresh raw chicken eggs

--- PAGE BREAK ---berculosis. A.V. took Kolosov from the hospital
in a hopeless condition. The doctor gave a receipt that he refused to give up
the patient. A.V. gave him 10 fresh raw chicken eggs

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and prescribed sunbathing. For this purpose, he put him naked in the sun in
the frost in a place protected from the wind, in the yard, starting from a few
minutes. In a month or a month and a half Kolosov got so well that he went to
the Crimea to recover on his own.
AB. cured an anaemic, tubercular, very weak girl. He told her to air the
room, took her outside all day, cancelled her diet. He gave carrot juice, 2
glasses a day, fruits, berries, vegetables, raw water. By the end of the summer
the girl recovered, ran, picked berries and flowers. It was in Yuryevets, on the
Volga. Lida Markova was tubercular, could not lie down, even slept in a half-
sitting position. She was sunbathing in a red kumacha shirt with a "vent" on
her spleen. Also carrot juice, fruit, vegetables, gymnastics. She got better,
only she was always weak.
A woman in Kostroma was losing her eyesight. She was treated for a long
time and took a lot of medicines, mainly eye drops. A.B. cancelled all the
medicines and said: we should treat the body. Her eyes were very inflamed.
He brewed ochradia oficinalis (arauca?) and made lotions. She had a heart
condition and a metabolic disorder. [Gave her] carrots with the skin on. The
woman began to see without glasses. She began to feel well.
In 1919 or 1920. A.V. cured a young woman of lung sarcoma. She was
spitting out pieces of lung, she was hopeless.
A.V. put her up at Alekseevskaya, and there she took sunbaths in the
summer. What else he treated her with, I don't know. But I do know that she
got better.
On the Volga River in the village of Spasskoye lived uncle Al. Vas., a 50-
year-old man, a peasant. His hand, the back side, was hurting. He was treated
by a doctor for about a month. Gangrene had set in. The hand was dying off,
festering terribly. The doctor was going to take the hand away. A.V.
undertook to cure it. The man came every day. A.V. treated the hand, cleaned
it, washed it and on the street, laying the hand still, illuminated it with the sun
through a magnifying glass, starting with 1 minute and bringing it up to 10
minutes, gradually bringing the magnifying glass closer. A.V. set a condition -
not to drink, not to smoke and to keep the arm on a bandage in complete rest.
In 3 weeks the wound was covered with young skin and the pain stopped.
Soon the man started working in the collective farm.to drink, not to smoke and to keep the arm on a bandage in complete rest.
In 3 weeks the wound was covered with young skin and the pain stopped.
Soon the man started working in the collective farm.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Dew treatment
A.V. considered dew to be the most effective remedy.
In the evening on the lawn on 8 pegs stretch 2 sheets, preferably linen, a
little above the grass. Before sunrise, take off one sheet soaked with dew,
wrap the sick person with head in it and warmly wrap him. The sick person
should lie wrapped up like this for 2 hours. The second sheet is squeezed into
a clean glass bowl and given to the patient to drink.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ad in it and warmly wrap him. The sick person
should lie wrapped up like this for 2 hours. The second sheet is squeezed into
a clean glass bowl and given to the patient to drink.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

S
NNNOJENNE 4
Reports to the OGPU
Summary 1
I bring to your attention some details and characteristics of the persons
who have taken up residence in the flat of the astronomer
CONDIAINI, where Prof BARCHENKO lives.
In the middle of September last year (i.e. 1924 - A.A.), gr. Kovdiaiwa
settled with gr. Tatiana SPENDIAROVA came from Sudak (Crimea), where
her parents live in their own possession, former millionaires who still have
ties with the White emigration and some counter-revolutionary elements on
the territory of the USSR. She came to Levi Grad for medical treatment and
stayed with her acquaintances, i.e. Kondiaini, because the Kondiaini family
lived in Sudak last year, and thanks to this she got acquainted with the
Kondiaini family. For the first two days, Mrs. SPENDIAROVA behaved as
befitting a person enjoying the hospitality of a foreign family, but later on her
behaviour changed immediately, she became extremely attentive, cautious,
She tried to open doors to all comers, to talk to strangers, and asked all
comers who they were, and for what purpose they were visiting A. B.
Barchewko and A. B. Barchewko.B. Barchewko, etc. At first, Gpov.
BARCHENKO thought that this was idle curiosity, but later it turned out that
she was exclusively interested in information. Trying by all means to decipher
it, she pretended to be a person interested in her, after which she began to
court him, trying to get more or less intimate with him, but seeing that she did
not succeed, she changed her position and began to openly criticise the
Soviets, expressing purely counter-revolutionary views, etc. Seeing that her
talks did not work on BARCHENKO, she began to come into contact with the
rest of the family, trying to probe the ground, what their views were on the
present situation, etc.s, etc. Seeing that her
talks did not work on BARCHENKO, she began to come into contact with the
rest of the family, trying to probe the ground, what their views were on the
present situation, etc.

--- PAGE BREAK ---her
talks did not work on BARCHENKO, she began to come into contact with the
rest of the family, trying to probe the ground, what their views were on the
present situation, etc.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

About a month ago, she asked Mr BARCHENKO for permission to
introduce him to one of her fellow countrymen, Mr Tsurinov, who was also
interested in Mr BARCHENKO's scientific discoveries in the field of
prehistoric culture. Having received consent, she passed her conversation to
gr. Tsurinov, who immediately wrote a letter about his desire to become better
acquainted with him. Tov. BARCHENKO also replied that he agreed to
receive him at his home, as it was impossible for him to visit him himself
because of his illness. On 27 January this year, after his arrival from Moscow,
he found a letter from Tsurinov, who asked permission to visit him, after
which, after a few days, Tsurinov himself appeared, started a conversation
with him about the Whites, about the Soviet order, expressed his disapproval
of the modern authorities, and, above all, expressed his opinion about the
imminent fall of Soviet power, expressing great pleasure [from] taking part in
the massacre of the Bolsheviks. In response to the anti-Soviet talk of Gr.
Tsurinov, Comrade BARCHENKO parried, expressing the opposite opinion,
with sufficient evidence revealing his attitude towards the modern authorities.
Seeing that it was impossible to incline him to the opposing point of view, he
asked him if he could not, on his next visit, invite young man who was also
interested in prehistoric culture, but more powerful than he. Having obtained
his consent to do so, he left.
Interested in the social situation of gr. Tsurinov, Comrade BARCHENKO
went to his flat and was amazed at the luxury he had. It turned out that gr.
Tsurinov had managed to keep his colossal wealth on the basis of his
connections, living at large, denying himself nothing. He said that he had
connections with foreign countries, if he needed money, he got it in any
amount. After leaving Mr Tsurinov, a few days later, a young man came to
see Mr BARCHENKO and introduced himself as a person interested in
prehistoric culture, referring to the recommendation of Mr Tsurinov.
TSURINOV. This person bore an extremely great resemblance to Dr
VYACHESLO. (For information about Dr VYACHESLO, see my old
bulletins.) The young man in question immediately revealed his anti-Soviet
face, endeavouring by all means to bring out all the negative aspects of the
modern state system, revealing a convincing knowledge of all the defects of
the modern state system.led his anti-Soviet
face, endeavouring by all means to bring out all the negative aspects of the
modern state system, revealing a convincing knowledge of all the defects of
the modern state system.

--- PAGE BREAK ---face, endeavouring by all means to bring out all the negative aspects of the
modern state system, revealing a convincing knowledge of all the defects of
the modern state system.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Al-Dr. Vasilievich was surprised at this statement and asked who the person
in question was, then the young man said that this common acquaintance of
his was also interested in the achievements of Comrade BARCHENKO. Al-
Dr Vasilievich was surprised at this statement and asked who this person was,
then the young man said that this common acquaintance of theirs, who was
also interested in the achievements of Comrade BARCHENKO in prehistoric
culture, was none other than Dr VYACHESLO. At the same time he informed
that Dr VYACESLO is extremely popular, influential in the spheres that can
do a lot for the implementation of A.V. BARCHENKO's wishes, at the same
time stating that Dr VYACESLO is now in Afghanistan (Kabul), where he
holds an extremely responsible post and as a connoisseur of prehistoric
science is very influential and will be able to help him in anything if he
wishes. What exactly he understood by the word "arrange a lot", he did not
explain.
After his departure, Mr. BARCHENKO's household immediately noticed
that Gr. SPENDIAROVA, who previously had always shown an amazing
curiosity towards all persons coming to Mr. BARCHENKO's house, was now
extremely cold-blooded, trying not to show her curiosity, and was behaving in
a tactic contrary to her initial behaviour. It is evident from all her behaviour
that Gr. SPENDIAROVA, as Tsurinov, who had recommended Mr.
BARCHENKO to Tsurinov, was well aware of those questions and of the
purpose of Mr. Tsurinov's visit to Mr. BARCHENKO, and did not inquire
further about the present visit. Without referring to the above, when Mr.
BARCHENKO was in Moscow and met Dr. VYACHESLO, the latter
informed him that he had a son in St. Petersburg, a former student.
The second characteristic phenomenon in the Kondiaini family is the
precise and personal discovery that Kondiaini's astro-woman, a close relative
of the acquaintance of Mr MESMAHER, who settled in their family, is in
contact with a counter-revolutionary element grouping in the Lamaist Temple
(a Buddhist temple). MESMAKHER, is in contact with a counter-
revolutionary element grouped in the Lama Temple (Buddhist temple in Novy
Derevya), where the Tibetan mission is located. The Ozwachevsky gr.
JSMAKHER stayed with gr. KOCTSIAINI, according to him, he stated that
he was a former member of the RCP, held a responsible post in Bukhara as
some kind of commissar, and was forced to resign from it.MAKHER stayed with gr. KOCTSIAINI, according to him, he stated that
he was a former member of the RCP, held a responsible post in Bukhara as
some kind of commissar, and was forced to resign from it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---r. KOCTSIAINI, according to him, he stated that
he was a former member of the RCP, held a responsible post in Bukhara as
some kind of commissar, and was forced to resign from it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

He is now looking for the service he was promised by Gr. SPENDIAROVA,
whom he met at KONDIAINI's apartment. But now he is looking for service,
which he was promised by Gr. SPENDIAROVA, whom he met in the flat at
Condiaini's. At first, Mr MES-MACHER avoided meetings with Mrs
SPENDIAROVA, but later he began to court her intensely. Ozwachevsky
MESMAKHER, former] son of Prof. MESMAKHER, who leads an extremely
passionate way of life, leaves early, returns late at night, when asked during
his return where he goes, he refers to the fact that after his appointments he
walks as if on Yelagi Island. When he was told that it was not safe to take a
walk at such a late hour, he smiled and said nothing definite. During his late
visits he washes himself thoroughly, as if after some very work, in order not to
leave any trace of his activity in some strange service, about which he says
absolutely nothing. Through Gr. SPENDIAROVA, MESMAKHER comes into
contact with the Tibetan mission and informs the Easterners (Buryats, Moguls
um. etc.) about all news and persons visiting Mr. YARCHENKO. He passes on
this information to Mr. Gr-wartels, the former son of the governor of Riga,
who lives permanently in the Tibetan mission. Mr BARTELS is a member of
KONDIAINI's relatives, including Mr KATUNSKY, head of the secret
department of the radio-electro-vacuum factory located on Lopukhivskaia
Street, who can use the radio at any time to communicate with the foreigners.
This investigator KATUNSKY tried several times to get in close contact with
Comrade KATUNSKY. But, seeing the fruitlessness of his attempts, he
somehow began to grow cold towards him and took the opposite line-tactics,
courting his family members, but seeing that he failed here too, then he simply
began to draw and spread gossipy rumours, dishonouring Mr. YARCHENKO.
Mrs SPENDIAROVA, in addition to her informational work, keeps up a great
deal of correspondence with the foreign countries. Every day she receives a
pile of letters from Paris, London, Berlin and other cities. She responds to
them , often leaving the flat <...>. (The end of the text is lost. - KA.)
10 February 1925.ies. Every day she receives a
pile of letters from Paris, London, Berlin and other cities. She responds to
them , often leaving the flat <...>. (The end of the text is lost. - KA.)
10 February 1925.

--- PAGE BREAK ---eceives a
pile of letters from Paris, London, Berlin and other cities. She responds to
them , often leaving the flat <...>. (The end of the text is lost. - KA.)
10 February 1925.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Exhibit 2
Having received a letter of recommendation from Gr. Sergey Vladimirovich
PALISADOV[377] to Gr. KIRICHENKO-OSTROMOV (aka Watson),
[(378)(]) I went to his flat at 8 Moskovskaya Street, Apt. 9, on Sunday, as he
only receives on that day, the rest of the time he lives in Detskoye Selo with a
former senator.
FROLOV,[(379)(]) also a Freemason working among his acquaintances. When I
asked him whether in Leningrad there were many adherents of the Masonic
current to which he adhered, he evasively replied that there were, but that in
most cases these people were involved in science,    as    e.g.,    Head of]
Push[kinskiy]    House    gr.
MODZALEVSKY Boris Lvovich,[380] Prof. STRUVE[(381)(]) and others. In
response to my indications that MODZALEVSKY belonged earlier, as I
know, to the group of the so-called "Cosmos", where Prof. Maksim Maksim
once belonged.
Maksimovich KOVALEVSKY,[382] he confirmed that at this time.
"Cosmos" is an insignificant group uniting only the literary fraternity, and
that to this group belonged the exiled from the RSFSR Profs
LOSSKY,[(383)(]) KARSAVIN,[(384)(]) as well as the present-day "Cosmos".
Prof. MEYER,[(385)(]) PERGAMENT[(386)(])and others, who are in Leningrad.
Of his acquaintances he did not indicate to me a single person. To my
question, to which orientation to refer SHANDAROVSKY, KIRICHENKO
told me in the affirmative that SHANDAROVSKY belongs to the group of
the so-called "Northern Lodges". To my question whether it was not to those
"Northern Lodges",   which   were   organised by   in   Finland   by a
from
He said yes. When I asked him if there was anyone of this group in the USSR,
he said that there were  many  of his  students in Moscowand  in  including
indicatedTo my question whether there is anyone in this group in the USSR,
he said that in Moscow there are   many   of his   pupils   and   in
including   including   pointed   to   Prof. KORDIK.
Zubakina,[(388)(]) and in Leningrad it seems that Shandarovsky belongs to this
group. When I asked him if he knew Shandarovsky's address, he replied that
Pyotr Sergeevich Shandarovsky lived at 32, 25 October Avenue, married to
the artist Zinaida Nikolaevna NIKOLAEVA (stage), and that he worked
among artistic groups, having taken an active part in the organisation of the
so-called "Artistic Lodge of Free Stonemasons", which did not last long. He
also said that to this lodge belonged   such   large   artistic   forces,   anti-
Soviet.part in the organisation of the
so-called "Artistic Lodge of Free Stonemasons", which did not last long. He
also said that to this lodge belonged   such   large   artistic   forces,   anti-
Soviet.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ation of the
so-called "Artistic Lodge of Free Stonemasons", which did not last long. He
also said that to this lodge belonged   such   large   artistic   forces,   anti-
Soviet.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The following people were in favour of the project: Pavel Mikhailovich
SAMOILOV, Maria Alexandrovna POTOTOTSKAYA, Nina Mikhailovna
ZHELEZNOVA,
Maria
Andreyevna
VEDRINSKAYA,
and
Nikolai
Nikolayevich EVREINOV,
[(389)(]) Nikolai Nikolaevich KHODOTOV [(390)(]) and others who were
corrupting the whole artistic milieu. Evreinov, POTOTOTSKAYA were
arrested, POTOTOTSKAYA for her communications and correspondence
with Grand Duke NIKOLAI NIKOLAEVICH, whose wife she was, and she
still has an illegal connection with the emigrant milieu in Leningrad. When I
asked him if there was any relevant literature in Leningrad, and whether and
where it had been preserved, he said that such repositories were secretly
guarded for the time being, and affirmatively informed me that near N[ovaya]
Ladoga there was a manor house of a distant relative of the famous
Mason Shvarts,[(391)(]) also by the surname of Evgeny Grigorievich Shvarts.
And that at him as if in the attic are hidden ancient manuscripts, diplomas and
corresponding Masonic literature and attributes. On my proposal to go there
sometime for my acquaintance with Gr. Schwartz, he said that he would think
about it, and asked me to visit him on one of the next Sundays. Having
previously known of
that Boris Viktorovich KIRICHENKO was a disciple of G.O.M.,[(392)(]) I asked
about G.O.M., he said that G.O.M. was extremely old and therefore no longer
took an active part in the work due to his advanced age, and that he and
G.O.M. had separated on matters of principle.   He pointed out      that
the current   cohabitant of   G.O.M.    -.
Maria Andreevna NESTEROVA, [(393)(]) has entangled him, does not allow
outsiders to visit him, fearing various spies, etc., while she herself does all the
extensive work for him. KIRICHENKO at the same time reported that the
former wife of G.O.M. IVANOVA-NAGORNAYA, who now works the
Department of Preschool Education at Kazanskaya Street in the GUBONO, is
intensively engaged in organising separate groups among the teachers, and
that there are about 1500 such united members among the Leningrad
professors.
From conversations about the Academy of Sciences and its personalities,
such as OLBDENBURGH and others, he said that a certain GRENSTRAND
(Head of] the Trade and Expeditionary Sector) also belonged to a lodge, but to
which lodge he did not know. Having promised to visit him one Sunday, I
left.thers, he said that a certain GRENSTRAND
(Head of] the Trade and Expeditionary Sector) also belonged to a lodge, but to
which lodge he did not know. Having promised to visit him one Sunday, I
left.

--- PAGE BREAK ---a certain GRENSTRAND
(Head of] the Trade and Expeditionary Sector) also belonged to a lodge, but to
which lodge he did not know. Having promised to visit him one Sunday, I
left.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The famous Russian self-taught inventor Yablochkin was also involved in
the Cosmos lodge. Of the academic centres the following        professors
belong to this group:    FRANK-KAMENETSKY
Israel Grigorievich,[(394)(]) residing] at 5 Khalturina St., Shileiko Vladimir
Kazimirovich,[395(]) residing in the same house, and in Moscow Prof.
Yanovich([)(396)(]) - ethnographer, residing at 17 Nikitsky Blvd. 17.
Having learnt   from   some   sources   about   the involvement of
Prof.
KOVALEVSKY,[(397)(]) now working in the People's Commissariat for Land, I
went to see him, introducing myself as a person interested in Freemasonry. He
met me in an extremely friendly manner and informed me that it was difficult
for him in such years to take an ardent part in familiarising himself with the
details of the present Masonic current. To my question whether he was
acquainted with a certain Gr. Valero-Valersky, he informed me that this
Valero-Valersky visits him almost daily, enjoys his hospitality and sometimes
his material means. Knowing that gr. VALERO-VALERSKY (see my old
summaries) of various such affairs, in the sense of intercourse with the West, I
approached KOVALEVSKY very cautiously, lest he should decipher me.
After various minor inquiries about his former life and meetings, I went
straight to the most painful question and asked him what VALERO-
VALERSKY was doing now and whether he still had relations with the West,
he told me that VALERO-VALERSKY (a pseudonym) was his real name.
surname Grachev,[(398)(]) as the former personal secretary of Count ORLOV-
DAVYDOV-DENISOV,[(399)(]) with whom he is still on good terms, <...> and
that he is now graduating from the Geographical   Institute   and   at the
same time   Institute   of the Living.
He is thinking of taking advantage of his privileged position to leave the
USSR. KOVALEVSKY reported that GRACHEV had already been to
Mongolia, almost walked through [all of it], and therefore his main goal was
to return there again and join the Mongolian government, with some members
of which he was well acquainted. At the same time KOVALEVSKY informed
that VALERO-VALERSKY has enormous connections with foreign countries
and during his frequent visits he often changes his costume, sometimes
coming in luxurious clothes and sometimes in simple ones,that VALERO-VALERSKY has enormous connections with foreign countries
and during his frequent visits he often changes his costume, sometimes
coming in luxurious clothes and sometimes in simple ones,

--- PAGE BREAK ---Y has enormous connections with foreign countries
and during his frequent visits he often changes his costume, sometimes
coming in luxurious clothes and sometimes in simple ones,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

almost in rags, without giving any explanation such a masquerade. When I
asked him if he knew Colonel ELBTSA, he said that he was a good friend of
his, now living abroad and playing a great part among Russian emigrants. He
asked me how I knew ELBTSA, to which I told him that I had once met
ELBTSA at G.O.M.'s, when he was still a teacher in the Corps of Pages,
having been expelled from it for seducing young pageboys into Freemasonry,
who had informed me of the famous promissory notes of the artiste
SHABELBSKY, with forged signatures, which promissory notes were
presented to me as an expert to determine their authenticity. Seeing that I
knew his intimate old life, he began to inform me more credulously of some
contemporary news, and informed me that this famous Colonel ELETZ now
resided in Austria in one of the estates of the ex-crown princes, with his friend
Jaime of Bourbon, and was engaged in some work of instructing young
Vatican officers sent to Russia to plant Catholicism among the Russian clergy.
He explained his attitude to Jesuitism by the fact that Colonel ELETZ is in the
rank of State Marshal of the Vatican, for his former services in defence of a
Catholic monastery in Manchuria during the attack on that monastery by the
Boxer gangs. He now works among the Poles and, through his marriage to the
Countess Tyszkiewicz, has access to the most conspiratorial Polish centres.
His closest aide,
as he says, according to rumours, is Colonel PALBCHINSKY,[400] now
allegedly in the Caucasus, formerly residing in Leningrad and working
among the professors of the Military Medical Academy, and as if this
PALBCHINSKY heads the so-called lodge
"Vega." KOVALEVSKY reported that gr. GRACHEV has great connections
among some of the officers of the Special Department and, thanks to his
acquaintance with them, sends White Guards hiding in the USSR across the
frontier. Expressing his doubt as to the possibility of such a fact, he informed
me that these were former officers who had settled down in the service and
concealed their past. Who these officers were, I did not feel comfortable
asking. Perhaps on my next visit I will be able to find out more about them.
Typewriting, b\dettled down in the service and
concealed their past. Who these officers were, I did not feel comfortable
asking. Perhaps on my next visit I will be able to find out more about them.
Typewriting, b\d

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Archive of the FSSB Department for S-Neter6urr and Neno6region. Case N-21098 (archival
and investigative file of K.K. Vladimirov). These two summaries and some other reports are in a
separate envelope in the file.

--- PAGE BREAK ---S-Neter6urr and Neno6region. Case N-21098 (archival
and investigative file of K.K. Vladimirov). These two summaries and some other reports are in a
separate envelope in the file.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

O
NNNOGENNE 5
Excerpt from Eliyahu Chaim Altgauz's letter about A.I.
Barchenko's meeting with the spiritual head of the Hasidim Yosef
Yitzhak
Schneerson.192   .
At that time an unpleasant event happened to Rabeinu (I. I. Shneerson
- A.A.), which in fact has not been revealed and clarified until today,
and it remained closed
a mystery, and no one knows what explanation to give for it. And if there had
not been all sorts of discussions and accusations during my imprisonment, I
would not have broken my silence. On the night of the name of Atzeret in the
year 5686 (12 October 1925 - A.A.), before the Akafot ceremony, a stranger
came to Rabeinu's house and asked to report to Rabeinu that Professor
Barchenko from Moscow wanted to come to him and talk to him alone in his
chambers. When he heard that today was a holiday and that Rabeinu was not
engaged in any routine  on such days, he did not accept this answer, thought it
was an excuse and insisted indecently that he be introduced to the Rebbe. And
because of respect for the professor's name and because of apprehension (for
it was not written on his face who he was), one of us went to the high table at
which the Rebbe and all those who took part in the meal were sitting, and told
him about this guest. The Rebbe did nothing, but called his secretary
Lieberman and asked him to convey his apologies to the guest, since he would
not be able to receive him because of the holy day, but if it would please him,
let him come the day after the holiday, and then he would be received with
honour. After Lieberman's reply, the professor said: I am very sorry that I
have wasted my time for nothing, but I will stay to wait in Leningrad until
after the holiday. And so he did.
And on the day after the feast he came again and was immediately
received in the Rebbe's chambers and sat alone with him for a long time. And
we, who were close to the Rebbe, did not know the purpose of his coming,
and why he needed the Rebbe. And after that he confessed to us that this
Barchenko is engaged in wisdom hidden from people, based on numerology,
in order to reveal the hidden and predict the future, and this [teaching] has
some relation and connection with Kabbalah (may they not be mentioned
together), and that he had already organised a society in Moscow, whiche hidden and predict the future, and this [teaching] has
some relation and connection with Kabbalah (may they not be mentioned
together), and that he had already organised a society in Moscow, which

--- PAGE BREAK ---the future, and this [teaching] has
some relation and connection with Kabbalah (may they not be mentioned
together), and that he had already organised a society in Moscow, which

--- PAGE BREAK ---

is interested and engaged in this doctrine, and they have permission from the
government to engage in it, and many of the great and great have joined this
society. And so, when Barchenko knew that in Leningrad there was the
greatest scholar of Israel, wise in the wisdom of Kabbalah, from whom there
are no secret secrets and the ways of Heaven are open to him, he went to him
to hear his interpretations, for according to Barchenko, his wisdom led him to
believe in the One G-d, blessed be He, just as we, the children of Israel,
believe. From the Rebbe's answers only this became known to us, because
there is no study of Hasidism and no connection with predicting the future,
and it is forbidden for us to interpret it and what concerns Barchenko's
questions concerning Kabbalah and Kabbalistic books, but he, the Rebbe, is
ready to serve him in this only so that his precious time would not be wasted;
and also he cannot translate from language to language, but when he arrives
from Yekaterinoslav, he will be able to translate from language to language.
M. Shneerson (Menachem-Mendl, in the future the 7th Lubavitcher Rebbe. -
A.A.), he will ask him to find for Barchenko stories from Kabbalah and
translate them into the language of Russia and send them to his address),
which he will leave, because he, Mr. Shneerson, knows well the language of
Kabbalists, and also translates well into another language. And Barchenko
was pleased and thanked the Rebbe for accepting him, and Barchenko set off
on his journey.
We also became aware of the Rebbe's opinion and his views on the power
of this professor, whom he respected, for beware, for in the first minutes,
when he began to speak about the oneness of G-d, blessed be He, and about
numerology and predicting the future, the Rebbe thought that he was a little
crazy, But Barchenko also felt it and took out of his pocket an important paper
from the great professors of Moscow, in which it was certified by their
signatures that his mind was clear and there was no spying in him, so that they
would not look at him as a spy, and showed him many papers from the
political department and from the Sovnarkhoz (Council of National
Economy), in which he served in an important position. And after some time a
certain amount of money, several hundred gold rubles, was suddenly received
from Barchenko for the Rebbe. The letter enclosed said that he was sprinkling
this sum for the travelling expenses of R. Schneerson from Yekaterinoslav to
Leningrad. The Rebbe returned the entire sum back to him the same day.e. The letter enclosed said that he was sprinkling
this sum for the travelling expenses of R. Schneerson from Yekaterinoslav to
Leningrad. The Rebbe returned the entire sum back to him the same day.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Barchenko, having received his money back, could not find rest for his
saddened soul, and he wrote a long letter to the Rebbe, in which he tried to
explain
to
him
and
show
his
righteousness
and
honesty
and
straightforwardness, and that there was no crookedness in him, God forbid,
and from the fact that the Rebbe returned his money to him, he understood
that the Rebbe doubted his sincerity, and he would have to come and talk to
him face to face because of that, in order to clear the Rebbe's heart from vain
suspicions. And so he did so, coming in the winter to visit the Rebbe, and then
the Rebbe introduced him to R. Schneerson (Menachem-Mendl. - A.A.); and
the whole year there was correspondence and meetings with R. Schneerson in
Barchenko's house, and the Rebbe forgot about him and his case, and he didn't
follow what was happening and didn't pay attention and didn't think about it
anymore.
Likkutei Dibburim. An Anthology of Talks by Rabbi Yosef Yitzchak
Schneerson of Lubavitch. Vol. V. 1990. C. 1375-1377 (in Hebrew).
Translated from the Hebrew by M. Œ. Bbruk

--- PAGE BREAK ---nymore.
Likkutei Dibburim. An Anthology of Talks by Rabbi Yosef Yitzchak
Schneerson of Lubavitch. Vol. V. 1990. C. 1375-1377 (in Hebrew).
Translated from the Hebrew by M. Œ. Bbruk

--- PAGE BREAK ---

U
NNNOGENNE 6
From the minutes of the interrogation of G.I. Bokia dated 17-18
May 1937.
LADOVATELB: Tell us about all the political differences that you say
led you to the internal divide.
BOCIUS: My divergence from the Party began as early as 1918
with the Brest peace, when I succumbed to petty-bourgeois sentiments and,
together with Bukharin and other left communists, went against Lenin. By
virtue of the traditions I had developed, I then submitted to Party discipline,
but, since I was not persuaded, the circumstance left an unpleasant residue in
me. This unpleasant feeling was intensified when I was transferred from Party
work to work in the Cheka, and especially when, because of the conflict with
Zinoviev, I was recalled from Leningrad to Moscow, then sent to Tashkent,
from where, together with other members of the Turkkomission, I was also
recalled, or rather removed from work. By the period of the trade union
discussion, the personal dissatisfaction that had grown out of the above-
mentioned failures began to develop into a more general dissatisfaction.
During the period of the discussion I stood on Lenin's position, but the
demagogic methods of struggle that we used, in my opinion, repelled me from
it and deepened my dissatisfaction with the existing situation. The events of
Kronstadt made an indelible impression on me. I could not reconcile myself to
the idea that the very sailors who had taken part in the October battles had
rebelled against the Party and the authorities, and in searching for an
explanation of this fact I came to blame the Central Committee When the
NEP was introduced I, despite the tear I had formed, did not oppose this
measure of the Party. In my gut, however, I could not accept the NEP and
recognised it only because I saw no other outcome. This circumstance led to a
deepening of the inner discord in me, and I began to withdraw from party life.
I took the discussion with Trotsky in 1923-1924 in the party way, and
although I did not share Trotsky's views, I was against what, in my opinion,
was the excessive passion that was used in the polemics against him. The
death of Lenin had a decisive influence in the future. I saw in it the death of
the revolution. Lenin's will, which to men,
was the excessive passion that was used in the polemics against him. The
death of Lenin had a decisive influence in the future. I saw in it the death of
the revolution. Lenin's will, which to me

--- PAGE BREAK ---e passion that was used in the polemics against him. The
death of Lenin had a decisive influence in the future. I saw in it the death of
the revolution. Lenin's will, which to me

--- PAGE BREAK ---

became known, I do not remember from whom, prevented me from
perceiving Stalin as the leader of the party, and I, seeing no prospects for
revolution, went into mysticism.
By 1926-1927 I had already drifted so far away from the Party that the
struggle with the Trotskyites and Zinovievites, which was unfolding at that
time, passed me by and I took no part in it. Deepening more and more into
mysticism under the influence of Barchenko, I finally organised a Masonic
association with him and embarked on the path of direct counter-revolutionary
activity.
THE WITNESS: Who is Barchenko, how do you know him, and how did
he involve you in the Masonic organisation?
BOCIY: A.V. Barchenko, biologist, currently an employee of VIEM,
where I placed him in 1935. I was introduced to Barchenko in 1924 by former
Leningrad Cheka officers Leismeyer-Schwartz and Vladimirov, who came
from Leningrad. Appearing to me in the Special Department of the OGPU
accompanied by Barchenko, they recommended him to me as a talented
researcher who made an extremely important political discovery, and asked
me to bring him to the leadership of the OGPU in order to implement his idea.
Barchenko put forward the theory that in prehistoric times there was a
culturally highly developed society, which then died as a result of geological
cataclysms. This society was communist and was at a higher stage of social
(communist) and logistical development than ours. The remnants of this
higher society, according to Barchenko, still exist in impregnable
mountainous areas located at the junctions of India, Tibet, Kashgar and
Afghanistan, and possess all the scientific and technical knowledge that was
known to the ancient society, the so-called "Ancient Science", which is a
synthesis of all scientific knowledge. The existence of both the Ancient
Science and the very remnants of this society is a secret, carefully guarded by
its members. This desire to preserve its existence in secrecy Barchenko
explained the antagonism of the ancient society with the Roman Pope. The
Roman popes throughout history persecuted the remnants of the ancient
society that survived elsewhere, and eventually destroyed them completely.
Barchenko called himself a follower of ancient society, stating that he was aistory persecuted the remnants of the ancient
society that survived elsewhere, and eventually destroyed them completely.
Barchenko called himself a follower of ancient society, stating that he was a

--- PAGE BREAK ---e remnants of the ancient
society that survived elsewhere, and eventually destroyed them completely.
Barchenko called himself a follower of ancient society, stating that he was a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

was initiated into all this by secret messengers of his religious-political centre,
with whom he had once managed to get in touch.
 kind of messengers are they?
BOCIUS: Barchenko mentioned the names of Mongolian-Tibetan sages
Naga Naven and Khayan Khirvu. These sages were part of a Mongolian-
Tibetan delegation that travelled to Leningrad and Moscow in 1918 to liaise
with the Soviets. The delegates were not received by the Soviet government
and, insulted, went back. Barchenko, however, during their stay in Leningrad
had the opportunity to meet with them, and they initiated him into their plans.
During the period of my meeting with Barchenko I was interested in his story
about the existence of a synthesis of absolute scientific knowledge and tried to
organise Barchenko's trip to Afghanistan in 1925 in order to get in contact
with the keepers of this ancient science. Our enterprise, however, failed
because Chicherin protested against it. Irrespective of the failure of my
enterprise, I, without abandoning my intention to get in touch with the
guardians of the Ancient Science, organised from among the staff of the
Special Department a circle for the study of this mystical doctrine. This circle
worked under the guidance of Barchenko, who was initiated into its secrets.
The circle included the employees of the Special Department of the
VChK/OHPU Gusev, Tsibizov, Klemenko, Filippov, Leonov, Gopius,
Pluzhnitsov. Soon after I organised the circle, however, it became clear that
the persons I had attracted to it from among the employees of the Special
Department were not prepared to perceive the mysteries of Ancient Science.
In this connection the circle broke up, and I attracted new persons from
among my old comrades at the Mining Institute to study the mystical
teachings of Barchenko. These persons later formed our Masonic community.
THE WITNESS: Who, other than yourself, was part of that community?
BOKIY: Apart from me and Barchenko, who led our classes, our group
included: Kastrykin /Kostrikin. - A.A.) Mikhail Lavrentievich, Alexander
Vladimirovich Mironov, Ivan Moskvin    Mikhailovich    and
Stomonyakov    Boris    Spiridonovich.our classes, our group
included: Kastrykin /Kostrikin. - A.A.) Mikhail Lavrentievich, Alexander
Vladimirovich Mironov, Ivan Moskvin    Mikhailovich    and
Stomonyakov    Boris    Spiridonovich.

--- PAGE BREAK ---oup
included: Kastrykin /Kostrikin. - A.A.) Mikhail Lavrentievich, Alexander
Vladimirovich Mironov, Ivan Moskvin    Mikhailovich    and
Stomonyakov    Boris    Spiridonovich.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

For a short time the group included Alexander Yakovlevich Sosnovsky.
THE WITNESS: What kind of contact did you have with these
individuals other than the circle?
BOCIUS: All these persons, as I have already shown, are my old
comrades at the Mining Institute. In addition to the meetings at which
Barchenko read us abstracts on his mystical teaching, we   had   established
traditional   meetings,   so   called
"rendezvous of friends". Three or four times a year I, Stomonyakov,
Kastrykin, and Mironov would meet at the house of an old acquaintance,
Altayeva, and spend two or three hours together, after which we would part
company, not meeting until the next time.
THE WITNESS: For what purpose did you produce these gatherings,
what did you do at them?
BOCIUS: We came together as old friends just to spend time together. We
didn't set any other goals.
You're not telling the truth. We will return to the study of this question in
the future. Now, what Masonic order did your community belong to?
BOCIY: I use the name "Ancient Science" for our society conditionally,
as a name that shows that our society's main task was to master the mystical
teaching known as "Ancient Science" and was oriented to the religious-
mystical centre, which was its guardian. Barchenko, who was a mentor in our
community and once established contact with this centre, called it Shambhala
or Dunhor, which means "seven circles of knowledge" in Tibetan. According
to Barchenko, Shambhala-Dünkhor is the highest Masonic chapter, with
which all Masonic orders were connected in the past. At present, this chapter
extends its influence mainly to eastern countries, particularly China, Tibet,
Xinjiang, India, Afghanistan and even North Africa. The influence of the
Chapter in these countries, according to Barchenko, is so great that in Africa,
for example, it approves the accession of new emirs to the throne. Before
moving to Moscow in 1925, Barchenko had a major conflict with the leaders
of the Masonic organisation in Leningrad, who accused him of divulging the
secrets of the Order and threatened him with themoving to Moscow in 1925, Barchenko had a major conflict with the leaders
of the Masonic organisation in Leningrad, who accused him of divulging the
secrets of the Order and threatened him with the

--- PAGE BREAK ---1925, Barchenko had a major conflict with the leaders
of the Masonic organisation in Leningrad, who accused him of divulging the
secrets of the Order and threatened him with the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

by annihilation. This threat on behalf of the Masonic organisation was made
to him in 1924 by a member of the Order, Acad. Oldenburg. In connection
with the conflict with the leadership of the organisation Barchenko withdrew
from its Leningrad nucleus and began to seek ways for direct communication
with the highest chapter of Shambhala-Dunghor, uniting around himself
various Masonic element. Thus our mystical community, actually an
independent lodge, orientated on direct connection with the highest Masonic
chapter of Shambhala-Dunghor, appeared. To which order Barchenko
belonged before moving from Leningrad, I find it difficult to say. In view of
Barchenko's special, conflicting relations with the main core of the Masonic
organisation in Leningrad, none of us, grouped around Barchenko in the new
lodge, was not officially initiated, and, as the uninitiated, Barchenko could not
tell some of the secrets of the Order, to which we did not formally belong. By
indirect hints Barchenko and general observations can be judged that he is
initiated into the Order of the Rosencreutzers. I say this on the basis of the fact
that Barchenko definitely pointed to the Rosencreutzers as an order associated
with our centre Shambhala-Dunhor. At Barchenko in various kinds of
geometrical drawings and numerous photographic pictures of objects of
antiquity constantly repeated emblems of a rose, a cross and a bowl which are
symbols of Rosenkreuzers. At present Barchenko possesses a seal with all-
Masonic emblems - a double triangle with the Sun, Moon and bowl
symbolically depicted on its sides.
THE WITNESS: Who do you know of among the members of the
Masonic organisation?
BOKIY: Apart from the already listed by me Stomonyakov, Moskvin,
Kastrykin and Mironov, who were members of our lodge, according to
Barchenko, the following Leningrad residents are known as members of the
Masonic organisation: Vyacheslov - doctor, Zabrazhnev - former employee of
the People's Commissariat, Kondiain (Masonic alias Tamil) - astrophysicist
and former employees of the Leningrad Cheka-PPOGPU - Leismeyer-
Schwartz, Otto, Vladimirov and Rix.
About Kondiain and former employees of the Leningrad Cheka
Barchenko spoke to me not as dedicated Freemasons, but as his disciples andad Cheka-PPOGPU - Leismeyer-
Schwartz, Otto, Vladimirov and Rix.
About Kondiain and former employees of the Leningrad Cheka
Barchenko spoke to me not as dedicated Freemasons, but as his disciples and

--- PAGE BREAK ---ismeyer-
Schwartz, Otto, Vladimirov and Rix.
About Kondiain and former employees of the Leningrad Cheka
Barchenko spoke to me not as dedicated Freemasons, but as his disciples and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

followers. I know all of them personally, and I have heard similar statements
from . Kondiain, moreover, at the request of Barchenko once made a report at
the classes of our circle. As an initiate into the mysteries of the mystical
teachings of Shambala-Dyunkhor Barchenko told me about a certain Gurdjieff
- the director of the
The Institute of Rhythm in Paris,[401] who once lived in the USSR. A disciple
and follower of Gurdjieff on the territory of the USSR in former times,
according to Barchenko, was the sculptor Merkurov. Gurdjieff, as Barchenko
told me, tried to establish contact with his disciple Merkurov, but he evaded
this for reasons unknown to me. As his disciples and followers of Shambala-
Dyunkhora Barchenko called me the co-workers Lobach and Shishelova,
Shishelova's fictitious husband and an employee of the People's Commissariat
Korolev. Finally, even before the revolution I was aware of the affiliation to
the Freemasons of Acad. Oldenburg, about whom I have already shown
above.
What kind of fictitious husband does Barchenko's follower Shishelova
have?
BOCIUS: The fact is that Shishelova's real surname is Markova. She is
the daughter of Markova II, a well-known Black Hundred member of the
State Duma. Wishing to change her surname in order to conceal her social
origin, Markova concluded a marriage with one of Barchenko's followers.
THE WITNESS: You have shown that your lodge was orientated to liaise
directly with the central chapter. Tell us what you did to establish that
connection?
BOCIUS: To organise this connection, I arranged for Barchenko to travel
to various areas of the Union, in respect of which we had data that there were
any religious and mystical sects of Eastern origin oriented towards
Shambhala.
What funds were used to organise these trips?
BOCIUS: On the funds I illegally released to Barchenko from the sums of
par. 9 and the illegal fund I had. 9 and the illegal fund I had. In general, I
completely supported Barchenko and his family for 10 years - from 1925   to
1935      Illegal   disbursements   of money   Barchenko   I   continued.d. 9 and the illegal fund I had. In general, I
completely supported Barchenko and his family for 10 years - from 1925   to
1935      Illegal   disbursements   of money   Barchenko   I   continued.

--- PAGE BREAK ---fund I had. In general, I
completely supported Barchenko and his family for 10 years - from 1925   to
1935      Illegal   disbursements   of money   Barchenko   I   continued.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This year I gave him about 23,000 roubles, of which about 9,000 from the par.
9, and the remaining 13-14 thousand from the illegal fund.
What was the illegal fund from which you supplied Barchenko?
BOKIY: These are sums of money received by the Special Branch from
various institutions for the fireproof cabinets we sold and for the work we did
on codes. I used to keep this money illegally in the Special Branch's coffers,
and I spent it as I saw fit.
What specific trips did you arrange for Barchenko?
BOCIUS: I have in my memory the following cases. In 1925 I organised
Barchenko's trip to Altai, where Barchenko was to establish a connection with
the sects of the "Belovodya" - religious-mystical circles jb Central Asia,
representing according to mystical doctrine the nearest environment of our
Shambhala centre. As a result of Barchenko's trip among the local sectarians
were established persons who made regular pilgrimages to the mystical centre
located beyond the cordon. In 1926-1927. Barchenko travelled to Crimea -
Bakhchisarai, where he established contact with members of the Muslim
dervish order Saidi-Edtsini-Djibawi. Subsequently, he summoned to Moscow
and brought to me the son of the sheikh (head) of this order. About the same
time he travelled to Ufa and Kazan, where he established contact with the
dervishes of the Paksh-Bendi and Khalidi orders. Barchenko also travelled at
various times to Samara province and Kostroma to liaise with sectarians. In
1926 Barchenko travelled to Kostroma to meet a representative of our
Shambhala Order, who was arrive from abroad.
THE WITNESS: Were you aware that all these sects represent socially
and politically hostile sections of the population and are saturated with an
espionage element?
BOKY: Yeah, I knew.
THE INSPECTOR: For what purpose did you seek connections with
counter-revolutionaries and spies?
BOCIUS: I did not specifically seek links with the espionage element, I
went into contact with the above-mentioned sects, being fascinated by the
mystical teachings of Barchenko and putting the mastery of its secrets aboveically seek links with the espionage element, I
went into contact with the above-mentioned sects, being fascinated by the
mystical teachings of Barchenko and putting the mastery of its secrets above

--- PAGE BREAK ---th the espionage element, I
went into contact with the above-mentioned sects, being fascinated by the
mystical teachings of Barchenko and putting the mastery of its secrets above

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the interests of the Party and the State. The high task of mastering the
scientific mystical secrets of Shambhala in my eyes justified the departure
from the Marxist-Leninist doctrine of classes and class struggle and the
connection with the class enemy. Nevertheless, I did not want to cause any
special harm to the Party and Soviet power, and none of the members of our
Order was known as a spy or a person connected with spies.
That's not true. Where is Vladimirov, who recommended Barchenko to
you at the time, currently located?
BOCIUS: Vladimirov was shot in 1926 or 1927 for spying for England.
THE WITNESS: So how do you say you don't know of any members of
your order engaged in espionage or associated with spies?
BOCIUS: I admit that I was aware of the facts indicating Barchenko's
espionage activities.
THE INSPECTOR: So why did you not take action to arrest and bring
Barchenko to justice, but helped him to continue his espionage activities?
BOCIUS: I recognise that our lodge was part of the all-Masonic system of
espionage. I tolerated this situation because, as I have already said, I placed
the interests of our Order above those of the Party and the State and,
observing manifestations of counter-revolutionary espionage activity, I turned
a blind eye to them, justifying them by the same interests of our Order.
SLEDOVATELB: Who else, other than Vladimirov, were the members of
the lodge associated with in terms of espionage?
BOKIY: From the words of Barchenko I know about the connections of
our order with the famous organiser of English espionage in the East,
currently living in Paris, the English prince Aga Khan. Aga Khan is a member
of the Order of Sham-bala-Dunghor and is directly connected with the centre.
In addition, Barchenko  a connection with Poland, through a member of our
order, Kondiain. In particular, Barchenko told me in 1925 that Kondiain
received "under the guise of inheritance" money from Poland.
THE ATTORNEY: Give detailed testimony as to what Barchenko's
espionage activities were.rticular, Barchenko told me in 1925 that Kondiain
received "under the guise of inheritance" money from Poland.
THE ATTORNEY: Give detailed testimony as to what Barchenko's
espionage activities were.

--- PAGE BREAK ---told me in 1925 that Kondiain
received "under the guise of inheritance" money from Poland.
THE ATTORNEY: Give detailed testimony as to what Barchenko's
espionage activities were.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BOCIUS: Barchenko's espionage activities mainly consisted in the
creation of an extensive espionage apparatus. This work was carried out by
him in two directions - organisation of a spy network in the periphery and
penetration into the leading Soviet and party circles. The latter was done with
the aim of mastering the minds of the leading workers and, following the
example of the Masonic organisations in capitalist countries, particularly in
France, to direct the activities of the government at will. To plant a network in
the periphery, Barchenko used various religious and mystical sects of oriental
origin. For this purpose, he constantly travelled to different parts of the Union,
established links with local sectarian organisations, and met with emissaries
from abroad. In 1926, when he travelled to Kostroma to meet representatives
of our Shambala Order, which was to arrive from abroad, he was detained by
the local department of the OGPU. I, however, having in mind the interests of
the Order, ordered his release. Besides Kostroma, as I have already shown, he
travelled to Altai, the Crimea, Kazan, Ufa and Samara province. In order to
penetrate into the leading circles of Soviet workers, Barchenko tried to
interest individuals in his "scientific research", its importance for the defence
of the country, and so on. Having interested someone in the scientific side of
the question, he gradually moved to the presentation of his doctrine of
Shambala and, having entangled the victim in a web of mysticism, used it for
espionage purposes. In this way he at one time processed me and infiltrated
the OPTU. Subsequently, Stomonyakov, Moskvin, Mironov and Kastrykin
were treated with my participation. With my help he managed to interest in
his teachings the former head of the sub-department of national minorities of
the Central Committee of the All-Union Communist Party of Bolsheviks
(Bolsheviks) Dimanshtein and the engineer Flakserman, who at my invitation
attended 2 times the classes of our circle Ancient Science. Not content with
this, Barchenko asked me to set him up with Molotov and Voroshilov.
Especially persistently he began to seek a meeting with Voroshilov recently.
He acted together with Leismeyer-Schwartz, who at one time brought
Barchenko to me. Leismeyer specially for this purpose in early 1936 came
from Leningrad to Moscow and carried Voroshilov written by Barchenko at
the insistence of Leismeyer report. Voroshilov Leismeyer, however, did notmeyer specially for this purpose in early 1936 came
from Leningrad to Moscow and carried Voroshilov written by Barchenko at
the insistence of Leismeyer report. Voroshilov Leismeyer, however, did not

--- PAGE BREAK ---this purpose in early 1936 came
from Leningrad to Moscow and carried Voroshilov written by Barchenko at
the insistence of Leismeyer report. Voroshilov Leismeyer, however, did not

--- PAGE BREAK ---

accepted. After that Leismeyer went to Leningrad and sent Barchenko a small
amount of money (200 rubles), which Barchenko for some reason did not
accept and sent back.
What espionage activities did you conduct, what specific espionage
assignments did you personally receive from Barchenko?
BOKIY: I did not receive direct espionage assignments from Barchenko.
My role in this case was that, being fascinated by Barchenko's mysticism, I
disregarded the interests of the state and helped him to conduct espionage
work [7], turning a blind eye to the nature of his activities and covering it with
the name of the OGPU Special Branch.
That is incorrect. In your position, Barchenko could not but seek to use
you more actively for espionage purposes.
BOCIUS: The reasons for Barchenko's restraint in this respect are not
clear to me either. Now, after the circumstances discovered under the
direction of Commissar of Internal Affairs Yezhov, I think that espionage in
the organs of the OGPU-NKVD followed a different line. With the most
active use of me, I could not give the information other arrested persons, in
particular Yagoda, were able to give. In this connection I was evidently kept
in reserve, not wishing to expose me to the risk of failure associated with any
active work, and being content with the general assistance which I rendered to
Barchenko. The following circumstance  leads me to this conclusion. For the
last year and a half or two years my connection with Barchenko has weakened
considerably. We have not met, and he has ceased to address me with any
requests, and it was only after the recent arrests that he, endeavouring to re-
establish his former connection with me, again addressed a letter to me. I
believe that here it is an attempt to include me in active espionage, in view of
the failure of other lines.
The investigation doesn't believe you. By trying to divert the investigation
away from the investigation of your espionage activities, you want to steer it
in another direction. I suggest that you testify frankly about your espionage
work.
BOCIUS: To what I have already shown, I can add nothing more
substantial.
28 May 19C7 r.es, you want to steer it
in another direction. I suggest that you testify frankly about your espionage
work.
BOCIUS: To what I have already shown, I can add nothing more
substantial.
28 May 19C7 r.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Interrogated by: Deputy Commissar of the Military Committee of
Internal Affairs, Commissar of State Security of the 2nd District Velsky,
State Security Lieutenant Ali Archive of the Department of Internal
Affairs for St. Petersburg and Leboblast. Case 23 768. N.60-68.

--- PAGE BREAK ---of State Security of the 2nd District Velsky,
State Security Lieutenant Ali Archive of the Department of Internal
Affairs for St. Petersburg and Leboblast. Case 23 768. N.60-68.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1
NRNMEANNP
MAIN DATES OF LIFE AND ACTIVITY OF G.I.BOKII
879 - Born on 3 July in Tiflis into a noble family. 1894-1899
- worked as a tutor in St Petersburg.
1896 - graduated from the 1st real school and 4 courses of the St.
Petersburg Mining Institute.
1897 - member of the "Union of Struggle for the Liberation of the Working
Class".
January 1900 - joined the RSDLP.
1899 - February 1902 - worked as a draftsman at home. February 1902 -
January 1903 - was in exile, worked on the construction of the railway
(Irkutsk, Krasnoyarsk, Achinsk, Baikal) from the Ministry of Railways.
January 1903 - April 1905 - hydraulic engineer in the Ministry of
Agriculture.
1904-1916 (intermittently) - member of the Petersburg Committee of the
RSDWG1(b).
1905-1907 - participates in the revolution.
April 1905 - July 1906 - political prisoner.
July 1906 - July 1907 - continued his work as a hydraulic engineer. July
1907 - December 1908 - again in prison.
January 1909 - March 1916 - hydraulic engineer in the Ministry of
Agriculture.
1915-1916 - member of the "Bolshevik Group of the 15th year under the
Central Committee".
March 1916 - December 1916 - political prisoner.
December 1916 - April 1917 - member of the Russian Bureau of the Central
Committee of the RSDLP(b), headed the department for relations with local
organisations. April 1917
- March 1918 - Secretary of the PC RSDLP(b).
May 1917 - elected to the executive commission of the PC RSDPR(b).
August 1917 - member of the Bolshevik faction of the City Duma, where he
was chairman of the audit committee.
October 1917 - member of the Petrograd Military Revolutionary Committee
(as a representative of the PC)
November 1917 - member of the Revolutionary Defence Committee, later
the Defence Council of Petrograd. Petrograd.er of the Petrograd Military Revolutionary Committee
(as a representative of the PC)
November 1917 - member of the Revolutionary Defence Committee, later
the Defence Council of Petrograd. Petrograd.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Military Revolutionary Committee
(as a representative of the PC)
November 1917 - member of the Revolutionary Defence Committee, later
the Defence Council of Petrograd. Petrograd.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1918 - participated in the opposition "Left Communist" until the
resolution of the VII Party Congress, which he unconditionally obeyed, and
voted at the III Congress of Soviets in favour of the Brest Peace.
March 1918-31 August 1918 - worked as deputy chairman of the
Petrograd Cheka.
From 31 August 1918 (after the murder of M. S. Uritsky) - Chairman of
the Petrograd Cheka.
27 October 1918 - representative of the Central Committee of the RCP(b)
at the regional and territorial committees of the RCP(b) of the Western region.
29 November 1918 - appointed a member of the Collegium of the RSFSR
NKVD. March
1919 - member of the Turkkomission of the All-Union Central Executive
Committee and the Central Committee of the RCP(b).
April 1919 - Head of the Special Department of the Eastern Front. 1919 -
awarded a gold watch from the Revolutionary Military Council of the
Eastern Front.
of the front for merciless struggle against counterrevolution. October 1919 -
Head of the Special Department of the Turkestan Front and at the same time a
member of the Turkestan Collegium of the All-Russian Central Executive
Committee and SNK RSFSR.
April 1920 - plenipotentiary representative of the VChK in Turkestan.
From September 1920 he was treated for tuberculosis, and then he was on
the leading work in Moscow in the organs of VChK-OGPU-NKVD and the
Supreme Court.
January    1921    -    appointed    head of    special department
(cipher) under the Presidium of the VChK.
July 1921 - member of the Collegium of the All-Union Cheka July 1922 -
member of the Collegium of the GPU.
1922 - awarded the Order of the Red Banner by the All-Russian Central
Executive Committee. September 1923 - member of the Collegium of the
OGPU, simultaneously a member of the Collegium of the RSFSR NKVD
until its liquidation in 1930. 1927 - awarded by the Collegium of the OGPU
with a military weapon (Mauser). 1932 - awarded by the Collegium of the
OGPU with the "OGPU Badge of Honour". July 1934 - Head of the Special
Department of the 1UGB NKVD of the USSR.
From the end of December 1936 - Head of the 9th Department of the
GUGB.
16 May 1937 - arrested and shot by sentence of the Military Collegium of
the Supreme Soviet of the USSR.
1956 - posthumously rehabilitated.of December 1936 - Head of the 9th Department of the
GUGB.
16 May 1937 - arrested and shot by sentence of the Military Collegium of
the Supreme Soviet of the USSR.
1956 - posthumously rehabilitated.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

NriMeuania

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1
"Altayeva" - writera Rmimova Mar7arita Vladimirovna, wrote her
works under the pseudonym Al. Altayev (not Altayeva). A close WmXy
WnXmYmXnXl Bo mia. It is strange that Rmimova, in whose apartment the
meetings between Bomiya and his friends took place, was not arrested.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2
Eliade M. No souvenirs. Journal. 1957-1969. N.Y. - L, 1977. P. 16.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C
Tinley Geshe J. Tana: The Path of Awakening. SPb., 1996. U. 47-
48.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4
Bembaum E. The Way to Shambhala. Anchor Press, N.Y., 1980. P. 123-
124. Russian translation of the book: Bernbaum 3. In search of Shambhala. M.,
2005.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5
Csoma de Koros A. Note on the origin of the Kala-Chakra and Adi-
Buddha Systems //JASB. 1833- Vol. II ( NO. 14). P.57. Rmsart is the ancient
name of the Syr Darya.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6
Blavatsmaya E.P. 3soteriuessmoe uchenie (The Secret Doctrine. Vol. III).
M, 1993. U. 345.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7
it. by mn.: Krsnston S., Blavatsmaya E.P. Misn and Creation of the
Founders of the Modern Theosophical Movement. M.: Sirin, 1996. U. 17-3.
Per. with an7l.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8
Belosleddov A.H. To the history of Belovodya // Sapismi Sap. - Sib. otd.
RGO. VOL. XXXVIII. Omsm, 1914. U. 32-35.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9
Nistov K.V. Russmiye narodnye soialno-utopianuiesmiye le7endy XVII-
XIX cv. M, 1967. U. 279.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
See Joscelyn G. Arktos. The Polar Myth in Science, Symbolism, and
Nazi Survival. Phaned Press, Grand Rapids, 1993. P. 81.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---967. U. 279.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
See Joscelyn G. Arktos. The Polar Myth in Science, Symbolism, and
Nazi Survival. Phaned Press, Grand Rapids, 1993. P. 81.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11
See: St Yves d'Alveidre. The mission of India to Europe. I7., 1915. U.
27, 29,40.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12
Some researchers say that the toponym "A7arta" ("A7art7a") is derived
from the sandinavsmo7o name "As7aard", see Joscelyn G. Arktos: Joscelyn
G. Arktos... P. 40, 80,81.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1C
Pauwels L., Bergier J. Ausbruch ins dritte Jahrtausend. Von der Zukunst
der phantastichen Vernunst. Bern - Munchen, 1962. P. 375-377.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14
Du7in A. Conspirolo7yia (Hauma o sa7 conspiracies, secret societies and
ommult warfare). M., 1993. U. 39.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15
Krol.N. Boris Ivanovits Panmratov (Sarisovma m portretu utsitelu) //
Countries and peoples of the East. 1989- Vyp. XXVI. U. 90.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16
See: Rosov V A Manuzhurskaya espeditionH.K. Roerich: In search of a new
life.
"New Country" // Aryavarta. 1999- Z 3- He also: Himolai Roerich - Vestniki
Sveni7oroda. H.K. Roerich's expeditions to the Gobi Desert. M, 2002.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

17
For more details about this see: Rosov V.A. Himolai Roerich - Vestnik
Sveni7orod.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

18
See: Bernbaum E. Op. cit. [. 101, 265.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

19
Johnson K Paul. The Masters Revealed: Madame Blavatsky and the myth
of the Great White Lodge. State University of New York, 1994.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20
Roerich H.K Hearte Asii. In mn.: Roerich H.K Isbrannoe. M., 1969. U.
155.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

21
Roerich N. Shambhala the Resplendent. N.Y., 1928. P. 45.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

22
See: Roerich H.K.. Hearte Asii. Ibid. U. 159
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

21
Roerich N. Shambhala the Resplendent. N.Y., 1928. P. 45.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

22
See: Roerich H.K.. Hearte Asii. Ibid. U. 159
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2C
Roerich N. Shambhala. NY., 1930.. by mn.: Krsnston S. E.P. Blavatsmaya...
P. P. 280.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

24
Mullin G. Pratimtimaa kalauamra. M., 2002. U. 178.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

25
Bernbaum E. Op. cit. [. 257-259.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

26
Hilton J. Lost Horizon. London, 1933
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

27
The Oxford English Dictionary (2nd ed.) Vol. XV. Oxford, 1989
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

28
K.3. Beyond the . M., 1958. C. 21.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

29
Laufer V. Zur buddhistischen Literatur der Uiguren // T'oung Pao. Ser.
2. Vol. 3 (1907); Pelliot P. Quelques transcriptions apparantee a Cambhala
dans les textes chinois // T'oung Pao. 20, no. 2 (1920-1921); Bernbaum E. Op.
cit. P. 45-46; Newman J.R.. A Brief History of the Kalachakra, see: Sopa,
Geshe Lhundup. The Wheel of Time. NY., 1990. P. 54.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C0
Kusneov B.I. Ancient Iran and Tibet. History of Bon Religion. SPb.,
1998. U. 46.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C1
Boyce M. The Soroastrians. Beliefs and customs. M., 1988. U. 84.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C2
Allen C. The Search for Shangri-La: A Journey into Tibetan History.
Abacus (IJK), 2000. P. 273.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CC
Orofino G. A propos of some foreign elements in the Kalacakratantra //
Proceedings of the 7th Seminar of the International Association of Tibetan
Studies, Graz, 1995. Vol. II. Wien, 1997. P. 722-724.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C4
Bernbaum E. Op. cit. P. 31.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C5
See: Marnimova S. On the lomalisaaia of the holy 7or Meru and Haru. In
Sb.: Hyperborean morni Kalomaa7atii. SPb., 2002. U. 65-84.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---1.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C5
See: Marnimova S. On the lomalisaaia of the holy 7or Meru and Haru. In
Sb.: Hyperborean morni Kalomaa7atii. SPb., 2002. U. 65-84.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C6
Baruenmoo S.A. Time to collect mamni // Baruenmoo A.V. IW marma. M,
1991. U. 27.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C7
Information about A.V. Baruenmoo's education in 7 gymnasiums in Ele
and St.-Petersburg is also available in many reference books: List of students,
outsiders and students of the Povivan Institute of Kasansmoo7o University.
1902-1903. Kasan, 1902. U. 200.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C8
Baruenmoo S.A. Time to collect mamni. . U, 29.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C9
See:
Historu]^mXy
sapisma
75th anniversary
St.-
Peterburg7smoy
2nd 7ymnasium. N. 1-3. SPb, 1880-1905. N. 3.
U. 109-113.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

40
. U. 115.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

41
. U. 356.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

42
See: List of students... 1902-1903. Kasan, 1903; 1903-1904. Kasan, 1904.
These publications contain a brief note on Baruenmoo's half-valuable
education, according to which he was a student at the Military-Medical
Academy from 1 September 1901-7o to 25 May 1902 7. He entered the
Kasansmii University on 20 August 1902 7. On his studies at the Œriev
University see: Niiunyy ^Y^`Xa Imperatorsmoo7o Œrievskmoo7o university
Wa 1904-1905 77. Œriev, 1905. In this reference book, the number of
Baruenmoo's student matriul ( No. 19917) is given. In a short bio7raiuessmoy
note compiled many years later, Baruenmo somehow listed only the last two
universities he had been able to study at - Kasansmii and Œrievskii, claiming
that he had studied there for two and a half 7 years. See: GA SPb. b. 2990.
On. 1. S. 103. N. 5 (statement by A.V. Baruenmoo to the board of the
Peda7o7iuessm amaademy, 14 April 1919 7.).
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---here for two and a half 7 years. See: GA SPb. b. 2990.
On. 1. S. 103. N. 5 (statement by A.V. Baruenmoo to the board of the
Peda7o7iuessm amaademy, 14 April 1919 7.).
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4C
Report of I.V. Baruenmoo, son of the above-mentioned V.A. Baruenmoo.
45 See: Rnsen 3. On the revolt movement among Tartu students in the early
19th and early 20th centuries // Valuable writings of the University of Tartu.
1954. Vyp. 35. U. 28.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

44
Baruenmoo S A Time to collect mamni. . U. 14.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

45
Protomol of the interrogation of A.V. Baruenmo dated 10 June 1937. it.
by mn.: Shishmin O. Battle of the Himalayas. NKVD: Ma7ia and espionage.
M., 1999. U. 353
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

46
See: Œrievsmii university. Bio7raiuessmii dictionary of proessors and
professors of the Imperial, formerly Derptsmoo7o, University (ed. by G.V.
Nevimoo7o). Œryev, Vol. 1.1902. U. 619-620; Nyuunyi ^Y^`Xa
Imperatorsmoo7o Œrievsmoo7o university Wa 1894-1910 77.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

47
See: Amimenmo M.A., Shereshevsmii A.M. Istoriya Institut7a im.
B.M. Bekhterev. SPb, 1999. N. 1. U. 88.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

48
Grabar V.3. Netverti vea v Tartusmom (erptsmom-ŒŒrievsmom)
university // Valuable writings of Tartusmoo7o University. 1954. Vyp. 35.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

49
See: Garstotto 3. The first Russian revolt: a view of Paris. To the bi7raia of
A.B. Amiteatrov (1904-1907) // The Past. c. 22.1997. C. 350; ibid: Pepisma
A.B.. Amiteatrov and M.A. Voloshin. U. 378, note 5. P. 387, note 3
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

50
dA SPb. .
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

51
Baruenmoo S.A. Time to collect mamni. . U. 23-24.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

52
Saunier J. Op. cit. P. 415. vt . C. 416.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5C
Composition of the Russian Federation with the 266Do and thece of the
Russian Federation.
of the Russian Federation. St.
Petersburg, 1908.
(<< back )vt . C. 416.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5C
Composition of the Russian Federation with the 266Do and thece of the
Russian Federation.
of the Russian Federation. St.
Petersburg, 1908.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

54
Rebus. 1906. ZZ 8-9- 25 evar . U. 4.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

55
On A7van Dorzhiev see: Andreev A.I. Buddhist shrine of Petro7rad.
Vlan-Vds, 1992; Snelling O. Buddhism in Russia. The Story of Agvan
Dorzhiev, Lhasa's Emissary to the Tsar. Shaftesbury, Dorset, 1993.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

56
Andreev A.I. Buddhist shrine of Petro7rad. U. 14.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

57
Letter from M. Voloshin A.M. Petrova from 14 December 1902. In mn.:
Voloshin M. Ands literary7 heritage. Vol. I. SPb! 1991. U. 158.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

58
See: Kupuenmo V. In Sabaymale - ceres Paris // Baymale. 1983-
Z 2. U. 143- See also: Bo7omolov H.A. Russmaya literatura natsala XX veka i
ommultism. M., 1999
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

59
For details on the construction of the temple see: Andreev A.I. Buddhist
shrine of Petro7rad; Buddha temple in the northern capital. St. Petersburg, 2003
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

60
Vilensmii vestnii. 1909. Z 1817. 5 and July.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

61
Roerich N. Himalaya, Abode of Light. Bombay - London, 1947. P.
110.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

62
In
Buddhistmiyo.
mumirne // Peterbur7smii listom.
1913. Z  52. 22
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---Roerich N. Himalaya, Abode of Light. Bombay - London, 1947. P.
110.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

62
In
Buddhistmiyo.
mumirne // Peterbur7smii listom.
1913. Z  52. 22
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6C
Dansan Tundutov (1888-1923) graduated from the Corps of Arms (1908),
after that he served in the Life Guards of the Grodno 7th Guards Regiment.
Since March 1914 7. - from March 1914 7. Adjdtant on the staff of the
Supreme Commander-in-Chief 7 General H.H. Rnushevitz, from 1915 7.
Rnushevitz, from 1915-7o - Adjtant to Grand Duke H.H. Hymolai
Hymmolaevich. Himolai Himolayevich. In 1918 he was elected ataman of the
Astrakhansmoo7o Kasaiuye7o army. He took an active part in the White
movement. About him see: Balinov Sh. About the Tundutov family //
Kovilnye volleys (Paris). 1936. No. 13-14; Brusilov A.N. My memoirs //
Military-historical journal. 1990. Z 2. U. 61.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

64
Vilensmii vestnii. 1909. Z 1817.5 idl.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

65
3ti Baruenmo's short stories were published: "The Tower of Babel"
(Nature and Ladies. 1912Z19,20), "The Horned Thief" (Nature and Ladies.
1913- Z 32), "NWuur Settlement" and "Vslu7a mestiza" (in the collection:
BaruenmY A.B. Waves of Life. St. Petersburg, 1911).
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

66
See: Waves of life.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

67
.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

68
Nature and people. 1912. Z 28,29,30,31.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

69
Baruenmoo A.V. Ands marma. M., 1991.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

70
See. Mir primlduenii, 1913- Kny. 1-5; 1914.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

71
Mir primlduenii. 1913. U. 230-231.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

72
. U. 108-109.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7C
. U. 344.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

74
. U. 227.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

75
BaruenmY S.A. VmXW. soc. U. 34.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

76
VYmYn R. Satonu materiae and secrets of the healed tribes. M, 1966. U. 27.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---k )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

75
BaruenmY S.A. VmXW. soc. U. 34.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

76
VYmYn R. Satonu materiae and secrets of the healed tribes. M, 1966. U. 27.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

77
Baruenmoo A.V. Ands marma. U. 75.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

78
Romhil V.V. Travelling in China and Tibet. SPb, 1901; . Nkhasa and its
mysteries. Ouerm of Tibetan espedia 1903-1904 7od. SPb, 1906. W.W.
Rockhill (W.W. Rockhill) (1854-1914) was an American diplomat, Tibetan
orientalist7 and researcher in Central Asia. He made two journeys to Tibet
(1888, 1891- 1892). A. Waddell (L.A. Waddell) - Major of the Indian Medical
Service, a member of F. Rn7hasband's military expedition to Tibet (1904-
1905).
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

79
VYddWl A. VmXW. soc. U. 179
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

80
. U. 306.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

81
. U. 307.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

82
Baruenmoo A.V. Soul of Nature // Misn for All. 1911. Z 12. Sta.
1687.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8C
. Pp. 1717.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

84
. Sta. 1718.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

85
See: Kotim H.G. N-reading of thoughts and N-luci; Bekhterev V.M.
Mental suggestion or omus? // Obosrenie psikhiatriiia, neurolo7iia i
Wmperimental'naya psikhologia7i. 1904. Z 8. See also: Bekhterev V.M.
Hypnos. Suggestion. Telepathy. M, 1994.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

86
BaruenmY discusses his experiments in more detail in the article
"Experiments ^
onions
"Experiments with Monster
Beams. published a
journal
"Nature and the lddy" (1911.Z 31 and 32).
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

87
Baruenmoo A.V. Soul of Nature. Stl. 1714.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

88
. Stl. 1720.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

89
dA SPb. b. 2990. On. 1. S. 103. N. 5 ob.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

90
.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

91
On him see: Povel N. Mr Gurdjieff. Documents, testimonies, tests and
comments. M, 1998.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---N. 5 ob.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

90
.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

91
On him see: Povel N. Mr Gurdjieff. Documents, testimonies, tests and
comments. M, 1998.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

92
Gurdjieff .I. Meetings with Remarkable Men. NY, 1974. P. 152.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9C
Bennett J.G. Gurdjieff. Making a new World. London, 1973.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

94
Translated from the Russian edition: Vspensmii P. In search of wonder7o.
SPb, 1994. U. 41.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

95
Translated from the Russian edition: Vspensmii P. In search of wonder7o.
SPb, 1994. U. 41.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

96
Ouspensky P.D. In Search of the Miraculous. NY. - L, 1977. P. 37-40.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

97
Protomol of the interrogation of A.V. Baruenmo dated 10 June 1937.. by
mn.: Shishmin O. Battle of the Himalayas... P.. 354.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

98
Vedensmii A.I. Obrymii serta verude7o // Vestnii truda. 1918.
Z 2, 26 May.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

99
See: Shishmin O. U. 354.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

100
See: Herald of Labour. 1918. Z 5.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

101
See: Shishmin O. VmXW. soc. U. 355-356 D.V. Bobrovsmii lived in house
15, Vladimirovsky Ave.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

102
dA SPb. b. 2990. On. 1. S. 103. N. 106 ob.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10C
GARF. F. A-2307. Op. 7. D. 12. N. 92 ob.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

104
dA SPb. . N. 1. Statement of A.V. Baruenmoo to the Council of the
Peda7o7iuesm Academy of 30 August 1919.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

105
Baruenmo later described the circumstances of this relationship as
follows: "I met Vladimirov in 1918, when he came to see me with Professor
Karsavin. See: Shishmin O. VmXW. soc. U. 363.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

106
OR RNB. b. 150. S 22. Certificate, dated 26 June 1909 7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

107
. From 26 June 1909 7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---mXW. soc. U. 363.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

106
OR RNB. b. 150. S 22. Certificate, dated 26 June 1909 7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

107
. From 26 June 1909 7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

108
. S. 39. Letter from I. Butovsko7o to Vladimirov of 10 December
1907 7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

109
. S. 83. Letter from A.A. Kamensmoi to Vladimirov dated 2 November
1909 7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

110
. S. 187. Letters from V. Stein to Vladimirov, 1912-1913.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

111
Hemirovsmii A.I., Vmolov V.I. Svet Svesd, or the Last Russian
Rosenmereier. M, 1994. U. 51 e 403.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

112
OR RNB. . S. 187. Letter from V. Stein to Vladimirov. B/d
(approximate mone November 1912 7.).
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11
C
. S. 138. Letter from S.V. Piramidov to Vladimirov dated 4 October 1913 7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

114
Vladimirov K.K. Graolo7ia // IW Mrama m Svetu. 1914. Z  3.
U. 128-135;Z 5. U. 223-234.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

115
Vladimirov K.K. What is 7raolo7ia? // Damsmii Mir. 1916. Z 4.
U. 31-32.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

116
OR RNB. b. 150. D 73- Letter S. Yesenin Vladimirov. B/d
(supposedly written in 1915 7.).
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

117
. D. 33- Letter A.H. Benois to Vladimirov. Dated 30
anddnya, b]W fYmXWXngXngng 7Yd.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

118
. S. 117. Letter from M.P. Murashev to Vladimirov dated 31 August
1916 7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

119
. D. 23. Otmrytma, 24 September 1917 7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

120
See: Petro7radsmaya Pravda. 1918. Z 192-196. 5-10 September.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

121
Archive of VFSB for St. Petersburg and Nenoblast. D P-85221. c. 1.
Protomol of the interrogation of K.K. Vladimirov at the OGPV PP in the N-VO
dated 30 May 1928.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

122
Vyrubova
A.A
Maid of honour
Her
Majesty.
"Diary"
and memoirs of Anna Vyrubova. M,
1991. U. 252.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---V PP in the N-VO
dated 30 May 1928.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

122
Vyrubova
A.A
Maid of honour
Her
Majesty.
"Diary"
and memoirs of Anna Vyrubova. M,
1991. U. 252.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12C
. U. 256.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

124
Archive of VFSB for St. Petersburg and Nenoblast. . N. 210.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

125
. Protomol of the interrogation of K.K. Vladimirov dated 6 June 1928. N.
110.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

126
OR RNB. b. 150. S. 40. Letter from V.F. Bul7amov dated 3 December
1918.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

127
Ibid. S. 123. The letter was presumably written in 1919 7. On V.I.
Nemirovitz-Danuenmo see: Starev V.I. Russian political Freemasonry at
the beginning of the XX century. SPb, 1996.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

128
Morev G.A. Is histoire russmoy literatury : m bio7raiia N]onid Kanne7iser
// Minushchee. c. 16. M, 1994. U. 145.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

129
Vyrubova A.A. Vmass. soc. U. 261.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1C0
Kondiain A.A. Comet Broomes and observations over it made at the
RONM observatory // Proceedings of the Russian Society of Ndobbites of
World Science (hereinafter referred to as World Science). 1912. Z 1.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1C1
See: Hauma in Russia. Data m natsalu 1922 7. Petro7rad, 1923. The
information about A.A. Kondiain also contains information about his
membership in the Russian Astronomical Society. The Petro7rads Institute of
Optics was founded in 1919 7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1C2
See: World Studies. 1914. Z 1.P. 180 (Otset on the session12 March).
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1CC
World Studies. 1920. Z 1 (38). Idl. U. 85 (Otzet on the 103rd obem.
RONM meeting on 17 January 1920 7.).
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1C4
. U. 88-89 (Otzet on the 105th 7odom obem meeting of RONM
20 April 1920).
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---t on the 103rd obem.
RONM meeting on 17 January 1920 7.).
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1C4
. U. 88-89 (Otzet on the 105th 7odom obem meeting of RONM
20 April 1920).
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1C5
Protomol of Baruenmo's interrogation dated 10 June 1937.. by mn.:
Shishmin O. Battle of the Himalayas. U. 358.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1C6
HXional Archives of the Republic of Buryatia (NARB). F. 1. On. 1. S
966. Letter to A.B. Baruenmo to G.. ybymov dated 12 December 1927 7. - 24
Mar7a 1928 7 (typewritten mopy). Prim, g 36-38.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1C7
AVPRF. b. 100. On. 1. P. 1. D/1. N. 8.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1C8
Rsinsmii   performed   in   1917   7.   in   Kronstadt   on the   battleship
"Harodovole" and in front of the Vybor7cmy detachment of Red Army
soldiers. See his memoirs: Rsinsmiy I.I. The novel of my life. M. - N, 1928. U.
330-332. During the interrogation in the summer of 1927 7. Rsinsmii told the
investigator that he had met K.K. Vladimirov in 1912 7, "when he appeared to
me as a collector of auto7raovs". Satem met with him in 1913 7, at which
time Vladimirov told Rosinsmom that he had come from the North. The
relationship continued after the revolution - Vladimirov arranged for the writer
to give a lecture to the PNC staff. In 1919, at his request, Rsinsmii sold his
book collection (about 4,000 volumes) to Vladimirov "to compile the State
Library" (?). The relationship between Rssinsmoo7o and Vladimirov was
particularly close in 1923-1927 77. Archive of the VFSB for St. Petersburg
and Nenoblast. D P-21098. Protomol of the interrogation of I.I. Rsinsmoo7o,
b/d.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1C9
Protomol of Baruenmo's interrogation of 19 June 1937. See: Shishmin O.
The Battle of Shmalai. U. 367.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---tion of I.I. Rsinsmoo7o,
b/d.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1C9
Protomol of Baruenmo's interrogation of 19 June 1937. See: Shishmin O.
The Battle of Shmalai. U. 367.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

140
For more details on the visit of Soviet diplomatic expeditions to Tibet in
the 1920s see: Andreev A.I. From Baymala to the holy Nkhasa. New
materials about Russian expeditions to Central Asia in the first half of the
20th century (Buryatia, Mongolia, Tibet). Samara - S-Peterbur7 - Pra7a, 1997.
U. 121-226.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

141
AVPRF. . N. 19.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

142
Archive of the SPF RAS. b, 208. Op. 3. S 685. N. 162.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14C
GIA SPb. b. 2265. On. 1. S. 65. N. 131. Letter to Baruenmo V.M.
To Bekhterev dated 8 January 1921 7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

144
. N. 148. Letter from Baruenmoo to V.M. Bekhterev dated 6 December
1922 7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

145
. N. 161 ob. Letter from Baruenmo to V.M. Bekhterev dated 1 November
1923 7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

146
OR RNB. b. 150. S 77. Letter from S. Sarkh to K.K. Vladimirov dated 3
June
1920 7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

147
Kareev H.I. Prozhitoe i . N., 1990. U. 272.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

148
Baruenmoo A.V. IW marma. U. 387.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

149
GIA SPb. b. 2265. He. 1. S. 65. N. 130 ob.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

150
NARB. F. 1. Oil 1 D. 966. N. 33 (certificate issued by the Baruenmoo
Institute of hYW7a 4 idnya 1923 7 Wa signed by pro. V. Kashmadamov and
Rappoport's department manager).
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

151
Mgm]vgu S.I. MWnWrgm and WmirgXcen]. Forms of hysteria in the Kolymm
mrai. (Materials of the commission on hysteria in the Rmutsk ASSR. Issue
15.) N, 1929. U. 10.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

152
. U. 12.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---ms of hysteria in the Kolymm
mrai. (Materials of the commission on hysteria in the Rmutsk ASSR. Issue
15.) N, 1929. U. 10.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

152
. U. 12.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15C
V.M. Bekhterev wrote a preface m m mni7e: Krainsmii H.V. Portza,
mlymushy and demon-possessed. Hov7orod, 1900. On the same topic see:
Konovalov D.G. Reli7ioWnyi WmstaW in Russmom mystiu]^mom s]mtantstvo.
N. 1. Vol. 1. FWiu]^m] phenomena in the mXrtin] of ^]mtXntWmY7Y Wm^`XWX.
Ser7iev Posad, 1908; Vitashevsmii A.H. IW areas of primordial7o
psychoneuroWa // 3tno7raiu]^m] obosrenie. 1911. Z 1-
2. Kn. 88-89. U. 180-228.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

154
See: Mdller I.P My system (with a foreword by V.N. Kashmadamov). N,
1928.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

155
Verbal communication from N.N. Vasiliev to R.M. Granovskaya (January
2000). Vasiliev R.M. Granovskaya (January 2000). The reliability of this
information, however, is denied by N.N. Vasiliev's close associates. N.N.
Vasiliev's friends.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

156
The information is also available in the short reference about him in mn.:
Amimenmo MA., Shereshevsmii A.M. History of the V.M. Bekhterev
Institute. c. 1-2. M., 1999-2000. c. 2. Note on Art. 115.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

157
. U. 24.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

158
dA SPb. b. 2555. On. 1. S. 612. N. 105 ob. (From 1 July to 1 October
1923 7.).
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

159
See: Bekhterev V.M. On experiments on "mental" influence on the
behaviour of animals // Problems of personality development and education.
Vyp. 2. 1921. See also: Durov BJ1. My beliefs. M, 1927 (and more recent
writings).
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

160
GIA SPb. b. 2265. On. 1. S. 64. N. 277-279. Letter V.N. Durov
Dated 15 March 1920 7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

161
GIA SPb. b. 2265. O7h. 1 S. 802. Nl. 15 ob, 16, 26.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

162
dA SPb. b. 2555. Oil 1. S. 612. N. 106-106 ob.
(<< back )15 March 1920 7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

161
GIA SPb. b. 2265. O7h. 1 S. 802. Nl. 15 ob, 16, 26.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

162
dA SPb. b. 2555. Oil 1. S. 612. N. 106-106 ob.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16C
This is a compt rendue officiel du premier congres international des
recherches psychique a Copenhague, 26 aout - 2 septembre 1921. (Ed. Carl
Vett.) Copenhague, 1922.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

164
dA SPb. b. 2555. . N. 107-107 ob.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

165
N.N. Vasiliev's memoirs are in the personal archive of his son I.N.
Vasiliev's memoirs are in the personal archive of his son I.N. Vasiliev. Vasiliev.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

166
On him see: Bratsev V.S. Masons and Power in Russia. M, 2003. U. 453,
455, 356,458.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

167
Œ.M. Antonovsmii is mentioned in the list of Freemasons appended to H.
Berberova's book "Nddy i lodge. Russian Freemasons of the XX century"
(N.Y, 1986).
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

168
See: 3n7el7ardt H.A. Himolai 3n7el7ardt andW Bateva. 3pisodes of my life
(Memories) // Minushchee. c. 24. SPb, 1998.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

169
See: Vasiliev N.N.. Suggestion at a distance ().
M., 1962. U. 61.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

170
GIA SPb. b. 2265. On. 1. S. 64. N. 131.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

171
dA SPb. b. 2555. Ibid. Nl. 107-108.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

172
GIA SPb. b. 2265. On. 1. D. 802. Nl. 36-38. The document is dated
14 May 1927.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

17C
GIA SPb. b. 2265. On. 1. S. 1005. The statement (typewritten copy) is
dated September 1926 7. All thesewere included in the forward-looking plan
of work of the 7ipnolo7o-bioiisiiuessmoy sémia for 1926-1927 77. Letter
from R.A. Kamshilov to O.P. Baruenmo dated 15 April 1958. Kondiain
family archive.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---king plan
of work of the 7ipnolo7o-bioiisiiuessmoy sémia for 1926-1927 77. Letter
from R.A. Kamshilov to O.P. Baruenmo dated 15 April 1958. Kondiain
family archive.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

174
NARB. F. 1. On. 1. S. 966. N. 34. The certificate is dated 1 July 1921 7.
and signed by the head of the political department of the Morsmoy forces of
the Murmansmoo7o district and the head of the Murmansmoy 7ubono.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

175
Ouermi istorii Murmansmoy or7anisXia CPSU. Murmansm, 1969.
U. 85.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

176
See: Nadson G.A. On the use of seaweeds mainly from our northern seas
// Murnal of the Petros7rads Institute. 1921. Z 3-4. (AndWd. also otd.
broshdroi, P7., 1922.) See also: Nadson G.A. Selected Works: In 2 vol. c. 1.
M., 1967. U. 354.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

177
Saunier J. Saint-Yves d'Alveydre. Op. cit. P. 140-146. In this book, M.
Saunier reports that in 1879 7. Saint-Yves published a 55-page brochure under
the title "L'Utilite des Agues Marines" ("The Use of Seaweed") and in the
same year he founded the Algue Marines Society. In the same year, he
"deposited his application for a patent for the acquisition of a patent" in the
"Cabinet industriel" (Cabinet industriel) M. Armangeau in Paris. Armangeau
in Paris for a period of 15 years (Z129.822) "for the preparation of foodstuffs
with the help of vegetable cream and seaweed". St. Ives's research did not stop
there - on 20 April 1881 7. he deposited a new , which concerned an improved
technology for the preparation of paper pulp (No. 142.433), apparently from
the same algae.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

178
Nadson G.A. Selected Works. c. 2. U. 75, 78.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

179
See:
Kld7e
G.A.. Istoriiuiesmii
ouerm
developmentMurmansk
biostation of the Nenin7rads Society of Naturalists. N., 1925.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---U. 75, 78.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

179
See:
Kld7e
G.A.. Istoriiuiesmii
ouerm
developmentMurmansk
biostation of the Nenin7rads Society of Naturalists. N., 1925.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

180
Geo7raiu]^mio-statistical dictionary of the Russian Empire (compiled by.
P.P. Semyonov). SPb., 1865. VOL. I. P. 583.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

181
See supra note 1.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

182
GIA. SPb. b. 2265. On. 1. S 65. N. 148,148 ob.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

18C
is evidenced by the previously mentioned certificate of the Institute of
Mos7a, issued to Baruenmo in 1923 (NARB. F. 1. On. 1. D. 966. No. 33).
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

184
Krasnaya 7aseta (vetserniy issm). 1923-Z 47 (128). 28.
The sta™ is signed by the iniials "V.R."
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

185
World Studies. 1923- c. 12. Z 1 (44). U. 113.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

186
Amt about the traces of the so-called "ancient civilisation in Napland",
verified by the survey of Comrade Arnold Kolbanovskmoo7o, on 3 and 4 July
1923 // Polar Pravda. 1923. No. 32.17 August.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

187
.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

188
World Studies. 1923. c. 12. Z 2 (45). U. 233.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

189
See the summary of the Hyperborea-97¦> expedition: V.H. Demin.
Hyperborea - the morning of ivilisXia. M., 1997; he also: Sa7admii
Russmoo7o Severa. M., 1999- P. 52.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

190
A.G. Kondiain's letter to V.H. Demin dated 22 May 1997. Demin dated 22
May 1997.
Condiain Family Archives.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

191
See, for example: Demin V.H. The Holy Chronicle of the North //
Haumaa i Reli7ia. 1999. No. 1; Nasarev E. Here they prayed to the Bo7ina of
Sari and Immortality // Hauma i Reli7ia. 1999- Z 2. On the preliminary
results of the search operations in the summer of 2000 in the area of the
Khibins tundras and Solovemoo7 archipelago see: Sperboreis morni
Kalomaa7atii. U. 104-113
(<< back )2. On the preliminary
results of the search operations in the summer of 2000 in the area of the
Khibins tundras and Solovemoo7 archipelago see: Sperboreis morni
Kalomaa7atii. U. 104-113
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

192
Demin V.D. Sa7admii Russmoo7o Severa. U. 455-456.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

19C
. U. 461.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

194
A.N. Nizhevsmii. The whole life. M., 1974. U. 130.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

195
GARF. F. A-2307. Op. 7. D 4. N. 164. Reference about the research of
biologist A.B. Baruenmo. Baruenmo. Compiled by the Amentre of the NKP
RSFSR on 27 October 1923.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

196
. D 4. N. 69. The plan is written in penmanship; signed with the name A
Besymyanny.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

197
. N. 73- Baruenmo's letter is dated 20 December 1923.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

198
GARF. A-2307. Ibid.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

199
GARF. . N. 64 ob.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

200
GARF. F. A-2307. Op. 3. S. 197. N. 6. Some idea of the scientific
interests of H.A. Morosov in the post-revoldionnye 7 years gives the names
of published by him mni7: "The Principle of Relativity and the Absolute. 3td
d ands areas of manifestations of wave-form motion" (1920), "The Relativity
Principle in Nature and Mathematics" (1922),
"Christ or Ramseye. An Attempt to Apply the Mathematical Theory of
Probability to a Historical Subject" (1924), "Christ," mn. 1-7 (1924-1932). On
Morosov's affiliation with the Freemasons ("The Great Orient of France" - the
lodge "Polar Sveda" in St. Petersburg), see: Soloviev O. Masonry in Russia //
Voprosy istorii. 1988. Z 10. U. 14.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

201
GARF. F. A-2307. Op. 7. D. 8. N. 250. The letter is dated 24 May
1924 7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

202
Ibid. N. 251.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20C
See: S. Shumikhin. Delirium Persecutio // Novoe literaturnoe obosrenie.
1993- Z 4. U. 70.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---k )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

202
Ibid. N. 251.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20C
See: S. Shumikhin. Delirium Persecutio // Novoe literaturnoe obosrenie.
1993- Z 4. U. 70.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

204
On the mission of S.S. Borisov see: Andreev A.I. From Baymala to the holy
Nkhasa. U. 146-172.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

205
On this subject see: Warcollier R. La telepathie a tres grand distance 11
Le comptes rendue officiel de III Congres International des recherches
psvchiques. Paris, 1927; Upton Sinclair. Mental Radio, Pasadena Station
(USA), 1930; Konstantinides K. Telepathische Experimente zwischen Athen,
Paris, Warschau und Wien // Transactions of the Fourth International
Congress for Psychical Research. Athens, 1930. Also: Vasiliev N.N.
Experimental Studies of Mental Suggestion. N, 1962.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

206
NARB. . N. 42-43.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

207
Archive of VFSB for St. Petersburg and Nenoblast. D. P-51351. N. 102 and
102 ob.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

208
Condiain family archive. 3.M. Condiain. Notebook 2.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

209
Protomol of Baruenmo's interrogation dated 10 June 1937.. by mn.:
Shishmin O. Battle of the Himalayas. (1st iWd.) P. 368-369.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

210
On the Tibetan mission of S.S. Borisov, see note 14 m before. 7lava.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

211
Archive of VFSB for St. Petersburg and Nenoblast. D. G1-26492. Protomol
of the interrogation of A.A. Kondiain from 16-21 June 1937. N. 18.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

212
Protomol of Baruenmo's interrogation dated 10 June 1937. See: Shishmin
O. Battle of the Himalayas. U. 370.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

21C
For more details about Otsirov and Tepmina see: A.I. Andreev. Buddhist
lamas and the Old Village // Hebrew Archives. M.-SP6, 1993. U. 327-328.
Also: Bamayeva 3. Nuvsan Sharab Tepmin and his time // Shambala (3lists).
1997. Z 5-6. U. 9-17.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---lamas and the Old Village // Hebrew Archives. M.-SP6, 1993. U. 327-328.
Also: Bamayeva 3. Nuvsan Sharab Tepmin and his time // Shambala (3lists).
1997. Z 5-6. U. 9-17.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

214
NARB. F. 1. On. 1. S. 966. Letter A.B. Baruenmoo to G.. ybimov from
27 March 1927. N. 19-20.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

215
Condiain family archive. 3.M. Condiain. Notebook 2.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

216
See: Roerich H.K. Selected. M., 1979. U. 177.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

217
Shishmin O. Battle of the Himalayas (2nd .). M, 2003- P. 266.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

218
it. in: Baruenmoo S A Time to collect mamni. . U. 17.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

219
Bratsev B.C. Masons and power in Russia. U. 531 ff.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

220
. U. 459.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

221
Condiain family archive. Typewritten mopia. B/d.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

222
Protomol of Baruenmo's interrogation dated 10 June 1937. See: Shishmin
O. The Battle of Shmalai. U. 364.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

22C
Athanasius Kircher (1602-1680), a famous uzeny-rosenmreier, was the
author of numerous works in the most diverse fields of . The most famous of
them is Musurgia universalis, sive ars magna magna consoni et dissoni
(1650). P.A. Nasonov's dissertation is devoted to this work (The Universal
Musurgia Universalis of Aanasius Kircher: Musurgical Science in the Early
Baroque Musurgical Practice. 1995). Kircher also wrote a treatise on the secret
subterranean world (Mundus Subterraneus, quo universae denique naturae
divitiae... 1665- 1678).
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

224
Protomol of Baruenmo's interrogation dated 10 June 1937 7. See: Shishmin
O. The Battle of Shmalai. U. 364-365.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

225
Ibid. U.- 362. Altukhov-isim - the reference is apparently to Vladimir
Mikhailovich Altukhov (1879-1926), who had a large collection of mni7 on
alchemy.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---REAK ---

225
Ibid. U.- 362. Altukhov-isim - the reference is apparently to Vladimir
Mikhailovich Altukhov (1879-1926), who had a large collection of mni7 on
alchemy.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

226
. U. 363
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

227
Two final amilies surfaced during Condiain's interrogation 9
and dlya 1937. Archive of the VFSB for St. Petersburg and Nenoblast. D-P-
26492. N. 15 e 40.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

228
Condiain family archive. 3.M. Condiain. Notebook 2.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

229
N.N. Kapia reports about these plans. Kapia reports about these plans
in his article "Materials for the ethno7raiuesm characterisation of the
Kondomosmoo7o and Vomnavolomoo7o districts of Northwestern Karelia"
// Karelian Collection. N., 1929 In the 1920s, a small work on the Loparians
was published: Kapia N D. Simnyaya odezhda russmikh Loparii. I7., 1926.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2C0
See: Shishmin O. Battle of the Himalayas. U. 371.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2C1
Rosin7
B.N.
Birth
medieval
sciences
alchemy
and astrology in modern natural science.
N., 1924. U. 57.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2C2
dA SPb. b. 1001. On. 1. D. 2. N. 22.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2CC
. N. 18. The certificate is dated 15 February 1921 7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2C4
. N. 9- Statement to the Petro7ubsovet of 10 November 1921 7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2C5
dA SPb. b. 1001. Op. 9. D. 37. N. 4.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2C6
Ibid. N. 5.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2C7
Condiain family archive. 3.M. Condiain. Notebook 2.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2C8
Same there.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2C9
Condiain family archive. 3.M. Condiain. Notebook 1.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

240
See: Pauvel N. Monsieur
Groux and mommentaries. M.,
1998.
dzhiev. Documents, certificates, tests
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---rchive. 3.M. Condiain. Notebook 1.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

240
See: Pauvel N. Monsieur
Groux and mommentaries. M.,
1998.
dzhiev. Documents, certificates, tests
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

241
Saunier J. Saint-Yves d'Alveyedre ou une synarchie sans enigme. Paris,
1981. C. 70-71.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

242
Saint-Yves d'Alveydre. Mission des Juifs. Paris, 1884. P. 38.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

24C
Saint-Yves d'Alveydre. La Theogonie des Patriarches. Paris, 1909.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

244
Condiain family archive. 3.M. Condiain. Notebook 1.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

245
See: Baruenmoo A.V. Memo for the ETB members. it. by mn.: Shishmin
O. Battle of the Himalayas. U. 308.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

246
. U. 313.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

247
. U. 314.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

248
Besedovsmii G. On the way to the Thermidor. M., 1997. U. 163.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

249
Condiain family archive. 3.M. Condiain. Notebook 2.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

250
See: Godwin J. La Genese de l'Archeometre // L'Initiation (Paris).
1988. Z 2. P. 61-71;Z 4. P 153-166.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

251
A. Saint-Yves d'Alveydre. L'archeometre - clef de toutes les religions et
de toutes les sciences de l'Antiquite; reforme synthetique de tous les arts
contemporaines, Paris, Dorbon Aine, s.d.. [1912].
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

252
Boisset Y.-F. A la rencontre de Saint-Yves d'Alveydre et son oevre.
L'Archeometrie. T. II. Sepp, [Paris], 1997. P. 161.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

25C
. C. 60-67.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

254
Ibid. C. 163- Full ranuW^mY] name of the patents: Moyen d'appliquer la
regle musicale a l'archeticture, aux Beaux-Arts, metiers et industries d'arts
graphiques ou plastiques. Moyen dit Etalon archeometrique.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

255
Baruenmoo A.B. The Soul of Nature. . 1718-1719.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---iers et industries d'arts
graphiques ou plastiques. Moyen dit Etalon archeometrique.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

255
Baruenmoo A.B. The Soul of Nature. . 1718-1719.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

256
Vspensmii P.D. In search of uudesno7o. U. 145.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

257
On the 3nnea7ramme see: Vspensmii P.D. Vmas. soc. Ch. 12. U. 294 and
others.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

258
Spen7ler O. SaMat of Europe. M., 1993. c. 1. U. 206.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

259
Martynov A. Confessed Way. M., 1991- P. 41.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

260
Condiain family archive. 3.M. Condiain. Notebook 1.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

261
A.N. Nizhevsmii. My life. U. 129.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

262
A.N. Nizhevsmii. Cosmic pulse of life. Semlya in the arms of the Sun.
Heliotaramcia. M., 1995. U. 505-506, 503.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

26C
Martynov A. Confessed path. U. 42.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

264
Tolmovaya Biblia, or Commentary on all the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament. c. 1-3. St. Petersburg, 1904-1913
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

265
For more details about this see: Andreev A.I. From Baymala to the holy
Nkhasa. U. 92-120 (chapter "Why Russian travellers were not allowed into
Nkhasa"),
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

266
Archive of the VFSB for St. Petersburg and Nenoblasts. Protomol of the
interrogation of K.F. Shvara dated 3 July 1937 7. N. 78.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

267
Protomol of Baruenmo's interrogation of 23 December 1937.. by mn.:
Shishmin O. Battle of the Himalayas. U. 129, 130.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

268
Archive of the VFSB for St. Petersburg and Nenoblast. Protomol of the
interrogation of G.I. Bomiya dated 17-18 May 1937. N. 61.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

269
. Protomol of the interrogation of K.F. Shvara dated 3 July 1937 7. N. 79
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

270
OR RNB. b. 150. S. 194. Sapismi K.K. Vladimirov from wounded persons.
N. 10.
(<< back )9
. Protomol of the interrogation of K.F. Shvara dated 3 July 1937 7. N. 79
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

270
OR RNB. b. 150. S. 194. Sapismi K.K. Vladimirov from wounded persons.
N. 10.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

271
. S. 78. Letter from V.V. Soenmo K.K. Vladimirov from 20
April 1925 7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

272
. Letter to V.V. Soenmo dated 25 April 1925 7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

27C
Buddhist matechism. SPb., 1902.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

274
ybimov G.. Manual for learning Tibetan language. Exercises in the spoken
and literary language and 7 grammatical notes. N. 1. A short review.
Vladivostok, 1908.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

275
RO RNB. b. 150. D. 29. Letter from V.H. Belyaev K.K. Vladimirov, 23
anddlya 1925 7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

276
GAIMK Archive F. 2. Op. 1(1924). S. 83. N. 1. Letter M.G.
The vetslova is dated 12 and July 1924 7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

277
. N. 2. Letter amad. P.N. Marr to the Soviet Embassy in Kabul dated 24 July
1924 7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

278
Information about V.I. Sabrezhnev can be found in his 7o re7blanm of the
1936 1936 All-Union Communist Party of Bolsheviks (kept in the Russian
State Archive of State Information and Information Technologies of the
Russian Federation) and in the investigation file P-14115 (archive of the
VFSB in St. Petersburg and the Nenoblasts).
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

279
A7a-khan is the title of the spiritual leadership of the Ismaili Nisarites.
The most famous is A7a-khan 3rd, 48th Imam (1885-1957), a political figure
of India, author of the memoirs: Aga Khan. The Memoirs of Aga Khan. L,
1954.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

280
Andreev A.I. From Baymala to the holy Nkhasa. U. 170-171.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

281
NARB. Letter from Baruenmoo to G.. ybymov dated 24 March 1927 7.
N. 21,
25.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---reev A.I. From Baymala to the holy Nkhasa. U. 170-171.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

281
NARB. Letter from Baruenmoo to G.. ybymov dated 24 March 1927 7.
N. 21,
25.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

282
Protomol of Baruenmo's interrogation dated 10 June 1937 7.. by mn.:
Shishmin O. The Battle of Shmalai. U. 366.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

28C
. U. 369
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

284
NARB. . N. 4.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

285
Archive of the VFSB for St. Petersburg and Nenoblast. D P-23768.
Protomol of the interrogation of G.I. Bomiya dated 17-18 May 1937 7. N. 63
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

286
Archive of VFSB for St. Petersburg and Nenoblast. . 62. N]onov was in
charge of
1 - e department of the special division, which was in charge of protecting
7os. secrets and enforcing the secrecy regime; Filippov was in charge of the
northern correctional camps; A.G. Gusev was in charge of the 4th department
of the special division; V.G. Gusev was in charge of the 2nd department of the
special division, which was in charge of decryption and secrecy. Gusev was in
charge of the 4th department of the special division, which was engaged in
detective work; V. ybisov worked in the 2nd department and at the same time
headed the 8th mrypto7raiu]^moe department of the Red Army headquarters (:
Shishmin O. Battle of Shmalai. 2nd ed. P. 240).
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

287
Archive of VFSB for St. Petersburg and Nenoblast. D P-26492. Protomol of
interrogation
A.A. Kondiaina dated 8 June 1937 7. N. 16.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

288
Archive of the VFSB for St. Petersburg and Nenoblast. D. P-23768.
Protomol of the interrogation of G.I. Bomiya. N. 62.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

289
NARB. . Letter to Baruenmoo G.. ybybimov. N. 37.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

290
Nenin V.I. A7rary question and "KritiMa Marmsa". PSS. c. 5. U.
103.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---BREAK ---

289
NARB. . Letter to Baruenmoo G.. ybybimov. N. 37.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

290
Nenin V.I. A7rary question and "KritiMa Marmsa". PSS. c. 5. U.
103.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

291
See:
Handel
M.
Cosmo7oniuessmaya
monenia
(Order
of
Rosenmreiers). Basic murs on the past Wvolvdia uelovem, e7o present
monstituia and future kXWvitid. St. Petersburg, 1994.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

292
Archive of the VFSB for St. Petersburg and Nenoblast. D P-23768.
Protomol of the interrogation of K.F. Shvara dated 3 July 1937 7. N. 73.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

29C
NARB. Letter from Baruenmoo to G.. ybymov dated 24 March 1927 7:
N. 27.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

294
Archive of VFSB for St. Petersburg and Nenoblast. D P-26492. Additional
notes by A.A. Kondiain. N. 53.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

295
Ras7on N. Captivity in his fatherland. M., 1994. U. 97.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

296
Tromii N.D. Devoted revoldia (reprint, and edition). M., 1991- P. 41.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

297
Ras7on N. Prisoner in his father's own fatherhood. U. 65.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

298
Ibid. N. 94-95.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

299
Soboleva T.A. Tainopis in the history of Russia. M., 1994. U. 325.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C00
See: Alemseeva T., Matveev H. Dovereno saiat revoldid. M., 1989.
See also Berezhmov V.I. Inside and outside the "Bolsho7o Dom". SPb., 1995.
U. 48-49. E.D. Stasov's Memoirs (M., 1969. . 161) treats the encounter
between Boris and Sinoviev in a different way.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C01
Ras7on N. Prisoner in his father's own
fatherhood. U. 93
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C02
See: Shishmin O. Battle of Wa Shmalai (2nd iWd.). U. 30, 182.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C0C
For more details about the Specialised Department see. - Soboleva T.A.
VmXs. soc. U.
322.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---ttle of Wa Shmalai (2nd iWd.). U. 30, 182.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C0C
For more details about the Specialised Department see. - Soboleva T.A.
VmXs. soc. U.
322.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C04
During interrogation in the PP OGPV in N VO on 30 May 1928 7. K.K.
Vladimirov said: "From May 1925-7o to the spring of 1926-7o I was at the
disposal of the OGPV SB. This period is known to Comrade Bomim" (VFSB
archive for St. Petersburg and the Nenoblasts. D P-85221. Vol. 1. No. 106).
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C05
FlXm^]rman Œ.H. In the life and struggle. Memories of an old communist.
M., 1987. U. 191.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C06
NARB. Letter to A.B. Baruenmoo to G.. ybymov dated 24 March 1927 7.
N.
5.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C07
Archive of VFSB for St. Petersburg and Nenoblast. D P-26492. Protomol of
interrogation
A.A. Kondiain from 16-21 June 1937. N. 43- G.A. Tikhov published several
works on this subject: "New Investigations on the Question of the Cosmic
Dispersion of Light" (Brief summary of the results). P7., 1916; Anomalous
dispersion in the Wem atmosphereer. Isd. "MiroWdaniya", 1935. See also:
Tikhov G.A. Light distribution in the seminal atmosphere (manuscript).
Archives of the St. Petersburg Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences.
b. 971. On. 1. S 159.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C08
Archive of VFSB for St. Petersburg and Nenoblast. . N. 44.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C09
NARB. N. 31. The reit in the citedrefers to Article 3. Touché
"Secrets of the Suna" (Vestnim. 1927.Z 1. P. 2-14).
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C10
OP RNB. b. 150. D. 251 (H]mYtor] speciiiiu]sm] certa rithmgu]s
molebanii). B/d. [om. 1925]. Typescript.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C11
Condiain family archive. 3.M. Condiain. Notebook 2.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C12
See: 3rnst     H.N. 3smi-Kermen     and   peer 7cities     Crimea   //.
ITOI3A. 1929. c. 3. U 39.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---rchive. 3.M. Condiain. Notebook 2.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C12
See: 3rnst     H.N. 3smi-Kermen     and   peer 7cities     Crimea   //.
ITOI3A. 1929. c. 3. U 39.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C1C
See: Problems of the history of the "peasant 7orods" in the Crimea.
Collection of scientific works. Simeropol, 1992.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C14
3rnst H.N. Netopisy arkhaolo7iu]^mih racesmopom and raWvedom in
Crimea sa 19 years (1921-1930). Simeropol, 1931.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C15
GAIMK Archive F. 2. On. 1 (1922). D. 79 (3rnst H. On the mamennoe
veme
in the Crimea).
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C16
Timiryasev A.K. On light, vetov and rad7e. I7, 1919. U.
11.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C17
Protomol of the interrogation of A.B. Baruenmo dated 10 June 1937 7.
Baruenmo dated 10 June 1937 7.. on mn:
Shishmin O. Battle of Shmalai. U. 371.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C18
Archive of the VFSB for St. Petersburg and Nenoblast. D P-23768.
Protomol of the interrogation of G.I. Bomiya. N. 66. The names of the
Suiysm orders have been deleted. The Saadiyya Order, named after the
dervish Saad ad-Din Jibawi (d. in the 8th century), was founded in Damascus
in the 10th-11th centuries. The Pamshbandi (Pamshbandia) Order is named
after its founder Hajj Baha al-Din Hamshband (d. 1389). The order with the
name Khalidi is unknown. The closest in Wvuu^anid is the Western-Tdrm^m
order of Halvati (Halvatia).
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C19
NARB. Letter to A.B. Baruenmoo to G.. ybimov. N. 29.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C20
Protomol of the interrogation of A.B. Baruenmo dated 10 June 1937 7.
Baruenmo dated 10 June 1937 7. e` lY mn.: Shishmin O. The Battle of
Shmalai. U. 369.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C21
NARB. . N. 20.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C22
Archive of VFSB for St. Petersburg and Nenoblasts. Protomol of the
interrogation of G.I. Bomiya.
N. 66.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---REAK ---

C21
NARB. . N. 20.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C22
Archive of VFSB for St. Petersburg and Nenoblasts. Protomol of the
interrogation of G.I. Bomiya.
N. 66.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C2C
For more details on Baruenmo's contacts with Schneerson and his7
successor Menachem-Mendl, see: E. Moros. The Omultist and the OGPV and
the Ndbavivius Rebbe // Nota Bene. Literary-public journal (Jerusalem),
2004, No. 2. U. 222-237.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C24
Protomol of the interrogation of A.A. Kondiain. N. 42. ("With Bohemia's
help, Schneerson was released from exile and exiled to the USSR. When
Schneerson was living in Warsaw, Shvarts continued to keep in touch with
him.)
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C25
ybimov G.. Dnevniem poesdmii v Vr7u in 1927 7. AndW selected works
in
2 `. Hovosibirsm, 1981. c. 2. U. 126-127.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C26
NARB. Letter to A.B. Baruenmo to G.. ybymov dated 12 December
1927 7. - 24 March 1928 7. N. 38. Only a large ra7ment has survived from
Wto7o letter.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C27
NARB. . Letter from A.B. Baruenmoo to G.. ybimov dated 24 March
1927 7. N. 9-10.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C28
it. on d.: Obina. Tallinn, 1991. U. 25.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C29
Shishmin O. Battle of the Himalayas (2nd ed.). U.
299.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CC0
Archive of VFSB for St. Petersburg and Nenoblast. D P-21098. Protomol
of interrogation
K.K. Vladimirov dated 13 July 1927.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CC1
. The vault is dated 10 1925.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CC2
. Domlad (enclosed in a separate envelope). N. 4-5.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CCC
. Domlad. N. 3-4.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CC4
. N. 57. On this case Vladimirov was rehabilitated in
1999 7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CC5
. N. 58 and sl.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CC6
Archive VFSB
on
St. Petersburg.
e
Nenoblast. S.
I-85221.
c.
1.
Indictment. N. 359-386.
(<< back )ted in
1999 7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CC5
. N. 58 and sl.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CC6
Archive VFSB
on
St. Petersburg.
e
Nenoblast. S.
I-85221.
c.
1.
Indictment. N. 359-386.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CC7
Ibid. N. 392.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CC8
Archive VFSB
on
St. Petersburg.
e
Nenoblast. S
I-
51351.
m
P.S.
See pages 98-105. The case of M.A. Radynsmoo7o's group was discontinued
after all the accused "declared in writing their rejection of any renewal of any
activity in Freemasonry at all". According to the materials of the
investigation, Mikhail Anatolievich Radynsmii (b. 1891) was "a former
nobleman, the son of a general, a scientific collaborator of the 1st-7th ranks of
the Astronomical Institute". According to B.V. Astromov, M.A. Radynsmii
worked together with G.O. Mebes in the past.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CC9
Archive of VFSB for St. Petersburg and Nenoblast. D. P-28949-
T. 1. N. 60.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C40
Ibid. N. 70-72.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C41
Protomol of Baruenmo's interrogation of 10 June 1937.. by mn.: Shishmin
m. Battle of the Himalayas. U. 361.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C42
Archive of the VFSB for St. Petersburg and Nenoblasts. Protomol of the
interrogation of F.K. Shvara dated 3 July 1937 7. N. 75-76.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C4C
Ibid. N. 76.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C44
Condiain family archive. 3.M. Condiain. Notebook 2.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C45
Archive of VFSB for St. Petersburg and Nenoblast. D P-26492. Protomol
of interrogation
A.A. Kondiaina dated 9 July 1937 7. N. 43
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C46
. And the postings of A.A. Kondiain from 8, 16-21 June and 15 August
1937. N. 31,49
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C47
. Protomol of the interrogation of A.A. Kondiain from 16-21 June 1937.
N.
13.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C48
Vampilov B. On anti-religious work in Buryat-Mon7oliya.
Antireli7iYWngm. Z 8/9.1938. U. 29.
(<< back )interrogation of A.A. Kondiain from 16-21 June 1937.
N.
13.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C48
Vampilov B. On anti-religious work in Buryat-Mon7oliya.
Antireli7iYWngm. Z 8/9.1938. U. 29.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C49
Ands letter from A.G. Kondiain to V.H. Demin, 22 May 1997 7. To
Demin, 22 May 1997 7. Kondiain family archive.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C50
it. by mn.: O. Shishmin. Twilight of the Ma7ovs: George Gurdjieff and
others. M., 2005. U. 228-230.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C51
Bratsev B.C. Masons and power in Russia. M., 2003. U. 564.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C52
NARB. Letter to Baruenmo ybimov dated 24 March 1927 7. N.
28.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C5C
Ibid. N. 16.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C54
See: Hyperborean morni Kalo7atia. Tikhoplav V.Œ., Tikhoplav
T.S. Phisima of Faith. SPb., 2002.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C55
Sinoviev
AB,
Sinoviev
A.A.
No7os
e7ipetsmih
pyramids.
Vladimir, 1999. U. 84.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C56
See, for example: Nariuuev V.E.. The Wisdom of Smei: primitive
uelovem, Nuna and Sune. Hovosibirsm, 1989; Armaim: Researches.
Findings. Discoveries. Collected under the editorship of G.B. Sdanowitz.
Nelyabinsm, 1995; Trekhlebov A.V. Klitz Fenimsa - Russian Solnetsnaya
Ptitsa. 1997; Bjdvsl R., Gilbert 3. Semrets of the Pyramids. M., 1997;
HsnmYm G. Traces of Bo7s. M., 1997; Farlon7 D. Stonehenge and the
Pyramids of E7ipta. M., 1999.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C57
Vladimirsmii B.M., Kislovskii N.D. Archaeoastronomy and History of
Culture. M., 1989. U. 58.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C58
See:
Tortsinov
E.A..
Reli7ions
of the world.
Experience
Ultimate7o: transpersonal states and psychotechnics. SPb., 1997.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C59
Nanshin I.I. Mystical knowledge and the "Universal feeling" //
Sborni in honour of V.I. Naomansmoo7o. St. Petersburg, 1905. U. 60.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C59
Nanshin I.I. Mystical knowledge and the "Universal feeling" //
Sborni in honour of V.I. Naomansmoo7o. St. Petersburg, 1905. U. 60.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C60
it. in the collection: Chrestomatiya po obey psychologii7ya:
psychologii7ya muzheniya. M., 1981. U. 136.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C61
History of the Ancient East. N. I: Mesopotamia. M., 1983. U. 100,
101. Edited by I.M. Dyamonov.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C62
Tortsinov E.A. Reli7ions of the World. U.
84, 87.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C6C
Kondratov A Address - Nemuria? N., 1978.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C64
Sinoviev AB., Sinoviev A.A. No7os e7ipetsmikh pyramids. U. 6.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C65
See Dubrov AP, Pushmin V.H.. Parapsychology and modern
Natural Science. M., 1989; Smirnova H.M. Foresight - a view of space and
time. M., 2003.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C66
See: Gro S. Sa bounds of mos7a. Birth, death and transendence in
psychotherapy. M., 1993; ibid.: Oblasts ueloveu]^mY7o besosnXtnXlno7o. M.,
1994.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C67
. U. 45.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C68
Martynov A VmXW. soc. U. 4..
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C69
Azhazha V.G. Volo7iu]^maya mystery. Creation of the world: day
eighth. M., 2002. U. 309, 310.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C70
. U. 306, 308, 309
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C71
. U. 252-254.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C72
. U. 317, 318.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C7C
Remomendud citators
most interestingd
articled iWiìa
ŒI.
Kulamov, in which the author attempts to create a new martina of the world
on the basis of the "synthesis of science and religion", see: Kulamov Œ.I.
Synthesis of science and religion // Voprosy ilosoloii. 1999- Z 2. U. 142-
153.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C74
A.N. Nizhevsmii. Cosmic pulse of life: Semlya in the arms of the Sun.
Heliotaramcia. U. 504.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---sy ilosoloii. 1999- Z 2. U. 142-
153.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C74
A.N. Nizhevsmii. Cosmic pulse of life: Semlya in the arms of the Sun.
Heliotaramcia. U. 504.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C75
Triumov
Alemsandr
Vimtoroviu
(1897-1963),
neuropathologist7,
corresponding member of the AMH (1951), major-general of medical service.
From 1919 he was a st. ass. Since 1919, he was a senior assistant professor at
the Institute of Patholo7 relemsolo7yesmoo7on.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C76
Vladimir Hymolayev (1893-1973), psychologist7, doctor of medical
sciences, corresponding member of the Academy of Pedagogical Sciences,
pro. NGV. In the early 1920s, he was head of a psychotherapy laboratory with an
outpatient clinic attached to it.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C77
Polisadov S.V. - Master of the chair of the Moscow lodge "Harmony",
which belonged to the Autonomous Russian Freemasonry (1922-1925). In the
ARM he held the position of Deputy General Secretary with the right to open
new lodges independently. Until 1921 7. he was a member of the Autonomous
Order of Martyneesis7 of Strictly Oriental Obedience (AOMVP), which he
left together with B.V. Astromov. He was not involved in the case of the
Lenin7rad Masons. See: Bratsev B.C. Masons and power in Russia. U. 445,
446,449,462.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C78
Astromov or Watson (real name Kiriuenmoo) Boris Vimtorovich (1883-
later 1928). In 1903 7. he entered the East of the C-Pb. university, and became
a participant in the Russian-Japanese war. Took part in the storming of the
Simne7o courtyard, drismonsultant of Smolno7o (1921). General secretary of
the ASMWP (1919-1921) and the ARM (1922-1925). HXmXnun] arrestin.
insp]mtor of Gubono. See: Bratsev V.S. Ibid. U. 440-463.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C79
Frolov S.P. After the Revolution he worked as a guide in the arsmom
(Detsmom) Village.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---f Gubono. See: Bratsev V.S. Ibid. U. 440-463.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C79
Frolov S.P. After the Revolution he worked as a guide in the arsmom
(Detsmom) Village.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C80
Modsalewski.
B.N.
(1874-1928),
Soviet
literary scholar,
Pushmainist, member of the USSR Academy of Arts.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C81
Struve V.V. (1889-1965), Soviet orientalist, academician, AH
USSR (1935).
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C82
Kovalevsmii M.M. (1851-1916), historian, historian, , socio7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C8C
Nossmii
H.O.
(1870-1965),
iloso,
one
ands greatest
representatives of intuitivism in Russia. In 1922 he was exiled to 7ranu.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C84
Karsavin N,P. (1882-1952), religious7ios philosopher and historian. In
192.2 7. he was exiled to 7ranu.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C85
Meyer A.A. (1875-1939), religious7ioWn iloso, 7lava of one7o andW
religious7ioWnoilosocmih mruzhmov in Nenin7rad.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C86
Per7ament
M.R.
(1866-1932),
uceny-legal scholar,
pro.
Nenin7radmoo7o University.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C87
Cordy7 Alemsander Kasparovitz, ommultist; in 1907 7. founded a lodge of
Rosenmreiers in Oserma. Vicitele of B.M. Subamina (see below).
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C88
Subamin Boris Mikhailovits (1894-1937), po^t, improvisXtor, ucenXtor,
smulltor. About him see: Hemirovsmii A.I., Vmolova I.I. VmXW. soc.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C89
Evreinov H.H. (1879-1953), director and dramatist7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C90
H.H. Khodotov (1878-1932), actor, in 1908-1909 77. directed the
Contemporary Theatre in St. Petersburg. Performed as a playwright7 and
paed7o7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ------ PAGE BREAK ---

C90
H.H. Khodotov (1878-1932), actor, in 1908-1909 77. directed the
Contemporary Theatre in St. Petersburg. Performed as a playwright7 and
paed7o7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C91
Shvar Io7ann-Geor7 (1751-1784) - a well-known Moscow Freemason,
co-founded the Harmony lodge together with H.I. Hovimov (1780). He
founded the Vuitelsmud seminary at the University of Moscow (1779), edited
the journal Morning Light", and organised the "Friendly Price Society"
(1782).
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C92
G.O.M. - Gr7orii Ot7onoviu on Mebes, baron, born in 1868 7. in Riga.
Chairman of the Graolo7iuiesmoo7o Society (1912). O 1910-1912
- Inspector General, from 1912-7o to 1925 77. 7lava of the Order of
Martinists in St. Petersburg/Nenin7rad. At the time of his arrest, he was a
mathematics teacher at the 2nd Soviet Labour School in Nenin7rad. About
him see: Bratsev B.C. Ibid. U. 440-442, 456-458, 462.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C9C
Nesterova M.A. (b. 1878). In the 7 years of the First World War founded
the
"Obestvo uisto7o" in Petro7rad. Mena G.O. Mebesa.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C94
Franm-Kamenemii I.G. (1880-1937), e7iptolo7.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C95
Shileymo V.K. (1891-1930), orientalist-assyrolologist7, second husband
of A.A. Shileymo.
Akhmatova.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C96
Pro. Rnovits - the reference is probably to the Wtno7rae Vsevolod
M]odjevijevije Rnovits.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C97
Pro. Kovalevsmii - probably refers to Mikhail Mamsimovich
Kovalevsmii, son of the famous Mamsim Mamsimovich Kovalevsmii
(reported by E.B. Belodubrovsmii).
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C98
Valero-Gratsev H.V. (1879-1960), Wtno7ra. On him see: Andreev A.I.
H.V. Valero-Gratsev - traveller or mystiimator? // Ariavarta. Z 2.1998. U.
157-167.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---BREAK ---

C98
Valero-Gratsev H.V. (1879-1960), Wtno7ra. On him see: Andreev A.I.
H.V. Valero-Gratsev - traveller or mystiimator? // Ariavarta. Z 2.1998. U.
157-167.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

C99
Orlov-Davydov
Alemsei
A,
7ra,
7lava
(venable)
boxes
"Polar , one of the first Masonic lodges to come into existence in Russia in the
early 20th century. He was admitted to the lodge in 1907 7. About him see. -
Bratsev
B.C. Masons and power in Russia. U. 305, 306, 316.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

400
P.I. Paluinsmiy (1878-1929), engineer, or7anisator of the syndiMat
"Produ7ol". After the February Revolution, he was a comrade of the Minister
of Trade and Industry in the Provisional Government, and was in charge of
the defence of the Simne7o Palace during the October Uprising.
(<< back )

--- PAGE BREAK ---

401
Apparently, this refers to the Institute for the 7armonious7o development
of man, founded in 1922 7. G.I. Gurdjieff near Paris (Chateau dd Priere,
Fontainebleau). Gurdjieff left Russia with a group of uuenim in the summer of
1920 7. At the same time, it should be noted that in Petrograd in 1920-1921
77. there was an Institute of Rhythm, with which Baruenmo probably
collaborated.
(<< back )