NTOM
GERHARD
HAUPTMANN

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BERSERKER
BOOKS

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PHANTOM
ANOVEL
BY
GERHART HAUPTMANN
TRANSLATEDBY
BAYARDQUINCYMORGAN

--- PAGE BREAK ---

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PHANTOM
I
My wife has furnished for me the tiny corner-
room in the front, and I am now sitting in it.
Across the way the village brook murmurs un-
der ash and willow. Below me I hear the tin-
kling bell of the little shop which my wife tends
It does well and supplies our modest demands
completely.
But I shall have to undertake something be-
sides. First, I have time to spare, and then I
have spiritual cravings. Otherwise I am quite
content and feel as happy as a king.
I smoke a pipe. That costs me virtually noth-
ing, for we have cheap tobacco in the shop.
Smoking stimulates the fancy. It also' quiets.
I get by it, for example, the opportunity to feel
a state of agreeable leisure and at the same time
to set down my thoughts in writing. “"Why
[1]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

don't you write,”" says my wife, “perhaps it may
turn out to be a book, you know."
I just simply write down everything that
passes through my mind.
And if I should succeed in making a book, why
shouldn't I be able to write a second, a third?
Then I should be an author. In the most nat-
ural way I should then have found my desired
avocation.
This house, which my father-in-law bought
six months ago, together with the shop, did once
belong to the widow of such a person. Her
name was Mrs. Wander. Wander was a school-
master who had had to give up his position on
account of certain views.After long wander-
ings he found this asylum, like me, and had a
livelihood in it. His life-work, which he may
have begun and completed in this very room, is
a German dictionary of proverbs in five volumes.
[2]

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd this asylum, like me, and had a
livelihood in it. His life-work, which he may
have begun and completed in this very room, is
a German dictionary of proverbs in five volumes.
[2]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

IⅡ
IAMunknown here so far.Mywife andher
fatherpicked outthislittlevillagein theHirsch-
bergValley,because they did notwish people
tohave constant occasion to talk aboutmy“aim-
less journeys1but also for the sake of with-
drawingme from an environment which atevery
step must waken recollections in me,and keep
themawake.
Justhere itoccurs tome:am Inot on the
pointofthwartingtheirintention?
Yesandno.
IfIreflecthere uponmydestiny,seektogain
acomprehensiveviewofmypast,andendeavor
tosetdownveraciouslyallthatseemsmemo-
rabletome,itisforone thingan attempttofree
myself from the spell of my recollections, and
somethingverydifferent from unwillinglyfall-
ing under their spell once more,which would
probably happen in Breslau.
I never wish to see that place again.
Perhapsaman would nolonger be ableto
live after such experiences as mine, if all past
1Translator's note.Title of a popular novel by Gerstacker.
[3]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

events were not actually unreal.In no case does
the past any longer affect us with the power of
reality. I must proceed with great calmness, pa-
tience, and care, if I would still recall to my
mind the details of my great experience. The
last are of course the most vivid, whereas all
those that precede my entrance into prison are
much less clear, although much more important.
[4]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

III
I sPENT six years, four months, and twenty-one
days in prison. That is a hard fact, which I
had rather put down at the outset. It would be
more than disagreeable to me to have fraudu-
lently won myself readers by concealing it, if a
complete book should some day actually be born
of the faded dream of my life. It will then
remain a fact, and be it here expressly stated,
that the writer has been a convict.
[5]

--- PAGE BREAK ---a
complete book should some day actually be born
of the faded dream of my life. It will then
remain a fact, and be it here expressly stated,
that the writer has been a convict.
[5]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

IV
I sHouLD quite certainly not be writing these
lines,indeed quite certainly no longer be living
but for my present wife Marie, nee Stark.
Stark isa common name.Butitisnatural to
say,asis the fact,thatmy present wife isnot
only called Stark [i.e. strong], but is so,al-
though in pure externals she is characterized by
a gentle and amiable nature. Her father was a
bookbinder.If his daughter has been strong,
she has also had in him and at all times a strong
support.
My father-in-law is eighty.He clerks in the
shopbelow.Heis anadmirableman.
We have here in the village a strange school-
master:a baptized Jew,Dr.Levine.His father
was a banker in Berlin and very wealthy.They
say thatDr.Levine renounced the greatest part
ofhisfortuneinfavorofhisbrothersandsisters.
He was state's attorney,andwastobepromoted
toAttorney-General,when he suddenly resigned
andafter suitablepreparation was appointed
here as teacher in the grammar-school.Only
thus could he appease his social conscience, as
[9]

--- PAGE BREAK ---Attorney-General,when he suddenly resigned
andafter suitablepreparation was appointed
here as teacher in the grammar-school.Only
thus could he appease his social conscience, as
[9]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

he puts it.Asa favor my father-in-law still
occasionallybinds a bookforDr.Levine.
Ihavesometimes toldDr.Levinethisand
that about my past.He encourages me to write
itdown.
Hehasfurnished a comfortable studyin the
gable of the schoolhouse.When Irecently re-
turnedtohim someboundvolumes,hedetained
me.Ihad to smoke a cigar and drink acup of
coffeewithhim.ItwasthenIshowedhimthe
picture.
My wifeknowsnothing ofthepicture.
Ireceived thispicture from Melitta.
Yousee,whenmyrelationswith Melitta were
at their zenith,Ihad told her in a confidential
hour ofmy weakness for VeronicaHarlan,the
daughter of the hardware-merchant.Melitta
was good-natured.Oneday shewashaving her
picture taken and saw thispicture in thepho-
tographer's studio.Itwasnothardtopersuade
him to let her have it,as she found the child-
face in the picture so uncommonly beautiful.
Dr.Levine alsofound ituncommonlybeautiful.
It is beautiful,truly,but thank God it has
nomorepoweroverme.
[7]

--- PAGE BREAK ---it,as she found the child-
face in the picture so uncommonly beautiful.
Dr.Levine alsofound ituncommonlybeautiful.
It is beautiful,truly,but thank God it has
nomorepoweroverme.
[7]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

"No more power over me."
This assertion must be modified.
To-day with God’s aid I enjoy perfect health.
This health I attained in three years of utter soli-
tude in my prison cell,and subsequently, when
Iwas employed in the prison library through
thekindness of the chiefwarden.ThereI could
alsocompletemyeducation.
Since I am now enjoying perfect health, the
little picture has no more power over me.When
the original of this picture entered into her power
over me I was twenty-eight years old, and,be-
cause sickly from childhood,stillolder in spirit.
From childhood I have been sickly,I said;I
became really sick about in my twenty-second
year.I coughed much and for several years the
cough alwaysleftbloodonmyhandkerchief.
This had howeverpassedwhenmy spiritual sick-
ness began.
They say that the so-called “consumption,”
that is the lung-disease,intensifies the craving
for love.But I can perhaps return to that later.
Anyway,it is the affair of medical science to de
[8]

--- PAGE BREAK ---the so-called “consumption,”
that is the lung-disease,intensifies the craving
for love.But I can perhaps return to that later.
Anyway,it is the affair of medical science to de
[8]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

terminewhatinfuencethebodyhasuponthe
soul.
Somuch I thinkIcan say,thatwhen the spark
fell upon my soul, a vast pile of fuel had col-
lectedinboth soulandbody.
Now what sortof sparkwas it,and of what
origin was that spark?HereI could choosebe-
tween havingitconsistofdivine or devilishfire,
tracingitsorigin from heaven orhell.Strictly
speaking,if Iwere still in a position to operate
with these concepts,I should haveno choice at
all.For since this sparkgaverise toa truly
hellishconfagration,a Christian couldnever ad-
mit that itwas a heavenly spark.And so indeed
theprison chaplain,theReverend Mr.Walkmil-
ler,called it a hellish spark, and thereupon of
coursefound itveryeasy totrace all the terrible
consequences forme and others back to thisin-
cendiarism ofSatan.
Sucha simplificationwouldnotbein thein-
terest of truth, which is my purpose.
JustnowIhaveoncemorescanned attentively
thepictureofthethirteen-year-olddaughterof
the hardware-dealer,and I must say that it is
of captivating charm. "Virgin, mother, queen!""
[6]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the Master 1 would say. A sacred image in it-
self. It would not be strange if pilgrimages
were made to it from far and near.
An orthodox Catholic might object that the
guile of the devil may have occasionally made
use even of the unsuspecting Virgin Mother, in
order to lure souls to destruction.
So when I said: the picture has no more power
over me, I meant that in the sense of its misuse
by the devil it has no more power over me.
1 Translator's note: i. e. Goethe, see Faust II, 12102.
[01]

--- PAGE BREAK ---e picture has no more power
over me, I meant that in the sense of its misuse
by the devil it has no more power over me.
1 Translator's note: i. e. Goethe, see Faust II, 12102.
[01]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

VI
So much for Satan; to trouble him again will
I hopebeunnecessary.
Iwas simply burned to ashes, as it were,by
a conflagration,becauseIwas absolutelydefense-
less,after my mole-like existence,before the in-
rush ofthe divinefame.
Butin so far as thispicture is therefection
of the divine fame,it still has power over me,
andwill retain it until my death.
Ifrst sawVeronica Harlan one noon,when I,
apoor municipal clerk, was walking home as
usual.Before the city hall of Breslau stands
the whipping-post.There are rings on it, with
which the childwasplaying.It was thetwenty-
eighth of May,a date which for many reasons,
as you will understand, I cannot forget. Even
when thepassers-bybegan to noticeher,thegov-
ernesscouldnotdiverttheinterestofthechild
from the whipping-post.She tried repeatedly to
lureawayfrom the steps thestrikinglybeautiful
creature with the fying, saffron-yellowhair.In
vain.I only know that my hat few from my
head—someonehadjostledme-andrecallhow
[11]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the child burst into an irresistibly hearty laugh
atit.
Without the experience of that moment,I
shouldprobablybeto thisdaywithoutreproach
before theworld,and sorrow upon sorrowwould
have been spared me. But there is a proverb,
tobe sure not a German one,in the collection
of the excellent Wander:“Even my own sor-
row is dearer to me than the happiness of an-
other."AndifIwereaskedwhetherIwould
rather not have had that morning's adventure,
seemingly so harmless,yet so pregnant with con-
sequences,Imustneedsreply:
Iwouldratheryieldupmylifethanthatex-
perience.
[12]

--- PAGE BREAK ---rIwould
rather not have had that morning's adventure,
seemingly so harmless,yet so pregnant with con-
sequences,Imustneedsreply:
Iwouldratheryieldupmylifethanthatex-
perience.
[12]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

VII
THIs confession,tomy former judges,would be
equivalent to the expression'of basest obduracy,
to a man of average common sense,the expression
ofhighestfolly.IfIlivelongenoughand
abide by my desire and present ability,until all
hasbeensaidthatcanmakeafrankandfull
confession wholly frank and full,and if my
judges shall one dayreadit,itmaybethat they
will change their minds.They will perhaps rec-
ognizehowdistorted,howincomplete,howfalse
my confession in the protocols really is.The
man of average common sense,on the other hand,
whohasalreadydeclaredmefoolish,willin the
end regard his opinion as confirmed.For my
part,asIreflectonmytask,refect superfcially
to be sure,I cannot help seeingin it theproblem
ofweaving together the story of a dunce,a fool,
andacriminal.
Of course,in doing this,Imyselfhope tobe
abletoriseabovethedunce,thefool,andthe
criminal-orletussay,to castoffall three.
[13]

--- PAGE BREAK ---ng together the story of a dunce,a fool,
andacriminal.
Of course,in doing this,Imyselfhope tobe
abletoriseabovethedunce,thefool,andthe
criminal-orletussay,to castoffall three.
[13]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

VIII
AwoRDaboutmyextraction.
My father was a tax-collector,and had under
him the supervision of the brandy-distilleries.
In his duties he was frequently treated to liquor,
and had eventually become a pronounced toper.
Ashe was seldom athome, traveling about on
business and dependent on hotels,the greatest
part of his income was squandered,in addition
tohis travelallowance.Hadhe nothada
stroke of apoplexy in thevery nickoftime,they
wouldprobably have driven him outofoffice,
and mother would have losther pension.She
had already made up several deficits in the ac
counts,having to beg thenecessary sums ofAunt
Schwab,which wasnoteasy.
Mymotherhad ahard life.
Wholly disappointed by my father,almost
wholly abandoned, and made wholly unhappy
by him, she found solace in her children, as is
common in such cases.She had two sons and a
daughter. I was the oldest. As long as my
brother and my sister,the youngest among us,
werechildren,thingswentwellenough.When
[14]

--- PAGE BREAK ---as is
common in such cases.She had two sons and a
daughter. I was the oldest. As long as my
brother and my sister,the youngest among us,
werechildren,thingswentwellenough.When
[14]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

theyhadpassedtheirseventeenthoreighteenth
year,it became absolutely clear that one could
notrelyon them anymore.Thatwasatthe
timewhenmymotherwasalreadyinthefifth
yearofherwidowhood.
Ihadalwaysbeenonespeciallygoodterms
withmymother.When thishad begun,Ido
notknow.Ithinkveryearly.Itwas already
sowhenIfirstobservedthatmyfathercould
not endure me.Ashewas also mostlyat odds
withmy mother,Inaturally tooksides with her.
Icannot saywhenIbecameher avowedfa-
vorite.Itmusthavebeenbeforefather'sdeath.
Even thensheoftenwouldcall meheronlycom-
fort.Later,when I had become a solicitor’s
hands on thefirstofthemonth,Iwouldnot in-
port.
Thefatintowhichwemovedafterfather's
deathwasinthesecondstoryofanold-fashioned
little house inPocket Street.Wekeptit until
the catastrophe came,that is for about eight
years.It was very small, very dark, but never-
theless not uncomfortable.Such quaint little
[15]

--- PAGE BREAK ---e house inPocket Street.Wekeptit until
the catastrophe came,that is for about eight
years.It was very small, very dark, but never-
theless not uncomfortable.Such quaint little
[15]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

cityhouses,with their smallwindows andlow-
ceiled rooms, usually have great charm.I had
no ideabutthatIandmymothershouldlive
in thoserooms till theend ofour days.
Iassumedinthelittlehouseholdtheposition
offather,ofheadofthefamily.Considerably
older than theother children,Iwas anauthority
tothemforthatreason alone.Butmorethan
this,mymothertookevery occasionto affirmmy
paternalpower over them intheirpresence.It
felltomeforanotherreasontoo,becauseIhad
long been the sole bread-winner. When my
brother andmy sister occasionallyearned some-
thing themselves,theynever turnedoversomuch
asaredcenttomymother.
This paternal authority I never misused,to my
knowledge.
To spare my lungs and larynx I had accus-
tomedmyselftospeakinalowvoice.Itbecame
second nature with me. It is still clear in my
mindhowatthetrialseveralofthejurorscried
to me,“Louder, Louder! This restrained man-
ner of speechI never needed to accelerate or in-
tensifyin intercourse withmybrother and sister,
evenwhenIhadoccasion to admonishorrepri-
[91]

--- PAGE BREAK ---“Louder, Louder! This restrained man-
ner of speechI never needed to accelerate or in-
tensifyin intercourse withmybrother and sister,
evenwhenIhadoccasion to admonishorrepri-
[91]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

mandthem.ImaysaythatIenjoyedfrom
them esteem mingledwith admiration,and had
a more unrestricted authority than even my
fatherhadeverpossessed.
"You ought to teach,or rather,you ought to
have become a teacher,”my mother would say
attimes,when shenoticedhowIwouldtakethe
troubletohearmybrotherandsisterrecitedates
in history, Bible verses, and the like. I am
surely underno delusionincreditingmyselfwith
always having been to them a willing and pa-
tient adviser,helper,and teacher.And I took
realpleasure in teaching.
Once when my mother had repeated her “You
should havebecomea teacher,it occurred to me
towonder,Ibeingthen twenty-five,whether that
were not still possible.The idea aroused my in-
terest,nay my enthusiasm,in so far as one can
callenthusiasm anyone of theless depressed
moods ofwhich Iwas capable.Withina short
timeIhadsecuredsufficientinformation,usedfor
thefirsttimeapartofmywagestopurchase
books,andbegunto spendeveryfreehour inpre
paringmyselfto take theteacher's examination
forsecondaryschools.
[17]

--- PAGE BREAK ---dsufficientinformation,usedfor
thefirsttimeapartofmywagestopurchase
books,andbegunto spendeveryfreehour inpre
paringmyselfto take theteacher's examination
forsecondaryschools.
[17]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Until then Ihad lived along in a state of
natural resignation, without thinking. While I
was studying English,French, and the other sub-
jects, both winter and summer in my cosy little
room,thedoor ofwhich openedona wooden
gallery abovethelittle court,Iwasfor the first
time doing something which originated ina
genuine initiative of my own.Hence I had a
special gratification in it, and felt my self-con-
fidenceincreasing.
I have not yet mentioned the double bone-
fracturewhichIhadhadthemisfortunetosuffer
as a child.My father had a military way of
dealing with mewhichwashardlyvery appro-
priate in view of my gentle nature,with its
tendencyto subordination.When thenameLo-
renz,for soIwasnamed,rang through thehouse
in his accents,I almost always lostmy head com-
pletely.Hurrying down a staircase in such a
bones werebadly setby a quack,so that the af-
fectedleg became shorter.In order torepair
thedamagethelegwasoncemoreforcibly
broken by another quack,whereupon it ulti-
mately became still shorter.After that I limped,
[18]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and that affected my way of life not a little,
more especially at that time. For obvious rea-
sons I avoided the children's games, in which I
had so far taken part with enthusiasm, and tumed
to quiet occupations, preferably indoors and al-
ways where there was nobody present.
I think it was not until my trial that I really
learned to think and to realize the blessing of
independent thinking. Yet a beginning had been
made when I formed the resolve to work towards
the teaching profession, and as I have said, an in-
dubitably increased self-confidence was the bene-
ficial result of it.
[19]

--- PAGE BREAK ---been
made when I formed the resolve to work towards
the teaching profession, and as I have said, an in-
dubitably increased self-confidence was the bene-
ficial result of it.
[19]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

IX
INDEED the self-instruction I had begun was
beneficial to me in every respect, and I think back
withpleasure on thehoursI devoted toit.(My
wifeknowsthat,andhasthereforetriedtomake
thisroom assimilaraspossible to thatinwhich
Iused to pursue my studies.The old tile-stove,
againstwhich I had shovedup my little study-
table,was chocolate-brown.Perhaps at the ad-
viceofherfather shehas had thisvery similar
stove setup forme,and byit stands thelittle
old tableoncemore.)Courses ofinstructionI
procured by instalments.One by one I also pur-
chased the other indispensable text-books.My
mothervacillated thewhile between anxiety and
approval. Her father was a prosperous citizen
ofBreslau,a furrier by trade,and the last four
years before his death he had even been in the
Council.Now to be sure shehad resigned her-
selfineveryreect,butstillitdidatterherelf-
esteemtoseeinmenolonger themiserableclerk
ofalawyer,butthefuture schoolmaster.On the
other hand,the diminution of the household
money,which she suffered in consequence of the
[OZ]

--- PAGE BREAK ---esteemtoseeinmenolonger themiserableclerk
ofalawyer,butthefuture schoolmaster.On the
other hand,the diminution of the household
money,which she suffered in consequence of the
[OZ]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

book-buying, made itself painfully felt. Later,
whenmyinterestinliteratureandhence alsofor
booksdevelopedbeyond therangeof teachers
courses,and I began to buyReclameditions and
also somewhatmore expensive editions of the
classics,Isometimes found mymother in tears
and hadmuchdiffcultyincomfortingandquiet-
ingher.Tobe sureIwasnever able to convince
her thatmoneyspentforbooksnotabsolutelyre-
quired for the examination was not thrown away.
Needless tosay,through Schiller and Goethe
myintellectualhorizonwasextended,theworld
ofmyideasinfinitelyenriched.Butmy then
incipientweaknessforbooks,somuchbewailedby
mymother,had anotheradvantageforme,which
cannotbeovervalued:withoutitIshouldnever
have come to know my father-in-law and my
present wife,and I thinkIhave already stated
that in that case I should no longer be living.
1Translator's note.Pbilipp Reclam began in x867 the pub-
lication of bis “Universal Library,”offering the best of the
world’s literature in tiny unboundvolumes at about 5 cents
each。
[21]