"1 
4 
i 
A I 'I v.» .III n I Nil 
A>IVMiU'l 
ws’riWN iiiiH' .111 '111.")': 
7- F I 
rp'r.:.iTF IV'tiZ].

RF .IHURKAllSU LIBIM'F 
• IIF RfiUFCm 
RiUirHHA 94/20 
; EDITORIAL 
,yj>UESlDENT 
CLAUS 
* 
Bosses Tweed, Hague and Curley would have to 
.

‘ V'.

lip to President Carter.

The brazen way 
^Ja^lhis most pious of Presidents is ladling out pub- 
* //:• lie funds to help his own renomination campaign 
I'' in a state-by-siatc sequence based solely on pri- 
V.

t *mary dates is quite dazzling.

i He sent his Transportation Secretary to Chi- 
cago the other day to dish out S24.8 million in 
“discretionary** highway funds.

The ceremony 
V.- was held in the office of a “loyal** Congressman 
because Mayor Jane Byrne had the nerve to an- 
nounce herself for Senator Edward Kennedy.

The troughs of Florida and Iowa arc already 
* \ brimming and the other primary slates arc 
.

» preparing to be slopped with their deserts, just 
.^ifcKor not.

It is worth noting that the Chicago 
• ♦ largess alone is $7.8 million more than a 
Presidential candidate can spend for the entire 
primary campaign.

Onward and upward with 
“reform**!

Hail to incumbency!

One of Ronald Reagan*s better lines in his 
1976 race against President Ford was that the 
- bands at Ford rallies never knew whether to play 
*5?T“Hail to the Chief** or “Santa Claus Is Coming 
to Town.** Ford was in the same Federal hand- 
out racket, but Carter The Innocent is harder- 
nosed about it.

Can Americans lake comfort from the fact 
that Carter has been restrained in his conduct of 
foreign policy, venting his aggressions at home 
on political enemies?

Perhaps, but ii*s a peculiar 
trade-off and one that might not last.

For now, 
the Carter Presidency is more aldermanic than 
• ’ imperial.

What he is doing goes far beyond the 
norms of our political traditions.

Bribery is the 
real name of this game.

It also violates the law 
prohibiting the use of a Federal officiaPs 
authority to help nominate or elect a President.Bribery is the 
real name of this game.

It also violates the law 
prohibiting the use of a Federal officiaPs 
authority to help nominate or elect a President.

It is lime to dust off that old statute and honor it 
in the observance.

Why Not a Prosecution?

:u 
lei 
Biakey 
l^i'^NelTiianv 
.V ScKwai^ 
k^NroYAiib 
t'THilttt 
V Ndfliian : 
' I Birhbaiini .

i 
tH^bLtiNT 
f NiicNaiis ': 
l^bppIbAM 
Jiifi biiife 
:*6N Ki'EM 
'^MAMridbiDl^f 
Jeail ieltiiia^ 
lishlalii 
.r.

THE ASSASSINATION CIRCUS 
CONSPIKACILS 
UNLIMITED 
FRANK DONNER 
*'Sometimes these cogitations still amaze/The 
troubled midnight and the noon's repose.

'* 
—T.S.

Eliot 
The iwcniy-sevcn-volume invcsligalive record 
and 686-pagc report on the Kennedy and King 
assa.ssinations by the House Select Committee, 
on Assassinations released earlier this year may 
make history—but for the wrong reasons.

The 
lengthy probe (September 1976 to December 
1978) concluded after spending $5.4 million that 
President John F.

Kennedy was ‘‘probably assas- 
sinated as a result of a conspiracy,** and that 
“on the basis of circumstantial evidence .

.

., 
there is a likelihood that** Dr.

Martin Luther 
King Jr.

was assassinated also “as a result of a 
conspiracy.’* Even these qualified conclusions 
rest on rickety foundations.

Like the Warren Commission before it, the 
committee’s investigation has confirmed an 
underlying bias.

From the start, the Warren 
Commis.sion tilted toward a lone-assassin con- 
clusion for a variety of reasons: its more or less 
explicit mandate to eliminate the unsettling im- 
pact of conspiracy speculations on political sta- 
bility; its need (a priority of Chief Justice Earl 
Warren) to counteract the nativisi Communist 
conspiracy mania which burgeoned in the 1960s,* 
and (a White Hou.se concern) the desire to elimi- 
nate embarrassment in foreign relations.Like the Warren Commission before it, the 
committee’s investigation has confirmed an 
underlying bias. From the start, the Warren 
Commis.sion tilted toward a lone-assassin con- 
clusion for a variety of reasons: its more or less 
explicit mandate to eliminate the unsettling im- 
pact of conspiracy speculations on political sta- 
bility; its need (a priority of Chief Justice Earl 
Warren) to counteract the nativisi Communist 
conspiracy mania which burgeoned in the 1960s,* 
and (a White Hou.se concern) the desire to elimi- 
nate embarrassment in foreign relations. The bias of the Warren Commission was re- 
flected in its failure to exhaust invcsligalive leads 
and thereby prove that no conspiracy existed. In 
the turbulent decade that followed its investiga- 
tions, when the traumas of the Vietnam War, 
Watergate and the lawlessness of the intelligence 
community amounted to what has been called a 
(Continued on Page 654)

--- PAGE BREAK ---.

Ilic distual collahoiation ol many apparciil na)»-\vaviTs wiili 
^ (he nu)s( dangerous ciieiiiy (lie eouiidy (or any oiliei eonn- 
' iry) ever had.

l inally, ilu* wlude HInni sa^*a slnnilil have 
.

^ broughl home (he need lor open governmeiu and lor tree 
informalion.

Inslratl, IIKMC lias heen an alinosplierc of vin- 
I / dieiivc rceiiiinmiiion, daik Miggesiions dial ihcie are “niuie 
j names lo conic,** Toni innuendos alunn homosexuals and 
an exclusive coiteenuaiion on llluiir.s “Icllow (raveling.** 
V Against (hat you can score one for open government, but it 
*' isn’t much of a consolation.

/:• Forster*s remark, (hal if faced wiih a choice between 
• I betraying his country and betraying his friends he hoped he 
V would have the courage to betray his country, has often 
V been taken as the epitome of faggot detachment and effete 
pacifism.

The secret it really holds is the clue to the British 
* establishment mentality—which always has put class before 
country, interest before patriotism, while claiming to speak 
in the most resonant national mode.

Kipling’s ‘*Kim” says, 
as Kim Philby might have said, by way of an obituary for 
the 1930s and for the class that protected him: 
!

..V’ Something I owe to the soil that grew 
.

'’■ * ’ More to the lives that fed— 
But most to Allah, who gave me two 
Separate sides lo my head.

□ 
Conspiracies 
(Continued From Front Cover) 
’'cumulative fall from innocence,** this failure became a 
^ central feature of attacks on the lone-assassin theory.

The 
strong establishment tics of the members of the Warren 
Commission also contributed to a widespread conviction 
that they had collectively served as the conscious instru- 
ments of betrayal, part of a **covcr-up.** And there is little 
doubt that the commission did consciously withhold its in- 
vestigative resources from areas that might compromise the 
• powers that be, 
.□ 
Conspiracies 
(Continued From Front Cover) 
’'cumulative fall from innocence,** this failure became a 
^ central feature of attacks on the lone-assassin theory.

The 
strong establishment tics of the members of the Warren 
Commission also contributed to a widespread conviction 
that they had collectively served as the conscious instru- 
ments of betrayal, part of a **covcr-up.** And there is little 
doubt that the commission did consciously withhold its in- 
vestigative resources from areas that might compromise the 
• powers that be, 
.

The House Select Committee’s report rcllccts an even 
», more serious bias—in conformity with the now widespread 
conspiracy consensus.

This bias is reflected not.

as in the 
ease of the Warren Commission, in its investignlive procc- 
* durcs but in the strained inferences and coiicinsions which it 
drew from the taels.

I'hc repi)it and the conspiraev iimvc- 
ment from which it has emerged illuminate a larger pattern of 
escapism, frustration and me-too politics which increasingly 
dominate Congress and its constituencies as we enter the 
1980s.

Moreover, the mandate by the House to investigate 
the assassinations not truly for a legislative purpose but 
^ proscriptivciy—to determine the innocence or guilt of indi- 
..

viduals—demonstrates anew the case with which Congres- 
sional power can, when the climate is favorable, be diverted 
Frank Donner is director of the American Civil Liberties 
\ Union research project on political surveillance and author 
I of a forthcoming book on the subject.

The Age of Surveil- 
lance (Alfred A.

Knopf), 
to t)lli‘SliuiK||)ic uses.

I he lluusi u» polilici/c assassinalioits and view ihein as 
the woik id amspiiacies answers .seveial needs barely con- 
cealed beneath the .surface of American life.

I hrcaicncd by 
the raiulomness of sriions crimes, we iiisiinctlvelv strive for 
an explanatiuii ot .sucli acisa.s |)uipo.selnl and rational.I he lluusi u» polilici/c assassinalioits and view ihein as 
the woik id amspiiacies answers .seveial needs barely con- 
cealed beneath the .surface of American life.

I hrcaicncd by 
the raiulomness of sriions crimes, we iiisiinctlvelv strive for 
an explanatiuii ot .sucli acisa.s |)uipo.selnl and rational.

Lven 
in so clear a ca.se of uncontcsled insanity as that of George 
Mele.sky, ’*ihc mad bomber.** the majority of pco|dc polled 
expressed the conviction that he was the instrument of a 
conspiracy!

When the victim is an important public figure, 
ralionali/aiions of irrational acts arc even more important.

Is it possible that the very embodiment of the principles by 
which we live as people can be destroyed by the action of a 
nobody?

And a nobody who lacks even the capacity to con- 
trol his own behavior?

If a President is to be taken from us.

it can only be by a powerful malignant counicrforcc, not by 
a random crank.

To make our loss bearable, we need lo at- 
tribute it to a conspiracy matching the dead leader in power 
and status.

Historically, real conspiracies associated with a.ssassina- 
tions of important public figures arc marked by a distinctive 
motivation, structure and background in both the political 
culture and the mass consciousness.

But the facts adduced 
to support the House Select Committee’s conspiracy claim, 
even if true, bespeak a far different kind of group action.

The committee is talking, in both the King and Kennedy 
eases, about the unaided acts of isolated individuals with 
clear responsibility, acts which just might have had the sup- 
port and encouragement of others, but which lack in any event 
(he political resonance of a true assassination conspiracy.

It 
has tried to bridge this gap by playing semantic games with 
the word conspiracy.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The committee is talking, in both the King and Kennedy 
eases, about the unaided acts of isolated individuals with 
clear responsibility, acts which just might have had the sup- 
port and encouragement of others, but which lack in any event 
(he political resonance of a true assassination conspiracy. It 
has tried to bridge this gap by playing semantic games with 
the word conspiracy. The committee Justifies its strained use of ilic language of 
conspiracy with a technicality: for legal purposes, all con- 
spiracies arc ''partnerships in crime.” In presenting its con- 
clusions. it uneasily acjcnowicdgcs that ’’widely varying 
meanings” attach to the term conspiracy, but argues that 
•’euphemistic variations can lead to a lack of candor.” and 
that ’’plain truth should not be avoided even if it causes dis- 
comfort.” But it is the committee’s ’’plain truth” that is a 
form of deception and indeed reflects “a lack of candor.** 
In any event, the basis for the conspiracy finding in the 
Kciiiicdy ease is highly dubious acoustical evidence of gun- 
lire by a secoiul (grassy knoll) shooter. The infirmity of this 
cviilciice eaiiiiol be cuied hy the coiitlieling testimony about 
puffs of smoke from the gra.ssy knoll. The required support- 
ing evidence—eyewitness reports, spent bullets, llight—is 
altogether lacking, as is evidence of group involvement. If 
the two putative gunmen fired at the same lime, they were 
presumably under external direction and control. (If, mirac- 
ulously. they fired independently of each other, the conspir- 
acy thesis tails apart altogether.) But such planned or on- 
Ihc-scenc coordination is blithely left to the imagination. More: the key concerns of a conspiracy aimed at the public 
murder of a well-guarded target arc. first, to take care of the 
logistics of access and, then, to reduce the risks of apprehen- 
sion. Here we are invited to believe that the conspirators 
chose to increase the risk to the entire group by assigningke care of the 
logistics of access and, then, to reduce the risks of apprehen- 
sion. Here we are invited to believe that the conspirators 
chose to increase the risk to the entire group by assigning

--- PAGE BREAK ---(.55 
'I’lic Nal.ion.

I Urrtiliu'i J 
two incmhcrs to the hit wliilc altogether ncKlccliiiR to organ- 
ize an escape plan.

(>i shoiilil we, plucking a leal lunu the 
o«7/vrr of assassiiiology.

assume that both gunmen were 
nutty fall guys mauipiilatevJ by unseen mastets I mm some 
remote hide-out ami deliberately thrown to the wolves in the 
lust act of a snpeiploi?

Equally unimpressive is the King conspiracy contention— 
that James liarl Kay was motivated by a bounty offer Irom 
two St.

Louis businessmen, who arc east as core conspira- 
tors.

The committee relies for its bounty conspiracy script 
on a story from a gamy source, one Russell Byers, whose 
coinmiUcc testimony was given under an immunity grant.

And Byers had great need for immunity.

A convicted thief, 
he was characterized by his own attorney as “one of the 
most degenerate criminals in St.

Louis.** 
The committee concedes that “it was unable to uncover a 
direct link between the principals of the St.

Louis conspiracy 
and James Earl Ray and hi.s brothers.*’ A footnote informs 
the reader that John Ray (Ray*s brother, who owned a 
tavern in St.

Louis) denied under oath knowing either the 
alleged conspirators or Byers or having heard about the 
bounty offer.

The committee ncvcrthclc.ss insists that he 
could have learned about the offer and transmitted it to his 
brother James, who, we are reminded, visited the St.

Louis 
area “at least twice** during the period when he was a fugi- 
tive.

One of these occasions, according to the committee, 
was the alleged joint robbery by the brothers of a bank in 
Alton, Illinois—the fruit of a wholly conjectural piece of 
detective work by the committee.

The committee has a way 
of floating speculations and then retreating in self-doubt, a 
practice that permits it to embrace the implausible and un- 
proved without at the same time entirely forfeiting its 
credibility.One of these occasions, according to the committee, 
was the alleged joint robbery by the brothers of a bank in 
Alton, Illinois—the fruit of a wholly conjectural piece of 
detective work by the committee.

The committee has a way 
of floating speculations and then retreating in self-doubt, a 
practice that permits it to embrace the implausible and un- 
proved without at the same time entirely forfeiting its 
credibility.

After adopting the bounty conspiracy thesis, based on 
Byers’s highly questionable testimony, and then conceding 
the lack of proof of the communication of the offer (or a 
payofO to Ray (or a family member) either before or after 
the assassination, the committee’s report again returns to a 
conspiracy beat punctuated by a flurry of subjunctives— 
“could have,” **would have,” *‘might have’*—and varia- 
tions on the “possibility” of a conspiracy.

The committee makes Ray’s alleged greed for money the 
fuse of the murder, and grotesquely minimizes his racial 
bigotry.

He was not.

the committee insists, a “rabid racist” 
who would have killed King without a financial incentive.

But the evidence of Kay’s .sociopathie racism cannot be so 
lightly ignored in assessing its motivating power.

Here is a 
man who admired the Nazis and gave the Nazi salute in pub- 
lic.

joined the Army in the hope of aiding in the rehabilita- 
tion of the Nazi movement in Germany, planned to make his 
escape to Rhodesia where (he thought) his deeds would be 
honored, revealed his racism to prison inmates and authori- 
ties.

after his capture told his custodial officer in England.

Chief Inspector Alexander Eisl, that he hated blacks, was 
proud of the murder and wanted to get to Africa to “kill 
some niggers.” Given this and other evidence of Ray’s 
racism, the committee nevertheless determinedly tailored its 
interpretation of Ray’s motivation to fit its conspiracy 
thesis.after his capture told his custodial officer in England.

Chief Inspector Alexander Eisl, that he hated blacks, was 
proud of the murder and wanted to get to Africa to “kill 
some niggers.” Given this and other evidence of Ray’s 
racism, the committee nevertheless determinedly tailored its 
interpretation of Ray’s motivation to fit its conspiracy 
thesis.

11 failed to rccogni/.c the simple fact that, while Ray 
ulfintairiy expected fame and fmlufic, what reduced his 
pcrccpnon of risk, which is the master clue to motivation, 
was not money Init hale.

Bill the distortion of motivation to fit a conspiracy 
liyp«»lhcsis evrn iiioic seiiously niais llie ctuninillcc’s Heat- 
ment of the Kennedy a.ssassination.

Since the attempt in 
IK.IK on the life of Aiulrew J.ickson by Richard Lawrence, 
there have been a tolal of twelve attempts on the lives of 
Prc.sidcnis and candidates for the Presidency, of which five 
have succeeded.

All of them, with the sole c.xception of the 
attempt by the Puerto Rican nationalists on the life of Presi- 
dent Truman, have been unified by a common pattern: a 
single psychopathic gunman acting alone.

(The Lincoln 
assassination is no exception: John Wilkes Booth was a 
deranged loser who killed Lincoln on his own, abandoning 
at the last momeni a prior kidnap-hostage conspiracy plan.) 
Our national experience contrasts with the history of 
a.ssa.SNination in countries all over the world, which abounds 
in instances of cla.ssic Brutus-style conspiracies organized to 
bring about a transfer of power or to call attention to injus- 
tice (“propaganda of the deed”).

History, both ancient and 
modern, also supplies examples of assassinations in foreign 
countries by single individuals, ranging from the tyranni- 
cidal and the avenging through Dostoyevsky’s ‘’rational 
homicide,” the reasoned elimination on ethical or moral 
grounds of a figure embodying or symbolizing injustice or 
oppression.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(The Lincoln 
assassination is no exception: John Wilkes Booth was a 
deranged loser who killed Lincoln on his own, abandoning 
at the last momeni a prior kidnap-hostage conspiracy plan.) 
Our national experience contrasts with the history of 
a.ssa.SNination in countries all over the world, which abounds 
in instances of cla.ssic Brutus-style conspiracies organized to 
bring about a transfer of power or to call attention to injus- 
tice (“propaganda of the deed”). History, both ancient and 
modern, also supplies examples of assassinations in foreign 
countries by single individuals, ranging from the tyranni- 
cidal and the avenging through Dostoyevsky’s ‘’rational 
homicide,” the reasoned elimination on ethical or moral 
grounds of a figure embodying or symbolizing injustice or 
oppression. But these arc not the models drawn from our past, and in 
order to make Lee Harvey Oswald a suitable candidate for a 
group crime, a man who would trust and be trusted by 
others to share an enormous risk, the committee ignored the 
psychological profile of our unique breed of assassins. The 
committee docs not bother to explain why Oswald’s head 
was siraighier than those who preceded or followed him— 
Sirhan Sirhan, Arthur Bremer, Sara Jane Moore and 
Lynette (“Squeaky”) Fromme. One docs not exp>eci a clini- 
cal diagnosis, but Oswald’s psychological biography reflects 
a pattern made all too familiar by our history. A post- 
humous child, buffeted by an assortment of blows—affec- 
tionlcss, separated from his brothers—Oswald became a 
truant and was remanded for psychiatric observation. An

--- PAGE BREAK ---(..VI 
J’Ji'* Niilcioii.

early c.xaminaiion showc-J .IK,i„ci ,,sych.,iic synipiuiM-- 
.

detachment from the world and fanta.sici about power an.I 
fame.

Iliv .short lile was maikeil by vit.lence indmliuK 
'I'feats with a knile against his brother and .si.sier-in-law 
• .Mrikiiig Ins inoiher on inoie llian one occasion ami Mibse' 
• quenily beating his wife, Marina.

Id these we must add 
.

threats against ELsenhower and later Ni.xon, a .sell inllicled 
> wound in Japan and a later wrist-slashing in the Soviet 
Union, the attempted murder of Gen.

Edwin A.

Walker and 
...

the post-assassination killing of Dallas policeman J .D.

Tippit.

,.

In an investigation which purports to persuade us that Os- 
wald acted with others, the committee apparently found no 
.significance in (and did not even refer to) Oswald's state- 
,■ rnent while under interrogation by a Dallas police officer 
^ that everybody will know who I am now." This is ihe 
J..

'a'»"|'ar howl of the embattled .self hungering for faiiie 
wh^h has been heard in the cries of.

among others.

Uoml, 
( When I leave the .stage for gm.d I will be the most lanions 
man in America"); Hremer (to a police officer: "Just stay 
with me and you will be a star like I am”), and Sirhan 
LivmiJTr'’ ' Ken- 
nedy all his life to do ).

Here.

too.

the anomic and paranoia 
that spawn such dreams of glory would render iniplau.sibic 
involvement and shared motivation 
which the committee's conspiracy thesis requires.

In order 
o overcome this obstacle, the committee is forced to use 
politics as an armature for its thesis.

But this is not easy the 
^ thrust to politicize assas.sinations and thus to c,xploit the vul- 
rierabihty of a grievmg constituency by linking as.sassina- 
ions to purposeful, discontented groups has historically ' 
(after an initia fiurry of conspiracy charges) foundered on 
the realicy of the assassin’s dotiincss.

The committee makes Oswald a ''Marxist" acting with 
(unidentified) others to achieve a political goal.But this is not easy the 
^ thrust to politicize assas.sinations and thus to c,xploit the vul- 
rierabihty of a grievmg constituency by linking as.sassina- 
ions to purposeful, discontented groups has historically ' 
(after an initia fiurry of conspiracy charges) foundered on 
the realicy of the assassin’s dotiincss.

The committee makes Oswald a ''Marxist" acting with 
(unidentified) others to achieve a political goal.

Only a 
Marxist, the committee argues, could have defected to the 
Soviet Union, organized a (one-man) branch of the Fair 
Play for Cuba Committee, sat for a photograph armed to 
the teeth and holding copies of Communist journals, etc As 
Ihe committee pictures this "Marxist." he is a freelance 
gunslinger without an organizational base, stalking game in 
the capitalist badlands.

But the committee never tells us why 
a Marxist would, alone or with others, try to kill General 
alkcr or what Marxist cau.se or interest would be served by 
the murder of J.F.K.

Oswald's Marxism is a ve.sioi, of a 
theme lamihar m the hisloiy of Aiiieiicaii assassiiialioiis - 
politics III Ihe head" (Aii.hew llackei calls it ",H-isuiial 
politics"): the lesoii by a.s.sa.sxiiis to the language of poliiics 
w a projeeiion for uiicoiiirollable |x-rsonal impulses.

Oswald s Marxism is of a piece with Booth's commiinieni to 
!

the Confederate cause.

Czolgosz's anarchism.

Guiteau's Re- 
pubheamsm.

Bremer's radicalism or I roiiime's environ.

nieniah.sm.

All of these are but labels for the fantasies of 
alienated psychoiics-brooding in hall bedrooms-thc true 
polmcs of the American assassin.

The committee's evaluation of the Jack Ruby connection 
IS ^rnilarly overburdened by its conspiracy bias.

Ruby's in- 
siabthty IS ignored, as is the historic phenomenon of the as- 
sassin s assassin, the individual who removes the a.ssassin 
iHxcmhiU J,\ /V V 
lor peisoiial reasons—a divine iiies.sage is a favorite.

The 
connniiiee presumably relies, as do almost all of Ihe con 
.spimphiles.Ruby's in- 
siabthty IS ignored, as is the historic phenomenon of the as- 
sassin s assassin, the individual who removes the a.ssassin 
iHxcmhiU J,\ /V V 
lor peisoiial reasons—a divine iiies.sage is a favorite.

The 
connniiiee presumably relies, as do almost all of Ihe con 
.spimphiles.

on the ruling of a Texas court that Ruby was 
(vrN !.i'i"'*^’o'I''*' '"f muler the 
‘ F "‘^■'i Kills', an I.SSUC quite irrelevant to an undersiand- 
I g of his iiiotivation and of the possible involvemeiii of 
I 11.11.

icdiclably.

his own professed reason for killing 
Oswald-sympathy for the President’s widow and children 
evidence^*''* ** lawyer’s invention, despite corroborative 
wa's"rp'’' committee suggests that Ruby 
was recruited to silence Oswald by the mob jis pan of a plot 
lo neutralize R.F.K.’s organized.crinie program.

(What 
ganiblers ihe.se chaps!

How could they be certain that 
R.I-.K.

won d leave his job if his brother were no longer 
wnmc^"k " i*^**^'’ Johnson 
wanlid Kennedy lo slay „„ j„ 
aganw a political threat.) Both the organized-crime and the 
anli-C asiro mob figures wiih whom Oswald was supposedly 
linked were presumably right-wingers.

Oswald was a leftisr 
why should these mobsters entrust him with the high-risk 
m e o hit man?

But hold!

Was Oswald all that left wing?

asn t he a pal ol George de Mohrenschildi.

a mysterious 
right-wing figure, with C.I.A.

connections?

Didn't he offer 
wasiTt'^ 11^*3° ^"‘'-Castro paramilitary operation, and 
wasiM he associated with David Ferrie.

an anti-Castro 
C.

I.A.

contract operative and associate of Carlos Marcello’ 
The committee in the end admits that it cannot link Oswald 
sriellsT’^ group, but how fishy everything 
For the most part, the leaders and activist champi- 
ons of the conspiracy constituency arc drawn from 
the New Left.

As the New Left declined from the 
mid-1960s on, the investigation of assassinations 
ticcamc a major item on its agenda.

AfRicted by a sense of 
loss and powerlcssncss.--- PAGE BREAK ---

As the New Left declined from the 
mid-1960s on, the investigation of assassinations 
ticcamc a major item on its agenda. AfRicted by a sense of 
loss and powerlcssncss. those identified with the declining 
radicalism of the 1960s sought in conspiracy theories an 
escape from the grubby task of beginning anew and organiz- 
mg around issues that would influence policy and action. The temptations to follow this escapist route were consider- 
iihle: a ready-made demotic fellowship .shaM by pain and 
gnel; a perva.sivc distrust of official explanations; an uniisu- 
.Illy lecrpiive nietlia siippoii iiclwi.ik; a lice IliKitiiig .s»K.jal

IJ I-.O.s, the Bermuda liiangle. etc ) ' 
imd most mipoitaiit of all, of cour.se. an issue bigger than 
Like rightists in the past, many radicals shrank from the 
conipexity of power relations, preferring to attribute their 
Irusiraiioiis to idei.lifiable evil men. gun-wielding conspir- 
ators. I he conspiracy fever in the left coiiiniuniiy, as it 
emerged m the late 1960s. was a paradigm for Christopher 
I.asch s "culture of narcissism." This is apparent in the con- 
•spiraphilcs* fa.scinaiion with the sensational and in their 
preference lor the conceivable over the real or the probable- 
m their search for political highs in bizarre theories; in their 
media peacockery, and their rejection of the past as a guide. 
T ic literature of conspiracy is astonishing not so much for

--- PAGE BREAK ---/ ><*» nnlu'i 
/•; ’•; 
V - 
i 
(.N; 
whni it snvs hiH in iis siliMicc ;ih»»iil onr pnsl.

Ii lr;ivcs us \vilh 
li sense, us l .usdi |uils ii, **oi' living in ii vvoilU in which ilic 
pnsl hoiiis (Mil no ^nidunce lo ilie pieseiii.** 
I his Ihrusl lo poliiici/c conspiracies grailnally developed 
«an idcoloHV, n haphazard Ihcnreiical system sirncitired 
around a network ol conspiracies, ulliinalely merging into a 
huge mcia-conspiracy controlled by our hidden rulers.

Watergate and the h.B.l.-C.I.A.

scandals, with their roots 
in demonstrable conspiracies, spurred the imagination of 
the conspiraphilcs lo spin out ever more sinister reticulations 
for an emerging mass-media market (a subject I will discuss 
later).

In addition, newsletters, broadcasts and “hot lines” 
poured out a stream of increasingly spooki.sh offerings full of 
trendy intelligence jaigon tracing webs of “connections** lo 
an assortment of masterminds.

In this process, a key role 
was played by the *‘covcr-np,** an intelligence practice 
brought lo the popular consciousness by Watergate.

Thus, 
every stage in the conspiratorial cycle was matched by a con- 
spiracy (typically by intelligence bigwigs) to conceal it—a 
process that at once explains the absence of evidence to sup- 
port a particular conspiracy claim and demonstrates the 
power and deviousness of the plotters.

A related self-prov- 
ing gambit is the charge that doublers and critics are them- 
selves really concealed intelligence operatives.

The extent to which the cover-up has become embedded 
in the conspiracy myihos is perhaps best illustrated by the 
courtroom statement of Sara Jane Moore following her at- 
tempt to assa.ssinatc President Ford in 1975.

She explained 
that her act was an attempt to trigger an investigation of the 
Government cover-up of its own assassinations of promi- 
nent figures.The extent to which the cover-up has become embedded 
in the conspiracy myihos is perhaps best illustrated by the 
courtroom statement of Sara Jane Moore following her at- 
tempt to assa.ssinatc President Ford in 1975.

She explained 
that her act was an attempt to trigger an investigation of the 
Government cover-up of its own assassinations of promi- 
nent figures.

Along with crack-pot realists, scif-.serving experts and 
authors of lurid cxpos(:s, the conspiracy movement has at- 
tracted a body of intellectuals and scholars.

The older 
literature, in the wake of the Warren Commi.ssion report, as 
well as more recent productions, following the second 
(post-1968) surge of conspiracy writings, often reflect valid 
motives: a hunger for an explanation free of distortions, 
omissions and the bias which one has come lo expect of offi- 
cial versions of controversial events.

Such explanations have 
inevitably challenged the rcsourccfulnc.ss of the investigator 
and the ingenuity of the scholar.

Indeed, such a challenge 
has led to straiiKc i(Mirncys, such ns the drsrrti(»n of the 
clavsinoin hy plnlosophy piutc.vsoi and ciMispiialugi.st Jo- 
siah rinMupson {Six Seconds in Dallas) for a career as a 
piivate investigator.

More than any single individual, novelist Norman Mailer 
has provided a bridge between conspiracy politics and cul- 
ture.

Flashy and narcis.sistic, he invited contempt for reality 
by treating it as a mere stage for clods.

Mailer .saw himself as 
writer-disrupter, the prophetic voice of American chaos and 
corruption, the poet of .secret plots, the cxpo.scr of the .secret 
government which he dubbed “The Fifth Estate.” His fas- 
cination with a hyped-up version of reality made his novel 
writing pallid: it was “The Novel as History, History as a 
Novel.** Conspiracy became the metaphor for the hidden 
meaning of power, and then replaced the reality it purported 
to describe.

If it was conceivable, it was true.Mailer .saw himself as 
writer-disrupter, the prophetic voice of American chaos and 
corruption, the poet of .secret plots, the cxpo.scr of the .secret 
government which he dubbed “The Fifth Estate.” His fas- 
cination with a hyped-up version of reality made his novel 
writing pallid: it was “The Novel as History, History as a 
Novel.** Conspiracy became the metaphor for the hidden 
meaning of power, and then replaced the reality it purported 
to describe.

If it was conceivable, it was true.

As I asch has 
noted, the i.ssuc was no longer truth: “1‘rulh has given way 
to credibility, facts lo staieincnis that sound nuihorilative 
without conveying any authoritative information.*’ Nothing 
less than a new politics was being forged, the politics of the 
imagination.

Mailer developed his views in a series of essays and in a 
biography of Marilyn Monroe.

The book argues that Mon- 
roe may have been murdered by a conspiracy spearheaded 
by the C.I.A., the F.B.I., the Mafia or “half of the secret 
police of the world,” that she had been under surveillance 
perhaps because she had been married to a playwright 
denied a passport for supporting a Communist movement 
(Arthur Miller).

Mailer isn’t sure whether she was murdered 
in order to protect the reputation of the Kennedys, to amass 
evidence against them, or simply lo u.sc an alleged affair be- 
tween Monroe and R.F.K.

as a means of blackmailing the 
President.

But, he insists, “by the end, political slakes were 
riding high on her life and even more on her death.

If she 
could be murdered in such a way as lo appear a suicide in de- 
spair at the turn of her love, what a point of pressure could 
be maintained (by right-wingers] against the Kennedys.” 
Given such fishy possibilities, why insist on evidence?

But 
we arc not through yet; “Why not assume,” Mailer asks, 
“even more and see her death as the seed for assassinations 
to follow?’* (Unpersuaded right-wing conspiraphilcs can 
find comfort in Frank A.--- PAGE BREAK ---

If she 
could be murdered in such a way as lo appear a suicide in de- 
spair at the turn of her love, what a point of pressure could 
be maintained (by right-wingers] against the Kennedys.” 
Given such fishy possibilities, why insist on evidence? But 
we arc not through yet; “Why not assume,” Mailer asks, 
“even more and see her death as the seed for assassinations 
to follow?’* (Unpersuaded right-wing conspiraphilcs can 
find comfort in Frank A. Capell’s Strange Death of Marilyn

--- PAGE BREAK ---T1H‘ Sal loll.

/>rii•//</»!•» 
At4*nnu\ wliii li uiKHi-.

lluil MMIIUK* w;r.

nniitlrird l»v ii I'oii 
spiracy of Coiiiiiuiiu.sl af^cnis m oiilci lo SIUMKC her.) 
ir Not man Mailri is llu* poi*l ol o>iis|>ii.iphilia, Niaik 
Lane is ils Ininlelickl comniaiulei.

Despite set ions cralihilily 
.setbacks, his followinp.

es|HvialIy on the campus, where lie 
lours a highly proliiablc lecuire ciicuil, i.s considerable, lie 
shared this audience with Carl ()glcsby*.s Assas.sinaiion 
Information Bureau which, until ils recent dissolution, spe- 
cialized in a more ideological interpretation of the assa.ssina- 
tion phenomenon.

(Oglesby*.s book, The Yankee and Cow- 
boy War, links Watergate and Dallas as rounds in a struggle 
between the old money of the Lasicin Seaboard and the new 
wealth of the West.

Hailed by Mailer, Its ingenuity, story 
line and plot construction earn it high niark.s—but purely as 
fiction.) 
Lane’s rise lo the lop of the heap is a puHhict ol his ability 
to e.xploil his role as a lawyer, his media skills, his claimed 
leftist support and seir-promolitmal powers.

His nux/us 
operand!

has been lo .secure .smoking-gun clients, proclaim 
their innocence, and charge a Government frame-up.

Thus, 
Lane has insisted that Oswald was framed, that the rifle 
traced to him was a plant and not the one used in the J.F.K.

assassination, that the bullet linked to this rifle was also a 
plant and that the C.I.A.

was involved in the assassination.

In the same way, he charged (in his book Code Name 
**Zorro**) that the b.B.I.

engineered the a.ssas.sination of 
Martin Luther King Jr.

and that his client, Ray, was a patsy.

He was retained by the Rev.

Jim Jones lo obtain intelligence 
files on the People’s Temple after feeding Jones’s paranoia 
with the charge that a sinister intelligence cabal was seeking 
the group’s destruction.

The mass poisoning then became 
Lane’s vindication, grim proof of his conspiracy charges.Jim Jones lo obtain intelligence 
files on the People’s Temple after feeding Jones’s paranoia 
with the charge that a sinister intelligence cabal was seeking 
the group’s destruction.

The mass poisoning then became 
Lane’s vindication, grim proof of his conspiracy charges.

The a.ssa.ssination conspiracy cult has produced a huge 
body of literature.

The J.F.K.

as.sa,ssination alone is the sub- 
ject of an estimated 150 books, hundreds of periodical 
pieces and at least ten ncwsletiers including JFK Assassina- 
tion Forum, published in Belfast.

No less than five anno- 
tated bibliographies describe the Dallas literature alone.

In 
addition, the assa.ssinailon movement as a whole is served 
by groups such as: the Committee to Investigate As.sas- 
sinations (directed by Bernard Fensierwald), the Citizens 
Commission of Inquiry (Mark Lane), the Campaign for 
Democratic I'rcedom (Donald ITeed) and the Committee to 
.

Investigate Political Assassinations.

Dominating the assassination movement and ils literature 
is the politicization of the killings of public figures by atlrib- 
‘ uling them to right-wing or establishment inspiration.

This 
originated in the need to respond lo charges that Dallas was 
the result of a Communist plot, and that, more grandly—to 
quote a right-wing columnist—“Oswald was an insirumcnl 
of a global Communist conspiracy.’* Indeed, it was Warren 
Commission member (then) Congressman Gerald R.

Ford 
who insisted on inserting a reference lo Oswald’s Commu- 
nism in the commission’s findings.

Thus, in the dominant 
sectors of the conspiracy movement.

Oswald is considered 
cither innocent (the victim of a frame-vip), a right-winger, an 
F.B.l, informer ot a C.I.A.

agent, l or the right he is sull a 
Commutd'** or a K.G.B.

agent.

All of the^e roles rco’"'C a 
•iiilMtiiliiuiiioii Ol «.iippirssion of the fai‘t of (Kwald’s mnilal 
inslahiliiy.

I le is iiitioduced to us as a spy leeiuited instiu by 
the I^B.I .All of the^e roles rco’"'C a 
•iiilMtiiliiuiiioii Ol «.iippirssion of the fai‘t of (Kwald’s mnilal 
inslahiliiy.

I le is iiitioduced to us as a spy leeiuited instiu by 
the I^B.I .

as a Kussipn agent, as an agent of Castroites .seek- 
ing lo inlilliale the anti-Caslio movement and vice versa and 
as a double agent.

In a second stage his dismcmhereil per- 
SiHia is disinbiited lo look-alike.s, decoys and stand-ins, and 
finally cloned into “the two Oswalds” and “the three 
Oswalds.” These conspiracy scenarios draw on aspects of 
agcni-informcr-targci relationships—vicariousness, imper- 
sonation, deception and role-playing—to politicize a classic 
theme in Western literature (E.TA.

Hoffmann, Dostoyev- 
sky and Joseph Conrad are example.s), that of the double.

Where the shifting of responsibility for an a.ssassination is 
thwarted by physical reality, rohoii/ation (‘’Manchurian 
candidate”) theories come into play.

Here too, intelligence 
practice ha.s influenced the imagination of conspiraphiles.

Phenomena such as the manipulation of the informer by his 
agent control or C.I.A.-.style drug-induced behavioral con- 
trols are grafted onto hypnotism, occultism and computer 
data processing.

Thus, a theory of “hypno-programming” 
dominates theSirhan-R.F.K.

and Brcmcr-Wallacc literature.

The Manchurian candidate approach has also been used to 
exonerate Oswald.

According to Prof.

Richard Popkin, the 
J.F.K.

killing was commillcd by a group of “zombie 
as.sassins” programmed by the C.I.A.

The objections of 
earthlings enslaved by smoking-gun reality arc dismissed as 
a tribute to the skill of the (far-ofl) programmer who not 
only took control of his victim’s mind but also with awe- 
.some cunning blanked out his memory of what happened.

This even lakes care of the protestations of the killer himself 
that he acted alone.

The Oswald-as-C.l.A.-spy thesis is developed in 
detail by Robert Sam Anson in They've Killed the 
President, a Bantam Books project.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This even lakes care of the protestations of the killer himself 
that he acted alone. The Oswald-as-C.l.A.-spy thesis is developed in 
detail by Robert Sam Anson in They've Killed the 
President, a Bantam Books project. Anson makes 
Oswald a C.I.A. operative whose defection and 
return were stages in an elaborate intelligence plot. Com- 
plete with look-alikes, su.spicious coincidences and sinister 
motives, Anson’s narrative scorns facts that stand in the 
way or converts them into proof by strained inferences. For 
An.son. it is “Only connect,” with a vengeance. But the 
spirit of F.M. Forster’s teaching burns even more brightly in 
the works of other con.spiraphiles. For example, former 
F.B.l. agent William Turner has called attention lo a sinister 
link iKMween the King and Kennedy as.sassinations, namely, 
that in both cases a rillc with a telescopic sight “was conven^ 
icntly left at the crime scene.” Is this not a clue to the modus 
operandi of a single group of conspirators? Anson makes Oswald an American intelligence agent, but 
another investigative author, Edward J. Epstein, makes him 
a K.G.B. agent (l.cftend). Epstein’s earlier book. Inquest, 
won praise for its skillful dissection of the Warren Commis- 
sion’s report. In Counterplot, he furthered the image of the 
sober objective investigator by exposing New Orleans Dis- 
trict Attorney Jim Garrison. In Agency of Fear—sensational 
and factually dubious as it is—he lectures the reader on the 
need to subject investigative reporting to the test of truth. But Legend, an ambitious project sponsored by the

--- PAGE BREAK ---Hntt/rr\ lUi;r\f mu\ liiiulrtl hv n IIUKT is .is hi/:inr 
a conn (billion lo (lie liicianiic ol con.sim acy iis iltc cllorls 
Ep.sicin hiul earlier tle|iloieil ami exposal.

1 his laiional 
inair.s conspiracy C.\|H:II has .sccincil lo some a lallci-ilay 
version of ihc ninclccnlloccnlury confiilcncc operalor who 
guin.s (ru&l by u|>|x;aling lo a hunger for audienticiiy and 
truth.

Epstein’s thesis (or scam) is thal after Oswald’s stay in 
the Soviet Union and a prior stint as a Russian spy in the 
Marine Corps, he returned to America to renew his spying 
for the K.G.U.

cquipix'd with a cover story, a “legend.” His 
alleged K.Ci.B.

control, defector Yuri Ivanovich Nosenko, 
was, in Epstein’s version, a “disinformation agent,” or, in 
the C.I.A.'s usage, a “dispatched agent” assigned to protect 
his cover.

Unlike lowlier toilers in the vineyard, I-pstein has 
access to an important .source—James J.

Angleton, the 
C.I.A.’s now retired superspook.

Despite the credibility risk 
presented by this prophet of the long twilight struggle, 
Epstein apparently bought Angleton's thesis that Nosenko, 
too, was cloaked in a legend, a contention long ago disputed 
as a fantasy in high-level C.I.A.

circles.

And to prove what a tangled web we weave when first we 
practice to deceive, Angleton claims that a K.G.Ii.-KB.I.

double agent named Fedora was also briefed by the K.G.B.

to corroborate Nosenko’s deception, Epstein writes that 
Oswald’s legend required him lo return to Texas, establish 
himself in the area with some .sort of job, and then wait for 
proper contacts to be made.

The author admits tliat there is 
no indication that the Russians re-established contact with 
Oswald in America.

But, Epstein insists, they did make 
Oswald bitter, becau.se instead of returning him to the 
United States on an important mi.ssion they discarded him, 
forcing him to turn, in desperation, lo the Cubans.

Epstein plays his K.G.B.But, Epstein insists, they did make 
Oswald bitter, becau.se instead of returning him to the 
United States on an important mi.ssion they discarded him, 
forcing him to turn, in desperation, lo the Cubans.

Epstein plays his K.G.B.

games (so congenial to the poli- 
tics of his sponsor) without bothering to deal with many 
troublesome questions.

If, as he claims, Oswald was re- 
cruited in Japan, why should the K.G.B.

encourage him, 
presumably a valuable “agent in place,” lo defect to the 
Soviet Union; why should it train for future spy work a man 
who, after he slit his wrists in the Soviet Union, was pro- 
nounced unstable by K.G.B.

doctors, and why encourage 
him lo leave with the risk that he would tell all, or fail to 
train him for a job in this country, such as a security-related 
occupation, which would at once provide both a cover and a 
source of information?

What really lifts the skeptical reader 
out of his chair is Epstein’s “proof” that Oswald’s diary 
was dictated by the K.G.B.

to provide .support for his 
legend.

The sole basis for this startling contention is the 
opinion of a handwriting expert (at best a highly ductile 
source) that the jerky quality of the diary’s entries reflects 
dictation by a K.G.B.

control.

But there is unconiroverted 
evidence thal O.swald wrote jerkily and .spelled poorly 
because he was dyslexic.

It is hard to .say which is le.ss excus- 
able, the fact that with his huge resources Epstein failed to 
di.scover Oswald’s learning disability or thal he knew about 
it but suppressed it because it spoiled his (and Angleton’s) 
, "legend.” 
Still another version of “diary-diary-who-wroie-ihe diary’* 
is offered by British barri.ster-lnvcsiigator Michael Eddowc.s.

/ ‘rt finhrt \ /V/V 
(Wr pus*, iivn Ihr p<M.siblY Iniigiir in ilirrk oilciiiig of 
noveli.sl tiiue Vidal who aigues that (he diaiies of thiee 
assas.sinaiion ligures, Oswald, Sirhan and Bremer, may all 
have been wiiiien by one man, I!.It is hard to .say which is le.ss excus- 
able, the fact that with his huge resources Epstein failed to 
di.scover Oswald’s learning disability or thal he knew about 
it but suppressed it because it spoiled his (and Angleton’s) 
, "legend.” 
Still another version of “diary-diary-who-wroie-ihe diary’* 
is offered by British barri.ster-lnvcsiigator Michael Eddowc.s.

/ ‘rt finhrt \ /V/V 
(Wr pus*, iivn Ihr p<M.siblY Iniigiir in ilirrk oilciiiig of 
noveli.sl tiiue Vidal who aigues that (he diaiies of thiee 
assas.sinaiion ligures, Oswald, Sirhan and Bremer, may all 
have been wiiiien by one man, I!.

Howard Hunt.) 
l-ddowcs, traveling the same path as Anson and Epstein, 
reaches a third destination.

He aigues (hat (Tswald was 
replaced at some point by a K.G.B.

agent who wrote the 
O.swald diary and was shipped out of Ihc country to the 
United Slates as a “sleeper.” In his version, Marina and her 
infant child were accomplices in the deception.

Oswald the 
husband and Oswald the son (“the historic Oswald” in the 
usage of the trade) were two different people.

1 he fact that 
the imposter’s Rngcrprinls matched those taken when 
Oswald was in the Marine Corps presents no difficulty at all 
—merely a K.G.B.

trick.

Eddowes finds it “beyond compre- 
hension” that the Warren Commission failed lo consider the 
evidence pointing lo K.G.B.

complicity.

Still, all may not be 
lost: Eddowes recently persuaded the Dallas County Medi- 
cal Examiner to request auihori/.ution to exhume the body 
of the man who was buried as Oswald.

It is hardly likely that the Dallas exhumation furor 
will rcinvigoraic a flagging assassination conspiracy 
movement.

1 he commillcc’s report has dealt a blow 
to the politics of conspiracy by demolishing virtually 
the entire construction of contentions—the Zapruder Him, the 
virgin bullet, the forged photographs and related mystifica- 
tions—upon which the movement rests.It is hardly likely that the Dallas exhumation furor 
will rcinvigoraic a flagging assassination conspiracy 
movement.

1 he commillcc’s report has dealt a blow 
to the politics of conspiracy by demolishing virtually 
the entire construction of contentions—the Zapruder Him, the 
virgin bullet, the forged photographs and related mystifica- 
tions—upon which the movement rests.

There would appear 
lo be little mileage lo be gained at this late date by attrib- 
uting lo a covcr-iip the Justice Department’s failure lo pur- 
sue the wispy new leads dredged up by the committee.

A death blow will surely come from another quarter—the 
media.

The prominence of media-broker Lawrence Schiller 
in Mailer’s story of the life and execution of Gary Gilmore, 
The Lxccudoner's Soni^, dramatizes the media’s dominance 
in our time in shaping and ordering public concerns.

To an 
extent barely rcali/cd, the conspiracy movement is a media 
offspring.

Through generous coverage (not only in the prc.ss 
and periodicals but also on TV and in books and films), it 
promoted the conspiracy myihos, constantly broadening its 
scope.

Interviews and bylines gave luster to superstars who 
in turn vied with one another in the quest for fresh investiga- 
tive and media triumphs.

But lacking new scripts, its growth 
potential has been exhausted.

A Mark Lane may seek lo 
renew his priesthood in the blood of Jonestown, but for his 
followers and others who have worshipped at the conspiracy 
shrine, hard morning-after questions remain.

Is it not lime to abandon the cscapi.sm, media hustle and 
radical chic of political conspiraphilia and face the desperate 
challenge of organizing a left movement in this country?

Perhaps the will lo go forward may be strengthened by re- 
flecting on the insights of the radical philo.sophcr Herbert 
Marcu.se, wlio has described the unique capacity of our sys- 
tem lo absorb radical challenge by adopting its symbols.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Is it not lime to abandon the cscapi.sm, media hustle and 
radical chic of political conspiraphilia and face the desperate 
challenge of organizing a left movement in this country? Perhaps the will lo go forward may be strengthened by re- 
flecting on the insights of the radical philo.sophcr Herbert 
Marcu.se, wlio has described the unique capacity of our sys- 
tem lo absorb radical challenge by adopting its symbols. In 
any case, we cannot permit the political meaning of what 
has been done to us by real conspirators to be lost in the 
cries of “Wolf!” by lho.se for whom the truth is never bad 
enough. □ 
'riiP Nal.ioii.