'news focus'--by tom tiede
FreP119/3
Still keeping JFK murder data under wraps
WASHINGTON (NEA)-It has been
almost 20 years since John F.Kennedy
wasmurdered on a street inDallas,yet
it doesn't seem that long at the Nation-
al Archives.Many of the federal
records of the assassination,are kept in
the archives,and their presence has'
The bloodstained clothes the presi-
dent wore are packed in boxes.The gun
that is said to have been used is pre-
served and operable.The recollections
and testimonies of more than500peo-
ple havebeen committed tomicrofilm,
and so have the gruesome details of
medical and ballisticreports.
Indeed,it all seems likeyesterday at
the archives. The numbing horror and
the assault on the senses have not aged.
The tape-recorded sound of gunfire is
just as unreal, the frame by frame
moment of impact has not changed;
even the newspaper headlines seem to
be as shocking as ever.
And there is one other thing that's
`-the same.
The murder records are still publicly
incomplete.
The National Archives has 300 cubic
feetof assassination material.But it's
not all available to the general popula-
ition.Despite the passageof two
decades, and the arguments of journal-
ists and researchers, the government
continues to withhold about 10 percent
THE ASSASSINATION of President Kennedy in Dallas in 1963is stilla.topicof
of the official record.
U.S.secrecy.The federal government continues to withhold about 10 percentof
The archivists say that is a relatively
the official record.
trivial percentage. And other federal
officers fully concur.The official posi-
tionis thatmost of the trulyimportant
records are open for inspection,and
none of the other documents have any
significant bearing on the facts of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---Secret Service and the CIA have simi-
lar papers of their own.

One guess is
in Washington that are keeping assassi-
nation records in hiding:
Many of the secrets are being kept
indefinitely.

Some of them may never
be revealed.

Marion Johnson,an offi-
cial at the National Archives,says doc-
uments that are protected by specific
legislation,such as income tax records,
cannot by law be released and will
probably remain secret forever.

murder.

But critics of the secrecy disagree.

Johnson is the archivist in charge of
They have argued for years that people
the Warren Commission material.

He
have a right to see all of the files,and
says that, besides tax records, the
tomake up their own minds about their
secret files'contain information relat-
significance.

What's more, the critics
ing to.national security,to confidential
insist that there are any number of
sources, to inter-agency law enforce-
secret records that may have an
ment,and to the commission's off-the-
impact on the case..

record executive conferences.

The autopsy X-rays, for example.

Johnson is a rumpled man, some-
They were taken in theDallas hospital,
what laid-back,and he doesn't act as.if
shortly after the president died,and
he's sitting on any deep dark revela-
they are said to show the precise
tions.

He says he has his own opinions
nature of his wounds.

Researchers say
about the assassination,but he suggests
the X-rays are critical to the assassina-
he also agrees with the original find-
tion studyyet fewpeople outside gov-
ings;in any event,he couldn't release
ernment have seen them.

the archival secrets if he wanted.

Hundreds of people have tried to see
Johnson reviews the classified
the X-rays.

Historian Michael Kurtz is
records periodically,but he has no
one of them.Hundreds of people have tried to see
Johnson reviews the classified
the X-rays.

Historian Michael Kurtz is
records periodically,but he has no
one of them.

He is the author of the
authority to act on them.If he thinks a
book “Crime of the Century，”and he
document may be ready for declassifi-
had to write it without examining the
cation,he sends it to the agency from
most important evidence of the crime.

which it came.

The agency makes the
Dr.Kurtz asked to see the X-rays,but
decisions, and the.archives waits.“It
he was flatly turned down.

can be a slow process, Johnson says.

"It‘'s unfair,"he grumbles.

And they may have to wait even
It may likewise be suspicious.Kurtz
It can be for sure.

The National
longer to see the autopsy films.

John-
says the presidential group that investi-
Archives has been waiting for some
son says the X-rays are classified
gated the assassination in 1964,the
declassifications since it was founded
under different arrangemens.The
Warren Commission,used the X-rays
in 1934.

It has collected 1.3 million
government has allowed the Kennedy
to conclude that Kennedy was shot by a
cubic feet of records,including 15mil-
family to make decisions about the
lone gunman,Lee Harvey Oswald.But
lion pages of classified documents,and
pictures,and some officials think the
Kurtz and others believe there was a
some of the latter pile is said to have
family may want to hide them perma-
conspiracy to kill the president.

been secret since theFirst World War.

nently.

The film then is vital to the debate.

Well, nobody knows that for certain.

That decision would naturally out-
Kurtz says it might even resolve the
question once and for all.

If the X-rays
But there are definitely secrets from
rage assassination researchers.

Many
World War II.--- PAGE BREAK ---

If the X-rays
But there are definitely secrets from
rage assassination researchers. Many
World War II. It wasn't too long ago,
journalists and writers think it would
show that the murder wounds were
for instance, that a document concern-
violate the traditional democratic doct-
substantially what they were said to be,
then the Warren Commission's judg
ing a 1944“aerial bolo"was declassi-
fied;the bolo was a half-baked scheme
ment is strengthened;if not,the Ameri
can public deserves toknow. to use a big slingshotto,ah,shoot down
So Kurtz and other researchers think
German buzz bombs. the secret records in the archives
The aerial bolo was made public
should be declassified. And they say
after about 30 years behind the
that goes for secrets being held in other
padlocks. And Johnson suspects that
corners of the government. The
most of the remaining Warren Com-
archives is only one agency withhold-
mission secrets will be released in a
ing data;a string of other offices here
like periodof time.If so,it means that
is doing it as well. people who want to see a more com-
The FBI has a mountain of assassi-
plete assassination record may have to
nation material, for instance,much of
wait until 1994. it classified.The State Department.the

--- PAGE BREAK ---John Kennedy was killed as a result of
a conspiracy that may have involved
U.S.

government complicity.

That's
why government investigators tried to
cover it up.

Weisberg says the FBI was
principally involved;it broke the law to
hide the facts.

Tll give you an example.

The War-
ren Commission said one of the bullets
OFTHEI
entered Kennedy's neck,and came
through the center of the knot on his
tie.That was the angle they said that
proved Oswald fired from the window
LITTERA
of the book depository building.

It was
SCRIPTA
their big argument.

MANET
UNITED
“But,actually, the bullet didn't go
through the center of the knot.The FBI
made it look that way, to support the
government's case.

The real hole was a
little off angle,and so the FBI undid
the knot andretied it.It was illegal,of
course; but they put the hole in the
center."
Weisberg says he has dozens of other
examples of FBI manipulations.

And
that's why he wants the wraps taken
off all the records in the archives.He
believes the secrets on the whole will
1934
support his contentions,and force the
government to reinvestigate the Ken-
nedy murder,this time honestly.

But that may be wishful thinking.

The odds are not good it will happen.

The government has resisted all calls
to take a second look at the assassina-
rine of full disclosure.“If we want to
tion,and it doesn't seem to be weaken-
get to the truth,says writer Harold
ing now.

One officerin Ronald
Weisberg,“all the records should be
Reagan's White House says a new
made public as soon as possible.

investigation would be“just asinine."
Weisbergis70yearsoldandakind
of elder statesman in the macabre
As for the classified records, the
industry of assassination literature.--- PAGE BREAK ---

One officerin Ronald
Weisberg,“all the records should be
Reagan's White House says a new
made public as soon as possible. investigation would be“just asinine."
Weisbergis70yearsoldandakind
of elder statesman in the macabre
As for the classified records, the
industry of assassination literature. He
White House officer says the secrecy is
has written six books on the subject,
probably for the best.“If the autopsy
including “Postmortem.”He was one
shots were releasedhe explains,
of the first researchers to sue the gov-
“they would be printed in detail in eve-
ernment in an effort to win the right to
ry lurid publication in the country. look at classified records. That wouldn't be freedom of informa-
He says he is still fighting for free-
tion;it would be tasteless exploitation."
dom of the information. Because the
Besides,Washington authorities
government can't be trusted."I'm glad
doubt the secret records would resolve
I live in this country， he says.“In
anything even if there was'a full disclo-
other places I'd be arrested for trying
sure.Rather,they might only refuel the
to uncover secrets.But the fact is that
conspiracy theorists.“Folks like Har-
our government has lied to us about the
old Weisberg are single minded” says
assassination."
a Secret Service agent,“they can't be
Weisberg says the government never
budged by the facts."
proved that Oswald shot the president. And what are the facts? People who
And it has cavalierly discounted the
have seen the bulk of the records in the
evidence of a conspiracy.He says the
National Archives, classified and
Warren Commission set out to docu-
unclassified,say the evidenceis simply
ment a preconceived verdict,and aft-
overwhelming that Oswald,and
erward it tried to hide the real truth in
Oswald alone,shot thepresident.That‘s
the secret archives. another part of the historic incident
The writer says the real truth is that
that hasn't changed over the years.