Remote Viewing Pioneer Returns after Intel Community
forced her to disappear for 22 Years
https://rumble.com/v71xpmm 72m 11-24-25
Birdie Jaworski (aka Prudence Calabrese) became interested in remote
viewing in 1995 after the Defense Intelligence Agency and the Stanford
Research Institute declassified the Stargate Program. She was trained in
military grade remote viewing by Dr. Courtney Brown and soon became
Vice President of the newly created Farsight Institute in 1996. After a year,
she left to form her own remote viewing organization called
TransDimensional Systems (TDS), where she was joined by John Vivanco,
who became Vice President.
In 1998/99, she remote viewed the next terrorist attack on US and drew the
twin towers with planes flying into it. Her successful prediction of the
September 11, 2001, attack brought her mainstream media attention, where
she was interviewed by news organizations from around the world.
Her successful prediction also brought her the unwelcome attention of the
intelligence community, whereby she began experiencing serious
harassment and threats. Fearing for her five young children, she abolished
TDS and went underground in 2002. After 22 years of staying out of the
public arena with her remote viewing sessions, which she privately

--- PAGE BREAK ---for her five young children, she abolished
TDS and went underground in 2002. After 22 years of staying out of the
public arena with her remote viewing sessions, which she privately

--- PAGE BREAK ---

continued, she reemerged in 2024 to form a new remote viewing
organization called TransDimensional Mapping (TDM).
In her first Exopolitics Today interview with Dr. Michael Salla, Birdie
discusses what happened to her and what she did during her 22 years of
private remote viewing. She discusses remote viewing deep underground
military bases where huge space arks are being built, Gray extraterrestrials
who have been visiting Earth for millennia, Inner Earth civilizations, giants,
human cloning, supersoldiers and the ancient origins of 3I/Atlas.
Birdie Jaworski’s website is: https://www.norivets.com
Her YouTube channel is: https://www.youtube.com/@norivets
Visit https://Patreon.com/MichaelSalla/
DR. SALLA: Birdie Jaworski, or Prudence Calabresi, first began
remote viewing in 1996. She became the vice president of the
Farsight Institute, and then soon after established her own remote
viewing organization called Transdimensional Systems. And she was
very successful with Transdimensional Systems to the extent that
she was able to see the destruction of the Twin Towers. And that
brought her to the attention of the intelligence community who visited
her and basically threatened her and her collaborator John Vivanko
at the time. And so Prudence dropped out of the scene, and for 22
years just concentrated on raising her family and doing other things,
but continued her remote viewing sessions, but privately and not
really doing very much at all in the public arena until recently where
she has come back and has been doing some amazing remote
viewing.
ANNOUNCER: You're listening to Exopolitics Today with Dr. Michael
Salla, your source for the uncensored truth regarding the human,
extraterrestrial, global and political agenda. Click the like button and
subscribe to this channel. And now, here's Dr. Michael Salla.
DR. SALLA: Well, welcome, Bertie, to the show.
BIRDIE: Thank you, Michael. I am excited to be here.
DR. SALLA: Yes, well, you have a really fascinating background,
and I'm sure a lot of my audiences don't know you. So, yes, whyertie, to the show.
BIRDIE: Thank you, Michael. I am excited to be here.
DR. SALLA: Yes, well, you have a really fascinating background,
and I'm sure a lot of my audiences don't know you. So, yes, why

--- PAGE BREAK ---BIRDIE: Thank you, Michael. I am excited to be here.
DR. SALLA: Yes, well, you have a really fascinating background,
and I'm sure a lot of my audiences don't know you. So, yes, why

--- PAGE BREAK ---

don't you kind of walk us through what happened in those early
years when you got interested in remote viewing and how things
progressed to the extent that you were threatened and had to
basically withdraw from the field for over two decades?
BIRDIE: Yes, exactly. I first learned about remote viewing in 1995
when it was declassified by the government, the US government.
They admitted at that time that they had spent over 20 years and
$20 million of taxpayer money in something they called the Stargate
Program, where they trained soldiers to become psychic spies, the
first remote viewers. And I was fascinated. This was all over the
news, the military guys that were in the program, the psychic spies
were making the media rounds. They were on all of the big news
stations. And of course, this was before the modern age of the
internet. So the internet was in its public infancy then. So it was hard
to get information on this. And I happened to be living in Atlanta,
Georgia at the time, and actually was pregnant with my youngest
child, who's now grown up. So I found out that there was a professor
in Atlanta at Emory University, Dr. Courtney Brown. And he had just
been trained by major Ed Dames, one of these military remote
viewers. And Courtney wanted to start a new educational institution
that he named the Farsight Institute. So I bartered with Courtney,
and I traded building Farsight's first website for a C and one of their
very first classes. So I became one of the first civilians trained in
remote viewing. And it ends up, I had a bit of a knack for it. Now
everyone, literally everyone on the planet can learn to do this. We all
have this natural, intuitive ability. But it's like learning a musical
instrument. Some people can just pick up the clarinet and play, and
some people need a lot of practice before they can join a band. And
so I had some of that natural ability. So I worked at Farsight for a
couple of years. I became the vice president. But I had some ideas,
things I wanted to try on my own. I wanted to really kind of push the
boundaries of remote viewing. And so I left Farsight and started my
own company, Trans Dimensional Systems. And there I trained
hundreds of people. We ended up with about 200 remote viewers in
our organization, in our group. My second in command was John B.
Vivanko, who you've had on your show. And he's a wonderful,I trained
hundreds of people. We ended up with about 200 remote viewers in
our organization, in our group. My second in command was John B.
Vivanko, who you've had on your show. And he's a wonderful,

--- PAGE BREAK ---of people. We ended up with about 200 remote viewers in
our organization, in our group. My second in command was John B.
Vivanko, who you've had on your show. And he's a wonderful,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

wonderful human being and a great friend. And so we did so many
interesting projects during that time. We looked actually at disclosure
and what would happen. At that time, 25-ish years ago, we even said
it was going to happen in 25 to 30 years. And so now we're butting
up against that time period right now, which is super interesting. All
the things that we described are now just playing out in front of us.
It's amazing. And so after a time, we were pushing the envelope. We
were making predictions. We were accurate.
We had a lot of law enforcement that were hiring us to work on
missing persons. And things like that. And the harassment started.
Now, to be fair, I was kind of in your face about the things that I really
did want to make a splash with this. I wanted everybody to know that
they could learn this. And I had so many cool ideas at the time. But it
started to rub people in the intelligence community the wrong way.
And both John B. Vivanko and myself, we started getting visited by
members of the SPOOK community. Government agents, private
contractors, they never really quite identified themselves. They
would drive around following us in these white unmarked vans with
dark windows. They literally lined the cul-de-sac that I was living in at
the time and bothered all of my neighbors. And then the phone calls
started. The that kind of harassment with threats literally first threats
against me. And that didn't bother me as much. I figured, well, it's
just talk. But then when they started threatening my children, I had
five children, very young at the time. And I was terrified. I was
terrified. And I decided, you know what? It's not worth it. It's not
worth putting my family's life in danger. So I shut down
Transdimensional systems. And I essentially kind of went
underground, changed the name that I was operating under to Birdie
from Pro. And then I just did all kinds of interesting things.
I sold Avon door to door. I started a newspaper. I taught eighth
grade. But I still kept remote viewing every single day, twice a day in
the early morning, in the evening. And I worked on developing my
system. And in all those 22 years that I was out of the field, I
managed to come up with a really cool new method of remote
viewing that I call Transdimensional mapping. It takes it kind of to the
next level and allows you to understand what your subconscious isI
managed to come up with a really cool new method of remote
viewing that I call Transdimensional mapping. It takes it kind of to the
next level and allows you to understand what your subconscious is

--- PAGE BREAK ---p with a really cool new method of remote
viewing that I call Transdimensional mapping. It takes it kind of to the
next level and allows you to understand what your subconscious is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

saying as you're working on your remote viewing. And so I came
back into the field just over a year ago. I'm very excited. I'm now
training people again and building an operational team. And we are
having the time of our lives.
DR. SALLA: Fantastic. Now, in our pre-interview, you talked about
basically seeing the destruction of the twin towers. And that was
something that you thought was a major factor in why you began to
get harassed because clearly that was a planned false flag event.
Well, what can you say about that and what happened and who was
behind it.
BIRDIE: Yes, at the time, this was several years before 9-11. And I
was given a task to remote view. Now in remote viewing, most of the
time you remote view blind, meaning you don't know what it is that
you've been given to remote view. You're only given a set of random
numbers that someone has associated with that experience, with
that target, as they say in the military system. And so the target was
the next terror attack on the United States. And I didn't know what
the target was. I just knew it was something to remote view. And it
could have been the Taj Mahal as far as I knew we're Disney World
or the wedding of Prince Charles and Lady Di. All these things that
you remote view on a regular basis. So I started working on the
session and I ended up drawing the twin towers, a statue of liberty,
which was my subconscious's way of saying this is New York. And I
drew planes flying into the towers. At the time, none of this made
sense to me. I looked at it and I didn't realize that what I had drawn
were planes. I thought I had drawn those kind of cartoony bombs like
in Road Runner, they have the bombs with the little wings on them.
So I thought that that's what I was drawing, that it was like a
bombing. Didn't realize what it was. And you know, we posted it on
our website. We didn't really say much about it. It was just there.
And then when 9-11 happened, kind of all hell broke loose at that
point. And we made the media rounds, just like the military guys had
done some years before. And even outlets like the London Sunday
Times sent reporters to not only interview us and take photos, they
literally took our training and had incredible experiences themselves.
Even the Women's Magazine Cosmopolitan sent a reporter out toTimes sent reporters to not only interview us and take photos, they
literally took our training and had incredible experiences themselves.
Even the Women's Magazine Cosmopolitan sent a reporter out to

--- PAGE BREAK ---to not only interview us and take photos, they
literally took our training and had incredible experiences themselves.
Even the Women's Magazine Cosmopolitan sent a reporter out to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

take my class, which was super fun. And of course, the resulting
article is called How to Be a Psychic Spy and Have Multiple
Organisms. It's Cosmo. They had to fit the sex angle in.
DR. SALLA: That's for having us.
BIRDIE: Yes. Yes. But what was interesting, if you look back at that
data because I looked back at it after the fact in 9-11, there are a lot
of strange things that don't quite add up in terms of the official
narrative, what people reported seeing and experiencing at the time.
And all of this, of course, the session I did was small at the time. It
wasn't a big project. It was just a standalone session. But I did get in
there within all the language that I wrote on different pages outside
of the sketching that there was something unusual about this. This
was extremely destructive. But there was this idea that the storyline
didn't match what people were being told. So I do think that there
were a lot of strange things around 9-11, for sure.
DR. SALLA: So can you explain the difference between military
grade remote viewing, which usually uses the double-blind protocol
and the kind of, say, single-blind studies and how what was done at
Farsight in those early years and what you did in Transdimensional
systems, how that was different, or similar to the military grade
double-blind remote viewing.
BIRDIE: Yes. So in a double-blind situation, you don't know what
you're being given. And typically, you are getting your task, your
target from a big pool of targets, maybe a thousand or 10,000
targets. And so nobody exactly knows what you're looking at in that
moment. And so that's traditionally how the military set up their
experiments.
Now, however, they did have their remote viewers, their psychic
spies doing things single-blind, meaning somebody knew what it was
and directly gave them the target. And so they did a mix. At Farsight,
we almost entirely did single-blind sessions at the time. I'm not sure,
Farsight's still in existence. I know they have some incredible remote
viewers on their team. And I'm not really sure what their protocol is
today. But at the time, it was single-blind. You know, Courtney, Dr.
Brown, knew what it was he was giving to the students, or I knew
what I was giving to the students if I was one of the trainers at theay. But at the time, it was single-blind. You know, Courtney, Dr.
Brown, knew what it was he was giving to the students, or I knew
what I was giving to the students if I was one of the trainers at the

--- PAGE BREAK ---it was single-blind. You know, Courtney, Dr.
Brown, knew what it was he was giving to the students, or I knew
what I was giving to the students if I was one of the trainers at the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

time. And then at Transdimensional systems, we did a combination
of single-blind and double-blind. And today, in my Transdimensional
mapping classes, it's also a combination. Some of the classes, we
do a lot of double-blind because the students, maybe they've been
trained in other remote viewing methods, and they really want to
have like the hardest possible targets so they want it double-blind.
Some of them are single-blind. We do a combination. Almost
everything that I map out, that I remote view these days, is double-
blind. I have a pool of over 8,000 targets, experiences, as I call them.
And it's all kind of computerized. I have a combination of like literally
targets and envelopes that are in these huge moving tubs, like when
you pack up your house to move, and they feel completely my shed
in the backyard. And so I was doing it by just pulling out envelopes at
random, I then moved to computerized system over this past year,
getting back into the field. So now everything's on my computer. If I
want to remote view something, I click a button, a little program that I
wrote on my computer scientist as well, and out pops the random
numbers. And if I want to get what be revealed as to what it was, I
just input the numbers, click a button, and boom, it either shows me
a photograph or the written target, depending on what it is.
DR. SALLA: Yes. Great. So can you explain what are the
advantages of doing a remote viewing using these blind protocols?
Vis-a-vis people, and you see a lot of this today, there's a lot of
people who have kind of like YouTube channels, and they have an
audience, and they'll say, oh, let me let me remote view what's
happening right now in Russia over there. And so they'll kind of like
do a remote view. So they choose the target themselves, and they're
doing something and getting some information, and it sounds good.
But I mean, how reliable is that?
BIRDIE: That's a really great question. So that's called being front
loaded in the remote new community. That's the language we use.
Front loading means that you know what it is when you start the
session. So you go in knowing you're going to look for this serial
killer, or you're going to look at 3I Atlas or what have you. And can
you remote view front loaded? Absolutely you can. I sometimes do
some of my law enforcement work front loaded missing persons andkiller, or you're going to look at 3I Atlas or what have you. And can
you remote view front loaded? Absolutely you can. I sometimes do
some of my law enforcement work front loaded missing persons and

--- PAGE BREAK ---oing to look at 3I Atlas or what have you. And can
you remote view front loaded? Absolutely you can. I sometimes do
some of my law enforcement work front loaded missing persons and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

things like that. If you're very experienced, you learn what the data
feels like. The problem though with front loading is that you tend to
get your own ideas about things mixed in with the data, because you
can't divorce yourself from the process. We all come into this with
our educational, religious, social backgrounds, cultural backgrounds,
the way we were grown, the way we were raised, all of this stuff
plays into it. And so when you're developing a narrative and you're
remote viewing, if you already think you know what it's going to be,
that can cloud your data. So I prefer not to do front loaded work for
that reason. I only do it in very limited cases, like if it's an emergency
and I get a call from the state police because a woman's gone
missing right then and there. There's not time for me to set this up as
a blind thing that maybe I'll get a month down the road. It needs to
happen right then. So that's the only time when I really do that.
DR. SALLA: Okay. All right. Well, yes, that seemed important
because people are using the term remote viewing for what seems
to be very different things. So it's good to know exactly what that all
is. So you've mentioned Transdimensional systems, which was set
up and ran with John Vivanco, in the 1990s and had to close down.
And more recently you set up Transdimensional mapping.
BIRDIE: So what's the difference? Yes, Transdimensional mapping
is my new method of remote viewing. It is a very visually oriented
method. And in the old military style, which almost everyone
practices who's in remote viewing, the old military style was called
CRV for Controlled Remote Viewing, and or coordinate remote
viewing, they kind of use both terms. And all of the different schools
of remote viewing thought that have developed since are derivatives
of CRV. We've got Farsight with SRV, Scientific Remote Viewing,
Major Ed Dames, had his TRV, Technical Remote Viewing.
So everybody kind of maybe massage the military protocols a little
bit, put their own little twist on it, but it's still a derivative of CRV. And
I wanted to get out of that mindset because in a military style
session, you are getting discrete pieces of data. The system is set
up to keep your left brain busy because our brains have two
hemispheres. And the left brain is the controlling manipulative part of
you. It's the part that wants an answer. It wants to know somethingup to keep your left brain busy because our brains have two
hemispheres. And the left brain is the controlling manipulative part of
you. It's the part that wants an answer. It wants to know something

--- PAGE BREAK ---t brain busy because our brains have two
hemispheres. And the left brain is the controlling manipulative part of
you. It's the part that wants an answer. It wants to know something

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and put a label on it. And that's the part that trips you up when you're
remote viewing.
It's the part that will make conclusions about things that might be not
entirely direct or true. In your right brain is your intuitive, gentle, more
loving, more open, puzzle loving side. And that's the side that gives
you the data. So in the military method, you keep your left brain busy
and your right brain pops out little pieces of data. And it works. It
works. All of these systems are remotely work wonderfully. So I'm not
at all bashing the military style system. I learned on that. And that's
what I did for the first 16 years as a remote viewer. I've been in this
30 years. So and then I started developing this new system. My first
maps I did about 14 years ago.
And so I decided instead of getting teeny tiny pieces of data and not
really understanding what I was experiencing until the end and
someone gave me the answer, the reveal, I really wanted to have a
real experience. I wanted to see it and smell it and taste it and feel it
and know what's going on right in the middle of it. So I developed
this new system work that allows you to do that. It's quite different
from the military method. It invites you to take whatever your
subconscious is giving you even all of those conclusions, even all
those labels. And while you're doing your remote viewing, break
those down into their essential elements. And that gives you the
whole story. And so people that are learning this new method, they
are having true bilocation type experiences where they really feel
that they are there. It's so alive to them. It's amazing. So that's what
I'm doing.
DR. SALLA: Well, that's very interesting. You mentioned bilocation.
So remote viewing, is that essentially kind of bilocation?
BIRDIE: It is or at least I think it should be, but it truly is a form of
bilocation. So for example, in one of my student classes recently, I
gave them an experience at Target, which was a photograph of all
these little kids at a county fair, and they were having a pie eating
contest. And so the photograph shows all these kids around this big
table and they're stuffing themselves full of pie. And there's a guy
there with a stopwatch in the photo. And one of my students literallyt. And so the photograph shows all these kids around this big
table and they're stuffing themselves full of pie. And there's a guy
there with a stopwatch in the photo. And one of my students literally

--- PAGE BREAK ---raph shows all these kids around this big
table and they're stuffing themselves full of pie. And there's a guy
there with a stopwatch in the photo. And one of my students literally

--- PAGE BREAK ---

felt so sick while she was remote viewing this, she sincerely thought
that she was going to vomit because she became part of the scene.
It was like all that pie was going into her and it was making her feel
upset. And another example, I gave out a photograph of Jacques
Cousteau under the sea famous oceanic explorer. And he's there in
his diving suit, swimming around with some fish. And one of my
students was sitting down and I was watching her because she
started swaying back and forth like this. And I thought maybe she
wasn't feeling well. And I went over to her. I said, are you okay? And
she's like, no, I'm underwater. She knew where she was. She could
see everything around her. And it felt as real as being underwater
feel. So bilocation is real. The more that you practice any kind of
remote viewing, the more bilocation you have and the more visceral
these experiences become.
DR. SALLA: Fantastic. Now during those 22 years where you had to
go underground and just raise your family to other things, you still did
the remote viewing. And you did say, well, you've described doing
300 sessions on the history of grey aliens and the interactions with
Earth over an eight year period. So yes, you want to give us a
thumbnail sketch of what you found.
BIRDIE: Oh, that was a really cool project. It's kind of still ongoing. I
wrote up around 400 different tasks, different targets. And I put them
in my pool. And it took me eight years to get through the bulk of
those because like I said, I'm pulling these out at random. They're
double blind. I might be getting a photograph of Mount Rushmore or
it might be some verifiable event. Most of what I do is verifiable, but
there's small percentage that are the fun things I throw in there. So it
took a while to get through all of this. And what I learned in it is
absolutely fascinating. So the grey aliens, they are true
extraterrestrials. They did come from another planet out there.
Their planet was dying. This was due to technology run amok. They
left the planet in these huge ships. They sent out several of these
absolutely enormous mother ships, I guess you could call them.
They kind of are shaped like a bullet with a little bit of a pointed
head. And one of them ended up landing here on Earth. It's kind of a
crash landing. It landed in the ocean near what today is the Antarctic.of are shaped like a bullet with a little bit of a pointed
head. And one of them ended up landing here on Earth. It's kind of a
crash landing. It landed in the ocean near what today is the Antarctic.

--- PAGE BREAK ---a bullet with a little bit of a pointed
head. And one of them ended up landing here on Earth. It's kind of a
crash landing. It landed in the ocean near what today is the Antarctic.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Now this was billions of years ago, millions, hundreds of millions of
years ago. Anyway, it was a very, very long time ago. So the
continents on the Earth look very different today than they did at the
moment that the grays crashed.
And it took them eons to kind of repair their ship and they started
building smaller ships, which they then started flying around the
surface of the planet. And they've been with us ever since. In fact,
they predate human history because they were here before we
evolved. They were here at the time, the comet or meteor or
whatever it was to cut the dinosaurs, whatever that big thing was that
crashed. They were, they were here on the planet at that time. So in
a way, it's as much their planet as it is our planet. And so they are
spacefaring.
They managed to get themselves back up into that overall, these
millennia, but they have been monitoring us. They have been
involved in genetic manipulation across our planet, not just in terms
of human beings, but in terms of plants and animals. They've been
very instrumental in making all kinds of small incremental changes
because to them, this is their planet. They sincerely feel that this is
their planet. And who's to say it isn't? They've been here longer than
we have.
DR. SALLA: Well, that's a very interesting question because there's
a lot of literature out there describing different extraterrestrials that
came here and kind of bioengineered humans and their image.
And some talk about, I mean, I'm sure you're familiar with the Alex
Collier material, where he describes 22 different extraterrestrial
species that bioengineered humanity in different experiments and
the Anunnaki, one of them. I can't remember the grays being among
that.
BIRDIE: I mean, they were definitely part of it, especially very, very
early on. Now, I have looked at the Anunnaki and a number of other
species. And yes, they too were involved in genetic manipulation for
their own reasons. Whether they wanted slaves or they wanted
people to do their bidding or they were interested in the future of our
species and humanity. It's probably a combination of all of these
things. But the grays were involved in this too for certain.d
people to do their bidding or they were interested in the future of our
species and humanity. It's probably a combination of all of these
things. But the grays were involved in this too for certain.

--- PAGE BREAK ---bidding or they were interested in the future of our
species and humanity. It's probably a combination of all of these
things. But the grays were involved in this too for certain.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. SALLA: Now, I guess the question is, is that in terms of the
historical influencing human genetics, I mean, did they call
themselves grays? I mean, or did they refer to a particular planet or
something?
BIRDIE: Yes, they have their own, they have to this day their own
names and their own ways of understanding who they are, grays.
That's, we came up with that because they're short, they're grayish,
not quite gray, gray, but close enough.
And so we came up with that name, but they definitely have a
designation for themselves. They are not clones entirely, they're not
a mix of biology and technology. These are biological creatures.
They do reproduce asexually. They are more built kind of like a
clone, but it's different. It's not entirely clone. They are individuals,
but they also have a hive presence where they are completely a
telepathic society and they're able to think and to converse much like
we breathe just in and out that easy kind of way that we breathe.
That's their telepathic communication with each other.
DR. SALLA: I remember the Sasquatch Message to Humanity kind
of like corroborates what you just said, because they say that prior to
humans, there were the reptilians and prior to the reptilians were the
insectoids. So if we, if we kind of like view grays as insectoids, then
yes, it's quite, I mean, that would match the, this history according to
the Sasquatch Message to Humanity that they were here millions of
years ago before humans, before reptilians were these insectoids
that I guess included praying mantas, grays, and that kind of mix.
BIRDIE: Yes, so all of those are very ancient species. They've been
around an extremely long time.
DR. SALLA: This kind of like relates to that, I mean, the ant people, I
mean, I've got someone that I've been working with former military
and he's met these ant people in these underground civilizations,
and they kind of like have some of these characteristics of grays in
that they look like insectoids. So is that an example of this kind of
like ancient insectoid gray presence here?
BIRDIE: Yes, ant people, I think are very closely related to the grays
that might even be an offshoot, to be quite honest. I've actually, that's
part of what I'm hoping to look at in the near future. It's part of thispeople, I think are very closely related to the grays
that might even be an offshoot, to be quite honest. I've actually, that's
part of what I'm hoping to look at in the near future. It's part of this

--- PAGE BREAK ---very closely related to the grays
that might even be an offshoot, to be quite honest. I've actually, that's
part of what I'm hoping to look at in the near future. It's part of this

--- PAGE BREAK ---

project that I've been working on for a long time. But I think that they
are kind of an offshoot or related in some way to the grays. The ant
people are fascinating, and here in New Mexico, some of our
indigenous populations have stories about these ant people, so it's a
great interest to me.
DR. SALLA: Now, I know you remote viewed underground bases
and there's a kind of very famous example, and I think the CIA
released this, this is where Pat Price was tasked with four
underground facilities under these mountain, well, he described four
underground facilities in these mountains, one in Alaska, one in
Australia, one in South Africa, and I forgot the fourth one. So yes, I
mean, did you have a remote view, any of those mountains?
BIRDIE: Yes, I have, I have gotten the same underground bases. I
think things have changed in the year since Pat Price first looked at
this. There's definitely more technology involved, very advanced
technology that hasn't been released to the public, of course, the
government and the secret groups there, 50, 100 years ahead of us
in terms of what we, the poor lowly consumer, are allowed to know
about. So there's a lot of technology, but they also have some very
interesting other underground bases that have been built, I'd say
over the past 10, 20 years.
And this kind of goes into this project I'm currently working on, the
Biggest Secret in the World, doing a number of taskings on this,
because there is this huge push now, where they're building
enormously sized bunkers, almost like arks of some sort that are
going to house the select few, those chosen, when this big kind of
catastrophe happens, that they are completely expecting, it's more
like Earth changes, maybe a huge solar flare, maybe a pole shift, it's
related to huge Earth changes. And so they are creating these
underground bunkers to save the best, the brightest, the youngest,
the people, we're not on that list, Michael, you know what I mean?
The powers that be.
DR. SALLA: Right, okay, that's because it's kind of similar to that
movie, 2012, in that movie where they built these huge arks, ocean
arks, to kind of like ride out, flooding and Earth changes. So you'reSALLA: Right, okay, that's because it's kind of similar to that
movie, 2012, in that movie where they built these huge arks, ocean
arks, to kind of like ride out, flooding and Earth changes. So you're

--- PAGE BREAK ---that's because it's kind of similar to that
movie, 2012, in that movie where they built these huge arks, ocean
arks, to kind of like ride out, flooding and Earth changes. So you're

--- PAGE BREAK ---

seeing that happening in a lot of these underground bases now. And
are like these arks designed for space travel?
BIRDIE: Some of them are, they're underground right now, but they
are designed for space travel.
Some are designed just for waiting it out under the Earth. But some
are enormous arks in the true sense that they're going to take people
to some other location. Now, I believe we have a secret space
program anyway, and this has been going on for some time and this
is an extension of that secret space program.
DR. SALLA: Very interesting. And what else did you see in the
underground bases? I mean, people have been talking about a lot of
kind of like darker things happening there. So yes, what else have
you seen?
BIRDIE: Yes, well, some of these underground facilities have groups
of remote viewers, military trained remote viewers. And I have looked
extensively at those groups, maybe because I wanted to find out
what are they doing? What can I learn from them or take from them?
Right now, most of those groups, government, secret government,
government adjacent defense contractor remote viewer groups, they
are using an incredible amount of technology to enhance their sight
abilities. One of the things that they're doing, and I discovered this
over 10 years ago, doing sessions on this, is that they're monitoring
their brainwaves.
Every single remote viewing data session that they do, they put on
EEG style devices that measure their brainwaves, and they monitor
their brainwaves because it can tell you literally what's there at the
target. It can give you clues to what you're picking up. And so 10
years ago, I started doing the same thing. I thought, okay, if they're
going to do it, I'm going to do it.
And I bought a Muse, which is like a consumer headband style
device that trains you in meditation, but it also measures your
brainwaves. And you can watch your brainwaves when you have it
on. And I bought other devices over the years. And so now I
absolutely monitor my brainwaves every single time. And what I've
noticed in the brainwave data, it's fascinating. Certain kinds of
brainwave patterns emerge, and that tells me something abouto now I
absolutely monitor my brainwaves every single time. And what I've
noticed in the brainwave data, it's fascinating. Certain kinds of
brainwave patterns emerge, and that tells me something about

--- PAGE BREAK ---onitor my brainwaves every single time. And what I've
noticed in the brainwave data, it's fascinating. Certain kinds of
brainwave patterns emerge, and that tells me something about

--- PAGE BREAK ---

what's there at the experience, at the target. Like there's a particular
signal in my brainwaves that comes up if it involves extraterrestrials
or any kind of ETs and some sort of non-human intelligence.
There's another that like, if there's a horse at the target, my
brainwaves do a particular thing. So I've been able to use this EEG
activity because I was spying on these secret remote viewing
programs. But that's not the only thing going on in these
underground bases.
They are doing tests, all kinds of tests involving things like human
cloning. It's really kind of terrifying the genetic and manipulation that
they're doing with this is kept very, very secret. They're trying to build
super soldiers. They're trying to build super humans that have that
are bigger, taller, stronger, faster, and have incredible sight activity.
So they are looking at everyone's genetic codes. In fact, the people
they choose for these remote viewing programs, they're looking at
their genetics and doing genetic tests on all of them, and they look
for particular markers. So there's a lot of creepy stuff going on
underground.
DR. SALLA: I know that there's been some kind of like soft
disclosure movies talking about this. I mean, you have the X-Men.
There's a series Babylon 5 that also talks about something called
Psychor, where I think they kind of like describe people, they
categorize psychics on their abilities. I think it was a one to ten scale,
ten being, I mean, someone that could kind of make the room
around you dissolve into ocean or something. So incredible. So yes,
I mean, is that real?
BIRDIE: I do think so. Yes, absolutely. They are trying to determine
who on this planet has the absolute best abilities in this area. They
are co-opting some of these people. They're testing genetics, they're
doing genetic experiments to try to grow this ability in their chosen
people and absolutely some of these remote viewers in these secret
programs are absolutely incredible. They can do things with their
minds. They can do telekinesis, move things with their minds.
And we all have these abilities on an innate level. In the more that
we work on our abilities, we can become quite excellent. But they
are using techniques that go beyond simple practice. They are usingd we all have these abilities on an innate level. In the more that
we work on our abilities, we can become quite excellent. But they
are using techniques that go beyond simple practice. They are using

--- PAGE BREAK ---abilities on an innate level. In the more that
we work on our abilities, we can become quite excellent. But they
are using techniques that go beyond simple practice. They are using

--- PAGE BREAK ---

all different kinds of technologies to enhance this experience,
including drugs, nootropic style drugs that enhance the abilities, all
kinds of interesting things. It's terrifying to be honest.
DR. SALLA: And what that is, what about government remote
viewers running interference on civilian remote viewers like yourself
who are trying to probe into something like an underground facility? I
mean, did you encounter government remote viewers kind of
messing with you when you were trying to see what was going on at
particular targets?
BIRDIE: Yes. And this is one of the things I actually teach in my
more advanced classes. They are able to set up blocks and some
non-humans like gray aliens and Reptilians and others, they can set
up blocks so that you can't see or perceive beyond that block. But I
was able to figure out ways to get around these blocks.
And so I teach these anti-blocking techniques in my advanced class,
and so that you can get in to see what's in that underground bunker
or what's in that spaceship. And it works very well. Now, sometimes
it does irritate the person who's put up the block. And so you have to
kind of weigh balance whether it's worth the risk.
They can't hurt you. There's nothing they can do to hurt you. And in
30 years of doing this, and I have really pushed the envelope on so
many times it's insane. And I've never had a situation where I felt like
anything bad was happening to me. No one's taken over my mind or
my soul or my body. This is something we're already all connected to
everything in this fine universe and beyond.
And so it's just a question of turning your attention to these things.
So nothing can hurt you, but they can try to set up these blocks. But
it's pretty much a psychological tool on their end. We can put up
blocks. I train people how to do that, how to put it to your own block if
you don't want someone remote viewing you.
DR. SALLA: Yes. What about remote viewing extraterrestrials? If
you like remote viewed, say, a spacecraft and went inside it, how can
we be that what we're seeing is what's really in that ship as opposed
to some screen memory projected by the ETs or by the ship itself?
BIRDIE: Yes, that's a good question. And to be completely frank, you
always kind of just have to take it moment by moment and see whatto some screen memory projected by the ETs or by the ship itself?
BIRDIE: Yes, that's a good question. And to be completely frank, you
always kind of just have to take it moment by moment and see what

--- PAGE BREAK ---y projected by the ETs or by the ship itself?
BIRDIE: Yes, that's a good question. And to be completely frank, you
always kind of just have to take it moment by moment and see what

--- PAGE BREAK ---

it feels like. Now, for example, if you were to give me as a blind
session, Santa Claus to remote you, I would get a fat jolly man in a
red cap and some snow and maybe some presents. And so even
though Santa Claus is a myth that we humanity is kind of co-created
and it came from the history of Saint Nicholas and all of this. It's still
not a real person. You would still get it as if it was a real person, but
in your data, you would also get this aspect. You would get that it's a
myth, that it's a story that we tell each other, that it's not entirely real.
So you get what is expected to get, but you also get this idea that
there's something funny going on here. It's not quite right. And so
when I have looked at some extraterrestrial type things, whether I've
gone on a ship or like a good example is the Calvine UFO famous
photograph taken in in the UK of this big diamond shaped ship being
chased by a Harrier Jet. And these hikers had taken the series of
photos and Nick Pope had been holding on to this photo for a long
time. And then he finally received some of these photos came to light
and it was all publicized a few years ago. So that's one of the
sessions I did and that that there was one alien on that ship when I
had never encountered before was super interesting, but he was
trying to put up screen memories and blocks, but I kept getting the
idea that there's something not quite right here. There's something
not real here. This is a manipulation of what I'm experiencing. So
even when that does happen, you do know that it's happening,
especially if you're very practiced and you know what these things
feel like. Now, a new student, they wouldn't realize it. It would just
feel completely real because they haven't done it enough to get all
those different flavors of data.
DR. SALLA: Now something happened to me at a conference back
in 2024 in France and there was a night, a sky watching event at
night and there was a white light up there and I looked at it and all of
a sudden I found myself inside it. I could see inside it and I could see
the crew and when they kind of saw me or saw my consciousness,
almost like they kind of stood up and in a line as though they were I
guess standing to attention. You know, like when an officer arrives on
a ship, they're standing to attention. So was that like a case of
spontaneous remote viewing or what was that?though they were I
guess standing to attention. You know, like when an officer arrives on
a ship, they're standing to attention. So was that like a case of
spontaneous remote viewing or what was that?

--- PAGE BREAK ---uess standing to attention. You know, like when an officer arrives on
a ship, they're standing to attention. So was that like a case of
spontaneous remote viewing or what was that?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BIRDIE: Yes, I would call that spontaneous remote viewing. We do it
literally all day long. If you just pay attention, you might be walking
down the street and you just get this feeling. Someone's staring at
you and you turn around and sure enough, someone's staring at you
or you think about your sister and 10 minutes later, the phone rings
and it's your sister even though you haven't talked with her in a few
weeks. We do this constantly, but sometimes it's more like that
experience you just described where you just have this whole like
immersive experience. Now that was I would call that a bi-location
experience. Michael, I truly would. So that is spontaneous remote
viewing. It happens to everybody at one time or another.
DR. SALLA: Interesting. Okay. Now last year at the actually
beginning of 2025 and the end of last year, there were all of these
drones appearing over military facilities in the U.S. East Coast, New
Jersey, New York. So I mean they were a big mystery. So what do
you know about those drones?
BIRDIE: I did a number of sessions on these and everyone can go
watch them, watch me map them out live on my YouTube channel.
The New Jersey drones were not drones. These were shape shifting.
The craft were sentient. This is craft that are sentient.
So some of them may have had some kind of intelligence on board,
but many of them didn't have like a living body on board, but the craft
itself was intelligent. It could work into orbs. It could morph into
something that looked like a military style drone that would be a little
bit off. It could morph into a helicopter shape or an airplane.
And to this day, these drones, people are still seeing them every
single night in New Jersey. This phenomenon hasn't stopped. The
media stopped giving it attention, but it has continued. One of my
sons lives in Hoboken New Jersey. And he said, Mom, we can see
them outside every single night. And now we're starting to see them
in Northern Europe, in Norway, in Finland, and other areas. These
drones are now showing up. And it's the same kind of phenomenon
that these are sentient. They are monitoring. They're waiting for
something. This is like a, it's a true kind of rise up of non-human
intelligence because I believe we're headed towards some big
changes on this planet and some big surprises ahead.hey're waiting for
something. This is like a, it's a true kind of rise up of non-human
intelligence because I believe we're headed towards some big
changes on this planet and some big surprises ahead.

--- PAGE BREAK ---omething. This is like a, it's a true kind of rise up of non-human
intelligence because I believe we're headed towards some big
changes on this planet and some big surprises ahead.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I think that these guys are along for the show. They're interested in
what we're doing. And the drones themselves, whatever they are,
they were highly fixated on the activities of our son that kept coming
up in my sessions just out of the blue, the sun that we are really
watching what's going on with the sun.
I believe our sun's undergoing a transformation. I mean, I think
scientists would agree with that work. It's solar maximum right now.
We just had all these solar flares. And here in Albuquerque, New
Mexico, I was able to photograph the Aurora Borealis the night
before last just because of this increased solar flare activity. But
they're interested in that. And they're continuing. Their numbers are
growing and they're monitoring what we're up to. And they're wanting
us to wake up. It's like they're saying, hey, we're here. We want you
to wake up.
DR. SALLA: I see something just happened to my screen there. Oh,
that's interesting. And your fear is all of a sudden we were just kind
of knocked out. Well, I must be talking about some cool stuff here.
We must be definitely all right. So the sun is a big player. It is what's
happening on the Earth. So, yes. Okay. So the New Jersey drones, a
lot of those were actually some kind of sentient organic craft.
BIRDIE: Right. Yes. People saw them coming out of the ocean as
well. They're going in and out of the ocean. Exactly. There's so many
underwater bases. It's crazy. I did a session on the tic-tac that
commander David Fravor reported in the Navy that that famous case
that came out in December of 2017 in the New York Times, where
these Navy pilots, they had these encounters with these tic-tac
shaped craft. And they saw the craft go down and dive into the
ocean. And I did a session. In fact, it was a live session in front of a
group of students.
They gave it to me to remote use. So I remote view it in front of
them. And I got the tic-tac, but I also got that it was going in the
water. And there was this enormous, enormous facility under the
water there off the coast of Southern California. And it was almost
like a tic-tac factory. And there were hundreds of these arrayed in a
spiral pattern. And we have places like this all over the planet that
you can look at. There's there are bases in the Mariana Trench, thetic-tac factory. And there were hundreds of these arrayed in a
spiral pattern. And we have places like this all over the planet that
you can look at. There's there are bases in the Mariana Trench, the

--- PAGE BREAK ---there were hundreds of these arrayed in a
spiral pattern. And we have places like this all over the planet that
you can look at. There's there are bases in the Mariana Trench, the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

deepest part of our oceans. There are underwater bases off of
Alaska, certainly near Antarctica. That is a hotbed of extraterrestrial
activity, actually many different kinds of extraterrestrials have bases
down in the Antarctic region.
DR. SALLA: Fascinating. Also, I've interviewed a couple of people
that talked about encountering  underwater cities in the Bermuda
Triangle region, the Bahamas. Did you ever kind of like come across
cities, underwater cities?
BIRDIE: I have on one occasion, I have seen an underwater city.
And this was, actually this was when I was looking into Atlantis. Was
Atlantis, a myth? Is it just a story people told? I believe it was a real
place, absolutely.
And so in looking at Atlantis at the height of its civilization, it was
partially underwater, partially above water, really quite a remarkable
city, very high tech, but also very organic. A lot of crystalline type
structures, beings, different kinds of extraterrestrials were involved
with humanity at that point.
And so that it was incredibly beautiful and interesting. You could just
tell that they were interested in art, in poetry, in music, in philosophy.
It was kind of the best of humanity at the time, mixed with some non-
human intelligence. And I'm sad that it's no longer with us, just the
remnants are still there.
DR. SALLA: Right, right. People talk about these ancient Atlantean
halls of records and artifacts. And I mean, some are saying these are
kind of activating as new fleets of ships come in. Very, very
interesting. Now, you did a remote viewing of 3I Atlas. I think you've
done a three-part (1), (2), (3) YouTube remote viewing of 3I Atlas. So
you wanted to say what you found?
BIRDIE: Yes, 3I Atlas is interesting. I happened to remote view this
actually on July 31st. It was the day before I left to teach a class in
Wilmington, North Carolina. I was co-teaching a class with the
assistance of Chris Bledsoe. So I was teaching my remote viewing
during the day. And Chris was having sky watches on the beach at
night to call down the orbs for the students.
And so the day that I mapped this was the day right before I took off
for the class, I ended up giving this to my students as well. And I'llthe beach at
night to call down the orbs for the students.
And so the day that I mapped this was the day right before I took off
for the class, I ended up giving this to my students as well. And I'll

--- PAGE BREAK ---to call down the orbs for the students.
And so the day that I mapped this was the day right before I took off
for the class, I ended up giving this to my students as well. And I'll

--- PAGE BREAK ---

talk about their data in a minute. But what I got now, I didn't know
much about 3I Atlas at the time.
This was part of just my pool of experiences that came out at
random. So I got a natural but unusual astronomical object moving
through space on a directed path. And it was comet like, but there
were some interesting things about this. Yes, it was it's a natural
comet style astronomical object, a little unusual probably because it
is interstellar. But it had something inside of it, a payload, if you will.
And when I looked back to see how this happened, I found that this
object had many, many, many billions of years ago when it passed
this one particular star system, much like it's coming through our
system now, there was a civilization there, very ancient, very old,
very wise civilization.
And their civilization was dying off just sort of a natural death. Their
planet had been depleted to some degree. And they were no longer
able to reproduce. And so they were kind of dying off. And they sent
out, just like we sent out the Voyager probe with our music and art
and science and mathematics. They created something like that, but
way more advanced compared to Voyager. It is like a compendium of
everything that they are that they've ever known and learned and
thought their music, their mathematics. Math is extremely important
to these people. And they sent it off a little probe out to the comet.
And they had like a little robot arm come out of the probe and it
drilled a hole into the comet. And they inserted this thing in my
session. I say, well, it's like a thumb drive because it's a storage
device, but it's more way more high tech than that.
And so this device is in there and it's broadcasting this repeated
message. And I got that we got that message years ago. And maybe
that's the wow signal. I have future sessions I plan on doing on this.
So when I get to those, I'll share those with the public, but it's
fascinating. This whole civilization has sent this and many other
civilizations have noticed it as this 3I Atlas has continued its journey
through our universe, through the galaxy. And so it's not nothing bad.
There's nothing bad or negative about it. It's actually a beautiful
message, I think, that would really resonate with humanity. But I also
got, which is pretty interesting, is that our scientists, now they'renothing bad or negative about it. It's actually a beautiful
message, I think, that would really resonate with humanity. But I also
got, which is pretty interesting, is that our scientists, now they're

--- PAGE BREAK ---ive about it. It's actually a beautiful
message, I think, that would really resonate with humanity. But I also
got, which is pretty interesting, is that our scientists, now they're

--- PAGE BREAK ---

monitoring this comet, 3I Atlas. And you know, hey, we haven't been
given very much information by the powers, that NASA's not
releasing the photos. It's very curious.
But one of the probes that's out there, I ended up describing this
probe. And I said, this is a human made probe. And I drew a scientist
that was associated with it. And I got that this particular probe was
going to be instrumental in understanding something important about
3I Atlas. It was going to pick up perhaps the broadcast, the message,
maybe get even more data on that. And that this would happen likely
in December. Now this probe that I drew, it ends up, it looks just like
this probe called Lucy. And I was even singing during the session,
wrote it down Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds. And it ends up that
they have a big plate made of diamond inside that probe.
So that's why I got that as data. So that probe is going to be picking
up information about 3I Atlas in December. So it's a fascinating case.
And I'm really enjoying hearing everyone's experiences with this and
their thoughts on 3I Atlas. We haven't had an extraterrestrial visitor
quite like this. And it's exciting. It's an exciting time to be alive.
DR. SALLA: Yes, it is. It's fascinating watching it because I mean so
far all of the images are taken from great distances. And they're seen
kind of like something that doesn't have the usual long comet tail
behind it. And so it seems that at some point then they're going to
realize that this is no comet, that it's in fact an ancient spacecraft.
BIRDIE: Right, right. I think that whatever that that civilization put
into the comet, it's able to maneuver that comet. So it's kind of like a
mix of the natural and this technology.
DR. SALLA: Yes. Okay, so you think that the builders of that craft,
they actually designed it to look like a comet. But it still has things
like maneuvering thrusters. Because that seems to be what the most
recent images have shown that there seems to be thrusters there.
BIRDIE: Yes, exactly. Exactly. It can move in ways that it shouldn't
be able to move if it were just strictly a natural object. So there's
something that is involved in propelling this forward, choosing which
direction it intends to go. And I think that it's kind of deliberately
making stops along the way, so to speak, or deciding who it wants to
visit. And I think we're on that list clearly. We're of interest.tion it intends to go. And I think that it's kind of deliberately
making stops along the way, so to speak, or deciding who it wants to
visit. And I think we're on that list clearly. We're of interest.

--- PAGE BREAK ---o. And I think that it's kind of deliberately
making stops along the way, so to speak, or deciding who it wants to
visit. And I think we're on that list clearly. We're of interest.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. SALLA: Yes, yes, definitely. But I think, I mean, to me, it's such
an elegant way of awakening a planet like ours, especially given the
decades of secrecy and the governments haven't disclosed anything
to us, then all of a sudden, like you have this comet and it, or you
know, supposed comet, and then it, I mean, then the astronomers
kind of like decide, Oh, discover that. Well, it's a spacecraft.
BIRDIE: Right. And Avi Loeb been pretty upfront about how this
does not look like a natural comet. And so I've been enjoying
listening to his take on this. And it's always nice to have a member of
the actual science community backing up these kinds of things that
we just know intuitively. So it's pretty wonderful. And what a time to
be alive. It's just like the greatest moment in human history, where
the world is about to know that we truly are not alone. Yes, they've
been working on soft disclosure now for about almost a decade. But
we're getting, I think, to that big announcement point, I think that'll
happen fairly soon.
DR. SALLA: Yes, I agree. And fascinating to see. I mean, you
already mentioned that like NASA's actually withholding some
images by the Mars reconnaissance orbiter that the highest
resolution images taken so far. And I have a release that Europeans
are releasing thing that the Chinese have released something but
they're pretty blurry. The right on the orbiter Mars, reconnaissance
orbiter is more powerful. But I haven't released it. And but yet on the
other hand, and maybe this is all kind of part of a kind of global
initiative to disclose, you have this United Nations organization called
the International Asteroid Warning Network, issuing a worldwide kind
of like comet viewing exercise involving 3I Atlas from November 27,
which from the data recording, we're talking two weeks from now,
right? November 27 up until January 27. So it's like all eyes on the
skies.
BIRDIE: Exactly. Exactly. They're letting us know. It's time to wake
up people. And I think it's a good way. This is a good method of
disclosure because people, if you simply got out in front of the
country, say you're the president of the United States, and you get
out and you say we are not alone, who is actually going to believe it?
A lot of people would have trouble believing it. People that are on theay you're the president of the United States, and you get
out and you say we are not alone, who is actually going to believe it?
A lot of people would have trouble believing it. People that are on the

--- PAGE BREAK ---ent of the United States, and you get
out and you say we are not alone, who is actually going to believe it?
A lot of people would have trouble believing it. People that are on the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

other side of the political aisle would feel, well, I'm not going to trust
him, right? And then you would have different religious factions
saying, well, those are just really demons.
We've got to stay away from this. But now we have a show and tell
situation. Hey, guys, look up in the sky. We've got drones. We've got
this really unusual comet shaped thing that's not quite a comet that's
flying in overhead.
Now, people are starting to see and understand that this is reality.
We are definitely in the midst of this cosmic symphony in all of these
different non-human intelligences. They're coming to play a part in
this. I think that they're welcoming us to our next step as we venture
out as cosmic citizens.
DR. SALLA: Yes, I agree. I think definitely there's going to be some
big disclosures coming. So as far as disclosures go, so this will be
kind of like the first step. I mean, a space giant spacecraft, who built
it, where they come from? You can imagine all the speculation and
the hope from people that wake up.
What about the inner Earth? I mean, have you kind of like looked
inside of the Earth? I mean, there are stories about Telos and
Shambhala, these Inner Earth civilizations. Have you ever viewed
any of that?
BIRDIE: Yes, yes. There have been and are to this day, some Inner
Earth civilizations, they keep to themselves. Some of them are
spacefaring, but they've managed to live under the Earth as well.
And some of these places, they're incredibly beautiful. They've really
done something nice with the place. They've made it look cool, very,
very ancient.
And so those stories, when we have these kinds of mythologies, they
all come from some nugget of truth. That's why they become so
important to us and an important part of the way in which we share
our experiences.
And so yes, there are absolutely underground civilizations, at least a
couple that I've looked at, one in Tibet, which is really interesting.
And a lot of the ancient traditions in that area talk about this
civilization. So I took a look at it and it's remarkable. It's a
combination of human and non-human intelligence living together,ting.
And a lot of the ancient traditions in that area talk about this
civilization. So I took a look at it and it's remarkable. It's a
combination of human and non-human intelligence living together,

--- PAGE BREAK ---he ancient traditions in that area talk about this
civilization. So I took a look at it and it's remarkable. It's a
combination of human and non-human intelligence living together,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

working on different kinds of things, very, very spiritually evolved,
technologically evolved, super interesting people.
DR. SALLA: Interesting. The person I mentioned, JP, the military,
US Army, he says he was taken into one of these underground
locations. And it was like the Ant people living with humans, but
these humans were like refugees from the surface from centuries
ago, like the 30 years war or whatever was happening there in the
Americas at that time, the conquistadors or whatever.
BIRDIE: Exactly. Yes, that's interesting. I kind of picked up things like
that too, that these people, they haven't had contact with the rest of
humanity in a long time. And they did come from different kinds of a
combination of different civilizations. But now that's who they are.
They live with non-human intelligence, Ant people, or other kinds of
gray ETs, what have you. And they're working together. They're very
tight working together, a lot of trust between non-human intelligence
and humans in those areas.
DR. SALLA: Apparently there's a very extensive network of
underground cities all over the world. So I mean, apart from that one
in Tibet, did you come up with any other underground cities?
BIRDIE: Yes, well definitely in Antarctica, a huge one, absolutely
enormous one there, very ancient, very ancient. Of course you have
the X-Files mythology that talks about all that, but it's kind of similar
to that. Huge mother ships, a lot of things going on under there.
There's one that's underground in northern China, very remote. And
the Chinese government's very aware of this. In fact, they don't let
anyone go into that part of China. It's very much kept patrolled with
soldiers. They don't want people to go in that area and they've been
trying to monitor and understand what that's all about. So that one's
interesting too, just from a geopolitical perspective.
DR. SALLA: Yes, I know there are all these ancient pyramids in
China that the Chinese government have kept secret. They just kind
of cover them up.
BIRDIE: That's right. Yes, so you've confirmed that with your remote
views. Yes, they definitely, the Chinese government has concealed
so many things. Of course, so has the United States government. So
not throwing stones at the Chinese, but they definitely have kept,views. Yes, they definitely, the Chinese government has concealed
so many things. Of course, so has the United States government. So
not throwing stones at the Chinese, but they definitely have kept,

--- PAGE BREAK ---finitely, the Chinese government has concealed
so many things. Of course, so has the United States government. So
not throwing stones at the Chinese, but they definitely have kept,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

there's so many ancient things in that land in China, in areas
surrounding China, that they have kept quiet, that they have private,
that they've pilfered for themselves, different kinds of technologies.
And then like I mentioned at the beginning of the show, how we're
building bunkers and things here in the United States, they're doing it
too.
So they are doing it in Russia and in many other different countries.
The Chinese are very, very much building like these life arks,
bunkers, seed banks, they're genetic, even in fact, genetic samples
from their population so that they have this like catalog of what's in
the country with coming Earth changes and things that are going to
happen. They want to be able to recreate what they had or at least
have a memory of what's here today.
DR. SALLA: Yes. What about giants? Have you remote viewed
giants?
BIRDIE: Oh, yes. I loved some of the ancient history. And I've looked
at a number of the megalithic structures on the planet. There are
some of these huge structures. And you think, how did they even
build these things like the pyramids or some of these huge walls out
there, big structures that we don't quite understand how they came
to be.
And there have been giants involved in some of the production of
these giants really are a nonhuman or nonhuman mixed with human.
I mean, that's even right out of the Bible that the sons of God came
down and mated with the daughters of man and they created these
giants.
And so I think that those ancient stories, biblical traditions, it's based
on some real events. So yes, the giants are fascinating.
You know, you tend to think of a giant as being kind of brutish and
huge and maybe a little malevolent and just getting his own way and
being able to build things. But you know what, they were super
intelligent. They only had the brawn, but they had the brains as well.
Brilliant, brilliant tacticians, brilliant builders, and even
mathematicians. It's kind of interesting. I think the giants have been
misunderstood.only had the brawn, but they had the brains as well.
Brilliant, brilliant tacticians, brilliant builders, and even
mathematicians. It's kind of interesting. I think the giants have been
misunderstood.

--- PAGE BREAK ---but they had the brains as well.
Brilliant, brilliant tacticians, brilliant builders, and even
mathematicians. It's kind of interesting. I think the giants have been
misunderstood.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

DR. SALLA: Yes, that's very important. I had an experience like a
vivid dream. And in this dream, I was at a someplace and I was in a
room, a hall with other people. It was like a viewing area. And then
all of a sudden, like there were 12 giants that just walked in. They
were like 15 foot tall. They radiated this really benevolent energy,
almost like masters of wisdom.
And they just came in, they just stood in front of that audience. And
everyone was, it wasn't worship, it was just like a deep respect for
these giants. So yes, so that's kind of matching what you said.
BIRDIE: Yes, that's my take on the giants. I don't think that they were
big brutish. They were just big, brilliant and interesting and
intellectual, for sure.
DR. SALLA: Yes, well I got from these beings that they were kind of
very loving, that there was a loving energy coming out of them. That
was interesting.
[…]
Oops, you're frozen. Okay, wow, we're having an affair.
BIRDIE: I think not. Somebody doesn't want us to talk about these
things.
DR. SALLA: Yes, obviously not. So, so I was just adding that in the
experience I had, I felt that these giants, they were very loving.
There was a loving energy coming from them. Yes, which is
completely opposite to what you get in the Old Testament, the Bible.
BIRDIE: Exactly, exactly. That's why I think they're misunderstood.
Every time I've looked at them and I've looked at them a number of
times I'm fascinated with them. They really are cool. I would love to
hang out with the giants. I think it would be a blast. I would learn so
much and I would not be afraid. They just do not seem scary in any
way, shape or form. They're just really cool individuals.
DR. SALLA: So, have you done any recent remote viewings that
you want to share, that you thought your findings were really kind of
interesting that my audience would be interested in?
BIRDIE: Yes, okay, I'm going to be posting on my YouTube very
soon within the next week, a session that I did on the biggest secret
in the world.f
interesting that my audience would be interested in?
BIRDIE: Yes, okay, I'm going to be posting on my YouTube very
soon within the next week, a session that I did on the biggest secret
in the world.

--- PAGE BREAK ---y audience would be interested in?
BIRDIE: Yes, okay, I'm going to be posting on my YouTube very
soon within the next week, a session that I did on the biggest secret
in the world.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Now, I've looked at this a number of times. Now, you have to think,
okay, so who has the secret? How is this the biggest secret in the
world? Well, when you see this session, you'll understand why. It has
to do with these coming Earth changes.
The government literally knows the dates when certain things are
going to happen. In fact, they've known this for some time. It's the
reason that disclosure has started off as the slow disclosure since
2017. They're rolling this out because they know that on a certain
date and they know exactly what date this is, that there is going to be
a return, a return, a flotilla, if you will.
They're going to be ships that are going to come in. And so, they
have to disclose before the ships come in. In fact, we looked at this
25 years ago, John Vivanco and I, and we used to call it The Big
Event. Well, that date is rapidly approaching now toward this big
event.
And the way that the government is preparing for this is absolutely
fascinating. So, I'm very excited to share this session. I think people
will find it interesting, maybe a little scary, maybe a little exciting,
depending on what your interest is in all of this, but they are
definitely, they're building those bunkers. They are getting things
prepared for any kind of global unrest, but they know what date that
those ships are coming. And I believe it's the return of the Anunnaki.
That's what I think it is.
DR. SALLA: Fascinating, fascinating. So, your website is, or your
YouTube channel is NoRivets. All of these remote viewings up there.
And as of probably, what is it, November 20, your new channeling on
the biggest secret will be there.
BIRDIE: So, that's right. The Biggest Secret link at NoRivets.com (3
hrs) and some really other cool things coming up too, some other
cool ET experiences. I spoke at the Beyond the Brain Conference
last weekend on a project that I did on remote viewing the
multiverse. So, I managed to remote view different dimensions,
different universes, and different timelines. I looked at myself in 63
different timelines. This project took me some years. And what's
super interesting, in some of these timelines, I'm married, some I'merent universes, and different timelines. I looked at myself in 63
different timelines. This project took me some years. And what's
super interesting, in some of these timelines, I'm married, some I'm

--- PAGE BREAK ---different timelines. I looked at myself in 63
different timelines. This project took me some years. And what's
super interesting, in some of these timelines, I'm married, some I'm

--- PAGE BREAK ---

divorced, some I don't have a partner, some I am really fat, some I'm
in amazing shape.
And there's one thing that's consistent across all of these timelines. I
have a dog in every single one. So, I'm going to share some of those
live remote viewing sessions that I videoed so that people can also
take a look at the multiverse and see what it's like. What is it like in a
different timeline or a different dimension or a different universe? It's
interesting stuff. And it offers, I think, a lot of clues perhaps to the
philosophical and scientific community about what some of these
possibilities are. Different scientists may look at this and see things
in my data that maybe I didn't notice was important or was there
because I'm that's not my area of expertise.
DR. SALLA: Well, that sounds like a fascinating remote viewing as
well. Do you have information for people that are maybe interested in
learning how to remote view or getting in touch?
BIRDIE: Yes. If you want to learn, you can learn absolutely for free.
All of the things you see me do on my YouTube channel, I have a
free workshop on my channel. It's called You Can Map Too. And it's 3
1-2 hours. And I teach you literally all the steps that you see me do in
these sessions. And so you will be able to go ahead and learn it
yourself for free.
Now, if you want some in-depth training or learn more about what I
do, I have two websites. My personal website is norivets.com. And
that's where I have personal essays and I post videos and talk about
this and that. And then my business website is
transdimensionalmapping.com. And all of our classes are listed there
plus information about our method of remote viewing,
Transdimensional mapping. And we also have a group student
development group called Mapping Mavericks. And we have around
100 students in that now. We're joining all the time and it's ongoing
student development. For those who want to do this operationally,
work in the real world as a remote viewer.
DR. SALLA: Fascinating. Well, you've shared a lot of great
information for people. And I'm really glad you're back and sharing
your remote viewing results. I'm sure people are going to benefitviewer.
DR. SALLA: Fascinating. Well, you've shared a lot of great
information for people. And I'm really glad you're back and sharing
your remote viewing results. I'm sure people are going to benefit

--- PAGE BREAK ---

greatly. And I look forward to seeing some of your upcoming remote
viewings.
BIRDIE: Thank you so much, Michael. I really appreciate you taking
the time to speak with me. It was delightful. Thank you.
ANNOUNCER: You have been listening to Exopolitics today with Dr.
Michael Salla. Please remember to like, share, and subscribe to this
channel. Join or start a conversation in the comments. Take the time
to explore the vast library of best-selling books, webinars, and
podcasts by Dr. Salla. Visit ExoPoliticsToday.com.