FPT ISBN Q-3c13
1 w-T • y 1
ii r • % * M j r§ j 11
I|I Swj
IIJ!
>iR
R, <r »\ w
y
m
1
•. ; j. 1
m%tff n ill f e
%. L
Oswald’s G
Jean Davison
Foreword by No
Twenty years h
dent John F. Ken
and although bo
sion and the Hou
mittee conclude
wald was his ass
tion could exp
presenting a c
searched exami
character, and a
book to challen
and reveal how
motivated to as
As an adoles
nosed as emotio
and intelligent.
when he was six
to kill President
ing the working
fected to the S
years later, retur
where he attem
right-wing leade
Oswald was a p
to infiltrate anti
an agent provoca
Kennedy be kill
No previous
passed all this m
span of thirteen
vocative and co
breaking investi
yet neglected fa
Kennedy’s assas
himself.
JACKET DESIGN BY
JACKET PHOTOGRA
WIDEWORLD PHO
11-83

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Printed in the United State* of America
Davison
“I have never found persuasive any of the ‘conspiracy
theories’ about President Kennedy’s murder, and
despite the deficiencies of the Warren Report, I have
always believed Lee Oswald was the lone assassin.
Oswald's Game comes as near proving it and provid-
ing the long-sought motive as perhaps any investiga-
tion ever will. ”
—Tom Wicker
“For twenty years we have been subjected to a variety
of wooly-headed conspiracy theories about President
Kennedy’s assassination. Jean Davison has stripped
away the emotionalism and inaccuracies to present us
with very persuasive evidence that Oswald was the
lone assassin, on his own but influenced by his admi-
ration for Fidel Castro. She carefully traces Oswald’s
character and the circumstances surrounding JFK’s
death. This is a fascinating and important book.”
—Marianne Means, columnist, King Features
syndicate and Hearst newspapers
Norton s magma—aam
W • W • NORTON & COMPANY NEW YORK • LONDON
ISBN 0-3R3-017tiM-fl
'W
NORTON

--- PAGE BREAK ---book.”
—Marianne Means, columnist, King Features
syndicate and Hearst newspapers
Norton s magma—aam
W • W • NORTON & COMPANY NEW YORK • LONDON
ISBN 0-3R3-017tiM-fl
'W
NORTON

--- PAGE BREAK ---

i
-:,;5
OSWALD’S
GAME
_ Jean Davison
: FOREWORD BY NORMAN MAILER
• W. W. NORTON & COMPANY New York London

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Copyright © 1983 by JCM Divi»on
AJI rights reserved.
Published simultaneously in Canada by George J. McLeod Limited, Toronto.
Printed in the United States of America.
The teat of this book is composed in Times Roman, with display type set in Melior
Semibold. Composition and manufacturing by The Haddon Craftsmen, Inc.
Book design by Nancy Dale Muldoon.
First Edition
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication. Data
Davison, Jean.
Oswald s game.
Includes index.
1. Oswald, Lee Harvey, a. Kennedy, John F. (John
Fitzgerald), 1917-1963—Assassination. 3. Assassins—
United States—Biography. I. Title.
E842 9.7*038 1983 364.15M-10914 [B] &J'835i
ISBN 0-3W117bM-fi
W. w. Norton A Company, Inc.. 500 Fifth Avenue, New York. N. Y. 10110
W. W. Norton A Company Ltd., 37 Great Russell Street, London WCtB tNU
1234567890
Contents
Foreword by Norman Mailer QQQ
Introduction QQ0
1: A Most Unusual Defector QQQ
2: Marguerite’s Son QQQ
3: Dropping Out, Joining Up 000
4: The Marxist Marine 000
3: The Defection QQQ
6: Getting Out QQQ
7: Homecoming QQQ
8: Taking Action QQQ
9: The Activist 000
10: “Street Agitation . . . Radio Speaker and Lecturer” 000
11: The Troubling Testimony of Sylvia Odio:
“A Matter of Some Importance to the Commission” 000
12: Castro's Revelations 0OO
13: October 1963—Reading between the Lines 000
14: November: The Decision QQQ
13: The Arrest QOQ
16: Reactions QQQ
17: Conspiracy Thinking: Best Evidence and Other
Theories 000
18: Oswald's Game QQQ
Index ooo
Illustrations appear between 00 and 00.

--- PAGE BREAK ---QQ
13: The Arrest QOQ
16: Reactions QQQ
17: Conspiracy Thinking: Best Evidence and Other
Theories 000
18: Oswald's Game QQQ
Index ooo
Illustrations appear between 00 and 00.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Foreword
IN field artillery, forward observers are told to bracket a target. If,
in their estimation, the first shot falls three hundred yards short, they
call for the next to be six hundred yards farther. They want to be
certain to land on the far side; that way, by comparing the near and
the long, they can approach a direct hit. The target is not found as
well creeping toward it. One wants to make certain that errors fall to
opposite sides of the mark.
Oswald's Game by Jean Davison fulfills such a purpose. Consider-
ing the difficulties surrounding one lonely researcher, she does it well,
and here I may as well confess that the author came to my attention
when she wrote me a letter full of gentle but determined criticisms to
Conspiracy by Anthony Summers (McGraw-Hill 1980). I suggested
then that she write her own book. Indeed, she has, and I think it may
enter the small canon of acceptable words about Lee Harvey Oswald
and the Kennedy assassinations, and say this although I am still not
sympathetic to her point of view which would argue that Oswald was
not an agent for the KGB, CIA, or FBI, nor any pan of an anti-Castro
Cuban conspiracy with the Mafia to kill Jack Kennedy (which pos-
sibilities are carefully investigated in Anthony Summers’s book) but
to the contrary, Davison here makes the case that Oswald was what
he purported to be, an isolated Marxist, half-crazed, who killed for
his ideas—in other words, we are given the Warren Commission
revisited. While their august labor now resides in our minds as a
congeries of evasions, replete with bad conscience (for the Warren
Commission cut off more interesting possibilities than it opened) Jean
Davison has gone through the forest and settled on a string of trees

--- PAGE BREAK ---r
8 ...

Oswald's Game
that offer a path.

Her product, as a result, has lucidity and Oswald
emerges as the protagonist of a novel, rather than as a set of forced
conclusions by committee.

Her work, in short, has conviction, and
offers us a recognizable Oswald, a desperately fouled-up young psy-
chopath, full of brilliance, arrogance, cruelty, and bad spelling all in
one.

So Oswald's Game presents a thesis that is unpleasant but not to
be ignored, for it is possible.

The merit is that Ms.

Davison lands on
the other side of the target.

When we treat such enigmas as assassination and the possible
implication of secret police, we never know whether to give such
agents credit for too much intelligence or too little—the crucial ques-
tion is always: are they as stupid as they seem7 Or do they pretend
to such incompetence in order to conceal exceptional plans and
works?

Of course, both may be true.

Some of the brightest and some
of the most stupid (let us say blindly stubborn) men among us go into
secret police work.

Short of a solution to the Kennedy assassination,
we do have to live, therefore, with two notions of Oswald—that he
was the focus, the pawn, and the plaything of more than one intelli-
gence organization, most specifically the CIA and the KGB (and on
■ this is much intriguing evidence that Summers presents, and Davison
all but ignores) or, to the contrary, these services were surprisingly
I benign in their treatment of Oswald—which is not inconceivable
given the peculiar reflexes of bureaucracy—but is certainly suggestive
of intense incompetence.

It is not easy to believe that the KGB would
accept an American defector without scrupulously analyzing the pos-
sibility that he was a young CIA plant, or without trying to turn him
into an agent for themselves.

At the least, to make him a double agent
would be a game of much interest to them.It is not easy to believe that the KGB would
accept an American defector without scrupulously analyzing the pos-
sibility that he was a young CIA plant, or without trying to turn him
into an agent for themselves.

At the least, to make him a double agent
would be a game of much interest to them.

In turn, on Oswald’s
{ } voyage back to America, we are also asked, via Davison, to believe
that the CIA never debriefed Oswald, or made any attempt to use him
as a counter in a game with the KGB.

It is hard to believe all those
intelligent, game-hardened Ivy League classmates of mine were not
seizing the rare opportunity that Oswald presented.

Still, Davison
takes the benign view.

Somehow or other, Oswald slipped through.

They did not bother with him.

They were out to lunch when he came
along.

It is conceivable, but it is a point of view that must ignore
much, particularly that the genial and urbane George de Mohren-
schildt featured in her pages was not conceivably debriefing Oswald
for the CIA.

Foreword...

9
If we are willing to accept Jean Davison's portrait of Oswald
as a psychopath, and to a great degree I am, it becomes difficult to
see him pursuing one course to the exclusion of all others.

Psy-
chopaths have a prodigious sense of their own talents, of their speed
of mind and essential importance—so they see opportunities every-
where.

Given their enormous sense of the present, their lack of loyalty
to the past, and their taste for action, it is natural for psychopaths to
attach themselves to every opportunity even when their aims are
contradictory.

The clue to much of Oswald’s behavior, and Davison
leads us to it even at damage to her thesis, is his psychopathy.

He
would not have been out of his element leading eight lives at once.

To
assume, however, that none of these eight lives was dictated by the
KGB, CIA, FBI, Mafia may be to insist on a valley in this fog where
others sense a mountain range.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He
would not have been out of his element leading eight lives at once. To
assume, however, that none of these eight lives was dictated by the
KGB, CIA, FBI, Mafia may be to insist on a valley in this fog where
others sense a mountain range. Davison does not even seem aware
that Marina Oswald’s uncle, Ilya Prusakov, was a lieutenant colonel
in the MVD and a leading light of Minsk. He gave approval to her
marriage to Oswald. The Marina Oswald that Jean Davison offers us
does not present such fine connections. No matter. I return to the first dilemma. The net of conspiracy is
always more or less finely woven than what we do perceive of it. Coincidence often creates the facsimile of evidence for many a con-
spiracy. To give my own example, I remember that I worked through
most of the Fifties in a small studio building on Fulton Street in
Brooklyn, and on the floor below worked Colonel Abel, undercover
head of a vast net of Soviet espionage in America. For years Abel and
I must have gone up and down in the elevator together many times. Then, too, in the late Forties. I subscribed for a little while to the Daily
Worker, and since I was staying with my parents at the time, my
father was brought up before a Loyalty Board and almost lost his
governmental job. Finally I wrote a novel called An American Dream
and in the first paragraph Jack Kennedy is mentioned not ten lines ,
i

--- PAGE BREAK ---ore a Loyalty Board and almost lost his
governmental job. Finally I wrote a novel called An American Dream
and in the first paragraph Jack Kennedy is mentioned not ten lines ,
i

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10 ... Oswald’s Game
iw... usuua j uune . _
f ’' ~i* 1r« P»*,S
away from the name of the villain whom. I chose to call Barney Oswald
Kelly. I wrote that paragraph in September, 1963, two months before
the assassination.
Conceive of those items as they must look on a computer readout
in some Intelligence shop. Then add to them that in 1965 I exhorted
Berkeley youth to hang posters of LBJ upside down as a protest
against the war in Vietnam, and in truth was so demagogical that a
standing ovation rewarded me. I am struck how full of profile many
a dossier can seem if we are not alert to these unfathomable powers
of coincidence. So I can read Oswald's Game as a most legitimate
attempt to perceive the terrain on that other side of the moon where
people’s lives are always less interesting than they ought to be, and
less sinister, less manipulated. Though I belong to the Summers’s
school of conspiracy, I still think Jean Davison has delivered an
invaluable tool, a corrective, a clear measure of the other possibility
to be kept in mind by all us other amateur and professional investiga-
lore of the great American mystery. From my side of the debate, I
choose then to greet her work.
Norman Mailer
Vladimir Ilyich and I recalled a simile L. Trotsky used somewhere.
Once when walking, he spotted in the distance the figure of a man
squatting on his haunches and moving his hands about in an absurd
way. A madman/ he thought. But on drawing nearer, he saw that it
was a man sharpening his knife on the paving-stone.
—Lenin's wife, quoted in Bertram D. Wolfe’s
Three Who Made a Revolution

--- PAGE BREAK ---an/ he thought. But on drawing nearer, he saw that it
was a man sharpening his knife on the paving-stone.
—Lenin's wife, quoted in Bertram D. Wolfe’s
Three Who Made a Revolution

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(
(B
Introduction
Practically everybody who can remember November 22, 1963,
remembers the exact moment when he or she heard that President
John F. Kennedy had been shot while riding in a motorcade in Dallas.
I was sitting in a staff office at the University of Georgia, getting ready
to teach a class of freshmen, when 1 saw a knot of students in the hall
huddled around a transistor radio. One glanced up at me with the
fiercely introspective look survivors of a natural disaster often have
and said, ‘^Somebody shot President Kennedy/'
I didn't believe it. An hour or so later, after news came that he had
died, I walked outside the building and noticed the intense green of
the lawn and trees and the sudden weight of the air. Down the hill,
a long line of cars was backed up leaving the campus—all classes had
been canceled. The cars moved foot by foot, but very quietly and
patiently, like a funeral procession.
People too young to remember may find it hard to credit the degree
of shock and disbelief that was the almost universal reaction. No
American leader had been assassinated since McKinley in 1901, and
Kennedy was no ordinary leader, as even his adversaries agreed. More
than a popular president, he was fortune's child, having wit, elegance,
wealth, and a style that made his admirers talk, even while he lived,
of the Kennedy myth and the legend of Camelot. He had been de-
stroyed in an instant by a bullet to the brain, and for no apparent
reason.
At first, because Dallas was a notorious center of right-wing ex-
tremism, many people assumed Kennedy had been attacked by a
right-wing fanatic—someone who opposed his civil rights program or
his efforts to relax tensions with the Soviet Union. The news that the
...u

--- PAGE BREAK ---14...

Oswald's Gun,
stu*
A
suspect who had been arrested-a 24-year-old named Lee Harvey
Oswald—was a Marxist and a former defector to the Soviet Union
V^V
L.

,*Av™.ck 858 grotesque twist of fate.

When Robert Kennedy told
., IpM' - 1 h,S *’r0ther s Jacqueline, that Oswald was a Communist, her
Jjj ^!,0“ was> °h my God.

but that's absurd.

...

It even robs his
death of any meaning.

A Marxist killing a liberal president made no
sense.

Under arrest, Oswald maintained he hadn’t shot anybody.

Two
days later, when the police attempted to transfer him from one jail to
another, he was gunned down by Jack Ruby, a Dallas nightclub
owner, before a national television audience.

,.P^er ,he few weeks the public’s impression of Oswald soli-
dified around the bits of information that qame oujjhrough the news
gedia.

Oswald never held a steady job and h^ad^rit^TSBlSns.

He seemed erratic and aimless.

Having defected to Russia, he re-
turned to the United States and later tried to go to Cuba.

In April of
1963 he had reportedly taken a shot at retired General Edwin A
«A ™ker’ 8 Prominent right-winger-Walker was one of Kennedy’s
.v A ^!,ter”t P°**»«cal enemies.

Many editorials blamed the vicious anti-
^ a,mosPhere Dallas for inciting a confused misfit to vio-
r f .

In 1964 the Warren Commission published the results of the official
investigation—a summary that came to be known as the Warren
Report, followed by twenty-six volumes of testimony and exhibits that
sold mainly tolibranes.

The report presented strong circumstantial
evidence that Oswald had fired three shots at the motorcade from the
?W-.fl02rn0f thC Te,Xaf Slho°l Book Depository, striking Kennedy
twice and Governor John Connally once, and that during his attempt
o escape he had shot and killed Patrolman J.D.

Tippit.

Among other
things, the nfle found in the School Depository had been mailed to
Oswald s post office box, and the order blank and money order bore
his handwriting.Tippit.

Among other
things, the nfle found in the School Depository had been mailed to
Oswald s post office box, and the order blank and money order bore
his handwriting.

When he was arrested at a movie theater, he held in
his hand a pistol that matched the bullet casings found near Patrol-
man Tippit’s body—and Oswald reportedly exclaimed, "It’s all over
a??

ff5hapS the most ,ellin8 was a sma)l symbolic gesture.

Before Oswald went to work at the Depository on the morning of the
assassination, he took off his wedding ring and left it on his wife's
dresser, something he had never done before.

And yet, although the Warren Commission concluded that Oswald
shot Kennedy, tt was unable to say why:
Introduction...

15
Many factors were undoubtedly involved in Oswald's motivation for the
assassination, and the Commission does not believe that it can ascribe
to him any one motive or group of motives.

The Warren Report spoke of his troubled personal life, his hostility
to American society, his interest in Marxism, and his alleged propen-
sity for violence.

None of this seemed adequate to explain what had
been called the crime of the century.

It seemed to many Americans
that the reason Kennedy was murdered would never be known.

Some felt, in fact, that there was no reason.

If Oswald was a lone
gunman with no motive, then the assassination was an event without
meaning.

It was as though Kennedy had been struck by a bolt of
lightning, or by a brick that happened to fall from a construction site
as the motorcade passed by.

In their view, it amounted to the same
thing: the course of history had been changed by a freak accident.

Others suspected a conspiracy from the very beginning.

They
pointed out that the murder of any head of state is a political crime.

If the assassin wasn't a raving lunatic—and Oswald certainly wasn't
that—then there must have been a political motive.

The Warren
Commission's critics began asking the old legal question, Cui bono?--- PAGE BREAK ---

If the assassin wasn't a raving lunatic—and Oswald certainly wasn't
that—then there must have been a political motive. The Warren
Commission's critics began asking the old legal question, Cui bono? Who stood to gain by Kennedy's death? If Oswald had no obvious
motive, there were others who did—CIA operatives and Cuban exiles
who felt Kennedy had double-crossed them at the disastrous Bay of
Pigs invasion of Cuba, and Mafia dons who were feeling heat from
Kennedy's Justice Department, to name a few. As many of the critics
saw it, one had only to discover the links between these groups and
their patsy, Lee Harvey Oswald, to determine a motive. The result
would be a multitude of assassination books attacking the Warren
Report and offering new theories about how and who and why. The
prospect of a widespread, high-level conspiracy entered America's
consciousness, as did a new suspicion about the way our world
worked. In these books, Oswald is merely a pawn, and the real assas-
sins are the unidentified men who successfully plotted to control and
change American history. It has been said that there are only two theories of history: blunder
and conspiracy. Broadly speaking, these were the only theories about
Dallas, as well. It was an act of random violence or a plot. Choose
the first, and run head on into the conclusion that history—life itself
—is chaotic and meaningless. Choose the second, and history is a
racket run by unseen, all-powerful conspirators. (\\/
vD

--- PAGE BREAK ---16...

Oswald's Game
?

a
■
i!

In the mid-1960s I didn’t take an interest in this controversy.

Like >
a lot of people I had formed an immediate impression of the alleged
“*om
.e 4nd of nut" who probably didn’t know him.

•:
*hy
.

he he d,d- As far as I was concerned, the case was
In I96s.I.left my '“ching job and got married, moved north ;i
and began working as a free-lance writer.

^ :i
Then in 1968 I happened to read an article about Oswald in 77te r-
Vl at8L^U^’ * conserva,ive.

youth-oriented magazine
that has since folded.

The article was written by an anti-Communist
propagandist named Ed Butler, who said he had faced Oswald in a
New Orleans radio debate on Cuba in August 1963.

That surprised '
me, since I found it hard to imagine Oswald, who apparently couldn’t
even hold a menial job, holding his own in a public debate.

But
according to Butler, he was a well-informed and articulate debater
who was dedicated to the cause of Castro’s Cuba.

Butler produced
totunony and documents from the Warren Commission records to
bolster his belief that Oswald had been ’’conditioned to kill” by the
Communist propaganda he’d been reading since he was a teenager
That didn t seem likely, to put it mildly, but even taking Butler’s
politick bias into account, I couldn’t reconcile this picture of Oswald
as a skilled public debater with the on^I had previously been given
^S^Ahapl^ dnfter.

Although I did!Tr^zTiU was g«ting
bitten by one of the central mysteries of the Kennedy assassination—
the question of who Oswald really was.

On a later trip to the library I checked out Mark Lane’s Rush to
Judgment, one of the first attacks on the Warren Report.

Lane had
been retained by Oswald’s mother to represent her son’s interests
betore the Commission.

His argument was that Oswald had been
framed.

Almost nothing was said about Oswald’s personal back-
ground, his political commitment or lack of one.

Like the defense
attorney he was.Almost nothing was said about Oswald’s personal back-
ground, his political commitment or lack of one.

Like the defense
attorney he was.

Lane tore into virtually every piece of evidence in the
k* cltent—the shell casings found near Patrolman Tip-
pit s body, the famous snapshots showing Oswald holding the rifle
found in the Depository, and much more.

Lane portrayed the Warren
Report as a fan*, a calculated attempt to conceal a conspiracy.

By
the time I had finished this angry book, I wondered if Oswald «u
involved in the assassination at all.

J ™Wrad ,hree PiT'?

0f °swald t0 ch°°« from: those of the
a™ Commiaion, Butler, and Lane.

All had relied on evidence
contained in the Commission’s twenty-six volumes.

Everybody had
read the same material and arrived at wildly different conclusions
I
Introduction...

17
How was that possible?

More to the point, who was telling the truth?

At the time, it seemed simple enough to find out.

I would read the
twenty-six volumes myself.

I found the blue-bound Hearings in a local university library.

Volumes I-XV contained the testimony of witnesses who appeared at
the Commission's hearings or gave depositions before a Commission
lawyer.

The question-and-answer format made the transcripts read
like the text of a play.

The remaining volumes contained exhibits
entered as evidence—FBI reports, photographs, and similar docu-
ments.

The first thing that struck me was how disorganized this
material was.

An FBI report on ballistics might be followed by a
psychiatric report on Jack Ruby’s mother or a description of the
preparations for the motorcade.

And there was no index.

I began
taking notes, wondering if 1 could ever find an underlying order in this
jumble of information.

During the reading I checked some of Mark Lane's footnotes.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I began
taking notes, wondering if 1 could ever find an underlying order in this
jumble of information. During the reading I checked some of Mark Lane's footnotes. The
testimony he had cited as evidence that the Warren Report was a
cover-up had often been quoted out of context, so that what he quoted
changed the meaning of what had actually been said. For example, the
way Lane wrote about Jack Ruby’s testimony led readers to believe
that Ruby was denied the opportunity to reveal the existence of a
conspiracy. After Ruby had been convicted of Oswald’s murder and sentenced
to death, Warren Commission members Earl Warren and Gerald R. Ford questioned him at the Dallas jail. For many months, there had
been rumors that Ruby was a hit man whose job had been to silence
Oswald. To hear Lane tell it, Ruby seemed eager to disclose his pan
in this conspiracy:
Ruby made it plain that if the Commission took him from the Dallas
County Jail and permitted him to testify in Washington, he could tell
more there; it was impossible for him to tell the whole truth so long as
he was in the jail in Dallas. . . . “I would like to request that I go to
Washington and . . take all the tests that I have to take. It is very
important.... Gentlemen, unless you get me to Washington, you can't
get a fair shake out of me.”
After quoting similar statements by Ruby, Lane continued:

--- PAGE BREAK ---Representative Ford asked, not a little redundantly, “Is there anything
more you can tell us if you went back to Washington?” Ruby told him
that there was, and just before the hearing ended Ruby made one last
plea to the Chief Justice of the United States.

RUBY: But you are the only one that can save me.

I think you can.

WARKEN: Yes?

RUBY: But by delaying minutes, you lose the chance.

And all 1 want
to do is tell the truth, and that is alL
But Warren didn’t take him to Washington.

Reading Lane’s account,
one is horrified His implication is clear: Ruby was begging to be
allowed to expose the conspiracy, and the Chief Justice of the Su-
preme Court wouldn’t listen.

Everything Lane quoted was in the record.

What he didn V say,
however, was that the “tests” Ruby wanted to take were simply a lie
detector test—and the reason Ruby wanted to take one was to prove
that he was not part of a conspiracy.

After his arrest, Ruby had been diagnosed as a “psychotic depres-
sive.” His testimony to the Commission indicates that he believed he
was the victim of a political conspiracy by right-wing forces in Dallas.

He suggested that the John Birch Society was spreading the falsehood
that he, a Jew, was implicated in the president’s death in order to
create anti-Jewish hysteria- ’The Jewish people are being exter-
minated at this moment,” Ruby insisted “Consequently, a whole new
form of government is going to take over our country.” To foil this
supposed plot.

Ruby repeatedly asked to be given a lie detector test.

At various points in this conversation Ruby told Warren:
No subversive organization gave me any idea.

No underworld person
made any efTort to contact me.

It all happened that Sunday morning.

...

If you don’t take me back to Washington tonight to give me a chance
to prove to the President that I am not guilty, then you will see the moat
tragic thing that will ever happen....

All I want is a lie detector test.

...All I want is a lie detector test.

...

All I want to do is tell the truth, and that is all.

There was no
conspiracy.

The following month Ruby was allowed to take a polygraph test in
his jail cell, and he showed no signs of deception when he denied being
part of a conspiracy.

Because of the doubts about his sanity, however,
the test results were considered inconclusive.

The only part of this background that appears in Lane’s book is
Ruby’s statement, “All I want to do is tell the truth, and that is all.”
Had he presented the accompanying material, Lane might have ar-
gued that Ruby was faking.

Instead, Lane cheated.

He transformed
a man who seemed pathetically anxious to prove his innocence into
*n honest conspirator desperate to reveal everything he knew.

And
this was only one of many similar distortions in Rush to Judgment.

I remember feeling outraged when I realized what Lane had done.

I Evidently, the Warren records were like a vast lumberyard.

By pick-
ing up a few pieces here and there, and doing some cutting and fitting,
any theory could be built for which someone had a blueprint
Meanwhile my impression of Lee Harvey Oswald was changing.

I
was surprised by the sheer amount of material the Commission had
collected on his background.

Much of this information was new in the
sense that jt Jiad never been published anywhere except in the Hear-
ings.

There was testimony frefmdozens of witnesses who had known
-Oswald at each stage of his life from birth to death—they described
him and his activities and recounted numerous conversations they had
had with him.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Much of this information was new in the
sense that jt Jiad never been published anywhere except in the Hear-
ings. There was testimony frefmdozens of witnesses who had known
-Oswald at each stage of his life from birth to death—they described
him and his activities and recounted numerous conversations they had
had with him. And there was a good deal more: Oswald’s personal
papers and letters; detailed evaluations by social workers and a psy-
chiatrist who had interviewed him when he was a junior high school
truant; a diary and manuscript he had written that purported to show
his experiences in the Soviet Union; his school, Marine, and work
records—even lists of the books he checked out of libraries, the maga-
zines and newspapers he subscribed to, and the reading material found
among his effects. A transcript of the radio debate Ed Butler had written about was
included, and Oswald did indeed appear to be an able debater. The
moderator, a reporter named William Stuckey, testified that he
thought Oswald was impressive, almost like a young lawyer. And
Stuckey’s judgment was not unusual. Virtually everyone who knew
Lee Oswald thought he was intelligent, rational, and dedicated to his
brand of left-wing politics. The people who knew him best described
him as a revolutionary. (This was in 1964, when most Americans
thought revolutionaries existed only in banana republics or in Russia
before 1917.) On the other hand, people also felt that he was bitter,
secretive, and—the most frequent description of all—“arrogant.”
Testimony about his troubled personal life, beginning when he was a
child, was presented in great detail as well. And yet, if the impression Oswald gave his relatives and acquaint-
ances was clear, some of his political activities were not. He went to
the Soviet Union as a 19-year-old defector and lived there for almost »
Introduction... 19

--- PAGE BREAK ---« VH »\ 20.1.

Oswald’# Game
oMis^^UL.0ih^ y>ji
(kivi\b t IW’
vHv-vm w* Th^»
£.

Jpt£ ^
e House Assassinations Coi
iKteitK 4 j'u
ictloa...

21 f
.

.

W
Committee
three years.

The particulars of his life during that period are, and v,l^\ hearings and report of the House Assassinations Committee.

In .^V I
probably always will be, sketchy.

He had given political reasons for '979 'Bstudy describing the personality traits of career criminals %>
his defection, but were they the only reasons?

After he relumed to the /l9?6, additional insight into Oswald’s character.

The project, y, ,Ut
.

- ...

— —.

....

but \pveme ao cff and on.

for thirteen years.

_ _ ■ M> ‘
United States, he supported Castro both publicly and privately, ,
he also made contact with anti-Castro groups.

These clouded areas of i
activity raise questions about which side he was really on.

After the ^ .

hc livea in> expiaiiauuu* iu.

7*  A*7'
assassination, there had been heavy speculation that he may have 0 ***.

emerged.

Since 1 had not been pursuing any part'c oT
actually been working for the CIA or the FBI.

(Although I didn’t like ^ by looking foTSfiaence to support what I already believed.

1 J tk-
Mark Lane’s methods, I could see that he and the other more respon- ^„ftmsuronsed by what I found.

1 don't clajgito jviy
siblc critics did have a point.)
W But no one’s explanation encompassed all the available material.

t wL*a .a r.t tir n UoJ neuialrl’c nprcnnol
V 8#V^on a whim, lasted, cff and on, for thirteen years.

SUrwine that time, as I acquired more knowledge about Oswald and
D j 8he lived in, explanations for some of his mysterious activities
the times c.

t nni h^<-n nursuine any particular if
p But no one s explanation encompassea an me avtuiauic UIBICUU,
> The authors of the Warren Report had emphasized Oswald’s personal
life, while turning aside important questions about his political as-
• M a *% .

1 • .1  A.L.!

A fV* M in I ^ M rlein f /\k
SldllU 1119 luuuvauuiu Vliuv*.1 • .1  A.L.!

A fV* M in I ^ M rlein f /\k
SldllU 1119 luuuvauuiu Vliuv*.

* wyui o
^ chronological order, hoping to catch the drift of his thinking in the ■
way events unfolded.

Leaning first toward one theory, and then an- ^
\ vother, I soon discovered that it was possible to manipulate the evi- ^
\Vs
T
%
‘^moSe waTone suspected by Lyndon Johnson President
tf^nedv’?successor.

Shortly before he died.

Johnson told journalist
I^MiJanos that after he took office he discovered “we were operating
^amn^Murder Inc’ in the Caribbean." He said that a year or so
ILr^Kennedy's death a CIA-backed assassination team had been
S up in Havana.

Although he couldn’t prove it, Johnson believed
^Dallas bad been a retaliation for this thwarted attempt on Cas-
>££«£ On another occasion Johnson told columnist Marianne
„„ w„
  - - ^ 4 Means that he thought Oswald had acied “either under the influence
'stanSnis motivations either.

I began putting the details of his life into -r ordcrs*> of Cuban Premier Fidel Castro.

More recently, sever
    - — -'*-1- =- _former CBS reporter Daniel Schorr, among others-have
lechoed LBJ’s dreadful suspicion that Amencan ploU to kill Castro
hid somehow backfired in Dallas.

|b writing in the New York Review of Books in 1977- Schorr pointed
out that Oswald could have become aware of these plots, and astro s
taction to them, from an article that appeared in his local newspaper
<nme ten weeks before the assassination.

The article was based on an
impromptu interview American reporter Daniel Harker had hud wlth
So m September .963.

and Castro was quoted as saying Weare
nreoared to fight them and answer in kind.

United States leaders
t'uld think that if they are aiding terrorist plans to eliminate Cuban
Sere they themselves will not be safe." (This newspaper article
in the Warren Commission’s published exhibits.--- PAGE BREAK ---

and Castro was quoted as saying Weare
nreoared to fight them and answer in kind. United States leaders
t'uld think that if they are aiding terrorist plans to eliminate Cuban
Sere they themselves will not be safe." (This newspaper article
in the Warren Commission’s published exhibits. It wasnI
mentioned in the Warren Report, however.)
b it possible that Castro’s warning to Amencan leaders gave Os-
wald the idea that Kennedy should be killed? Daniel Schorr thought
« He revealed that just three weeks after the Harker interview was
oublished, Oswald reportedly made threatening statements about
Kennedy when he visited the Cuban Embassy in Mexico City to apply
for a visa to enter Cuba. Oswald was quoted as telling a consular
dence to support any position I took (whether it was, for example, that
Oswald worked for the FBI or that he did not work for the FBI.)
Unfortunately, whichever stand I chose, there was always evidence
left over that seemed to contradict it. The simple idea of coming up
with a theory and finding evidence to support it was obviously the
wrong way to go about finding out the truth. I gave up the research for a while and turned to other things. When
I went back to it I made a deliberate effort to cover as much ground
as I could without looking for patterns of evidence to convince me of
any particular theory. Eventually the research involved substantially
more than the Commission's twenty-six volumes. I read a biography
of Oswald written by his brother and many other books and articles
on the assassination. I went through contemporary newspapers and
magazines, concentrating especially on those Oswald subscribed to
and presumably read. I visited the National Archives to examine still
other Commission records. Later, I read Senator Frank Church s
senate committee reports on the CIA plots to murder Castro, and the

--- PAGE BREAK ---\MA W'v| Vn i>v )yvp//H rtA A w'
rt} \nV W,T^X Wv l) QjJ 0.*»,H'W>V ^Sii,YW-*| tvv'nfi-
,^it?.' i ..*...

22...

Oswald's Gam
.KVVWJN a ^ \
official that he wanted to “free Cuba from American imperialism."
Then he said, “Someone ought to shoot that President Kennedy.

Maybe I U try to do it” Schorr had uncovered two sources that
reported Oswald’s threat.

One was a top-secret letter FBI director J.

/W'w.iA —1 ^°°ver *'a<* sent t0 ,*le barren Commission in 1964, the other
'W*T LI.

A a jabloid, article in 1967 that quoted Fidel Castro.

Considering the timing of Oswald’s outburst, Schorr concluded
that it was likely Castro had influenced Oswald, as Lyndon Johnson
\r<Vy ;
[/''.

Jr' L J , ' .—r  <40 K/IIUUII juiuj^jr
1 A \\ ,<had "“P**** Schorr wrote, “The ’influence’ may have been as sim-
'\.V\ Wr p/c 88 rcadm8 Castro’s public denunciation of attempts on him and
V!

A “« warning of possible retaliation." Schorr believed that “the possi-
bility Oswald acted on his own, inspired by Castro’s statement, cannot
today be proved.” Even so, he ended by saying, “An arrow launched
into the air to kill a foreign leader may well have fallen back to kill
our own/’f
By the time Schorr’s article appeared, my research had already led
me to a similar conclusion.

This book will present evidence that
Castro’s public warning did, in fact, inspire Oswald to assassinate the
president.

Furthennore, the full context of Oswald’s life directed him
toward this reaction.

In the Anal analysis, the assassination was a
natural outgrowth of Oswald’s character and background—and of the
American-backed plots to kill Castro.

~l 71,6 teader will probably be skeptical, for there have already been
two official investigations and scores of books, each claiming to have
^uncovered the truth about Dallas.

He or she may well askl If what
you say is true, why Hasn t this solution been discovered before now?~l 71,6 teader will probably be skeptical, for there have already been
two official investigations and scores of books, each claiming to have
^uncovered the truth about Dallas.

He or she may well askl If what
you say is true, why Hasn t this solution been discovered before now?

In large part, American authorities have been understandably reluc-
tant to suggest that Cuba or any other foreign government was in-
volved—however indirectly—in the assassination of the president.

y»One of the authors of the Warren Report, attorney Wesley J.

Lie-
S* rjS .

er’ ,old writer David s- Liffon in 1965 that he “suspected Cuban
VTIJ Involvement.” Writing in Best Evidence.

Lifton said that Liebeler then
V \ dwe,t at great len«,h on 8 speech Castro had made in September 1963
^ and *^e possibility that this speech may have influenced Oswald.”
^ / (This "speech" was the newspaper article quoted above.) Lifton only
, mentioned this conversation in passing and said nothing further about
there was no hint of Liebeler’s suspicion in the Warren Report
V ^ records in the National /ychives.-Liebeler had argued
w
R;
; ■
 ;
-T   ■’ Ituu I
warning should be included in the report, but he was
V .—7 - - •—“• 7—*“'* u,wluutu »* icpon, out ne was
v>> s> overruled by the chief counsel of the investigation, J.

Lee Rankin, who
' C°ntCnded lhat lhcrc/w??

no evidence Oswald had seen it Liebeler
vf SV
_< <ry --i y
e* -f
V -> NT
^ djto AvyT Lt 3V
v-v-XW'W Vvb n*, G\\
rX> WwV.

kVj C
Introduction...

23
wrote a memo protesting this decision, noting that the same could be
said of certain anti-Kennedy propaganda distributed in Dallas, which
was discussed in the report.

Liebeler added, "Our discussion of the
possible inclusion of the Castro quote had obvious political over-
tones/’
Hoover’s top-secret letter was also withheld from the report.

After
the assassination a Communist party informant for the FBI had gone
to Cuba and met with Fidel Castro.Liebeler added, "Our discussion of the
possible inclusion of the Castro quote had obvious political over-
tones/’
Hoover’s top-secret letter was also withheld from the report.

After
the assassination a Communist party informant for the FBI had gone
to Cuba and met with Fidel Castro.

The informant said that Castro
had told him about a threat Oswald had made against the president
in Mexico City—Castro explained that the Cubans had considered
this a provocation and would have nothing to do with him.

Hoover
passed this information along in his letter to the Commission, but the
Inaiter was dropped.

Nowhere in the report is there any indication
that Oswald might have threatened Kennedy’s life in the presence of
a Cuban official.

On the contrary, the report states that the Commis-
sion had found no evidence “that Oswald’s trip to Mexico was in any
way connected with the assassination of President Kennedy.’* The
author of that section of the report, W.

David Slawson, apparently
never saw Hoover’s letter.

Uv\t/rr\tvfe ^
Thus, the Warren Report omitted two significant pieces of evi-
dence: (i) Castro’s warning that he was ready to “answer inTunci" to
American-backed assassination plots, which appeared in Oswald's
hometown paper on September 9; (2) a report that some three weeks
later Oswald told the Cubans he was ready to kill the president.

Had
ihe Warren investigation put together these and other clues available
to it* Oswald’s probable motive might have been explained back in
1964*
However, there was one piece of information the Commission
didn't have.

It didn’t know the CIA had been trying to murder Fidel
Castro.

If these plots had been common knowledge in November 1963,
as they are today, the announcement that the accused assassin was a
militant supporter of Castro would have suggested a retaliation from
the suit.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It didn’t know the CIA had been trying to murder Fidel
Castro. If these plots had been common knowledge in November 1963,
as they are today, the announcement that the accused assassin was a
militant supporter of Castro would have suggested a retaliation from
the suit. But the Warren Commission investigators didn't know
about about our “Murder Incorporated" in the Caribbean—the CIA
officials who had that knowledge didn’t tell them. With lhat path kept
in the dark, the Commission looked for Oswald's motivation down
several better-lighted dead ends. Having failed to provide a motive^the Warren Report soon fell prey
to the proponents of a conspiracy, who dismissed Oswald as a pawn
and looked for a motive in the minds of Mafia dons and CIA opera-
tives. It is one purpose ojf this book to show how some of the most
' ' i <kk,\yX
yu)
U'\n
l ( (
G/*
'■$%
y

--- PAGE BREAK ---

%i &\i\i ft* f3
\blv n* tMm»‘%r *
' l -d k- ’ irt 0* ktfMtC
'Jy ■
24...Oswald's Game
fe-
t* a
widely read conspiracy books have presented what amounts to an
imaginary history. The argument that Oswald was the tool of a high-
level conspiracy does seem plausible, until one tries to fit it into the
context these theorists always leave out—the personality and back-
ground of Lee Harvey Oswald, the individual.
6 Jean Davison
ft
m
OSWALD’S GAME

--- PAGE BREAK ---one tries to fit it into the
context these theorists always leave out—the personality and back-
ground of Lee Harvey Oswald, the individual.
6 Jean Davison
ft
m
OSWALD’S GAME

--- PAGE BREAK ---

'
1... A Most Unusual Defector
ON a crisp, clear day in October, 1959, advisers and allies of the
Kennedy family gathered for an important meeting at Robert
Kennedy’s house on Cape Cod Seated in front of a fireplace, they
listened as Senator John Kennedy talked about his decision to make
a run for the i960 Democratic presidential nomination. This election
would mark the end of the Eisenhower era, a period of deceptive
tranquillity compared to the raucous decade that lay ahead. The
country was at peace, although the Cold War continued, as both sides
tested intercontinental ballistic missiles and began putting unmanned
satellites into orbit. In Cuba, Fidel Castro’s revolution was less than
a year old. There was a small group of U.S. military advisers in South
Vietnam, but this would not be a campaign issue. Earlier that year the
milestone of first American casualties—two GIs killed by a Vietcong
bomb—made front-page news. However, the conflict there soon
dropped to the back pages. At home, the civil rights movement was
quietly gaining momentum. It was the year of “Father Knows Best”
and “Leave It to Beaver,” the TV quiz show scandals, and the kitchen
debate between Premier Nikita Khruschev and Vice-President Nixon.
During the same month the Kennedy forces assembled to map
strategy,, a young ex-Marine named Lee Harvey Oswald entered the
Soviet Union on a six-day visa. Soon after he reached Moscow he
informed his female Intourist guide that he wanted to become a Soviet
citizen. She helped him draft a letter to the Supreme Soviet and put
him in touch with the appropriate officials—who were not encourag-
ing. On October 21 he was informed that since his visa had expired,
he would have to leave the country that evening. Oswald went back
...27uch with the appropriate officials—who were not encourag-
ing. On October 21 he was informed that since his visa had expired,
he would have to leave the country that evening. Oswald went back
...27

--- PAGE BREAK ---28 ...

Oswald's GaiM
to his hotel room and cut his left wrist about an hour before his guide
was scheduled to arrive.

She found him in time, and he was taken to
a hospital where his minor wound was stitched up and he was held
for observation.

The ploy of a suicide attempt apparently turned the
Soviet bureaucracy around.

According to Oswald’s Russian diary, a
new group of officials interviewed him and told him that his request
to stay in the country was being reconsidered and that he would hear
from them, but “not soon.”
After waiting in his hotel room for three days, Oswald decided a
“showdown” was needed to give the Russians a sign of his faith in
them.

On October 31 he took a taxi to the American Embassy,
slammed his passport down on Consul Richard Snyder’s desk, and
announced that he wanted to give up his American citizenship.

Os-
wald gave Snyder a signed, handwritten note:
I, Lee Harvey Oswald, do hereby request that my present citizenship
in the United States of America be revoked.

I have entered the Soviet Union for the express purpose of applying
for citizenship in the Soviet Union, through the means of naturalization.

My request for citizenship is now pending before the Supreme Soviet of
the USSR.

I take these steps for political reasons.

My request for the revoking
of my American citizenship is made only aAer the longest and most
serious consideration.

I affirm that my allegiance is to the Union of Soviet Socialist Repub-
lics.'
The note showed that Oswald understood the legal procedure for
renouncing his citizenship.

Snyder observed at a glance that Oswald
was “wound up like six watch springs.” He later said, “You could tell
he’d been rehearsing this scene for a long time.”
When Oswald demanded that he be allowed to sign the necessary
papers then and there, the consul stalled.

The month before, another
American had formally renounced his citizenship and had been ac-
cepted by the Soviets.Snyder observed at a glance that Oswald
was “wound up like six watch springs.” He later said, “You could tell
he’d been rehearsing this scene for a long time.”
When Oswald demanded that he be allowed to sign the necessary
papers then and there, the consul stalled.

The month before, another
American had formally renounced his citizenship and had been ac-
cepted by the Soviets.

It turned out that the man had been discharged
from the armed forces with a 100% mental disability.

When the
mental problem became obvious, the Soviets had reacted as though
they had purchased damaged goods.

They contacted the embassy and
ordered the Americans to “get him out of here.” With that incident
in mind, Snyder, who had once worked for the CIA, tried to get more
information from Oswald.

He asked his reasons, and Oswald
launched into a condemnation of American military imperialism.

B
■
'•tTir-vmu 11 mili>anmmIIIIIi«tnwinnmmniiiiuimiiIJI n n mi IIHIIJILJIIIIU
A Moil Unusual Defector...

29
When Oswald declared, “I am a Marxist,” Snyder joked that he was
going to be a very lonesome man in the Soviet Union.

Evidently,
Oswald didn’t get it.

He replied that he had been warned the consul
would try to talk him out of his decision, and he didn’t want any
lectures.

Snyder quizzed him about his knowledge of Marxist theory.

He later remembered asking him “if he could tell me a little bit about
the theory of labor value.” Oswald didn’t have the faintest notion of
what he was talking about.

When he wrote to Washington about this
incident two days later, he said that Oswald had “displayed all the airs
of a new sophomore party-liner.” The overall impression Snyder got
was one of “overbearing arrogance and insufferable adolescence.” He
thought Oswald was intelligent and mentally competent—but unintel-
lectual, intense, and humorless.

Sometime during their conversation, Oswald dropped another hot
potato in his lap.When he wrote to Washington about this
incident two days later, he said that Oswald had “displayed all the airs
of a new sophomore party-liner.” The overall impression Snyder got
was one of “overbearing arrogance and insufferable adolescence.” He
thought Oswald was intelligent and mentally competent—but unintel-
lectual, intense, and humorless.

Sometime during their conversation, Oswald dropped another hot
potato in his lap.

While Oswald was in the Marines he had been a
radar operator at a U.S.

base in Japan from which America's secret
U-2 planes made reconnaissance flights over the Soviet Union.

He had
tracked the high-altitude U-2S on his radar screen.

When Snyder
asked him if he was actually prepared to serve the Soviet state, Oswald
told him about his duty as a radar operator and that he had informed.

Soviet officials he was ready to give them any military information he
could recall concerning his specialty.

He hinted he might know some-
thing of special interest.

Richard Snyder's assistant, John McVickar, was in the same room
listening to this.

The business about giving away secrets “raised hack-
les,” he later testified.

He thought Oswald made the threat in order
to shock Snyder into taking prompt action on his renunciation of
citizenship.

The tone of the meeting was so unpleasant that McVickar
and two other people who were in and out of the room during part
of it—a receptionist and an American exchange student—still remem-
bered it years later.

Finally Snyder told Oswald that the embassy staff would need some
time to prepare the necessary papers and that he would have to come
back.

Oswald stalked out, leaving his passport behind.

Snyder im-
mediately drafted a wire to the Department of State reporting Os-
wald’s visit, including his threat to reveal military information.

Copies
of the telex were sent to the CIA, FBI, and the Office of Naval
Intelligence.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Snyder im-
mediately drafted a wire to the Department of State reporting Os-
wald’s visit, including his threat to reveal military information. Copies
of the telex were sent to the CIA, FBI, and the Office of Naval
Intelligence. Someone at the embassy alerted the press, and the next day the N*w
York Times ran a small story at the top of page 3:

--- PAGE BREAK ---30 ...

Oswald’s Game
EX-MARINE REQUESTS
SOVIET CITIZENSHIP
MOSCOW, Oct.

31 (AP)—A former marine from Texas told the United
States Embassy today that he had applied for Soviet citizenship.

"I have made up my mind, I‘m through,** said Lee Harvey Oswald,
20 years old of Fort Worth, slapping his passport on the desk.

The embassy suggested that he withhold signing papers renouncing
his citizenship until he was sure the Soviet Union would accept him.

Mr.

Oswald is the third American in recent months to apply for Soviet
citizenship upon arriving in Moscow.

.

.

.

Mr.

Oswald's mother, Mrs.

Marguerite Oswald, lives in Fort Worth.

His sister-in-law, Mrs.

R.

L.

Oswald of Fort Worth, said he got out of
the Marines about a month ago and returned to Fort Worth for a visit.

After the news broke, Oswald was besieged by reporters at his hotel
room.

He refused all interviews, as well as telephone calls from his
mother and brothers back home.

His brother Robert found out when
a reporter from the Fort Worth Star-Telegram confronted him at
work with a telex from Moscow.

He told the reporter, “Lee is awfully
young, looking for excitement.

I don’t believe he knows what he is
doing.” As soon as Robert got home he telegraphed his brother:
'*Through any possible means contact me.

Mistake.

”
On November 3 Oswald wrote to the American ambassador, going
over Snyder’s head as it were, to repeat his request for a revocation
of his citizenship and to protest Snyder's refusal to grant his “legal
right” to sign the papers.

The letter concluded by saying that in the
event his application for Soviet citizenship was accepted, “I will re-
quest my government to lodge a formal protest regarding this inci-
dent.”
Five days later, he wrote Robert:
Well, what shall we talk about, the weather perhaps?

Certainly you
do not wish me to speak of my decision to remain in the Soviet Union
and apply for citizenship here, since I'm afraid you would not be able
to comprehend my reasons.The letter concluded by saying that in the
event his application for Soviet citizenship was accepted, “I will re-
quest my government to lodge a formal protest regarding this inci-
dent.”
Five days later, he wrote Robert:
Well, what shall we talk about, the weather perhaps?

Certainly you
do not wish me to speak of my decision to remain in the Soviet Union
and apply for citizenship here, since I'm afraid you would not be able
to comprehend my reasons.

You really don’t know anything about me.

Do you know for instance that 1 have waited to do this for well over a
year, do you know that I [phrase in Russian] speak a fair amount of
Russian which I have been studying for many months.

I have been told that I will not hare to leave the Soviet Union if I do
I not care to.

This then is my decision.

I will not leave this country, the
1 Soviet Union, under any conditions, 1 will never return to the United
States which is a country I hate.

A Mo*t Unusual Defector ...31
Reading these cold words, one wonders what there was in Oswald’s
„«i that led him to reject not only his country but his brother as well.

nThers—especially people who have followed the controversy about
ihe Kennedy assassination—may suspect that Oswald was insincere
ask: Who sent him?

What was the real purpose behind his coming
to the Soviet Union?

Certainly there was more to Oswald’s defection
than appeared on the surface.

Two weeks after his confrontation with Snyder, Oswald changed
hi.

mind about talking to the American press corps.

He gave two
interviews in which he elaborated on his reasons for defecting.

On
November 13 he called Aline Mosby.

a UPI correspondent, who came
to his room on the second floor of the Metropole Hotel.--- PAGE BREAK ---

On
November 13 he called Aline Mosby. a UPI correspondent, who came
to his room on the second floor of the Metropole Hotel. It was a large
mom overlooking the Bolshoi Theater, with ornate furniture and blue
walls and she thought he looked totally out of place there, like some
Okie from the boondocks.” Mosby asked questions and took notes in
Shorthand, and Oswald talked “non-stop" for two hours. He seemed
, little stiff at first, but the longer he talked, the more confident, even
TJL Mosby was a veteran reporter, originally from Montana. (It
was she who Tevealed, in 1951. that Marilyn Monroe had once posed
, ., nu(je calendar photo.) She had questioned other American defec-
tors during her assignment in Moscow, but as the interview pro-
messed she could see that Oswald was an anomaly. The others as she
Serceivcd them, fell into one of two categories—either a “high-level
official who had played an impprtant role in his country and decided
m transfer his knowledge to the Soviet side” or someone "ot the
romantic variety who flees behind the Iron Curtain in the hopes ol
^aoing personal problems.” Oswald claimed that his reasons were
ideological. When Mosby heard him using phrases like "capitalist
uckevs ” she thought it sounded "as if it were all being given by rote,
M if he had memorized Pravda." She got very few glimpses of the
nerson behind the political talk. Mosby asked him how he had become a Marxist, and he told her,
-1 became interested about the age of 15. From an ideological view-
in, An old lady handed me a pamphlet about saving the Rosen-
j*\_ I looked at that paper and I still remember it for some
-Jo!,, I don’t know why.’” He was living with his mother in New
York City at the time. The Rosenberg pamphlet introduced him to
socialist literature. He began observing the "class struggle” in New
York “the luxury of Park Avenue and the workers’ lives on the
[Lower] East Side.” Nobody had influenced him, he said and insistedsocialist literature. He began observing the "class struggle” in New
York “the luxury of Park Avenue and the workers’ lives on the
[Lower] East Side.” Nobody had influenced him, he said and insisted

--- PAGE BREAK ---32...

Oswald’s Game
only through his reading and personal observation CUK
ociety that he had become a Marxist.

“I guess you couldfl
that it was
American society
say I was influenced by what I read, and by observing that the materulfl,
was correct in its theses.” * fit
Serving in the Marines had strengthened his beliefs, particularly h*||
view of American imperialism: “Like Formosa.

The conduct of|I
American technicians there, helping drag up guns for the Chinese.^
Watching American technicians show the Chinese how to use them
—it's one thing to talk about communism and another thing to drag)
a gun up a mountainside.” On guard duty at night, he said, he wouldp
dream about getting out of the Marines and going to Russia—it would j|
be, he thought, “like being out of prison.”
About his decision to leave America he said, “I would not care to£j
live in the United States where being a worker means you are
ploited by the capitalists.

If I would remain in the United Slates/^
feeling as I do, under the capitalist system, I could never get ahead.

,.

.

I would have a choice of becoming a worker under the system Ip
hate, or becoming unemployed.

..

.

One way or another I’d lose
the United States.

In my own mind, even if I’d be exploiting others
workers.” Evidently, it was fairly important to him to get ahead andg
not lose.

He presented himself as a struggling idealist: “I'm sincere in ray f-
ideal.

This is not something intangible.

I’m going through pain and||
difficulty to do this.” But even an idealist can be aggressive, and he *
seemed to believe he had chosen the winning side.

At one point he
said.

“Communism is an aggressive ideal as well as an economic
system....

The forces of communism are growing.

I believe capital,
ism will disappear as feudalism disappeared/' He also talked about
armchair socialists.

“You don't just sit around and talk about it,” he
said.I believe capital,
ism will disappear as feudalism disappeared/' He also talked about
armchair socialists.

“You don't just sit around and talk about it,” he
said.

“You go out and do it.” £
The next day Aline Mosby’s UPI story was picked up by a Fort f
Worth newspaper and run under the headline "Fort Worth Defector;/
Confirms Red Beliefs.” After reading her account in another paper ;£
available in Moscow, Oswald telephoned Mosby to complain about
what he considered to be distortions, saying that his family had not if
been poverty-stricken, as she had said.

True, he told her how he had /
seen the “impoverishment of the masses” in his own mother, but he^‘
felt that Mosby had put her emphasis in the wrong place.

He reite- ^
rated that his defection wasn’t prompted by personal hardship, bui||
was “a matter only of ideology.” g
A Moat Unusual Defector ...

33
nn November 16.1959.

Priscilla Johnson stopped by the American
cibaSy to pick up her mail.

She had just returned from the United
SteTwhere she was covering the Camp David summit meeting
^ule5.

President Eisenhower and Premier Khruschev.

Her first job,
.« Washington as > richer for ,k« «riy
°^L senator from Massachusetts, John F.

Kennedy.

In the winter
ms she had gotten to know him well.

She had left Washing-
9,
5nd was working in New York as a Russian-language translator
“he was hospitalized there for two operations on his spine.

She
2Sd him occasionally during his recovery, posing as one of h,s
‘ ln ,058 she went to Moscow as a correspondent for the North
Ht,en' " MewsDaocr Alliance and The Progressive magazine.

(In
^‘Ts PniiHa^ohnson McMillan, she would publish a book with
widow called Marina and Lee.) .

°*Al the embassy that day she had run into John McVickar, who told
•*nh bv the way, there’s a young American in your hotel trying
°h- HV won’t alk to any of us.

but maybe he’ll talk to you
^Lu> e a woman.’’ When she knocked on the door of Oswald-,
ZZXwtbM day.--- PAGE BREAK ---

°*Al the embassy that day she had run into John McVickar, who told
•*nh bv the way, there’s a young American in your hotel trying
°h- HV won’t alk to any of us. but maybe he’ll talk to you
^Lu> e a woman.’’ When she knocked on the door of Oswald-,
ZZXwtbM day. he came out into the hall to speak with her
£Ltd of inviting her in, but readily agreed to come up to her room
““ the floor above for an interview that evening. ^Oswald arrived dressed in a dark flannel suit. With his pale, rather
iMsant features," he resembled “any of a dozen college boys 1 had
tnnwnback home." They talked for about five hours, from nine until
inbtbe morning. Like Aline Mosby, she had also seen other
defectors, and she too found Oswald hard to figure. Oswald had just
turned zo, and she had never known anyone “of that age ..., or that
Oration, taking an ideological interest to the point where he would
He reminded her of the leftists who had emigrated to Russia
for political reasons in the 1930s. The reasons Oswald gave-unem-
ployrnent in the United States, racial inequalities—sounded tune-
**^le IK2an by complaining about the runaround he had gotten at the
.mbassv insisting that the American officials were "acting in an
i^eal way." He told her he had decided to grant the interview be-
-,iL now that Soviet officials had assured him he would not be
S3 toTetum to the United States, he felt "it was safe to tell his
l°L of the story." He wanted to counter the American Embassy s
S‘ tements about his defection because, he said, "1 would like to give
Monle in the United States something to think about."
After that, he seemed mainly interested in discussing economic

--- PAGE BREAK ---34...Oswald’s Gams
A Most Unusual Defector ...

35
theory.

Like Richard Snyder, Priscilla Johnson got the impression
that Oswald didn’t fully understand Marxist economics.

When she
pointed out that the Soviets made a large profit from their workers
in order to accumulate capital for the state, Oswald agreed.

What was
important, he said, was that the profit was used to benefit all the
people, emphasizing this concept with a sweep of his arm.

Asked
about the difference in the living standards of the two countries, he
replied, ‘They don’t have as many hot water heaters and meat pies
here but they will in 20 years, through an economic system that is
leaving the United States far behind.” At another point he told her,
”1 believe sooner or later communism will replace capitalism.

Capital-
ism is a defensive ideology, whereas communism is aggressive.” A
recent meeting of the Supreme Soviet had taken no action on Oswald’s
request for citizenship, and Johnson thought he seemed disappointed
and worried by that.

But he told her he hoped that his experience as
a radar operator would make him more desirable to them.

Oswald’s account of how he became a Marxist was virtually the
same as the one he had given Mosby.

He reiterated his belief, from
his observations in New York, that the workers were exploited and
explained once more how he had discovered socialist literature and
saw that the description it gave of capitalist society “was quite cor-
rect.” He told her, “i had been brought up like any Southern boy to
hate Negroes.

Socialist literature opened my eyes to the economic
reasons for hating Negroes: so the wages could be kept low.”
Listening to him.

Johnson felt “it was as though Oswald wanted to
convince us both that he had never had a childhood, that he had been
all his life a machine, calibrating social justice.”
He repeatedly said that his decision to defect was "unemotional.Socialist literature opened my eyes to the economic
reasons for hating Negroes: so the wages could be kept low.”
Listening to him.

Johnson felt “it was as though Oswald wanted to
convince us both that he had never had a childhood, that he had been
all his life a machine, calibrating social justice.”
He repeatedly said that his decision to defect was "unemotional.

But she noticed that his voice seemed to tighten when he talked about
his mother, whom he described as a victim of the capitalist system.

In contrast, his voice sounded cold and considerably more distant
when he answered a question about his father's line of work: I believe
he was an insurance salesman.” (In fact, his father had died before
Oswald was bom.) Oswald told her he had joined the Marines “be-
cause we were poor and I didn’t want to be a burden on my family.”
By his account, he’d been making plans to defect for two years, finding
out how to go about it mostly by reading.

”1 have had practical
experience in the world.” he said.

"I am not an idealist completely.

1 have had a chance to watch American imperialism in action.

Shortly after the assassination, Priscilla Johnson would write, “If
there was one thing that stood out in all our conversation, it was his
truly compelling need...

to think of himself as extraordinary " When
she asked him if he recommended defection to others, he said he did
not.

The course he had chosen was not for everyone.

Defection meant
••coming into a new country, always being the outsider, always adjust-
ing, but I know now that I will never have to return to the United
States.

I believe what I am doing is right."
And later, in Marina and Lee.

she wrote, "Our evening was like
a seesaw, with me trying to get Lee to talk about himself and Lee
Ling to talk about his ‘ideology.11 would say that Lee won.I believe what I am doing is right."
And later, in Marina and Lee.

she wrote, "Our evening was like
a seesaw, with me trying to get Lee to talk about himself and Lee
Ling to talk about his ‘ideology.11 would say that Lee won.

Before
he left, he told her he had never talked about himself so long to anyone
before, and she felt a twinge of pity, "for if this was his »<Jca of
openness, then I thought he must never have talked about himself to
^Tendays after his interview with Priscilla Johnson, Oswald wrote
a second, remarkable letter to Robert, who had responded to his first
one by telling Lee he hadn’t renounced him.

Robert was soil puzzled
•bout why his brother wanted to live in the Soviet Union.

Oswald s
lengthy reply began like a political tract and ended with a threat
the tone was much more hostile than the one he had used with the
W^g2*byExplaining "Why I and ray fellow workers and com-
munists would like to see the capitalist government of the U.S.

over-
thrown." He instructed Robert that the American government sup-
oorts an economic system which exploits all the workers, a system
bised upon credit which gives rise to the never-ending cycle of depres-
sion, inflation, unlimited speculation (which is the phase America is
in now) and war Look around you, and look at yourself.

See the
segregation, see the unemployment and what automation is.

Remem-
ber how you were laid off at Convair?”
He continued:
Ask me and I will teU you 1 fight for communism.

.

.

.1 will not say
vour grandchildren will live under communism, look for yourself at
history, look ai a world map!

America is a dying country.

1 do not wish
to be a part of it, nor do I ever again wish to be used as a tool in its
military aggressions.

This should answer your question, and also give you a glimpse of my
way of thinking.

......

.

-
So you speak of advantages.

Do you think that is why I am here?

For
nersonal.

material advamages?--- PAGE BREAK ---

For
nersonal. material advamages? Happiness is not based on oneself, it does
not consist of a small home, of taking and getting. Happiness is taking

--- PAGE BREAK ------ PAGE BREAK ---

For
nersonal. material advamages? Happiness is not based on oneself, it does
not consist of a small home, of taking and getting. Happiness is taking

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A
36 ... Oswald’s Game
part in the struggle, where there is no borderline between one’s own
personal world, and the world in general. . . .
I have been a pro-communist for years and yet I have never met a
communist, instead I kept silent and observed, and what I observed plus
my Marxist learning brought me here to the Soviet Union.
Jid [|hatj[ wha/l s£y now, I do not say lightly,
He advised his brother of the following.
or unknowingly.
1. In the event of war l would kill any American who put a uniform
on in defense of the American government—any American.
2. That in my own mind 1 have no attachments of any kind in the
U.S.
3. That I want to, and I shall, live a normal happy and peaceful life
here in the Soviet Union for the rest of my life.
4. That my mother and you are (in spite of what the newspaper said)
not objects of affection, but only examples of workers in the U.S.
On December 17 Robert received a third letter in which Oswald said
he wouldn’t write again and didn’t want Robert to continue writing
to him. The letter concluded: ‘i am starting a new life and 1 do not
wish to have anything to do with the old life. I hope you and your
family will always be in good health." It would be hard to imagine
a more extreme rejection of his past.
On January 4, 1960, Oswald was informed that his request for
Soviet citizenship had been denied. He was issued an "identity docu-
ment for stateless persons" and sent to Minsk to start work in a radio
factory. If Oswald’s statements are to be believed, he never intended
to see the United States or his family again.
Although the reasons Oswald gave for his defection were political, |
his letters to Robert—as well as the undercurrent of his interviews |
with Aline Mosby and Priscilla Johnson—suggest that there waa|
something highly personal behind his ideology. One of the most curi- f
ous things about Oswald’s sketchy account of his past was his stale- g
ment concerning the Save the Rosenbergs pamphlet. During the early £
1950s American soldiers were fighting a bloody stalemate in Korea
and anti-Communists like Senator Joseph McCarthy were riding g
high. This was the political atmosphere of Oswald’s childhood. When g
the Rosenbergs were executed in 1953. Lee Oswald was not about 151
years old. as he had said, but 13. He had been bom into an apolitical |
family in the conservative South. How could a pamphlet about saving |
A Most Unusual Defector ... 37
the Rosenbergs have gotten this 13-year-old interested in Marxism
“from an ideological viewpoint"?mily in the conservative South. How could a pamphlet about saving |
A Most Unusual Defector ... 37
the Rosenbergs have gotten this 13-year-old interested in Marxism
“from an ideological viewpoint"?

--- PAGE BREAK ---2...

Marguerite’s Son
E ARLY one hot August morning in 1939.

Robert Edward Lee Os-:
was mowing his lawn in New Orleans when he felltitsharp pam
in one of his arms.

His wife Marguerite gave him an asprnn and called
a doctor, but he was dead of a heart attack before the doctor codd .

get there.

Marguerite arranged to have him buried the same afternoon
—shewas seven months pregnant and wanted to avoid any undue
strain.

Some of her in-laws were appalled by her "coldness’ and never
SP°£ HX88£W.W was born on October .8, two months later.;
Marguerite was 32 years old.

Oswald never spoke much about his childhood.

Wbat he did say
bore more than a trace of resentment an^lf-pity.

Inw
graphical sketch he wrote in 1962 he described himself simply as the
LnPof an Insurance Salesman whose early death left a fair mean streak
of independence brought on by neglect.” As in mflnVslat="fl“^
people make about themselves to explain who they are, *hl*
Jeflect more than he realized.

What Richard Snyder and others saw
as his insufferable arrogance, Oswald evidently regarded “ a "lean
’ streak of independence a more admirable quality, a proud deliberate
separation from other people.

And ultimately he felt he was what he
WM because his father died.

If his mother him, this was secondary.;
she too was a victim of circumstance.

And this was precisely the way
MThernost significant and revealing thing about Oswald's chddhood
is not what happened to him but how much his personality resembled
38...

I
Marguerite's Sou...

39
his mother’s.

Robert Oswald saw some of Marguerite’s worst traits
repeated in Lee.

Their mother had, as Robert once put it, an extraor-
dinary idea of her ability and her importance.

If she didn t get
everything she thought she deserved, it was because circumstances or
individuals were against her.

Throughout his youth Robert had heard
her talk about the hidden motives and malicious actions of other
people.If she didn t get
everything she thought she deserved, it was because circumstances or
individuals were against her.

Throughout his youth Robert had heard
her talk about the hidden motives and malicious actions of other
people.

She was the type, her older sister Lillian Murret testified, who
Snany disagreement would always insist she was nght.

Whenever they
Quarreled, Lillian wouldn’t hear from her again until Marguerite
needed “assistance or a place to stay." Lillian explained, You see,
am forgiving, but she is not." People would say much the same things
about Lee Oswald.

...

,.

Marguerite herself had once observed that Robert was like his
easygoing father: “He is not opinionated like I armMy older son and
Lee are my disposition." And to writer Jean Stafford she admitted.

"I should say I’m very outspoken, I’m aggressive.

I’m no dope.

Let s
face it, if you step on my toes I’m gonna fight back, and I don-t
apologize for that." This was, she added, the way she wanted her boys
W When Lee was bom.

Marguerite already had two sons—John Pic,
from her first marriage, who was 8 and Robert who was 5.

Her late
husband, a collector of insurance premiums, had left her a sio.ooo
policy and she began thinking about how she was going to get by once
taa, was gone.

In early 1941 she sold her house and bought a smaller
nne where she opened Oswald’s Notions Shop in the front room,
selling sewing supplies and grocery items.

This venture failed, and the
following year she placed John and Robert in the Bethlehem Chil-
dren’s Home so that she could find work.

Lee was too young to be
"med, so she boarded him with Lillian, who was married and had
Z ^ids of her own.

Lillian liked her nephew, but he was unusual in
one respect.

Sometimes he would sneak out of her house at night in
his*pajamas, to be found later in a neighbor’s kitchen “He could slip
om of the house like nobody’s business," she said.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Lillian liked her nephew, but he was unusual in
one respect. Sometimes he would sneak out of her house at night in
his*pajamas, to be found later in a neighbor’s kitchen “He could slip
om of the house like nobody’s business," she said. You could have
everything locked up and he would still get out."
After one of her many quarrels with Lillian, Marguerite took Lee
nut of the Murret home and found a babysitter for him. She told the
Warren Commission at one of its hearings, "War had broken out and
.he Negroes in New Orleans were going into factories and so on and
forth so there is many a job I had to leave in order to stay home
and mind Lee until I could get help So, then at age 3 Lee was
placed in the home. I waited patiently for age 3 because I wanted

--- PAGE BREAK ---T
< >
40...

0»w»ld'» Ctm«
naturally for the brothers to be together.

thirtp^n
Oswald was at the children's home with his brothers for thirteen
months.

The Lutheran orphanage had a relaxed atm^phereandits
own school, and the two older boys would remember their stay there
as a relatively happy time.

Robert, who thought of Lee as his kid
brother” and "stayed pretty close to him," said Lee seemed happy
there, too.

Marguerite visited often and brought them home on week-
ends One day she came by to introduce her sons to an older man she
had been dating-Edwin A.

Ekdahl from Boston, wto w worlong
in New Orleans as an electrical engineer.

John Pic reca led, He as
described to us as Yankee, of course.

Rather tall, I thmk he was over
6 feet.

He had white hair, wore glasses, very nice man.

Not long after this, Marguerite took Lee out of the home and
moved to Dallas, where Ekdahl had been transferred, leaving his
brothers to finish theschool year.

After she and Ekdahl were marned
in May .945, he tried to be a father to the boys, and Lee in ^cular
became quite attached to him.

That September John and Robert went
ofT for the first of three school years at a military academy mMissis-
sippi.

Lee stayed behind, and frequently accompanied Marguerite and
Ekdahl on his business trips to places like Boston and \nzona- •
dahl was making siooo a month, and they had moved to a comfortable
house on a large plot of land in Benbrook.

a Fort Worth suburb^But
the Ekdahl marriage was shaky from the start.

Marguerite com-
plained that her husband was stingy and expected her to account for
every penny.

There were noisy arguments and several «jP»nU»fc
Every time they got back together, Lee seemed elated.

Then in the
summer of 1947 Marguerite found out that her husband was seeing
another woman.

Her reaction was pure Marguerite.

, .

.

Ekdahl had sent her a telegram saying he'd be late getting back
from abusiness trip.

Marguerite told the Warren Commission.

So.Marguerite told the Warren Commission.

So.

I
called his office.

I..

• knew his secretary, and I was going to tell her
that Mr.

Ekdahl would be delayed 3 or 4 days.

But immrfiately^e
said ‘Mis.

Ekdahl, Mr.

Ekdahl is not in, he has gone out to lunch.

So I said .

..

‘When will he be back’ and so on."
Not having let on to the secretary, Marguerite drove her car that
evening to the building where her husband worked, watched him
come om.

and followed him to an apartment building_ She went home
and told her son John and a friend of his what had happenedThen
she called John McClain, an attorney who lived next door, told him
what she had seen, and asked his advice.

Marguerite reported.

, Marguerite’s Son ...

41
“He said, ‘Mrs.

Oswald, just ring the phone.

Do you know the
woman?*
“And I said, ‘Yes.*
“ ‘Just ring the phone and let him know that you know he is there.

• M
She thought about it, but decided against it because “he could leave
and say he was just there on business and I wanted to catch him.

>•
“So the kids and I planned that we would say she had a telegram
...

we went up the stairs, I believe it was the second or third floor,
and [John’s friend] knocked on the door and said, ‘Telegram for Mrs.

“She said, ‘Please push it under the door* and 1 told him no; he said,
‘No, you have to sign for it.*
“So with that she opened the door ...

[and] I, my son, and ...

the
other young man walked into the room .

.

.

Mrs.

C had on a
negligee, and my husband had his sleeves rolled up and his tie off
sitting on a sofa ...

he said, ‘Marguerite, Marguerite, you have
everything wrong, you have everything wrong.'
“He says, ‘Listen to me.'
“I said, ‘I don’t want to hear one thing.

I have seen everything I
want to see, this is it.”
It might have been a scene from a bedroom farce, but Marguerite’s
devious and vindictive personality was behind it, manipulating her
oldest son and another teenager into taking part in the subterfuge.--- PAGE BREAK ---

he said, ‘Marguerite, Marguerite, you have
everything wrong, you have everything wrong.'
“He says, ‘Listen to me.'
“I said, ‘I don’t want to hear one thing. I have seen everything I
want to see, this is it.”
It might have been a scene from a bedroom farce, but Marguerite’s
devious and vindictive personality was behind it, manipulating her
oldest son and another teenager into taking part in the subterfuge. According to Robert, “Lee’s imagination and love of intrigue was a
lot like Mother’s. She always had a wild imagination and 1 think it
influenced Lee’s view of the world.”
In 1948 Ekdahl filed suit for divorce and, Marguerite said, “I
thought I was sitting pretty. He didn't have anything on me. I had
him for adultery with witnesses and everything and I didn’t have an
idea that he could sue me for a divorce, but [he] did. . . .” John Pic
had to testify for Marguerite and, as he remembers it, Lee was called
to the stand but excused by the judge as being too young—he was
eight—to know “right from wrong and truth from falsehood.” In his
complaint, Ekdahl charged that his wife argued incessantly about
money, flew into “uncontrollable rages,” and threw cookie jars,
glasses, and bottles at him. The jury found Marguerite guilty of these
“outrages” and granted the divorce, awarding her a mere S1500 settle-
ment. Although Marguerite attributed their breakup to disagreements

--- PAGE BREAK ---42...

Oswald’s Gime
over money, a friend of hers, Myrtle Evans, thought her attachment
to Lee had something to do with it.

She thought Marguerite "spoiled
him to death." According to Evans, Marguerite wouldn't discipline
Lee or let Ekdahl do it, and Lee demanded so much of her attention
that she and Ekdahl never had a chance to be alone.

But this mother-
son relationship was oddly detached.

Lee would go his own way, as
she did, and she would observe from a distance.

After telling Jean
Stafford she had taught her sons to fight back, Marguerite said.

Let me give you one little instance with Lee and the next-door neighbor
boy.

They were approximately the same age, and if not, they were the
same height, and Lee had a dog.

He loved his shepherd collie dog.

It
was named Sunshine.

He used to romp in the back yard with his dog
and took him every place he went, and this little boy was throwing rocks
over the fence at Lee's dog.

Well, my kitchen window had a view to the
back yard.

And I watched my son Lee for approximately three days
telling the little boy over the fence he better stop throwing rocks at his
dog.

Well, I was amused, and I was just waiting to find out what
happened.

Finally, one day when 1 came home from work the father
called me on the phone.

It seemed his son was very badly beaten up—
in a child's way.

My son Lee had finally taken upon himself, after much
patience, I thought, to confront the little boy enough to fight him, and
the father didn’t approve.

I told the father what happened, and since the
boys were approximately the same age and height, let them fight their
own battles.

While she was at work.

Marguerite encouraged Lee to come
straight home after school instead of playing with other children.

Marguerite insisted he had always been solitary by nature, as she was,
and preferred to play alone.

"I am not lonely," she said.Marguerite insisted he had always been solitary by nature, as she was,
and preferred to play alone.

"I am not lonely," she said.

"But I live
to myself." The picture she gives of Oswald at this age—and of her
attitude toward him—is vivid and worth closer inspection:
Lee had a normal life as far as I, his mother, is concerned.

He had
a bicycle, he hod everything that other children had.

Lee had wisdom without education.

From a very small child—I have
said this before, sir.

and I have publicly stated this in 1959 [when she was
interviewed after his defection]—Lee seemed to know the answers to
things without schooling.

That type child, in a way, is bored with
schooling, because he is a little advanced.

Lee used to climb on top of the roof with binoculars, looking at the
stars.

He was reading [astronomy].

Lee knew about any and every
animal there was.

He studied animals.

All of their feeding habits, sleep-
r
!

I
Marguerite's So0 ...

43
ing habits.

.

..

And Lee read history books, books too deep for a child
his age.

At age 9—he was always instructed not to contact me at work
unless it was an emergency, because my work came first—he called me
at work and said, "Mother, Queen Elizabeth’s baby has been bom."
He broke the rule to let me know that Queen Elizabeth’s baby had
been bom.

Nine years old.

That was important to him.

He liked things
of that sort.

He loved comics, read comic books.

He loved television programs.

But most of all he loved the news on radio and television.

If he was in
the midst of a story, a film—he would turn it otT for news.

That was
important.

.

..

Lee read very, very important things.

.

.

.

Yet he played Monopoly, played baseball.

He belonged to the Y.

He used to go swimming.

He would come by
work with his head wet, and I would say, "Hurry home, honey, you are
going to catch cold."
And I considered that, sir, a very normal life.

While the divorce was pending.

Marguerite moved to a small house
next to the railroad tracks.--- PAGE BREAK ---

While the divorce was pending. Marguerite moved to a small house
next to the railroad tracks. For John, it meant they "were back down
in the lower class again." Soon they relocated, first to a one-bedroom
house where John and Robert slept in a screened-in porch while their
mother and Lee shared the bedroom, and then to another house in
Fort Worth, so that Marguerite could be nearer her job at a depart-
ment store. Later she began selling insurance. Marguerite had taken the older boys out of the military academy. They could have stayed on with the aid of scholarships, and wanted
to, but their mother reminded them that they were orphans and she
could no longer afford it. Robert later wrote, "We learned, very early,
that we were a burden. By the time we were teenagers, she felt that
we should take over some of her burden." John was 16 when she told
him to quit school and get a job. Eventually, she talked him into
joining the Marine Corps Reserve to bring in a little more income. He
was still under age. but she signed an affidavit giving him an earlier
date of birth. As John saw it, "Money was her God," and "Every time
she met anyone she would remind them she was a widow with three
children. I didn't fed she had it any tougher than a lot of people
walking around."
According to Robert, John Pic was "so resentful of Mother that he
simply ignored her as much as he could." He went back to high school
on his own, signing his report cards himself and working at a shoe
store part-time. Three days before he was to graduate in 1950, he
enlisted in the Coast Guard. During the following year Marguerite

--- PAGE BREAK ---44...

Oswald's Game
wrote him several letters containing a repetitive theme: "Try and help [
as much as possible.

After all, my struggle to keep what we have will |
also help you boys,” and "I have four more payments on the car and
then that struggle will be over.”
With John gone, it was Robert’s turn to quit school and go to work.

He, too, went back to school and completed his junior year, working
after school and Saturdays at the A&P.

In July 1952 he joined the ^
Marines.

Soon after he left, Lee bought a copy of the Marine Corps j
handbook and began studying it.

He was only 12, but he planned to
join the service too, as soon as he was old enough.

The month after Robert left home, Marguerite and Lee Oswald L
loaded their belongings into her 1948 Dodge and moved to New York ;
City.

John was stationed on Ellis Island and was living with his wife,
a woman from New York, and their infant son in her mother’s apart-
ment on East 92nd Street.

Marguerite said she wanted to meet her
new daughter-in-law and first grandchild.

John recalled that the day
they arrived, Lee was waiting for him at the subway exit about ten
blocks from the apartment and seemed glad to see him.

He took a few
days’ leave to show him around the city, and during that time he
noticed a change in his younger brother: Lee had definitely become
“the boss.” If he decided to do something, he did it.

Pic thought he
had no respect for his mother at all.

As time went by, tension developed at the Pics’ apartment when
Marguerite made no move to help pay the grocery bills or find a place
of her own.

When Pic’s wife was interviewed by the FBI after the
assassination, she still remembered how Lee kept damaging their
bookcase by putting beverage glasses down on it.

She also remem-
bered that one day she asked Lee not to turn on a TV set Marguerite
had brought with them and Lee pulled out ”a small pockctknife with
a blade opened.” He moved toward her, she said, and she backed off.When Pic’s wife was interviewed by the FBI after the
assassination, she still remembered how Lee kept damaging their
bookcase by putting beverage glasses down on it.

She also remem-
bered that one day she asked Lee not to turn on a TV set Marguerite
had brought with them and Lee pulled out ”a small pockctknife with
a blade opened.” He moved toward her, she said, and she backed off.

When Pic got home that night, she told him about it.

Marguerite |
claimed it wasn't anything serious, simply a misunderstanding.

John [
asked Lee what had happened and immediately "he became real \
hostile toward me.” After that, whenever John tried to talk to him "he |
ignored me, and I was never able to get to the kid again.” Warren g
Commission lawyer Lee J.

Rankin questioned Marguerite about the f
incident: 6
"Was there any time that you recall ...

a threat of Lee Oswald |
against Mrs.

Pic with a knife or anything like that?

Do you remember £
that?” .

I
"Yes, I do.” she replied.

"I am glad you said that.

My daughter-in- fe
Marguerite'* Son...

45
law was very upset.

The very first time we went there ...

we were
not welcome.

And immediately it was asked what did we plan to do
as soon as we put our foot in the house.

...

I had made it plain to
John Edward that I was going to have a place of my own, that we were
just coming there to get located.

"My daughter-in-law resented the fact that her mother—this went
on before I got there—that her mother had to leave the house and go
visit a sister so I could come I had never met my daughter-in-law.

She didn’t like me and she didn’t like Lee.

"So she—what is the word to say—not picked on the child, but she
showed her displeasure.

.

.

.

"So there was, I think now—it was not a kitchen knife—it was a
little pocketknife, a child’s knife that Lee had.

So she hit Lee ...

I
remember this distinctly, because I remember how awful I thought
Marjory was about this.

Lee had the knife in his hand.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I
remember this distinctly, because I remember how awful I thought
Marjory was about this. Lee had the knife in his hand. He was
whittling, because John Edward whittled ships and taught Lee to
whitde ships. He puts them in the glass, you know. And he was
whittling when this incident occurred. And that is what it occurred
about, because there was scraps of wood on the floor. "So when she attacked the child she made the statement to my
son that we had to leave, that Lee tried to use a knife on her. "Now, I say that is not true, gentlemen. You can be provoked into
something. And because of the fact that he was whittling, and had the
knife in his hand, they struggled. "He did not use the knife—he had an opportunity to use the knife. "But it wasn’t a kitchen knife or a big knife. It was a little knife. So I will explain it that way, sir. So immediately then I started to look
for a place.”
She found a job as assistant manager of a Lerner dress shop and
took a basement apartment, one big room, in the Bronx. As soon as
she could find a larger place they moved again, to East 179th Street. Originally, Lee Oswald was enrolled in a Lutheran private school and
then switched, after several weeks of irregular attendance, to a sev-
enth-grade class in Junior High School No. 117. By the following
January he had been absent 47 out of the 64 school days, and he finally
stopped going entirely. He later explained that he preferred being by
himself and had "many more important things to do.”
At first he would get dressed as though he were going to school,
but after his mother left for work he would stay home all day reading
or watching television. Sometimes he would go to the public library
or ride the subways. Once he was picked up by a truant officer at the

--- PAGE BREAK ---Bronx Zoo—he was reportedly surly and called the officer a “damn
Yankee/’ When a teacher came to the Oswald apartment to ask him
to return to class, he said he would think about it.

Eventually, truancy charges were brought against him, and in
March 1953 he was ordered to appear before a juvenile judge.

On the
appointed day, Marguerite showed up at court alone and told Judge
Delany her son had refused to come with her.

As a result, a warrant
was issued, and at a hearing in April, at which he did appear, Lee
Harvey Oswald was remanded to Youth House, a juvenile detention
center, for three weeks of evaluation so the court could determine
whether or not he needed psychiatric help.

The old Youth House was on Manhattan’s Lower East Side be-
tween First and Second avenues on Twelfth Street, among tenement
buildings.

Oswald was examined by a physician and then a psycholo-
gist.

The latter, Irving Sokolow, reported:
He achieved an I.Q.

of 118 on the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for
Children (abb.) indicating present intellectual functioning in the upper
range of bright normal intelligence.

All his scores were above the aver-
age for his age group, appreciably so in the verbalization of abstract
concepts and in the assembly of commonly recognizable objects.

His
method of approach was generally an easy, facile and highly perceptive
one.

Although presumably disinterested in school subjects he operates
on a much higher than average level.

...

The Human Figure Drawings are empty, poor characterizations of [a]
person approximately the same age as the subject.

They reflect a consid-
erable amount of impoverishment in the social and emotional areas.

...

He exhibits some difficulty in relationship to the maternal figure
suggesting more anxiety in this area than in any other.

Under conditions of emotional stress and strain he appears increas-
ingly defensive...

and in general incapable of constructing an effective
ego-defense.Under conditions of emotional stress and strain he appears increas-
ingly defensive...

and in general incapable of constructing an effective
ego-defense.

Afterward, a social worker named Evelyn Strickman talked to him
at length and wrote an insightful report in which we are able to see
Oswald’s own assessment of his situation, and hers.

She began by
describing him as “a seriously detached, withdrawn youngster of
thirteen” who answered questions, “but volunteered almost nothing
about himself spontaneously.”
Marguerite's Son...

47
By persistent questioning, the information received from Lee was as
follows: his father died before he was bom and he doesn’t know a thing
about him.

He has no curiosity about his father, says he never missed
having one.

and never thought to ask about him.

His mother was left
with three children....

Lee said his mother supported them by working
as an insurance broker and she was on the go all day long.

He doesn’t
remember anyone else taking care of him and he thinks she either left
him in the care of his older brothers or.

..

that he shifted for himself.

She would leave early in the morning and come home around seven or
eight at night after a hard day's work.

Occasionally she took Lee with
her on these trips, but he wrinkled his nose and said it was very boring
because she was always making stops, going into houses and trying to
sell people things, while he waited for her in the car.

He told her that after his brothers went into the service, his mother
decided to move to New York “to be near John.” His story of their
stay with the Pics was similar to his mother’s, but he didn’t tell her
why they left.

Questioning revealed that while Lee felt John was glad to see them, his
sister-in-law .

.

was unhappy about their sharing the apartment until
they could find a place of their own and she made them feel unwelcome.--- PAGE BREAK ---

. was unhappy about their sharing the apartment until
they could find a place of their own and she made them feel unwelcome. Lee had to sleep in the living room during this period although there
were five rooms in the apartment and he admitted that this made him
feel as he always did feel with grownups—that there was no room for
him. After they relocated, the report continued, “He withdrew into a
completely solitary and detached existence where he did as he wanted
and he didn’t have to live by any rules or come into contact with
people.”
When questioned about his mother's reaction to this he said she fold
him to go to school, "but she never did anything about it." When he was
asked if he wished that she would do something he nodded and finally
emerged with the fact that he ... felt his mother “never gave a damn”
for him. . . When Lee and his mother are home together, he is not
uncomfortable with her, but they never have anything to say to each
other. She never punishes him because she is the kind of person who just
lets things ride. It was hard for him to say whether she acted the same
way towards his brothers, because he never noticed. Although his broth-
ers were not as detached as his mother was, he experienced rejection
from them, too, and they always pushed him away when he tried to

--- PAGE BREAK ---48..

• 0*w«ld’» Game
When h^i^r<^yf^n='y.

anfshTnoted, "Questioning
ESthe '..formation that he M atom* ^o'^h hT^ but'he
him and other paopk ,h’ou*h "J’iJ * ,Jis revt|»,i„„ prompted her
S^jSSSSJft * responded b, pmndn, on.

-dd,
is my own business.**
S5ftlf«r»SS.'Smd *• he, he hms.ed ««-»•"
pleasant.

Ashed about hb tutu,A be ^n .T^Sj
Tom mm‘jt‘e™u“ He admitted that home "ottered him ver,
school as an alternative ^ lt ne:ne away from home
little." but he said wrote.

"If
meant "a loss of his freedom and pn y.

™ and join
he could h...ttX"Z‘^SJ «3£ » ..be.

people and |
roMotrins a routine .bold be disiesletol he tronld -ateel' htmtelf lb de I
a smartly dresseo, gr y essenually a “defensive, ngid.

self.

|
£*s?s
as an extension of henetf.

When *ne as well as .be |
T“maanyone, her fa"herTaiS sSd“« §
^}&ZZZSX~, poor — -—t
i
■
f|c
Marguerite’s Son...

49
of mixed racial groups.

She always had ‘high-falutin* ideas and
managed to make something of herself.'*
Marguerite made it clear she believed her son Lee had been treated
unjustly:
Mrs.

O.

railed and railed against NYC laws which she felt in a large
measure were responsible for the way Lee acted.

She said that when he
first began to truant, the truant officer picked him up in a police car and
took him back to school and she thought that was just atrocious.

..

She said she felt Lee could be stubborn and defiant...

as she would
be if someone kept stressing with him the way the truant officer had with
Lee that he had to go to school because the NYC law said so.

When it came time to write her recommendation, Evelyn Strickman
faced a dilemma.

She felt that if he returned home and got counseling,
his mother's “attitude about social workers, probation, etc., would
inevitably communicate itself to the boy" and that if he started show-
ing improvement in therapy she was “one of these mothers who would
have to break it up.--- PAGE BREAK ---

When it came time to write her recommendation, Evelyn Strickman
faced a dilemma. She felt that if he returned home and got counseling,
his mother's “attitude about social workers, probation, etc., would
inevitably communicate itself to the boy" and that if he started show-
ing improvement in therapy she was “one of these mothers who would
have to break it up. On the other hand, Lee was so strongly against
placement she doubted much could be accomplished by sending him
away, either. She noticed that he had become totally withdrawn at
Youth House: “I have spent some time watching him with other boys
and he doesn’t participate or mingle in any way but keeps himself
completely aloof."
The following day Oswald was seen by the chief psychiatrist, Rena-
tus Hartogs, who had gathered the reports on his desk and whose task
it was to put a label on Oswald's behavior and decide what to do with
him. Hartogs found him to be a tense and evasive boy who disliked
talking about himself and his feelings. Lee repeated to Hartogs his
belief that his mother and brothers showed little interest in him, and
be remarked, “I dislike everybody." In Hartogs* view, Lee Oswald
was quite disturbed emotionally—but definitely not psychotic: "He
was in full contact with reality,’* and there was "no indication of
psychotic mental changes." Lee’s problem, he believed, came from the
impact of his “emotional isolation and deprivation." The psychia-
trist’s diagnosis was "a personality pattern disturbance with schizoid
features and passive-aggressive tendencies." As he later explained,
The “schizoid features’* were apparent in his extreme withdrawal and
the depth to which he seemed to live in fantasy. “Passive-aggressive
tendencies" is a term used to describe an apparently compliant manner

--- PAGE BREAK ---Iki AT'MnwiJb u*u.

uM^d uu
|V> iSjAi.i IA t 1/u 2 JA it Lfy w.i.A A l!V\ tDU/ &4'lvr\
(r^t4W
v >w>W;
e tiv%Lr k McJilty fj\t
At' <*■
urvwb
nq iy+4iiot>r,inui~ AA>AL'&V A<W
Hartogs recommended that Oswald be allowed to go home orf the—/
condition that both he and his mother seek help from a child guidance
clinic.

If that didn’t work out, placement in a juvenile home tor
further treatment could come later.

Released from Youth House on May 7, 1953* Oswald appeared m
court again and was put on parole with the understandmg that be
return to school and attend regularly.

Mrs.

Oswald was told that the
case had been referred to a family agency for counseling, and Lees
probation officer recorded, “Both mother and boy promised to coop-
erThe Save the Rosenbergs pamphlet probably fell into Oswald’s
hands three days later—ironically, on Mother’s Day.

Julius and Ethel Rosenberg were on death row in upstate New
, York.

Their execution was set for June 19.

During May and June,
W supporters of The Worker, the Communist party daily, were canvass-
ing neighborhoods all over the city in a subscription drive.

They gave
away copies in a housing project in the Bronx and simultaneously
tried to enlist help in the Rosenberg campaign.

0,1 Methw'* Day.

May 10, women who had been recruited through an ad in The Worker
passed out leaflets for the New York Committee for Clemency for the
Rosenbergs on city street comers.

(This was the only instance cou
find, in back copies of the New York Times and The Worker, of
city-wide distribution of leaflets on the streets—there may have been
others.

But the fact that women volunteers were specifically
for this one suggests, at least, that this may have been the day the old
lady’’ handed him a pamphlet.

Possibly Oswald was on his way to he
Bronx Zoo or the library or the subway station that Sunday-the
entrance to any of those places would probably have been a good spot
for a demonstration.) ...

.Possibly Oswald was on his way to he
Bronx Zoo or the library or the subway station that Sunday-the
entrance to any of those places would probably have been a good spot
for a demonstration.) ...

.

■_
It isn’t known exactly what was in the pamphlet, but the campaign
for clemency had only two themes.

The first was that the Rosenbergs
were innocent victims of an unjust court.

In The Worker they were
described as martyrs who were being lynched by a hanging judge and
by President Eisenhower, who refused to commute their sentences.

The other theme was implicit in the choice of women for a Mother s
Dav demonstration-implicit, too.

whenever the nam« of the Rosen-
bergs' sons Michael and Robert were mentioned.

Michael was to;
Robert was four years younger.

Their parents were going to be ex-
Marguerite's Son...

51
ecuted, leaving them orphans.

It’s unlikely that a campaign could
have been designed any better to strike Oswald’s nature and circum-
stances.

“I looked at that paper,” he told Aline Mosby six years later,
“and I still remember it for some reason, I don’t know why.”
It wasn’t that he had compassion for the Rosenbergs.

Oswald never
bad a talent Tor empathy.

An acquaintance of his in Dallas, an intelli-
gent and sensitive man, believed that Oswald saw people as cardboard
figures, with the single exception of his daughter June.

There is evi-
dence for this in the Youth House records.

He had no curiosity about
his dead father.

He didn’t know how his mother treated his brothers
because he never noticed.

If Robert and John, five and eight years
older, respectively, didn’t always want a kid brother tagging along,
they were rejecting him.

They “never met any of his needs.” Whether
through force of example or inherited disposition, Lee Oswald had
acquired an egocentricity resembling his mother’s.

What made the
Rosenberg pamphlet memorable to him, surely, was that he saw
himself in it—the “innocent victim” of a New York court.--- PAGE BREAK ---

They “never met any of his needs.” Whether
through force of example or inherited disposition, Lee Oswald had
acquired an egocentricity resembling his mother’s. What made the
Rosenberg pamphlet memorable to him, surely, was that he saw
himself in it—the “innocent victim” of a New York court. He held
in his hand a message that said to him: Here are allies you can identify
with. Here are people who feel as you do about the legal system. The more one takes this period of his life into account, the more
plausible the story he told in Moscow becomes. The pamphlet got him
started reading socialist literature, he said, and he saw that the de-
scription it gave of capitalist society matched his own observations. When he talked about “watching the treatment of workers in New
York and observing the fact that they are exploited,” we may assume
he was speaking primarily about Marguerite. During the year and a
half they lived there, she resigned or was fired from at least three
different jobs. When Evelyn Strickman saw him at Youth House, his
resentment was aimed at his mother. She was always busy selling
insurance and^when she cameJiome she didn't even make hijra a
decent supper\She never gave a damn ftSlTiffirift-hisTnterview with
Priscilla Johnson he explamed^wtry^rtedame a Marxist—by charac-
terizing his mother’s situation: “At 15 I was looking for something
that would give me the key to my environment. My mother has been
1 worker all her life. All her life she had to produce profit for the
capitalists. She is a good example of what happens to workers in the
United States.” It was as though new battle lines had been drawn. The
uncaring mother had become a “good example” of what capitalism
does to people. It followed that if he could see her as the victim of a
political system, he now had a more secure emotional footing—and
a way to fight back. Thus, Oswald’s anger and resentment were easily
'// hfij
b^J

--- PAGE BREAK ---€
m
’ fjw) b MuLjtmkMM} 'f tpwfcbiti+Ai, rJj^ (fecXeltO U.

Wj 4*uU Ml-fou/ bU liYMuLfjOV.

IfWoiii, /^r
j \**rt,th Lin, h hk*y*h ■ ■ n- n *• ,J Jl ' r /f- -
52...

Oswald’* Game
subsumed by a radical political outlook.

53d lUd^y^uctant to talk about himself and W.

b«, I,, .o-ki0.1,
M- wcyfi'c
HSTKBKS
533-other's incernt taking ;-d
“whVfelt withoSrrrasonthat His brothers had neglected him.

hum., .1 7S, itol.^,1 viewpoint" He
He would insist i
hides me person
detached i3-year-
getting, who felt
who admitted ha
hurting and killii
Sil3SSSS
toward'politics could hardly have been more firmly entangled in his
“SJ^S wy that he was insincere when he said he defected
for political 7^*^ <££
S£ , ..id he though.

Cwdd hi» "i^oenbl.

rrtsf XSft-
iAflS4jffi^w®i ..Vie, oA~L
fit‘u
,nanYl°donTlhink you couid have changed his mind_ • un‘^°“ past relationship.

SS£^m^&S:::SiSfh ******
#as reading a pamphlet I bought from the speiker giving
the facts of this case and the next day I went and contributed 50 cents.

Then I began to distribute the pamphlets and collect signatures on a
Mooney petition from school friends and neighbors.

In The Implosion Conspiracy, Louis Nizer quoted the passage above
and remarked, “It is curious how a purely accidental incident can
change the course of a person's life.

If Julius Rosenberg had not
stopped to listen to the Mooney oratcr, he may not have been seated
in a defendant's chair in the courtroom eighteen years later."
We return now to the summer of 1953, to pick up Oswald's trail.

In July Robert Oswald came to New York City on a ten-day furlough
to visit his family, and Lee showed him around.

After taking him by
]*“ subway from the Bronx to Times Square, Lee guided him to the top
of the Empire State Building and mapped a tour for him from Wall
l Street to the Museum of Natural History.

Typically, Lee didn't open
^ up to him about his recent troubles.--- PAGE BREAK ---

After taking him by
]*“ subway from the Bronx to Times Square, Lee guided him to the top
of the Empire State Building and mapped a tour for him from Wall
l Street to the Museum of Natural History. Typically, Lee didn't open
^ up to him about his recent troubles. Nobody else in the family men-
tioned Lee’s confinement or his clash with Mrs. Pic to Robert, either. (As far as one can tell from the Warren records, Oswald never talked
about his court appearances and his stay at Youth House with anyone,
ever. As he wrote Robert from Moscow, "You really don’t know
fj anything about me.") Robert noticed some tension between John and
their mother, but that was nothing unusual, no different from their
knew why
lion. And IhatTi why 1 »y [It »“1 irrevocable
rxwald1, chance encounter wilh the Rosenberg pamphlet just after
h,story doesn’t make that type of rf.ton^jud^^W^^ 5
berg’s account of his own introduction to politics, at age 15 m
York;
1 .fanned to listen to a speaker at a street comer meeting.... His topic
was .0 w^freedom for Tom Mooney, [a] labor leader who was ,mpn»-
' Sft ft $ v *****
Marguerite had told John that the school authori-
ties suggested Oswald be seen by a psychiatrist but that she couldn’t
get him to go. She said he refused to see a "nut doctor head shrinker."
John advised her to just take him, but he never heard any more about
it
In September 1953 Lee Oswald entered the eighth grade in the
Bronx. The following month one of his teachers reported:
During the past 2 weeks practically every subject teacher has com-
plained to me about the boy’s behavior. He had consistently refused to
salute the flag during early morning exercises. . . . He spends most of
his time sailing paper planes around the room. When we spoke to him
about his behavior, his attitude was belligerent. [When] I offered to help
him, he brushed out with, "I don’t need anybody’s helpl"

--- PAGE BREAK ---r planes around the room. When we spoke to him
about his behavior, his attitude was belligerent. [When] I offered to help
him, he brushed out with, "I don’t need anybody’s helpl"

--- PAGE BREAK ---

54... CHwmld’i Game
Mo,h« coun h-rin,«£*£•«J££S3i“^ToS
telephoned the probation officer “ h me reason, and the
hearing had already apparcntly afraid that Lee might
Warren Report notesjttat f Jeww Ijp« up} Justice sicher
be "retained in some sort of c J r£f(;rral ,Q lhe Berkshire Indus-
continued hlsP“j°!'a"dvUla
8ge At about the same time, Marguerite
S.bou, l* «rf “»
tion came to the Oswald apartmen doing fine,
ttttsxsx&z - -* - -
New Orleans.
3 • • • Dropping Out, Joining Up
O N arriving in New Orleans that January, Marguerite and 14-year-
old Lee moved in with her sister, Lillian, until they found another
place to live—an apartment managed by Marguerite's old friend Myr-
tle Evans. To Marguerite's way of thinking, bringing Lee back to the
South had averted a tragedy. The anger he had revealed in New York
receded from view. To his relatives and Evans, Oswald seemed quiet
and studious, often going off into his bedroom to read or listen to the
radio. His cousin Marilyn Murret, who was 25, recalled seeing him
read encyclopedias "like somebody else would read a novel." He
returned to school, and the disciplinary problems didn't reappear.
But Lillian noticed a strange aloofness. The Murrets were Catholic,
and on Fridays he came over to have seafood, which he liked. Then
on Saturdays he came back, and Mrs. Murret would give him money
to rent a bike even though he could have borrowed one from her
children. “My children had a bike, but it seemed like he wanted to
go up in the park rather than ride their bicycles, and sometimes I
would have to . . . give him more money so that he could keep his
bike another hour." She bought him some school clothes "so he would
look presentable to go to school, you know, whatever a boy needs, and
when we gave them to him, he said, ‘Well, why are you all doing this
for me?' And we said, 'Well, Lee, for one thing, we love you, and
another thing we want you to look nice when you go to school, like
the other children.* ’* But he offered no thanks, and later on he told
her, “1 don’t need anything from anybody." Another time he told her
he didn't want to go to school anymore because he already knew
everything they had to teach him. Like his mother, Lillian thought
...551 don’t need anything from anybody." Another time he told her
he didn't want to go to school anymore because he already knew
everything they had to teach him. Like his mother, Lillian thought
...55

--- PAGE BREAK ---- fly / Vs <-~A^ fh** , iluI b 44/k/nJjf
56...

Oswald's Gama
—Marguerite “didn’t think she needed anybody either.”
Sometime after returning to New Orleans Oswald was beaten up by
a gang of white boys for silting in the black section of a city bus.

Marguerite and Lillian assumed he must have forgotten the buses
were segregated while he was in New York, and the Warren Report
says he probably acted “out of ignorance.” But Marilyn Murret
thought it was possible he had acted “defiantly.” ^ »
After a falling-out with Myrtle Evans in the spring 611955, Mar-
guerite moved to an apartment in the French Quarter.

There Oswald
spent time playing pool and darts with a junior high classmate named
Edward Voebel, but made no other friends.

In Voebel’s opinion,
“people just didn’t interest him generally” because he was “living in
his own world.”
One day Oswald shocked Voebel by showing him a plastic gun and
glass cutter and outlining a plan to steal a pistol from a store on
Rampart Street.

When Oswald went to reconnoiter the store, Voebel
tagged along and pointed out a burglar alarm wire running through
the shop’s plate glass window.

Afterward Oswald said no more about
his idea.

Since there had recently been several jewel robberies on
Canal Street in which store windows were cut, it occurred to Voebel
that Lee wanted to “look big among the guys” by doing something
similar.

UT^O VWW (||>/M ]
Had he gone ahead with this scheme, it would have been whdt
policemen call a copycat crime.

Voebel’s testimony thus provides a
revealing glimpse of young Oswald’s thinking.

At age 15 one of his
fantasies was to imitate a daring crime described in the local press.Voebel’s testimony thus provides a
revealing glimpse of young Oswald’s thinking.

At age 15 one of his
fantasies was to imitate a daring crime described in the local press.

In June Oswald filled out a personal history form at school, listing
his plans after high school as “military service” and "undecided.”
That summer he joined the Civil Air Patrol and attended several
meetings at which one of the leader was an eccentric pilot named
C David Ferric.Teme would become a central figure in many conspir-
vacyTheones.' ....

-
It was during this period, when Oswald was evidently looking for
excitement, that he began to think of himself as a Marxist.

In Moscow
he would tell Aline Mosby:
Then we moved to New Orleans and I discovered one book in the
library.

“Das Kapital." It was what I'd been looking for
It was like a very religious man opening the Bible for the first time.

I read the “Manifesto.” It got me interested.

I found some dusty back
shelves in the New Orleans library, you know, I had to remove some
Dropping Out, Joining Up ...

57
front books to get at the books.

KhI
m
S'a"ed
f “ s,udy Ma™“‘ economic theories.

I could see the impover- '
„ of'he mas“s before my own eyes in my own mother, und I
could see the capitalists.

I thought the worker's life could be better
I continued to indoctrinate myself for five years.

My mother knew I
was reading books but she didn't know what they were about.

!ikSr^rgU,^‘e d,id kn°Wl but Said noth'n8 to him about it.) At
s point Oswald s only work experience consisted of about ten Satur-
I ?U b0y a shbe store whtfrs his mother worked.

CrkLl'/f/'955 Lee e"tered ,oth 8rade at Warren Easton High
School, but dropped out after his birthday a month later.

He wrote
a letter to school authorities to which he signed his mother's name:
To whom it may concern.

Because we are moving to San Diego in the middle of this month Lee
birth r:^.rw'Afa0, piease send by him pap*” ^ h*
birth certificate that you may have.

Thank you.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Because we are moving to San Diego in the middle of this month Lee
birth r:^.rw'Afa0, piease send by him pap*” ^ h*
birth certificate that you may have. Thank you. Sincerely,
Mri. M. Oswald
As he often did, Oswald had woven a part of the troth into a decep-
cemer in S™ £“nmf.,0j°in ,he Marines and 8° “> training
center m San Diego. Since he was just 16. Marguerite signed a false
affidavit saying he was a year older. But the recruiting officer must
have seen through the rose, for Oswald had to wait another year to
get out on his own. 7
Early in 1956 Oswald went to work for the Pfisterer DcntaJ Labora-
PaLeTluX^'TK1^ ar°Und ‘°Wn W'th 3,1 '^car-old named
Palmer McBnde. The two young men shared an interest in classical
music and astronomy and would visit one another after work
McBnde soon learned that Lee Oswald “was very serious about the
virtues of Communism, and discussed these virtues at every opportu-
n,ty|, °*wa!d * “ntral theme *«ned to be that the workers h! the
worldwould one day nse up and throw off their chains.” Oswald
JS!?? ‘he l,brary “P” of 003 KaP‘,al a"d the Communist
Manifesto he kept m his room, and McBride thought he “seemed
qutte proud to have them.” On another occasion, after they began
discussing President Eisenhower, McBride recalled, “He then made
a statement to the effect that he would like to kill President Eisen-
hower because he was exploiting the working class.” McBride added.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ftvw u wVn Ur 1
£«JtW i/»*t AKTIU.

.

hrSw,i^
5S...

Oswald's G«n* -1/lAOVW fWt"-* I'U^Ufy W
W !>WMfc> & 'VU 1.

.

■ ,,.

‘
’"This statement was not made in jest.

.......

..

t In April 1956 Senator James Eastland of Mississippi held lengthy
subcommittee hearings in New Orleans to investigate alleged Com-
munist activity in the area.

The hearings were covered by the local
press, especially after a defense attorney was ejected from one of the
sessions.

Eastland told a television interviewer that there were, or had
been.

Communist cells in Louisiana.

It was apparently about this time that McBr.de and Oswald got to
know William Wulf, a history major and president of an astronomy
club they were interested in joining.

During a visit to WulTs home
Oswald, who had been looking at some of the books in Wulf s library,
started talking about communism.

McBride recalled that Oswald
began telling Wulf "about the glories of the Worker’s State and saying
that the United States Government was not telling the truth about
Soviet Russia.” As Wulf remembered it.

Oswald
started expounding ihe Communist doctrine and saying that he was
highly interested in communism, that communism was the only way ot
life for the worker, et cetera, and then came out with a Statement mat
he was looking for a Communist cell in town to join but hecouldn t find
any.

He was a little dismayed at this, and said that he couldn t find lone]
that would show any interest in him as a Communist.

According to Wulf, Oswald “was actually militant on the idea, and
1 can repeat that he expressed his belief that he could be a good
Communist, he could help the Communist Party out.

if he could find
the .

..

Party [and] join it.” At this point,
we were kind of arguing back and forth about the situation, and my
r fa,her came in the room, heard what we were arguing on communism,
[saw] that this boy was loudmouthed, boisterous, and asked him to leave
.....

Party [and] join it.” At this point,
we were kind of arguing back and forth about the situation, and my
r fa,her came in the room, heard what we were arguing on communism,
[saw] that this boy was loudmouthed, boisterous, and asked him to leave
...

and that is the last I have seen or spoken with Oswald.

Wulf concluded that Oswald was "looking for something to belong
to"
On another occasion Oswald had tried to talk McBride into joining
the Communist party with him.1 At a time when most adolescent
males were thinking about cars and girls, Oswald’s fantasy life in-
volved a pistol and an unrequited romance with the Communist party.

As a child, one of his favorite TV shows had been “I Led Three
Lives," an anti-Communist program that stressed the supposedly
h Wt Jo io uh ffi iopk
rvUH A,y4 Su i£ *Vvvvo ^ A'
Dropping Out, Joining Up ...

59
^ clandestine and subversive nature of Party work.

This kind of life—
?

\ an outsider and secretly fighting the authorities—would likely
^ have appealed to him.

^ The patterns laid down during adolescence shaped Oswald’s later
^ behavior.

Evidently, he had already begun to identify more closely
with the political world than with his immediate environment.

One
might wonder why this should be so.

Psychiatrist and author Edwin
^ Weinstein believes that many potential assassins take up a political
5 cause to give themselves a sense of identity.

Several other American
.

^ assassins have identified strongly with a political group—John Wilkes
§ .- Booth with the Confederacy.

Sirhan Sirhan with the Palestinians, and
-<2**° on' Th,s identification may take the place of close relationships
with relatives and friends—in effect, the cause becomes the assassin's
J family or “pseudo-community.” More important, however, the typi-
Vs:caJ assassin often has a grandiose self-image that allows him to see
^Mumself as a player on the world political stage.^ assassins have identified strongly with a political group—John Wilkes
§ .- Booth with the Confederacy.

Sirhan Sirhan with the Palestinians, and
-<2**° on' Th,s identification may take the place of close relationships
with relatives and friends—in effect, the cause becomes the assassin's
J family or “pseudo-community.” More important, however, the typi-
Vs:caJ assassin often has a grandiose self-image that allows him to see
^Mumself as a player on the world political stage.

For most people,
President Eisenhower was a remote figure somewhere above them;
Oswald projected himself onto Eisenhower’s level, as someone who
J 3 wanted to punish what he saw as an abuse of power,
jin And yet* classifying Oswald as a typical assassin doesn’t go very far
toward explaining him.

There is another model that may throw more
^ tight on his character, or at least one side of it.

The episode Voebel
recounted about the pistol foreshadowed the fact that Oswald ended
his life as someone accused of committing two murders with firearms
In 1978 there was a brief stir in the press about a three-volume work
entitled The Criminal Personality by psychiatrist Samuel Yochelson
and his associate, psychologist Stanton Samenow.

The work was the
result of a study Yochelson had instituted at St.

Elizabeth’s Hospital
in Washington, D.C., a federal psychiatric hospital where felons
judged to be criminally insane are treated.

(John Hinckley, Reagan’s
attacker, is now confined there.) Yochelson and Samenow examined
250 young men who were habitual felons, having them record their
thoughts daily on tape and interviewing both the inmates and their
relatives.

The Criminal Personality presents their provocative conclu-
sions, which I’ll attempt to summarize.

Yochelson and Samenow contend that all habitual criminals, of
whatever category, share many specific character traits from early
childhood.

In their view, the typical felon is unusually self-centered
and secretive.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Yochelson and Samenow contend that all habitual criminals, of
whatever category, share many specific character traits from early
childhood. In their view, the typical felon is unusually self-centered
and secretive. At an early age the criminal-to-be "wraps himself in a
mantle of secrecy,” as Samenow puts it, and “sees himself as unique "
He conceals his ideas and activities from his family because he doesn’t

--- PAGE BREAK ---fkto cv s.

A Axrt-A ,</.

>J~ L-'tfv /J* Cumikuti fv
fat Ui/Utii1 [\u-i-!

UAJ.

biufcl, yt
Avwfct E^IH^^H/TTw7^ jcdt^n, muAj
ix&Mk&l&si'-'*
|v4 Aw> "flc^'A VTMj jyv.

J v{?; xtr
60....

Os««Id-« 6ami J tj A' HIM f r ' K ■ v
wan, lo be interfered wUh^He ^chronically restless.

diWatisfied.

and
anerv He often gets into trouble for school truancy.

Violatio
becomes a means of getting excitement: normal life seems boring.

Listening to the tapes, the authors discovered that their subjects spent
a good deal of time fantasizing about potential crimes t tfy''
,ou
never commit—merely thinking about a crime was itself exciting.

Whatever crimes they did commit, Yochelson and Samenow s sub-
,ecusawthem^v« as good, decent people.

An inmate would usually ,
justify his behavior by describing himself as a victim of his environ- ^
{£?

He Z himself as superior to others, capable of gnat £»£
He wants to be Number One, to come out on top.

but he ex[»c,s ,
instant success and considers schoolwork and most jobs beneath hi .

If he joins a sports team, he wants to be the captain and run the show.

(The authors describe a prison football team as consisting of eleven -
j vqUfhghly nianipulative, the criminal described here seM.^i^He
- as pawns.

Even as a child, he rejects close personal relationships.

He
Safewav even if he intends to go to Grand Union.

He feels he is ngni.

and others must see things on his terms.

As one inmate wryly put it,
paraphrasing Descartes, “1 think; therefore it is.

P When held accountable, “the criminal believes he has ten
There is no inconsistency in this, from the cnminsl s j,,
breaking the law, he exercised the freedom to do as he wanted.

He vnU
nowuslflhe law to achieve the same freedom, which is being denied him
[emphasis in the original).

Assuming that this unflattering portrait is accurate, how did the St
Elizabeths inmates get this way?He vnU
nowuslflhe law to achieve the same freedom, which is being denied him
[emphasis in the original).

Assuming that this unflattering portrait is accurate, how did the St
Elizabeths inmates get this way?

Yochelson and Samenow could find
Although they had expected to find the root cause in famdy
or social influences, they discovered thattheirSnaTwho were
kinds of backgrounds and.

in many cases, had siblings who were
"straight.” These authors concluded that the criminal freely choo
.

Dropping Out, Joining Up ...

61.

this way of life in his unending quest for power, control, and excite-
'Went.

They noted that some people with this type of personality were
attracted to radical political movements of the left or the right—in
^ their view, for the same reasons they were drawn to crime.

“Although
he may forcefully present himself as a spokesman for the oppressed,
he is using his cause as a vehicle for self-aggrandizement For those
who take direct action, the excitement of the event outweighs the
merit of the cause."
1 The St.

Elizabeths study is highly controversial and its findings
lhave been rejected by many criminologists.

One suspects there is
i something more than "free choice" involved in the criminal lifestyle.

But the personality profile outlined above appears to describe Lee
‘Oswald remarkably well.

For one thing, this model at least provides
a framework for looking again at Oswald's breathtaking arrogance—
for instance, the manner in which he threatened to give away military
secrets at the U.S.

Embassy and then loudly complained that the
embassy had acted illegally in refusing to let him sign away his citizen-
ship.

Oswald expected his adversaries to abide by the letter of the law,
whereas he did as he pleased.

However, despite the foregoing analysis, it ought to be remembered
that Oswald was an individual, not a type.

Throughout his life, none
of his acquaintances saw him as dangerous or as a criminal.--- PAGE BREAK ---

However, despite the foregoing analysis, it ought to be remembered
that Oswald was an individual, not a type. Throughout his life, none
of his acquaintances saw him as dangerous or as a criminal. For the
most part, his teenage years were mundane—he often rode a bike in
the park or went to museums. Even McBride remained friendly,
despite Lee's hangup on Marxism. The cumulative details of his life
reveal more about him than any category we might use to explain him. In July 1956 Marguerite took Lee to live in Fort Worth with Robert,
who had just gotten out of the Marines. That fall he entered the 10th
grade for the second time, and a classmate recalled that Oswald tried
to get him interested in Marxism, too. Oswald went out for the B
football team, but was kicked off the squad for refusing to run laps
with the other players. (Robert later commented, "He usually wanted
to be 'the boss' or not play at all. He was like Mother in this respect. ')
Soon he dropped out of school again. 'On October 3, 1956, young Oswald wrote the Socialist Party of
America:
* Dear Sirs;
I am sixteen years of age and would like more information about your
. youth Leasue. I would like to know if there is a branch in my area, hqw / X,
yvvO Qvts (ivikiUu *'Ww. \W Lt/' tVr ^
V, \)v tr V- Kjf l f A£>. kvxli iVvyvw \^VlK

--- PAGE BREAK ---ion about your
. youth Leasue. I would like to know if there is a branch in my area, hqw / X,
yvvO Qvts (ivikiUu *'Ww. \W Lt/' tVr ^
V, \)v tr V- Kjf l f A£>. kvxli iVvyvw \^VlK

--- PAGE BREAK ---

62... Oswald's Game
to join. etc. I am » Marxist, and have been studying socialist prinaples
for well over fifteen months. I am very interested in your Y.P.S.L.
Later that month, after his seventeenth birthday, he enlisted in the
Marines.
jb is'irftj.' uAuyAU
G^O cl
A)Ui n^' Jjv A lith< c\\X <h h,
K llhp tU 4
’ti/cK, t" \y tJti) Xb /OMlMJk tlt'k &\\Ch. M'
c\\X h hy ifuty
'ry,Ui
'i/W !MJ yU/io /•XtLLitr-'y 1. '.vwiitn.-, v » -
tvVui'V I (f ( 4 /V--Uy jlfij jl i-i(
v Is" V} lli) Jvb AiMwK
v, x .. - ui> 4 IWA A /
W lvt( ')*r Ju u
Vl
4... The Marxist Marine
^ OM£ critics of the Warren Report have found it strange indeed that
an avowed Marxist should want to join the U.S. Marine Corps. Rob-
ert thought his brother saw “an escape from the drabness of school,
a chance to lead his own life, and an opportunity to impress the world.
... To him, military service meant freedom." John Pic was blunter.
He thought his half-brother joined up largely to get out from under
“the yoke of oppression from my mother." Oswald himself once said
that he enlisted not because he was a patriot but because he wanted
“to get away from the drudgery” and see the world.
Whatever his reasons for enlisting, Oswald’s career in the Marines
would show a development of the same pattern of behavior we ve
already seerrf-probjems with authority,'a good deal of secretive
scheming, and dramatic incidents in which he tried to manipulate or
outwit the system.
On aptitude tests during basic training Oswald scored significantly ^
above die Corps average in reading and vocabulary, and significantly . *V '
below m Arithmetic and pattern analysis. In a six-week course on
aviation fundamentals, he finished forty-sixth in a class of fifty-four. '\ 0
As usual, he kept to himself, doing a lot of serious reading. During
combat training in early 1957 Oswald shared a tent with Alien R. v
' . Felde, who recalled that Oswald constantly talked about politics. Hel^
said that Oswald espoused “the cause of the working-man” and be- I
lieved the American intervention in Korea had resulted in one million
needless deaths for which he held Presidents Truman and Eisenhower
y responsible.
i!U £ After being trained as a radar controller, Oswald was shipped >
v t
y W , /f£L U vu.r KAXI ^
;»x
if/
,/yvu l K
, . JV to /Mf . UJAX lu ( ft?7 /Vx,^*v
, hx /V. v^> tU'W( J- U/Hfrlk C’r4t{ •••“ Af.Vr, <M« ►fJ
jrx 44VH. Ajrfsfiuft''
!VW\ 'wald was shipped >
v t
y W , /f£L U vu.r KAXI ^
;»x
if/
,/yvu l K
, . JV to /Mf . UJAX lu ( ft?7 /Vx,^*v
, hx /V. v^> tU'W( J- U/Hfrlk C’r4t{ •••“ Af.Vr, <M« ►fJ
jrx 44VH. Ajrfsfiuft''
!VW\ '

--- PAGE BREAK ---3^
£
64...

Oswald's Game
overseas to Japan in September.

At the Atsugi base twenty miles wet
^ 24 of Tokyo he began work in the radar room, where he often plotted
* *-C the coarse of America’s U-2 plane.

The U-2 was an extremely hght
j.

jet that could achieve altitude close to too.ooo feet.

U-2S were then
operating at American base in Europe and the Far East, ostensibly
it to collect wether information.

Their principal purpose, however^ was
- "to gather military intelligence.

Lone U-2S began “straying over Com-
* $£ munist territory in 1956-at the touch of a button seven camera^
~ Vj| mounted under the plane, took continuous, high-resolution picture
£ of the ground below.

They were doing the work eventually taken over
,4/r by spy satellite.

Several of Oswald’s co-workers later remembered
LO seeing these strange-looking glider-like planes take off and land.

In
^ * * their briefings, Oswald and the other men were told that the U-2 was
i a top-secret reconnaissance project which they were not to discuss
3 with anyone outside their unit .

.

' ^ Oswald seemed to take pride in his work and would bristle when-
S,.

Y\ 1 ever a young officer tried to second-guess or correct him.

Being resent-
| 1 ful of authority was almost second nature among the enlisted men, but
| 4- Daniel Patrick Powers, who had been with Oswald since their techm-
-a 7% cal training, thought Oswald wasn’t resentful of authority per se: he
4 was resentful of the position of authority that he could not com-
m Oswald began gathering with his fellow Marines in some of the
-w iS cheap bars near the base and apparently had his flrst sexual experience
4 It*- with a Japanese bar girl.

Then he started dating a beautiful young
?

3 ^‘Japanese woman who was a hostess at a Tokyo bar.

When the time
A Approached for his unit to be shipped out to the Philippines in Novem-
^ men, Oswald grazed his left arm with a .22 caliber bullet from a
'b *5 7.

derringer he had kept in his locker.When the time
A Approached for his unit to be shipped out to the Philippines in Novem-
^ men, Oswald grazed his left arm with a .22 caliber bullet from a
'b *5 7.

derringer he had kept in his locker.

A barracks-mate, George Wilk-
=•-* ^ ens, hard the shot and rushed in to 6nd Oswald sitting quietly on a
3.

§,• £ bunk holding the gun.

Wilkens had seen the gun a few weeks before
when Oswald showed it to him and said he had bought it fromi a
-t mail-order company in the United States.

Others rushed in, and Wilk-
^~cns left.

,, ,
^ cn "5 At the hospital Oswald claimed his minor wound had been caused
4.

fjf accidentally when he dropped his government-issue .45- But the .22
bullet was found, and the incident was reported as a breach or regula-
l^niom concerning private firearms.

The scuttlebutt afterward was that
-2 z ' Oswald had deliberately shot himself to avoid leaving Japan to go on
^-“5 maneuvers.

If that was his plan, it failed—he was shipped out to the
Philippines five days after he was released from the hospital-
^U A* w U
ilippincs five days alter ne was reicascu .

«»X
The Marxist Marine...65
After his unit returned in the spring of 1958, Oswald was court-
martialed for possessing an unauthorized weapon.

He was fined S50
and sentenced to twenty days 31 hard labor, but the confinement was
suspended for six months.

Two months later, however, he was court-
martialed again.

This time he was charged with attempting to provoke
a fight with Sergeant Miguel Rodriguez at the Bluebird Cafe in
Yamato, and for assaulting Rodriguez by pouring a drink on him.

(Oswald evidently bore a grudge because the sergeant had kept him
on mess duty.) After electing to serve as his own defense counsel,
Oswald cross-examined Rodriguez and persuaded the court he was
drunk that night and had spilled the drink by accident.This time he was charged with attempting to provoke
a fight with Sergeant Miguel Rodriguez at the Bluebird Cafe in
Yamato, and for assaulting Rodriguez by pouring a drink on him.

(Oswald evidently bore a grudge because the sergeant had kept him
on mess duty.) After electing to serve as his own defense counsel,
Oswald cross-examined Rodriguez and persuaded the court he was
drunk that night and had spilled the drink by accident.

(Years later,
Rodriguez would still insist Oswald had been sober and knew exactly
what he was doing.) But despite this minor victory, Oswald was found
guilty of using “provoking words” and sentenced to the brig.

He
served eighteen days in a tough military prison.

His fellow Marines noticed a change in Oswald when he got out.

He seemed bitter and more withdrawn than he had been before.

One
man remembered Oswald telling him, 4Tve seen enough of a demo-
cratic society here.

.

.

.

When I get out I’m going to try something
else.” Oswal^wouldJatcr^ met jJewJTommunists in
Japan who got him interested in going to the SovieTUnio^
a socialist country was like.

There may be some truth in this it
would have been in character for him to try to make contact with a
Communist group, as he had in New Orleans.

The court-manial may
have helped make up his mind.

In any case, it was during this period
that Oswald began studying the Russian language.

In September 1958, a month later, the Chinese began shelling the
offshore islands of Queraoy and Matsu, which were controlled by the
Nationalist government on Formosa (now Taiwan), and Oswald’s
unit was sent to Formosa to set up a radar base.

Shortly after they
arrived, Oswald was on guard duty one night when the officer in
charge heard four or five shots at Oswald’s position.

Running over
he found Oswald “shaking and crying.” Oswald told him he was
seeing things and that he couldn’t stand being on guard duty.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Shortly after they
arrived, Oswald was on guard duty one night when the officer in
charge heard four or five shots at Oswald’s position. Running over
he found Oswald “shaking and crying.” Oswald told him he was
seeing things and that he couldn’t stand being on guard duty. After
Rhodes reported what had happened, Oswald was sent back to Japan
on a military plane. Rhodes believed Oswald was faking. He told
Edward.Jay Epstein, ’’Oswald liked Japan and wanted to stay . I
know he didn’t want to go to Formosa, and I think he fired off Ins
gun to get out of there. ... There was nothing dumb about Oswald."
At the end of his overseas duty in November 1958 Oswald was
a,tC-r -
fets
igx
0

--- PAGE BREAK ---u> tW) rf njt, ,u HJC cj'Pnm^h, utujL U
*!

u t) f tuU^U-vyj ^ iMMiuitS.gXi ,
it...

OtnM’t G<un« ^ & ‘■^k.

T!

“«1£ &*r.r3SM=:
&££££* ""■
informed about foreign affairs.

He recalled that
—«»™ i*«f<■“£* “ "5SKStiSi!3S2
a country, but five or ^’"^^uTofthe X «nter and in a most
,o that officer's «*«-»»; °u ag7ee with that?" In
-=
he was saying] than he did aeoui ine po j,
knowledge than that man.

“ Thth r^nSg a“d Ske himself come out top dog/*
was high ranking .

• • Oswald thought the poverty he saw in
Donovan also rc^J k special interest in Latin America.

Asia was unjust and that he tookj P« ^ asked.

"Did he ever
At a Warren Commission hearing, Do .

abnUr nrob-
Cave any specific suggestions
Corp..

oughi » b.

^Uio., of p,on»-
■JE?

S2«3K “"i“1 o,“ “,h' sq“1'
ron football team, on which Lee played end.

playing.

and admired his ability to “pursue Russian on his own and learn it."
At the £1 Toro base Oswald flaunted his admiration for all things
Russian, playing Russian music in the barracks and putting his name
in Russian on one of his jackets.

He subscribed to a Russian-language
newspaper and to the Daily Worker.

Some of his barracks-mates
kidded him, calling him “comrade," or accused him jokingly of being
a Russian spy.

Oswald seemed to enjoy these comments jmmensely.

Some critics of the Warren Report have^arguecTthat Oswald
couldn't have gotten away with this ostentatious pro-Russian behav-
ior without official sanction.

They contend that Oswald was merely
pretending to be pro-Russian, while he was, in fact, working for
American intelligence.

As it often happens, a more reasonable expla-
nation is less exciting, but more suited to his character.

Oswald was
apparently not as open about his political beliefs with the officers as
he was with the enlisted men.--- PAGE BREAK ---

As it often happens, a more reasonable expla-
nation is less exciting, but more suited to his character. Oswald was
apparently not as open about his political beliefs with the officers as
he was with the enlisted men. Lieutenant Donovan, for instance,
never heard Oswald “in any way, shape or form confess that he was
a Communist, or that he ever thought about being a Communist." He
thought Oswald subscribed to the Russian newspaper to learn the
language and to get another view of international aflfairs. Oswald's
behavior evidently attracted official interest just once, when a mail-
room clerk reported that he had been receiving leftist literature. When
Captain Robert E. Block questioned Oswald about this literature,
Oswald replied, in a typically disingenuous fashion, that he was indoc-
trinating himself in Russian theory in conformance with the Marine
Corps policy (of getting to know the enemy). Although Block wasn't
satisfied with that explanation, he let the matter drop. According to
Thomley, Oswald believed he was being watched because of his poli-
tics and felt “unjustly put upon."
In December 1958, when Fidel Castro was on the verge of defeating
Batista in Cuba, Oswald began spending more time with Nelson ’
Delgado, a Puerto Rican who agreed with him in supporting Castro. While Delgado was on leave in January Castro took power, and when
he returned Oswald joked that he must have been down in Cuba
helping Castro win. The Cuban revolution fired Oswald's imagina-
tion, especially when it appeared that other Latin American countries
might follow suit. In June, Dominican exiles based in Cuba launched
to invasion of the Dominican Republic in an unsuccessful attempt to
overthrow Trujillo. Later that summer there were similar exile raids
against Nicaragua, Guatemala, and Haiti. Oswald’s hero during this

--- PAGE BREAK ---I CATfhj
V:
.\o ^ (tU v wH v*Vu(iow> Iv^i CVfwIn
\Nii > fl***jw ^ ^ Aa W^Wk>
68 ...Oiwtlk'j G*m« :\i t\M)< fWk ^4c\V^ rwm^
time was William i
rmy who
L former —„—
had become a major in Castro's army.

That August Morgan received
considerable press coverage when he lured some anti-Castro rebels
into a trap by pretending to be a counter-revolutionary.

Delgado recalled that Oswald wanted to emulate Morgan, lltey
began talking about going to Cuba to join the revolutionary forces as
officers and “lead an expedition to some of these other islands and free
them too.” They talked about how they would “do away with Tru-
jillo." With Delgado’s help, Oswald learned some elementary Span-
After the Cuban government started sending hundreds of Batista
supporters before the firing squad, Delgado lost his enthusiasm for
Castro, but Oswald defended him.

He argued that in all new govern-
ments some errors were bound to occur, but he was certain that these
people had been investigated prior to their executions and that die
American press wasn't publicizing those investigations.

For Delgado,
leaving for Cuba had been barracks talk, mostly, but Oswald still
wanted to go.

He asked Delgado for ideas about how an Anglo-
American like himself could, in Delgado's phrasing, “get with a
Cuban, you know, people, be part of that revolutionary movement^
fand Delgado suggested he get in touch with ^ Cuban embassy.

He
I believed that Oswald later made contact with the Cuban consulate in
iLos Angeles and received mail—perhaps pro-Cuban literature—from
There.

But for some reason Oswald abandoned the idea of going to
•Cuba, at least for the moment.

..

.

Delgado also remembered that Oswald had no use for religion
“He used to laugh at Sunday school...

mimic the guys that fell out
to go to church.

.

.

..

.

Oswald told him that “God was a myth or a
legend, that basically our whole life is built around this one fake-
hood." The Bible was simply “a novel." Oswald preferred Das /Capital
and other political books like George Orwell's Animal Farm.

Through Delgado, we are able to see that Oswald had little sense of
irony.

As he described Animal Farm to Delgado, the farmer repre-
sented the imperialistic world, and the animals were the workers or
socialist people, and "eventually it will come about that the socialists
will have the imperialists working for them.” When he was asked if
Oswald had explained that after the pigs took over the farm they
became like the farmers, Delgado replied, “No; just that the pigs and
ranimals had revolted and made the farmer work for them.

Oswald
A had read the book literally and obviously missed Orwell s pome.

/ Nelson Delgado's name appears in many conspiracy books, t?ut
[JKV cvu{ v* v> 0y^b
A Lvv,i| rx ktVtivPV
A,, la?

ii-vk fj
1
Ink (W# L Wfp Arfwfl WKu
finx %fl\vu .

udv) uv*W il WH flu WMf
Ltur UP-
., ,T.

H^'i, ,'V v--v », , .

- „.

'y '»w ' mfr - y /»-,.» Ty, rji'f -j
-ri>ie * yJu
JlAwt' 'ru-t' 0 £OVvJtTkV.\v \v\4vt U L——-i
f] mainly because he testified that Oswald was a poor rifle snot when he
was in the Marines:
r 11
i fa .

kw: .

Q.

Did you fire with Oswald?

A.

Right; I was in the same line....

It was a pretty big joke, because
he got a lot of “Maggie’s drawers" [a red flag indicating the shot had
missed the target], you know, a lot of misses, but he didn’t give a dam.

Q.

Missed the target completely?

A.

He just qualified, that’s it.

He wasn't as enthusiastic as the rest of
us.

We all loved—liked, you know, going to the range.

yC The key_elemcnt in this account is that Oswaldwasn't enthusiastic.

.—he didn’t give a dam.

He scorccTJust one poIHTabove the score
necessary to qualify.

As a raw recruit he had done better.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He scorccTJust one poIHTabove the score
necessary to qualify. As a raw recruit he had done better. And accord-
ing to a report in Time, his Marine rifle-score book showed him
’’making 48 and 49 points out of a possible 50 in rapid fire at 200 yards
from a sitting position, without a scope.”
In the spring of 1959 Oswald struck up an acquaintance with Kerry
Thomley, another young radar operator, who would be so impressed
by Oswald that he would write a novel about him aftctiusjfcfection. As in the case of Delgado, Oswald^ccameThferested in Thomley after
Thomley seemed to agree with some of his ideas—beginning with an
admiration for the new Cuban leader. They met at a bull session
during which Oswald learned that Thomley, too, was an atheist. "What do you think of communism?” Oswald asked him. When
Thomley replied he didn’t think much of it, Oswald told him, ’’Well,
I think the best religion is communism.” At first Thomley felt that
Oswald was merely playing to the crowd, but he later decided that
Oswald sincerely believed “communism was the best system in the
world.” AlLfiough hc noticed some gaps in Lee’s knowledge, Thomley
consider^ him to'Be^TIextremely~intelligent,v’ am
learning after the assassination that Oswald had never finished high
school. He thought the news media underestimated Oswald's under-
standing of Marxism:
I certainly think he understood much more than many people in the
1
press have seemed to feel. I don't think he was a man who was grasping
onto his particular beliefs ... trying to know something over his head,
by any means. (ptb+'nUU
fhiww
!■>*(
KM
lV>' JF*
"1,
Jjsfc

--- PAGE BREAK ---don't think he was a man who was grasping
onto his particular beliefs ... trying to know something over his head,
by any means. (ptb+'nUU
fhiww
!■>*(
KM
lV>' JF*
"1,
Jjsfc

--- PAGE BREAK ---

70 ... Oswald’s Game
' He also thought Oswald “could analyze what he read very well, but
it was a very subjective impression.” .
Thomley said, "I think in his mind it was almost a certainty that
the world would end up under a totalitarian government or under
totalitarian governments." With that future in mind, Oswald seemed
to be “concerned with his image in history":
He looked upon history as God. He looked upon the eyes of future
people as a kind of tribunal, and he wanted to be on the wumingside
» that 10,000 years from now people would look in toe history books
and say, "Well, this man was ahead of hu time... He wanted to be
looked back upon with honor by future generations. It was, 1 think,
substitute in his case for traditional religion.
The eyes of the future became what to another man would be the eyes
of God, or perhaps to yet another man the eyes of his own conscience.
' ' I don’t think he expected things to develop within bis lifetime. I am
sure that he didn’t. He just wanted to be on the winning side for all
eternity.
Oswald's view of history wasn’t as unusual as it might appear. In
a book on the ideological battles of ^McCarthy penod. Victors.
Navasky wrote, “Ernest Becker has argued that what man really tors
is not so much extinction but extinction with insignificance. Man
wants to know that his life has somehow counted, if not for himself
then at least in a larger scheme of things, that it has left a trace, *lrace
that has meaning.” In wanting his name to live on. young Oswald was
not very different froth a philaKto^isT^ho endows a library in hts
nameTr a politician who hopes to be remembered. But Oswald was
staking his hopes in what has been called "revolutionary immortal-
ity ” And in that particular system of belief, there is a catch. In order
to be remembered, his side has to win. If the revolution he supported
prevailed, he would live on. If it didn’t, he would end up in the dustbin
of history. Fighting for the revolution thus meant fighting for his own
^Fo^meone who defines himself and his >^.TpfJmmortality
through his politics, as Oswajddid (thus making politics h.s religion),
ideological disputes are quite literally a matter of hfe and death. As
Navasky wrote, "No wonder men go into a rage over fine points of
belief: if your adversary wins the argument about truth, you die. our
immortality system has been shown to be fallible, your life becomes
1 A V ft H
The Marxist Marine ... 71
One day Oswald was complaining to his buddy Thornlcy about the
stupidity of a ceremonial parade they were preparing for, and Thom-
ley happened to joke, "Well, come the revolution you will change all
that," at which point Oswald looked at him "like a betrayed Caesar,"
in Thomley’s words, "and screamed . . . ‘Not you too, Thomley*.
. . They never spoke to each other again.on you will change all
that," at which point Oswald looked at him "like a betrayed Caesar,"
in Thomley’s words, "and screamed . . . ‘Not you too, Thomley*.
. . They never spoke to each other again.

--- PAGE BREAK ---0
W
CK CLbh*AvyrLu ±*k )id
,"Vn) i)UU^ jh A i'fr\ JrrH tX'viL lu Lf /ki/iidi /L(|i> O/){^
Vv)\r^vi\i<)|0 flv^ijvV{/|u Wv i/w Iktiwtj Ku<£.

fvaa k> U^vf JP ftx-WU^ /nXky A> A
1/
(\2CP*VA> .

Jp^\>cf W tnv|UVvuv\H Lf lu ll^vP jj b )ml{j
IWs.

\v/lwvH
1j 11 lVit>ifv-l 'U» r*M0|n» Dw^V
Altec ij ^ ikjUtW.jJdil^ W ftne fat AW,
A^ilf ' .^ ^tV ib
5...The Defection
■ \ \
V V
E VEN before he met Kerry Thomley, and while he was daydream-
ing with Delgado about Cuba, Oswald was making concrete plans for
his defection.

He had been thinking about it long enough to anticipate
a problem he would have to face.

After his discharge he was required
to serve threelnore yearsin the inactive Marine Reserves.

How was
a member of the Reserves going to explain applying for a passport for
a trip to Europe and the Soviet Union, without arousing suspicion?

To get around this difficulty, Oswald worked out an elaborate cover
story.

He was due to be discharged from active duty in December
1959.

In March he passed a high school equivalency exam and applied
for admission to the Albert Schweitzer College in Switzerland for the
spring i960 semester.

On his application he indicated that he planned
to attend a summer course at the University of Turku, Finland, before
returning to America to pursue his “chosen vocation.” Turku is 100
miles west of Helsinki, the city through which he would enter the
Soviet Union.

After his application to Schweitzer College was ac-
cepted, he had an alibi.

If anyone questioned him before he entered
the Soviet Union, he could say that he was traveling to Finland to
enroll at Turku and would be visiting Russia as a sidetrip.

(Soon after
the defection, Robert Oswald realized this was his cover story and
mentioned it to a reporter.)
Oswald must have spent a good deal of time working out this
scheme.If anyone questioned him before he entered
the Soviet Union, he could say that he was traveling to Finland to
enroll at Turku and would be visiting Russia as a sidetrip.

(Soon after
the defection, Robert Oswald realized this was his cover story and
mentioned it to a reporter.)
Oswald must have spent a good deal of time working out this
scheme.

The trips that Delgado noticed he took alone into Los An-
geles may have involved visits to libraries oifconsi^ to find
out about European colleges and routes to the Soviet Union.

Th<^lan
Wij Wj Ui-U 0S i-h fki/fc
tfrlt) ^ ft \> Mt t'k
Tb« Defection...

73
potential defector and pick him up.

He talked with Delgado about
extradition treaties and the countries that were “extradition-free,”
like Cuba.

Russia, and Argentina.

Oswald told him about a route to
get to the Soviet Union, in Delgado’s words, “bypassing all U.S.

(censorshig;.

.

.

And he definitely said Mexico to Cuba to Russia.

V'T7~f^emember him at the time mentioning two men that had
defected, and we were wondering how they got there.” Later on,
Delgado asked Oswald if he still intended to go to Cuba.

Oswald
grimaced and acted as if he didn’t know what he was talking about
“When I get out,” he said, “I’m going to school in Switzerland.”
In June 1959 he wrote Robert, “Pretty, soon I’ll be getting out of
the Corps and I know what I want to be and how I’m going to be it,
which I guess is the most important thing in life.”
Later that summer—five months before he was due to be dis-
charged—he saw an opportunity to expedite his departure.

In Decem-
ber 1958 Marguerite had been hit on the nose by a jar that fell off a
shelf at the store where she worked.

She went from doctor to doctor
trying to obtain evidence with which to sue her employer and wrote
Oswald about her troubles.

On August 17 he wrote back saying that
he had applied for a hardship discharge
X f ruu
in order to help you.--- PAGE BREAK ---

She went from doctor to doctor
trying to obtain evidence with which to sue her employer and wrote
Oswald about her troubles. On August 17 he wrote back saying that
he had applied for a hardship discharge
X f ruu
in order to help you. Such a discharge is only rarely given, but if they
know you are unable to support yourself then they will release me from
the U.S.M.C. and I will be able to come home and help you [his em-
phases]. He cautioned her to make the “right” impression when the Red Cross
representative arrived to ask questions about her capacity to support
herself. Marguerite came through. She somehow got letters from an
attorney, a doctor, and two friends—plus one from herself—all saying
she had been injured at work and was unable to support herself. Because of this documentation, Oswald’s petition for discharge was
approved fairly quickly. Oswald’s letter to Marguerite says quite a bit about his nature, for
he never intended to live in Fort Worth and help support his mother. Immediately after his discharge was approved he applied for a pass-
port, indicating he planned to sail from New Orleans within three
weeks to attend the colleges in Europe. Under countries to be visited
he listed Cuba, the Dominican Republic, England, France, Switzer-
land, Germany, Finland, and Russia. Before being discharged he
signed the customary statement promising not to divulge any secret

--- PAGE BREAK ---74...

Oswald's Garni
or confidential information he may have gained during his military
service.

The day after he arrived at his mother’s one-room apartment in
Fort Worth, he informed her that he was going to "board a ship and
work in the export-import business." When she tried to talk him out
of it, he told her his mind was made up and, "If 1 stay here, 1 will
get a job for about $35 a week, and we will both be in the position
that you are in." He visited Robert and his family at their home—
where he altered his explanation somewhat by saying he had plans to
go to New Orleans and "work for an export firm." He said nothing
about boarding a ship.

After two days at home he left for New
Orleans, where he booked passage on the freighter Marion Lykes
bound for France.

On the steamship company’s application form he
described himself as a "shipping export agent." From New Orleans
he wrote Marguerite:
I have booked passage on a ship to Europe.

1 would have had to, sooner
or later, and 1 think it's best I go now.

Just remember above all else that
my values are different from Robert's or yours.

It is difficult to tell you
how I feel.

Just remember (his is what I must do.

I did not tell you atom
my plans because you could hardly be expected to understand.

During the first days at sea Oswald spent most of his time pacing
back and forth on deck.

There were only three other passengers
aboard: a retired army colonel and his wife, and a 17-year-oid student,
Billy Joe Lord.

They found their fellow passenger to be vague about
his travel itinerary and bitter about life in the United States.

He
complained about his mother’s circumstances, the fact that she had
to work in a drugstore to get by.They found their fellow passenger to be vague about
his travel itinerary and bitter about life in the United States.

He
complained about his mother’s circumstances, the fact that she had
to work in a drugstore to get by.

When he saw that Billy Joe, his
roommate, had brought a Bible, he said he couldn’t see how anyone
could believe in God in light of the findings of modem science, since
"anyone with intelligence would recognize there was only matter."
From Le Harve, France, Oswald sailed to Southampton, England,
where he told customs officials he planned to stay in Britain for one
week before proceeding to school in Switzerland.

On the same day he
flew to Helsinki.

U
^ /mU| jf\ (Aj\Shh Ifaimhiitl
I 1Oswald aiTivea in Moscow around the time ofhis twentieth birth-
L A rt day, in October 1959.

Shortly thereafter, he told his Intourist inter-
CMM mfeter, Rimma Shirokova, that he wanted to become a Soviet citizen.

Ci> W'^'She helped him write a letter to the Supreme Soviet requesting citizen-
JW.

.

\N
The Defection...

75
Chio But at that point the Soviet bureaucracy took control.

When his
ti.ldav visa expired.

Oswald was informed he would have to leave the
country immediately.

And since the Russians were not interested he
would have to return to the United States.

Oswald went back to his
hotel room, considered the situation for a lew hours, and cut himself
above his left wrist.

......

Although the WarTen Report cautiously called it an apparent
suicide attempt," there is reason to believe that this incident was
another one of Oswald’s dramatic manipulations.

He knew that
Rimma was scheduled to arrive at his hotel room within the hour and
would find him.

The hospital records, provided by the Soviets after
the assassination, state that his injury was "light” and that Oswald
mid Itis doctor he had cut his wrist to “postpone his departure from
the Soviet Union.He knew that
Rimma was scheduled to arrive at his hotel room within the hour and
would find him.

The hospital records, provided by the Soviets after
the assassination, state that his injury was "light” and that Oswald
mid Itis doctor he had cut his wrist to “postpone his departure from
the Soviet Union.

In fact, this "apparent suicide attempt" was similar
m the minor gunshot wound Oswald had inflicted on htmscjf in Japan..

Each incident seemed to have had the same purpose—to avoid being
sent where he did not want to go.

The emotion expressed was probably
not suicidal despair but an extraordinary willfulness—a determina-
tion to act decisively and even violently to manipulate events.

The strategem worked, at least for a while.

After being released
from the hospital, Oswald was transferred to another hotel, although
his tourist visa had expired.

His diary claims he was interviewed by
.

new set of Soviet officials the same afternoon.

They asked him to
describe the other officials he had seen, and took notes.

But these
bureaucrats also put him off.

Several factors must have entered into
their decision—among them, Oswald’s evident unpredictability and
the overall political situation.

While Oswald was sailing to Europe.

Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev had been touring the United States
after meeting with President Eisenhower at Camp David.

The world
oress was heralding a potential thaw in the Cold War.

Priscilla Johnson thought the Soviets were suspicious of all foreign-
ers, including those whose ideological credentials were unquestion-
able—as.

of course, Oswald’s were not.

Having never joined the Com-
munist party, he had no ideological record.

One of the questions the
second group of officials asked him was.

"What documents do you
have to show who and what you are?" The only thing Oswald could
nroduce was his Marine Corps honorable discharge.

After waiting for three days without getting an answer, Oswald
decided to take action again.--- PAGE BREAK ---

"What documents do you
have to show who and what you are?" The only thing Oswald could
nroduce was his Marine Corps honorable discharge. After waiting for three days without getting an answer, Oswald
decided to take action again. He went to the American Embassy and
attempted to sign away his citizenship. As a non-American he
couldn’t have been forced to return to the United States—it would

--- PAGE BREAK ---i\>r Cl* UVAtU| UlU 1
tmd ll)
A
VVLV?

Wl
tWa
^^VAV^*144 WVj
(W <\W)AX-0» Hi-1!IV'<^{- -
libittfo OL jUf if MiM/Ufrt'Yime
‘itb.O* uXla.

'4ttxef (M w4 tHo/fl
A (,vvui;'O\M OC WU\-U ^^^
have made it impossible for Soviet officials to tell him, as one already
had, “Go home." Although he didn’t get to sign the papers that day,
he eventually got what he wanted.

When he spoke to Priscilla Johnson
two weeks later, he said the Russians had assured him he would be
allowed to stay.

t Toward the end of November the embassy lost track of him in
\ l Moscow.

He surfaced in Minsk the following January.

Some writers
M suspect that during the interim Oswald was being questioned by the
IKGB.

tt*.

udo^Flilie rff*
f Like his fellow radar operators, Oswald had a low security clear-
ance.

In 1964 jojuf Dmiuvan.-lllslormercfeW chief at El Toro, listed
itfiy confidentiallntorination uswaia Was_known to have had access
, tbrrh^iesifion of every base in the West Coast area, their radio
frequencies and call signs, their radar capabilities, and the relative
v strengths of all squadrons.

(The radio frequencies and call signs were
u changed after Oswald’s defection.) He also had some knowledge of the
V U-2 and of a device called TPX-i, which was used to transfer radio
f and radar signals several miles away from their source, diverting
UX' missiles set to home in on them.

And he had received instruction in
1* ftX^^)the then-new MPS 16 height-finding radar equipment, which could
(V^ s* locate planes, such as the U-2, at extremely high altitudes.

But he
LV - - - .

• 1 •
would not have had the technical expertise to reveal very much about
those devices.

(K ^
When Oswald hinted tTSnyder that he knew something of special
interest, he may have been talking about the U-2.• 1 •
would not have had the technical expertise to reveal very much about
those devices.

(K ^
When Oswald hinted tTSnyder that he knew something of special
interest, he may have been talking about the U-2.

But the Russians
already knew a good deal about thcTAmerican “mystery plane." One
intelligence observer has said that the Soviets may have first learned
about the U-2 from a Ukrainian-born scientist and aerial photography
specialist who defected from the United States in 1956.

The existence
of the plane was no secret.

In March 1958 the Japanese magazine Air
Review published photographs of U-2S taken by a 16-year-old boy
standing off-base near a runway of an American installation.

It was apparently standard practice for the Soviet intelligence ser-
vices to debrief defectors, especially military personnel.

As one CIA
officer has remarked, if nothing else, "they will talk to a Marine about
close order drill." We may assume Oswald was debriefed- The impor-
tant thing for our purposes, however, is not that he may have given
/ away secrets but that he didn’t receive the favorable treatment he had
\ clearly expected as a reward.

| According to his wife Marina, he had come to her country hoping
to get an education.

He applied for admission to the Patrice Lumumba
v ^ ^ &vc\ jv tu ^1VUVY\ UA>
I llV> W»4 Wv 'VYVXH 0 V^
The Defection...

77
University of Friendship of Peoples in Moscow, where student^ from
Third World countries learned Marxist ideology.

He wanted to study
philosophy, economics, and politics.

But in May 1961 his application
was turned down.

Looking back, Kerry Thomley thought Oswald
must have assumed that the Russians would accept him in a “much
higher capacity" than they did.But in May 1961 his application
was turned down.

Looking back, Kerry Thomley thought Oswald
must have assumed that the Russians would accept him in a “much
higher capacity" than they did.

He thought Oswald expected them,
“in his own dreams, to invite him to take a position in their govern-
ment, possibly as a technician, and I think he then felt he could go
out into the world, into the Communist world and distinguish himself
and work his way up into the party, perhaps."
ThisJmjje was, of course, completely unrealistic.

Even the most
celebrate<r"dcfectors were never given significant positions in the So-
viet Union.

Guy Burgess and Donald MacLean, high-level members
of British intelligence who had been KGB agents for many years,
defected after learning they were under suspicion by the British.

After
being feted in Moscow, they were given work at the English Depart-
ment of a government publishing house.

Another defector, Morris
Block, was sent to Odessa to work as a shipfitter.

Lee Harvey Oswald
was sent to Minsk to work in a radio factory.

He lived there from
January i960 until May 1962, and for more than half of that time, he
was trying to get out.

When Richard Snyder appeared before the Warren Commission
someone wanted to know what his reaction was when he heard Os-
wald had been sent to live in Minsk.

Snyder, who had once taken a
walk around town while waiting for a train at Minsk, replied, "Serves
him right." Miask was heavily industrialized and unattractive.

Its
winters were long and severe, quite different from anything Oswald
had ever experienced.

He was given an expensive apartment and a
monthly stipend—he lived well, by Russian standards—but he was
assigned manual labor, which he disliked.

The records supplied by the
Soviet government indicate that he made a familiar impression on his
employers: “Citizen Lee Harvey Oswald reacts in an over-sensitive
manner to remarks from the foremen, and is careless in his work.

Citizen L H.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The records supplied by the
Soviet government indicate that he made a familiar impression on his
employers: “Citizen Lee Harvey Oswald reacts in an over-sensitive
manner to remarks from the foremen, and is careless in his work. Citizen L H. Oswald takes no part in the social life of the shop and
keeps very much to himself."
While Oswald was in Minsk, the American plots to assassinate
Fkld Castro began. The idea originated during the planning stages of
the Bay of Pigs invasion, while Eisenhower was soil in ,
jew CIA oft ran It were mvaHrec. The -armfihnTmTr. m-n
Caws ^mnutinn mjgjL mttr mt mvtsuMi teas ZL _r
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---78...

OfwiM'i Gtmt
P°FrSra Imment President John F.

Kennedy took office, Cuba
was a troublesome burden.

In his first State of the Union message he
said.

"In Latin America, Communist agents seeking to exploit that
region's peaceful revolution of hope have established a base on Cuba.

.

Our objection with Cuba is not over the people s dnve for a better
life.

Our objection is to their domination by foreign and domestic
tyrannies." He warned that such domination in Latin America can
never be negotiated." The public was alarmed by this new Soviet ally
 “only 00 miles from Miami,” as the popular expression went.

A
month after the Bay of Pigs debacle, the House of Representatives
passed a resolution declaring that Cuba was "a clear and present
danger" to the Western Hemisphere.

Editorial writers cited the
Monroe Doctrine and demanded that the administration do all it
could to get rid of the Castro government.

When other methods failed,
the assassination idea bobbed to the surface again.

Nobody knows precisely who ordered the assassination attempts.

,
Despite a thorough investigation in 1975, Senator Frank Church s .

senate committee on intelligence activities couldn t determine ;
whether the CIA acted on its own or on orders from above.

During
the investigation Church predicted to the Baltimore Sun.

The people
will recognize that the CIA was behaving during those years like a
rogue elephant rampaging out of control,” and the phmse rogue
elephant” quickly embedded itseirin the public mind.

But that was
not the conclusion reached by Church's committee in its report four
months later:
The picture that emerges from the evidence is not a clear one..

.

.

The
Committee finds that the system or executive command and control was
so ambiguous that it is difficult to be certain at what levels assassination
activity was known and authorized..

The
Committee finds that the system or executive command and control was
so ambiguous that it is difficult to be certain at what levels assassination
activity was known and authorized.

This situation creates the disturbing
prospect that Government [i.e., CIA] officials might have undertaken
the assassination plots without it having been uncontrovertibly clear
that there was explicit authorization from the Presidents.

It is also
possible that there might have been a successful ptausibU; denial in
which Presidential authorization was issued but ts now obscured.

One committee member has said that pinning downresponsibility
for these activities was “like nailing Jello to a wall.

The committee
ended up criticizing CIA officials for failing on several occasions to
disclose their plans and activities to superior authorities, or to do so
^7— if j ‘4AsiMui'j 1/) K7
The Defection...

79
with sufficient detail and clarity." But it also criticized administration
officials “for not ruling out assassination, particularly after certain
Administration officials had become aware of prior assassination
That last statement was a reference to former Attorney General
Robert Kennedy, who served as a liaison with the CIA on Cuban
policy for the White House.

On May 7.

1962, Kennedy had been
informed by CIA general counsel Lawrence Houston and another
CIA officer, Sheffield Edwards, that an intermediary for the CIA had
contacted Mafia leader Sam Giancana before the Bay of Pigs with a
proposition of paying $150,000 to hire some hit men to go into Cuba
and kill Castro.

Kennedy was led to believe that this plot had been
terminated, but that was untrue.

Since Giancana's association with
the CIA complicated the attorney general’s ongoing attempt to prose-
cute Giancana, he was furious.

Houston recalled Kennedy’s response: ^ tip
“If you have seen Mr.

Kennedy’s eyes get steely and his jaw set ^
...--- PAGE BREAK ---

Houston recalled Kennedy’s response: ^ tip
“If you have seen Mr. Kennedy’s eyes get steely and his jaw set ^
... his voice get low and precise, you get a definite feeling of unhappi-J
One of the few things made clear by the Church committee report
was that, following the Bay of Pigs humiliation, the Kennedy adminis-
tration put considerable pressure on the CIA to "do something about
Castro.” Robert Kennedy’s notes of a White House meeting on No-
vember 4,1961, indicate that he wanted stronger covert action against
Cuba: ’’My idea is to stir things up on [the] island with espionage,
sabotage, general disorder, run and operated by Cubans themselves
with every group but Batistaites & Communists. Do not know if we
will be successful in overthrowing Castro but we have nothing to lose
in my estimate.” .. ,
On November t6 President Kennedy delivered a speech at the
University of Washington in which he said, “We cannot, as a free
nation, compete with our adversaries in tactics of terror, assassina-
tion, false promises, counterfeit mobs and crises.” But at the end of
that month, the president authorized a major new coven action pro-
gram called MONGOOSE, the purpose of which was to “use our availa-
ble assets... to help Cuba overthrow the Communist regime.” It was
a project designed to use Cuban exiles in intelligence and sabotage
activities aimed toward an internal revolt against the Castro govem-
ment—the same idea Robert Kennedy had outlined earlier. On January 19,1962, a meeting of MONGOOSE participants was
held in the attorney general’s office, and the notes taken by a CIA
executive assistant contain the following account of what Robert

--- PAGE BREAK ---\u\Qt\ ail tA ktfoJuL WL
^J^^VL \1HV><V\\S6U W'^1
twAwr «| KiiW /v
80...

Oswald'* Gam#
Kennedy told them:
PnncluMon Overthrow of Castro is Possible
•• a solution to the Cuban problem today carried top priority w
U.S.

Govt.

No time, money, effort-or manpower ts to be
“Yesterday ...

the President had indicated to turn that the final
chapter had not been written—it’s got to be done and will be done.

Former CIA Director Richard Helms told the committee that
during the MONGOOSE period "it was made abundantly clear
to everybody involved in the operation that the desire was to get
rid or STS!!!, regime end to get rid of Cwn,...

Iko pornu™
that no limitations were put on this injunction.

As the p «sure
inrrpased he said “obviously the extent of the means that one
thoukbTwere avrilableT..

increased too" He added" In the percep-
tions8of the time and the things we were trying to do this was one ^
human life against many other human hves that were being lost
...

people were losing their Hves in raids, a lotof P*?p'e hi*?

|
Ufe at the Bay of Pigs, agents were being arrested left and right and
nut before the wall and shot.” Helms testified that he received no •
direct order to assassinate Castro, but he told the committee: I have
testified as best I could about the atmosphere of the time, what I
undeSood was desired, and I don’t want to take refuge tn saymg that
I was instructed to specifically murder Castro.

Other administration officials backed up Helms s picture of^the
' crisis.

Former Secretary of Defense Robert M^amarat«tifie^ e
were hysterical about Castro at the time of the Bay or Pigs and
thereafter, and ...

there was pressure from
the attorney general] to do something about f“tr^.

®“‘ ‘jjjjj
“I don’t believe we contemplated assassination.there was pressure from
the attorney general] to do something about f“tr^.

®“‘ ‘jjjjj
“I don’t believe we contemplated assassination.

We did, however,
^Nevertheless, talk of assassination was in the air
Smathers, former senator from Florida and an old fnend of the prest-
dent’s told the Church committee that the subject came up during a
SSX!

k.

tori with Kennedy on |be Whto H-ta»
testified that the president asked him ’what reaction I thought there
i^uld be throughout South America were Fidel Castro to be assas-
sinated ” After Smathers told him that it would only result in unfavor,
able publicity for the United States, Kennedy agreed with him.

(It was
Kennedy’s habit to ask all manner of questions of to obtain infonna-
tion.)
The Defection ...

81
Later on, Kennedy let Smathers know he didn’t want to hear any
more about Cuba.

One evening when Smathers was a dinner guest:
I iust happened to mention ...

something about Cuba, and the President
took his fork and cracked the plate .

..

and says, for Gods sakes.

quit
talking about Cuba.

On November 9, 1961, reporter Tad Szulc was asked by Robert
Kennedy to meet with the president, off the record, to discuss the
situation in Cuba.

The president asked Szulc a number of questions
about conversations he had had with Castro and what he thought the
United States might do about Cuba, either in a hostile way or in
establishing some kind of dialogue.

Kennedy then asked, What
would you think if I ordered Castro to be assassinated?” Taken aback,
Szulc told him he would strongly disapprove of the idea for both
ethical and pragmatic reasons.

Szulc said that Kennedy replied, ‘‘I
agree with you completely.” The notes Szulc wrote shortly after the
meeting continue:
JFK said he raised question because he was under terrific pressure from
advisers (think he said intelligence people, but not positive) to okay a
Castro murder, said he was resisting pressure.

Officially, the CIA was against the idea as well.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Szulc said that Kennedy replied, ‘‘I
agree with you completely.” The notes Szulc wrote shortly after the
meeting continue:
JFK said he raised question because he was under terrific pressure from
advisers (think he said intelligence people, but not positive) to okay a
Castro murder, said he was resisting pressure. Officially, the CIA was against the idea as well. Only the month
before, its Board of National Estimates had prepared a paper for the
president which concluded that ”it is highly improbable that an exten-
sive popular uprising could be fomented” against Castro and that
Castro’s death “would almost certainly not prove fatal to the regime.”
After hearing this sometimes contradictory testimony, some com-
mittee members came to feel that a Becket-like situation may have
developed in which CIA officials carried out what they believed to be
the wishes of their superiors. At one point. Senator Charles Mathias
questioned Richard Helms:
Q. Let me draw an example from history. When Thomas Becket was
proving 10 be an annoyance, [like] Castro, the King said who wiil rid
me of this man. He didn’t say to somebody, go out and murder him. He
uid who will rid me of this man, and let it go at that. A That is a wanning reference to the problem. Q. You feel that spans the generations and the centuries? A 1 think it does. sir. Q. And that is typical of the kind of thing which might be said, which

--- PAGE BREAK ---g reference to the problem. Q. You feel that spans the generations and the centuries? A 1 think it does. sir. Q. And that is typical of the kind of thing which might be said, which

--- PAGE BREAK ---

82... Oswald's Gams
might be taken by the Director or by anybody else as Presidential
authorization to go forward?
A. That is right. But in answer to that, 1 realize that one sort of grows
up in [the] tradition of the time and 1 think that any of us would have
found it very difficult to discuss assassinations with a President of the
United States. 1 just think we all had the feeling that we’re hired , . .
to keep those things out of the Oval Office.
Q. Yet at the same time you felt that some spark had been transmitted,
that that was within the permissible limits?
A. Yes, and if he had disappeared from the scene they would not have
been unhappy.
The first known CIA plot to assassinate Fidel Castro was set into
motion in August i960, when an omciaHn the CIA’s Office of Medical
Services was given a box of Castro's favorite cigars and asked to treat
them with poison. After being doctored, the cigars were handed over
to an unidentified conspirator on February 13, 1961.
v \w(~ \o Cnta GW"k tow)*
6. •• Getting Out
F EBRUARY 13,1961: At the American Embassy in Moscow, Richard
Snyder found on his desk a letter from Lee Harvey Oswald, whom he
hadn't seen or heard from in over a year. Oswald had decided to
return to the United States, but he was worried about the reception
he might get from the American authorities. He wrote, “I desire to
return to the United States, that is if we could come to some agree-
ment concerning the dropping of any legal proceedings against me.”
asked to have his passport returned and concluded, “I hope that in
recalling the responsibility I have to America that you remember
yours in doing everything you can to help me since I am an American
citizen.”
On February 28 Snyder replied. He asked Oswald to come to Mos-
cow for an interview to determine his citizenship status. Unsure about
the reference to “legal proceedings,” Snyder also sent a dispatch to
the State Department about Oswald's letter, asking whether he might
face prosecution on his return, and if so, should Snyder tell him that?
The State Department responded by saying it had no way of knowing
whether Oswald had broken any laws and could offer him no guaran-
tees. It cautioned Snyder not to return his through the Soviet mails
under any circumstances.
Oswald didn't want to go to Moscow to be interviewed—he was
afraid he might be arrested the minute he set foot on American
territory at the embassy. On March 12 he wrote Snyder again saying
he found it “inconvenient" to come to Moscow:
...83rviewed—he was
afraid he might be arrested the minute he set foot on American
territory at the embassy. On March 12 he wrote Snyder again saying
he found it “inconvenient" to come to Moscow:
...83

--- PAGE BREAK ---84...

Oswald's Gams
I see no reason for any preliminary inquiries not to be put to me in the
form of a questionnaire and sent to me.

I understand that personal
interviews undoubtedly make the work of the Embassy staff lighter than
written correspondence; however, in some cases other means must be
employed.

Snyder replied on March 24, restating the need for him to come to
Moscow.

And there the matter rested, for the moment—a standoff.

Meanwhile, something else was going on in Oswald's life.

On
March 17 he had met Marina Prusakova, an attractive 19-year-old girl,
at a dance at the Minsk Palace of Culture.

He saw her once more at
another dance the following week.

Soon after, Oswald went into the
hospital for an adenoid operation, and Marina visited him there sev-
eral times.

After just these few meetings—and a stolen kiss on a
hospital stairway—Oswald proposed.

Marina, an orphan, lived with
her Aunt Valya and Uncle Ilya, sleeping in their living room.

When
Oswald was released from the hospital on April n, she invited him
home for dinner.

Oswald told her relatives he had come to Russia to
learn the truth about it, not just the ‘'truth” shown to tourists.

He told
them he was happy there.

As he was leaving for work, Ilya put his
arm around Oswald’s shoulders and told him, “Take care of this girl.

She has plenty of breezes in her brain.”
Marina had not yet decided to say yes.

She would later admit that
she had been attracted to Oswald because he was an American, some-
one out of the ordinary compared to her Russian boyfriends.

The fact
that he had a private apartment was appealing, as well.She would later admit that
she had been attracted to Oswald because he was an American, some-
one out of the ordinary compared to her Russian boyfriends.

The fact
that he had a private apartment was appealing, as well.

But Marina
has also said, “I fell in love with the man.” In her biography of
Marina, Priscilla Johnson McMillan noted that the ideal man of
Marina's imagination was Pechorin, the protagonist of Mikhail Ler-
montov’s story “A Hero of Our Time.” She wrote, "Vengeful and
cold, Pechorin is forever spinning webs of intrigue that destroy all
those whose lives touch his own.” McMillan pointed out that Pecho-
rin shunned emotional contact with other people and boasted, "How
many times have I played the part of an axe in the hands of fate?

Fame
is a question of luck.

To obtain it, you only have to be nimble.”
On April 18 Oswald proposed again and insisted that they be mar-
ried right away or break up—he couldn't go on seeing her, he said,
without having her.

They were married as soon as it could be ar-
ranged, on April 30.

They had known each other for six weeks.

.Could there have been some reason other than passion for Oswald's
sudden decision to marry?

He later claimed that he had proposed to
WJZWnlJ
(j> (Wf WUlu W
Gening Out...

85
another Russian girl, Ella German, and had been turned down—he
married Marina on the rebound, he said, to Kurt Ella and didn't fail
in love with Marina until after their marriage\That may have been
true.

But it would have been unusual for Oswalaao take a step like
marriage without considering how it would affect his plans to leave
Russia.

Eventually he would have to go to the embassy.

Did it occur
1
to him that if the Americans intended to arrest him it might be to his
advantage to have a Russian wife?

BeforThisWeddihg OswXldThavmg
cuThimsefrofirTrom hiS^fannly, was completely alone.Did it occur
1
to him that if the Americans intended to arrest him it might be to his
advantage to have a Russian wife?

BeforThisWeddihg OswXldThavmg
cuThimsefrofirTrom hiS^fannly, was completely alone.

If theNAmeri-
cans had wanted to take him into custody at the embassy and whrik
him away to the United States to stand trial, no one but Oswald woulck^
have protested.

Marrying a Russian citizen gave him some'Ieverage.

If he were arrested now, his wife could protest to the Soviet govern-
ment—thus raising the specter of an "international incident.”
Although Marina didn’t realize it until after their marriage, Oswald
had told her many lies during their courtship.

He had said he was 24,
increasing his age by three years.

He told her his mother was dead.

And he maintained that he had renounced his American citizenship
and could never go back to the United States.

Having grown up in the
Soviet Union, Marina could understand someone wanting to keep
secrets from potential informers.

But as McMillan put it, "Marina
soon realized that her husband's secretiveness was of another kind
entirely.

He told lies without purpose or point, lies that were bound
to be found out.

He liked having secrets for their own sake.

He simply
enjoyed concealment.”
A few weeks after their wedding they went to see a Polish spy
movie.

Coming out of the theater Lee remarked, “I’d love a life like
that.” When Marina expressed surprise, he explained, “I’d love the
danger.”
During their courtship Marina also began to notice Oswald's inter-
est in Cuba.

In mid-April an army of Cuban exiles supported by the
United States invaded Cuba at the Bay of Pigs and was quickly
defeated.

Marina heard Oswald condemn the invasion and American
policy toward Cuba and Fidel Castro in general.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In mid-April an army of Cuban exiles supported by the
United States invaded Cuba at the Bay of Pigs and was quickly
defeated. Marina heard Oswald condemn the invasion and American
policy toward Cuba and Fidel Castro in general. He took her to see
a Soviet film about Castro and afterward spoke of him as "a hero" and
“a very smart statesman." Oswald sought out the Cuban students
living in Minsk—there were about three hundred of them—to find out
more about Castro’s revolution. The students he met were disap-
pointed in Russia, as he was. According to Marina, he felt the Cubans
would succeed in creating an egalitarian society where the Russians
had failed. l
M*

--- PAGE BREAK ---B6...

Oswald's Game
On May 16, less than three weeks after his marriage, Oswald wrote
the American embassy in a familiar vein:
I wish to make it clear that i am asking not only for the right to return
to the United States, but also for full guarantees that l shall not, under
any circumstances, be prosecuted for any act to this case Unless you
think this condition can be met, I see no reason for a continuance of our
correspondence.

Instead, I shall endeavour to use my relatives in the
United Slates, to see about getting something down in Washington.

He informed the embassy he had gotten married: "My wife is Russian
.

..

and is quite willing to leave the Soviet Union with me.

...

He
said he would not leave without her, adding, "So with this extra
complication, I suggest you do some checking up before advising me
further.” ,
Earlier that month Oswald had written a letter to his brother
Robert, his first since 1959, when he told Robert he never wanted to
hear from him again.

Acting as though nothing had happened, Lee
informed Robert of his marriage and invited him to visit him in Russia
sometime.

Testing the waters, he said nothing about his plans to
return.

He also wrote to his mother for the first time in a year and
a half.

After Robert answered in a friendly manner, Oswald wrote a
second time on May 31: "I can’t say whether I will ever get back to
the States or not, if I can get the government to drop charges against
me, and get the Russians to let me out with my wife, then maybe I’U
be seeing you again.

But you know it is not simple for either of those
two things."
When he had received no response to his most recent letter to
Snyder by July, Oswald decided to take his vacation and fly to Mos-
cow.

He still suspected he was walking into a trap.But you know it is not simple for either of those
two things."
When he had received no response to his most recent letter to
Snyder by July, Oswald decided to take his vacation and fly to Mos-
cow.

He still suspected he was walking into a trap.

He told Marina
the embassy was entitled to arrest him because, "I threw my passport
on the table and said 1 didn’t want to be a citizen anymore." Always
sensitive to his legal rights, Oswald must have known that that action
wasn’t enough to put him in jail.

More likely, he was worried he would
be accused of giving the Soviets military information, as he had threat-
ened to do.

Since Oswald hadn’t let the embassy know he was coming, Richard
Snyder was surprised to see this bad penny turn up.

Snyder remem-
bered him as one of the most obnoxious young men he had ever
known.

Since it was a Saturday, the consular offices were closed, and
Snyder suggested he return the following Monday.

Oswald tele-
Gctting Out...

87
phoned Marina and asked her to join him, assuring her, "It’s okay.

They didn’t arrest me." She flew to Moscow on Sunday and accom-
panied him to the embassy the next day.

To determine whether Oswald had committed any expatriating
acts, the embassy personnel questioned him at length about his activi-
ties since he had come to the Soviet Union.

Was he a Soviet citizen,
they asked?

No.

Had he applied for citizenship?

No.

Had he taken an
oath of allegiance to the Soviet Union?

No.

Had he made any state-
ments for the Soviet press or for audiences?

No.

Had he joined a Soviet
trade union?

No.

When he was asked whether he had given the
Russians information he had acquired as a radar operator, he replied
That he was never in fact subjected to any questioning concerning his
life or experiences prior to entering the Soviet Union, and never pro-
vided such information to any Soviet organ....No.

When he was asked whether he had given the
Russians information he had acquired as a radar operator, he replied
That he was never in fact subjected to any questioning concerning his
life or experiences prior to entering the Soviet Union, and never pro-
vided such information to any Soviet organ....

that he doubted in fact
that he would have given such information if requested despite his
statements made at the Embassy.

The Warren Report noted that some of these answers were un-
doubtedly false.

Oswald had almost certainly applied for Soviet citi-
zenship, he had a membership card in a Soviet trade union, and "his
assertion to Snyder that he had never been questioned by Soviet
authorities concerning his life in the United States is simply unbeliev-
able." But at the time, since Oswald’s answers indicated he was still
an American citizen and there was no way of proving otherwise, the
embassy had little choice but to conclude that he had not expatriated
himself.

In a dispatch to the State Department, Snyder reported Os-
wald's many denials and added:
Oswald indicated some anxiety as to whether, should he return 10 the
United States, he would face possible lengthy imprisonment for lus act
of remaining in the Soviet Union.

Oswald was told informally that the
Embassy did not perceive, on the basis of the information in its posses-
sion, on what grounds he might be subject to conviction leading to
punishment of such severity as he apparently had in mind.

It was clearly
stated to him, however, that the Embussy could give him no assurance
as to whether upon his desired return to the United States he might be
liable to prosecution for offenses committed in violation of laws of the
United States or of any of its States.

Oswald said he understood this.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It was clearly
stated to him, however, that the Embussy could give him no assurance
as to whether upon his desired return to the United States he might be
liable to prosecution for offenses committed in violation of laws of the
United States or of any of its States. Oswald said he understood this. He
had simply felt that in his own interest he could not go back to the
United States if it meant returning to a number of years in prison, and
had delayed approaching Soviet authoriues concerning departing from

--- PAGE BREAK ---^ fc'K M ')H /KM A.

/tX
: .;.-c l i-
U...

Otwald’l G»m«
the Soviet Union until he "had this end of the thing straightened out."
Snyder concluded:
Twenty months of the realities of life in the Soviet Union have clearly
had a maturing effect on Oswald.

He suited frankly that he had learned
a hard lesson the hard way and that he had been completely relieved of
his illusions about the Soviet Union at the same time that he acquired
a new understanding and appreciation of the United States and the
meaning of freedom.

Much of the arrogance and bravado which charac-
terized him on his first visit to the Embassy appears to have left him.

When McMillan read that last passage to Marina Oswald after the
assassination, Marina burst out laughing and remarked that "without
an ulterior purpose he would never have said any such thing."
It now appeared that he would be allowed to go home.

But despite
the assurances Snyder had given him, Oswald remained wary.

Upon
I returning to Minsk with his wife, he began preparing a cover story to
I protect himself, just as he had done when he planned his defection.

After the assassination one of the items found among Oswald’s
belongings was a twelve-page handwritten account of his life in Russia
which he had grandly entitled "Historic Diary." When portions of the
diary appeared in the news media, Oswald’s melodramatic tone made
it appear as if he were a highly emotional young man who had become
thoroughly disillusioned with the Soviet Union.

What no one realized
then was that the "Historic Diary’’ was not a diary at all—that is, it
was not a daily, spontaneous account of his experiences in Russia.

It
had been written up after his July interview at the embassy.1
The Warren Commission staff noticed anachronisms in the diary.

Entries for particular days sometimes alluded to events that hadn’t yet
occurred.It
had been written up after his July interview at the embassy.1
The Warren Commission staff noticed anachronisms in the diary.

Entries for particular days sometimes alluded to events that hadn’t yet
occurred.

Because of these discrepancies, the Warren Report noted
that Oswald had apparently written many entries at a later date,
possibly with "future readers in mind," and that it wasn’t an accurate
guide to the details of his activities.

Despite this skepticism, however,
the report relied on the diary to establish Oswald’s state of mind when
he decided to return to the United States.

It quoted an entry dated
January 4-31, 1961:
I am starting to reconsider my desire about staying.

The work is drab,
the money 1 get has nowhere to be spent.

No night clubs or bowling
alleys, no places of recreation except the trade union dances.

I have bad
.

Atll-Urvvto Uh(j Lift Ifixrtto'j ^ ~
OMkki AtoUt (A hub'm vf/fa >yfc hi jtf!

'
/KM <V> l/W MA/U.UA-
0' faI i ^ 0ul • ■• •89
.

enough.

uijftu, JU
The report concluded thal “a great change must have occurred in ^
Oswald’s thinking to induce him to return to the United States," and
suggested that he came back chastened—his return "publicly testified
to the utter failure of what had been the most important act of his
life." The idea that Oswald had leaned his lesson and was humbled
was, of course, the same impression he had created with Richard
Snyder.

But Oswald’s actual purpose in writing the diary is suggested by its
contents.

Point by point, the diary covered most of the questions he
had been asked at the embassy.

It begins with his arrival in Moscow
full of hope and idealism.

It describes his attempt to renounce his
citizenship—omitting his threat to give away secrets.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It begins with his arrival in Moscow
full of hope and idealism. It describes his attempt to renounce his
citizenship—omitting his threat to give away secrets. A November
entry mentions the interview he had with Aline Mosby, which he
knew had been published in the United States: "I give my story, allow
pictures, later story is distorted, sent without my permission, that is:
before I ever saw and O.K.’ed her story." His questioning by Soviet
officials is made to appear extremely perfunctory. The diary claims he was offered Soviet citizenship but turned it
down. It says he was asked to address a meeting of workers in Minsk
but politely refused. It says nothing of his joining a trade union. After
recording his growing disillusionment with the Soviet system, he
wrote:
Feb, in [19611 Make my first request of American Embassy, Mos-
cow for reconsidering my position. I stated "I would like to go back to
US."
Feb. 28th I receive letter from Embassy. Richard E. Snyder stated
“I could come in for an interview anytime I wanted.”
March i-r6 I now live in a stale of expectation about going back to
the U.S. Oswald didn’t mention his concern about the possibility he would be
arrested. The rest of the diary depicted a continuing disillusionment
with the Soviet Union and an uncharacteristic silence about politics. In short, the "Historic Diary" was a self-serving account that could
be used as evidence that he had violated no American laws. It mav
also have served to get his stdry^tfafght in hiTowh mind, in case he
was questioned by the authorities after he arrived in the United Slates,
as indeed he would be.

--- PAGE BREAK ---90...

Oswald's Gama
l
( %
f/Md
By January iq6r the only hitch remaining was getting the Ameri-
can!

to agreeto let Marina come into the country.

The embassy wrote
Oswald suggesting that he precede his wife to the United States, but
he refused.

Sometimes he would tell; Marina, “If it hadn't been for
you, 1 could have gone to America long ago.” And she would counter
his accusation with perhaps more truth than she realized, “The only
reason you’re waiting for me is—you're afraid they'll arrest you if
you're alone.”
During January Oswald got troubling news from his.

mother, who
wrote him that the Marines had changed his honorable discharge to
a dishonorable On fact, an “undesirable”) discharge.

He must have
suspected this change was a prelude to criminal charges, for on Janu-
ary 30 he wrote Robert:
You once said that you asked around about whether or not the U.S.

government had any charges against me, you said at that time “no,"
maybe you should ask around again, it's possible now that the govern-
ment knows I'm coming they’ll have something waiting If you find
out any information about me, please let me know.

I'd like to be ready
on the draw so to speak.

On the same day he also wrote John Connally, who he believed was
still secretary of the navy.

(Connally was by that time governor of
Texas.) Oswald’s letter to him was a shrewd mixture of gall and
dissembling:
I wish to call your attention to a case about which you may have
personal knowledge since you are a resident of Ft.

Worth as 1 am.

In
November 1959 an event was well publicized in the Ft.

Worth newspa-
pers concerning a person who had gone to the Soviet Union to reside
for a short time (much in the same way E.

Hemingway resided in Paris).

This person, in answers to questions pul to him by reporters in Mos-
cow criticized certain facets of American life.Hemingway resided in Paris).

This person, in answers to questions pul to him by reporters in Mos-
cow criticized certain facets of American life.

The story was blown up
into another “turncoat” sensation, with the result that the Navy depart-
ment gave this person a belated dishonourable discharge, although he
had received an honourable discharge after three years service on Sept,
u, 1959 at El Toro Marine Corps base in California.

These are the basic facts of my case.

1 have ami always had the full sanctionof the US.

Embassy, Moscow
( USSR and hence the U.S.

government Inasmuch as i am returning to
the U.S.A in this year with the aid of the U.S.

Embassy, bringing with
fii Arwcrvm) it U*\ Wt]
Getting Out ...91
me my family (since I married in the USSR) I shall employ all means
to right this gross mistake or injustice to a bom-fied [sic) U.S.

citizen and
ex-service man.

The U.S.

government has no charges or complaints
against me.

I ask you to look into this case and take the necessary steps
to repair the damage done to me and my family.

For information I
would direct you to consult the American Embassy, Chikovski St.

19/21,
Moscow, USSR.

Conally referred his letter to the Department of the Navy, which
informed Oswald that it contemplated no change in his undesirable
discharge.

On February 15 Oswald wrote Robert once more.

After indicating
that he and Marina had received their Soviet exit visas, he said:
The chances of our coming to the States are very good.

.

.

How are things at your end?

I heard over the voice of America that
ihey released Powers, the U2 spy plane fellow.

That’s big news where
you are I suppose.

He seemed to be a nice, bright, American-type fellow,
when 1 saw him in Moscow.

You wouldn’t have any clippings from the November 1959 newspa-
pers of Ft Wonh.

would you?

1 am beginning to get interested in just what they did say about me
and my trip here.

The information might come in handy when I get back.--- PAGE BREAK ---

1 am beginning to get interested in just what they did say about me
and my trip here. The information might come in handy when I get back. I would hate
to come back completely unprepared. Oswald may have had a particular reason for mentioning Francis
Gary Powers. The Russians had created an international sensation by shooting
down Powers's U-2 plane in May i960. Powers cooperated with his
captors by revealing what he knew, and President Eisenhower was
forced to admit that the United States had been conducting reconnais-
sance flights over Soviet territory. It was one of the Soviets' most
impressive propaganda coups ever. That August, Powers went on trial
in Moscow. Oswald couldn't have missed hearing about it—exceqpcs
from the trial became daily fare on Soviet television, and a movie of
the trial made the rounds at neighborhood theaters. During his trial
Powers’s defense attorney, Mikhail Griniev, had emphasized that
"the divulgence of state secrets in the United States is punishable by
ten years' imprisonment, or a fine of ten thousand dollars, or both."
Griniev pointed out that Powers had said: “I know that I shall be tried
in your court, but if I happen to return home I shall be tried there
♦

--- PAGE BREAK ---92...

Oiwmld'i GUM
as well." In February 1962 Powers was exchanged for an imprisoned
Russian spy, Colonel Rudolf Abel.

The ten-year sentence for divulging state secrets may have been the
kind of lengthy prison sentence Oswald was worried about.

Over and
over he had asked Robert to look into certain unspecified charges be
might be faced with.

Robert apparently didn’t know what he was
talking about He may have wanted Robert to send him the newspaper
clippings so he could find out whether anything had been said about
his threat to expose military secrets.

In any case, the Powers case
stayed on his mind, for two weeks later he wrote Robert: “In another
month or so it’ll start to thaw out here although I suppose it’s already
hot in Texas.

I heard a “voice of America’’ program about the Rus-
sians releasing Powers.

I hope they aren’t going to try him in the U.S.

or anything.”
By May the paperwork was finally completed and the Oswalds and
their infant daughter June left the Soviet Union.

It had taken Oswald
fifteen months to get out On board the SS Maasdam Oswald found
some stationery and spent hours in the ship’s library writing about
politics.

Still worried about his reception, he prepared himself for the
hostile questions Ameican reporters might ask a returning defector.

He compiled a list of possible questions and n*o sets of answers—one
giving sanitized responses reminiscent of his diary and the other
giving what was evidently the truth.

Here are some of the dual an-
swers he gave.

IVhy did you go to the Soviet Union?

One response was that he went
as a tourist “to see the land, the people and how their system works.’’
The other, that he went “as a mark of disgust and protest against
American political policies in foreign countries, my personal sign of
discontent and horror at the misguided line of reasoning of the U.S.

Government/* t _ .

rr .

,
What are the outstanding differences between the Soviet union and
the United States?rr .

,
What are the outstanding differences between the Soviet union and
the United States?

Answers: “freedom of speech, travel, outspoken
opposition to unpopular policies, freedom to believe in god, and
"None, except in the U.S.

th?

living standard is a little higher, free-
doms are about the same, medical aid and the education system in the
USSR is better than in the USA.”
Are you a Communist?

“No, of course not...." and Yes.

basically,
although I hate the USSR and [the] socialist system I still think
Marxism can work under different circumstances."
The defector was coming home, essentially unchanged.

7.

• a Homecoming
ON June 8,1962, a Fort Worth newspaper carried a photograph of
lee Harvey Oswald and an article headlined, "Ex-Marine Reported
on Way Back from Russia.** Six days later the Oswalds arrived at
Love Field, the Dallas airport Robert and his family met them and
brought them home to stay until they could get settled—they would
live at Robert’s for about a month.

Oswald had cautioned his brother
to make no statements to the press before he got home—“None at
all!*’—and now, when reporters called the house Oswald refused to
talk with them.

A week later * Fort Worth Press writer sent him a
letter asking for an interview, saying that Oswald’s story might be
liable to a magazine or book publisher or possibly even to the movies.

• The writer warned Oswald he might have trouble finding a job in Fort
Worth: "You would be surprised how many people still link the name
Lee Oswald with *traitor* and ‘turncoat.’ ” Oswald never answered.

Marina enjoyed her first taste of American life.

Robert’s wife, Vada.

cut her hair and gave her a permanent, and Marina seemed delighted
with the way she looked.

She bought her first pair of shorts and was
overwhelmed by the supermarkets.

Before long Oswald would begin
speaking disparagingly of his wife as a typical American girl, someone
more interested in material things than in important political issues.--- PAGE BREAK ---

She bought her first pair of shorts and was
overwhelmed by the supermarkets. Before long Oswald would begin
speaking disparagingly of his wife as a typical American girl, someone
more interested in material things than in important political issues. He would complain that he had thought he married a different sort
of girl, **a Russian girl.**
On June 19 Oswald called on Peter Gregory, a Siberian-born petro-
leum engineer who taught Russian at the Fort Worth Public Library. Oswald asked if Gregory would write him a letter of recommendation,
certifying his competence in the Russian language, so that he might
...93
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---iW 4 idi^y
(||
94.,.

Oswald's GUM
try to get a job as a translator.

(Oswald was by this time jluent in
ussianj.Gregory opened a book at random and had Oswald readlor
him, then gave him the letter he wanted.

Through Gregory, Oswald
would meet other members of the Russian-speaking Emigre commu-
nity in the area.

Meanwhile, the Fort Worth FBI had taken note of Oswald’s return.

Special Agent John Fain saw Oswald’s picture in the paper and called
Marguerite, and then Robert, to locate Oswald and arrange for an
interview.

Oswald went down to the FBI office and spoke to Fain and
another agent for about two hours.

Fain found him to be “insolent and
tense.” When Fain asked him why he went to Russia, Oswald said
“because I wanted to” and “to see the country.” The FBI agent
1*4\ * wanted to make sure Oswald wasn’t going to be recruited by Soviet
V/%jA intelligence, and on this point Oswald “seemed to be just a little bit
V* derisive of our questions, and hesitated to bring out whether or not
the Soviet intelligence officials might have been interested in him or
\r.*< might have contacted him.

...

He just didn’t think he was that
\ important; in other words, that they would want to contact him.”
’’"According to Fain’s written report, Oswald denied that he had tried
to renounce his American citizenship or that he had said he would
reveal radar secrets to the Soviets.

Fain asked Oswald to take a lie
• detector test on whether he had dealings with Soviet intelligence and
Oswald refused.

In mid-July he got a job as a sheet-metal worker for a manufacturer
of louvers and ventilators and moved his family to an apartment on
Mercedes Street, in a low-income area of Fort Worth.

He spent much
of his free time reading books on history and politics he’d checked out
of the library.

As soon as he had settled, he sent an airmail payment
to The Worker for renewal of his subscription.He spent much
of his free time reading books on history and politics he’d checked out
of the library.

As soon as he had settled, he sent an airmail payment
to The Worker for renewal of his subscription.

On August (2 he sent
a letter to the Socialist Workers party asking for information, and the
party sent him some literature.

He also wrote to the Fair Play for
Cuba Committee in New York and received some pamphlets.

Agent Fain hadn’t been satisfied with Oswald's responses in their
first meeting.

He decided to interview Oswald again on August 16, and
went to the Mercedes Street address.

The interview went over the
same ground and yielded similar denials.

Marina recalled:
Lee had just returned from work and we were getting ready to have
dinner when a car drove up and [a] man introduced himself and asked
Lee to step out and talk to him.

There was another man in the car.

They
talked for about two hours and I was very angry, because everything had
Homecoming...

95
gotten cold I asked who these (men) were, and he was very upset
over the fact that the FBI was interested in him.

...

Lee said that the
FBI had told him that in the event some Russians might visit him and
would try to recruit him to work for them, he should notify the FBI
agents.

I don’t know to what extent this was true.

...

he said that they
saw Communists in everybody and they are much afraid ..

• inasmuch
as I had returned (with him] from Russia.

The FBI’s concern was that the Soviets might be able to coerce
Oswald into intelligence work because Marina had relatives in Russia.

Oswald quickly developed what an acquaintance would call an •‘ex-
treme allergy to the FBI.” Fain had gotten Oswald’s new address
from Robert, and from that point on.

whenever Oswald moved, he
rented a post office box and refused to give Robert his home address.

After this FBI visit, Marina says he remained nervous and irritable
for some time.--- PAGE BREAK ---

whenever Oswald moved, he
rented a post office box and refused to give Robert his home address. After this FBI visit, Marina says he remained nervous and irritable
for some time. If the past is any guide, his fear of being arrested must
have been renewed. . . . _ . . Oswald' didn’t know it, but before Fain retired in October, he
determined that Oswald wasn’t working in a sensitive industry, and
decided to close his case, at least temporarily.1
Many of the Russian-speaking emigres in the Dallas-Fort Worth
area had heard about Oswald's arrival, and they were eager to find out
about current conditions in the Soviet Union. Peter Gregory gave a
dinner party to introduce the Oswalds to George Bouhe and Anna
Meiler. Like most of the emigres, Bouhe and Meiler were strongly
anti-Communist. They quickly discovered they had nothing in com-
mon with Oswald politically. When Bouhe asked about the living
standards of the Russian worker, Oswald told him he had made 90
rubles a month and had a rentfree apartment. Pressed about other
costs, Oswald said a pair of boots cost about 19 rubles, cafeteria food
about 45. Bouhe said, “90 minus 45, minus 19, what is left?” Oswald
didn’t respond. Bouhe soon stopped discussing the Soviet system with
Bouhe later visited the Oswalds at their apartment, and when he
saw what few things they had, he collected clothes for the whole
family and bought some groceries and a crib for the baby, who had
sleeping on the floor in a suitcase. Oswald was furious. He picked
up a shirt Bouhe had brought him and measured and remeasured it. Finally Bouhe said, “Lee, this is to go to work. Wear them 3 or 4 days,
get them dirty, then throw them away." Oswald folded the shirt and
i

--- PAGE BREAK ---96...

Oswald's Game
gave it back to him.

He said.

"I don’t need any." The other gifts were
tacitly accepted, however.

Anna Meller visited, too, and was shocked
to sec Marxist books in the living room.

She thought Oswald was
extremely irresponsible in not taking better care of his family and in
refusing to let Marina learn English.

(Oswald wanted to retain his
Russian and wanted June to learn the language.) From his point of
view, he was eminently responsible: he was pursuing important politi-
cal concerns that they were too self-centered and bourgeois to recog-
nize.

But the way he criticized both the Soviet Union and the United
States made Meller think he was mentally ill.

She told the Warren
Commission, "He had always something hidden; you [could] feel it."
That summer Gregory’s son Paul, a student, paid Marina to tutor
him in Russian for a couple of months.

Sometimes he would drive the
Oswalds to the grocery store, and he was amazed at how little Lee
bought.

Oswald would get the cheapest possible cut of meat and then
, haggle to make sure they gave him the best of the lot.

Paul remem-
bered that once when they were coming out of the store Marina
missed the step down and fell with June in her arms.

Oswald rushed
over to make sure the child was all right, ignoring his wife, and then
gave her a tongue-lashing.

*
Paul Gregory believed that Oswald considered him a friend, while
other people were "beneath him." The two young men discussed
politics, and Oswald expressed admiration for Castro and for Presi-
dent Kennedy, whom he called "a good leader." He told Paul the
Party leaders in Russia were " 'ruining the principles which the coun-
try should be based on.’ In other words, they were not true Commu-
nists." When Paul mentioned his interest in going to the Soviet Union
as an exchange student, Oswald advised, "Just go over there.

Don t
( $ gCt on a waiting list.

You will never get there.

If you want to do
something, go ahead and do it.You will never get there.

If you want to do
something, go ahead and do it.

You will get involved in red tape."
After recalling this conversation for the Warren Commission, Greg-
ory added, "And I think that was possibly the way he thought about
everything." After the assassination, Paul told the FBI that Oswald
was "arrogant, stubborn, and would not discuss anything but his
particular type of politics, which was definitely radical."
Before long, other members of the Russian-speaking community
were offering their help.

Meller and Bouhe noticed that Marina’s teeth
were in very poor condition and sought out the assistance of another
*migr*, Elena Hall, a dental technician, who directed Marina to a
low-cost clinic and began collecting money and clothes for the family.

Elena's husband John drove her to the Mercedes Street apartment,
Homecoming...

97
and on the way over she told him how destitute the Oswalds were.

When they walked in, John Hall remembered, Oswald had just been
to town to buy "this 50-cent magazine on Russia, which of course I
thought, to myself, here they are destitute and he is spending 50 cents
on a magazine, especially about Russia." Oswald seemed to him "a
so-called egghead." At a later meeting Hall, who was a Baptist and
owned his own dental lab, tried to convince Oswald that "our system
was a tremendous enterprise, was the best." But to Hall’s mind, this
young man was "completely out in left field in politics" and "you just
didn’t have any idea at all that you were going to change him." Elena
thought the same thing.

Her attitude was that after seeing what Russia
was like he should have learned his lesson.

Oswald resented the emigres' help, never thanked anyone, and
showed his contempt for these middle-class anti-Communists.Her attitude was that after seeing what Russia
was like he should have learned his lesson.

Oswald resented the emigres' help, never thanked anyone, and
showed his contempt for these middle-class anti-Communists.

Marina
told the Commission, "Well, he thought that they were fools for
having left Russia, they were all traitors." He said that they only liked
money, and that everything is measured by money in this country.

There was only one exception to his general dislike of this group
—George dc Mohrenschildt, a petroleum engineeer from Dallas.

Al-
most thirty years Oswald’s senior, de Mohrenschildt had a flamboyant
personality and a colorful past.

Bom in Russia in 1911, de Mohren-
schildt had been an officer in the Polish Army and a roughneck in the
Louisiana oilfields.

In 1941 he had worked for a French intelligence
agent collecting information on people involved in pro-German activ-
ity in the United States.

Nicknamed "The Mad Russian," de Mohren-
schildt was a nonconformist.

It was said of him that he might show
up at a formal dinner in a bathing suit or come to a church function
and announce that he was an atheist.

George, who had the reputation
of being a "leftwing enthusiast" of some kind, was the one emigre who
would listen to Oswald’s political ideas and take him seriously.

For
this reason, Oswald looked up to him, and apparently was more open
with him than he was with most people.

The older man would be
Oswald’s confidant until de Mohrenschildt left Dallas in April 1963.

De MohrSSscSfidt told the Warren Commission, "I could under-
stand his point of view, because that is what happens exactly in the
whole world with dissatisfied people.

If they are constructive, they
study more and try to get good jobs and succeed.

The [others] try to
form a revolutionary party.

And he was one of them." He described
Oswald as "an idealistic Marxist" who "had read and created some
sort of a theory, a Marxist theory for himself....--- PAGE BREAK ---

The [others] try to
form a revolutionary party. And he was one of them." He described
Oswald as "an idealistic Marxist" who "had read and created some
sort of a theory, a Marxist theory for himself.... he was building up
a doctrine in his head." He testified that when he asked him why he

--- PAGE BREAK ---98 ...

Oswald’s Game
had left Russia, Oswald replied, “Because I did not find what I was
looking for.”
Q.

And did you ask him what he was looking for?

A.

A Utopia.

I knew what he was looking for—Utopia.

A manuscript found among Oswald’s belongings shows that he did,
indeed, have visions of forming a party and was constructing his own
Marxist doctrine.

In a long, rambling discussion on politics, he wrote:
It is readily foreseeable that a coming economic, political or military
crisis, internal or external, will bring about the final destruction of the
capitalist system; assuming this, we can see how preparation in a special
* p&fty could safeguard an independent course of action after the debacle.

He proposed a new system of pure communism controlled at the local
level, with civil liberties, heavy taxes on profits but none on individu-
als, an abolition of fascist organizations and racial discrimination, and
strict gun controls.

His idealistic goals were teamed with a grandiose
fanaticism that de Mohrenschildt apparently never detected:
Resourcefulness and patient working towards the aforesaid goals are
preferred rather than loud and useless manifestations of protest.

Silent
observance of our principles is of primary importance.

But these pre-
ferred tactics now, may prove to be too limited in the near future, they
should not be confused with slowness, indecision or fear, only the intel-
lectually fearless could even be remotely attracted to our doctrine, and
yet this doctrine requires the utmost restraint, a stale of being in itself
majestic in power Membership in this organization implies adher-
ence to the principle of simple distribution of information about this
movement to others and acceptance of the idea of stoical readiness in
regards to practical measures once instituted in the crisis.

Years later, de Mohrenschildt wrote a manuscript about Oswald that
was published in the House Assassinations Committee hearings.But these pre-
ferred tactics now, may prove to be too limited in the near future, they
should not be confused with slowness, indecision or fear, only the intel-
lectually fearless could even be remotely attracted to our doctrine, and
yet this doctrine requires the utmost restraint, a stale of being in itself
majestic in power Membership in this organization implies adher-
ence to the principle of simple distribution of information about this
movement to others and acceptance of the idea of stoical readiness in
regards to practical measures once instituted in the crisis.

Years later, de Mohrenschildt wrote a manuscript about Oswald that
was published in the House Assassinations Committee hearings.

In it
he said, “What I liked about him was that he was a seeker for justice
—that he had highly developed social instincts.

And I was disap-
pointed in my own children for the lack of such instincts.” His manu-
script described many of their conversations, as de Mohrenschildt
remembered them.

Although his account may not be entirely reliable
—de Mohrenschildt was known to exaggerate—it may still provide
MOT
nto Oswald’s thinkinj
„ Homecoming...

99
De Mohrenschildt wrote that Oswald had been disappointed by his
reception as a defector because he had naively expected “to be treated
as a special person, a prominent refugee, and nothing happened.”
Oswald admitted that living conditions in Russia were poor.

“But
what does it matter” he said, “if everyone is in the same boat, if
everyone suffers.” At least there were no rich exploiters there.

Oswald
said, and no great contrasts between the rich and the poor.

He said
he got out of Russia “because all bureaucrats, all over the world, are
stupid.” Here, in de Mohrenschildt’s words, are Oswald’s opinions on
other subjects:
On integration: Lee’s faith, his strongest belief was—racial integra-
tion.Oswald
said, and no great contrasts between the rich and the poor.

He said
he got out of Russia “because all bureaucrats, all over the world, are
stupid.” Here, in de Mohrenschildt’s words, are Oswald’s opinions on
other subjects:
On integration: Lee’s faith, his strongest belief was—racial integra-
tion.

He told me on many occasions, “it hurts me that the blacks do
not have the same privileges and rights as white Americans.” “Segre-
gation in any form, racial, social or economic, is one of the most
repulsive facts of American life I would be willing any time to
fight these fascistic segregationists—and to die for my black broth-
ers.” Because of his poor, miserable childhood, he probably compared
himself to the blacks.

On world politics: “Under dictatorship people are enslaved but they
know it.

Here the politicians constantly lie to people and they become
immune to these lies because they have the privilege of voting.

But
voting is rigged and democracy here is a gigantic profusion of lies and
clever brainwashing Free people should not remain mere pawns
in the world game of chess played by the rulers.”
On J.

Edgar Hoover: Also he said something about the FBI which
did not strike me at the time as very clever, but history proved his
judgment correct.

“Knowledge is a great power, especially if you
know it about very important people.” Obviously J.

Edgar Hoover’s
files must come to your mind.

On death: “I have had enough time in this short existence of mine.

What shall I do with eternity?

When a rich man dies, he is loaded with
his possessions like a prisoner with chains.

I will die free, death will
be easy for me.”
On Marina: *i never wanted a middle-class wife, mediocre, ob-
scure, money loving.

.

.

George seemed to agree with this opinion of Marina.

He wrote that
he found no “substance” in her: “She was amusing sometimes, witty,
naive mostly, like some Russian peasants, yet with a great deal ot
shrewdness underneath.--- PAGE BREAK ---

George seemed to agree with this opinion of Marina. He wrote that
he found no “substance” in her: “She was amusing sometimes, witty,
naive mostly, like some Russian peasants, yet with a great deal ot
shrewdness underneath. My wife used to call her affectionately ‘that
rascal Marina’—and that description fitted her perfectly.”
According to de Mohrenschildt, Oswald “thought that someday

--- PAGE BREAK ---100 ...

OfwaJd'f GaiM
there would be a ‘coup d'etat’ in this country organized by the Penta-
gon and that the country would become a militaristic, nazi-type dicta-
torship.”
Concerning President Kennedy, de Mohrenschildt wrote, Lee ac-
tually admired President Kennedy in his own reserved way.” He
recalled Oswald praising a picture of Kennedy on the cover of Time
and remarking on how different he looked from the other ratty
j politicos.” He said that Oswald hoped Kennedy would accept coexis-
tence with the Communist world after the Bay of Pigs.

De Mohrenschildt said he told Oswald, “If you want to be a revolu-
tionary, you have to be a fool or to have an inspiration.

And your
actions will be judged by the success or failure of your life”—and
Oswald agreed.

But he also claimed that he urged Oswald to be more
flexible, saying, “Live pleasantly and keep your own ideology to your-
self.” And to that Lee replied, “You are right.

But this society we live
in, it’s so disgusting and degrading.

How can you stand it?

The approving audience Lee Oswald received from this eccentric
but sophisticated man was undoubtedly encouraging to him.

During
this time, de Mohrenschildt spoke highly of Oswald to at least one
acquaintance, who testified, “According to George, ...

he had great
intellectual powers; he was a very clever person...

and very well-read.

...

He told me on several occasions that *.

..

he’s just an idealistic
Marxist.’ ”
In September 1962 a black student named James Meredith tried to
enroll in the all-white University of Mississippi at Oxford.

On the
evening of September 30, a mob of segregationists rioted against the
federal marshalls who were protecting Meredith on campus.

Two
people were killed, and after President Kennedy called out the Na-
tional Guard, former Major General Edwin A.

Walker, who was
believed to have instigated the riot, was arrested for insurrection.Two
people were killed, and after President Kennedy called out the Na-
tional Guard, former Major General Edwin A.

Walker, who was
believed to have instigated the riot, was arrested for insurrection.

This
latest violence in the struggle for civil rights in the South made head-
lines around the world.

Walker had resigned from his army command in West Germany m
1961 after being reprimanded for trying to indoctrinate his troops with
the rightist philosophy of the John Birch Society.

Since then he had
become a national political figure speaking against integration and
Castro's Cuba.

His home base was Dallas.

Oswald was aware of
Walker’s history.

At some point, when Oswald wrote up his theory
that a military coup was possible in America, he argued that the army
had too many conscripts and bases to lead a coup, and that “The case
Homecoming...

101
of General Walker shows that the Army ...

is not fertile enough
ground for a far-nght regime to go a very long way.” He contended
that the coup might come instead from the smaller Marine Corps—
“a rightwing-infill rated organization of dire potential consequences to
the freedom of the United States.” He concluded, “I agree with for-
mer President Truman when he said that The Marine Corps should
be abolished.’ ”
After Walker’s arrest, the news media followed him closely.

He was
released on $50,000 bond on October 7 and arrived at Love Field,
where he was greeted by two hundred supporters.

During the next few
months.

Walker would repeatedly make headlines as he prepared to
stand trial in Mississippi.

As it happened, a group of the emigres came to Oswald’s apartment
on the same Sunday Walker returned, and Oswald announced that he
had been laid off from his job.

(This was, in fact, untrue.

His employer
was satisfied with his performance.

Oswald was simply planning to
quit.) Feeling sorry for Marina and the baby, the emigres offered to
help.--- PAGE BREAK ---

His employer
was satisfied with his performance. Oswald was simply planning to
quit.) Feeling sorry for Marina and the baby, the emigres offered to
help. It was settled that Marina and June would move in with de
Mohrenschildt’s daughter Alexandra and her husband Gary Taylor
for a few days, and then go to live with Elena Hall while Oswald went
to Dallas to look for another job. There were evidently several reasons behind his decision to move
lJu to Dallas. He probablyjwantedjoj^yejn,* cityjvhere the FBI didn’t
a know his address. And he wanted to get away from Marguerite, who
hJcTbccn visiting his family despite his strong objections. He didn’t
tell her where he was going and didn't see her again until after the
assassination. And, just possibly, he may have already turned his
attention to the right-wing leader, General Walker. On arriving in Dallas the following Tuesday, Oswald rented a box
at the main post office. A few days later he got a job at a graphic arts
firm, Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall, as a trainee in photographic reproduc-
tion. Making no reference to Fort Worth, he told his new boss he had
recently gotten out of the Marines. Oswald began receiving his copies of The Worker at the post office. In the October 2 edition there was an appeal for support for two
Communist party officials who were being prosecuted after failing to
register under the McCarren Act. The article spoke of the work being
done by the Gus Hall-Ben Davis Defense Committee with John Abt
as chief counsel. The committee’s address was given with the com-
ment that it needed and invited financial support. After Oswald began
working at Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall, he made up some poster-like blow-

--- PAGE BREAK ---102 ...

ChwaJd'fl Game
ups of an anti-McCarren Act slogan and sent them to the defense
committee as a contribution.

On the front page of the same issue, big
headlines proclaimed: “Gen.

Walker Arrested for Insurrection and,
alongside:
Nation Supports the President’s Action
Punish the Guilty!

Gov.

Barnett Gen.

Walker
White Citizens Council
One year ago on Nov.

u, 1961 The Worker exposed the fascist charac-
ter of Gen.

Edwin A.

Walker and warned the Kennedy administration
and the American people of the need for action against him and his
allies.

A front-page article asserted:
“The general thus becomes the first open candidate for leadership of
the mass movement which the miliury-monopolist-pro-fascist plotters
are now hoping to organize throughout the nation.

.

•
Critical of the “indecisiveness of the Kennedy administration in this
situation/’ 77ie Worker insisted last November that “firmness is essen-
tial” to defeat the ultra-Rights....

In the October 7 issue another front-page story, headlined Gen.

Walker Bids for Fuehrer Role/’ again warned ’’the Kennedy Ad-
ministration and the American people of the need for action agamst
him and his allies." Two weeks later an article, headlined Oxford
Campus Plot for Bloodbath Bared,” contained the assertion that a
coded file, arms and other materials" found in a car driven by one of
Walker’s cronies would reveal that “financial backers of extreme nght
wing groups" were “seeking the violent overthrow of the govern-
ment M
r Oswald probably read, and agreed with, a good deal of this.

After
L his attempt to murder Walker the following April he told Manna he
Paid it because Walker was another Hitler and by killing Hitler in time
many lives could have been saved.

Nothing in The Worker's call for
political action advocated violence.

Many other American newspaper
editorials were saying much the same thing about Walker.

Oswald
1 already had his own ideas about the former army general.Many other American newspaper
editorials were saying much the same thing about Walker.

Oswald
1 already had his own ideas about the former army general.

In hts view,
j the man must have bad three strikes against him—he opposed fair
play for black Americans, he opposed Castro to the extent of calling
For an invasion of Cuba, and he was a potential leader of a right-wing
coup.

But as we’U see, Oswald evidently came to believe that he could
become a hero to the Left by doing away with him.

jL |A
* /& (TV
yvvytT C a
...103
8...Taking Action
F OR most of October and part of November .962 when Os wald was
Uv.ng alone in Dallas.

Marina and June were dependent on the chan y
r.f the Tavlors and the Halls.

From this time onward his family would
2J!S.T.tad of d.

W..h =,b«, poople.

Wb» or" “T
to visit Marina at the Taylors, their relationship seemed so impersonal
Toary that he thought it was "like two fnends mcetmg.

Oswa d
would play with his daughter but never attempted to be alone with
his wife.

Taylor decided Marina's feelings simply weren t important
fac, tKe Oswald marriage had been strained ever since the
SJL.

In Fort Work.

0,.*> hn.

»niok
his wife, giving her a black eye, for allowing Bouhe to teach her some
English.

This was only one of the ways in which he tried to exen his
control over her.

He was often rude and overbearing to his wife in
front of other people, ordering her around in a domineering voice.

As
a teenager, he had yelled orders at his mother in the same manner.

Most of their quarreling reflected their differences over his obses-
sion with politics.

Although Marina agreed with some of h‘8^‘*wtT
she admired Castro, too—she felt the family should cotne first
Oswald, such mundane concerns were bourgeois and stupid.

She
thought he had—as a later friend of Manna's would Put “
overblown opinion of himself, and of what he could and should
achieve in the world.” He in turn complained about her lack of
interest in politics.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Although Marina agreed with some of h‘8^‘*wtT
she admired Castro, too—she felt the family should cotne first
Oswald, such mundane concerns were bourgeois and stupid. She
thought he had—as a later friend of Manna's would Put “
overblown opinion of himself, and of what he could and should
achieve in the world.” He in turn complained about her lack of
interest in politics. One of the emigres, Katya Ford, was questioned

--- PAGE BREAK ---104...

Oswald's Game
Q.

Did she tell you whether or not they discussed politics?

A.

She said she was arguing with him about that.

Certainly, in fact,
[as] he called her, she was a typical American girl, ...

not interested
at all in politics....

She said she wanted a house and family and he said
"AJI the American girls think that way’*.

...

For the rest of their life together, Marina would continually wonder
whether Lee loved her or not and would continue to hope he would
give up this rival, politics, and settle down.

Occasionally Oswald would get into some friendly political argu-
ments with the Taylors.

He talked about the ideal society he had
written about.

AJexandra said, “He believed in the perfect govern-
ment, free of want and need, and free of taxation, free of discrimina-
tion, free of any police force .

.

.

total and complete freedom in
everything.” She felt he was “extremely devoted,, to his ideas and
“very, very rigid.” And she found him persuasive: “He could almost
make anybody believe what he was saying.” But her overall opinion
was negative.

She thought he expected things to be given to him on
a silver platter.

Gary Taylor was a Democrat who often expressed a strong disap-
proval of the John Birch Society, but there was little else he and
Oswald could agree on.

He gathered that Marina's husband was
pro-Communist but anti-Russian, and that Oswald was disappointed
when the Russians assigned him to a factory job instead of giving him
“something important to do.”
Max Clark, a Fort Worth attorney and friend of George de Moh-
renschildt, met Oswald at about this time and got a similar impression
about Oswald's ambitions and his reasons for leaving the Soviet
Union.

Oswald told him he had been unhappy about his work assign-
ment in Minsk and had finally made up his mind that the Russian
system was not “true communism” and that he would “never be able
to get ahead or make his mark” in the Soviet Union.He gathered that Marina's husband was
pro-Communist but anti-Russian, and that Oswald was disappointed
when the Russians assigned him to a factory job instead of giving him
“something important to do.”
Max Clark, a Fort Worth attorney and friend of George de Moh-
renschildt, met Oswald at about this time and got a similar impression
about Oswald's ambitions and his reasons for leaving the Soviet
Union.

Oswald told him he had been unhappy about his work assign-
ment in Minsk and had finally made up his mind that the Russian
system was not “true communism” and that he would “never be able
to get ahead or make his mark” in the Soviet Union.

Clark told the
Warren Commission that Oswald “seemed to have the idea that he
was made for something other than what he was doing.”
In October 1962 a serious international crisis developed over the
introduction of Soviet nuclear missiles into Cuba.

In a dramatic televi-
sion appearance President Kennedy announced that he had ordered
a naval blockade to prevent Soviet ships carrying more missiles from
entering Cuban waters.

After almost two weeks of worldwide fear of
a nuclear war the confrontation ended on October 28, when the Soviet
Union agreed to withdraw the missiles—over the strong protest of
O'1 , cku AL Hi (W^i J> A/Of *1 KTviik4 0two
■h b CryJ'/wt'W- fa
Tilling Action...

105
Fidel Castro.

We have only a glimpse of Lee Harvey Oswald's reaction to this
crisis.

According to one man who met him at a party the following
February, after citing the Bay of Pigs and the missile crisis as exam-
ples of imperialist interventions, Oswald suggested that Kennedy’s
actions had set the stage for a nuclear holocaust.

He added that even
after the missiles had been withdrawn, American-sponsored acts of
terrorism and sabotage against Cuba were continuing.

This was pre-
sumably a reference to the sporadic paramilitary raids conducted by
Cuban exile groups.He added that even
after the missiles had been withdrawn, American-sponsored acts of
terrorism and sabotage against Cuba were continuing.

This was pre-
sumably a reference to the sporadic paramilitary raids conducted by
Cuban exile groups.

(This account was, incidentally, the only report
of Oswald's saying anything critical about President Kennedy before
Ute September 1963.)
A day or two after the missile crisis ended, Oswald dipped a
coupon from a pamphlet the Socialist Workers party had sent him,
checked the box “I would like to join the Socialist Workers Party,”
and sent it via airmail to the New York headquarters.

Writer Albert
H.

Newman has suggested that this action may be read as a sign of
Oswald’s feelings about the missile crisis.

A Trotskyist group, the
Socialist Workers party vehemently supported Castro and often criti-
cized the Soviet Union for being too soft on Western imperialism.

Since there were no chapters of the organization in Texas at that time,
Oswald was unable to join.

On the back of the coupon, now a Warren
Commission exhibit, a portion of the party's message can be seen, and
its tone suggests another reason Oswald may have been attracted to
this group:
...

that you are helping in the greatest cause ever undertaken, and that
your weight really counts.

Socialism is the only road leading away from poverty, inflation, unem-
ployment, imperialist war, totalitarianism—all the world-wide scourges
of decaying capitalism.

Socialism can save us from capitalist barbarism
and open up a new world for humanity.

The most courageous workers,
those capable of the greatest sacrifices, those intelligent enough to see
the task and endowed with the will to carry it out, must take the lead.

That is our historic.

.

.

.

In November Oswald finally rented an inexpensive apartment for
his family on Elsbeth Street in the Oak Cliff section of Dallas.

His
landlady, Mrs.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In November Oswald finally rented an inexpensive apartment for
his family on Elsbeth Street in the Oak Cliff section of Dallas. His
landlady, Mrs. Mahlon Tobias, remembered that when he looked the
place over, he particularly wanted to be shown the back entrance. Weeks later, when she rang his doorbell, Oswald came out the back

--- PAGE BREAK ---It
fRi*
^ and abound the side of the building to see who it was.

The Taylon
Tw helped the Oswalds move in on November 4, and for once Oswald
“Very briefly, thank you, and that was all,” Alexandra
, thanked them.4
Jg t said.

Before a week had passed the Oswalds were quarreling again.

It had
started over a trifle—or so Marina thought.

Perhaps because he
wanted no more visits from the FBI, Oswald had told Mrs.

Tobias
that his wife was from Czechoslovakia.

Marina later wrote:
When the landlady asked me, I told her that I was from Russia, not
knowing what Lee had told her.

In this way a misunderstanding arose.

I did not understand why Lee was hiding the fact that he was married
to a Russian He got angry with me, said that I did not understand
anything, and that I was not supporting him.

I answered that it was hard
to understand such stupidity, and that he was simply stupid.

He told me
that if I didn't like it I could go where I wanted.

I was terribly hurt.

I
had no one there close to me except him and if this man rejected me,
why should I stand in his way.

I took June and left Lee to go to my
VRussian acquaintances.

Taking only her child, a few diapers, a shirt, and a baby bottle,
Marina took a taxi to the Metiers* home.

This time when the emigres
got together and agreed to look after her, it was with a condition.

George Bouhe told her he didn’t think Oswald would ever treat her
as he should and, "If you leave him, of course we*ll help.

But if you
say one thing now and then go back, next time no one will help."
Marina assured him she would never go back "to that hell."
Bouhe took her to stay at the home of Katya and Declan Ford.

Oswald found out where she was living and called asking her to come
home.

He had been invited to his brother Robert's for Thanksgiving
and wanted her with him—it would be humiliating if he had to go
alone.

Marina was curt with him at first but soon began to relent.He had been invited to his brother Robert's for Thanksgiving
and wanted her with him—it would be humiliating if he had to go
alone.

Marina was curt with him at first but soon began to relent.

A
few days later Valentina Ray offered to let Marina live with her until
she could learn enough English to find a job.

Marina agreed, but she
told her husband where she was, and when he telephoned her there,
she consented to see him.

At the Rays* home they went into a bedroom to talk, and Marina
reported that only after he begged her to return did she give in: "We
talked alone in the room, and I saw him cry for the first time.

What
woman’s heart can resist this, especially if she is in love?

Lee begged
me to come back, asked my forgiveness, and promised that he would
(J M) Tup/h rWu
J/Vt^ky- lu» w*
•flu t P J- jL Sojf' VM WWWUP
Taking Action...

107
uv to improve.

.

..

Knowing Lee’s character, I can say that this is
oerhaps the first time in his life that he had to go and ask someone
ifavor, and what is more, show his tears....

Lee was not particularly
ooen with me about his feelings, but always wore a mask."
Whether the scene represented his true feelings or was just another
manipulation to get what he wanted, he recovered his composure very
auiekly.

What Valentina Ray remembered from that day was Oswald
arguing politics with her husband.

He offered to drive the reconciled
couple home, and the political lecture continued en route.

Valentina
•aid her husband came home "huffing, puffing, said he never met
anybody dumber in his life, doesn’t understand simple economics or
how anything works in this country."
\ After Marina moved back, most of the emigres threw up their
hands.

Only the de Mohrenschildts remained friendly, exchanging
visits and taking them to a few parties.

For a short while, the Oswald
household was peaceful.

Marina said of this period, "He used to bring
home dozens of books from the library and just swallowed them
down.

...--- PAGE BREAK ---

Marina said of this period, "He used to bring
home dozens of books from the library and just swallowed them
down. ... Sometimes it seemed to me that he was living in another
world which he had constructed for himself, and that he came down
to earth only to go to work, to earn money for his family, to eat, and
to sleep." s\ .. * . . In early December 1962 Oswald began making use of the Jaggars-
Chiles-Stovall facilities and materials for his own purposes when he
was working overtime. Using the photographic techniques he’d
learned, he made some advertising postef^-farthe Socialist Workers
party and The Worker, as well as the Hall-bavis Defense Committee. (The Worker’s poster said. "READ THE WORKER / If you want to
know about / PEACE / DEMOCRACY / UNEMPLOYMENT / ECONOMIC
TRENDS.") Along with the blowups, he sent letters offering to do
further photographic work at no charge. Each organization wrote a
polite letter of acknowledgment, and Oswald carefully saved these
replies—he would find a use for them in the months ahead. In mid-December he look out a subscription to The Militant, the
Socialist Workers’ newspaper. Like The Worker, it was critical of
General Walker and of Kennedy^ policies on Cuba and the civil
rights struggle. One of the first issues he would have received in
January commented on the speech President Kennedy gave in the
Miami Orange Bowl on December 29. Before a crowd of 40,000
Cuban exiles, Kennedy greeted a group of Bay of Pigs veterans who
had just been ransomed from their imprisonment in Cuba. When the
president was presented with the Cuban brigade’s battle flag, he spon-
ivitfa

--- PAGE BREAK ---108...

Oswald's Game
m
> taneously declared, "l can assure you that this flag will be returned
^ to this brigade in a free Havana”—a prediction that drew tumultuous
/ cheers from the audience.

The Militant called it “the most barefaced
" and disgusting display of immorality, ignorance and bad taste ever put
^ on by a U.S.

President.” In its January 21 issue.

The Militant pub-
f fished Castro’s response to Kennedy’s Miami appearance, a speech
headlined, "We Will Not Stop Being Revolutionists.” Castro said
\J Kennedy had "conducted himself like a pirate.” After citing the Bay
^ of Pigs and the Cuban citizens who had been killed in exile raids and
^ in internal counter-revolutionary attacks, he declared, "Mr.

Kennedy,
^ too much blood has flowed between you and us.”
^ cr* t At the beginning of 1963 Oswald began making specific plans to
_ ^/assassinate General Walker.

The final decision apparently came after
January 21, when a federal grand jury in Mississippi released Walker
after declining to indict him.

The next day, the Dallas Morning News
quoted Walker: "I am glad to be vindicated.

.

.

.

Today my hopes
returned to the Cubans and millions of others who long to return to
their homes....” On January 27, Oswald ordered a Smith & Wesson
.38 snub-nosed revolver from a Los Angeles mail-order firm, using
"A.

J.

Hidell” as an alias.

f This was his first known use of the Alek James Hidell alias.

"Alek”
had been his nickname in Russia.

"Hidell” was probably an altered
""Fidel,” embraced by two of his own initials.

The "James” is less
^ j certain but may have come from a fictional character he was known
\ /U to have admired—James Bond.

' It was apparently around this time that he printed up a phony ID
in the name of Alek James Hidell—perhaps he thought he might need
• t identification to pick up the gun at the post office.The "James” is less
^ j certain but may have come from a fictional character he was known
\ /U to have admired—James Bond.

' It was apparently around this time that he printed up a phony ID
in the name of Alek James Hidell—perhaps he thought he might need
• t identification to pick up the gun at the post office.

He also began
r‘<1 V ^studying a city map and a bus schedule to lay out an escape route from
1 » talker's home on Turtle Creek Boulevard.

And he began putting
^ pressure on Marina to return to the Soviet Union with June.

The
‘ i Warren Commission evidently never realized why Oswald wanted to
Y ^ /send his family to Russia.

Marina testified, "Lee wanted me to go to
^ v Russia ...

and I told him that if he wanted me to go then that meant
/.

' he didn't love me and ...

in that case what was the idea of coming
to the United States in the first place.

Lee would say that it would be
better for me to go to Russia.

I did not know why.

I did not know
what he had in mind.

He said he loved me but it would be better for
me if I went to Russia.”
Taking Action...

109
Q.

Did he have a job then?

1 YCS
Q‘ Did you feel that you were getting along on what he was making?

Q.

D.fdCyo”undemand when he suggested you return to Russia that
he was proposing to break up your marriage?

• A.

I told him that I would go to Russia if he gave me a divorce, but
he did not want to give me a divorce.

O.

Did he fay why?

, ..

.

.

A He said that if he were to give me a divorce that would break
everything between us, which he didn't want.

That he wanted to keep
me as his wife.

When she was asked if she now understood why Oswald wanted her
,0 return to the Soviet Union, she said, “Yes...

I think I know why[ ]
he had in mind to start his foolish activity which could harm me, but,
of course, at that time he didn’t tell me the reason....--- PAGE BREAK ---

When she was asked if she now understood why Oswald wanted her
,0 return to the Soviet Union, she said, “Yes... I think I know why[ ]
he had in mind to start his foolish activity which could harm me, but,
of course, at that time he didn’t tell me the reason.... At that time
when I would ask him he would get angry because he couldn t tell
me.”
While he was waiting for the pistol to arrive, something happened
to delay his plans. On February 14 the Morning News announced that
Walker would be going out of town on a nationwide tour, dubbed
“Operation Midnight Ride,” from February 27 to April 3 to make
speeches warning about the dangers of Castro and communism. Three
days later Oswald forced the reluctant Marina, who wanted to stay
in America, to sit down and write the following letter to the Soviet
Embassy in Washington:
I beg your assistance to help me to return to the homeland in the USSR
where I will again feel myself a full-fledged citizen. Please let me know
what I should do for this, i.e., perhaps it will be necessary to fill out a
special application form. Since I am not working at present of
mylack of knowledge of the English language and a small child), 1 am
requesting you to extend to tac a possible material aid for the trip. My
husband remains here, since he is an American by nationality. I beg you
once more not to refuse my request. It is not too difficult to sec Oswald's hand in this, especially in the
phrase "full-fledged citizen” and in the request for "material aid.”
Since he couldn’t afford to send his family to Russia, he expected the
Russians to take care of it. . On February 22 Lee and Marina went to a party given by Everett

--- PAGE BREAK ---110...

OiwiJd’i Gamt
Glover, a friend of de Mohrenschildt’s.

One of the guests was Ruth
Paine, a Quaker who had recently separated from her husband Mi-
chael and who was studying the Russian language.

Ruth was eager
to meet someone who spoke modem Russian because she hoped to be
able to learn the language well enough to teach it.

She and Marina
began a friendship that evening which Oswald encouraged for his own
reasons.

Marina said later that "from the moment he met Ruth, Lee
[thought] only how to use her.'*
^ Marina would remember February 1963 as by far the worst month
v * lhcir marriage.

Oswald often flew into a rage and beat her whenever
^ she seemed to go against his wishes.

Their landlady noticed that
3 Marina was always quiet around Oswald and that he never seemed
want her 10 be out of his-sight when he was home.

She thought
Marina seemed “very lonely.” During this period Oswald sometimes
^ wouldn’t come home until seven o’clock or later, and Marina never
^ 1 knew where he was.

On one such night in late February, Mrs.

Tobias
^ ^testified that Marina came knocking on her door:
...

and wanted to know if she could use the phone.

She said, “I don’t
know where my husband is." ...

I said to her, “Mrs.

Oswald, Marina,
can you read English?" She said “Yes"—and I went and got a tablet of
^ paper....

took a pencil and wrote “When he gets home give him a good
_ -3 ^ [kick in the shin." And she started laughing ...

and she said she would.

Marina then called several numbers and spoke in Russian but, said
Mrs.

Tobias, “She never did find him.** One of Marina’s calls was to
George de Mohrenschildt, who telephoned Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall for
her and found out Lee wasn't there.

Oswald, of course, was angry
when he discovered she’d been checking up on him.

Later that week
their fighting got so noisy the owner of the building told Oswald he
would have to stop fighting or move.

Oswald decided to move.Later that week
their fighting got so noisy the owner of the building told Oswald he
would have to stop fighting or move.

Oswald decided to move.

On March 3 they carried their belongings to another furnished
apartment several blocks away at 214 West Neely Street, using June’s
stroller as a carrier.

Mrs.

Tobias watched them go: “They moved
away in that stroller They didn't have very much—all he had was
books and what little dishes they had, and that wasn't very many, and
the baby bed.’* The new apartment had a small room Oswald appro-
priated for a study—it had an interior door that could be locked and
another door leading to the outside.

Now he could come and go
without Marina’s knowledge, and he could have privacy while he
worked out his plans.

Taking Action...

Ill
At least some of Oswald’s mysterious activities undoubtedly had to
do with General Walker.

He may have rehearsed his route by riding
the buses he intended to use to and from Walker’s home.

At any rate,
it is certain that after Walker left town, Oswald undertook a recon-
naissance.

On the weekend of March 9-10 he used his Imperial Reflex
camera to photograph the alley behind Walker’s house and an area
near a railroad where he would hide the weapon.

(The pictures, found
among Oswald’s possessions, could be dated because of some con-
struction work going on in the background.) He recorded a detailed
description of the house and its surroundings in a notebook he kept
in his study.

Evidently his survey of Walker’s property changed his mind about
the appropriate weapon, for on March 12 he ordered a Mannlicher-
Carcano rifle from Klein’s Sporting Goods in Chicago, again using the
Hidell alias.

By coincidence both weapons were shipped on March 20
and arrived about five days later.

When Walker returned to Dallas,
he’d be ready.

Ironically, it was during this month that the FBI took a renewed
interest in the Oswalds.--- PAGE BREAK ---

When Walker returned to Dallas,
he’d be ready. Ironically, it was during this month that the FBI took a renewed
interest in the Oswalds. It was FBI practice to interview immigrants
from the Soviet bloc countries on a selective basis, and Marina was
one of those selected. When John Fain retired he left her case marked
pending inactive. On March 4 Fain's successor, James P. Hosty, Jr.,
obtained Marina’s Elsbeth Street address from the Immigration and
Naturalization Service records. On the nth, the day before Oswald
ordered his rifle, Hosty drove over and spoke to Mrs. Tobias, who told
him that they had moved. Hosty obtained the Oswalds’ new address. But having learned of their frequent quarrels from Mrs. Tobias, hfc
decided to allow them a certain “cooling off period,’’ as required by
FBI regulations, before he talked to Marina. (Even though he was
going by the book, this decision would ultimately earn him a repri-
mand and the eternal wrath of J. Edgar Hoover.) Hosty checked Lee
Oswald's file and found that he was on The Worker's mailing list. At
Hosty's request, Oswald’s case was reopened on March 26. But when
he finally went to the Neely Street apartment in late May they had
moved without leaving a forwarding address. Would it have made a difference if agent Hosty had caught up with
Oswald before he attacked Walker? Probably not. Oswald already
knew the FBI was interested in him, and the watchful eye of the
authorities had never stopped him in the past. On Sunday, March 31, Oswald had Manna take several pictures of
him in their backyard. Dressed in black, he wore a pistol on his belt,

--- PAGE BREAK ---112...OtwaJd’f Game
anH^Vi^ nfe ^ °2e ha
,nd and a recent c°py of both The Militant
In^VKr/" th'°thfJr He t0,d her he wanted Photographs to
£ * S?

0s^a,d was cles"-ly proud of what he was about
t rn M?

“1Scnbfd one °f prints “For Junie from Papa" and gave
June^lni"a “ * k“P“ke„fOr
J the,r daughter, so that "maybe someday
iZE&ZZ* me‘ put *“•print and one 1Uce ii in
a„^.WaJd obviously beheved that The Militant would applaud his
2K.M He undoubted|y 8°‘ ‘his idea from the general
editorial line of the newspaper, which advocated revolutionary vio-
lence where nec«sary.

In the February 2J issue there was a «vl£
by R0bert F> WiU'ams that called for blacks to arm them-
fiah^i111* reV'eT "°ted’ "John Brown 80(1 'he Abolitionists did not
fight slavery with prayers but with armed struggle against the evil
fS^ff th.us ,,a"ds in the American tradition of struggle for
Gandhd.m ***' °f °Ur hent?ge and ,egacy- [Martin LutherJ King’s
““T ^ in its out-
tactics Jnon-v^en«.’’ “,adeqUaCy °f narr0W,y COnceived
On April a Ruth Paine invited the Oswalds to dinner and had her
£l^dJJn
C
fhaelP,ck ‘heni up at their apartment.

An engineer with
^Cha T WM in,eIligent and well-educated man
S l * T
1rf'skyi,e after leaving the Communist party
in ‘he 1940s.

Michael could remember being taken to Party meeting
as a child and being bored by them.

Like Ruth, he was toS.Tf
dissidents even when he disagreed with them.

That night one
he and Oswald could agree on was their opinion of
Said « d^lh ^ ^‘h Cn,,c'zed ‘he Far Right.

Naturally Os-
ph 8 abou‘hB S€cret p|an- At the Oswalds’ Neely Street
ET h WM Sh0Cked by °SWaJd's ™deness his wife.

At
Ruth s, he becameannoyed when he tried to include Marina in their
ButSd^ ?*Waid Setmtd ‘° rCSCnt b8™*t0 ,ransla‘e for her.

Ruh^mtr^ P
l^Sed W,th‘he even'n8» for he saw once more how
hadl’t ” u Ma.nna “u'd serve his purposes.At
Ruth s, he becameannoyed when he tried to include Marina in their
ButSd^ ?*Waid Setmtd ‘° rCSCnt b8™*t0 ,ransla‘e for her.

Ruh^mtr^ P
l^Sed W,th‘he even'n8» for he saw once more how
hadl’t ” u Ma.nna “u'd serve his purposes.

The Russian visas
wJjr^ hr°Ug^’ and ,f he went ahead with his plan to kUl
w.1 £ ^ m'gh‘nccd 8 friend who spoke Russian.

During the
weejLOswald practiced withthe rifle.

=*=*
*pr” & he lost hiTjoBTHenevcr held any job for very Iona
ers ^ h^h^ d^M "* "T* h“ «P«W-«y employ
hLd ^'d 10 l^oscow' ,f he lived in the United States he
' *0l^d face the choice of being an exploiter or one of the exploited.

f KCH5V MJJL (VH.

Jl pH.

(Vto (I'M d-lAJltf
Taking Action...

113
and rather than assume either role he would end up being one of the
unemployed.

Oswald appeared to like his job at Jaggars-Chiles-
Stovall, but eventually began to show his resentment by reading Rus-
sian magazines at work—it was reminiscent of the way he had openly
read Russian newspapers in the Marines.

His employer noticed it.

and
he also noticed that Oswald's work often had to be redone.

Around
the first yveek of April he informed Oswald he would have to let him
g°-
To help Oswald find another job, de Mohrenschildt referred him to
a friend, Sam Allen, a native of New York who served on the boards
of several Dallas corporations.

During a two-hour interview with
Ballen, Oswald didn't mention his recent employment and instead
claimed to have learned reproduction work in Russia and New Or-
leans.

Inevitably the conversation drifted into Oswald’s politics: his
opposition to race prejudice and what Ballen later called his "compas-
sion for mankind generally." Oswald complained that he too was the
victim of prejudice because of his stay in the Soviet Union.--- PAGE BREAK ---

During a two-hour interview with
Ballen, Oswald didn't mention his recent employment and instead
claimed to have learned reproduction work in Russia and New Or-
leans. Inevitably the conversation drifted into Oswald’s politics: his
opposition to race prejudice and what Ballen later called his "compas-
sion for mankind generally." Oswald complained that he too was the
victim of prejudice because of his stay in the Soviet Union. Although
sympathetic, Ballen decided that this young man wouldn't fit into a
team operation—he was "too hard-headed, too independent." Ballen
considered Oswald to be "a truth-seeking decent individual with a bit
of Schweitzerian self-sacrifice in him—so much so that I didn't want
him working for me." For his part, Oswald seemed uninterested in a
position that required conformity. He told Ballen, "Don't worry
about me."
Sometime in early April—the exact time isn’t certain—Oswald
staged his first pro-Castro demonstration. With a placard saying
"Hands Off Cuba! Viva Fidel!" hanging on his chest, he handed out
Fair Play for Cuba literature briefly on a downtown street. Two
policemen later reported seeing the demonstration. According to a
passerby, when Oswald spotted them coming toward him he mut-
tered, "Oh hell, here come the cops," and ducked into a nearby store. He wrote the Fair Play for Cuba Committee in New York to report
his demonstration (omitting the appearance of the police) and asked
the group to send him "40 or 50 more" of their pamphlets. Having completed his speaking tour, General Walker came home. Oswald may have been following his progress in the Dallas newspa-
pers. On March 6 the Times Herald had reported on a speech Walker
gave in Savannah in which he challenged President Kennedy to take
"one U.S. Army division . . . and liquidate the scourge that has
descended upon the island of Cuba." This was only a few days before

--- PAGE BREAK ---9
o/Wt k/ 6u^\ AuV' ^ IV A ^clLt 7 <> C'dAs^
& £ MMv <iVvf uf l4v/b |W~W( .

Ilf FJ?

I b Uo& ~1 if/Hww-i/ *
| .

fw*f iVFi7/^ yViv’TQwiHa
114...

OfwAid’s Game
Oswald reconnoitered the Walker house and grounds and ordered his
rifle.

On the evening of April 10 Oswald went to Walker’s home with the
Mannlicher-Carcano, which he had concealed under a raincoat.

He
took a position in a dark alley behind a stockade fence, 120 feet from
the back of the house.

Inside he could see Edwin A.

Walker through
a lighted window sitting at his desk.

The light obscured a strip of the
window casing and the bullet missed, striking the wall just above
Walker's head and leaving bits of wood and glass in his hair.

Oswald
ran without waiting to see the result.

He hid the rifle and escaped on
a city bus (exactly as be would do after the assassination of President
Kennedy).

Around 10 o’clock that evening Marina grew restless wondering
where he was.

She went into his study and found a key and a note of
instructions written in Russian:
1.

This is the key to the mailbox which is located in the main post office
in the city on Ervay Street.

This is the same street where the drugstore,
in which you always waited is located.

You will find the mailbox in the
post office which is located 4 blocks from the drugstore on that street
I paid for the box last month so don’t worry about it
2.

Send the information as to what has happened to me to the Em-
bassy and include newspaper clippings (should there be anything about
me in the newspapers).

I believe that the Embassy will come quickly to
your assistance on learning everything.

3.

I paid the house rent on the 2d so don’t worry about it
* 4- Recently I also paid for water and gas.

5.

The money from work will possibly be coming.

The money will be
sent to our post office box.

Go to the bank and cash the check.

/ 6.

You can either throw out or give my clothing, etc.

away.

Do not
keep these.away.

Do not
keep these.

However, I prefer that you hold on to my personal papers
(military, civil, etc.).

7.

Certain of my documents are in the small blue valise.

8.

The address book can be found on my table in the study should you
need same.

9.

We have friends here.

The Red Cross also will help you (Red Cross
in English) [sic].

10.

I left you as much money as I could.

s6o on the second of the
month.

You and the baby can live for another 2 months using sio per
week.

11.

If I am alive and taken prisoner, the city jail is located at the end
of the bridge through which we always passed on going to the city (right
in the beginning of the city after crossing the bridge).

Taking Action...

115
Marina testified thatwhen her husband got home that night he was
—I* He told her what he had done, and defended his action by
Jj^ribmgTjeneraTWalEeT^ of a fascist organization"
She responded by saying even though that might be true, he had no
right to take his life.

She made him promise never to do such a thing
again, and tucked the note of instructions he had left her into one of
her books.

She told the Assassinations Committee that Oswald "felt
quite strongly that he was doing a justice to the people” and consid-
ered her a fool for not understanding him.

She quoted Oswald: Well,
whut would you say if somebody got rid of Hitler at the right time.

So if you don’t know about General Walker, how can you speak up
on his behalf?” She reported that after reading the news accounts the
next day Oswald was "kind of angry” that he missed him, but at the
same time “kind of pleased with himself, with the clever fellow he
was” in getting away with it.

Oswald destroyed the notebook he’d used for the planning, but kept
the photographs of Walker’s house and its surroundings and the
photographs of himself holding the rifle.

He evidently wanted a record
of the attempt for some future use.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Oswald destroyed the notebook he’d used for the planning, but kept
the photographs of Walker’s house and its surroundings and the
photographs of himself holding the rifle. He evidently wanted a record
of the attempt for some future use. It’s possible he was even consider-
ing another attempt to kill Walker, at some later date after the police
attention subsided. _ .,
One may ask why Marina didn’t immediately go to the Dallas
police. In retrospect it is easy to condemn her. But Marina evidently
didn’t leave her husband or go to the police for much the same reasons
other battered wives often choose to stay with their husbands—at
times, she was afraid of him. Someone on the Assassinations Commit-
tee asked Her, “What do you think he would have done if you had
gotten rid of the rifle?” And she answered, “Well, he probably would
have got rid of me.” She had no one else, no way of supporting herself
and June; and she was three months into a second pregnancy. But
despite everything she still loved him and hoped he would change. Manna did not realize that Oswald could not change without giving
up the image he had of himself as an idealist who acted on his
principles. His feelings of self-worth derived not from his work or
personal relationships, but from his ideology. The assassination at-
tempt against Walker, like his defection, revealed Oswald’s extreme
dedication to his political beliefs. All else was secondary to him—his
family, even the question of whether he lived or died. At the same
time, Oswald expected and craved recognition as a revolutionary
hero. Both these events were clearly designed to attract worldwide
attention to himself as well as to his cause. Giving up these ideas, as

--- PAGE BREAK ---ftyji frVl.U^Wi b(ft,iVv'tY\-'wW\ tul
fm ►U'Vx; >K a>u<wi.

jWteVO \TAM ^tV/WUn ^W«'
,\M% <
fuA^MjVT 0?

\vffVtV ^,(t Uw/I^ U,«o (a A-CMt\Li3 4.

116...

OtwtU'l G.me /Wnlr^Wo Ojji \r- U\
Marina wanted, would have meant scrapping his identity and con-
structing a new one—or becoming a hypocrite in his own eyes, some-
one who sat around and talked but did nothing.

The attack on Walker resembled his defection in another respect:
it was carefully planned.

Part of the excitement must have been in the
detailed anticipation.

The note he left Marina indicates that he had
considered every eventuality—that he might be killed or arrested, or
that he might escape, possibly to another country.

Albert Newman
believes that had Oswald assassinated Walker he intended to go to the
Cuban Embassy in Mexico City, tell the officials there what he had
done—proving it with his notebook and photographs—and ask for
asylum in Cuba, an "extradition-free" country.

McMillan suggests
that in the event of an arrest he might have used his trial as a forum
to denounce American fascism, before asking for asylum in Russia.

At any rate, as Marina later said of the backyard photographs, "He
must have had something in his mind—some grandiose plans."
f On April 21 Oswald staged another dramatic scene.

After reading
the morning newspaper he got dressed and put his Smith & Wesson
pistol into his belt He informed Marina that former Vice-President
Richard Nixon was coming to town and that he wanted "to go and
"have a look." Marina has testified that she replied, "I know how you
look"—1nd physically restrained!

him from leaving the apartment.

(In
fact, Nixon was not coming to Dallas, but that day’s Morning News
reported a speech he had made in Washington.

The banner headline
read, "Nixon Calls for Decision to Force Reds Out of Cuba/Open
\ U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(In
fact, Nixon was not coming to Dallas, but that day’s Morning News
reported a speech he had made in Washington. The banner headline
read, "Nixon Calls for Decision to Force Reds Out of Cuba/Open
\ U.S. Support of Rebels Urged.")
When skeptical Commission members questioned her about this
incident, Marina admitted that she could not have kept her husband
from leaving their apartment if he had really wanted to go. She said
that at first he was angry and told her, "You are always getting in my
way,” but then rather quickly gave in. “It might have been," she
continued, “that he was just trying to test me." (Thinking back on it,
Marina saw the incident as a "kind of nasty joke." an example of a
sadistic streak he had. She also told the Commission that he would
make her write letters to the Russian Embassy asking to be allowed
to return to the Soviet Union: "He liked to tease me and torment me
in this way ... especially if I interfered in any of his political affairs,
in any of his political discussions.")
It isn’t clear why Oswald now decided to move to New Orleans. Marine has said it was her suggestion that he go to his hometown to
find work, because she wanted to get him away from the temptation
Taking Action... 117
_f trying to kill Walker again. But it also appears that Oswald had,
“ (,/ual, some political goal in mind. When Ruth Paine visited the
Oswalds on April 24, she found them waiting with their bags packed
ready to be driven to the bus station. Rather than see the pregnant
Marina make the long bus trip with a small child, she offered to let
them stay with her while Lee went ahead to look for a job This was
evidently exactly what Oswald had intended all along. She drove him
to the terminal to check his baggage, and the next day Oswald took
t bus to New Orleans.

--- PAGE BREAK ---9...The Activist
F ROM our perspective twenty years later, America’s undeclared war
on Cuba looks like a hysterical overreaction.

It did not seem so to
most Americans at the time.

The Kennedy administration was under
intense public pressure to do something about Cuba.

Thousands of
refugees had fled to the United States bringing horror stories about
life under communism, and many of them were prepared to fight to
liberate their country.

(Other refugees, according to the New York
Times, were Castro agents who were sent to create disunity and
promote agitation against the U.S.

government among the exiles.)
Castro had proclaimed himself an ally of the Soviet Union and was
boasting that his revolution would spread throughout Latin America.

Occasionally it looked as though his dream might come true.

Shortly
after the missile crisis, for example, pro-Castro guerrillas knocked out
one-sixth of Venezuela’s oil-production capacity.

The White House was still uncertain what to do about Cuba.

After
the October crisis, the MONGOOSE operation was disbanded, and
the Special Group committee, chaired by presidential assistant
McGeorge Bundy, took control of covert actions in Cuba.

On January
4,1963, and again in April and June, Bundy proposed to the president
the idea of opening communications with Castro with an eye to taking
Castro “out of the Soviet fold.” This option was to be explored on a
"separate track,” however, while other proposed actions, such as
sabotage, were going on.

In February 1963 Time carried an article
called "The Hardening Soviet Base in Cuba,” which quoted a top
administration official as saying that present U.S.

policy toward Cuba
was "not containment; it's getting rid of Castro"—through economic
118...

The Activist...

119 ,
and political pressures.

It stated that the administration was hoping
for an uprising against Castro and quoted President Kennedy on what
his reaction might be: "Probably the first U.S.119 ,
and political pressures.

It stated that the administration was hoping
for an uprising against Castro and quoted President Kennedy on what
his reaction might be: "Probably the first U.S.

response would be
diplomatic But a real uprising in Cuba would not be like a Bay
of Pigs invasion financed from abroad.

It would be a cry for help
which the U.S.

could not afford to ignore." Another report on a
Kennedy news conference that month quoted him as conceding "that
Soviet troops in Cuba are surely being used to train Cubans to export
revolution and sabotage throughout Latin America." One White
House estimate reported that at least 13,000 Latin American students
were being trained.

Early spring brought the first public talk about the possibility that
Fidel Castro might be assassinated by someone dissatisfied with his
rule inside Cuba.

On March 15 the Wall Street Journal quoted un-
named Washington officials as declaring that Castro’s assassination
had become "the major U.S.

hope for de-communizing Cuba’’—ex-
plaining that "rising public discontent in Cuba” was “bound to bring
a successful assassination attempt sooner or later." This item was
picked up for brief mention by both The Worker and The Militant.

Both papers omitted the reference to rising discontent in Cuba.

At
approximately the same time an exile group called Alpha 66 raided
a Cuban port and shelled a Russian ship, eliciting a strong protest
from the Soviet government.

The FBI and Coast Guard responded
with an official crackdown nationwide on exile raiders starting the
first week of April.

This new policy, in turn, brought protests from
the exiles and Republican leaders.

In an April 19 speech President Kennedy attempted to counter
demands for a second invasion of Cuba by predicting that "in five
yean” Castro would likely no longer be in power and that ultimately
the United States would be seen to have contributed to his downfall.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This new policy, in turn, brought protests from
the exiles and Republican leaders. In an April 19 speech President Kennedy attempted to counter
demands for a second invasion of Cuba by predicting that "in five
yean” Castro would likely no longer be in power and that ultimately
the United States would be seen to have contributed to his downfall. In recent years this speech has sometimes been interpreted as a sign
that Kennedy was aware of a CIA effort to kill Castro. But he was
clearly referring to the longterm effect of administration pressures on
Cuba in general, which he hoped would eventually result in Castro’s
overthrow. It would have been illogical for him to suggest that an
American contribution to Castro’s murder would someday be ap-
plauded—none of the plotters wanted the U.S. role ever to be re-
vealed. Moreover, according to the Church committee investigation,
there were no ongoing assassination plots during this period. The
plots involving members of the Mafia had been terminated in Febru-
ary after producing no results whatsoever. (It appears that the Mafia

--- PAGE BREAK ---120...

Oswald's G«mt
participants weren’t seriously interested in eliminating Castro but
were stringing the CIA officials along for their own purposes.)
But at the time, Fidel Castro apparently saw the president’s state-
ments as a threat.

His response came two days later in an April 21
New York Times headline that today seems startling:
CASTRO SAYS U.S.

PLANS SLAYINGS
Declares Assassination Plot Replaced Second Invasion
The story began, '‘Premier Fidel Castro said today that the United
States had abandoned plans for a second invasion of Cuba in favor of
a plot to assassinate Cuban leaders.” Castro then gave his version of
recent Cuban-American history, asserting that after the Bay of Pigs
the Soviets had introduced missiles into Cuba to prevent a second
invasion attempt, and had withdrawn them in return for Kennedy's
promise that Cuba would not be invaded.

The American government,
said Castro, understood that new military attacks on Cuba would
provoke a world war.

But, Castro added, “We cannot rest on our
laurels They are now making plans to assassinate the leaders of
the revolution.”
(This story was picked up by the Dallas Times-Herald the same
afternoon, but Lee Oswald almost certainly didn’t see it.

This was the
day of Oswald’s “nasty joke” about shooting Nixon, and therefore the
events of April 21 were vividly impressed on Marina’s memory.

She
testified that Oswald didn’t leave their apartment after going out for
the morning newspaper, and if she is right, Oswald couldn’t have
bought a Times-Herald that afternoon.)
In May 1963, the National Security Council’s Standing Group dis-
cussed several-contingencies, and found that the prospect of Castro's
death resulting in favorable developments inside Cuba was “singu-
larly unpromising.” The CIA’s Office of National Estimates agreed.This was the
day of Oswald’s “nasty joke” about shooting Nixon, and therefore the
events of April 21 were vividly impressed on Marina’s memory.

She
testified that Oswald didn’t leave their apartment after going out for
the morning newspaper, and if she is right, Oswald couldn’t have
bought a Times-Herald that afternoon.)
In May 1963, the National Security Council’s Standing Group dis-
cussed several-contingencies, and found that the prospect of Castro's
death resulting in favorable developments inside Cuba was “singu-
larly unpromising.” The CIA’s Office of National Estimates agreed.

The memorandum it prepared concluded that Castro would be re-
placed by his brother Raul or someone else who had Soviet backing,
and warned, “If Castro were to die by other than natural causes the
U.S.

would be widely charged with complicity.

.,
The president’s speech on April 19 and the negative conclusions of
the Standing Group and the CIA may be taken as further evidence
of the administration’s continuing sense of frustration concerning
Cuba.

The tension of those times was reflected in an April 29 issue
of The Militant which quoted a statement Robert Kennedy had made
The Activist...

121
on April 22: “We can’t just snap our fingers and make Castro go away.

But we can fight for this.

We can dedicate all our energy and best
possible brains to that effort.”
Lee Oswald hadn’t been in New Orleans since 1959 when he had
passed through on his way to the Soviet Union.

The city was much
the same.

In late April it was already getting hot and humid.

During
the months ahead there would be frequent afternoon thunderstorms,
and swarms of mosquitos blown in from nearby salt marshes would
attack pedestrians on downtown streets.In late April it was already getting hot and humid.

During
the months ahead there would be frequent afternoon thunderstorms,
and swarms of mosquitos blown in from nearby salt marshes would
attack pedestrians on downtown streets.

One could still get off a
streetcar in the middle of Canal Street and walk into the French
Quarter, with its carnival atmosphere of jazz and strip shows, tawdry
souvenir shops, sidewalk artists, and occasional young black boys
offering a quick softshoe routine in exchange for money.

But there
had been a considerable influx of Cuban exiles, some of whom were
active in anti-Castro organizations.

Oswald called his Aunt Lillian from the Greyhound Bus station.

She was surprised to hear from him, since she didn't know he had
returned from the Soviet Union, nor did she know he had married and
was a father.

She agreed to put him up while he looked for a job.

He
stayed with her family for a couple of weeks.

Oswald applied for and received unemployment benefits from
Texas, and then found a job as a maintenance mechanic at the William
B.

Reily Company, a distributor of Luzianne coffee.

Lillian remem-
bered him coining home excited.

.., and he grabbed me around the neck and he even kissed me and he
said ”1 got it; I got itl” ...

I said, “Lee, how much docs it pay” and
he said, “Well, it don’t pay very much but I will get along on it.”
...

I said, “Well, you know, Lee, you are not really qualified to do
anything too much.

If you don't like this job why don't you try to go
back to school again at night time and see if you can’t learn a trade or
whatever you think you can prepare yourself to do.” And he said, “No,
I don’t have to go back to school.

I don’t have to learn anything.

I know
everything.” ...

Q.

Did you get the impression .

..

that he really believed he was that
smart?

A.

He believed he was that smart, yes, sir.

Q.

You don’t think be was spoofing you?

A.--- PAGE BREAK ---

You don’t think be was spoofing you? A. No; l think he really thought he was smart, and I don’t think he
envied anybody else, because he thought he knew it ail, I guess.

--- PAGE BREAK ---122...

Oswald's Gi
That same- morning Oswald began looting for a place to live.

He
went to see his mother’s old friend Myrtle Evans, who was still
managing apartments.

She had nothing available, but they drove
around in search of "For Rent" signs.

They found a vacant apartment
at 4907 Magazine Street for *65 a month, and Oswald took it.

That
evening he called Marina at Ruth's house in Irving.

Texas, to tell her
the news.

Marina had been spending a lot of time discussing with
Ruth the question of whether Lee loved her or not, and now, after
hanging up the phone, she kept repeating to her daughter.

June,
«<papa nas lubet.

..

Daddy loves us, he got work and he wants us
to come." The next day Ruth, Marina, and their children left Irving
to drive to New Orleans.

Seeing the Magazine Street apartment with its dark rooms and
roaches was a bitter letdown for Marina, and Ruth noticed that
Oswald seemed disappointed by her reaction.

Although their meeting
had been cordial, the Oswalds began quarreling almost immediately,
and Ruth decided to leave earlier than she had planned.

The fighting
stemmed from the problem they had always had: their priorities were
not the same.

For after his family was settled, Oswald turned to
political activities.

On May 14 he mailed a change-of-address card to the Fair Play for
Cuba Committee, and eight days later the National Director, Vincent
T Lee, wrote a routine reply: “We received your notice of change of
address We hope to hear from you soon so that we may again
have your name amongst those who continue to support the efforts
of our Committee.’* Much to Vincent Lee’s subsequent regret, Oswald
needed no encouragement.

He responded quickly:
1 am requesting formal membership in your organization.

In the past 1 have received from you pamphlets etc., both bought by
me and given to me by you.

,   _.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the past 1 have received from you pamphlets etc., both bought by
me and given to me by you. ,   _. Now thQt 1 live in New Orleans I have been thinking about renting
a small office at my own expense for the purpose of forming a F.P.CC
branch here in New Orleans. Could you give me a charter? Also 1 would like information on buying pamphlets etc. in large lots,
as well as blank FPCC applications etc. Also a picture of Fidel, suitable for framing would be a welcome
l° Offices down here rent for S30 a month and if I had a steady flow of
literature I would be glad to take the expense. Of course 1 work and could not supervise the office at all tunes but
m« Activist... 123
sure I could get some volunteers to do it. f-rjw: SKSSSSS—- ■ -
2S2BS
you. own *•“ »»' ... to SIo bo, number, no. ** i'SSJ tarn fc FBI hod.-, .rocked
„ DOUOO. b N~ £££
°° ’“Sf.SaffiSo »ould ineAobl, d.o. the o.ien.ion
engaged in political actmucs visibility in New Orleans,
of the local police and FBI^^°NewnJ ^Ueves that the
but had wanted to stay hiddeiui Dallas. New ^ ^ ^ ^ New
m"lSflSthSn^n tactics. But it doesn’t necessarily
Orleans .. • refl*^ts , 8 back t0 Dallas. It may be that he
5*s ’SiSStssi.yi5&i«. ■* *”
simply realized ne wouiu Castro supporter in
i * -—
shooting. ikMirv i« well established. There’s little
TJiJ S^^Svities were designed to help him
doubt that Qswaia p r#.r-:VAd once he got there. Manna has
bu,= desire .a » !« » Orb. b, o«y
There is more than M reoetition of his earlier defection,
out that summer he would write to me ,

--- PAGE BREAK ---124...Oswald’s Game
Communist party, and The Worker telling them of his political work,
and he would save their replies.

He would write up the details of his
work under such headings as Marxist, Street Agitation, Radio
Speaker, and Lecturer.

In the fall he would present this material when
he applied for a Cuban visa in Mexico City.

(We know this because
the resumi material was found among Oswald’s belongings after the
assassination, and an employee at the Cuban Embassy described some
of these credentials to the Mexican police.)
What did Oswald hope to do after he got to Cuba?

Certainly, he
didn’t expect to be given factory work or be sent to a Cuban equivalent
of Minsk.

Oswald had a rigid and willful personality, seemingly inca-
pable of fundamental change; he kept repeating the same patterns
over and over.

Disappointed by his reception in Russia, he probably
expected that the Cubans would recognize his abilities and give him
the important assignment he thought he deserved.

It may be that he returned to the dream he had discussed with
Nelson Delgado just four years before—becoming an officer in Cas-
tro’s army to lead a revolution in another country.

This was not as
fantastic an ambition as it might seem.

In 1963 it was illegal for
Americans to travel to Cuba.

But during March there had been a
flurry in the press about a so-called "subversion airlift" flying between
Mexico City and Havana.

Some of these stories appeared in Time, a
publication Oswald subscribed to (although it isn’t known whether he
saw them).But during March there had been a
flurry in the press about a so-called "subversion airlift" flying between
Mexico City and Havana.

Some of these stories appeared in Time, a
publication Oswald subscribed to (although it isn’t known whether he
saw them).

On March 29, for instance, the magazine reported that
there were twice-weekly flights from Mexico City and that, in 1962
alone, approximately 1500 Latin Americans and others had been
taken to Cuba for "indoctrination and guerrilla warfare training.”
Time claimed that “thousands of students, small-time labor leaders,
intellectuals and professional men” were getting “all-expense-paid
tours” of Cuba and that many returned to their countries to become
•’terrorists, guerrillas, and Communist party workers.” The article
said that until February 15 “it was no trick to fly to Mexico, where
the Cuban embassy issued a visa on a slip of paper.

No telltale sump
marred the passports.

Now the Mexicans stamp passports ’Salid a
Cuba’ in bold letters.

But, of course, passports can be conveniently
’lost,’ destroying the evidence.” Time also noted that the airlift had
figured prominently in the questions and answers at President
Kennedy’s press conference a week earlier.

During the summer a group of 58 students sponsored by the Fan-
Play for Cuba Committee defied the U.S.

ban on travel to Cuba.

President Kennedy publicly condemned their action, and the SUte
Th« Activist...

12S
Department lifted their passports when they returned.

In July Edwin
E.

Willis, the chairman of the House Un-American Activities Com-
mittee, gave a speech in New Orleans in which he charged that many
of the travelers had Communist backgrounds and had returned to this
country “to lecture on the glories of Castro’s Cuba.”
At some point Oswald considered hijacking a plane to Havana.

He
studied airline schedules and maps, and when Marina refused to go
along with the scheme, he told her he would go ahead on his own.Willis, the chairman of the House Un-American Activities Com-
mittee, gave a speech in New Orleans in which he charged that many
of the travelers had Communist backgrounds and had returned to this
country “to lecture on the glories of Castro’s Cuba.”
At some point Oswald considered hijacking a plane to Havana.

He
studied airline schedules and maps, and when Marina refused to go
along with the scheme, he told her he would go ahead on his own.

On
July 30 the Times-Picayune covered the Cuban flights from Mexico
City and noted, “Any American with a valid passport and a clean
criminal record can enter Cuba via Mexico without State Department
authorization provided he is acceptable to Cuban authorities and
aerial transportation is available." After this—Marina thought it was
in late August—Oswald burst into the apartment with the news that
be had found a legal way to get to Cuba.

According to McMillan, he
told her, ‘There’s a Cuban Embassy in Mexico.

I’ll go there.

I'll show
them my clippings, show them how much I’ve done for Cuba, and
explain how hard it is to help in America.

And how above all I want
to help Cuba.”
In late May Oswald’s campaign to establish his pro-Castro creden-
tials was just beginning.

He was also tpring to get Marina to answer
a letter she had received from the Soviet Embassy in Washington in
April, asking her to state her reasons for wanting to go back to the
Soviet Union.

On the same weekend that Oswald wrote the Fair Play
for Cuba Committee asking for a charter, Marina sent a plaintive
letter to Ruth (in Russian): ”...

As soon as you left all ’love’ stopped,
and I am very hurt that Lee’s attitude towards me is such that 1 feel
each minute that I bind him.

He insists that I leave America, which
I don’t want to do at all.

I like America very much and think that even
without Lee I would not be lost here.

What do you think.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I like America very much and think that even
without Lee I would not be lost here. What do you think. This is the
basic question which doesn't leave me day or night."
Without waiting for a reply from the Committee, Oswald dropped
by the Jones Printing Company opposite his workplace. Using the
alias “Osborne," he ordered, for $9.89, one thousand copies of a
handbill reading:
9>
OiKt/wf
HANDS OFF
CUBA!

--- PAGE BREAK ---126...

Of waJd'i Game
Join the Fair Play for Cuba Committee
NEW ORLEANS CHARTER MEMBER BRANCH
Free Literature, Lectures
, LOCATION:
[space left blank]
EVERYONE WELCOME!

In the meantime, Vincent T.

Lee had written a cautious reply to
Oswald's requests, and sent him a membership card, but not the
charter or application forms he had wanted.

The Fair Play director
said that although the Committee would like to see a New Orleans
chapter opened, "It would be hard to conceive of a chapter with as
few members as seem to exist in the New Orleans area.” He added,
‘‘You must realize that you will come under tremendous pressures
with any attempt to do FPCC work in that area.” He told Oswald that
most chapters operated serai-privately out of a home using a post
office box for mailings to avoid violent opposition from "the lunatic
fringe.” Vincent Lee advised against taking an office so soon, suggest-
ing that Oswald wait and see how he could operate in the community
through several public experiences first.

Oswald was, of course, not prepared to "wait and see.” On June 3
he rented Post Office Box 30061, listing his own name and that of A.J.

Hidell and Marina Oswald as persons authorized to pick up mail.

In
addition, he gave Fair Play for Cuba as an organization receiving mail
at that box.

He visited another printer and ordered five hundred offset
copies of a membership application form he had made up.

A few days
later Oswald responded to Vincent Lee and enclosed one of the hand-
bills:
I was glad to receive your advice concerning my try at starting a New
Orleans F.P.CC.

chapter.

I hope you won’t be too disapproving of my
innovations but I do think they are necessary for this area.

As per your advice, I have taken a P.O.

Box (No.

30061).

Against your advice, I have decided to take an office from the very
beginning.30061).

Against your advice, I have decided to take an office from the very
beginning.

[As] you see from the circular I had jumped the gun on the charter
business but I don’t think it's too important, you may think the circular
is too provocative, but 1 want it to attract attention, even if it's the
attention of the lunatic fringe.

I had *,ooo of them run off.

.

.

.

In any event I will keep [you] posted, and even if the office stays open
1 month more people will find out about the F.P.CC.

than if there had
The Activist...

127
never been any office at all, don’t you agree?

Please feel free to give advice and any other help.

Not surprisingly, the national director thought better of offering any
more advice.

Although Oswald would continue sending reports of his
activities throughout the summer, hoping to get some favorable re-
sponse.

Vincent Lee never again wrote back.

On June to Oswald wrote The Worker:
I have formed a "Fair Play for Cuba Committee" here in New
Orleans.

I think it is the best way to attract the broad mass of people
to a popular struggle.

.

I ask that you give me as much literature as you judge possible since
I think it would be very nice to have your literature among the Fair
pUy” leaflets (like the one enclosed) and pamphlets in my office.

Also please be so kind as to convey the enclosed “honorary member-
ship” cards to those fighters for peace Mr.

Gus Hall and Mr.

B.

Davis.

^
Your* Fraternally,
The “membership cards" were evidently two copies of the forms he
had printed.

If the Party officials Hall or Davis happened to send even ^ L
a perfunctory letter of thanks, it would look good in his resume.

They
did not.

(As far as the FBI could later determine, Oswald never rented
an office, as he claimed.) , V
On June 16 an FBI informant in New York reported that Oswald
had written a letter to The Worker.

The information may have come
from someone in the New York post office who made a note of his /
return address on the envelope.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(As far as the FBI could later determine, Oswald never rented
an office, as he claimed.) , V
On June 16 an FBI informant in New York reported that Oswald
had written a letter to The Worker. The information may have come
from someone in the New York post office who made a note of his /
return address on the envelope. In any case, the information was sent 6
to the FBI in New Orleans, which relayed it to Dallas, where agent
James Hosty had recently lost track of him. In early July Hosty asked
the New Orleans office to verify Oswald’s presence there. It wasn t
until August that the office confirmed Oswald’s residence in that city. Keeping track of Oswald was apparently not high on the FBI s list
of priorities, but the agency didn’t have, at this point, any reason to
believe that it should be. During the second week of June there was a drumbeat of political
developments in the news. On the nth newspapers across the country
carried reports of Governor George Wallace’s flight to the University
of Alabama to block the admission of a black student, and of a South
Vietnamese monk who had burned himself to death to protest the
anti-Buddhist policies of Premier Ngo Dinh Diem. A day later, civil
rights activist Medgar Evers was lulled by a sniper in Mississippi. On

--- PAGE BREAK ---129...

OvwaJd’a Gun*
June 14, a front-page headline in the Times-Picayune played up a local
story.

It announced the arrival of the U.S.

carrier Wasp at the Du-
maine Street wharf, where it was greeted by state dignitaries and
relatives of the 2800 officers and men on board.

The accompanying
story also mentioned that the Wasp's planes had provided aerial
reconnaissance during the October naval blockade of Cuba.

This news gave Oswald an idea.

That weekend he appeared at the
Dumaine Street dock and began handing out his “Hands Off Cuba"
handbills and a Fair Play pamphlet called “The Truth About Cuba
is in Cuba." One of the enlisted men he solicited complained to a
patrolman, who approached Oswald and told him he needed a permit
and would have to leave or be arrested.

Oswald argued strenuously,
but he left.

During this period Oswald was still greasing and oiling machinery
at Reily’s coffee company.

It was the sort of dirty manual work he
hated.

A fellow worker named LeBlanc remembered that Oswald
approached him one day on the job:
...

and I asked him.

I says, “Are you finished ail your greasing?’* He
said yes.

So he asked me ...

“Well, can I help you?” I said, “No, what
I am doing I don’t need no help." So he stood there a few minutes, and
all of a sudden he said, “You like it here?” I says, “Well, sure 1 like it
here.

I have been here a long time, about 8Yi years or so.” He says, “Oh,
hell, I don’t mean this place.” I said, “Well, what do you mean?” He
says, "This damn country.” I said, “Why, certainly.

I love it.

After all,
this is my country.” He turned around and walked off.

Oswald spent a large portion of his work time at the Crescent City
Garage next door looking at gun magazines in their waiting area.

The
garage owner later said they had talked about rifles—trajectory and
feel per second and the supposed deadliness of a small-caliber bullet.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Oswald spent a large portion of his work time at the Crescent City
Garage next door looking at gun magazines in their waiting area. The
garage owner later said they had talked about rifles—trajectory and
feel per second and the supposed deadliness of a small-caliber bullet. On June 24 Oswald applied for a new passport in New Orleans and
was routinely issued one the next day.1 Later that week Marina no-
ticed that he seemed depressed. He stole a glance in her direction, then
put aside something he was writing and went into the kitchen. She
found him seated on a chair in the dark, his head down. When she
embraced him, he began to sob. He told her he was lost and didn’t
know what to do, and then asked, “Would you like me to come to
Russia, too?” Marina was delighted. He held her by the shoulders and
told her to write the Soviet Embassy and say he would be coming back
with her. He said he would add his own request to her letter. That
The Acti»i*t... 129
SSSSSsesisK
following note. Dear Sirs: ( Soviet citizen, Marina
Please rush the entrance visa for the return ot boviei
N. Oswald. Drtnher therefore you must grant the
cn^etuTind makMhc the transportation arrangements before then. M forZTetun, entrance visa please cons.der .« separably. His major concern was the same as before-to get Marina and June
back to Russia. For the
fSSSA toRussia alone, she could come and five with her
Thev bmh had small children, and Marina could keep her
instead. They w»tn help her improve her
u^nesBondtpy novels. The first book he had checked out was Par-
ZTofTRwIutionary: Mao Tse-'ung. He was also subscribing to
some Russian magazines (including Agimior. techniques of propaganda and agitation), as well as 77ie Worker, The
MilXis otS'cousin Gene Murret. who was studying to become
1isuit college in Mobile. Alabama, invited Oswald to
Union. The Murrets drove the Oswalds to Mobile, and by all ac-

--- PAGE BREAK ---130 ...

Oswald's Game
counts, Oswald handled himself well.

His audience of students and
faculty had expected to hear a man who had been disillusioned by
Soviet communism.

Instead, Oswald implied that he was disappointed
in Russia only because the full principles of Marxism weren't being
lived up to.

He criticized capitalism, claiming its foundation was
based on the exploitation of the poor.

Perhaps to draw a laugh, he
said, "Capitalism doesn’t work, communism doesn’t work.

In the
middle is socialism, and that doesn't work either." Yet he told them
he still believed in the Marxist ideals.

During the question and answer
session, Oswald seemed reluctant to discuss religion with the Jesuit
students, but when one asked what atheism in Russia does to moral-
ity, he answered, "No matter whether people believe in God or not,
they will do what they want.

..." ...

..

.

.

While Charles Murret and his son attended Oswald s all-male lec-
ture, Robert J.

Fitzpatrick, a student who spoke Russian, showed
Marina and Lillian around the seminary grounds.

It had been several
months since Marina had been able to converse with anyone except
Lee in her native tongue, and her remarks to Fitzpatrick were more
revealing than anything her husband had to say to his audience.

She
told him that she liked the United States, but that at least m Russia
people had no difficulty making a living.

Then she told him about
Lee's troubles.

He was out of work and they were having financial
problems.

He did a lot of haphazard reading.

She told him her bus-
band was away from home a great deal and she did not know any of
his associates or any of his activities.

She said she had no opportunity
to learn English because Oswald kept her away from other people.

Fitzpatrick though she appeared to be happy with Oswald, but that
he “was definitely the head of the family/*
12" r
u
10..

.“Street Agitation .

.

.--- PAGE BREAK ---

. . Radio
Speaker and Lecturer”
SituMPR 106v The Cuban exile community in New Orleans was
SSunited States outside of Miami. One of the militant
tne largest in the Cuban Student Directorate, or
DR£*which had claimed responsibility for an offshore shelling of
Hlol^Augu^uthe official crackdown on such raids, begun in Apnl,
°? Orleans. A front-page story in the Times-Picayune an-
Tunced that FBI agents had impounded a large cache of dynamite
Ttomb clings inNearby Mandeville. A follow-up story indicated
“at the ammunition belonged to an unnamed Cuban ex^™e
yune said that the FBI was investigating a possible Pj“2®®JKS
^military operation against a country with which he United States
‘«Se"-a violation of the U.S. Code. The implication was clear
ThS there was Cuban exile paramilitary acuvity going on in the ar«L
£faT£ it later came out, the cache had been earmarked for a ragtag
arouD^of*volunteersw ho had assembled at a secret guemlla training
Kp near Mandeville. After the FBI raid on their depot, the group
q1t?as“mly common knowledge that some of the ex.le groups
were Taking for ex-GIs to train their guemllas.ln the June 8 W-
day Evening Post, for instance, a story called Help . f. rlA
ported ihatffollowing the Bay of Pigs, exile leaden had askedItbeCIA
for money and "a few tough men in green beretsTrom the
Forces to train leaders in the techniques of guemlla war. The exiles
...131

--- PAGE BREAK ---132...

Otwald'i Game
complained about being turned down: “They told us that Fidel s spies
would infiltrate our movement.** The article concluded.

The pin
prick raids have been outlawed....

There is still work, however, that
brave men could do—as they were doing in small independent groups
before the suppression came.

It is the silent, dangerous work of organ-
izing an underground.*’ (It isn’t known whether Oswald saw this
article, but it’s conceivable that the Post*s cover photo of Fidel Castro
with the caption “The Mounting Chaos in Castro’s Cuba’* may have
caught his eye.)
In any case, it was evidently the discovery of this exile ammunition
dump near New Orleans that inspired Oswald’s next move.

Oswald made some inquiries.

On page 87 of his notebook, there
, appears:
Cuban Student
Directorate
107 Decatur St
New Orleans La.

Carlos Bringuier
This was followed by the names of a local “City Editor and a
reporter—and two other street addresses labeled “Cuban exile
stores.” , *
Carlos Bringuier, the Directorate’s only official in New Orleans, ran
the Casa Roca clothing store in the French Quarter.

In the front
window he displayed a 3 X 4-foot sign showing the Statue of Liberty
being stabbed in the back.

The hand holding the dagger was connected
to a long chain wrapped around Cuba.

The sign said, Danger!

Only
90 Miles from U.S.A., Cuba Lies in Chains.’’ Although his organiza-
tion wasn’t associated with the Mandeville training camp, Bringuier
had heard about it when two of their volunteers came to him seeking
transportation back to Florida.

On August 5 Bringuier was in his store speaking with two teenaged
boys who had been trying to collect donations for his organization by
selling so-called “war bonds.’’ The boys had brought the bonds back
when they found out Bringuier didn’t have the required city permit^
As they were talking, Oswald walked in and eased into their conversa-^
tion.Only
90 Miles from U.S.A., Cuba Lies in Chains.’’ Although his organiza-
tion wasn’t associated with the Mandeville training camp, Bringuier
had heard about it when two of their volunteers came to him seeking
transportation back to Florida.

On August 5 Bringuier was in his store speaking with two teenaged
boys who had been trying to collect donations for his organization by
selling so-called “war bonds.’’ The boys had brought the bonds back
when they found out Bringuier didn’t have the required city permit^
As they were talking, Oswald walked in and eased into their conversa-^
tion.

He introduced himself to Bringuier and said he was an anti-
Castro ex-Marine who wanted to fight Castro.

He said he had been
trained in guerrilla warfare and was willing not only to train exile
guerrillas but to lead their raiding parties into Cuba.

“Street Agitation ...

Radio Speaker and Lecturer”...

133
Bringuier was immediately suspicious.

He thought Oswald might
be an agent of either Castro or the FBI.

He had heard rumors that
there was a Castro agent in the Mandeville camp.

Bringuier told him
he wasn’t interested because he wasn’t involved in any paramilitary
activity.

At some point, apparently while Bnnguier was waiting on a cus-
tomer, Oswald had a talk with the two anti-Castro boys.

He told them
how to make gunpowder and a zipgun, how to derail a train by
locking a chain around one of the rails—and how to blow up the New
Orleans Huey P.

Long Bridge.

One of the boys testified.

"He told us
to put powder charges at each end of the bridge from the foundation
to where the foundation meets the suspension part...

blow that part
up and the center part of the bridge would collapse.”
Before he left, Oswald offered Bringuier a cash contribution, but the
Cuban refused it by saying he had no city permit to accept money.

The next day Oswald returned to the store and left his Marine Corps
guidebook with Bringuier’s brother-in-law.--- PAGE BREAK ---

blow that part
up and the center part of the bridge would collapse.”
Before he left, Oswald offered Bringuier a cash contribution, but the
Cuban refused it by saying he had no city permit to accept money. The next day Oswald returned to the store and left his Marine Corps
guidebook with Bringuier’s brother-in-law. In his political resume, Oswald wrote:
I infiltrated the Cuban Student Directorate and then harassed them with
information I gained including having the N O. City Attorney General
call them in and pul a restraining order pending a hearing on some
so-called bonds for invasion they were selling in the New Orleans area. So far as is known, there was no such restraining order. Oswald was
puffing up his resume with a false claim. The important thing here is
Ihat he stated his purpose: to infiltrate and harass the Directorate. This entry also seemed to explain why he offered Bringuier a contribu-
tion—that is, to get him into trouble with the law for raising money
illegally. .. t
The resume didn’t mention the other tactics he used—posing as a
guerrilla trainer and suggesting violent activities to the boys. Probably
he didn't want to put anything in writing that was potentially incrimi
nating. But his evident intention was to cause as much damage to the
DRE as he could. The offer to lead guerrilla raids into Cuba may hark
back to his old hero. William Morgan, who had posed as a counter-
revolutionary to lead some anti-Castro rebels into a trap.' Had Os-
wald gotten that far, he could have made himself a hero by turning
the raiding party over to the Cubans—or so he may have imagined^/
And even if he only got as far as the training camp, he might have
gained some information he could pass along to
IA)1 (Jh| (JL f AV\r& fwvC ^
i along to the Cubans when he
OK CL U/*4
l A Ct iw
as a
3 feC
Cbfe fty
ofe /
CL W S'W' A
1?

--- PAGE BREAK ---IW V) A^- aQr rtkj rv wW uu
1
134...

Oswald's Gams
went to Mexico City—a nice boost for his credentials.

In any event, practically every source agrees that Oswald’s ap-
\ proach to Carlos Bringuier was an infiltration attempt.

Oswald was not done with Bringuier yet, however.

On August 9 a
friend of Bringuier’s came into the store and told him he had seen
someone with a sign saying "Viva Fidel” and ’‘Hands off Cuba”
passing out literature a few blocks away on Canal Street.

Bringuier
grabbed his sign from the window, and then went with his friend and
another Cuban to confront the pro-Castro demonstrator.

They finally
located him near Walgreen’s Drug Store.

To Bringuier's surprise, it
was the same Lee Harvey Oswald who had offered his services to fight
Castro.

When Oswald saw him coming, he smiled and offered to shake
his hand.

Outraged, Bringuier called him a Castro agent and began
to ‘‘blame him in the street.” A crowd gathered and took Bringuier’s
side.

According to Bringuier “they started to shout to him, 'Traitorl
Communist I Go to Cuba.

1 Kill him!' and some other phrases that I do
not know if I could tell in the record.”
A policeman came and asked Bringuier to keep walking and let
Oswald hand out his literature, but Bringuier explained what Oswald
had done to him a few days earlier and refused to go.

When the
policeman left to telephone headquarters, one of Bringuier’s friends
took Oswald's batch of handbills “and threw it on the air.” Carlos
took off his glasses and was about to hit Oswald:
but when he sensed my intention, he put his arm down as an X.

.

.,
Q.

He crossed his arms in front of him?

A.

That is right, put his face and told me, “O.K.

Carlos, if you want
to hit me, hit me.’' At this moment, that made me to reaction that he
was trying to appear as a martyr if I will hit him, and I decide not to
hit him, and just a few seconds later arrive two police cars.

..

...

.

When
we were in the First District of Police, we were in the same room, one
small room over there, and some of the policemen started to question
Oswald .

.

and Oswald at that moment—that was in front of myself
—was really cold blood.

He was answering the questions that he would
like to answer, and he was not nervous, be was not out of control, he
was confident of himself at that moment.

..

.

Jhejgubans bailed themselves out, but Oswald spent the night in jail.1
Marina stayed up until 3 A.M.

not knowing where he was.

Worried,
she checked the closet where he kept his rifle and was relieved to see
it was still there.

The next morning Oswald was questioned by police lieutenant
,j M /fhivtjt bw/
“StTMl AgHation ...

Radio Speaker and Lecturer"...

135
Francis L.

Martello of the intelligence squad.

Among the ID cards
Oswald produced at his request was his New Orleans Fair Play chap-
ter membership card with the signature of A.J.

Hidell shown as
chapter president.

(Marina had signed the name at his insistence, alter
she commented that the name was obviously an "altered Fidel ")
Oswald led Martello to believe that the chapter was thriving.

Oswald
then asked to speak with someone from the FBI, and an agent named
Quigley came over to see him.

Oswald gave him a similar song and
dance, showing him the card with Hidell’s name.

Albert Newman has pointed out that Oswald told both Martello
and Quigley that he had moved to New Orleans from Fort Worth
about four months before.

Oswald apparently wanted to accomplish
several things by talking to Quigley: he wanted to be sure the FBI
knew he was now living in New Orleans and that he had been in Fort
Worth, not Dallas, when the Walker shooting occurred, and he
wanted to give the impression that A.

J.

Hidell was a real person, not
an alias.--- PAGE BREAK ---

J. Hidell was a real person, not
an alias. After speaking to Quigley, he called the Murrets’ number and
reached his cousin Joyce, who came down to the police station but
decided not to post bail when she realized what he was in for. But she
did speak to Lt. Martello and told him that her cousin Lee had been
in Russia and wouldn't let his wife learn English. That was the first
Martello had heard about Oswald's stay in Russia, and he decided to
question him again. Oswald admitted that he had lived in the Soviet
Union, and when Martello asked him his opinion of Russian commu-
nism, he replied, “It stunk.” Martello reported:
He said they have “fat, stinking politicians over there just like we have
over here” and that they do not follow the great precepts of Karl Marx,
that the leaders have everything and the people are still poor and de-
pressed. I asked Oswald why he would not allow members of his family
to learn English He stated the reason why he did this was because
he hated America.... 1 then spoke to him about the Fair Play for Cuba
Committee again and asked him if he knew that Castro had admitted
he was a Marxist-Leninist and he said he did. He was then asked if he
truly believed Castro was really interested in the welfare of the Cuban
people and he replied that be was not going to discuss the menu and
demerits of Castro but was primarily concerned with the poor people of
Cuba and that if this country would have good relations with the poor
people of Cuba and quit worrying about Castro, that was his main
concern. .. .

--- PAGE BREAK ---m
1J6...

Oswald's GUM
In two other comments Oswald seemed to be following his old
practice of telling the literal truth, but with a secret twist.

Martello
asked him which country he wouJd choose, Russia or America, if he
had to place his allegiance and Oswald told him, "I would place my
allegiance at the foot of democracy.*' As an example of Oswald’s
Marxist bias, Kerry Thomley mentioned that “he could look upon the
Soviet system today as a democracy by, of course, giving a completely
different definition to the word 'democracy.' *' When Martello asked
him what he thought about Kennedy and Khrushchev, he said he
thought “they got along very well together." Khrushchev had re-
cently come to an agreement with Kennedy on the Nuclear Test Ban
Treaty, a conciliatory move that both China and Cuba had criticized.

After he got out of jail later that day, his uncle Charles (“Dutz")
Murret paid him a visit and noticed a picture of Fidel on his living
room mantel.

As Lillian recalled it, Murret “asked Lee in a fatherly
way, what was he doing, you know, who he was connected with, and
so forth, and whether he was with any Commie group, and Lee said
no, he wasn't, and Mr.

Murret told him, he said, ‘You be sure you
show up at that courthouse for the trial,* and Lee said, ‘Don’t worry,
I'll show up,* and he told Lee, he said, ‘You ought to get out and find
yourself a job.' " Oswald didn’t attempt to argue, but after Murret left
he told Marina, “Well, these are just bourgeois .

.

.

only concerned
with their own individual welfare.”
Carlos Bringuier described their court appearance on August 12: "I
came first with my friends, and there were some other Cubans over
there and 1 saw when Oswald came inside the court.....

only concerned
with their own individual welfare.”
Carlos Bringuier described their court appearance on August 12: "I
came first with my friends, and there were some other Cubans over
there and 1 saw when Oswald came inside the court....

See, here in
the court you have two sides, one of the white people and one for the
colored people, and he walked directly inside of the colored people
and he sat directly among them in the middle, and that made me to
be angry too, because I saw that he was trying to win the colored
people for his side.

When he will appear in the court, he will defend
Fidel Castro, he will defend the Fair Play for Cuba, and the colored
people will feel good for him, and that is a tremendous work of
propaganda for his cause.

That is one of the things that made me to
think that he is really a smart guy and not a nut."
Oswald pleaded guilty and paid a sio fine.

He came home smiling.

The next day the Picayune gave him a small write-up:
Pamphlet Case Sentence Given
!

“Street Agitation ...

Radio Speaker and Lecturer"...

137
Lee Oswald.

4907 Magazine.

Monday was sentenced to pay a fine of
,io or serve to days in jail on a charge of disturbing the peace by creating
* Oswald was arrested by First District Police at *15 Fridaythe
700 block of Canal while he was reportedly distributing pamphlets
asking for & “Fair Pixy for Cubs.

Police were called to the scene when three Cubans reportedly sough
to stop Oswald.

Municipal charges against the Cubans for disturbing the
peace were dropped by the court.

He cut clippings and sent one to Arnold Johnson, the information
director of the Communist party, and another to Vincent Lee.

To the
latter, he wrote:
Continuing my efforts on behalf of the F P.C.C.

in New Orleans I find
that l have incurred the displeasure of the Cuban exile “worms here
fthe Cuban government's term for the exiles].

• • * ^
I am glad I am stirring things up and shall continue to do so.--- PAGE BREAK ---

in New Orleans I find
that l have incurred the displeasure of the Cuban exile “worms here
fthe Cuban government's term for the exiles]. • • * ^
I am glad I am stirring things up and shall continue to do so. The
incident was given considerable coverage in the press and local T.V. news broadcast. 1 am sure it will be all to the good of the Fair Play for Cuba Commit-
tee. Another clipping went into his pro-Castro file. When Marina was questioned about the purpose of his pro-Castro
activities in New Orleans, she said. “I think that Lee engaged in this
activity primarily for purposes of self-advertising. He wanted to be
arrested. I think that he wanted to get into the newspapers
Q. Do you think that he wanted to be advertised and known as being
in support of Cuba before he went to Cuba? A Yes. Q; Do you think he thought that would help him when he got to
Cuba? Q. Did he tell you anything about that, or is that just what you guess? A He would collect the newspaper clippings about his—when the
newspapers wrote about him. and he took those clippings with him when
he went to Mexico. On August 16 Oswald staged another demonstration in front of the
International Trade Mart. A friend of Bringuier’s picked up one ot
the leaflets and saw that Oswald had his name and address stamped

--- PAGE BREAK ---131...

Oswald's Gun
on it.

They decided to turn the tables on him.

The friend went to
Oswald's house posing as a Castro sympathizer and talked to him for
about an hour on his front porch.

Oswald reportedly told him that the
United States didn't have the right to invade Cuba or overthrow its
government, and that if it tried to, he would fight for Castro.

He
wasn’t taken in by the visitor.

Afterward, Marina testified, "I asked
Lee who that was, and he said it was probably some anti-Cuban, or
perhaps an FBI agent”
The Oswalds were getting along better by this time.

He no longer
f hit her—she was seven months pregnant—and he even confided in her
to some extent.

According to McMillan's book, Marina tried to tell
Oswald he wasn’t the outstanding man he thought he was.

She re-
minded him that Cuba had gotten along without him so far, and told
him, "Poor great man sits here all by himself.

He’s part of a great
cause, and yet he has nothing to eat.

Nobody sees that he's a genius."
"You laugh now," he replied, "But in twenty years, when I'm
prime minister, we’ll see how you laugh then." He told her Cuba was
"a tiny country surrounded by enemies" and that he hoped his leaflets
would help wake up the American people.

When Marina commented
that America obviously wasn’t ready for a revolution, he agreed:
"You’re right.

I ought to have been bom in some other era, much
sooner or much later than I was."
Marina explained to the Warren Commission, “I was not exactly
happy with this occupation of his, but it seemed to me better than his
'games' with the rifle as in Dallas.

To tell the truth, I sympathized
with Cuba....

But I did not support Lee since I felt that he was too
small a person to take so much on himself."
As a result of the publicity he'd been attracting, Oswald was invited
to appear on a local radio show called Latin Listening Post.To tell the truth, I sympathized
with Cuba....

But I did not support Lee since I felt that he was too
small a person to take so much on himself."
As a result of the publicity he'd been attracting, Oswald was invited
to appear on a local radio show called Latin Listening Post.

The
moderator, William Stuckey, found him to be self-assured and "very
well qualified to handle questions"—if his speaking style had a fault,
it was that Oswald seemed "a little stir' and too academic.

On the
air, Stuckey asked him about his background, and Oswald said that
after he had been honorably discharged from the Marines as a buck
sergeant, he had gone back to work in Texas, and had recently moved
to New Orleans with his wife and child.

No mention of Dallas or
Russia.

(Because of his court-martials he had never gotten above the
rank of private first class.)
In response to Stuckey’s questions, he denied that Castro was con-
trolled by the Soviet Union, and pointed out that when Khrushchev
“Street AgitiUon ...

Radio Speaker and Lecturer'*...

139
had asked him to allow on-site inspections of his rocket bases during
the missile crisis, Castro refused.

He called Castro an "experimenter,
a person who is trying to find the best way for his country.” But he
insisted that the Fiar Play Committee did not support Fidel Castro
as an "individual"—rather, it supported "the idea of an independent
revolution in the Western Hemisphere, free from American interven-
tion.”
If [Castro] chooses a socialist or a Marxist or a Communist way of life,
that is something upon which only the Cuban people can pass.

We do
not have the right to pass on that.

...

We cannot exploit that system
and say it is a bad one, it is a threat to our existence and then go and
try to destroy it
According to Oswald, the "current of history" indicated that "coun-
tries emerging from imperialist domination” would choose socialism
in one form or another.--- PAGE BREAK ---

... We cannot exploit that system
and say it is a bad one, it is a threat to our existence and then go and
try to destroy it
According to Oswald, the "current of history" indicated that "coun-
tries emerging from imperialist domination” would choose socialism
in one form or another. "Cuba,” be declared, "is irrevocably lost as
far as capitalism goes and there will never be a capitalist regime again
in Cuba." Here Oswald was repeating two themes expressed in a letter
to his brother Robert from Moscow four years earlier: opposition to
American imperialism and a classic Marxist belief in historical inevi-
tability. When Stuckey asked him why so many people were fleeing Cuba,
Oswald mentioned the criminal class and said that many of them were
"the same people who are in New Orleans and have set themselves
up in stores with blood money.” He said he thought that the Cuban
government's attitude was "good riddance." Stuckey pressed him on
this issue, asking why so many workers and peasants were leaving
Cuba while few were leaving dictatorships like Nicaragua, and Os-
wald turned the question to his advantage. Well, i good question. [The] Nicaraguan situation is considerably differ-
ent from Castro's Cuba. People are inclined not to flee their countries
unless some new system, new factor, enters into their lives. I must say
that very surely no new factors have entered into Nicaragua for about
300 years, in fact the people live exactly as they have always lived in
Nicaragua. I am referring to the overwhelming majority of the people
in Nicaragua, which is a feudal dictatorship with 90 per cent of the
people engaged in agriculture. These peasants are uneducated. They
have one of the lowest living standards in all of the western hemisphere
and so because of the fact that no new factor, no liberating factor, has
entered into their lives, they remain in Nicaragua.

--- PAGE BREAK ---'to f4a ‘/VT^f^Vi d U) M** ij(k~
140...

Oswald's Game
He explained the flight of workers and peasants from Cuba this
way:
You know, it's very funny about revolutions.

Revolutions require work,
revolutions require sacrifice....

These people are the people who do not
remain in Cuba to be educated by young people, who are afraid of the
alphabet, who are afraid of these new things which are occurring, who
are afraid they would lose something by collectivization You know,
it used to be that these people worked for the United Fruit Company
or American companies engaged in sugar reflning, oil refining in Cuba.

They worked a few months every year during the cane cutting or sugar
refining season....

They feel that now they have to work all year round
to plant new crops, to make a new economy ...

they feel that they have
been robbed of the right to do as they please....

What they do not realize
is that they have been robbed of the right to be exploited, robbed of the
right to be cheated, robbed of the right of New Orleanean companies to
take away what was rightfully theirs.

Of course, they have to share now.

Everybody gets an equal portion.

This is collectivization and this is very
hard on some people, on people preferring the dog-eat-dog economy.

Oswald was good at this.

When Stuckey brought up the lack of
press freedom in Cuba, he compared it to the voluntary press censor-
ship during wartime in the United States and complained about the
Times-Picayune and States-Jtem syndicate, which he spoke of collec-
tively as “the only newspaper we have in New Orleans and a very
restricted paper it is.” He said, “The Fair Play for Cuba Committee
has often approached this paper with information or comments and
this paper has consistently refused, because it is sympathetic to the
anti-Castro regime.Oswald was good at this.

When Stuckey brought up the lack of
press freedom in Cuba, he compared it to the voluntary press censor-
ship during wartime in the United States and complained about the
Times-Picayune and States-Jtem syndicate, which he spoke of collec-
tively as “the only newspaper we have in New Orleans and a very
restricted paper it is.” He said, “The Fair Play for Cuba Committee
has often approached this paper with information or comments and
this paper has consistently refused, because it is sympathetic to the
anti-Castro regime.

It has systematically refused to print any objective
matter, giving the other man's viewpoint about Cuba.” (This answer
shows that he had been following the local newspapers' coverage of
Cuba.) He also claimed that he had gone to their offices and asked for
coverage of his Trade Mart demonstration and they refused.

The other answers he gave indicate that he was well-informed about
Cuba.

His reference to young people teaching the old was an allusion
to the Alphabetization or Literacy Campaign of 1961, in which young
Cubans went into rural areas to teach older people to read.

Oswald
also complained about the U.S.

restrictions on travel to Cuba.

And
he referred to the anti-Castro underground—the “Batistaites" still in
Cuba who had gone into hiding and had been “engaged in counter-
revolutionary activities ever since the Bay of Pigs and even before
that, just after the revolution.

In other words, they have remained
MSir«*t Agitation ..

.

Radio Spnnker ind Ucturer"...

141
underground.”
He probably obtained this information from a variety of sources,
but primarily from his reading, including the pamphlets Fair Play had
sent him and articles about Cuba in The Miliiant and elsewhere.

He
had also spent time with Cuban students in the Soviet Union—one of
his best friends there was a Cuban student named Alfred.141
underground.”
He probably obtained this information from a variety of sources,
but primarily from his reading, including the pamphlets Fair Play had
sent him and articles about Cuba in The Miliiant and elsewhere.

He
had also spent time with Cuban students in the Soviet Union—one of
his best friends there was a Cuban student named Alfred.

And al-
though there’s no direct evidence for this, he may also have been in
contact with some other Cubans in New Orleans.

(Back in Dallas,
George de Mohrenschildt had noticed that Oswald knew quite a bit
about the history of several Latin American countries.

He later wrote
that Oswald told him he’d learned a lot from talking with refugees
from those countries when he was a teenager in New Orleans—“no
better source of information.**)
After this broadcast, Stuckey and the station manager decided to
arrange a debate between Oswald, Carlos Bringuier, and anotehr
anti-Communist, Ed Butler.

Oswald showed up promptly on the af-
ternoon of August 2L He was wearing a Russian-made suit—heavy
gray flannel, badly cut—a shirt and tie, and carried a black looseleaf
notebook under his arm.

Since the initial interview, Bill Stuckey had
learned, through a telephone call to the FBI, that Oswald had lived
in Russia.

He confronted him with this on the air and caught Oswald
offguard.

STUCKEY: YOU did live in Russia for three years?

OSWALD: That is correct, and I think that those, the fact that I did
live for a time in the Soviet Union gives me excellent qualifications to
repudiate charges that Cuba and the Fair Play for Cuba Committee is
communist controlled.

Naturally, his opponents didn’t agree.

Later in the debate Bringuier asked him if he concurred with Cas-
tro’s recent characterization of President Kennedy as “a ruffian and
a thief.” Oswald replied, “I would not agree with that particular
wording.

However.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Later in the debate Bringuier asked him if he concurred with Cas-
tro’s recent characterization of President Kennedy as “a ruffian and
a thief.” Oswald replied, “I would not agree with that particular
wording. However. 1 and the Fair Play for Cuba Committee do think
that the United States Government through certain agencies, mainly
the State Department and the CIA, has made monumental mistakes
in its relations with Cuba." Bringuier was referring to recent press
reports of a speech in which Castro charged that the United States
hadn’t delivered all the food and medical supplies it had promised
Cuba in return for the release of the Bay of Pigs prisoners. Castro had
said, “The ruffian Kennedy operates this way. We freed the mercenar-

--- PAGE BREAK ---142...

Oswald’s Guns
ies and already they are organizing new aggressions against Cuba.”
Oswald’s remark that he didn’t agree with Castro's particular
wording suggests that he may have instead agreed with the substance
But he went on to blame the State Department and the CIA, and this
too may have reflected his attitude toward John Kennedy.

Marina has
said that he considered Kennedy the best American leader one could
expect at that point in history.

And he seemed to feel that Kennedy
might have pursued a softer line on Cuba if it hadn’t been for the
political pressures he had to contend with.

He explained how a presi-
dent had to reckon with the opinions of others.

His only negative
comment was that Joe Kennedy had bought the presidency for his son
—but this criticism was directed against capitalism.

"Money paves
the way to everything here,” he said.

Thus, he seemed to put most of
the blame for America’s policy toward Cuba on conservative ele-
ments, not on Kennedy himself.

But it should be kept in mind that
Oswald considered his wife unqualified to discuss political issues with
him, and he knew she admired Kennedy.

Although Lee Harvey Oswald was a clever debater, the revelation
about his defection won the debate for his opponents.

Stuckey later
said, “I think that we finished him on that program.

.

.

.

Oswald
seemed like such a nice, bright boy and was extremely believable
before this.

We thought the fellow could probably get quite a few
members if he was really indeed serious about getting members.

We
figured after this broadcast of August 21, why, that was no longer
possible.”
After the program Stuckey noticed that he looked “a little de-
jected” and invited him to a nearby bar for a beer.

At the bar Stuckey
thought he seemed to relax for the first time, and they talked for about
an hour.

When Stuckey asked if his relatives had influenced him to
become a Marxist, Oswald seemed amused.At the bar Stuckey
thought he seemed to relax for the first time, and they talked for about
an hour.

When Stuckey asked if his relatives had influenced him to
become a Marxist, Oswald seemed amused.

No, he said, they were
"pretty much typical New Orleans types.” He told Stuckey that he
had started reading Marx and Engels when he was 15 and that his
service in Japan had convinced him that "something was wrong with
the system," so he decided to go to Russia and see for himself how
a revolutionary society operates.

But he became disillusioned with
Russia, he said, and he believed that Cuba was now the only revolu-
tionary country in the world.

Stuckey’s impression was that Oswald
regarded himself "as living in a world of intellectual inferiors.” He
thought Oswald knew he was intelligent and wanted "to have an
opportunity to express his intelligence.”
A week after the debate, Oswald wrote the Central Committee of
“Strew AtfUtiwi .

.

.

Radio Speaker and Lecturer^...

143
the Communist Party USA:
Please advise me upon a problem of personal tactics.

I have lived in the Soviet Union from Oct.

1959 to July 1962.

I had, in 1959, in Moscow, tried to legally dissolve my United States
citizenship in favor of Soviet citizenship, however, I did not complete
the legal formalities for this.

Having come back to the U.S.

in 1962 and thrown myself into the
struggle for progress and freedom in the United States, l would like to
Icnow whether, in your opinions, l can continue to fight, handicapped
as it were, by my past record, can I still, under these circumstances,
compete with anti-progressive forces aboveground or whether in your
opinion I should always remain in the background, i.e.

underground.

Our opponents could use my background of residence in the U.S.S.R.

against any cause which I join, by association, they could say the organi-
zation of which I am a member is Russian controlled, etc.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Our opponents could use my background of residence in the U.S.S.R. against any cause which I join, by association, they could say the organi-
zation of which I am a member is Russian controlled, etc. I am sure you
see my point
I could of course openly proclaim (if pressed on the subject) that I
wanted to dissolve my American citizenship as a personal protest
against the policy of the U.S. government in supporting dictatorships,
etc. But what do you think I should do? Which is the best tactic in
general? Should I dissociate myself from all progressive activities? Here in New Orleans, I am secretary of the local branch of the “Fair
Play for Cuba Committee,” a position which, frankly, I have used to
foster communist ideals. On a local radio show, I was attacked by Cuban exile organization
representatives for my residence etc. in the Soviet Union. %
I feel 1 may have compromised the F.P.C.C., so you see that I need
the advice of trusted, long lime fighter* for progress. Please advise. The information director of the party, Arnold Johnson, eventually
replied on September 19, saying that, as an American citizen, ‘*you
have a right to participate in such organizations as you want," but
that “often it is advisable for some people to remain in the back-
ground, not underground."
Marina has said that Oswald thought more highly of the American
Communists than he did of the Party members in Russia. He showed
her a letter from a Party official in New York—perhaps this one—and
said in effect: see, here is someone important who understands what
I'm trying to do. But Oswald wanted another letter for his records,
not advice. And it must have seemed to him, after the debate, that he
«

--- PAGE BREAK ---could no longer work openly as a pro-Castro organizer, certainly not
in New Orleans—and that he would now have to remain in the
background, Le., underground.

In late August he began practicing dry-firing his rifle several times
a week on his front porch.

He explained the practice to Marina: “Fidel
Castro needs defenders.

I’m going to join his army of volunteers.

I’m
going to be a revolutionary.”
During the second half of the summer, Oswald was seen with two
Latin Americans who have never been identified.

Dean Andrews, a
colorful New Orleans attorney, claimed that in July Oswald came to
his office more than once in the company of a short, stocky Mexican,
about 26 years old.

He called the Mexican “Oswald’s shadow." Al-
though the Warren Commission discounted Andrews’ testimony, one
part of his story rings true.

He said that Oswald came to see him about
getting his less-than-honorable discharge upgraded.

Oswald had been
trying to get the Marines to reinstate his honorable discharge ever
since he returned to the United States, and that month had received
official notice that his request had been rejected.

Considering Os-
wald’s persistence when he believed he had been wronged, it makes
sense that he might have then gone to an attorney.

(Andrews said that
since Oswald couldn't pay his fee, nothing came of it.)
Also, about this time, Oswald was reportedly seen in the Habana
O Bar with a Mexican or Cuban by both the bartender an^Crest Pena,
the owner.

The Habana Bar was said to be a hangoutfor Spanish-
speaking seamen, both pro- and anti-Castro.

The man with Oswald
was described as being approximately 28 years old, short and muscu-
lar, with very hairy arms and a receding hairline.

Finally, during the August 16 Trade Mart demonstration, Oswald
was photographed by a local TV news crew while he was handing out
his leaflets with two young men.

One was a teenager Oswald ap-
proached and offered $2 for an hour’s work.Finally, during the August 16 Trade Mart demonstration, Oswald
was photographed by a local TV news crew while he was handing out
his leaflets with two young men.

One was a teenager Oswald ap-
proached and offered $2 for an hour’s work.

But the other was a Latin
American who has never been identified.

The House^Assassmatiohs
/ w Commitfee^published a photogiaph'taken from the news film and
[ ^V^suggested that this second man should be investigated further.

1 Oswald was always on the lookout for people who agreed with his
& jLJJ political ideas.

Under a paragraph entitled ‘‘Organizer" in his r6sum£,
he wrote: ”1 hired persons to distribute literature.

I then organized
; persons who display receptive attitudes toward Cuba to distribute
pamphlets.

...

I caused the formation of a small, active, FPCC
P
1 organization of members and sympathizers where before there was
tt-t-
//vvO
“Street Agitation ...

Radio Speaker and Lecturer”...

MS
none.” It has been assumed that Oswald was lying when he claimed
to have organized a small group of supporters.

It may be that he was
simply exaggerating—possibly his support consisted of only one or
two unidentified Latin Americans.

The Warren Report described Oswald’s completed resume as con-
sisting of
...

several sheets of notepaper which he presumably intended to call to
the attention of Cuban and Soviet officials in Mexico City to convince
them to let him enter Cuba.

On these sheets he had recorded facts about
his Marine service, including the dates of his enlistment and discharge;
the places where he had served, and the diplomas that he had received
from military school.several sheets of notepaper which he presumably intended to call to
the attention of Cuban and Soviet officials in Mexico City to convince
them to let him enter Cuba.

On these sheets he had recorded facts about
his Marine service, including the dates of his enlistment and discharge;
the places where he had served, and the diplomas that he had received
from military school.

Recorded also were notes on his stay in the Soviet
Union, his early interest in Communist literature, his ability to speak
Russian, his organization of the New Orleans chapter of the Fair Play
for Cuba Committee, his contact with police authorities in connection
with his work for the Committee, and his experience in “street agita-
tion,’’ as a “radio speaker and lecturer," and as a photographer.

At the end of many of these sections Oswald attached some of the
letters and other documents he’d collected.

The handwritten sheets
appear in the Commission’s published exhibits.

This material is more revealing than the Commission realized.

The
section on his military service was probably intended to show that he
was qualified to serve as a revolutionary soldier.

There would other-
wise seem to have been little point in giving so many details.

The other
material seems designed to demonstrate that he was versatile and
well-qualified to serve the revolution in other capacities—as a political
organizer or translator, for example.

Under the heading “Marxist,” he wrote that he had attended nu-
merous Marxist reading circles and groups’’ at the factory where he
worked in Minsk, “some of which were compulsory and others which
were not,” and indicated that he had learned still more about the
works of Marx, Engels, and Lenin from Russian newspapers and TV,
adding that “such articles are given very good coverage daily in the
USSR” That last statement indicates that he wrote this resume with
the Cuban officials in mind and not the Russians, who would certainly
have known about such articles.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The other
material seems designed to demonstrate that he was versatile and
well-qualified to serve the revolution in other capacities—as a political
organizer or translator, for example. Under the heading “Marxist,” he wrote that he had attended nu-
merous Marxist reading circles and groups’’ at the factory where he
worked in Minsk, “some of which were compulsory and others which
were not,” and indicated that he had learned still more about the
works of Marx, Engels, and Lenin from Russian newspapers and TV,
adding that “such articles are given very good coverage daily in the
USSR” That last statement indicates that he wrote this resume with
the Cuban officials in mind and not the Russians, who would certainly
have known about such articles. In a brief section entitled “Russian" he said that he was totally
proficient in speaking conversational Russian" and appended the let-
ter Peter Gregory had given him back in June 1962. Knowing that

--- PAGE BREAK ---146...

Of waid's Game
there were Russian technicians and advisers in Cuba, Oswald may
have thought his knowledge of the language would be useful.

Throughout, the document presents not only what he had done, but
something of what he thought he was capable of doing.

For instance,
in phrasing similar to that of an ordinary job resume, he wrote, “I am
experienced in street agitation having done it in New Orleans.

.

.

But probably the most telling part of the resumi came under the
heading “Photographer.” It reveals a corner of Oswald’s fantasy life
that had first surfaced in 1961, when he told Marina he would have
loved the dangerous life of a spy.

When he worked at Jaggars-Chiles-
Stovall, he struck up an acquaintance with a co-worker, Dennis
Hyman Ofstein, who taught him how to use some of the photographic
equipment.

After they had become friendlier, Oswald asked him if he
knew what the term “microdot” meant.

He then explained to Ofstein
that microdots were highly reduced photographs used to transmit
secret information—and indeed they are, as any reader of spy novels
knows.

Very likely, Oswald was hoping Ofstein could teach him how
to reduce a photograph to that size.

But Ofstein had never heard the
term, and the equipment at the plant wasn’t capable of producing any
such photographs.

The word “microdot” also appears in a notebook
of Oswald’s next to the name Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall.But Ofstein had never heard the
term, and the equipment at the plant wasn’t capable of producing any
such photographs.

The word “microdot” also appears in a notebook
of Oswald’s next to the name Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall.

In his r£sum6,
Oswald wrote down the dates he had worked for them and that he
was familiar with “blowups, miniaturization, etc.”
Overall, this document suggests that Oswald didn't consider him-
self a miserable failure who, as the Warren Report put it, saw Cuba
as “his last escape hatch, his last gambit to extricate himself from the
mediocrity and defeat which plagued him throughout most of his
life.” Instead, these credentials indicate that he saw himself as an
experienced political operative who was qualified to work for the
Cuba revolution as a soldier, lecturer, organizer, agitator, translator,
or spy.

His ambition was evidently much the same as it had been in
1959.

As Kerry Thomley had guessed, he expected to be welcomed
aboard, and he would then go out and distinguish himself in the
Communist world and work his way up—after twenty years, he might
even get to be prime minister.

For someone who couldn’t hold a job
in the United States, he had some extraordinary ambitions.

During the first six months of 1963 there had been little, if any,
American sabotage activities against Cuba—the results were not con-
sidered worth the effort.

But in June 1963 the Special Group of the
National Security Council decided, with the president’s approval, to
1
I
“Street Agiudon .,.

Radio Speaker and Lecturer" ...

147
step up covert operations inside Cuba.

Sabotage missions were carried out by Cuban exiles led by paramili-
tary specialists under contract to the CIA.

Operating out of Florida,
they ran boats to Cuba that dropped off agents and supplies.

As in
many other such underground operations, the chief purpose was to
sabotage the economy and promote disaffection with the government
among the people.Operating out of Florida,
they ran boats to Cuba that dropped off agents and supplies.

As in
many other such underground operations, the chief purpose was to
sabotage the economy and promote disaffection with the government
among the people.

But some of the raiders had ideas about more direct
action.

As far as they and their American advisers were concerned,
there was a war going on.

The CIA’s deputy director of intelligence
during that period, Ray Cline, later told a journalist, “I’m almost
positive that there was no serious CIA-controlled effort to assassinate
anybody, but I think the intention of some infiltration teams was to
do it.” And one of the Cuban raiders said, “The papers now want to
say there were plots.

Well, I can tell you there were plots.

I took a
lot of weapons to Cuba.

Some of them were very specialjveapons for
special purposes.

They were powerful rifles with sophist icatwlscopes
—Spsngfields with bolt actions, rifles only used by snipers.

.

.

Everyone inTfie underground was plotting to kill Castro, and the CIA
was helping the underground.” Occasionally some of the infiltrators j
and their supporters inside Cuba were captured and shot.

_/
On August 18 anti-Castro commandoes shelled and raachine-f
gunned a Cuban factory.

On the 21st, the day of Oswald’s radio
debate, the Times-Picayune reported that the Cuban government had
charged that the raid was planned, organized, and supplied by the
CLA.

Ten days later a front-page story headlined “Policy Changed on
Cuba Attacks” quoted a Washington Post report that the new U.S.

policy was to “neither encourage nor discourage” such raids, if they
were militarily feasible and not carried out simply for publicity pur-
poses.

The reported change was seen as “an encouragement to activist^
exiles."
In early September the CIA renewed its contact with one of its
informants, a high-level Cuban official codenamcd AM/LASH.--- PAGE BREAK ---

policy was to “neither encourage nor discourage” such raids, if they
were militarily feasible and not carried out simply for publicity pur-
poses. The reported change was seen as “an encouragement to activist^
exiles."
In early September the CIA renewed its contact with one of its
informants, a high-level Cuban official codenamcd AM/LASH. Al-
though the CIA was primarily interested in keeping AM/LASH in
place for intelligence purposes, AM/LASH now proposed that he
engineer a coup involving, as a first step, Castro’s assassination. The
case officers who talked with him in Brazil cabled headquarters on
September 7 saying that AM/LASH was interested, in attempting an
“inside job” against Castro and was awaiting a U.S. plan of action. Even while covert activities continued, however, the White House
was considering an attempt to establish communications with the
Cuban government. Beginning in September, an adviser to the Ameri-
/\)

--- PAGE BREAK ---148...

Oswald's Game
can delegation to the United Nations, William Attwood, had a series
of informal talks with the Cuban ambassador to the U.N.

to try to
open negotiations leading to an accommodation between the two
countries.

When Attwood individually informed Robert Kennedy and
McGeorge Bundy of his effort, each agreed it was worth pursuing.

Thus, American policy was proceeding along two distinct and con-
tradictory raods.

Attwood had advised the White House of his diplo-
matic efforts, but the CIA officials involved with AM/LASH didn’t
inform the White House of theirs.

Richard Helms testified that he
didn't believe it was necessary,
...

given this Cuban of his standing and all the history ...

of trying
to find someone inside Cuba who might head a government and have
a group to replace Castro .

.

.

this was so central to the whole theme
of everything we had been trying to do, that I [found] it totally unneces-
sary to ask Robert Kennedy at that point [whether] we should go ahead
with this.

Meanwhile, behind the scenes, Oswald was pursuing his own covert ,
activities, evidently determined to play a role in the international
chess game.

On September 5 two planes dropped bombs on Santa Clara, Cuba.

Late in the evening of September 7 Premier Castro gave an im-
promptu, three-hour interview to Associated Press reporter Daniel
Harker during a reception at the Brazilian Embassy in Havana.

Two
days later the Times-Picayune reported:
CASTRO QLASTS RAIDS ON CUBA
Says U.S.

Leaders Imperiled by Aid to Rebels
Havana (AP)—Prime Minister Fidel Castro said Saturday night
’’United States leaden” would be in danger if they helped in any attempt
to do away with leaders of Cuba.

Bitterly denouncing what he called
US-prompted raids on Cuban territory, Castro said, MWe are prepared
to fight them and answer in kind.Leaders Imperiled by Aid to Rebels
Havana (AP)—Prime Minister Fidel Castro said Saturday night
’’United States leaden” would be in danger if they helped in any attempt
to do away with leaders of Cuba.

Bitterly denouncing what he called
US-prompted raids on Cuban territory, Castro said, MWe are prepared
to fight them and answer in kind.

United States leaders should think that
if they are aiding terrorist plans to eliminate Cuban leaders, they them-
selves will not be safe.”
Castro went on to accuse the United States of "double-crossing”
policies and called President Kennedy a "cheap and crooked politi-
cian." A similar story appeared in the States Item.

What were these terrorist plans Castro referred to?

Although it’s
“Street Agitation ...

Radio Speaker and Lecturer"...

t49
possible that Cuban intelligence had learned of the AM/LASH ope -
Kn, Castro implied that the plot was connected to the recentmdb
Lnied out by Cuban exiles.

As the Church committee noted, talk of
assassinating Castro was common among the more militant exile
STw of th .mbi— of out to- fo, lltam g*.

fo say that the best way to get their country back was to shoot Fidel.

The committee report says, “Castro’s September 7 statement could
have been referring to information he received relating to such assassi-
nation plots hatched by exile leaders.

In addition there were paramili-
tary raids on Cuba by exile leaders shortly before Castro s interview _
Irutny1 case, Raymond Rocca.

a CIA official who had been assigned
to work with the Warren Commission, wrote tn 1975.

There
no question from the facts surrounding the Castro appearance, which
Sad not been expected, and his agreement to the interview, that this
event represented a more-than-ordinary attempt to get a message on
the record in the United States.” „
Castro was mistaken to assume, as a matter of course, that Presi-
dent Kennedy had ordered or had specific knowledge of any of these
attempts.--- PAGE BREAK ---

a CIA official who had been assigned
to work with the Warren Commission, wrote tn 1975. There
no question from the facts surrounding the Castro appearance, which
Sad not been expected, and his agreement to the interview, that this
event represented a more-than-ordinary attempt to get a message on
the record in the United States.” „
Castro was mistaken to assume, as a matter of course, that Presi-
dent Kennedy had ordered or had specific knowledge of any of these
attempts. They grew out of the crisis atmosphere that prevailed, when
it seemed to many people that Castro had to be removed by any means
necessary. So far ^anyone knows, the president never saw Castros
intended message. But among the potential readere was Lee HarveT
Oswald, a disturbed young radical who had been following the local |
papers looking for a way to help Cuba. With his taste for violence and,
his subjective interpretations of everything he read, Castros warning ^
may indeed have seemed like the kings outcry against Becket quoted
earlier by Senator Charles Mathias: “Who will nd me of this man? The irony is that the CIA plots may have evolved in the same manner. During September Oswald eagerly awaited Ruth Paine s amval. After Marina and June went to stay at Ruth’s home in Irving, he
would be free to go to Mexico City to apply for a Cuban visa. He
informed his wife that he would also visit the Soviet Embassy in
Mexico and try to speed up her return to the Soviet Union. He assured
her that if everything worked out he would arrange for her to join him
in Cuba or for him to visit her in Russia. When Ruth amved he^
her to believe that he was going to Houston or Philadelphia to look
for work, and cautioned Marina not to tell her anything about his
actual destination. _ ,,
The women left for Texas on September z3. Oswald was seen
hurrying out of his apartment, suitcases in hand, the following after-

--- PAGE BREAK ---her anything about his
actual destination. _ ,,
The women left for Texas on September z3. Oswald was seen
hurrying out of his apartment, suitcases in hand, the following after-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

noon. After a gap of two nights and a day, he was spotted in south
Texas on a Trailways bus headed for the Mexican border. During the
intervening period, Oswald was reportedly in Dallasjffis appearance
r there provideS'lbe firsflndlcation thaTOswaJd Had read Castro’s
warning and that he was responding to it with his own idea of political
action, much as he had to other news reports about Cuba that sum-
11... The Troubling Testimony of
Sylvia Odio: “A MATTER OF SOME IM-
PORTANCE TO THE COMMISSION”
. UUHO «6, s,l.i» .Mta
was a leader of the anti-Castro ^ overthrown. She came from
a personal reason for wanting t ^ ^ Cgstro before the revolu-
a wealthy Cuban family that1tad PP^ hef parelUS had been
tion but later turned *8“"** “ . hc pn^n on the Isle of Pines,
imprisoned m Cuba. her ihu ^P Septcmber 15, 1963. the
At about nine o clock on t • Dallas. Her sister Ajinie
doorbell rang at SylviaOdm d°r. standing under the
answered, then went to caU chain Utch on, Sylvia
outside light were three ‘‘^^^Kericans in T-sh.rts who
took a good look at ‘hem Two^Utm ^ ba,d ^
a shave. “are vou Sarita Odio?
sitsrii "b. u»,..... t*. * “
the University of Dallas. I am***"£
Then he asked. “Is she the oldest?
“No I am the oldest. „
And he said. “It is you we are looking for.
...151

--- PAGE BREAK ---152.,.

Oiwald’a G«mc
He told her they were members of the Cuban Revolutionary Junta
(JURE), the anti-Castro organization Sylvia Odio belonged to.

Suspi-
cious, she asked their names.

She later recalled, "One of them said his
name was Leopoldo.

He said that was his war name.

In all this
underground, everybody has a war name.

This was done for safety in
Cuba.

So when everybody came to exile, everyone was known by their
war names." It was Leopoldo, the taller one, who did most of the
talking.

The other Latin gave his war name as something like "An-
gelo."
After she refused to let them in, Leopoldo told her, "We are friends
of your father.” He gave her "almost incredible details" about her
father's past, which she believed only someone who knew him, or was
very well-informed, would have known.

Mrs.

Odio later testified,
"after they mentioned my father they started talking about the Ameri-
can.

He [the Latin American] said, 'You are working in the under-
ground.' And I said, 'No, I am sorry to say I am not working in the
underground.' And he said, ‘We wanted you to meet this American.

His name, is Leon Oswald.' He repeated it twice.

.

.

.

And they
introduced him as an American who was very much interested in the
Cuban cause.”
The American attempted a few words in Spanish, "trying to be
cute.” She asked him if he had ever been to Cuba and he said he
hadn't, but that he was interested in her movement.

Afterward he
stood silently, watching and listening—as Odio would put it, "sort of
looking at me to see what my reaction was, like somebody who is
evaluating the situation."
One of the Latin Americans took out a letter written in Spanish that
requested money for her organization to buy arms to overthrow Cas-
tro.

He asked if she would translate the letter into English for him and
"send a whole lot of them” to American businessmen.

Mrs.

Odio
refused.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mrs. Odio
refused. (She had been shown a similar petition by a Dallas leader of
JURE, and had turned him down too.) She asked who had sent them,
and Leopoldo told her that they had "just come from New Orleans,”
where they were trying to get their movement organized, and that
they were doing this on their own. He apologized for the late hour,
saying they were leaving on a trip that night or the next evening. The entire conversation lasted about fifteen minutes. Sylvia told
them she had to go and, still suspicious, she added that she was going
to write to her father about their visit. As they were leaving, Leopoldo
asked, "Is he still in the Isle of Pines?” Then they drove away in a
red car, with Leopoldo at the wheel. . >H> lOxC. xwnwi-v
The Troubling Testimony of Syl.U Odio... I»
The next dny Leopoldo telephoned her ^e r s he
what he said, it d Leopoldo asked her what she had
with the anti-Castro unde g reDlied “I didn’t think any-
thoughi of the it ^now, he’s a Marine, an ex-Marine, and
thing. he •* > ■ [. ^ a tremendous asset to anyone,
an expert marksman. He would oe a iremc Qur idea
kt und,'r»,oui.d in Cube. like killin. Css.ro •;
T&E &■ s* ■jsssijssa
Kennedy ,f;e, ihe
BavKiB because he is the one that was holding the reedom of
“ to her s,ein on iheir return. Their cboverssuoo ended, end ehe
SE ZlgStt™ "some so., of rchenre o,
' K ch. didn’t know what. There had been something too
P1?1' ‘^
U1
S ^Ito’s apprSch: “When I had no reaction to
calculating about Leo^ldos approac th#, the man was
todrfSf .!»• oould do enyihing like
Sin, nX"“ond in Cnh.. Idee killingC-o. won’t have anything t?^o wltJ^^tLed the fact that we should
d°A few days later Odio wrote to her father describing
bTffi in putting
came^hat ImmSly she'remem-
way*10 the parkin g lot and was taken to a hosp.Ul by ambulance.

--- PAGE BREAK ---tuT DUT /L
)»lirwb a /Vfcuf 0tf« l*wA« jub Okh( -fufokrj- ^ teJu.

U, %
j'M t^T1 '‘w MW flu* ft<
^ ,«^±T£; ^
SSSiST
Sf^JMSrSSrS
oSS Sr2?S,Annie lnd 1 looked at one another and s°rt
guy is^ iS I MW $*?

r“ognlM him7’ She said.

‘It is the same
g y, sn i it/ 1 said.

Yes, but do not say anythin*.’ ”
bu^rrrere !°° aTraid t0 *°,0 the authorities with their story
EventSfv ?hd anr'her S,5ter about *«• who told an American friend'
entually the information made its way to the FBI who came tn
rssrssr.^
1” *«■ ■**- ^ £rrs
Odio's account of her meeting with Oswald was arauablv the mmi
lrimi“thoe^idns
fhT?n **"£ *° lhe Commi“ion- Here was a
witness who stud she had seen Oswald with two unknown comoan-
tons, one of whom reported a threat Oswald had made aaainsMhe
pr«.denfs hfe-this scarcely two months before STSXStaT
Pr"'d'""ke'“<*• «»»Tof «b,
mmmwM
mmmm
eans.

In short, Sylvia Odio’s story held up, and she WM sM
SSl “““ “• — *• “* «* 4kl »» U.

H.

"
Even before Odio was called to testify before the Warren Comrais-
Tb« Troubling Testimony of SylrU Odio...

155
sion, one of its staff lawyers, W.

David Slawson, was trying to pm
down Oswald's movements from the time when he was last seen in
New Orleans by Marina and Ruth Paine on Monday, September 231
to the time when he was next spotted on the bus heading for Mexico
shortly after 6 A.M.

on Thursday, September 26.

If Oswald’s where-
abouts during that period coudl be accounted for, Odio’s story—and
its disturbing implications—could be quickly disposed of.

As it turned out, this was not easy to do.

There were no eyewit-
nesses who could establish Oswald's presence in New Orleans after
neighbors saw him leave his apartment on the afternoon of the 24th,
and no evidence could be found that he left the city by bus, train, or
commercial airline.

Thus, the evening of the 24th and the entire next
day and night were a blank.There were no eyewit-
nesses who could establish Oswald's presence in New Orleans after
neighbors saw him leave his apartment on the afternoon of the 24th,
and no evidence could be found that he left the city by bus, train, or
commercial airline.

Thus, the evening of the 24th and the entire next
day and night were a blank.

Slawson had one slim piece of paper with
which to bridge the gap—Oswald’s weekly Texas unemployment
check that was cashed at a Winn-Dixie supermarket on the 24th or
25th.

The local postal officials told Commission investigators that the
check probably would not have reached Oswald’s post office box
before the early morning hours of Wednesday, September 25.

Slawson
reasoned that if Oswald stayed over somewhere in New Orleans until
Wednesday morning to wait for this check, and was next seen on his
way to Mexico, he must have caught the connecting bus that left New
Orleans for Houston on Wednesday afternoon.1 And if he was on that
bus, he could not have been at Odio's apartment.

Slawson's analysis seemed reasonable enough on the surface, but
there were problems with it.

No witness could be found who saw
Oswald on the io-hour bus ride from New Orleans to Houston—an
unusual circumstance, since there were passengers who had seen him
on every other leg of his bus trip to Mexico City and back to Dallas.

Furthermore, the driver of the connecting bus said he had never seen
Oswald "at any time.”
There was also good reason to believe that the postal authorities
had for once underestimated the efficiency of the U.S.

mails.

Marina
testified that Oswald always picked up his weekly Texas unemploy-
ment checks on a Tuesday.

Indeed, elsewhere in the Warren Report
(in knocking down a rumor that Oswald had been in Mexico the
preceding week), the Commission asserted that Oswald "cashed a
check from the Texas Employment Commission at the Winn-Dixie
Store no.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Marina
testified that Oswald always picked up his weekly Texas unemploy-
ment checks on a Tuesday. Indeed, elsewhere in the Warren Report
(in knocking down a rumor that Oswald had been in Mexico the
preceding week), the Commission asserted that Oswald "cashed a
check from the Texas Employment Commission at the Winn-Dixie
Store no. 1425 in New Orleans" on "Tuesday, September 17." Thus
it appears that Oswald could have cashed his next check on Tuesday
the 24th and left town, perhaps in a private car, the same day. Meanwhile, another staff lawyer, Wesley J. Liebeler, had by now

--- PAGE BREAK ---(j UTij-uj^ ^y.) tyl^ j%, {^.th .vyiijjrf, 1 U* >t) ^
ir%
m
156...

Oswald's Game
taken Sylvia Odio’s deposition, and Liebeler wasn’t satisfied with
Slawson's analysis.

He wrote an internal memo saying, “There are
problems.

Odio may well be right.

The Commission will look bad if
it turns out she is.” Liebeler pointed to the testimony of lawyer Dean
Andrews and the bartender at the Habana Bar, who each said he had
seen Oswald with a similar-looking Latin American.

Liebeler noted
that Oswald would have had time to travel to Dallas to see Odio and
still get to south Texas in time to catch the bus to Mexico.

The response of the Commission's chief counsel, Lee J.

Rankin, has
often been quoted by critics of the WaiTen Report.

He told Liebeler,
“At this stage we are supposed to be closing doors, not opening
them.” The Commission’s work was winding down, and President
Johnson was pushing for the release of their report well before the
November election to avoid having the investigation become a cam-
paign issue.

Nevertheless, in August 1964 Rankin wrote FBI Director J.

Edgar
Hoover: “It is a matter of some importance to the Commission that
Mrs.

Odio’s allegations either be proved or disproved.” Rankin sug-
gested that the two Latin Americans might have been either members
of an anti-Castro group other than JURE or “pro-Castro individuals
attempting to infiltrate the anti-Castro groups in Dallas.”
Rankin asked Hoover to conduct the investigation necessary to find
out who these men were.

He continued, “We are also concerned about
the possibility that Oswald may have left New Orleans on September
24,1963 instead of September 25,1963 as has been previously thought.

In that connection Marina Oswald has recently advised us that her
husband told her he intended to leave New Orleans the very next day
following her departure on September 23, *1963.” Rankin concluded
that since Oswald was in Mexico after the 26th.He continued, “We are also concerned about
the possibility that Oswald may have left New Orleans on September
24,1963 instead of September 25,1963 as has been previously thought.

In that connection Marina Oswald has recently advised us that her
husband told her he intended to leave New Orleans the very next day
following her departure on September 23, *1963.” Rankin concluded
that since Oswald was in Mexico after the 26th.

“th eonly time he
could have been in Odio's apartment appears to be the nights of
September 24 or 25, most likely the latter.”
Hoover subsequently reported back, saying the FBI had located an
anti-Castro activist named Loren Hall who claimed that he had vi-
sited Mrs.

Odio that September in the company of Lawrence Howard,
a Mexican-American from East Los Angeles, and William Seymour
■ from Arizona.

Seymour was said to resemble Oswald.

When the
Warren Report was published a few days later, the doubts expressed
in Rankin’s letter were nowhere to be seen.

Even though no other new
evidence had turned up, the report asserted that Oswald probably left
New Orleans by bus on the 25th.

Its discussion ended: “While the FBI
had not yet completed its investigation into this matter at the time the
u/Vn.

vvm VWL UAIf V'Q/
/UUfy J faLAUtonbl^uTI UfZ thenUfaj
)M \AvWr y cwuLftai ^
/W^t~
Odio...

157
^ freport went to press, the Commission has concluded that Lee Harvey
| Oswald was not at Mrs.

Odio’s apartment in September of 1963*
V.

Before the ink was dry, the FBI’s explanation collapsed.

After both
Lawrence Howard and William Seymour denied having visited Odio,
('Loren Hall retracted his story (he later claimed the FBI had misq-
\l uoted him in the first place), and Mrs.

Odio failed to recognize pic-
1 cures of any of them.

The Warren Commission had not succeeded in closing the doors
against its critics.

Sylvia Odio’s testimony, and its handling by the
authorities, would be a central issue in nearly every conspiracy book.The Warren Commission had not succeeded in closing the doors
against its critics.

Sylvia Odio’s testimony, and its handling by the
authorities, would be a central issue in nearly every conspiracy book.

Clearly, the Odio incident—as it came to be called—could not oe
tJA
\rAo1'1 j
isste*
explained away as a simple case of mistaken identity because, as the
critics were quick to point out, the report had left a huge question
dangling in mid-air: If Oswald wasn’t at Odio’s apartment, why HWIV
a look-alike using his name?

>-^1
The critics believed they knew the answer.

In Accessories After the ^
Fact.

Sylvia Meagher presented a careful analysis of the Comrais- yj
sion’s evidence and demonstrated, almost beyond question, that Os-1 ^„
wald could have been at Odio’s apartment on the night of September
25.

And since Odio's account “coincided with facts to which she had lr .

1]
no access,” the likelihood of fabrication was “thus virtually de-U/
stroyed." However, Meagher then proceeded to a strangely narrowed
conclusion.

She wrote, “That leaves two possibilities open: that the
real Oswald visited Mrs.

Odio with two companions, one of whom
deliberately planted highly incriminating information about him
without his knowledge; or that a mock-Oswald visited her, to accom-
plish the same purpose.” Either way.

it was a frame-up, for, as she saw
it, Leopoldo “took pains to plant seeds which inevitably would in-
criminate Oswald in the assassination carried out on November 22,
so that an anonymous phone call would be enough to send police
straight after him even if he bad not been arrested within the hour.

Who was behidn this scheme to frame Oswald?

In Meagher’s hy-
pothesis, they were probably Cuban counter-rovolulionuries and their
ultra-right associates, who may have taken notice of Oswald after his
attempt to infiltrate Carlos Bringuier’s organization in New Orleans.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Who was behidn this scheme to frame Oswald? In Meagher’s hy-
pothesis, they were probably Cuban counter-rovolulionuries and their
ultra-right associates, who may have taken notice of Oswald after his
attempt to infiltrate Carlos Bringuier’s organization in New Orleans. Their purpose would have been “to revenge themselves not only
against the President whom they considered a Communist and a
traitor but also against a marxist and suspected double-agent who had
tried to infiltrate the anti-Castro movement."
Since it's true that the Far Right and many Cuban exiles were bitter

--- PAGE BREAK ---kT
/tu» - A.

^HtUT''
L
about Kennedy's performance at ihe Bay of Pigs, this hypothesis has
a certain appeal.

But take a closer look
What would Meagher’s anonymous caller have told the police?

Presumably, that they should question a woman named Sylvia Odio
—who would then tell them what she later told the Warren Commis-
sion: that Oswald and his companions claimed to be members of an
anti-Castro organization, that Oswald had been offered as a potential
\ assassin of Castro, and that he said the exiles should kill the president
because of the Bay of Pigs.

How could this revelation, coriunjfmlhe
heat~of the moment following Kennedy’s death, have helped the
anti-Castro movement or the Far Right?

Indeed, Meagher's plotters
had painted Oswald as a violent ally of the very factions that were
ysupposedly trying to frame him.

Meagher herself noted that Odio
lidn't call the police, perhaps because she "feared that the Cuban
xiles might be accused of the President's death."
If this was an attempt by Cuban counter-revolutionaries to irapli-
ate a marxist, it was a peculiar way to go about it
^— Nevertheless, almost all of the theorists who came after her have
followed the direction of Meagher'saocusing finger.

For the critics,
the Odio incident could only have been an effort to frame Oswald.

They assume that since Leopoldo's report of Oswald's remark about
killing Kennedy was incriminating, it must have been intended as
incriminating.

This is a natural, common-sense view, and it's probably
wrong.

It's easy to forget that these events from the past, which are
now set in concrete from our point of view, actually took place in the
uncertain flux of the present.

For some reason, since we know what
was going to happen on November 22, we tend to assume Leopoldo
did, too.

But when these men visited Odio's apartment, Kennedy's
trip to Dallas had not even been scheduled, let alone announced.For some reason, since we know what
was going to happen on November 22, we tend to assume Leopoldo
did, too.

But when these men visited Odio's apartment, Kennedy's
trip to Dallas had not even been scheduled, let alone announced.

Strange as it may seem, no one on earth could have known that
Oswald would ultimately land a job in a building that would overlook
a Kennedy motorcade.

kO fL
But the frame-up theory's ultimate weakness involves the critics'!

* 1 conception of Lee Harvey Oswald.

In every jgonspiracy book, Oswald
is a piece of chaff blown about by powerful, unseen forces—he's a'
impliant puppet with no volition of his own.

If the man
Odio saw was an impostor, Ttow'couTd-the plotters be certain no
witnesses would be able to establish Oswald's presence somewhere
else that evening—unless they ordered the unsuspecting patsy to stay
out of sight?

And if the real Oswald was used, how did the anti-Castro
plotters get their Marxist enemy to stand at Odio's door to be intro-
JklAZ'iP MO h'A/ UA VU&A
t'ff'A' Wtidufaw WftvtcPU'
cd#,\i cih lu hulftf
TU TrovbUn, TeHimoor of Sjrltta Odio...

159
, duced as a friend of the Cuban exiles?

No one has come up with a
V nlausible scenario that can answer those questions.

X'"~P In years to come, Odio would be interviewed by two other govern- , v
mcnt commissions—the Church committee and the House Assassina-1 ^
lions Conunittee-and those investigators would also conclude that ✓
  m i
► «fe|
as?:
j-on Odio's testimony wasn't mentioned in its final report.

The^As-
sassination Committee’s report was hardly more helpful.

It said.

The
committee was inclined to believe Silvia [sic] Odio" and "did not agree
with the Warren Commission’s conclusion that Oswald could not
have been in Dallas at the requisite time." But it could go no farther:
“Based on a judgment of the credibility of Silvia and Annie Odio, one
of these men at least looked like Lee Harvey Oswald and was intro-
duced to Mrs.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It said. The
committee was inclined to believe Silvia [sic] Odio" and "did not agree
with the Warren Commission’s conclusion that Oswald could not
have been in Dallas at the requisite time." But it could go no farther:
“Based on a judgment of the credibility of Silvia and Annie Odio, one
of these men at least looked like Lee Harvey Oswald and was intro-
duced to Mrs. Odio as Leon Oswald." A fuller account of their
indecision was later given by the Committee's chief counsel and direc-
tor, G. Robert Blakey, who wrote:
Based on all [the] evidence, we believed Silvia [sic] and Annie Odio:
three men, who identified themselves as members of an anti-Castro
organization, did visit their apartment in Dallas about two months prior
to the Kennedy assassination; and one of them, who was either Lee
Harvey Oswald or his look-alike, was introduced to them as Leon
Oswald. Rather than dismiss the incident, as the Warren Commission
had we considered it a significant, if mysterious association of Oswald
(or someone posing as Oswald) with two individuals who were engaged
in anti-Castro activities, or acting as if they were. To sum up. there have been only two explanations for CMio's'cHs^
Iturbing testimony. It was a case of mistaken identity, as the Commis-
sion said, and a "Leon Oswald" and two other men visited her for
unknown reasons. Or it was an attempt to frame Oswald by planting
incriminating statements. The first is no explanation whatsoever, and
the second is based on several unreasonable assumptions^l he pomf'
to be stressed is this. Sylvia Odio gave testimony of obvious, even
crucial importance, and no one could explain what it meant. Some mysteries defy rational analysis. It takes a moment of
unearned insight—or what has been called the Ahal reaction—to
understand them. There is a picture psychologists use showing a white
goblet on a black background. Stare at it long enough and, with

--- PAGE BREAK ---fu ia AtAtaW fU fritmt IUtH* M*> c^l^j
CMVOVV^A^^ rwrv<jW W n^vT kttothto VK iXtHifff
^w'fWw, V- K* (<W?,ui uw.VU^y /W f}wvn*.

W/wwV
" nji^)4 pk; '
160...

Oswald’s Game
lightning speed and no conscious effort, one sees that the background
is actually the silhouette of two people facing one another.

The goblet
becomes merely the white background between them.

(Aha/ Why
didn't I see it before?) When I first read Sylvia Odio’s testimony, I was
a long way from understanding Oswald's thinking, and no matter how
I turned it, her testimony made no sense.

All the other evidence said
Oswald was a supporter of the Castro revolution.

Yet here he was,
apparently teamed up with two counter-revolutionaries.

One day I was reading a Secret Service report describing their
questioning of Marina Oswald shortly after Oswald's death, when a
single sentence brought me up short.

Marina had remarked that her
husband “was boastful that he was a good shot and that he learned
this while in the military service." That was exactly the way Leopoldo
had described “Leon Oswald" to Sylvia Odio: “He's a Marine, an
ex-Marine, and an expert marksman." They were talking about the
\ same man.

7\*> p 'Yi^O/yvwiI Wblf
There was just one other witness who/spokc of Oswald ab an ex-
Jl :^Marine who bragged about huutfiilitary expertig^r-and that was Car-
OS Bringuier, the exile leaderVhose organization Oswald had tried
o infiltrate.

I beganJo see hov^tunJafftia encounters with Bringuier
' [mTOcfio were.

Oswald had approacned each of them as an eager
v ft\yU'^rolunteer.

With Bringuier, he was an ex-Marine who could train
fir ‘ guerrillas and lead raids against Cuba.

With Odio, he was an ex-
—^Marine marksman who could knock off Fidel.

(Although it was Leo-
A yJt hi j poldo who voicedlhiS propOMtTil was the same general line Oswald
u / had used with Bringuier.)
c-%
L , There weTrother^rhilarities^ Oswi
nbution, hoping to drawlfiTexiles in
.1 .!With Odio, he was an ex-
—^Marine marksman who could knock off Fidel.

(Although it was Leo-
A yJt hi j poldo who voicedlhiS propOMtTil was the same general line Oswald
u / had used with Bringuier.)
c-%
L , There weTrother^rhilarities^ Oswi
nbution, hoping to drawlfiTexiles in
.1 .!

** vUitnrc Vw*r in distribute a letltf
lirularititer: Oswald had offeredj
into a1
visitors asked her to distributejJsUartppealmg for funds to buy amis
)
)) *1 for the war
:er of this kind would probably have been
plegal.

Infiltration and harassment—this was how Oswald had de-
scribed his encounter with Bringuier.

(“I infiltrated the Cuban Stu-
dent Directorate and then harassed them with information I gained
including having the N.O.

City Attorney General call them in and put
a restraining order...

on some so-called bonds for invasion they were
selling in the New Orleans area.")
But a third tactic was used.

While Oswald was in Bringuier's store,
he gave two anti-Castro teenagers specific instructions on derailing
trains and blowing up the Huey P.

Long Bridge.

With Sylvia Odio,
he allegedly proposed a still more outrageous act of violence.

It had
been put almost in the form of a dare: the exiles “didn’t have any guts.

|
I
The Troubling Testimony of Sylvia <
i.

i, so easy to do it” The age^ld role of the provocateur is to
‘ " 1 JfZ actsof violence that will discredit the group he has tnfil-
Bv eoading the exiles into attacking the president, a Pr0*Cas“°
”tcateur might have hoped to destroy two threats to Cuba with,
“ForTooUce detective, a criminal’s M.O..

his method ^o^raung
£° £ hut Svlvia OdioZnd the Cuban exiles.

Oswald was picking
Oswald, but SyWta t^to ano Unlike the explanat oos.

’S »d to ctoto.

.hU
frfs Oswald.

And i.

rtoke, A
Z ~ Odio fo, retoodjUto*".

¥
periled by Aid to Rebels.” Castro declared:
We are prepared to fight them and answer in kind.--- PAGE BREAK ---

rtoke, A
Z ~ Odio fo, retoodjUto*". ¥
periled by Aid to Rebels.” Castro declared:
We are prepared to fight them and answer in kind. United States leaden
S thXthat if they are aiding terrorist plans to ehmmate Cuban
leaders, ihey themselves will not be safe. I, would have been fairly easy to read between
.. nlans were obviously the work of the same exile groups that were
Wt Ihe raids with U.S. support. In the past, the Cuban gov-
tk CIA- No. Oo.ro
££“i„e.l, .. Kennedy—Ibe “oto.. n»d ‘tooled potato" —»d
■srin? i’sni.... opoo-to f«
0,‘t
/}>
jA
tVN. •
yltW
tin*

--- PAGE BREAK ---162...

Oswald's Game
Oswald to prove himself.

He had already made one attempt to pene-
trate the enemy underground.

Now, if he could just make contact with
the exile leaders involved in these "terrorist plans,” he might come up
with an even bigger trophy: inside information about the plots to kill
Cuba’s leaders.

Once again he would seek out an exile group and offer
his help—not as a guerrilla leader this time, but as a marksman who
could assassinate Fidel.

He would try to infiltrate as a volunteer, as
.

he had before.

While hrwas at it.Tie'a plant another little seed of
provocation.

He'd attempt to goad the exiles into retaliating against
Kennedy.

In other words, the Odio incident was Oswald’s reaction to Castro’s
warning.

Although I was fairly convinced of this by 1976,1 still didn't under-
stand why Oswald and the others went all the way to Dallas to carry
out this scheme.

Why did they go to Sylvia Odio, in particular?

An
article in the Saturday Evening Post that year provided an answer.

The authors, George OToole and Paul Hoch, had apparently discov-
ered more about Odio’s father from some of the large number of
Warren Commission records that were declassified in 1976.

It turns
out that Odio’s parents weren’t ordinary political prisoners, as the
Warren Report suggested.

They had been indirectly involved in a
spectacular plot to assassinate Castro in 1961.

The plot was the work of Antonio Veciana and Reinaldo Gonzales,
members of the anti-Castro underground.

Veciana's mother had
rented an apartment near the presidential palace from which they
planned to fire a bazooka to kill Castro and other officials.

Before their
plan could be carried out, however, word of it reached the Cuban
police.

Veciana and his mother escaped to Miami, while Gonzales fled
to a farm that was owned by Sylvia Odio’s parents.

Gonzales was
tracked down and arrested, as were the Odios.Veciana and his mother escaped to Miami, while Gonzales fled
to a farm that was owned by Sylvia Odio’s parents.

Gonzales was
tracked down and arrested, as were the Odios.

Castro himself an-
nounced the breaking up of this plot at a public meeting in Havana
in October 1961.

At the time, the Odio daughters were already out of
the country.

Having somehow learned of her father’s background, her visitors
apparently concluded (however mistakenly) that Amador Odio’s el-
dest daughter might be interested in introducing a volunteer hit man
Notice the chain of association in their approach
Irst about the details of her father’s activities in
they mentioned my father they started talking
He said, 'You are working in the underground.’
m sorry to say I am not working in the under-
round,
ilkedf
Then, "after
t the American,
nd I said, 'No, I a
'Jjr*-*
The Troubling TMtimony of Sylrla Odio...

163
wound1 And he said, ‘We wanted you to meet this American.

His
& m, is Leon Oswald.'...

And they introduced him as an American
who was very much interested in the Cuban cause.” Oswald told her
!L same thing, then stood silently, evaluating the situation.

The
iderlying logic seemed to be: We know about your father s connection
^Uhateml plot to kill Castro.

We believe you hove contacts w„h
the underground.

Here is an American you can use Had Odio invited
JEJE she might well have heard the rest of their proposal about
°What did theyTant from Mrs.

Odio?

Apparently, they hoped she j
would know, and tell them, the name of the right person to see—the
leader behind these new assassination plots.

And, in fact, it appears \
that Odio may have had a reputation for being able to put people m
ouch with the anti-Castro underground.

Mrs.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And, in fact, it appears \
that Odio may have had a reputation for being able to put people m
ouch with the anti-Castro underground. Mrs. Odio told ‘he Comrms-
°on that in June 1963 she had spoken with a Uruguayan named
Johnny Martin who claimed he could pjmndsJh^Ucs with secog^
wd*weapons if she could put him in touch with an appropriate^
STA^L later said, she had “jumped at the opportunity that I
something could be done” and arranged a meeting between Martin
anfi an exile leader in Miami. Mrs. Odio believed it would not have been difficult for anyone lo
find her. She testified that shortly before the Oswald 'ncident a
speaker at an anti-Castro meeting in Dallas had mentioned that he
Tew her father in Cuba and that Amador Odio's daughters were
living in that city. Odio said she could have been located by .calling
the Catholic refugee relief agency or even by consujtwg' the phone
Overall, one gets the impression thatCi^b^his country formed
a tightly knit community in which newSgot around easily and secrets
' were hard to keep. Oswald may^ve found Mrs. Odio ‘he same way
he apparently found(ttinguier-simply by asking around. Another,
I NewPOrleans anti-cSmrSuk Ernesto Rodriguez, has recently
'•'claimed that Oswald had also visited fum to olTer his services as a
guerrilla warfare specialist, and that it was he who sentOswald to see
Bringuier. Thus, it appears that Oswald made mor<(^raysinto the
anti-Castro camp than anyone realized, or wanted
f The real names of the two Latin Americans will probably neverbe
known. We know enough only to speculate about their roles. The
evidence suggests they were not anti-Castro activists, as they claimed. Angelo was likely the Latin American of similar appe^ance that
Oswald was seen with in New Orleans. Both men evidently hed when
\t>r

--- PAGE BREAK ---'fKux
\vl
cUfc IAAI Wu?

0 rk rt 14>j 1)u^ Aul (lujy
j\]/V^l/vm Mm  ~—  "-T
164...

Oswald's Gama
,}\
(I
they said they were members of JURR and friends of Odio’s father.

(The other leaders of JURE said they nad never heard of them, and
Odio’s father, now living in the UnitjxLStates, stijijnsists they were
no friends of his.) And if they wcrgTrotn Ncw~Orkan£, as they said,
they would almost certainly have known of the splash Oswald had
made there in August as a Fair Play for Cuba activist None of this
rules ouUfee idea that one or both or these men were anti-Castroites
wholiai infilfrated Oswald’s one-man op^raTioh.'Leopoldo may have
been an Mti-CasTro^HltanTwho triUy"heheved Oswald would be an
.

asset to his cause.

But his telephone conversation with Odio followed
.

.

Oswald’s line with Bringuier so closely that this seems doubtful.

And
- L( ^ I Leopoldo's parting shot about Amador Odio—“Is he still in the Isle
‘ ^ i Vjl of Pines?”—sounds almost like a jeer.

It seems more reasonable that
“ these three were birds of a feather than that they were working at
cross purposes.

But let’s pull back for a moment to get a broader view.

Was there
someone behind the scenes telling Oswald what to do?

Let’s make that question more specific: Who would have had a
reason to order Oswald to get inside the exile underground?

Not the
CIA, apparently, since the CIA already had plenty of contacts with
that group—the CIA was, in fact, running the war against Cuba.

The
FBI?

Maybe, though it's difficult to imagine that Hoover’s boys would
have wanted one of their operatives to go around suggesting that
Castro’s opponents should murder the president.

Besides, it’s hard to
picture Lee Oswald working for the FBI or the CIA, unless we crop
out everything else we know about him.

There is another possibility.Besides, it’s hard to
picture Lee Oswald working for the FBI or the CIA, unless we crop
out everything else we know about him.

There is another possibility.

Although the House Assassinations
Committee concluded, “on the basis of the evidence available to it,”
that the Cuban government was not involved in the assassination, its
report called the CIA investigation of the question of Cuban involve-
ment grossly inadequate—and it attached a fine-print footnote:
With respect to the incident at the home of Sylvia Odio in Dallas, the
CIA had developed since 1963 the ability to identify from physical
descriptions possible intelligence agents who may have been involved.

In fact, at the committee’s request, the CIA attempted to identify Odio’s
visitors, and it determined that they may have been members of Cuban
intelligence.

The committee showed photographs supplied by the CIA
to Odio who stated they did not appear to be the visitors in question.

The committee came to the conclusion that had she been shown photo-
6
*■
The Troubling Testimony of Sylvia Odio...

16S
araohs in 1963, when the event was clearer in her mind, she might have
Len able to make an identification.

It is also regrettable that the CIA
did not make use of a defector from Cuba who had worked m intelli-
gence and who might have been able to identify the Odio visitors.

An extraordinary footnote.

And yet, it’s hard to believe that Leo-
ooldo and Angelo were Cuban intelligence agents.

Anything this trio
hooed to get out of Mrs.

Odio they must have hoped to get right away,
before she could check their authenticity with her father.

The whole
nffair had an improvised, amateurish flavor.

As we’ll see later on,
although Oswald wanted to work for the Cubans, he apparently got
no further with them than he did with the Russians.

“As far as taking orders,” Mapna told the House Assassinations
Committee, speaking generally.As we’ll see later on,
although Oswald wanted to work for the Cubans, he apparently got
no further with them than he did with the Russians.

“As far as taking orders,” Mapna told the House Assassinations
Committee, speaking generally.

"I knew him personally and he didn’t
like to take orders.” There’s no reason to assume that Oswald was
following orders when he went to see Bringuier or Odio, because he
bad a motive of his own—or.

rather, two motives.

He wanted to help
Cuba, and he wanted to make a name for himself as a Castro sup-
oorter and revolutionary.

He was operating in the uncertain present,
with specific short-range goals in mind.

Oswald was on his way to
Cuba, he hoped, and he evidently wanted to come bearing gifts—
much as he had done when he went to Russia with his military
^The jimplest and most reasonable conclusion is that the Odio inci-
dent was Oswald’s idea.

Looked at more closely, each of the tactics
used was typical of Oswald in some manner.

It was like him to pose
as a leader: the guerrilla warfare expert, the expert marksman.

He was
nutting his military training to ironic use—as an enlisted man, Oswald
had once complained that all the Marine Corps did was teach you to
kill and after you got out you might be a good gangster.

The second
tactic—trying to draw the exiles into a violation of the law—also
sounds like Oswald, who often showed a tendency to be legalistic.

And finally, the threat against a president’s life was also in character,
since he had already made a verbal threat againstjiisenhower.

K
But it wasn't just the tactics.

The entire incident had the imprint
of Oswald’s personality on it.

Consider another remark of Marina’s.

She was if she thought her husband would have prepared for
his defection by learning Russian: “Was that a trait of his .

.

.--- PAGE BREAK ---

. . that
when he got ready to do something he felt was important he spent a
period of time preparing for it?” She answered, “I would say yes, and
4 few minutes later circled back to the same question: “Going back

--- PAGE BREAK ---166 ...

Oswald’* Gam*
to say that Lee was always preparing for something, he not always
prepared himself [sic], but he was quite calculating in that respect, and
sometimes quite clever.

He would masquerade somehow.'1 George de
Mohrenschildt, too, saw this trait of his.

Concerning the theory of the
conspiracists that Oswald was working for the anti-Castro side in
New Orleans, he wrote:
I cannot visualize Lee being in cahoots with these Cuban refugees in
New Orleans...

but he might have played his own game, meeting some
of them, checking just for the hell of it what their motivations were.

The amazing and attractive side of Lee’s personality was that he liked
to play with his own life, be was an actor in real life.

A very curious
individual.

On the other hand, I can very easily visualize Lee joining a pro-Castro
group.

The Odio incident was characteristic of Oswald.

There was even,
perhaps, a model for it from his childhood, although this was proba-
bly an event he had long forgotten.

In Fort Worth sixteen years
earlier, Marguerite had also stood outside a rival's door with two
confederates.

As the ringleader, she told one of them what to say—
'Telegram for Mrs.

C "—to trap her wandering husband, Edwin
A.

EkdahJ.

As Robert said, his brother's “imagination and love of
intrigue" were a lot like his mother's.

The compelling aspect of Sylvia Odio's testimony is the window it
provides on Lee Harvey Oswald's thinking just two months before
Dallas.

Up until then, there was little indication that Oswald felt any
animosity toward John Kennedy.

In fact, he seemed to favor him over
the other politicians on the scene.

In August he had publicly blamed
the CIA and State Department for America's policy toward Cuba.

6ut sixteen days aRer Castro’s warning appeared, Oswald not only
tried to penetrate the plots Castro spoke about, he suggested that
j Kennedy should be killed.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In August he had publicly blamed
the CIA and State Department for America's policy toward Cuba. 6ut sixteen days aRer Castro’s warning appeared, Oswald not only
tried to penetrate the plots Castro spoke about, he suggested that
j Kennedy should be killed. The September 9 warning evidently had an
effect: Oswald now believed that Castro was in danger and that the
i Cuban leader held Kennedy responsible. This conclusion is admittedly based on inferences—I have deduced
Oswald's thinking by reading Odio's testimony in light of his past
behavior. The method I’ve used is an old one. During closing argu-
ments in a trial, each attorney will attempt to weave the available
evidence into a reconstruction of the events in question. It is then up
The Troubling Testimony of Sylvia Odio... 167
to the jury to decide whose account is more likely to be true. I have
presented the Odio incident within a narrative of Oswald's other
activities, showing how the pieces mesh. Although I don’t claim to
have conclusive proof, I do maintain that my interpretation is more
credible than the alternative theories. . Only two other explanations of this incident have been given that
it was an extraordinary case of mistaken identity, or a plot to frame
a Marxist by presenting him as an anti-Castro hit man. Neither view
can be totally disproved. But neither encompasses the other evidence
about Oswald nearly as well as the Solution I've proposed. I found new support for my argument in 1977, when I learned that
Lee Harvey Oswald had made a second threat against Kennedy’s life
just a few days after he left Sylvia Odio’s doorstep. The man who
revealed this threat was not an unknown named “Leopoldo, but
Fidel Castro himself.

--- PAGE BREAK ---C'fl'Yv X t
k K ch&^vi~ ^ Ou^
12..

t Castro’s Revelations
Thursday afternoon, September 26, Oswald's bus crossed the
Mexican border at Laredo, Texas.

A fellow passenger, an Englishman
named John McFarland, recalled that Oswald told him he was en
route to Cuba and explained that he had to travel via Mexico because
it was illegal to go there directly from the United States.

When
McFarland asked why he wanted to go to Cuba, Oswald replied, “To
see Castro, if I could.”
The bus arrived in Mexico City the following morning, and Oswald
registered at the Hotel Comercio four blocks from the bus station
using the alias Harvey Oswald Lee.

He immediately set about arrang-
ing his travel plans.

According to Marina, he went to the Soviet
Embassy first.

Exactly what he said there isn't known, since the
Russians didn't allow the Warren Commission to interview its em-
bassy personnel.

However, from Marina’s testimony and other evi-
dence it's apparent that he asked them to expedite the visas he and
Marina had applied for through the Washington Embassy, and that
he told them he would be going to Russia through Cuba.

He also
seemed to believe that the Russians could smooth his way at the
| Cuban Embassy.

A Commission lawyer later asked Marina, "Did he tell you why he
went to Mexico City?"
"From Mexico City he wanted to go to Cuba—perhaps through the
Russian Embassy in Mexico he would be able to get to Cuba."
‘‘Did he say anything about going to Russia by way of Cuba?"
"I know that he said that in the Embassy.

But he only said so.

I
know that he had no intention of going to Russia then."
Castro's Revelations...

169
"How do you know that?"
"He told me.

I know Lee fairly well—well enough from that point
of view."
Next he went to the nearby Cuban Embassy, wher he requested an
in-transit visa, that is, a permit to travel to Cuba en route to the Soviet
Union.169
"How do you know that?"
"He told me.

I know Lee fairly well—well enough from that point
of view."
Next he went to the nearby Cuban Embassy, wher he requested an
in-transit visa, that is, a permit to travel to Cuba en route to the Soviet
Union.

(An in-transit visa would have allowed him to visit his family
in Russia if their visas came through.) On his application, Oswald
wrote that he wanted to leave for Cuba on September 30 and remain
there for two weeks—or longer, if possible.

He was interviewed by
Silvia Duran, a Mexican citizen and Castro supporter who worked in
the consular section.

After the assassination her name and office
phone number were found in Oswald's notebook, and she was brought
in for questioning by the Mexican police.

On November 23,1963, she
gave them the following statement:
....

On the night of Nov.

22, Senon Duran heard over the radio the
name of LEE HARVEY OSWALD, which caused her to remember that this
name refers to a North American who in the last days of September
..

.--- PAGE BREAK ---

22, Senon Duran heard over the radio the
name of LEE HARVEY OSWALD, which caused her to remember that this
name refers to a North American who in the last days of September
.. . appeared at the Cuban Consulate and applied for a visa to Cuba in
transit to Russia and based his application on his presentation of his
passport in which it was recorded that he had [lived] in the latter
country for a period of three years, [and] his Work permit from that same
country written in the Russian language and letters in the same lan-
guage, as well as proof of his being married to a woman of Russian
nationality and being the apparent Director in the city of New Orleans
of the organization called "Fair Play for Cuba” with the desire that he
should be accepted as a “friend” of the Cuban Revolution, as a result
of whu^h the speaker, in compliance with her duties, received all of his
data and filled out the appropriate application, and he left to return in
the afternoon, this time with his photographs [for the application], and
the speaker, recognizing that she [was exceeding] her duties, semi-
officially called (be Russian Consulate by telephone because of her inter-
est in facilitating the handling of the Russian visa for LEE HARVEY
OSWALD, but from there they answered her that the operation [of
getting him a visa to Russia] would require approximately four months,
which annoyed the applicant, since (as he affirmed) he was in a great
hurry to obtain the vises which would permit him to travel to Russia,
insisting that he was entitled to them because of his background and his
partisanship and personal activities in favor of the Cuban movement,
... [and] that his wife, of Russian nationality, was at that time in the
city of New York from where she would follow him. although hisplace
of origin was the aforementioned city of New Orleans; that as soon as
Oswald understood that it was not possible to give him a Cuban visa

--- PAGE BREAK ---170...Oswald's Game
without his previously obtaining a Russian one, because the former was
for transit, he became highly agitated and angry, as a result of which
the speaker called [Consul Eusebio] Azcue, who, at that time, was in his
private office in company with his ultimate replacement, MIRAVAL, but
came out and began to argue in English with OSWALD in a very angry
manner and .

.

.

concluded by saying to him that, “As far as he was
concerned, he would not give him a visa,*' and that A person like him,
in place of aiding the Cuban Revolution, was doing it harm/’..

.

that
in spite of the argument the speaker handed to OSWALD a piece of paper
...

in which she recorded her name ...

and the telephone number of
the Consulate ...

and, at any rate, she initiated the handling of the visa
application by sending it to [Cuba, from which] a reply was received in
the normal manner some fifteen to twenty days later approving the
issuance of a visa, but conditioning it on his previously obtaining the
Russian [one], although she does not recall whether OSWALD subse-
quently her or not on the telephone....

and that upon seeing his
photograph which appears in today's newspapers, specifically the news-
paper “El Die,” she immediately recogniied and identified it as being
the wnff person she had been referring to as LEE HAAVEY OSWALD.

Of course, Marina was not in New York—this was but a lie to
heighten the sense of urgency, as was the statement that he was in a
great hurry to reach Russia.

But note that even after the scene with
Azcue, Oswald took Duran's telephone number so that he could
check back about his application.

And despite the argument, Oswald
kept trying.

On Saturday and the following Tuesday, October I, he
made several visits to both the Russian and Cuban embassies, with a
continued lack of results.And despite the argument, Oswald
kept trying.

On Saturday and the following Tuesday, October I, he
made several visits to both the Russian and Cuban embassies, with a
continued lack of results.

The Cuban government provided the Warren Commission with the
application from which bore Oswald’s photograph and signature, as
well as its letter, dated October 15, which conditionally approved his
in-transit visa.

The Warren Report said that the CIA had been able
to corroborate Duran's account through several means, adding, "By
far the most important confirmation of Senora Duran's testimony,
however, has been supplied by confidential sources of extremely high
reliability available to the United States in Mexico.

The information
from these sources establishes that her testimony was truthful and
accurate in all material respects.

The identities of these sources cannot
be disclosed without destroying their future usefulness to the United
States.H
The CLA's "confidential sources" in Mexico included wiretaps on
the Soviet Embassy's phones.

On Tuesday, October 1, Oswald re-
Castro's Revelations...

171
mrned to the Cuban Embassy.

At his request Duran again called the
Wt Embassy and handed the receiver to Oswald.

Speaking in
Russian to a Soviet guard, he asked if there was any news concerning
digram that had been sent to Washington.

The guard asked to
whom Oswald had spoken at the embassy.

Comrade Kostikov.

Oswald replied, whereupon the guard suggested that he again speak
if person to Kostikov.

'Til be right over." Oswald replied, and hung
Ut>The CIA recorded this conversation and a transcript was made, but
the tnne was retained for only a week or so.Oswald replied, whereupon the guard suggested that he again speak
if person to Kostikov.

'Til be right over." Oswald replied, and hung
Ut>The CIA recorded this conversation and a transcript was made, but
the tnne was retained for only a week or so.

The reference to Kostikov
£d aroused the agency's interest, for in addition to his routine consu-
Ur duties, Valery Vladimirovich Kostikov served as a KGB intelli- \
geThe agency’s Mexico station also had surveillance cameras outside
the Soviet Embassy, which was considered to be a center of espionage
L-tivity directed against the United States.

After hearing the phone
call the CIA stafT went through its photographs of persons recently
entering and leaving the embassy, and found one of a blond, heavyset
American type that it guessed might be the man who had identified
himself as Oswald during the call.

(This tentative identification would
cause the CIA considerable embarassment later on.

The man in the
nhoto was never identified, but he evidently had no connection with
Oswald whatsoever, and the Mexico station never came up with a
nicturc of Oswald.

This circumstance led to a theory that the heavyset
man had impersonated Oswald at the Soviet Embassy.)
Meanwhile.

CIA headquarters was alerted, and on October i° the
agency informed the FBI.

the State Department, and the Officeof
Naval Intelligence of Oswald's contact with the Soviet Embassy.

The
notification omitted Oswald's reference to Kostikov, however.

In 1076 David Phillips, a CIA official who was serving in Mexico
at the time, added an important detail about Oswald's conversations
with the Russians.

Phillips told the Washington Post that, in a phone
^il to the embassy, Oswald had tried to make a deal.

(Whether this
was the call mentioned earlier or another one isn’t clear.) According
,o Phillips.

Oswald said in effect, “I have information you would be
interested in.

and I know you can pay my way [to Russia).--- PAGE BREAK ---

Oswald said in effect, “I have information you would be
interested in. and I know you can pay my way [to Russia). The
translator and typist who had worked on the transcript of the conver-
sation confirmed Phillips’s story. This sounds like Oswald, since he
had already asked the Washington Embassy to make travel arrange-
ments back to Russia for his wife and child. By the Commission's
estimate, Oswald had only about *214 on hand when he left New
y

--- PAGE BREAK ---172...

Oswald's Game
r
Orleans, hardly enough to pay transportation costs for the trips he
had in mind.

Furthermore, Phillips’s story would help explain the
CIA’s interest in Oswald’s contact with Kostikov.

But what information could Oswald have had of interest to the
Soviets?

A possible answer came in 1975 ^rom a second Ernesto Ro-
driguez—not the New Orleans Cuban exile mentioned earlier, but
another man who was a former CIA contract agent in Mexico City.

Rodriguez claimed that Oswald had told both the Soviets and the
Cubans that he had information about a new CIA attempt to kilJ Fidel
Castro.

According to Rodriguez, Oswald offered the details in return
for a Cuban entry visa.

He said that Oswald had also talked about this
planned assassination attempt in conversations with Fair Play for
Cuba members in Mexico City.

Rodriguez's story is uncorroborated and should be approached
with caution, but in light of Oswald’s known activities, it is not
implausible.

This wouldn’t have been the first time Oswald offered
secrets to get what he wanted.

More important, he had recently tried
to penetrate the exile plots through Sylvia Odio.

We have learned of
only t\yp infiltration attempts Oswald made—there may have been
others.

Anyone who had told him about a plan to kill Castro would
have been understandably reluctant to come forward with his testi-
mony after the president’s death.

We know from Odio’s testimony
that this was the kind of information Oswald was seeking.

Thus, it's
conceivable that he did find out details of a Castro assassination plot
from some unknown source, or (hat he at least claimed that he had.

Another question that remains unsettled is what Oswald did with
the rest of his time in the city.

Silvia Duran told the House Assassina-
tions Committee that she had suggested to Oswald that he might be
able to get a Cuban visa if he could obtain a letter of recommendation
from a Mexican in good standing with the Cuban government.Another question that remains unsettled is what Oswald did with
the rest of his time in the city.

Silvia Duran told the House Assassina-
tions Committee that she had suggested to Oswald that he might be
able to get a Cuban visa if he could obtain a letter of recommendation
from a Mexican in good standing with the Cuban government.

From
other evidence the Committee concluded that she had referred him
to a philosophy professor at the local National Autonomous Univer-
sity who had held seminars on Marx in her home.

In late September
Oswald was reportedly sighted at the university, where he approached
four left-wing philosophy students.

One of them, Oscar Contreras,
who had contacts in the Cuban Embassy, later said that Oswald had
introduced himself and told them that he wanted to go to Cuba
because the FBI was bothering him and life in the United States was
not for him but that the Cuban consulate was refusing to give him a
visa.

He asked if they could help him out, and the students agreed to
try.

According to Anthony Summers, who interviewed Contreras in
Castro's Revelations...

173
1978, Contreras then got in touch with his contacts at the embassy,
including Consul Azcue and an intelligence officer—who told him
that Oswald was suspected of being a provocateur “sent by the United
States to go to Cuba with evil intent."* Although Contreras’s story is
also uncorroborated, his statement about the Cuban officials’ reaction
to Oswald should be kept in mind.

What else did Oswald have to say to Cuban officials in Mexico City?

We should remember that he was angry at being denied a visa, and
made some comments to Azcue that provoked the Cuban to say that
someone like him was actually hurting the revolution, not helping it.

Azcue evidently considered him to be a hothead.

In 1964 new evidence turned up about a statement Oswald had
made at the Cuban Embassy.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Azcue evidently considered him to be a hothead. In 1964 new evidence turned up about a statement Oswald had
made at the Cuban Embassy. After the assassination an American
Communist party member—who was also an FBI informant—made
a trip to Havana and spoke with Fidel Castro. On June 17, 1964, J. Edgar Hoover sent a top-secret letter by a special courier to the
Warren Commission's chief counsel, J. Lee Rankin. Hoover wrote
that “through a confidential source which has furnished reliable infor-
mation in the past, we have been advised of some statement made by
Fidel Castro, Cuban Prime Minister, concerning the assassination of
President Kennedy." The existence of this letter didn’t come to light
until 1976, when it was declassified along with many other Commis-
sion papers in the National Archives—but the crucial paragraph
containing what Castro said had been deleted from the declassified
copy. The following year, however, TV newsman Daniel Schorr ob-
tained the deleted passage from his own sources. In his book Clearing
the Air (excerpted the New York Review of Books), Schorr revealed
that the missing paragraph quoted Castro as saying “that Oswald, on
his visit to the consulate, had talked of assassinating President
Kennedy. The consul had taken this as a deliberate provocation. The
Cuban ambassador in Mexico City had reported the incident to
Havana. It had not been taken seriously at the time, but after
Kennedy's assassination, Castro had come to suspect that the effort
to get Oswald into Cuba was part of a right-wing conspiracy. Oswald
would return from Cuba, then assassinate the president, and it would
look as though Castro had been responsible."
This information was never pursued by the Commission or men-
tioned in its report. In fact, two of the staff lawyers, W. David Slawson
and David Belin, don’t recall ever having seen Hoover’s letter. But the
FBI informant’s account would be supported by another report threereport. In fact, two of the staff lawyers, W. David Slawson
and David Belin, don’t recall ever having seen Hoover’s letter. But the
FBI informant’s account would be supported by another report three

--- PAGE BREAK ---174...

Oswald's Game
years later.

While Hoover’s letter lay buried, time passed.

In early 1967 New
Orleans’ flamboyant district attorney, Jim Garrison, announced to the
world that he had uncovered a conspiracy behind the assassination of
the President.

His chief suspect was David Feme, Oswald’s old Civil
Air Patrol instructor.

But Feme, in poor health, died of a cerebral
hemorrhage on February 22.

Undaunted, Garrison soon arrested a
prominent New Orleans businessman, Clay Shaw.

Garrison charged
that Ferrijf, Oswald, and Shaw had plotted the assassination at a party
at Feme’s apartment and that the murder itself had been carried out
by a team of anti-Castro Cubans.

Eventually the conspirators he
mentioned would include Minutemen, CIA agents, Dallas oil men
and policemen, arms dealers, White Russians, and a host of other
.

reactionaries.

The more publicity Garrison got, the wilder his charges became.

In
May 1967 Garrison issued a subpoena for CIA director Richard
Helms, demanding that Helms produce a photograph showing Os-
wald in the company of a CIA agent in Mexico.

Garrison apparently
reasoned it this way.

The CIA had never produced a photograph of
Oswald taken by their surveillance cameras stationed outside the
Cuban and Russian embassies.

Therefore, they must have taken a
photograph that showed Oswald in the company of someone whose
identity they did not want to be revealed.

Who could Oswald’s sup-
posed companion have been?

Obviously, a CIA agent.

By this time the press was calling the Garrison investigation a
three-ring circus.

In Juen an hour-long NBC documentary charged
Garrison with attempting to bribe and intimidate witnesses and using
other questionable tactics.

When NBC gave Garrison air time to reply
on July 15, Garrison once again asserted that Oswald was without
question “in the employ of U.S.

intelligence agencies.” He did not,
however, produce any evidence.When NBC gave Garrison air time to reply
on July 15, Garrison once again asserted that Oswald was without
question “in the employ of U.S.

intelligence agencies.” He did not,
however, produce any evidence.

Meanwhile, Fidel Castro was evidently watching the Garrison case
with interest.

In July 1967 scores of foreign reporters went to Cuba
to cover an international conference in support of revolutionary
groups in Asia and Latin America.

At an official reception in mid-
July, Castro met an American reporter named Laura Bergquist and
gave her a lengthy impromptu interview which she later wrote about
\ihLook magazine.

(It must be understood that Castro likes to talk—
Turner Catledge of the New York Times once said of him that he
made the garrulous Senator Hubert Humphrey look like Silent Cal
Coolidge.) Castro surprised Bergquist by admitting he had made a
UL/K
\ CAAAAAUA
/w
Ciistro’i Revelation*...

175
mistake in making his famous attack on the Moncada barracks in
1953.

Castro spoke with her for two or three hours, until he was finally
drawn away by an aide tugging on his sleeve.

For our purposes the
most important thing he said to her that evening was a reference to
the Garrison case.

He asked her if Garrison’s theory of the assassina-
tion was supportable.

The reason for his interest seems clear.

Ever
smce Oswald’s pro-Cuba background had been revealed in late 1963,
C,ctm*s public position was that Cuba had been set up and that the
murder was a plot by right-wing forces.

Now there was a New Orleans
prosecutor saying
1 the same thing.

A British journalist.

Comer Clark, later claimed that he had also
gotten an impromptu interview with Castro in July 1967.

perhaps ,
during this same week.

And Clark's version of what Castro told him , .

was the same story J.

Edgar Hoover had reported in his then still- UKvlA -j I
classified letter of 1964.--- PAGE BREAK ---

was the same story J. Edgar Hoover had reported in his then still- UKvlA -j I
classified letter of 1964. According to an article by Clark published A ■
that October—in, of all places, the National Enquirer—Castro told I
him that Oswald had come to*the Cuban consulate twice, each time /CUfiV V
for about fifteen minutes. Clark quoted Castro as saying, "The first <*A.Wr I
umc j was told—he wanted to work for us. He was asked to explain. but he wouldn’t. He wouldn’t go into details. The second time he said
be wanted to ‘free Cuba from American imperialism.’ Then he said
something like, 'Someone ought to shoot that President Kennedy.’
Then Oswald said—and this was exactly how it was reported to me
—‘Maybe I’ll try to do it.’ ”
Castro added that he had not alerted the United States government
because Oswald had been considered a ‘‘wild man" and was not taken
seriously: “We didn’t have any relations with the American govern^
ment anyway. IfTd taken it serlOUSl/ I might have informed the [ ^
United Nations or some other official agency like that. But who wouldj
have believed me? People would have said that Oswald was just mad,
or that I’d gone mad.” Clark also quoted him as saying, “1 thought
the visits might be something to do with the CIA—whether anything A'TLyl
eventually happened or not.... Then, too, after such a plot had been
found out, we would be blamed—for something we had nothing to do
with. It coudl have been an excuse for another invasion try. In any
case, people would have tried to put it at my door. I was not responsi-
ble for Kennedy’s death, I will tell you that. I think he was killed by
U.S. fascists—right-wing elements who disagreed with him.” (Since
Jim Garrison also thought that Oswald’s trip to Mexico had "some-
thing to do with the CIA," Castro was in effect supporting that
theory.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---I
176...

Oswald's Game
These statements attributed to Castro by Clark tally point for point
with the private conversation reported in Hoover’s letter to the Com-
mission.

This may be better appreciated if we lookat the two accounts
side by side.

FBI informant's report'
At the consulate Oswald had
talked of assassinating President
Kennedy.

Comer Clark interview:
'Then he said something like,
‘Someone ought to shoot that
President Kennedy.,..

Maybe 1'U
try to do it.*"
The consul had taken this as a de-
liberate provocation, but it bad
not been taken seriously at the
time.

After Kennedy's assassination
Castro had come to suspect that
the effort to get Oswald into Cuba
waa part of a right-wing conspir-
acy.

...

it would look as though
Castro had been responsible.

Oswald had been considered a
"wild man*’ and was not taken
seriously.

".

.

.

after such a plot had been
found out, we would be blamed—
for something we had nothing to
do with....

I think he was killed
by U.S.

fascists—right-wing ele-
ments.

.

.

." *
There are severl good reasons for believing that Castro did in fact
make these statements to Hoover's informant and to Comer Clark.

First, the general interpretation of the assassination attributed to him
in both accounts is exactly what he has expressed other occasions.

In
*974.

for instance, he told Frank Mankiewicz and Kirby Jones:
"[TJhis man—Oswald ...

applied for a permit at the Cuban embassy
to travel to Cuba, and he was not given the permission.

We had no
idea who he was.

But I ask myself why would a man who commits
such an act try to come here.

Sometimes we ask ourselves if someone
did not wish to involve Cuba in this, because 1 am under the impres-
sion that Kennedy’s assassination was organized by reactionaries in
the United States and that it 'was all a result of a conspiracy.

“What I can say is that he asked permission to travel to Cuba.Sometimes we ask ourselves if someone
did not wish to involve Cuba in this, because 1 am under the impres-
sion that Kennedy’s assassination was organized by reactionaries in
the United States and that it 'was all a result of a conspiracy.

“What I can say is that he asked permission to travel to Cuba.

Now,
imagine that by coincidence he had been granted this permit, that he
had visited Cuba for a few days, then returned to the United States
and killed Kennedy.

That would have been material for a provoca-
tion.”
But more important, the statements attributed to Oswald sound
authentic.

Clark’s more detailed account fits in perfectly with Os-
wald’s past record and with his known situation at the time he ap-
i
r-
Castro's Revelations...

177
peared at the Cuban Embassy.

For instance, Castro quoted Oswald
^saying he wanted to work for the Cubans.

It now appears that this
was indeed Oswald’s ambition, but few people realized that in 1967.

There was certainly no hint of this in the Warren Report or the early
conspiracy books.

Furthermore, if we accept that Castro’s warning
and the Sylvia Odio incident were fresh in his mind, it is reasonable
that Oswald might have said, "Someone ought to shoot that President
Kennedy,’’ and then add—as though the possibility had just occurred
to him—"Maybe I’ll try to do it.” Less than a week before this,
Leopoldo had relayed a similar message to Odio.

Oswald's statement
to the Cuban official that he wanted to "free Cuba from American
imperialism" sounds familiar as well.

Leopoldo had quoted him as
saying that Kennedy was the one "who was holding the freedom of
Cuba, actually.” And Oswald had been speaking out against "Ameri-
can imperialism” ever since his interviews with Johnson and Mosby
in Moscow.

These threats echo similar statements he had made about Eisen-
hower and General Walker.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Leopoldo had quoted him as
saying that Kennedy was the one "who was holding the freedom of
Cuba, actually.” And Oswald had been speaking out against "Ameri-
can imperialism” ever since his interviews with Johnson and Mosby
in Moscow. These threats echo similar statements he had made about Eisen-
hower and General Walker. To Oswald, these dissimilar men were
identical in one respect—they were leaders who abused their power
to exploit and oppress, or threatened to do so: Eisenhower was "ex-
ploiting the working class,” Walker was potentially another Hitler—
and he thought he would be "doing a justice to the people" if he got
rid of him. And now, President Kennedy, who Oswald had once)
believed might accept the status quo after the Bay of Pigs, had been
unmasked in Oswald's mind as a danger to Cuba, someone who oughtJ
to be killed. Finally, there is another reason to believe that Clark was telling the
truth. It appears that Consul Azcuc did indeed consider Oswald a
"wild man’*—otherwise, why would he have told Oswald that a per
son like him was hurting the Cuban revolution rather than helping it? Thus, Comer Clark's story contained a rich subtext that neither
Clark nor Castro coudl have known about. It doesn’t seem likely that
Clark could have fabricated this story with its myriad of reflections
of Oswald’s character and background. But after his free-lance ac-
count of Castro's revelation was published in the National Enquirer. it sank without a trace until it was brought to light by Daniel Schorr
in 1977. By *978 the situation had changed. The Garrison investigation had
long since collapsed into a fiasco, and the recent revelations about
CIA plots to murder Castro had given impetus to a new theory—that

--- PAGE BREAK ---Kennedy’s death had been a Cuban retaliation for the murder plots.

Early that year the House Assassinations Committee sent a delegation
to Havana to meet with Castro.

The congressmen and staff members
wanted to ask him about two incidents in particular: the warning he
had given to Daniel Harker about assassination plots in September
1963, and Comer Clark's report.

When the delegation finally got to see him, Castro appeared to be
cooperative.

Concerning the 1963 impromptu interview with Harker,
Castro insisted he had been misunderstood: “I did not mean to
threaten by that.

...

but rather, like a warning that we knew; that
we had news about it; and that to set those precedents of plotting the
assassination of leaders of other countries would be a very bad prece-
dent.

...

I didn’t say it as a threat.

I did not mean by that that we
were going to take measures—similar measures—like a retaliation for
that .

.

.

For 3 years, we had known there were plots against us.

So
the conversation came about very casually, you know; but I would say
that all these plots or attempts were part of the everyday life.** He
added, “We were constantly arresting people trained by the CIA
.

.

.

with explosives, with telescopic target rifles.”
Castro again made the reasonable argument that it would have been
madness for the Cubans to have plotted Kennedy’s death, saying,
“That would have been the most perfect pretext for the United States
to invade our country which is what I have tried to prevent for all
these years, in every possible sense”—an argument that was also
implied in a comment Clark quoted him as having made: "It could
have been an excuse for another invasion try.” In addition, Mankiew-
icz and Jones had quoted him as saying "That would have been
material for a provocation.” The Committee had no trouble accepting
this.

A Cuban plot would have indeed been a reckless adventure, and
its discovery would probably have destroyed Cuba.with explosives, with telescopic target rifles.”
Castro again made the reasonable argument that it would have been
madness for the Cubans to have plotted Kennedy’s death, saying,
“That would have been the most perfect pretext for the United States
to invade our country which is what I have tried to prevent for all
these years, in every possible sense”—an argument that was also
implied in a comment Clark quoted him as having made: "It could
have been an excuse for another invasion try.” In addition, Mankiew-
icz and Jones had quoted him as saying "That would have been
material for a provocation.” The Committee had no trouble accepting
this.

A Cuban plot would have indeed been a reckless adventure, and
its discovery would probably have destroyed Cuba.

Had Castro been
planning a retaliation in September 1963, he would hardly have talked
about it ahead of time to an American reporter.

But Castro's response to their second question took the delegation
by surprise.

When he was asked about Oswald’s reported threat
against President Kennedy at the embassy, Castro said, "This is ab-
surd.

I didn’t say that.

It has been invented from beginning until the
end.” Castro denied that the interview ever took place.

He suggested
that the journalist’s reputation should be investigated.

(Clark had by
this time died.) Castro argued that Clark's story was implausible
because, had the threat occurred, "it would have been our moral duty
to inform the United States.”
Castro's Revelations...

179
The Committee disagreed that Cuba would have been obligated to
report such a threat.

Furthermore, it had access to "a highly confiden-
tial, but reliable source” that disputed Castro’s testimony.

The source
reported that Oswald had "vowed in the presence of Cuban Consulate
officials to assassinate the President.” Nevertheless the Committee
ultimately accepted Castro’s denial.

It decided "on balance” that
Oswald didn t voice a threat to Cuban officials.The source
reported that Oswald had "vowed in the presence of Cuban Consulate
officials to assassinate the President.” Nevertheless the Committee
ultimately accepted Castro’s denial.

It decided "on balance” that
Oswald didn t voice a threat to Cuban officials.

Its reasoning was
somewhat peculiar.

The Committee argued in its report that Castro
probably would not have lied to American congressmen, because
being caught in a he would have been more dangerous than admitting
that Cuba had knowledge of Oswald’s threat—since being caught in
a lie might have raised sinister implications of direct Cuban involve-
ment.

Castro may have figured the odds differently.

For if he had admit-
ted that the Clark interview was authentic he would have been lending
support to Schorr’s theory that his own warning about assassination
plots may have inspired Oswald.

Thus, while it would have been m
1
Cuba’s interest to reveal Oswald’s threat at the time Jim Garrison was
arguing that the CIA had sent Oswald to Mexico City, it was now in
Cuba’s interest to deny it.

Maurice Halperin has written of Fidel Castro, "Like all successful
political leaders he has been a disciple of Machiavelli, capable of
inconsistency, opportunism, and deceit but not for their own sake and
always weighing anticipated profits against costs in any political oper-
ation ” Halperin also noted that Fidel often said, "We are not afraid
of danger.

As a matter of fact, we thrive on it.

And besides, everyone
has to die sooner or later.”
Had the Cuban premier been an ordinary witness, the Committee
might have checked his story more carefully.

To back up his argument
that the Clark interview never took place, Castro contended that it
wasn’t easy to get an interview with him, that even a well-known
reporter like Bill Moyers had had difficulty arranging a meeting.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And besides, everyone
has to die sooner or later.”
Had the Cuban premier been an ordinary witness, the Committee
might have checked his story more carefully. To back up his argument
that the Clark interview never took place, Castro contended that it
wasn’t easy to get an interview with him, that even a well-known
reporter like Bill Moyers had had difficulty arranging a meeting. While this may well have been true of formal interviews, lengthy
impromptu conversations were something else again, as the Daniel
Harker and Laura Bergquist interviews demonstrate. (As a matter of
fact, it is odd that Castro should have made this argument during the
same meeting at which he explained that the warning Harker reported
was part of a conversation that "came about very casually.”)
Second, to refutcComer Clark’s claim that he had spoken with him
at a Havana ^zeria^Castro told the Committee delegation that he
never went to puBITcrestaurants. Whether or not this was true when

--- PAGE BREAK ---Comer Clark’s claim that he had spoken with him
at a Havana ^zeria^Castro told the Committee delegation that he
never went to puBITcrestaurants. Whether or not this was true when

--- PAGE BREAK ---

180 ... Oswald's Game
he said it in 1978. it was certainly not true in earlier years. In 1974
Castro took the visiting writers Mankiewicz and Jones to an Arab
restaurant “in the middle of nowhere" and table-h°pp«dto greetall
the patrons. And in Castro's Cuba. Cuba’s ^eA pubhshed m l^.
Lee Lockwood described how Castro drove around a Havana suburb
after midnight until he found an “all-night pizzeria” where Castro,
Lockwood, and the Swiss ambassador talked for an hour and a half.
Mankiewicz and Jones later wrote, "Fidel is a former trial lawyer
and he shows it. All his arguments follow a carefully structured
presentation. By the time be has built his case, if you do not watch
out, he has you convinced of things you do not believe.
13.. • October 1963—Reading be-
tween the Lines
ONE can only guess at Oswald’s thoughts on the long bus ride back
to Dallas. It seems clear that he was genuinely disappointed and angry
about the red tape he had run into at the Mexican embassies.
Oswald’s life was a constant circling over the same ground. His
quarrel with Azcue might have reminded him of the trouble he'd had
getting the Russians to accept him—or of the angry scene at the
American Embassy when he tried to give up his citizenship. Bureau-
crats were always blocking his path, and whenever he was thwarted
he usually reacted with outrage or with some kind of dramatic manip-
ulation. But apparently nothing he tried in Mexico worked.
When his first defection hadn't given him what he wanted he came
back, much the same as he was, and tried again. One might expect
a similar reaction to this latest setback. Oswald seldom gave up on an
idea. Faced with an obstacle he maneuvered around it, but he had
never reversed his direction.
But first, there were other matters to attend to. The Warren Com-
mission calculated that Oswald had about $129 left when he returned
from Mexico. As soon as he arrived in Dallas on October 3, he filed
a claim for his last unemployment check. He spent the night at the
Y, and the next day began looking for work. He applied for a job with
the Padgett Printing Corporation, and only afterward did he call
Marina and hitchhike out to the Paine house in Irving.
When they were alone he told Marina about his recent disappoint-
ment at the Cuban Embassy: MAh, they’re such terrible bureaucratsdid he call
Marina and hitchhike out to the Paine house in Irving.
When they were alone he told Marina about his recent disappoint-
ment at the Cuban Embassy: MAh, they’re such terrible bureaucrats

--- PAGE BREAK ---182...

Oswald's Game
that nothing came of it after alL” He gave her the impression he’d
changed his mind about going to Cuba and sending her to Russia.

According to the Warren Report, Oswald had apparently lost his
enthusiasm for the Castro regime and had given up his plans to go to
Cuba.

McMillan agrees.

She wrote that after returning from Mexico,
•'Lee’s disenchantment with Castro and Cuba was complete.

He never
again talked about ‘Uncle Fidel,’ nor sang the song ‘Viva Fidel,’ as
he used to.

...

’ But a part of Marina’s testimony disputes this.

She
told the Commission that, after Lee came back to Dallas, “this was
his favorite subject, Cuba, and he was quite—a little bit cracked about
it, crazy about Cuba.”
It was agreed that Marina would stay on at Ruth’s until after the
baby was bom while Oswald took a room in Oak Cliff.

The Padgett
company job fell through when one of the owners of Jaggars-Chiles-
Stovall recommended against him, saying he was a troublemaker with
“communist tendencies,” and several other applications brought no
offers.

At the end of his first week at the rooming house, Oswald’s
landlady decided she didn’t want to rent to him any longer.

(“I didn’t
like his attitude.

He was just kind of like this, you know, just big shot.

.

.

.

Just didn t want him around me.”) When Oswald moved into
another rooming house, he signed the register as O.H.

Lee.

In a letter to her mother on October 14, Ruth mentioned that Lee
was looking for work in Dallas.

...

He spent last weekend Sc the one before with us here and was a happy
addition to our expanded family.

He played with Chris [Ruth’s son],
watched football on TV, planed down the doors that wouldn't dose, and
generally added a needed masculine flavor.

From a poor first impression
I have come to like him.

.

..

If Lee can just find work that will help so much.

Meantime, I started
giving him driving lessons last Sunday (yesterday).If Lee can just find work that will help so much.

Meantime, I started
giving him driving lessons last Sunday (yesterday).

If he can drive this
will open up more job possibilities Sc more locations.

I feel committed to seeing Marina Sc Lee through this difficult period
in their fives.

This may mean (U10’ I think it somewhat unlikely) having
her A the babies here until spring if Lee has to go East or somewhere
looking for work.

What I would like most is Marina to stay through Christmas (which
she has never celebrated—at least American style) then have you in Feb.

Later that day she and Marina had coffee at a neighbor’s house, and
one of the women there, hearing that Lee needed a job, suggested he
might try the place where her brother, Wesley Frazier, worked—the
October 1963—Reading between the Line*...

1S3
Texas School Book Depository.

When Oswald telephoned that eve-
ning, Ruth told him about this possibility, and he applied the next
day.

The superintendent, Roy S.

Truly, later said, “He looked like a
nice young fellow to me—he was quiet and well mannered.

He used
the word sir, you know, which a lot of them don’t do at this time."
Truly told him he could start work the following day as temporary
help, filling book orders at si.25 an hour.

^ 7
In the day* ahead Oswald would often read a local newspaper
during, his break m the Depository lunchroom.

One of his co-workers
once noticed him reading something about politics.

On the weekends
he got a ride to Ruth’s house with Wesley Frazier, and he would read
newspapers there as well.

There was a good deal going on that might
have interested him.

On October 8 President Kennedy signed fhe
Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty with the Soviet Union.

Cuba immediately
denounced the treaty, contending that while the U.S.

was making an
agreement with the Soviet Union, it was increasing its acts of sabotage
against Cuba.

Kennedy was meanwhile trying to prod the Russians
mto getting their troops out of Cuba.--- PAGE BREAK ---

was making an
agreement with the Soviet Union, it was increasing its acts of sabotage
against Cuba. Kennedy was meanwhile trying to prod the Russians
mto getting their troops out of Cuba. There were also several newspa-
per reports on pro-Castro terrorist attacks going on in Venezuela. In
South Vietnam the political situation was deteriorating. For some
time the American government had been attempting to get Premier
N8w?hnfhD,en! ‘° make pCaCe wi,h hU Buddhist opponents and get
on with the real war against the Communists 8
,^UJnlthfoWeekend* 0swald spent at Ruth's he sometimes talked
with Michael Paine, who, although separated from his wife, spent part
of hts weekends there. Michael didn't notice any change in Oswald’s
pobtical views since he last saw him in April. Oswald’s major theme
remained the exploitation of man by man, which he called an unfor-
givable moral sim Not only did Oswald feel that American workers
were esplo,ted, Pa.ne said, but “he also thought they were brain
w“hed ' ' Jh?‘ churches were alike, all the religious sects were
the same and they were all apparatus of the power structure to main-
tam “self in power. When Paine pointed out that his church was
financed by people like hunself, Oswald just shrugged. Paine said “
’ k‘* V',eWS SUB 5,0°d and it also permitted him. I think, gave him
the moral ground to dismiss my arguments because I was here just
a product or my environment... and therefore I was just spouting
the line that was fed me by the power structure.” ^
uIOUS COnCern for the working man, Michael ob-
axcefon of daughter June, “people were like
cardboard to him. People were either stupid or malicious—the ex-

--- PAGE BREAK ---•W'
184 ...

Oswald’s Game
ploited or the exploiters.

As for the president, he got the impression
that Oswald “didn’t like anybody,” but that he disliked Kennedy less
than the politicians to the right of Kennedy.

(After one of their
conversations, Oswald told Marina that Michael didn’t understand
anything about politics.

Michael had religion, he said, but he had no
philosophy.)
Like de Mohrenschildt, Paine saw Oswald as a revolutionary—,
someone who assumed that “the church and the power structure and
our education was all the same vile system and therefore there would
have to be an overthrow of the whole thing.” Michael thought Oswald
had “unreasonable and unrealistic and pervasive" feelings of hostility
toward American society in general.

He testified, “I thought that he
was of the mind that something small or evolutionary changes were
never going to have any effect.

It had to be, though he never revealed
to me what kind of actions or policies he would have advocated or did
advocate ...

it had to be of a rather drastic nature, where kindness
or good feelings should not stand in the way of those actions.” When
Paine felt moved to say that his own values were diminished in a
situation of violence, Oswald, in obvious disagreement, remained si-
lent.

Michael also noticed that Oswald sometimes got “hot under the
collar” but exerted self-control as though he had had considerable
practice in holding his position firmly and not getting ruffled.

It
reminded him of the movie about Lawrence of Arabia, when Law-
rence held a match while it burned down to his fingers and said that
“you just learn how to stand the pain.”
Despite the theoretical talk about violence and revolution, neither
Michael nor Ruth had any idea that Oswald was capable of acting on
these beliefs.Michael also noticed that Oswald sometimes got “hot under the
collar” but exerted self-control as though he had had considerable
practice in holding his position firmly and not getting ruffled.

It
reminded him of the movie about Lawrence of Arabia, when Law-
rence held a match while it burned down to his fingers and said that
“you just learn how to stand the pain.”
Despite the theoretical talk about violence and revolution, neither
Michael nor Ruth had any idea that Oswald was capable of acting on
these beliefs.

They had no idea he had once tried to assassinate Walker
—or that the weapon he used now lay disassembled and wrapped in
a blanket among other belongings of the Oswalds in their garage.

Michael had moved the bundle out of his way a couple of times and
imagined that it contained camping equipment.

When Oswald left New Orleans he had given Ruth’s address to the
post office as his forwarding address, where he continued to receive
his copies of The Worker and The Militant as well as the Russian
magazines he subscribed to, and Time.

The Commission asked Mi-
chael Paine if he had ever discussed these publications with Oswald.

A.

Yes, we talked with regard to the .

.

.

Worker.

He said (hat
.

..

you could tell what they wanted you to do by reading between the
October 1963—Reading between the Lines ...

185
lines, reading the thing and doing a little reading between the lines.

He
then gave me an issue to look and see.

Michael took the paper and glanced over it, thinking to himself,
“Here is a person who is pretty, well, out of it again if this is the way
be gets his communications from headquarters.” It suggested to him
that Oswald “wanted to be a party to something or a part of a group
that had objectives.” This conversation happened “fairly soon after
his coming back, so let’s say the middle of October.” He didn’t
remember which issue of The Worker it was.

The Commission questioned him further about the incident.

Q.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Commission questioned him further about the incident. Q. Did you draw any inference at the time as a result of this conversa-
tion with Oswald? A. Well, it made me realize that he would ike to be active in some
kind of—activist It made me also feel that he wasn't very well con-
nected with a group or he wouldn’t have such a tenuous way of commu-
nication, and I thought it was rather childish ... to think that this was
his bona fide way of being a member of this Communist cause or some-
thing. This was the situation Oswald was in—the situation he had been
in since he tried to join the Communist cause in New Orleans when
he was sixteen. He had recently failed to reach “headquarters” in
Cuba. Operating on his own, he had to obtain his ideas by reading
between the lines of The Worker and other newspapers. Not that he
saw these ideas as literal messages to him—Paine did not think he was
irrational. Oswald simply thought he was smart enough to deduce
what was going on in the world and decide what to do about it. But
Oswald’s statement about The Worker suggests that he believed the
newspaper’s call to political action had given him a sanction of some
kind to act against Walker. The call to revolutionary violence was not entirely in Oswald’s
imagination. An October 1963 issue of The Militant contained a major
speech by Castro entitled “What is Our Line? The Line of Consistent
Ajiti-Imperialism.” Speaking just after the failure of a leftist coup
attempt in Santo Domingo, Castro pointed to “a great lesson for the
Dominican people and for all the peoples, that there is only one way,
there is only one remedy: to liquidate the militarists, to fight the
militarists, to defeat the militarists and shoot their leaders. ... We
must know how imperialism is trying to tighten the knot, when the
imperialists are launching a counter-revolutionary offensive. They do

--- PAGE BREAK ---186...

Oswald's Game
not impress us.

We are already veterans in this struggle.

...

But we
must know what our duties are in the struggle against the counter-
revolutionary offensive of imperialism and in the struggle for the
economy.

With the rifle and the work-tool, the work-tool and the rifle,
with these, with both, we must bring our victory.”
Friday, October 18, was Oswald’s twenty-fourth birthday, and
when he arrived in Irving Marina and Ruth surprised him with a cake
and wine.

He seemed touched and self-conscious.

Lee and Marina
were getting along well.

Michael noticed that she sometimes sat in his
lap and whispered “sweet nothings" in his ear.

On the day following
his birthday they went into the living room after supper to watch
television together.

Marina lay with her head in his lap, half-asleep,
while he watched two old movies.

Occasionally she felt him sit up
straight and strain toward the television set, greatly excited.

What was he watching that caused this unusual reaction?

By an
eerie coincidence, the double feature he had chosen echoed the theme
of Castro’s public warning: murder plots against Cuban leaders could
lead to a retaliation.

The first movie was Suddenly, in which Frank Sinatra played an
ex-GI who planned to shoot an American president.

Sinatra’s charac-
ter took over a house overlooking a railroad station.

Holding a rifle,
he waited at a window for the president's train to arrive.

But at the
end, the train passed by without stopping and Sinatra was killed.

The
second movie.

We Were Strangers, was based on the overthrow of
Cuba’s Machado regime in 1933.

John Garfield played an American
who had gone to Cuba to help a group of rebels assassinate the Cuban
dictator by digging a tunnel and planting explosives.

Oswald’s strong reaction to these films made an impression on his
wife.John Garfield played an American
who had gone to Cuba to help a group of rebels assassinate the Cuban
dictator by digging a tunnel and planting explosives.

Oswald’s strong reaction to these films made an impression on his
wife.

A Secret Service report two weeks after the assassination quotes
her as saying that her husband had seen a movie on TV “depicting
a plot to kill a Cuban dictator with a bomb where the plotters had to
dig a tunnel and that Lee did not like the picture as he said that was
the way they did it in the old days." She later testified, “One film about
the assassination of the president in Cuba, which I had seen together
with him, be said that this was a fictitious situation, but that the
content of the film was similar to the actual situation which existed
in Cuba, meaning the revolution in Cuba."
Q.

Do you recall anything else he said about either of these films?

A.

Nothing else.

He didn't tell me anything else.

He talked to Ruth
October 1963—Reading between the Line* ...

187
, few words.

Perhaps she knows more....

They spoke in English.

[So
far as the record shows, Ruth was never asked about this.]
After Marina’s testimony was revealed, the movie dealing with an
American president's assassination.

Suddenly, received considerable
,ttention in the press.

But the other movie—the one Oswald com-
mented on—did not.

Since the Commission staff was unaware of the
nlots to murder Castro, Oswald’s statements attracted no further
intention.

Apparently even Marina didn’t fully understand what he
meant For Oswald, however, “the revolution in Cuba” was the Cas-
tro revolution, not only his takeover of power but the continuing
social revolution.

The most reasonable explanation for Oswald s re-
marks is that he saw the parallels between this movie and the Ameri-
can-backed plots against Castro.

The movie was a fictionalized ac-
count of the actual situation which existed in Cuba—except that the
methods shown were out of date.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The most reasonable explanation for Oswald s re-
marks is that he saw the parallels between this movie and the Ameri-
can-backed plots against Castro. The movie was a fictionalized ac-
count of the actual situation which existed in Cuba—except that the
methods shown were out of date. That observation, in turn, suggests
that Oswald somehow knew of the methods being used in ongoing
’’"Tbelieve that, together with the two recent threats he made against. President Kennedy’s life, this excited reaction ana ms comments
indicate that Oswald was, in fact, aware of Castro’s warning about
American-backed plots to assassinate him. He was excited because the
double feature had practically read his mind. Coincidences like this
one can make almost anyone believe that fate has intervened. If I’m
ristht, these two movies must have seemed like a tug at his sleeve. On the next night, a Sunday, Marina’s labor pains began. Ruth
drove her to the hospital while Oswald stayed behind to babysit June
and the Paine children. When Ruth returned, the children were in bed
and Oswald was in his room. Although his light was still on, he didn’t
come out to ask her about Marina. Shortly after eleven Ruth called
the hospital and was told that Marina had delivered a girl. By then,
Oswald’s light was out. Much annoyed, Ruth decided he might as well
wait until the following morning to hear that he was a father again. nJ J , I • r Ac tu alrl
Even at this point, there are signs that Oswald hadn’t yet made his
decision. The president’s tentative plans to visit Dallas had been
announced, but the visit would not be made definite until November
8 and even then there was no word of a motorcade. * During the next two weeks Oswald resumed his old routine of
building his political credentials, and he once again turned his atlen-

--- PAGE BREAK ---188 ...

Oswald's Game
tion to Edwin A.

Walker.

On Wednesday, October 23, he attended a
large right-wing rally at which Walker spoke.

The next evening some
of Walker’s followers created a national furor by jostling and spitting
on the U.S.

ambassador to the United Nations, Adlai Stevenson.

Over
dinner at the Pains’ that Friday, Oswald mentioned going to the
Walker rally.

Michael, who was also interested in finding out more
about the Far Right, gathered that Lee was going around to right-
wing groups to familiarize himself with them.

That evening Michael
was going to an American Civil Liberties Union meeting and invited
Oswald to come along.

During the meeting one of the speakers made the remark that all
members of the John Birch Society shouldn’t be considered anti-
Semitic.

“Lee at this point got up,” Paine recalled, “speaking loud and
clear and coherently, saying that...

he had been to this meeting of
the right-wing group the night before or two nights before and he
refuted this statement, saying names and saying how .

.

.

people on
the platform speaking for the Birch Society had said anti-Semitic
things and also anti-Catholic statements.” One of the names Oswald
mentioned was Walker’s.

A friend and co-worker of Paine’s, Frank Krystinik, was at the
ACLU meeting and heard Oswald’s remarks.

He got the impression
that Oswald was “stirring in dirty thoughts that you shouldn’t like
General Walker.

He didn’t say General Walker is a bad guy.

He just
made comments that General Walker is anti-Semitic and anti-Cath-
olic and he was spreading a little seed of thought.”
After the formal meeting broke up, discussion continued over
coffee.

Krystinik joined Oswald and Paine at the back of the room,
and approached Lee by saying that Michael had told him a bit about
his political background.

Knowing that Frank was about to defend
free enterprise, Michael excused himself, because he had heard it all
before.Krystinik joined Oswald and Paine at the back of the room,
and approached Lee by saying that Michael had told him a bit about
his political background.

Knowing that Frank was about to defend
free enterprise, Michael excused himself, because he had heard it all
before.

Krystinik asked Oswald what Russia had to offer that was
better than he could find in the United States, and recalled, “He kind
of shrugged his shoulders and didn't make any particular comment
then.” Frank mentioned that he had met Marina and June at the
Paines’ and told him he should be “real proud of them”—to which
Oswald replied that they were nice, and let it go at that.

Soon they
were debating about capitalism.

Krystinik told him he was an em-
ployer and paid two men S3 an hour and made S4, but he bought the
machinery and material.

Oswald said he was exploiting labor but,
“That is all right for you.

In your society it is not a crime.”
Frank sensed that Oswald was talking down to him and acting “as
October 1983—Reading between the Lines...

189
if he had complete command of the argument.” He felt ihat there were
moments in the discussion when he thought he had him practically
beaten but Oswald wouldn’t accept his opinion.

Lee •’turned his back
“d *°“ld 1
g.odow" a d’fferent avenue." Frank agreed with Michael,
who had told him that Oswald was interesting to talk to but that once
he had said his piece, he got very repetitive—he "had a certain fixed
image in his mind, and was reluctant to have it improved or changed."
.

?e ?uy fIme Presldent Kennedy’s name was mentioned Oswald
had said he thought Kennedy was doing ’’a real fine job" in civil rights
_th°Ught that he placed a sPec“1 emphasis on the way he
said it.

(There was continuing racial violence the South.

The month
before, several black children were killed in the bombing of a Birming-
ham church.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(There was continuing racial violence the South. The month
before, several black children were killed in the bombing of a Birming-
ham church. The Worker's position was that the president and the
attorney general weren’t taking a strong enough stand against the
raT£. ErJent1fJJy an °lder man interrupted their discussion, and he
d.^ked ab0ut dvU rights and Cuba- Before the meeting
ended Oswald went to speak to the man who had operated the movie
projector that night and asked him how the projector worked. Then
be picked up an application form for membership in the ACLU. As
they were going out the door, Krystinik joked to Paine, “We are going
to have to set this boy up in business and convert him," and Oswald
answered lightly, "The money might corrupt me."
On the drive home Paine explained that the function of the ACLU
was to protect civil liberties. Oswald told him that he couldn’t join
such an organization because it didn’t have political objectives. He
asked Michael if he knew the older man he had been talking to. Paine
recalled. I think he said the man seemed to be friendly to Cuba or
rather he said, ’Do you think that man is a Communist?’ And I said
No. And then he said something, ’I think he is.’ Then I asked him
why and I think he swd something in regard to Cuba or sympathy
with Cuba, and then I thought to myself, well, that is rather feeble
evidence for proving a Communist,
“But he seemed to have the attitude of, felt he wanted to meet that
(turn again and was pleased to have met him." And once again Paine
thought If this is the way he has to meet his Communists, he has
not yet round the Communist group in Dallas.”
Oswald now gave some thought to how he might use the American
Civil Liberties Union. On November i he mailed in the ACLU appli-
Mtion fonn he had taken with him and rented a post office box. giving
th^CLli8,1(1 hC FaU, PUy f0r Cuba as organizftionf
which might receive mail at that box. On the same day he sent anotherappli-
Mtion fonn he had taken with him and rented a post office box. giving
th^CLli8,1(1 hC FaU, PUy f0r Cuba as organizftionf
which might receive mail at that box. On the same day he sent another

--- PAGE BREAK ---letter to Arnold Johnson, the Communist party official in New York.

Even allowing for Oswald's deviousness, it doesn't sound like some-
one actively planning an assassination:
...

I have settled in Dallas Texas for the time.

Through a friend, I have been introduced into the American Civil
Liberties Union local chapter, which holds monthly meetings on the
campus of Southern Methodist University.

The first meeting 1 attended was on October 25th, a film was shown
and afterwards a very critical discussion of the ultralight in Dallas.

On October 23rd, 1 had attended a ultra-right meeting headed by
General Edwin A.

Walker, who lives in Dallas.

This meeting preceded by one day the attack on A.

E Stevenson at
the United Nations Day meeting at which he spoke.

As you can see, political friction between “left" and “right" is very
great here.

Could you advise me as to the general view we have on the American
Civil Liberties Union?

And to what degree, if any, 1 should attempt to heighten its progres-
sive tendencies?

This Dallas branch of the A.C.L.U.

is firmly in the hands of “liberal"
professional people, (a minister and two Law professors conducted the
Oct.

25th meeting.) However, some of those present showed marked
class-awareness and insight.

Oswald seemed about to launch another campaign of “above-
ground" political work involving the Fair Play Committee and the
ACLU.

But when he arrived at the Paine house that afternoon, he
learned that the FBI had been there looking for him.

During October, William Attwood continued his effort to open a
line of communication with Cuba.

So far, he had gotten little response
form Cuban officials.

In mid-October Attwood and the president's
friend Ben Bradlee, then with Newsweek, urged Kennedy to meet with
Jean Daniel, a French journalist who was on his way to Havana to
speak with Castro—perhaps the president could convey a personal
message to Fidel.

Kennedy saw Daniel on October 24, and gave him
his views on Cuba.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In mid-October Attwood and the president's
friend Ben Bradlee, then with Newsweek, urged Kennedy to meet with
Jean Daniel, a French journalist who was on his way to Havana to
speak with Castro—perhaps the president could convey a personal
message to Fidel. Kennedy saw Daniel on October 24, and gave him
his views on Cuba. He told Daniel that he understood the Cubans’
desire for a genuine revolution after the Batista regime, which the
Americans had wrongly supported, but that the United States
couldn’t tolerate Communist subversion in Latin America. The prob-
lem, he said, was that Castro had betrayed the revolution by becoming
October 1963—Reading between the Lines... 191
l
f-
i:
I
“a Soviet agent in Latin America." Kennedy asked Daniel to come
back to sec him after he talked with Castro, and Daniel understood
ihat he was to be an “unofficial envoy."
Meanwhile, CIA officials again met with AM/LASH. The Cuban
was told that his proposal for a coup was under consideration. AM/-
LASH requested a meeting with Robert Kennedy to obtain assur-
ances of high-level American support. Instead, Desmond Fitzgerald,
the senior official of the CIA section handling Cuba, decided to meet
with AM/LASH personally on October 29. Fitzgerald used an alias
and was introduced as a “DmnnaLrffnrrsfinjative" of the attorney
general. Fitzgerald indicated that the United States would support a
55ujT5ut drew the line at providing a high-powered rifle with a
telescopic sight, the assassination weapon AM/LASH had requested. But in early November AM/LASH’s case officer was directed to
inform the Cuban he would be given the rifles and explosives he had
asked for.

--- PAGE BREAK ---14..

• November: The Decision
JC BI agent James Hosty wanted very much to speak to Lee Harvey
Oswald.

The FBI had lost track of him when he left New Orleans.

On
October 3 the New Orleans office advised Hosty that Marina had
recently left town in a station wagon with a Texas license plate
"driven by a woman who could speak the Russian language," and that
Lee Oswald had remained behind and then disappeared the next day.

(This information apparently came form a neighbor.) Hosty was
asked to try to locate Lee and Marina Oswald.

He had then checked
their old neighborhood in Dallas and contacted Robert Oswald, but
came up empty.

On October 25 his interest in Oswald intensified considerably when
New Orleans advised him that it had been informed by the CIA that
Oswald had been in touch with the Soviet Embassy in Mexico City
in early October.

Hosty’s worry now was that the Russians might
have recruited Oswald for espionage.

Four days later New Orleans
sent him the forwarding address Oswald had left with the post office
—2515 West Fifth Street in Irving, Ruth Paine’s home.

Hosty immedi-
ately checked out the Paines and found that they were reputable.

Ruth
was said to be a Quaker and a "kindly" lady.

On November 1 Hosty went to her house to find Oswald.

Ruth was
cordial and invited him in, but she didn't know Oswald’s rooming
house address.

She knew the phone number, but didn’t think to offer
that, and Hosty didn’t request it When Hosty asked if she knew
where Oswald worked, Ruth hesitated.

She explained that Lee had
told her the FBI had gotten him fired from jobs in the past.

Hosty
assured her that this wasn’t so, that the agency never interviewed
192...

November The Decision ...

193
u at their jobs, and that he wanted to know where Oswald
nrked to see if he was employed in a sensitive industry.November The Decision ...

193
u at their jobs, and that he wanted to know where Oswald
nrked to see if he was employed in a sensitive industry.

Ruth told
?m and when Hosty realized that Oswald was a laborer .n a ware-
he was relieved—Oswald wasn’t in a position to commit espio-
^WhileThey were talking.

Marina walked into the room.

When Ruth
introduced Hosty as an FBI agent.

Marina looked alarmed.

Hosty
■houKht she reacted like other people he had interviewed from Soviet
hloc countries who seemed to be afraid of any kind of police.

But this
M only part of the reason.

Marina knew her husband s attitude
iiward the FBI.

and something of that attitude had rubbed off on her.

iuina Ruth as an interpreter.

Hosty tried to reassure her.

He told her
ihat his duty was to protect people and that if anyone should ever try i
Tnui pressure on her by threatening her relatives in Russiashecould^-/
...me to the FBI for help.

Hosty mentioned Oswald’stWCuba activiticSy New Orleans, but
rave nothing away regarding his knowledge oithe trip to Mexico.

Marina recovered her composure enough to tell him that Lee was no
"r passing out his pro-Castro leaflets.

As Ruth remembered it, r
Marina also told Hosty that she thought Castro wasn’t getting fair
treatment in the American press.

Before he left, Hosty gave Ruth his
office address and telephone number, which she would give to Oswald
^ When Oswald arrived a few hours later, Marina told him an FBI
.«nt had been there looking for him.

Irritated and upset, he ques-
tioned her in private, going over exactly what had been said.

He was
*necially concerned and suspicious about Hosty’s remark that Ma-
rina could go to the FBI for help if she needed it.

McMillan reports
that he told Marina, "You fool.

Don’t you see?

He doesn’t care about
vour rights.

He comes because it’s his job.

You have no idea how to
talk to the FBI.

As usual, you were probably too polite.--- PAGE BREAK ---

You have no idea how to
talk to the FBI. As usual, you were probably too polite. You can t
afford to let them see your weaknesses." Oswald warned her that if
she ever agreed to let the FBI "protect her rights," she would get into
trouble with the Soviet Embassy. Even as he spoke Manna could tel
that he was inwardly calculating at great speed and trying to conceal
his anxiety. Oswald instructed his wife that if Hosty returned, she
should take down his license plate number. That way, if Oswald saw
his car parked near Ruth’s house, he would be forewarned. He now
had to think of some way to handle the FBI. One should keep in mind Oswald’s attitude toward authority, as he
I..A ri.mnnurated in the Dast. Oswald evidently felt he should be able

--- PAGE BREAK ---m
( !

194...

Oswald's Game
7
i
to do whatever he wanted without interference.

When he was inter-
fered with, he considered it a personal affront and often took his
complaint to a higher authority.

He believed that what he was doing
was right, even when his actions were “illegal.” Thus, for example,
he could threaten to give away military secrets in one breath and
charge that his legaljigiiLii) expatriate hi^sclfwas being denied him
in the next—and y€il the American ambassador^ was going to ask
his new government to lodge a formal protest.

After deciding to leave
Russia, he expected the Americans to do everything they could to help
him.

In his logic, there was no inconsistency in any of this.

Since he
was always right, anyone who opposed him was wrong.

On that weekend there was a crisis in South Vietnam.

On Novem-
ber 2 an army coup ousted President Diem, and Diem and his brother
were assassinated.

At home, a front pagcMoming News headline on
November 4 announced.

“President in Dallas.” The story said that
the president was tentatively scheduled to attend a noon luncheon in
Dallas on November 21 or 22.

On November 5, Hosty passed through Irving with another agent
en route to Fort Worth and stopped by to speak briefly with Ruth.

She still hadn’t found out Oswald’s address in Oak Cliff*, but she told
him that when the Oswalds moved into an apartment again, as she
expected, she would be perfectly willing to give him that address.

During their conversation Ruth commented that she thought Oswald
was a Trotskyite.She still hadn’t found out Oswald’s address in Oak Cliff*, but she told
him that when the Oswalds moved into an apartment again, as she
expected, she would be perfectly willing to give him that address.

During their conversation Ruth commented that she thought Oswald
was a Trotskyite.

When Hosty asked her if she thought this was a
mental problem, Ruth said that she didn’t understand the mental
processes of a Marxist, but that “this was far different from saying he
was mentally unstable or unable to conduct himself in normal soci-
ety.” Ruth later testified, "I was not at all worried about ideology
contrary to my own or with which I disagreed, and it looked to me
that he was a person of this ideology or philosophy which he calls
Marxism, indeed nearly a religion,” but that she didn’t think him
dangerous because of these beliefs.

While Ruth was speaking with Hosty, Marina slipped out the back
door and memorized the license number of his car.

She had also
overheard and understood a part of their conversation.

Ruth testified
that during that day or the next, while they were doing dishes.

Marina
told her “she felt their address was their business.

..

.

and she made
it plain that this was a matter of privacy for them.

This surprised me.

She had never spoken to me this way before, and I didn’t see that it
made any difference.”
When Oswald returned to Irving on Friday the 8th, he was greeted
V, r.li
Not ember: The Decision ..

195
$
with the unwelcome news of Hosty’s return visit.

When Ruth told him
Hosty had asked if this was a mental problem Lee “gave no reply but
more a scoffing laugh, hardly voiced.” He said, “They are trying to
inhibit my activities.” Ruth replied, “You have your rights to your
views, whether they are popular or not." She was thinking in terms
of his handing out pamphlets or expressing a belief in Fidel Castro.195
$
with the unwelcome news of Hosty’s return visit.

When Ruth told him
Hosty had asked if this was a mental problem Lee “gave no reply but
more a scoffing laugh, hardly voiced.” He said, “They are trying to
inhibit my activities.” Ruth replied, “You have your rights to your
views, whether they are popular or not." She was thinking in terms
of his handing out pamphlets or expressing a belief in Fidel Castro.

But privately she also thought that with his background as a defector
he ought to expect the FBI to be interested in him.

She suggested that
he go see Hosty and tell him whatever he wanted to know.

Of course,
this was exactly what he could not do.

But he said that he had stopped
at the downtown office of the FBI and left a note.

The front-page story that day was again the president's trip to
lias.

Two luncheon sites, one of them the Trade Mart, were under
parades were yet being planned,
ears later,(Hosty’s receptionis^Nanny Lee Fenner, recalled that
wald had come into the FBI office on Commerce Street two or three
before the assassination.

He looked “fidgety" and asked to
speak with Hosty.

Informed that he wasn’t in, Oswald handed her a
business-size envelope with the word “Hosty” written on it and
walked out.

Hosty later admitted that he had destroyed the note inside
after Oswald’s death, on orders from his Dallas superior, J.

Gordon
Shanklin^Shanklin was evidently concerned that the note would
^suiiesTthat the FBI hadn’t kept a careful enough eye on the presi-
dent's assassin.) In 1975 Hosty told the Church committee that the,
unsigned “note"read, roughly:
If you have anything you want to learn about me, come talk to me
directly.

If you don’t cease bothering my wife, I will lake appropriate
action and report this to proper authorities.'
Hosty put the note in his workbox, where it remained until the day
of the assassination.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Gordon
Shanklin^Shanklin was evidently concerned that the note would
^suiiesTthat the FBI hadn’t kept a careful enough eye on the presi-
dent's assassin.) In 1975 Hosty told the Church committee that the,
unsigned “note"read, roughly:
If you have anything you want to learn about me, come talk to me
directly. If you don’t cease bothering my wife, I will lake appropriate
action and report this to proper authorities.'
Hosty put the note in his workbox, where it remained until the day
of the assassination. On Saturday the 9th Oswald borrowed Ruth’s typewriter to com-
pose a letter to the Soviet Embassy in Washington. It was a character-
istic mixture of guile and ingratiation. This is to inform you of recent events since my meetings with comrade
Kostin in the Embassy of the Soviet Union, Mexico City, Mexico. I was unable to remain in Mexico indefinitely because of my Mexican
visa restrictions which was for 15 days only. I could not take a chance
on requesting a new visa unless I used my real name, so I returned to
ft*
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---196...

Oswald's Game
the United States.

I had not planned to contact the Soviet Embassy in Mexico, so they
were unprepared, had I been able to reach the Soviet Embassy in Havana
as planned, the Embassy there would have had time to complete our
business.

Of course the Soviet Embassy was not at fault, they were, as l say
unprepared, the Cuban [consul] was guilty of a gross breach of regula-
tions, I am glad he has since been replaced.

The Federal Bureau of Investigation is not now interested in ray
activities inthc progressive organization "Fair Play for Cuba Commit-
tee,*' of which I was secretary in New Orleans (state Louisiana) since
I no longer reside in that state.

However, the FBI has visited us here
in Dallas, Texas, on November tst.

Agent James F.

Hasty [sic] warned
me that if I engaged in F.P.CC activities in Texas the F.B.I.

will again
take an "interest" in me.

This agent also "suggested" to Marina Nichilayeva that she could
remain i the United States under F.B.I.

"protection," that is, she could
defect from the Soviet Union, of course, I and my wife strongly protested
these tactics by the notorious F.B.I.

Please advise us of the arrival of our Soviet entrance visas as soon as
they come.

.

Also, this is to inform you of the birth, on October 20, 1963 of
daughter, AUDREY MARINA OSWALD in DALLAS TEXAS to my
wife.

Several points should be made.

On his application at the Cuban
Embassy, Silvia Duran had written, “He appeared at the Embassy of
the U.S.S.R.

in this city and requested that his visa be sent to the
Soviet Embassy in Cuba"—thus Oswald’s reference to completing
their business in Havana.

Second, Oswald went out of his way to assure the Russian officials
in Washington that he didn't hold the Soviet Embassy responsible for
his difficulties in Mexico City.

It was as though he was afraid they
might have gotten the “wrong" impression.Second, Oswald went out of his way to assure the Russian officials
in Washington that he didn't hold the Soviet Embassy responsible for
his difficulties in Mexico City.

It was as though he was afraid they
might have gotten the “wrong" impression.

In Mexico he had con-
tacted the Soviet Embassy several times after learning there would be
a four-month delay in getting a visa.

He probably showed his anger
there as he had at the Cuban Embassy.

Thus, he may have had some
fence-mending to do: “They were unprepared," “Of course the Soviet
Embassy was not at fault," and so on.

Consul Azcue had been replaced before Oswald’s in-transit visa was
conditionally approved on October 15—but how did Oswald know
this?

Azcue’s replacement, Alfredo Mirabel, had been in the consul's
office when Oswald had his quarrel with Azcue, and it's quite possible
November The Decision...

197
he picked up the information that Azcue was leaving from Duran or
someone else at that time.

But it’s also conceivable that Oswald
checked back with Duran about his visa after he returned to Dallas
—she said she couldn’t remember if he had ever called her or not—
and learned that Azcue was no longer there.

Although there’s admit-
icdly no evidence of a phone call or other communication, this slim
possibility might explain why he was now renewing his request for
jjoriet visas.

Obtaining them would clear the path to Cuba.

In any
case, Oswald said nothing to Marina about this new request for Soviet
entrance visas.

Perhaps he wanted no arguments from her until the
arrangements were an accomplished fact.

With the FBI pursuing him,
he may have wanted an exit out of the country, if he needed it.

Finally, Oswald had given his own interpretation to what Hosty
told Marina.

Hosty hadn’t suggested that she “defect,"'’ and he hadn’t
“warned" Oswald of anything—Hosty hadn’t, of course, even seen
Oswald on November 1.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Finally, Oswald had given his own interpretation to what Hosty
told Marina. Hosty hadn’t suggested that she “defect,"'’ and he hadn’t
“warned" Oswald of anything—Hosty hadn’t, of course, even seen
Oswald on November 1. But Oswald had found a way to use even the
FBI's renewed interest in him to his advantage. By making it appear
that a Soviet citizen was being harassed, he could perhaps speed up
those long-awaited visas. On the day he began working on this letter, Ruth drove Lee,
Marina, and the children to a shopping center where Oswald could
apply for a learner’s permit to drive a car. But since it was an election
day, the driver's license bureau was closed. Ruth recalled that on the
way home, “Lee was as gay as I have ever seen him He sang, he
joked, he made puns, or he made up songs mutilating the Russian
language, which tickled and pained Marina, both at once."
Oswald stayed over an extra night on that Veteran's Day weekend,
and when he called Marina the following Thursday she suggested he
not come out that week—he may have overstayed the last time, and
besides, Ruth was giving one of her children a birthday party on
Saturday. Oswald agreed. On Saturday morning he went back to the
license bureau alone and filled out an application for a learner’s per-
niii. ^
There was/stilprio indication that Oswald was planning the presi-
dent's assassination. On the same morning, November 16, the Morning
Sews announced that the president would “drive west on Mam Street
at noon next Friday while en route to a luncheon at the Dallas Trade
Mart beside Stemmons Freeway." From this a reader familiar with
the downtown streets might have deduced that the motorcade would
have to pass by the Depository, but the president’s route was not
explicit. Another front-page headline the next day said, “Incident-

--- PAGE BREAK ---198 ...

Oswald's Game
Free Day Urged for JFK Visit.” Dallas leaders were anxious to avoid
any right-wing demonstrations that might embarass the city as it had
been embarrassed by the Adlai Stevenson incident.

That Sunday afternoon, June was playing with Ruth’s phone dial
and Marina said, “Let’s call papa.” Ruth called the rooming house
number and asked for Lee Oswald.

The man who answered told her
there was no Lee Oswald at that address.

Oswald had registered as
O.H.

Lee—a circumstance he had forgotten when he gave Ruth the
phone number during Marina’s last stage of pregnancy.

On Monday,
November 18, Oswald called Marina as he usually did after work.

Marina testified, “I told him that we had telephoned him but he was
unknown at that number.”
Then he said that he had lived there under an assumed name.

He
asked me tq remove the notation of the telephone number in Ruth's
phone book, but I didn't want to do that.

I asked him then, "Why did
you give us a phone number, when we do call we cannot get you by
name?”
He was very angry, and he repeated that I should remove the notation
of the phone number from the phone book.

And, of course, we had a
quarrel.

1 told him that this was another of his foolishness, some more
of his foolishness.

I told Ruth Paine about this.

It was incomprehensible
to my why he was so secretive all the time.

Q.

Did he give you any explanation of why he was using an assumed
name?

A.

He said that he did not want his landledy to know his real name
because she might [have] read in the paper of the fact that he had been
to Russia and that he had been questioned.

Q.

What did you say about that?

A Nothing.

And also that he did not want the FBI to know where
he lived.

Ruth overheard Marina’s side of the argument, and afterward Ma-
rina, who was obviously upset, told her it wasn't the first time she had
felt caught between “two fires.” But she didn't mention to Ruth that
Oswald wanted her to cross out the phone number.And also that he did not want the FBI to know where
he lived.

Ruth overheard Marina’s side of the argument, and afterward Ma-
rina, who was obviously upset, told her it wasn't the first time she had
felt caught between “two fires.” But she didn't mention to Ruth that
Oswald wanted her to cross out the phone number.

Oswald was
clearly afraid that Ruth might give the number to the FBI, which
could then use it to determine where he lived.

That evening President Kennedy gave what was to be his last major
address.

Appearing in Miami, the president spoke on Latin America,
and his remarks on Cuba were similar to the message he wanted Jean
Daniel, who was now in Havana, to deliver to Castro.

q 0*KUM /V*/*.

Uil rj 1M<0
November The Decision ...

199
.

The genuine Cuban Revolution, because it was against the tyranny
and corruption of the past, had the support of many whose aims and
concepts were democratic.

But that hope for freedom and progress was
destroyed.

The goats proclaimed in the Sierra Maestra were betrayed in
Havana.

It is important now to restate what now divides Cuba from my
country and from the other countries of the hemisphere.

It is the fact
that a small band of conspirators has stripped the Cuban people of their
freedom and handed over the independence and sovereignty of the
Cuban nation to forces beyond the hemisphere.

They have made Cuba
a victim of foreign imperialism, an instrument of the policy of others,
a weapon in an effort dictated by external powers to subvert the other
American republics.

This, and this alone, divides us.

As long as this is
true, nothing is possible.

Without it, everything is possible.

.

.

.

Once
Cuban sovereignty has been restored we will extend the hand of friend-
ship and assistance.

.

.

.--- PAGE BREAK ---

. . The speech was written in part by McGeorge Bundy, who knew of
Daniel’s current trip to Havana, and its evident intent was to let
Castro know that the United States could reach an accommodation
with Cuba if Cuba backed away from the Soviet Union and ceased its
interference in other Latin American countries. But the message was
capable of being read another way. On November 19 both Dallas newspapers reported on the presi-
dent’s speech. The afternoon Times Herald said that President
Kennedy had “all but invited the Cuban people... to overthrow Fidel
Castro's Communist regime and promised prompt U.S. aid if they
do.” The headline was ’’Kennedy Virtually Invites Cuban Coup.”
Under its front-page article about the speech, the Morning News gave
a street-by-street layout of the motorcade route, making it clear that
the president would travel down Elm Street past the School Book
Depository. The afternoon paper carried a comparable story on the
motorcade route. Thus, on Tuesday Oswald could have known the
unique vantage point his workplace had given him, and in the same
issue he may have read an article suggesting that the president was
calling for a coup against Fidel Castro. Late that afternoon there was a change in Oswald’s routine—he
didn’t call Marina after work, or on Wednesday. Marina attributed
this change to the quarrel they’d had on Monday, and that seems to
be a reasonable explanation. But there was something else—a small
slip of the mind that suggests he was no longer thinking about eluding
the FBI and had turned his attention to some other matter. On
Monday Oswald had been extremely anxious for his wife to remove

--- PAGE BREAK ---200...

Oswald's Game
his number from Ruth’s phone book.

He was furious with Marina for
refusing to do it.

But after Monday he said no more about the phone
number, and when he next went to Irving on Thursday, he didn’t
remove the number himself, as he might have done.

At the Depository on November 20 a textbook salesman brought
in<£)iew hunting rifle to show Roy Truly and some of the employees
who happened to be in Truly’s office, Lee Oswald among them.

Os-
wald filed this incident away for future use—he would refer to it later
that week.

On the morning of Thursday, November 21, Oswald approached
Wesley Frazier at work and asked him for a ride to Irving that
afternoon.

Frazier readily agreed, but asked him why he was going
home on a Thursday.

Oswald said, “I am going to get some curtain
rods.

You know, put in an apartment.” Later that afternoon Ruth
came home from the grocery store and saw Oswald with Marina and
June on her front lawn—“I was surprised to see him.

...

I had no
advance notice and he had never before come without asking whether
ho could.” As they all went inside, Ruth said to him, ”Our President
is coming to town.” Oswald replied, ”Ah, yes,” and walked on into
the kitchen.

Oswald told his wife he had come home to make up with her.

That
night he watched TV, helped Marina fold diapers, and talked about
getting an apartment in Dallas right away.

Before Marina got up the
next morning, Oswald tucked $170—almost all the money he had—
into a wallet they kept in a drawer and left his wedding ring in an
antique Russian cup on top of the bureau.

When she woke he told her
to buy something for herself and the children, and she wondered why
he was being so kind all of a sudden.

In the garage he picked up the
disassembled rifle he had secretly wrapped in brown paper the night
before.

Then he rode into work with Frazier.In the garage he picked up the
disassembled rifle he had secretly wrapped in brown paper the night
before.

Then he rode into work with Frazier.

After the Depository
workers broke for lunch and most of them went outside to see the
president pass by, he would have the sixth floor to himself.

In Fort Worth early that morning President Kennedy addressed
four thousand people who had assembled in a misting rain at his hotel
parking lot.

Like the crowds in San Antonio and Houston the day
before, they gave him an enthusiastic welcome.

"Where’s Jackie?”
someone shouted, and Kennedy joined in the laughter.

"Mrs.

Kennedy is organizing herself,” he said.

"It takes longer, but, of
course, she looks better than we do when she does it.

We appreciate
your welcome.” During a breakfast speech later on, the president
answered his right-wing critics by pointing to his efforts to improve
November: The Decision ...201
the national defense.

Afterward, at his hotel suite, he looked through
the Dallas Morning News and saw a full-page advertisement that
accused him of selling out to the Communists.

Entitled "Welcome
Mr.

Kennedy” and bordered in black, the ad asked twelve impertinent
questions, among them, "WHY do you say we have built a ‘wall of
freedom’ around Cuba when there is no freedom in Cuba today?

Because of your policy, thousands of Cubans have been imprisoned,
are starving and being persecuted—with thousands already murdered
and thousands more awaiting execution and, in addition, the entire
population of almost 7,000,000 Cubans are living in slavery?” And,
"WHY have you scrapped the Monroe Doctrine in favor of the ’Spirit
of Moscow*?” Referring to the ad he told his wife, "Oh, you know,
we're heading into nut country today.” It reminded him of something
he had realized since he took office.

Despite Secret Service protection,
anyone who was willing to exchange his life for the president’s could
do so.Because of your policy, thousands of Cubans have been imprisoned,
are starving and being persecuted—with thousands already murdered
and thousands more awaiting execution and, in addition, the entire
population of almost 7,000,000 Cubans are living in slavery?” And,
"WHY have you scrapped the Monroe Doctrine in favor of the ’Spirit
of Moscow*?” Referring to the ad he told his wife, "Oh, you know,
we're heading into nut country today.” It reminded him of something
he had realized since he took office.

Despite Secret Service protection,
anyone who was willing to exchange his life for the president’s could
do so.

Now, to his aide Kenneth O’Donnell he said lightly, "Anyone
perched above the crowd with a rifle could do it.” Always fatalistic,
and having a fine sense of irony, Kennedy put himself in the assassin’s
place—he pantomimed the imagined action, extending a forefinger
like a weapon.

At 11:40 that morning, Air Force One brought the presidential party
to Love Field, where Kennedy greeted a crowd of well-wishers.

An
open limousine driven by a Secret Service agent was waiting.

The
president and Mrs.

Kennedy sat in the back, and Governor and Mrs.

Connally took the jump seats in front of them.

With another limou-
sine carrying armed Secret Service agents behind them, the motorcade
formed and left for downtown Dallas.

At 12:30 P.M., Lee Harvey Oswald entered history.

Three shots
from a sixth-floor Depository window hit Governor Connally once
and the president twice.

Oswald fled the building minutes later,
caught a bus, and.

when it got stalled in traffic, got out and took a
cab to his rooming house.

He picked up his revolver and a jacket and
rushed out—on his way, Albert Newman believes, to try to assassinate
Walker, 100.* At approximately 1:15 P.M., he was stopped by Patrol-
man J.D.

Tippit, who had been cruising the area in a squad car.

When
Tippit got out to question him, Oswald shot and killed him.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Tippit, who had been cruising the area in a squad car. When
Tippit got out to question him, Oswald shot and killed him. Within
minutes, the manager of a shoe store a few blocks away heard police
sirens and saw a disheveled young man outside his front window
glancing back over his shoulder. The manager watched as he ducked
into the lobby of a nearby movie theater. PM, /MJMUL ^ j

--- PAGE BREAK ---15..

• The Arrest
R EPORTER Seth Kantor had been waiting at the Trade Mart for the
motorcade to arrive.

Upon learning of the assassination attempt, he
joined the general scramble for transportation to the hospital where
the president had been taken.

Kan tor's first emotion was revulsion
toward Dallas right-wing extremists.

Running toward a station
wagon, he wanted to scream, “God damn you, Dallas.

Smug Dallas.

God damn you."
At that hour AM/LASH was meeting with his case officer in
Europe.

The CIA man referred to President Kennedy’s November (8
speech and told AM/LASH that he could take Kennedy’s remarks
on Cuba as a signal that a coup against Castro woudl receive Ameri-
can support—the CIA man was asking the Cuban official to read
* between the lines of the president’s speech.

He told AM/LASH that
the weapons he had asked for would be provided, and to establish his
credibility he handed him a poison-pen device.

As they were coming
out the door from their meeting, they were told that President
Kennedy had been shot.

Fidel Castro was meeting with Kennedy’s unofficial envoy, Jean
Daniel.

When he received word of the shooting, Castro slumped in
his chair and said, "Es un mala noticia" (This is bad news”).

After
Kennedy's death was confirmed, Castro said, "Everything is changed.

Everything is going to change.

...

I'll tell you one thing: at least
Kennedy was an enemy to whom we had become accustomed.

This
is a serious matter, an extremely serious matter."
Michael Paine was at work.

Someone turned on a radio, and when
he heard the Book Depository mentioned, his heart jumped.

Frank
202...

The Arrest...

203
jC/ystinik asked, "Isn’t that where Lee Oswald works?" Krystinik
thought Paine should call the FBI, but Michael resisted.

He didn’t
want to accuse Oswald unjustly.

Even so, when he went back to his
job, his hands trembled so badly he was unable to assemble a vibration
oieter he'd been working on.He didn’t
want to accuse Oswald unjustly.

Even so, when he went back to his
job, his hands trembled so badly he was unable to assemble a vibration
oieter he'd been working on.

Then an eyewitness who had seen the
assassin in he window came on the radio.

He said that the rifleman
fired "coolly," that he took "his jolly good time," and then drew his
nfle back "just as unconcerned as could be." Paine thought it sounded
like Oswald.

Oswald was arrested at the Texas Theater in Oak Cliff at 1:40 P.M.

After a struggle, an officer took from his hand the Smith 8c Wesson
with which he had shot Patrolman Tippit.

As he was hauled through
the lobby, Oswald was heard to shout, "I protest this police brutality,"
and "I am not resisting arrest." A large crowd of people had gathered
outside the theater, and when they saw the policemen emerge with
Oswald in tow some of them yelled, "Kill the s.o.b." and "Let us have
him." The lawmen hustled him into a patrol car and drove away.

Oswald wasn’t visibly shaken.

When one of the men in the car asked
him if he had killed Tippit because he was afraid of being arrested,
Oswald said he wasn’t afraid of anything, and asked, "Do I look like
1 am scared now?" As they drove into the police department base-
ment, Oswald was asked if he wanted to conceal his face from the
photographers.

"Why should I cover my face?" he asked.

"I haven't
done anything to be ashamed of."
From the written reports and testimony of the police detectives,
FBI agents, and Secret Service agents who questioned Oswald at the
police station, we have the following account.

His chief interrogator was homicide captain Will Fritz.

Fritz re-
called that Oswald would talk to him readily "until I asked him a
question that meant something, that would produce evidence," and
then Oswald would immediately tell him he wouldn't answer.

Fritz
thought he seemed to anticipate what he was going to ask.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fritz re-
called that Oswald would talk to him readily "until I asked him a
question that meant something, that would produce evidence," and
then Oswald would immediately tell him he wouldn't answer. Fritz
thought he seemed to anticipate what he was going to ask. Others who
were there also got the impression that Oswald was quick with his
answers and that he appeared to have planned what he was going to
say. The one thing Oswald discussed willingly was his political beliefs
—he said he was a Marxist and gave his views on civil rights. He said
he supported the Cuban revolution. On Friday afternoon Fritz apprised Oswald of his rights—his im-
mediate response was to say he didn't need a lawyer. Fritz had just
begun asking some general questions about his background when FBI
agents Hosty and James Bookhout came in. When Hosty introduced
jrvyiWvs

--- PAGE BREAK ---204...

Oswald's Game
himself Oswald reacted angrily and said, “Oh, so you are Hosty.

I’Ve
heard about you.” He accused Hosty of “accosting” his wife and
called the FBI a gestapo.

According to one report he added, “I am
going to fix you FBI.” During this scene Hosty became 100% certain
that the unsigned note in his workbox came from Oswald.

Unable to
calm him down, Hosty took a seat in the comer with Bookhout and
let Fritz continue with his interrogation.

In the past, when Oswald was questioned by agents Fain and Qui*.

ley and Lieutenant Martello, he had told many calculated lies.

Some
of his responses now showed the same calculation.

When Fritz asked
Oswald if he owned a rifle, he replied that he had seen his superviser
Mr.

Truly, showing a rifle to some other people in his office on
November 20, but he denied owning a rifle himself.

He maintained
that he had been eating his lunch when the motorcade passed by and
that afterward he assumed there would be no more work that day, so
he went home and decided to go to a movie.

When he was asked why
he took his pistol with him, he said it was because ”he felt like it.H
He claimed that he had bought the pistol from a dealer in Fort Worth.

At one point, when Hosty spoke up and asked him if he had ever been
to Mexico City, Oswald again displayed anger.

According to Fritz, he
“beat on the desk and went into a kind of tantrum.” He said he had
never been in Mexico City.

The interview was interrupted several
times for identification lineups in which witnesses identified Oswald
as the man they had seen shooting Tippit or running away from the
scene.

Sometime that day FBI agent Manning C.

Clements asked Oswald
for some routine background information, including his previous resi-
dences.

In his reply Oswald mentioned the addresses of every place
he had lived since he returned from Russia—except the Neely Street
apartment in Dallas, where Marina had taken pictures of him holding
a rifle in the backyard.Clements asked Oswald
for some routine background information, including his previous resi-
dences.

In his reply Oswald mentioned the addresses of every place
he had lived since he returned from Russia—except the Neely Street
apartment in Dallas, where Marina had taken pictures of him holding
a rifle in the backyard.

Instead, he claimed that he had lived on
Elsbeth Street for about seven months, that is, the entire time he had
been in Dallas in early 1963.

At 7:10 P.M.

Oswald was arraigned for Tippit's murder.

Around
midnight he was taken downstairs for an interview with the press
corps, which had been clamoring to see him.

There Oswald said of his
arraignment, “I protested at that time that I was not allowed legal
representation during that very short and sweet hearing.

I really don’t
know what the situation is about.

Nobody has told me anything
except that I am accused of, of murdering a policeman.

I know
nothing more than that and I do request someone to come forward
10 give me legal assistance.” A reporter asked, “did you kill the"
president?” He answered, "No.

I have not been charged with that.

In
fact nobody has said that to me yet.

The first thing I heard about it
was when the newspaper reporters in the hall asked me that question.”
Among the observers crammed into the room was Jack Ruby, the
owner of a nightclub featuring stripshows.

A well-known character in
Dallas, a habitual gladhander and publicity-seeker, Ruby was a police
buff who knew several dozen members of the local force.

He also had
an old arrest record for disturbing the peace, carrying a concealed
weapon, and assault, and he knew several individuals in the Mafia,
perhaps because of the nature of his business, Ruby often carried large
sums of money and a pistol.

Despite his rough background, acquaint-
ances had noticed that Ruby, like many other people, seemed greatly
affected by the president’s murder.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He also had
an old arrest record for disturbing the peace, carrying a concealed
weapon, and assault, and he knew several individuals in the Mafia,
perhaps because of the nature of his business, Ruby often carried large
sums of money and a pistol. Despite his rough background, acquaint-
ances had noticed that Ruby, like many other people, seemed greatly
affected by the president’s murder. At approximately 10 o'clock on Saturday rooming the interrogation
resumed. Oswald denied that he had told Wesley Frazier he was going
to Irving to pick up curtain rods. He said the package he brought to
work contained his lunch. He said he had gone to Irving on Thursday
because Mrs. Paine was planning to give a party for the children that
weekend and he didn’t want to be there then. In fact, the party had
been held the weekend before, but if Ruth were questioned about it,
he could say he had simply misunderstood. As so often happened,
Oswald was twisting the truth to fit his own purposes—it was almost
as though he saw reality itself as nothing more than raw material to
be shaped and used. Oswald said that when the motorcade passed the
building he had been in the second-floor lunchroom with some of his
co-workers, one of them a Negro named Junior. In fact. Junior Jar-
man didn’t see Oswald in the lunchroom that day. Jarman finished
eating before noon and went up to the fifth floor to watch the motor-
cade with Harold Norman and Bonnie Ray Williams. They heard the
shots going off over their heads. Norman was at the window directly
beneath the sniper and could hear the ejected shells hitting the floor
above him. According to a Secret Service report, Oswald refused to answer any
more questions concerning the pistol or rifle until he had seen a
lawyer. ... He stated that he wanted to contact a Mr. Abt, a New York lawyer
whom he did not know but who had defended the Smith Act “victims"
in 1949 or 1950 in connection with a conspiracy against the Government;tated that he wanted to contact a Mr. Abt, a New York lawyer
whom he did not know but who had defended the Smith Act “victims"
in 1949 or 1950 in connection with a conspiracy against the Government;

--- PAGE BREAK ---206...

Oswald’s Gome
that Abt would understand what this case was all about and that he
would give him an excellent defense.

.

.

.

Upon questioning by Captain Fritz, he said, "I have no views on the
President.” “My wife and I like the President’s family.

They are interest-
ing people.

I have my own views on the President’s national policy.

I
have a right to express my views but because of the charges I do not
think 1 should comment further.”
Oswald was returned to his cell before noon.

Seth Kantor had joined the horde of reporters inside the jail, and
at one point he saw the prisoner being led through the hall.

Reporters
were shouting, “Why did you kill the President?” One asked if he
blamed the wounded Governor Connally, a former secretary of the
navy, for his dishonorable discharge, and Oswald shouted back over
his shoulder, “I don’t know what kind of newspaper reports you are
getting but these are not true.” Kantor’s impression of Oswald was
visceral: “He was defiant.

He looked alert at all times.

In his profile,
he was sharp-featured.

Full-faced, he had a cunning look.” He re-
minded Kantor of the demonstrators who had disrupted a House
Un-American Activities Committee hearing in September.

The
demonstrators had seemed to time their actions to get the best camera
angles when the police dragged them out of the room.

“This was Lee
Harvey Oswald,” Kantor wrote in his notes.

“He was living the part
of a martyr.” Oswald also told the reporters, “I’m just a patsy.”
On November 23 Aline Mosby picked up a newspaper and saw a
photograph of the young defector she had interviewed in 1959.

The
picture, taken after his arrest, had a caption that said he was “glaring
at photographers defiantly." Looking at his face, Mosby disagreed.

She thought Lee Oswald was probably enjoying every minute of it.The
picture, taken after his arrest, had a caption that said he was “glaring
at photographers defiantly." Looking at his face, Mosby disagreed.

She thought Lee Oswald was probably enjoying every minute of it.

That morning the police had returned to Ruth’s house armed with
a warrant for a more thorough search than they had conducted the
day before, and they found copies of the photographs showing Oswald
holding a rifle, and one negative.

In the meantime Michael Paine had
been questioned about Oswald's previous residences and mentioned
the Neely Street apartment.

After lunch Fritz asked Oswald about the
Neely address and found that he was “very evasive about this loca-
tion.”
Afterward Oswald was allowed to speak with his wife.

Marina had
been apprehensive ever since she first heard from Ruth that the shoot-
ing took place near the Depository.

She hadn’t known the motorcade
would pass by her husband’s place of work.

Even if she had, she
The Arteel...

207
o/mildn’t have suspected he would kill the president—Walker, yes,
I.

lot Kennedy.

When ihe police came on Friday she showed them
where Oswald kept his rifle.

The blanket was still there, neatly tied,
but when a policeman picked it up the ends fell limp and she turned
ashen realizing the rifle was gone.

That night she had round the two
nictures of her husband in June’s baby book.

Marguerite had by that
fime arrived at the Paine house, having heard that her son had been
arrested.

Marina showed her one of the photographs of Lee brandish-
ing a rifle, and Marguerite groaned and shook her head to indicate
rhat she shouldn’t tell anyone.

b Before she went to see Lee that afternoon Manna folded the pic-
tures and stuffed them inside her shoe.

She wanted to ask him what
she should do with them.

Separated by a glass partition they spoke
over a pair of telephones.

Thinking of the pictures, she asked him,
••[Clan we talk about anything we like?

Is anybody listening in?

••Oh of course," he said.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Is anybody listening in? ••Oh of course," he said. “We can speak about absolutely anything
at all." And she knew from his tone that he was warning her not to
say anything significant. . „ . He assured her everything would work out fine, but she didn t
believe him. He told her she had friends who would help her. and if
necessary she could get help from the Red Cross Manna could tell
that he was guilty. If he hadn’t been, she thought, he would have been
loudly protesting his arrest, and besides, she sensed that he was saying
eoodbye to her with his eyes. McMillan has wntten that Manna
didn’t know if he would confess or. nof. he might claim that his act
had been justified, or he might insist that he was innocent. Either way,
eh would take the opportunity to proclaim his ideas. Concerning their conversation, Marina testified, He spoke of some
friends who supposedly would help him. I don’t know who he had in
mind. That he had written to someone in New York before that. I was
so upset that of course I didn’t understand anything of that.... I told
him that the police had been there and that a search had been con-
ducted, that they had asked me whether we had a nfle. and I had
answered yes. And he said that if there would be a trial, and that if
I am questioned it would be my right to answer or to refuse to
Oswald was perhaps referring to the lawyer in New York, John
Abt, who had represented Gus Hall and Ben Davis. Oswald hadn t
written to him, but he had written a letter to the Hall-Davis defense
committee in 1962. Abt, an attorney for the Communist party, had
never heard of him and would undoubtedly have been horrified to be

--- PAGE BREAK ---2M ...

Oswald's Game
asked to take this case.

The Left certainly had no intention of rallying
to Oswald’s cause, even if he claimed be was innocent.

Since John
Abt s name had appeared several times in The Worker during the
months Oswald was planning his attack on Walker, it’s probable that
thus was the lawyer he had intended to ask for if he had been arrested
after shooting Walker.

In any event, it’s clear that Oswald was now
planning ahead for his trial, and it’s likely he had already given it
considerable thought.

Evidently he intended to charge the FBI with
harassment and say he'd been framed because of his political beliefs.

Even from his jail cell, he still expected to manipulate events.

He
would try to turn his trial into a political cause celebre like the
Rosenberg case, thus making propaganda and ensuring his place in
leftist history.

If this was Oswald’s plan, it was typical of his thinking—grandiose,
perverse, manipulative, unrealistic.

Sometime that afternoon Robert Oswald visited his brother and
found him “completely relaxed"—he talked “matter-of-factly.

with-
out any sign of tension or strain." As soon as they picked up the
telephones in the visiting room, Oswald said, 'This is taped [sic]."
(When Marguerite spoke with Robert alone at the police station, her
first words were, “This room is bugged.

Be careful what you say.”)
As with the police, Oswald seemed willing to discuss anything but the
assassination.

Robert later wrote that he asked, "Lee, what the Sam
Hill is going on?”
"I don’t know," he said.

..

^7
Cj°n * know*?

Look, they've got your pistol, they've got your
nfle, they ve got you charged with shooting the President and a police
officer.

And you tell me you don’t know.

Now, I want to know just
what’s going on." J
He stiffened and straightened up, and his facial expression was sud-
denly very tight
.

'!!juit don’t know what they’re talking about," he said, firmly and
deliberately.Now, I want to know just
what’s going on." J
He stiffened and straightened up, and his facial expression was sud-
denly very tight
.

'!!juit don’t know what they’re talking about," he said, firmly and
deliberately.

Don’t believe all this so-caJIed evidence.”
Robert stared into his eyes, trying to find the truth, and Oswald said
quietly, Brother, you won’t find anything there.”
Although Oswald was uncommunicative, he made two statements
that suggest he saw the assassination as an act similar to
LIT?

defept,on and the attack on General Walker.

When Robert
asked him what he thought was going to happen to Marina and his
The Arrest...

209
children, he said, "My friends will take care of them,” and indicated
that he meant the Paines.

He was depending on other people to look
after his family, just as he had done when he tried to kill Walker.

Shortly before Robert left, Oswald told him not to get invovled in his
case, or he might get in trouble with his boss and lose his job.

He had
said the same thing in Moscow.

He told Aline Mosby, "I don’t want
to involve my family in this," and “My brother might lose his job
because of this."
After talking with his brother, Oswald telephoned Ruth and asked
her to call John Abt for him, giving her two numbers he had gotten
from information.

He had already tired to reach the attorney himself.

He made no reference to the reason he was in jail, and Ruth was
appalled and irritated that he sounded so apart from the situation.

He
sounded to her “almost as if nothing out of the ordinary had hap-
pened." Later she tried to reach Abt.

but he was out of town.

Meanwhile the president of the Dallas Bar Association, H.

Louis
Nichols, had been getting long-distance calls from other attorneys
who had seen Oswald’s press conference and were afraid his legal
rights weren't being protected.

Nichols decided to offer Oswald his
assistance.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Louis
Nichols, had been getting long-distance calls from other attorneys
who had seen Oswald’s press conference and were afraid his legal
rights weren't being protected. Nichols decided to offer Oswald his
assistance. When he saw Oswald in his cell that afternoon, the pris-
oner seemed calm and appeared to know “pretty much what his rights
were." Oswald told him he wanted Abt or a member of the American
Civil Liberties Union. If he couldn't get either one, Oswald said, and
if he could find a lawyer in Dallas who "believes as I believe, and
believes in my innocence—as much as he can, I might let him repre-
sent me." Oswald told Nichols he didn't think he would need his
assistance but that he "might come back next week." Nichols left,
having satisfied himself "that the man appeared to know what he was
doing. He did not appear to be irrational."
By this time the police lab had enlarged one of the backyard photo-
graphs and Fritz had Oswald brougt in at six o’clock to confront him
with this evidence. Oswald claimed that the photographs were fakes
and that he had never seen them before. He said he knew all about
photography and that the small picture was a reduced copy of the
large one. Fritz reported, "He further stated that since he had been
photographed here at the City Hall and that people had been taking
his picture while being transferred from my office to the jail door that
someone had been able to get a picture of his face and with that, they
had made this picture. He told me that he understood photography
real well, and that in time, he would be able to show that it was not
his picture, and that it had been made by someone else. At this time

--- PAGE BREAK ---210...

Oswald’s Game
r>.

t- ■ >**•
he said that he did not want to answer any more questions and he was
returned to the jail about 7:15 P.M.”
This was probably the line Oswald intended to pursue had the
backyard photographs been found after he shot Walker.

For years to
come there would be a controversy about the authenticity of these
pictures.

The House Assassinations Committee had a panel of photo-
graphic specialists examine the recovered photos and negative.

Using
sophisticated analytical techniques, the panel could find no evidence
of fakery.

In addition, the panel used similar techniques to uncover
a unique mark of wear and tear on the rifle in the photos that corre-
sponded to a mark on the weapon found in the Depository, and
concluded that the two weapons were identical.

On Sunday morning the accused assassin was questioned for the
last time by Fritz, two Secret Service men, and a Dallas postal inspec-
tor, Harry Holmes.

During this interview Oswald denied knowing
anyone named A.J.

Hidell, the name on an I.D.

card in his wallet and
on his post office box application, and denied using the name as an
alias.

He began talking politics again, and said that Cuba should have
full diplomatic relations with the United States.

Asked if he was a
Communist.

Oswald said, “No, 1 am a Marxist but 1 am not a Marxist
Leninist." When Fritz asked him the difference, Oswald said it would
take too long to explain it to him.

When a Secret Service inspector
asked him if he thought the assassination would have any effect on the
Cuban situation, Oswald at first responded with a question.

“1 am
filed on for the President’s murder, is that right?When a Secret Service inspector
asked him if he thought the assassination would have any effect on the
Cuban situation, Oswald at first responded with a question.

“1 am
filed on for the President’s murder, is that right?

Under the circum-
stances, I don’t believe that it would be proper [to respond].” Never-
theless, he went on to say that he thought there would probably be
* no change in America’s attitude toward Cuba with Vice-President
Johnson becoming president “because they both belonged to the same
political party and the one would follow pretty generally the policies
of the other.”
Detective J.R.

Lcavelle was also present that morning.

Oswald gave
him the impression “of being a man with a lot better education than
his formal education indicated....

for instance the long elaboration
that he went into on the Cuba deal would tell—indicate that he had
a fairly better than high school education that he was reported to have
had.” Leavelle told the Commission the prisoner seemed very much
in control of himself at all times and added, “In fact, he struck me
as a man who enjoyed the situation immensely and was enjoying the
publicity and everything [that] was coming his way.”
Inspector Holmes later reported:
The Arrest ...211
Oswald at no time appeared confused or in doubt as to whether or not
to answer a question.

On the contrary, he was quite alert and showed
no hesitancy in answering those questions he wanted to answer, and was
quite skillful in parrying those questions which he did not want to
answer.

I got the impression he had disciplined his mind and reflexes to
a state where I personally doubted if he would ever have confessed.On the contrary, he was quite alert and showed
no hesitancy in answering those questions he wanted to answer, and was
quite skillful in parrying those questions which he did not want to
answer.

I got the impression he had disciplined his mind and reflexes to
a state where I personally doubted if he would ever have confessed.

He
denied, emphatically, having taken part in or having had any knowledge
of the shooting of the policeman Tippit or of the President, staling tht
so far as he is concerned Ihe reason he was in custody was because he
“popped a policeman in the nose in a theater on Jefferson Avenue
Priscilla Johnson also believed he would never have confessed.

Soon
after the assassination she wrote that if there was one thing that stood
out in the conversation she had had with him in Moscow, “it was his
truly compelling need ...

to think of himself as extraordinary.

A
refusal to confess, expressed in stoic and triumphant silence, would
have fitted this need.

In some twisted way.

it might also have enabled
him to identify with other ‘unjustly
1 persecuted victims, such as Sacco
and Vanzetti and the Rosenbergs.”
Oswald was scheduled to be transferred to the county jail at ten
o’clock.

The questioning ran longer than expected, past eleven, but
yielded nothing further.

Oswald chose a black sweater from among
those offered to him from his clothes and put it on over his T-shirt.

He was now dressed entirely in black, as he had been in the nfleman
photographs Marina had taken.

To the end, he was playing out the
role he had created for himself and had been rehearsing, in one way
or another, for most of his life.

Then he was handcuffed to Leavelle s
left wrist and walked to the elevator.

Outside the building a large
crowd waited, and the basement was packed with police and report-
ers At 11:17 Jack Ruby was at the Western Union office across the
street sending a money order to one of his strippers.

He walked out
and went to the police station.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Outside the building a large
crowd waited, and the basement was packed with police and report-
ers At 11:17 Jack Ruby was at the Western Union office across the
street sending a money order to one of his strippers. He walked out
and went to the police station. Less than four minutes later, as televi-
sion cameras followed Oswald being brought out toward a wwting
car Ruby rushed forward and shot him once in the abdomen. Ruby
was immediately wrestled lo the floor by several policemen, to whom
he said. “You all know me. I’m Jack Ruby.” When the crowd outside
heard what had happened, it let out a cheer. Police detective Billy Combest had the presence of mind to try to
get a statement from Oswald before he died. The author of Conspiracy. Anthony Summers, interviewed Combest in 1978. Combest told him,
•*] got right down on the floor with him, just literally on my hands
and knees. And I asked him if he would like to make any confession.

--- PAGE BREAK ---viewed Combest in 1978. Combest told him,
•*] got right down on the floor with him, just literally on my hands
and knees. And I asked him if he would like to make any confession.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

212... OcwaJd’s Game
any statement in connection with the assassination of the President.
.. Several times he responded to me by shaking his head in a definite
manner.... It wasn’t from the pain or anything—he had just decided
he wasn’t going to correspond with me. he wasn't going to say any-
thing/'
In a footnote Summers added something he had left out of the text.
Combest had told him that Oswald accompanied his headshaking
with “a definite clenched-fist salute.” Summers then argued, "This
cannot be taken as good evidence of a political gesture, given Oswald’s
condition at that moment. It may indeed have been an expression of
pain.” He added that Combest had said nothing about the clenched-
fist salute in his statements to the Warren Commission. Two com-
ments can be made on Summers’ argument. When Combest testified
m 1964 he probably didn’t know what a clenched-fist salute was.
Although the gesture had been a socialist salute in Spain in the 1930s,
it didn’t become a widely recognized symbol of political militancy in
this country until the late 1960s. It was probably then that Combest
reinterpreted Oswald's gesture as a political statement. Second, a
news photograph taken of Oswald after his arrest shows him raising
one manacled arm in what appears to be a clenched-fist salute. /
r In «ny event, a raised fist was Oswald’s last comment.
'
\Sr>
16.. • Reactions
1 really look with commiseration over the great body of my
fellow citizens who, reading newspapers, live and die in the
belief that they have known something of what has been pass-
ing in the world in their time.
—Harry Truman
AL STUNNED nation groped for a meaning. Trying to assimilate the
president’s death into the only context they knew, many saw it as a
continuation of the violent opposition to the civil rights movement in
* the South—the murder of Medgar Evans, the bombing of the Bir-
mingham church. Editorial writers and television commentators im-
mediately blamed the anti-Kennedy environment in Dallas or Ameri-
can violence in general.
As more information came out, the possibility that Oswald had a
political motive became ever more remote. When reporters learned
that Oswald had once tried to join Carlos Bringuier’s organization in
New Orleans, this was taken as an indication that he was politically
erratic. In December the discovery that Oswald had tried to murder
Walker—whose political philosophy was radically different from
Kennedy’s—produced a similar impression.
An accepted picture of Oswald gradually emerged. He was seen as
a confused drifter who acted out of personal frustration—he couldn’t
hold a job and his wife didn’t want to live with him. The assassination
had no political significance, except as a timely lesson about right-
wing extremism and its consequences.
Fidel Castro's first reaction was given in a New York Times head-
...213he assassination
had no political significance, except as a timely lesson about right-
wing extremism and its consequences.
Fidel Castro's first reaction was given in a New York Times head-
...213

--- PAGE BREAK ---214..

• Oswald’s Game
line: “Castro Mourns ‘Hostile’ Leader: Deplores Slaying But Says
Kennedy Courted War.” Later, however, after details of Oswald’s
background were revealed, Castro began to suspect "a Machiavellian
plan against Cuba.” In a speech in late November he declared:
Oswald never had contacts with us—we have never heard of him.

.

We have searched through ail our files and this man is not listed
as president of any committee.

Nowhere is there any mention of any Fair
Play for Cuba Committee in Dallas or New Orleans Oswald is an
individual expressly fabricated to begin an anti-Communist campaign to
liquidate the President because of his policy.

This plan to call Oswald
a Castro Communist is designed to pressure the new Administration.

All people, including the U.S.

people, should demand that what is
behind the assassination be clarified.

Those who love peace and the
United States intellectuals should understand the gravity of this cam-
paign.

Apparently Castro sincerely believed this.

He was afraid a public
clamor about Oswald’s politics might lead to war.

American govern-
ment officials were also aware of this danger, and they too were
worried.

There was a general fear among cabinet members that the
American people might demand retribution from Russia or Cuba or
both.

When the new president, Lyndon Johnson, asked Chief Justice
Earl Warren to head up the investigation, he stressed that rumors
about Oswald’s foreign connections had created a grave international
situation.

He made Warren understand that it was his duty to head
up a responsible investigation to dispel these rumors, and Warren
reluctantly accepted the assignment.

When the Warren Commission began taking testimony a few
months later, some of the witnesses who knew Oswald were asked
what they thought his motive might have been.

None of these wit-
nesses thought Oswald acted because he was irrational or because he
had personal problems.When the Warren Commission began taking testimony a few
months later, some of the witnesses who knew Oswald were asked
what they thought his motive might have been.

None of these wit-
nesses thought Oswald acted because he was irrational or because he
had personal problems.

Several said they believed his motive was
somehow political.

Their opinions are remarkable in that they ran
counter to the contemporary news media interpretation and popular
belief.

Michael Paine had initially doubted that Oswald was guilty because
he "didn't see how this could fit, how this could help his cause, and
I didn’t think he was irrational.” Paine came to believe that the
president was a target of opportunity: "I thought it was a spur of the
moment idea that came into his head when he realized that he would
have the opportunity with sort of a duck blind there, an opportunity
Reactions...

215
to change the course of history, even though he couldn’t predict from
that action what course history would take, that in my opinon would
not have deterred him from doing it”
John Hall, Elena Hall’s husband, said he wasn’t surprised when he
heard that Oswald had been arrested because he thought Oswald was
the ’‘kind of guy that would do something like that.” Not that he
believed Oswald was insane—“He was pretty sharp.

If he had the
right training in the right direction, he could have done something
with his life.” Hall thought the assassination was a violent expression
of Oswald’s resentment not only of the American government but of
**our whole way of life.” Max Clark, the Fort Worth attorney, also
said he didn’t think Oswald was mentally unstable.

But he thought
Oswald was capable of assassinating Kennedy in order ”to go down
in history, because he seemed to think he was destined to go down in
history some way or another.”
Lee’s cousin Marilyn disagreed with the news media explanations,
as well.If he had the
right training in the right direction, he could have done something
with his life.” Hall thought the assassination was a violent expression
of Oswald’s resentment not only of the American government but of
**our whole way of life.” Max Clark, the Fort Worth attorney, also
said he didn’t think Oswald was mentally unstable.

But he thought
Oswald was capable of assassinating Kennedy in order ”to go down
in history, because he seemed to think he was destined to go down in
history some way or another.”
Lee’s cousin Marilyn disagreed with the news media explanations,
as well.

She didn’t think he acted because he was “jealous of Kennedy
and all that Kennedy stood for,” or because he wanted to “be some-
body.” In her view, Lee Oswald already thought he was somebody
and always seemed perfectly satisfied with the way he was.

She
thought his motive might have been “to discredit America in the eyes
of the world”—or “perhaps because he was turned down by Russia
and then turned down by Fidel, that perhaps he wanted to show them
that he could commit such a great act without the help of any others.”
Marina gave several contradictory opinions about her husband’s
motive, but at one point she testified that her first impression had been
that he wanted “by any means—good or bad, to get into history.”
Then she added, “But now that I have heard a part of the translation
of some of the documents, I think that there was some political
foundation to it, a foundation of which I am unaware.”
Police Captain Fritz seems to have come closer to the truth than
anyone else.

He testified: “I got the impression he was doing it because
of his feeling about the Castro revolution, and I think that...

he had
a lot of feeling about that revolution.

I think that was the reason.

I
noticed another thing.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I think that was the reason. I
noticed another thing. I noticed a little before when Walker was shot
[sic], he had come out with some statements about Castro and about
Cuba and a lot of things and if you will remember the President had
• some stories a few weeks before his death about Cuba and about
Castro . . . and I wondered if that didn't have some bearing. I have
no way of knowing that other than just watching him and talking to
him.” Asked if Oswald acted afraid, Fritz said, “No, sir; I don’t

--- PAGE BREAK ---216...

Oswald’s Game
believe he was afraid at all.

1 think he was a person who had his mind
made up what to do and I think he was like a person just dedicated
to a cause.

And I think he was above average for intelligence.

1 know
a lot of people call him a nut all the time but he didn’t talk like a nut.

He knew exactly when to quit talking.”
Oswald’s death left Marina in a predicament.

The FBI and Secret
Service now turned to her for the answers to their questions, and
although Marina had no foreknowledge of the assassination, she did
have knowledge of some of Oswald’s past activities that she was afraid
to admit.

On November 27, when FBI and Secret Service agents
confronted her with the backyard photographs showing Oswald with
his rifle, she admitted taking them, but said nothing about his attack
on Walker.

Instead, she said that before the assassination “she had
never bad any inkling that he would be so violent to anybody”—she
must have realized that she would be blamed for not going to the
police after the Walker shooting.

At the end of the interview she
volunteered the information that when Oswald came to Irving on
Thursday he told her he wouldn’t be coming back that weekend
because “he had something very important to do." Asked about this
statement a few weeks later, Marina said she couldn’t remember, and
the matter was dropped.

A Secret Service report of November 28 quotes her as saying that
at “one time she became so exasperated with Lee Oswald she asked
him ‘What are you trying to do, start another revolution?’ ” Inter-
viewed again the next day, Marina said that when she left New
Orleans with Ruth no arrangement had been made for Oswald to go
to Mexico City.

The interviewer noted, “Inasmuch as Mexico City
had not been mentioned, she was.

asked why she had said no arrange-
ments had been made.

.

.

..

.

She replied she had been looking at
television the past few days and had seen or heard that Oswald had
been in Mexico City." Later she admitted she had known about his
visits to the Cuban and Russian embassies.

And yet, despite her evasions, it does appear that Marina was trying
to convey the truth, but in such a way that she cold avoid getting into
any trouble.

On November 30, when Oswald’s attack on Walker still
hadn’t been discovered, she told the FBI that Oswald had once told
her “Hitler needed killing,” since by killing Hitler others could have
been saved.

But Marina didn’t mention the shooting incident that had
inspired that remark until she had to—after the note Oswald had left
her was discovered by the Secret Service on December 2, tucked inside
Reactions...

217
her Russian “Book of Useful Advice." She then admitted that he had
fnYd her Walker was the leader of the fascist organization in^Dallas
l&Twas t0 remove him." She explained that she had saved
the note so that she could threaten to take it to the police if Oswald
ever spoke of doing such a thing again.

.

.

/[fter she appeared before the Warren Commission in February, the
Commission lawyers weren't satisfied with her testimony W« ey 1
Liebeler thought she might have been approximating the truth in
older to tell the Commission what she believed it wanted to hear.

On
the other hand, the Commission seemed more ready to hear some
parts of her testimony than others.

It preferred to believe, for instance,
ihat Oswald became disillusioned with Cuba.

In 1978 Marina explained the inconsistencies in her testimony when
she appeared before the House Assassinations Committee:
At the beginning, if it is possible to understand ...

1 am just a human
being and 1 did try to protect Leo—that was my natural instinct that
nblfowed.

Some things 1 did not want to talk about because I tried to
protect Lee.

So they can hold this against me.

there is nothing I can do
‘Thad 10 protect myself, too.--- PAGE BREAK ---

So they can hold this against me. there is nothing I can do
‘Thad 10 protect myself, too. 1 didn't have any home to turn back to. I was not eligible or qualified to five right here so I really was trying 10
,»ve my skin, to put it bluntly, but it was not for the reasons that l was
protecting somebody, that I was part of any crime, that is not so. Thai
was just a very human mistake that you make but it wasinot maybe
legally you call this perjury. I don't know. But it was not because was
afraid that 1 might betray some secrets that 1 knew in °rde[ '°J*
punished for ... 1 was not aware of the crime that he was planning and
I am sorry that all this happened like the rest of us suffer. So I don t
think I can add any more. It was within this context that Marina told the Commission a story
that led to one of the earliest and most often repeated theories about
Dallas—that on the night before the assassination Oswald begged his
wife to live with him and she refused. O Did your husband give any reason for coining home on Thursday? A. He said that he was lonely because he hadn't come the preceding
weekend, and he wanted to make his peace with me. O. Did you say anything to him then? A. He tried to talk to roe but I would not answer him, and he was
very upset.

--- PAGE BREAK ---218...

Oswald's Game
Q.

Were you upset with him?

A.

I was angry, of course.

He was not angrv—he was upset.

I was
angry.

He tried very hard to please me.

He spent quite a bit of time
putting away diapers and played with the children on the street.

7* „ow did you indicate to him that you were angry with him?

A.

By not talking to him.

Q.

And how did he show that he was upset?

A.

He was upset over the fact that I would not answer him.

He tried
A ^ * cclnv
lucrM*ion wilh roc several times, but I would not answer.

And he said that he didn’t want me to be angry at him because this
upsets mm.

On that day, he suggested that we rent an apartment in Dallas.

He
said that he was tired of living alone and perhaps the reason for my being
so angry was the fact that we were not living together.

That if I want
to he would rent an apartment in Dallas tomorrow—that he didn't want
DLlMrCmaU1 W*th RUth tny ,<>n8Cr’ bUl WantCd mc t0 ,ivc wilh him in
• He repeated this not once but several times, but I refused.

And he said
that once again I was preferring ray friends to him, and that 1 didn’t need
T3?' '.A^d 1 told to® to buy me a washing machine, because two
children it became too difficult to wash by hand.

Q.

What did he say to that?

A.

He said he would buy me a washing machine.

Q.

What did you say to that?

«•
Ruth Paine, who saw (hem together that night, saw nothing of this
She thought they seemed "cordial.” “friendly,” and "warm"—"like
a<v°Ur!f m“*‘,lng UP after a *maU *Pat ” also testified that shortly
r*'r.?swaid ?

ar,rjest' Marina let her know she was bewildered and
hurt that he should do such a thing when just the night before he had
talked of their getting an apartment soon.

Marina later admitted to McMillan that she hod never asked her
husband to buy her a washing machine, and that it was Lee who had
brought that subject up on November «.ar,rjest' Marina let her know she was bewildered and
hurt that he should do such a thing when just the night before he had
talked of their getting an apartment soon.

Marina later admitted to McMillan that she hod never asked her
husband to buy her a washing machine, and that it was Lee who had
brought that subject up on November «.

McMillan concluded, "Lee
and Manna did not fight that evening about a washing machine "
Nor, apparently, did they fight about anything else.

When Marina
appeared before the Assassinations Committee and was questioned
for perhaps the twentieth time about the events of November 21, she
showed her impatience.

She was asked what her husband said to her
when he arrived.

“Did be say hello?" someone asked, and she replied
Isn t is usually people say hello when they see each other?

Probably."
Reactions...

219
But the way she eventually described that evening was quite different
from the story she had told in 1964:
He was more in [a] peaceful mood .

.

.

and was willing to listen.

Well, like, for example, if maybe before I would say I would like for
us to be together, and he woudl tell me to, oh.

just stop dreaming, or
just cut me off, or not listen at all, but now at least he was listening at
what I had to say.

.

.

.

[W]e were looking forward and talking about him renting [an] apart-
ment for us ...

it was a very big imposition to live with Mrs.

Paine, and
I thought we ..

.

should live as a family.

...

In the earlier version Oswald had begged her to live with him and
she had refused to listen; now, it was Marina who was repeating her
request that they be together, and Oswald for the first time seemed
willing to hear her out.

No wonder, then, that she was bewildered and
hurt when he was arrested for the president’s assassination th$ follow-
ing day.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the earlier version Oswald had begged her to live with him and
she had refused to listen; now, it was Marina who was repeating her
request that they be together, and Oswald for the first time seemed
willing to hear her out. No wonder, then, that she was bewildered and
hurt when he was arrested for the president’s assassination th$ follow-
ing day. Oswald had led her on about their future together—because,
1 believe, he wanted to ensure that she wouldn't guess what he
planned to do and tell Ruth, who would have instantly called the
police. “You and your long tongue,'* Oswald had once chided Marina,
“they always get us into trouble.*’ It would not have been the only
instance that Oswald had manipulated her shamelessly to get what he
wanted. Marina’s story was not entirely a fiction. McMillan believes that
Oswald did in fact ask her to move into an apartment, not once but
three times, and that each time Marina said no, saying that she
preferred to wait until they had saved some money. But as McMillan
wrote:
He knew how to get his wife back—indeed, he had done so one year
before when she ran away from him and he wanted her back in time for
Thanksgiving at Robert’s on November 22,1962. Had Lee, on Novem-
ber 21. 1963, genuinely wanted Manna back, he knew how to arrange it
—the telephone call in advance, a little cajoling, believable tenderness. It seems a fair guess that, unhinged as he must have been. Lee still, on
November 21, knew how to obtain the answer “Yes."
The story that Oswald was rejected by his wife on the eve of the
assassination has been so widely accepted that it seems almost per-
verse to challenge it. But I believe Marina's account was part of an
understandable impulse to distance herself as much as she could from

--- PAGE BREAK ---220...

Oswald's Game
the president’s assassin.

Consider the situation.

On November 21 si,e
knew tht her husband had attacked Walker, that he continued to keep
a rifle, and that he was using an alias.

If she told the Commission she
was still warm and friendly, how would it look?

How did you treat
him that night, Mrs.

Oswald?

I was angry, of course; I wouldn’t have
anything to do with him.

And this was probably not even a calculated
lie—it just came out that way.

It was not only a facesaving answer
it was probably also what she fervently wished she had done, instead
of falling for another one of Oswald’s deceptions.

Furthermore, it was a story that was readily accepted and never
questioned.

It was exactly the kind of thing everyone wanted to be-
,ieve—the assassin was such an obvious miscreant, even his own
wife spumed him.

It was Ruth Paine who warned the Commission
that if people thought that Oswald was someone who would be in-
stantly recognized as a potential assassin, someone who would stand
out in a crowd as being unusual, then they didn’t know this man and
had no way of recognizing such a person in the future.

Marina may have reasoned that her marital relationship was not
important and not the Commission's business—as indeed it wasn't,
except insofar as it related to the cause of the assassination.

But by
maintaining that she had coldly rejected Oswald, she inadvertently
distorted the perception of his motive.

George de Mohrenschildt’s testimony to the Commission reflected
his own difficult situation.

By the time he appeared, Marina had
revealed that he had guessed, after the fact, that Oswald might have
been the unknown sniper who shot at Walker.George de Mohrenschildt’s testimony to the Commission reflected
his own difficult situation.

By the time he appeared, Marina had
revealed that he had guessed, after the fact, that Oswald might have
been the unknown sniper who shot at Walker.

(When de Mohren-
schildt and bis wife had stopped by the Oswalds' apartment a few days
after the incident, George had said jokingly, "How did it happen you
missed?” Both Marina and the de Mohrenschildts reported that Os-
wald had turned pale and quickly changed the subject.) In his manu-
script on Oswald, de Mohrenschildt confessed that because he had felt
intimidated and wanted to clear his name, he said untrue things about
Oswald in his testimony that be later regretted, such as that he was
"a poor loser” who was envious of other peoples' success and money.

He wrote that he believed Oswald had been framed: "Lee, an ex-
Marine trained for organized murder, was capable of killing but [only]
for a very strong ideological motive or in self-defense.”
By coincidence, de Mohrenschildt had known Janet Auchincloss,
Jacqueline Kennedy’s mother, and Jackie herself as a child.

De Moh-
renschildt claimed that after he gave his testimony in Washington, he
Reactions...

221
.

invited to the Auchincloss house in Georgetown.

He said that he
* .«ied to Jackie’s mother that the family should finance a real
WgitiMtion of Kennedy’s murder, because he doubted Oswalds
f S that Mrs.

Auchincloss said, "He’s dead, nothing can change
£ £ Mohrenschildt then speculated that Kennedy’s rela tes
,hat .

ave suspected anti-Castro Cubans were involved and didn t
m!nt his death associated with the Bay of Pigs, “to biggest mistake.

"^Respite that story there is reason to believe that de Mohrenschildt
ilv felt guilty perhaps believing that he might have somehow
*Ct^nmdC Kennedydeath.ave suspected anti-Castro Cubans were involved and didn t
m!nt his death associated with the Bay of Pigs, “to biggest mistake.

"^Respite that story there is reason to believe that de Mohrenschildt
ilv felt guilty perhaps believing that he might have somehow
*Ct^nmdC Kennedydeath.

According to Edward Jay Epstein, de
Mohrenschildt told a friend in Houston in 1964 that he had inadvert-
MHv aiven Marina the money Oswald used to buy his nfle.

Manna
tunocsedly said to him, “Remember the twenty-five dollars you gave
rfWdl that fool husband of mine used it to buy a nfle.

fn 1067 de Mohrenschildt revealed that he owned one of theback-
jj 'photographs showing Oswald with hi.

rifle.

His copy had a
signed* inscription on the back in Oswald’s hand, "To my dm fnend
r^rae.

from Lee.” with a date written Russian-style: 5/IV/bj —
Ih^ il April 5, 1963.

or five days before the Walker shooting.

There
JJ asecond inscription in Russian that McMillan believes Manna
w“ * -Hunter of fascists ha-ha-ha!!!” De Mohrenschildt explained
Oat he had discovered this photograph among his stored belongings
when he returned to Dallas in .967 from Haiti, where he and hismfc
lived since May 1963.

He said that it was inside an unopened
mkag^f records Marini had returned to him by mail shortly before
K* MolUchild,, left Te*as ft».

ApA Be, Mm.

•»
shown this photograph during her Assassinations Committee testi-
mony she indicated that she had seen her husband show the picture
^ Gwree presumably in April 1963- At that point in the transcript
ihe seemedflustered.

and the Committee didn’t pursue the quenon
S In his manuscript de Mohrenschildt wrote that this photo-
araph demonstrated that Oswald “might have been considering hunt-
big fascists—and in his mind General Walker was one-but certainly
n°DeUMohrenschildt also wrote that the Warren Commission invest 1-
gation h^S vTnually ruined h,s life.--- PAGE BREAK ---

•»
shown this photograph during her Assassinations Committee testi-
mony she indicated that she had seen her husband show the picture
^ Gwree presumably in April 1963- At that point in the transcript
ihe seemedflustered. and the Committee didn’t pursue the quenon
S In his manuscript de Mohrenschildt wrote that this photo-
araph demonstrated that Oswald “might have been considering hunt-
big fascists—and in his mind General Walker was one-but certainly
n°DeUMohrenschildt also wrote that the Warren Commission invest 1-
gation h^S vTnually ruined h,s life. He claimed that he had lost work
because of the FBI’s interest in him and that the subsequent conspir-
ac^riieories produced “strange idiocies”-that be was Oswald s
“CIA handler." for example-that made him seem "controversu and
even gruesomely threatening.” He began getting strange phonecalls. apparently from assassination buffs who believed he was part of a CIA

--- PAGE BREAK ---222 •..

Oswald's Game
conspiracy.

(The Assassinations Committee investigation found no
evidence that he had ever worked for the CIA.)
In later years, de Mohrenschildt became depressed and voluntarily
underwent treatment in a sanitarium.

In 1977, shortly before he was
to be questioned by the Assassinations Committee, he fatally shot
himself.

*
Our perception of what happened in Dallas was distorted, for sev-
eral reasons.

Since Oswald was highly secretive, his motivation had
to be pieced together as one would reassemble a shredded document.

In 1963 his political motive was invisible, largely because the public
lacked knowledge of the context in which he had operated—it didn't
know about the attempts to kill Castro.

If Oswald were alive and on
tna!

today, he might be seen as a revolutionary terrorist.

Another circumstance blocked our view of this event.

The presi-
dent’s murder had aroused Washington’s fears of a dangerous interna-
tional crisis.

As a result, the overriding concern of the official investi-
gation was to prevent the situation from getting out of control.

As the
Church committee amply demonstrated, the CIA and FBI down-
played the possibility of a Cuban connection from the beginning
At 5:00 P.M.

on November 23,1963, CIA headquarters learned that
the Mexican police were about to arrest Silvia Duran, the Cuban
Embassy employee who had dealt with Oswald.

Agency personnel
telephoned the Mexico station and asked them to stop the arrest
After discovering that this couldn’t be done.

Richard Helms’s deputy
Thomas Karamessines, cabled the station that her arrest “could jeop-
awr * Uf* frccdom of aclion 011 lhe whole question of Cuban respon-
sibility.

When the Church committee asked him about this statement
in 1976, Karamessines
speculated that the CIA feared the Cubans were responsible, and that
Duran might reveal this during an interrogation.Richard Helms’s deputy
Thomas Karamessines, cabled the station that her arrest “could jeop-
awr * Uf* frccdom of aclion 011 lhe whole question of Cuban respon-
sibility.

When the Church committee asked him about this statement
in 1976, Karamessines
speculated that the CIA feared the Cubans were responsible, and that
Duran might reveal this during an interrogation.

He funher speculated
that if Duran did possess such information, the CIA and the U S
Government would need time to react before it came to the attention
of the public.

On November 24 the FBI legal atUche in Mexico cabled headquar-
ters that the American ambassador there believed that the Cubans
were unsophisticated and militant enough to have directed Oswald’s
action, and he suggested that the bureau might want to poll its Cuban
informants in the U.S.

“to confirm or refute this theory.“ But in
Reactions,..

223
Washington an FBI supervisor wrote a note on the cablegram: “Not
desirable.

Would serve to promote rumors.’’ This view was shared by
the CIA and the State Department.

On November 28 Heims notified
the CIA in Mexico:
For your private information, there [is a] distinct feeling here in all three
agencies that Ambassador is pushing this case too hard ...

and that we
could well create flap with Cubans which could have serious repercus-
sions.

In the months ahead, the CIA repeatedly failed to follow up leads
that seemed to point toward direct Cuban involvement.

Its investiga-
tion of this area became “passive in nature,’* as did that of the FBI.

The CIA and FBI had both laudable and self-serving reasons for
wrapping this case up quickly, like spoiled fish.

Each was aware that
a flap with the Cubans might lead to a nuclear confrontation like the
1962 missle crisis.

But at each agency, there were private considera-
tions as well.

J.

Edgar Hoover pushed for a quick solution.

He was convinced
that Oswald acted alone.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Edgar Hoover pushed for a quick solution. He was convinced
that Oswald acted alone. But he was eager to avoid public criticism
that the bureau neglected its job by not keeping Oswald under closer
surveillance after he returned form the Soviet Union. If a foreign
conspiracy were found, the FBI would look even worse. Although he
publicly defended the agents handling Oswald’s case. Hoover secretly
disciplined seventeen employees, including James Hosty, for not pur-
suing Oswald more aggressively. A full investigation of a possible Cuban involvement might have
proved even more embarrassing to the CIA. Warren Commission
member Allen Dulles, who resigned as the agency's director in 1961,
knew about the Mafia plots and withheld this information from the
other members. Perhaps he reasoned that it wasn’t relevant, since
these plans ended well before the assassination. But the few CIA
officials who were aware of the AM/LASH operation took steps to
make sure that the Commission never got wind of it. Although the Commission was kept in the dark, it seemed reluctant
to raise the Cuban issue on its own: Castro’s warning and Oswald’s
alleged threat at the Mexico Embassy were omitted from its report. Even fourteen years later the House Assassinations Committee found
this subject hot to the touch. With remarkable frankness, its chief
counsel, G. Robert Blakey, has written that one reason the Committee
formally concluded that Cuba was not involved in Dallas was that

--- PAGE BREAK ---224...

Oswald's Gama
“the Committee, as a responsible body of government, had an obliga-
tion to determine that the Cuban government was not involved in the
assassination, if it could not find convincing proof that it was.“ In
other words, if it couldn’t prove Cuba was involved, it had to say Cuba
was not involved.

Blakey was referring to the question of direct Cuban responsibility,
but the same rule seemed to apply to the question of indirect involve-
ment, that is, Castro’s influence on Oswald, a possibility that was
never discussed in the Committee’s report.

When members of the
Committee interviewed Castro and showed him the passage in Daniel
Schorr’s book dealing with the Comer Clark interview, Castro denied
that Oswald had threatened Kennedy at the Cuban Embassy.

Counsel
Blakey didn’t believe him—he suspected that Oswald probably did
make the threat and that Castro felt it was in Cuba's interest to deny
it.

But the Committee not only decided to accept Castro’s denial, it
went further.

Although its report discussed Castro's warning and.

Oswald’s alleged threat a few weeks later, it said nothing about
Schorr’s theory that the one event inspired the other.

The report
didn’t mention that Castro’s warning appeared in Oswald’s local
newspapers.

Moreover, the report dealt with the warning and the
threat in separate sections, thus stripping away the connective tissue
that would have been provided by a simple chronology.

Finally, there may be one other reason that our perception of Dallas
was flawed.

After a traumatic event, people naturally seek a reassur-
ing explanation, not one that is disturbing or painful.

To believe that
Lee Oswald was a drifter with no motive or the victim of a high-level
conspiracy is easier to bear than the idea that American-backed mur-
der plots helped bring about the assassination of President Kennedy.

17..--- PAGE BREAK ---

To believe that
Lee Oswald was a drifter with no motive or the victim of a high-level
conspiracy is easier to bear than the idea that American-backed mur-
der plots helped bring about the assassination of President Kennedy. 17.. • Conspiracy Thinking: Best
Evidence and Other Theo-
ries
It is wiser, I believe, to arrive at theory by way of the evidence
rather than the other way around. ... It is more rewarding,
in any case, to assemble the facts first and, in the process of
arranging them in narrative form, to discover a theory or a
historical generalization emerging of its own accord. The very process of transforming a collection of personalities,
dates, gun calibers, letters, and speeches into a narrative even-
tually forces the "why" to the surface. U will emerge of itself
one fine day from the story of what happened. It will suddenly
appear and tap one on the shoulder, but not if one chases after
it first, before one knows what happened. Then it will elude one
forever. —Barbara W. Tuchman, Practicing History
B UILDING a conspiracy theory is easy. One might say, it’s what the
mind does best. Consider this hypothetical example. According to a
1982 ABC television documentary, J. Edgar Hoover once spoiled an
important investigation of Soviet espionage by publicizing the case too
soon. And for years Hoover put his faith in a Soviet defector who later
turned out to be a phony, a KGB plant. After a pattern such as this
has been noticed, additional information tends to be filtered through
the screen of that pattern. Thus, if one examined Hoover’s career in
...225

--- PAGE BREAK ---226...

Oswald's Game
detail, one would undoubtedly find other instances in which decisions
he made turned out badly and helped the Soviet cause.

Upon such
documented evidence one might build a theory that Hoover was a
high-level mole working for the KGB.

But to make the theory stick,
one would have to ignore two things: alternative explanations for
those “pro-Soviet” actions (publicity seeking, bad judgment), and the
entire context, that is, everything else we know about J.

Edgar
Hoover.

Still, the notion that Hoover might have been a KGB agent
is titillating—and who can prove that he wasn’t?

Ail the conspiracy
books about Dallas are constructed in this way.

The paperback edition of David S.

Lifton s Best Evidence cites
reviews that called the book “a meticulously detailed detective story,”
“rigorously documented.” The author’s theory began, he tells us,
when he saw the Zapruder film of the assassination for the first time
and saw Kennedy’s body fall violently backward and to the left after
the fatal head shot.

Having been a physics major, Lifton understood
Newton’s laws.

He concluded that the backward movement of
Kennedy’s body could only be explained by a bullet striking him from
the opposite direction—the direction of a grassy knoll west of the
Depository.

Many earwitnesses thought the shots came from this
knoll, and some of the doctors who examined Kennedy in Dallas
described wounds consistent with a shot from the front.

Yet the
autopsy X rays and report clearly indicated that Kennedy was struck
only from the rear.

How could this be?

Unable to accept that the grassy knoll theory might be wrong,
Lifton reconciled the conflicting versions in an original manner.

He
decided both versions were true: the Dallas witnesses were right and
so were the autopsy surgeons—they saw different things because
someone altered the president's body before the autopsy.

Stated baldly, Lifton's theory is preposterous.He
decided both versions were true: the Dallas witnesses were right and
so were the autopsy surgeons—they saw different things because
someone altered the president's body before the autopsy.

Stated baldly, Lifton's theory is preposterous.

He contends that all
the bullets that struck Kennedy were fired from the front, and that
to conceal this fact a large group of unnamed conspirators managed
to steal Kennedy's body from its casket aboard Air Force One.

slip it
aboard a helicopter after the president’s plane reached Washington,
alter the body so that it appeared that Kennedy was shot from the rear
by Oswald, and then sneak the altered body into Bethesda Naval
Hospital for the official autopsy.

That much is complex enough, but
after Lifton began interviewing people who had been at Bethesda
Hospital that night he found new conflicts in the testimony.

Most of
the witnesses said the body arrived in an expensive casket, and was
wrapped in a sheet with a plastic mattress cover laid underneath.

This
Conspiracy Thinking: Best Evidence and Other Theories...

227
was how the body left Dallas.

But three hospital employees thought
they remembered seeing Kennedy’s body arrive wrapped in a body
bag inside a plainer casket.

Most witnesses put the time of arrival at
about 7:15, but one written report said 8 o'clock.

As he had before,
Lifton now attempted to reconcile these differences.

As he put it,
“Had this been an ordinary case, the choice of which witnesses to
believe would have been left to the jury.

But this was 110 ordinary
case.” He decided that the body must have entered the hospital twice
—once in the plain coffin/body bag, and later in the bronze coffin/-
sheet.

This is comparable to saying that if some witnesses say the
robber wore a black hat and others say he wore a red hat, there must
have been two robberies.

But how could witnesses recall a body bag, if there wasn’t one?--- PAGE BREAK ---

This is comparable to saying that if some witnesses say the
robber wore a black hat and others say he wore a red hat, there must
have been two robberies. But how could witnesses recall a body bag, if there wasn’t one? Elizabeth Loftus is a psychologist who specializes in eyewitness testi-
mony. Loftus says, “No matter how well meaning or how well trained
observers are, there are ways to make people see, hear, and even smell
things that never were.” Over time, she explains, memory doesn’t
fade, it grows. “What may fade is the initial perception, the actual
experience of the events. But every time we recall an event we must
reconstruct the memory, and so each time it is changed—colored by
succeeding events, increased understanding, a new context, sugges-
tions by others, other people’s recollections. We can get people to
conjure up details that are pure fantasy.”
When Lady Bird Johnson testified before the Warren Commission,
she vividly described ascending and descending a flight of stairs when
she went to pay her condolences to Jacqueline Kennedy at the Dallas
hospital. But there were no stairs—the two women were on the same
floor. Mrs. Johnson had apparently confused this incident with an-
other—when she went upstairs to visit Mrs. Connally. The first witness who remembered a body bag, Paul O’Connor, told
Lifton his story thirteen years after the event. During the intervening
time, body bags had been shown repeatedly in newscasts out of Viet-
nam. In his reconstruction, O'Connor may have transmuted the plas-
tic mattress cover into a body bag, or he may have confused two
separate events. Lifton was able to find two other witnesses who
“remembered” a body bag and/or cheap casket, but only after he
ttked them leading questions. For instance,
LIFTON: . . was he in any kind of bag or anything, or in a sheet? REIBE: 1 think he was in a body bag.

--- PAGE BREAK ---229,., Oswald's Game
Reibe said that his recollection was “vague."
Lifton knew, of course, that memories fade and that witnesses make
mistakes But he apparently never realized how often witnesses recall
unages they never saw—nor did I, until I read Best Evidence.

This
failing leads him into extending the labyrinth of his theory, time after
tunc:
I found O Connor perfectly credible when he said the throat wound was
unsutured when the body arrived.

I also found Ebersole credible when
he said it was sutured at what he thought was the outset of the autopsy.

I thought they made their obaervations at different times.

Simdarly, the chief of surgery at Bethesda recalled seeing an intact
bullet roll out from the clothing of President Kennedy and onto the
autopsy table.

Nobody else saw this, and it is beyond dispute that
Kennedy s body was unclothed.

Yet Lifton accepted this testimony
and used it to build another corridor in bis theory.

He concluded that
the bullet the chief “saw” must have been the same bullet the con-
spirators had earlier planted on a hospital stretcher in Dallas (before
they changed their plans, brought the bullet to Bethesda, then decided
to go with their original plan).

In The Mechanism of Mind, Edward de Bono has said.

"Ideas must
advance and if they miss the right direction they move further and
Turther in the wrong direction." De Bono was describing the weak-
nesses of what he calls vertical thinking, which he defined as the
sequential development of a particular pattern.

As soon as a pattern
is recognized it provides the framework for processing incoming
information.

The established pattern in fact selects the new informa-
tion.

This method of thinking is extremely efficient when the perceived
pattern coincides with reality.

But when it doesn’t, it leads to the
creation of a myth.

When a perceived pattern is firmly established, alternative explana-
tions *re ignored or rejected.But when it doesn’t, it leads to the
creation of a myth.

When a perceived pattern is firmly established, alternative explana-
tions *re ignored or rejected.

If Kennedy was struck from the rear
why was his body propelled backward?

Three alternative explanation^
have been given, none of which violates the laws of physics: (t)
Neuropathologist Richard Lindenburg told the Rockefeller Commis-
sion that the movement could have been caused by a violent neuro-
muscular reaction resulting from "major damage inflicted to the nerve
center, in the brain.” (z) Physicist Luis Alvarez expenmented by
melons wrapped with tape.

Each time, the melon was
propelled backward in the direction of the rifle.

Alvarez cited the law
i
Conspiracy Thinking: Best Evidence and Other Theories...

229
of conservation of momentum—as the contents of the melon were
driven forward and out by the force of the bullet, an opposite force
was created similar to the thrust of a jet engine, propelling the melon
in the opposite direction.

(3) In a documentary on the assassination,
CBS pointed out that the Zapruder film showed Mrs.

Kennedy touch-
ing her husband's left arm at the moment the fatal bullet struck, and
that in her shocked reaction she may have caused the president’s
backward movement by a pressure on his arm.

Any of these explana-
tions, or a combination of any of them, might explain the backward
motion.

When Lee Harvey Oswald’s body was exhumed in October 1981,
reexamined by pathologists, and reburied, a conspiracy theory put
forward by British author Michael Eddowes was buried with it.

In a
book called The Oswald File Eddowes had argued that the man killed
by Jack Ruby was not Lee Harvey Oswald but a Russian impostor.

Eddowes’s theory was never very popular, but since it has now been
conclusively disproved, it may serve as an undisputed example of the
way a conspiracy theory can go wrong.

There is usually a predisposition toward a certain point of view.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Eddowes’s theory was never very popular, but since it has now been
conclusively disproved, it may serve as an undisputed example of the
way a conspiracy theory can go wrong. There is usually a predisposition toward a certain point of view. The
introduction to Eddowes's book says that the author had suspected
Russian involvement even before he began investigating the assassina-
tion. When the Warren Hearings and Exhibits were published, Ed-
dowes and several assistants began looking for evidence to support his
suspicions—and found it As it always happens in conspiracy theories,
Eddowes ignored the larger pattern of Oswald’s life and zoomed in
on some tiny but puzzling anomalies in the record. Just before Oswald
left the Marines in 1959, his height was measured twice—-once by a
doctor—and recorded each time as 5'n*. Yet after Oswald was ar-
rested in Dallas, his height was measured as 5'9V4*, and the autopsy
report later recorded his height as 5'9#. Furthermore, at age six
Oswald had undergone a mastoidechtomy, and the Marine medical
records noted the resulting scar behind his left ear. But the postmor-
tem on Oswald didn’t mention a mastoidechtomy scar. (In conspiracy
theories, people don’t make mistakes.) There was more. Oswald’s
brothers noticed changes in his appearance after his stay in Russia:
thinner hair, a ruddier complexion, a slimmer build. Asked about this
difference, John Pic testified, “I would never have recognized him,
sir.” Pic also noticed that, after coining back, Lee referred to him for
the first time as his half- brother. Of course, Pic knew perfectly well
that the man was Oswald, but on the basis of these inconsistencies

--- PAGE BREAK ---230...OfwaJd's Game
:* w'0ry "Min P,ace* everything else was interpreted to fit
of the exhumation prove that Eddowes was wmna T\ 65 *
farffeSffh!J,e SO,u,io"s Pr°fx»«l by Lifton and Eddowes are more
other conspiracybroki Au'these'th*111' S'ylC reasonin* r°und in
discrepancies *hf ££££ tfr, '***on u***P'*ned
tssz sas?

-,he—~ » sps
mountain of evidence the Warring ^ ‘ ‘ anomahes in the
that are grotesquely improbable 3 * presente<l s,°ries
while working as an FBI infn™ * C^’ ^ an ant,'Castro group
sSttysa i°
A.

Conspiracy Thinking: Best Evidence and Other Theories J..

231 /
floor, opened the window slightly, and sat quietly in a stall to wait/9
Having explained Oswald's whereabouts at the critical moment, Mor-
row now faced another hurdle—Oswald was arrested with the Tippit
murder weapon in his hand.

How to explain this?

As Morrow tells it,
an Oswald look-alike shot Tippit with a similar gun, after which the
team of conspirators arranged for the gun, bullets, and shell casings
to be switched—by Jack Ruby, the FBI, and the Dallas police, respec-
tively.

Most conspiracists wisely eschew the narrative method.

My point
is that the wild implausibilities in Betrayal are implicit in every other
conspiracy book.

If the others seem more persuasive, it is largely
because they do not present a scenario of the events, but simply point
to one suspicious-looking anomaly after another.

The reader will
understand the difficulty these writers have sidestepped if he or she
tries to invent a story that explains why an innocent Oswald went to
Irving for “curtain rods,” left his wedding ring behind the next morn-
ing, brought a package into the Depository, and so on.

Because the
evidence against Oswald is strong, any detailed reconstruction that
argues a frame-up will inevitably sound less plausible than one that
argues his guilt.

It is not surprising, then, that most conspiracists now concede tht
Oswald was at least involved in the assassination.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Because the
evidence against Oswald is strong, any detailed reconstruction that
argues a frame-up will inevitably sound less plausible than one that
argues his guilt. It is not surprising, then, that most conspiracists now concede tht
Oswald was at least involved in the assassination. But they contend
that he was the instrument of others, typically a renegade element of
U.S. intelligence, anti-Castro activists, or the Mafia. This hypothesis
also lacks a credible story line, mainly because its proponents imply
that Oswald was either a closet right-winger who participated will-
ingly or a gullible Marxist who was tricked into it. These writeh turn
aside the plentiful evidence about Oswald’s politics and nature and
create, by implication, a different person entirely. As before, Morrow
made the problem explicit when he tried to illuminate Oswald’s moti-
vations for his “intelligence work":
If Oswald had any misgivings about the things he was asked to do he
put them aside, pleased to be gainfully employed and able to do things
for Marina. Bizarre as some of his assignments were, he cooperated
without question. This is not Lee Harvey Oswald, but a fictional character. Virtually every argument the critics make looks weak when its
hidden implications are stated openly. For example, many writers
suspect that someone impersonated Oswald at the Cuban Embassy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---232...

Oswald’s Game
l
In 1978 Consul Azcue insisted that the man he dealt with "in no wav
resembled" the president’s accused assassin.

But to accept this, one
must assume the following.

The impostor presented a photograph of
Oswald for the visa application and forged his signature.

Silvia Duran
didn t notice that the picture looked nothing at all like the person who
handed it to her.

Duran and Alfredo Mirabai were mistaken when
they later identified the applicant as Oswald.

Back in Dallas, someone
forged Duran's phone number in Oswald’s notebook.

One might be able to swallow this story, however improbable, were
it not for Oswald’s November 9 letter to the Soviets in Washington
—in which he talked about his run-in with the Cuban consul.

Ruth
Paine and Manna observed him writing this letter, and Ruth found
a copy of it lying on her desk later that day.

One is faced with two
incredible alternatives: either Ruth and Marina were involved in the
forgery/impostor scheme, or Oswald wrote about events that hap-
pened to his impersonator.

As might be expected, the conspiracists
say little, if anything, about the November 9 letter.

Anthony Summers
mentions it.

but be omits entirely Oswald's reference to the Cuban
Embassy.

To do otherwise would have made his impostor theory
sound ludicrous.

.

J
Were others involved in the assassination?

The House Assassina-
tions Committee believed that a tape recording of a police motorcycle
radio transmission contained the faint sounds of four shots and that
one of them came from the grassy knoll.

It concluded that another
gunman in that area had fired a shot that missed the motorcade
completely.

But in 1981 a new panel of acoustical experts reexamined
the tape for the National Research Council and unanimously con-
eluded that the sounds on the tape had been recorded about one
minute after the shooting and that there was thus no evidence for a
second gunman.It concluded that another
gunman in that area had fired a shot that missed the motorcade
completely.

But in 1981 a new panel of acoustical experts reexamined
the tape for the National Research Council and unanimously con-
eluded that the sounds on the tape had been recorded about one
minute after the shooting and that there was thus no evidence for a
second gunman.

And that is where the matter stands as of now In
any event, the bulk of the evidence about Oswald clearly suggests that
if there had been a conspiracy, Oswald would not have been a patsy
but the ringleader.

If he had any accomplices, which seems doubtful’
I would nominate the two unknown men who helped him try to gull
Sylvia Odio.

6
As the Assassinations Committee said, a conspiracy involving Os-
wald and someone else, “possibly a person akin to Oswald in tempera-
ment and ideology, would not have been fundamentally different from
an assassination by Oswald alone.” In a footnote it added, “If the
conspiracy was, in fact, limited to Oswald, the second gunman, and
Conspiracy Thinking: Bat Evidence and Other Theories ...

233
perhaps one or two others, the committee believes it was possible they
shared Oswald’s left-wing political disposition.

A consistent pattern
in Oswald’s life was a propensity for actions with political overtones.

It is quite likely that an assassination conspiracy limited to Oswald
and a few associates was in keeping with that pattern.” Conspirators
are usually allies, not political enemies.

But there’s no compelling reason to believe anyone else was in-
volved.

The police-tape theory overshadowed the other work done by
the Committee that strengthened the case for Oswald’s guilt.

Having
examined the Warren Commission’s evidence, as well as new evidence
it developed on its own, the Committee reached the following conclu-
sions.The police-tape theory overshadowed the other work done by
the Committee that strengthened the case for Oswald’s guilt.

Having
examined the Warren Commission’s evidence, as well as new evidence
it developed on its own, the Committee reached the following conclu-
sions.

President Kennedy was struck by two rifle shots fired from the
sixth-floor window on the southeast comer of the Texas School Book
Depository.

All the wounds inflicted on President Kennedy and Gov-
ernor Connally were caused by two bullets fired from the Mannlicher-
Carcano rifle found on the sixth floor of the Depository, and this rifle
belonged to Lee Harvey Oswald.

Oswald was present on the sixth
floor shortly before the assassination.

A paper bag suitable for con-
taining a rifle found in the sniper’s nest bore a fingerprint and palm-
print of Oswald’s.

Oswald had no alibi for the time of the assassina-
tion.

.Oswald shot and killed Patrolman J.D.

Tippit.

The evidence
’’strongly suggested that Oswald attempted to murder General walker
and that he possessed a capacity for violence.” Considering this and
other evidence against him, the Committee concluded that Oswald
assassinated President Kennedy.

As Anthony Summers said, ”If Os-
wald really was just a fall guy, he had been bewildcringly well "
framed.”
Probably the strongest evidence the proponents of a Mafia or anti-
Castro conspiracy have ever found is Oswald’s alleged association "N /
with David Ferric in New Orleans during the summer of 1963.

Feme ✓ *
was a strange character who was violently anti-Kennedy and anti-
communist.

After a disease caused the loss of his body hair, he began
wearing a reddish mohair wig and fake eyebrows.

He was also a
homosexual and had been fired from his job as an Eastern Airlines
pilot after he was charged with extortion and with molesting young
males.--- PAGE BREAK ---

After a disease caused the loss of his body hair, he began
wearing a reddish mohair wig and fake eyebrows. He was also a
homosexual and had been fired from his job as an Eastern Airlines
pilot after he was charged with extortion and with molesting young
males. In 1963 he worked as a private investigator, both for the lawyer
of Carlos Marcello, the New Orleans Mafia boss, and for Guy Banis-
ter, another militant anti-Communist who ran a detective agency. Both Banister and Ferric had connections with anti-Castro groups. On November 22, Feme was in a New Orleans courtroom with

--- PAGE BREAK --->
I
234...

Oswald's Game
'
n
Marcello and his lawyer.

The office of Banister's detective agency was in a building near the
coffee company where Oswald worked until mid-July.

The building
had two entrances, and the address of the one around the comer from
Banister's office was 544 Camp Street.

Anyone who has read a con-
spiracy book should be familiar with that address, because it was
stamped on some of Oswald’s "Hands Off Cuba" leaflets.

f So, the plot thickens.

The conspiracists believe that Oswald’s pro-
/ Castro activities in New Orleans were a scam being run by the anti-
Castroites Feme and Banister in order to discredit the Fair Play for
^ Cuba Committee.

This is highly unlikely.

Even if we knew nothing
about Oswald, the fact that his first pro-Castro demonstration oc-
curred before he got to New Orleans would seem to rule that out.

I
suspect that Oswald did have some contact with Feme and perhaps
with Banister as well, but I believe it had nothing to do with the events
in Dallas—which, at that point, no one could have foreseen.

Oswald may have approached Ferric or Banister, as he approached
Carlos Bringuier, with a plausible cover story and with an eye to
pursuing his own ends.

It may be that, after he lost his job at Reily's,
he went to sec Banister; working for a detective agency would proba-
bly have appealed to him.

He certainly could have used the money.

Marina said that by late summer of 1963 he was so stingy with his
money because he was saving it for his trip to Mexico that he lost
weight from not eating.

The best evidence that Oswald knew Feme, and possibly Banister,
comes from the testimony of several credible witnesses who told the
Assassinations Committee that they saw Oswald in Clinton, Louisi-
ana, during late August or early September with a man who looked
like Feme and another man whom they identified as Clay Shaw, the
businessman involved in the Garrison investigation.Marina said that by late summer of 1963 he was so stingy with his
money because he was saving it for his trip to Mexico that he lost
weight from not eating.

The best evidence that Oswald knew Feme, and possibly Banister,
comes from the testimony of several credible witnesses who told the
Assassinations Committee that they saw Oswald in Clinton, Louisi-
ana, during late August or early September with a man who looked
like Feme and another man whom they identified as Clay Shaw, the
businessman involved in the Garrison investigation.

The second man
was almost certainly not Shaw—but Shaw looked very much like Guy
Banister.

According to these witnesses, Oswald was fist seen in nearby
Jackson, where he asked a barber how he could get a job as an
electrician at the local mental hospital.

(Oswald had no training as an
electrician.) The barber referred him to a state representative, who
advised him to register as a voter to establish residency.

Two secretar-
ies said that Oswald applied for work at the hospital, and afterward
he was seen standing in line at the Clinton voter registrar’s office while
Ferric and the other man, presumably Banister, waited outside in a
Cadillac.

As it happened, blacks in the parish were conducting a voter
registration drive that month, and there was a long wait.

The regis-
i
Conspiracy Thinking: Bat Evidence and Other Theories...

235
trar, Henry Palmer, testified that when it came his turn Oswald
handed him a U.S.

Navy ID card with his name and a New Orleans
address on it, and Palmer told him he hadn’t been in the area long
enough to register.

Summers believes that Ferries and Banister may have brought
Oswald to Clinton as part of a U.S.

intelligence scheme to discredit
the civil rights movement.

Just how Oswald could have discredited
the movement by standing quietly in line isn’t clear.intelligence scheme to discredit
the civil rights movement.

Just how Oswald could have discredited
the movement by standing quietly in line isn’t clear.

The chronology
suggests that the right question is not why the man identified as
Oswald was at the registrar's office, but why he wanted to get a job
at the East Louisiana State Hospital.

If this was indeed Oswald, he
wasn’t likely to be interested in a permanent job, because he had
already made plans to go to Mexico City in three or four weeks, and
with no training he couldn't have lasted long as an electrician.

It's
conceivable that Oswald wanted to get inside the hospital as an em-
ployee for a short time, possibly to photograph someone's psychiatric
records for the detectives Banister and Ferrie.

This interpretation is,
of course, highly speculative, but it might explain why Feme always
denied that he knew Oswald in 1963, if in fact he did.

Does this mean that Ferrie or Banister or both were involved in the
assassination?

Obviously not.

If they had been planning to "use"
Oswald to kill the president, they would hardly have come to a busy
registrar’s office with him, especially not in a Cadillac, which drew
considerable attention that day.

How can we be certain, even so, that Oswald wasn’t working for
American intelligence or a similar group all along?

I return to the
principle that, in order to be plausible, a theory must fit the available
evidence into a reasonable chronology of events.

To argue that Os-
wald was merely posing as a leftist from the time he was 16 until,
literally, the day he died, one must unravel the story of his life pre-
sented in this book and attempt to reweave it into an entirely new
pattern.

I can’t say that it is impossible to do so, but thus far it hasn't
been done.

No event aroused more skepticism about the lone assassin theory
than Jack Ruby’s murder of Oswald.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I can’t say that it is impossible to do so, but thus far it hasn't
been done. No event aroused more skepticism about the lone assassin theory
than Jack Ruby’s murder of Oswald. Immediately after his arrest,
Ruby said that he shot Oswald because he had been upset by the
assassination and wanted to spare Jacqueline Kennedy the ordeal of
returning to Dallas to testify at Oswald's trial (as news reports had
indicated that she would have to do). Ruby added, "I also want the
world to know that Jews do have guts."1

--- PAGE BREAK ---236 ...

Oswald's Game
To many, Ruby's professed grief looked suspicious.

At the apart-
ment of his sister, Eva Grant, a few hours after Kennedy’s death, he
telephoned numerous acquaintances to bemoan the assassination.

He
tried to eat supper but threw up in the bathroom.

As he was leaving
Eva thought he looked “broken." He told her, "I never felt so bad in
my life, even when Ma or Pa died.” Several other people who talked
with Ruby that day or the next remembered that the expressed con-
cera for the president’s wife and children, saying in one instance,
those poor people, those poor people." These sentiments may seem
excessive, or phony, but they were not unusual.

Before the end of November the National Opinion Research Center
completed a poll on the public’s reactions to the assassination.

In 1964
the Center reported:
The majority of all respondents could not recall any other time in their
,.v“ wlJcn to* had ,he “me sort of feelings.

.

.

.

Of those who could
think of such an occasion (47%) the majority referred to the death of
a parent, close friend, or other relative.

.

..

The fint reactions of nine out of ten Americans were sympathy for
Mn.

Kennedy and the children and deep sorrow that “a strong young
man had been killed at the height of his powers.”
During the four days following the event.

68 percent of those inter-
viewed were “very nervous and tense," 57 percent felt "dazed and
numb, 43 percent "didn’t feel like eating," zz percent had upset
stomachs.

Many felt a need to talk to someone they knew, and the
nation s telephone lines were clogged with calls.

One person in nine
hoped that Oswald would be "shot down or lynched.”
This intense outpouring of emotion had little to do with politics
Clearly some psychological nerve had been touched.

Perhaps these
people had unconsciously identified with John Kennedy—at any rate,
his death was a sharp reminder of personal mortality.One person in nine
hoped that Oswald would be "shot down or lynched.”
This intense outpouring of emotion had little to do with politics
Clearly some psychological nerve had been touched.

Perhaps these
people had unconsciously identified with John Kennedy—at any rate,
his death was a sharp reminder of personal mortality.

Whatever the
underlying cause, Ruby’s reaction was within the mainstream.

But more important for our purposes is Ruby's remark that he
wanted to prove "that Jews do have guts." This is the kind of state-
moit that appears nonsensical at a distance but has a surprising
relevance on closer inspection.

It turns out that Ruby himself was a
conspiracy theorist and that his crime, like Oswald’s, was the result
of a deadly interplay between his past and the accidental circum-
stances of the moment.

Born in Chicago in 1911 as Jacob Rubenstein, Ruby was the fifth
Conspiracy Thinking: Bat Evidenct and Other Theories.,.

237
child of an alcoholic father and a mentally ill, delusional mother.

As
a young boy.

he was said to be “quick tempered” and “egocentric.”
Growing up in a ghetto surrounded by other ethnic groups.

Ruby
became a street fighter who reacted to anti-Semitic slurs with his fists.

Before World War II, Ruby and his neighborhood friends disrupted
several pro-Nazi rallies of the German-American Bund, “cracking a
few heads” in the process.

Although he took no other interest in
politics.

Ruby was.described by an acquaintance as “cuckoo nut” on
the subject of patriotism; he cried openly on learning of President
Roosevelt’s death in 1945.

In 1947 Ruby moved to Dallas to help his divorced sister, Eva,
manage a nightclub.

Over the next decade Ruby got into numerous
fistfights with his employees and unruly patrons.

According to Buddy
Turman, a prizefighter friend, he “picked his shots”: his victims were
often drunk, female, or otherwise unable to defend themselves.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Over the next decade Ruby got into numerous
fistfights with his employees and unruly patrons. According to Buddy
Turman, a prizefighter friend, he “picked his shots”: his victims were
often drunk, female, or otherwise unable to defend themselves. By the
fall of 1963 Ruby was running two striptease joints and having finan-
cial problems. He was also taking Preludin diet pills, commonly
known as “uppers.”
On the morning of November 22 Jack Ruby noticed the black-
bordered “Welcome Mr. Kennedy” page in the Dallas Morning News. He telephoned Eva to call her attention to it—he was annoyed that
a message attacking the president bore a Jewish name, Bernard Wciss-
man, as chairman of the sponsoring committee. Al about ti o’clock
Ruby made his customary visit to the Morning News building to place
weekend ads for his nightclubs. After he completed his business, a
newspaper employee, John Ncwnam, saw him sitting at a desk leafing
through the day’s paper, “killing time, as he always did.” Ruby made
a comment criticizing the “lousy taste” of the anti-Kennedy advertise-
ment. “Who is this Weissman?” he wanted to know. Privately he
suspected that someone had used a false name “to make the Jews look
bad.” (Actually, Weissman was a young conservative who had re-
cently moved to Dallas.)
Five minutes later, another employee ran into the office and said,
“Kennedy’s been shot.” Ncwnam saw Ruby respond with a look of
“stunned disbelief.” Soon telephone calls came in from people cancel-
ing weekend advertising—a development that Ruby interpreted as a
protest against the “Welcome Mr. Kennedy” page. A few minutes
later he used an office phone to call Eva again—and put the receiver
to Newnam’s ear so that he could hear her anguished reaction to the
shooting Muhv Intel piiibdneil tht he tvwnlei! N^twiti to l.u.m ||..n
he and his »i*ler were * cinullunally duiuibu.1 [by the

--- PAGE BREAK ---'w .•?

/ n
238...

Oswald's Game
the same way as other people.” It had never occurred to Newnam that
they weren’t, but Ruby was clearly worried that Weissman's untimely
criticism of the president might provoke a backlash against other
Jews.

}
J^ater that afternoon, Ruby checked the Dallas phone book: Weiss-
man’s name wasn't in it.

Driving across town on November 23, Ruby
noticed a billboard saying “Impeach Earl Warren” that listed a post
office box number similar to the one given in the right-wing advertise-
ment.

Ruby wasn't sure who Earl Warren was, but he suspected a plot
involving “the John Birch Society or the Communist Party or maybe
a combination of both.” After reaching his apartment, Ruby called
Larry Crafard, an employee of his who had a Polaroid camera, picked
Crafard up, and drove back to the sign and took pictures of it.

Ruby’s
roommate, George Senator, went along.

Ruby acted as though he had
uncovered something important.

Next the trio went to the Dallas Post
Office, where Ruby tried unsuccessfully to find out who had rented
the box indicated on the billboard.

The men went to a nearby coffee
shop, where Senator noticed that Ruby's voice sounded different
and that "he had sort of a sure look in his eye.”
When Ruby stopped by Sol’s Turf Bar that afternoon, a patron,
Frank Bellochio, began blaming Dallas for the assassination and
pulled out a copy of the anti-Kennedy page as evidence.

Ruby became
"upset and loud” and said that he didn’t believe there was such a
person as Bernard Weissman, that the ad was the work of a group
trying to create anti-Semitic feelings.

An hour later Ruby was telling
a friend that the black border was a "tipoff” that whoever placed the
ad "knew the President was going to be assassinated.” Thus, Ruby
suspected a scheme to murder Kennedy and use the Jews as scape-
goats.

r After he shot Oswald the following morning.

Ruby expected to get
out of jail on bond and be interviewed by reporters as a hero.r After he shot Oswald the following morning.

Ruby expected to get
out of jail on bond and be interviewed by reporters as a hero.

Instead,
he found himself under suspicion of being involved in a plot to kill
the president.

Every aspect of his life was investigated, and reports of
his past acquaintance with underworld figures made it appear that he
was a Mafia hit man.

Ruby assimilated this turn of events into the
pattern that had already formed in his mind.

He interpreted it as the
work of the same people responsible for the Weissman advertisement.

For Ruby, the irony was nightmarish.

His act was supposed to
absolve the Jews, by removing any possible doubt about where their
sympathies lay.

But in his mind, it had done just the opposite.

He now
believed that he had unwittingly played into the conspirators’ hands.

Conspiracy Thinking: Best Evidence and Other Theories...

239
By the time Ruby testified to the Warren Commission in June 1964,
hU conspiracy theory was full-blown.

As he imagined it, the John
Birch Society had convinced President Johnson that he was involved
in Kennedy’s murder.

Believing that, Johnson had "relinquished cer-
tain powers” to the organization, which was now beginning a wide-
spread pogrom against American Jews.

Speaking in his jail cell.

Ruby
insisted that he had shot Oswald on his own.

And I have never had the chance to tell that, to back it up, to prove it.

Consequently, right at this moment I am being victimized as a pan of
a plot in the world’s worst tragedy and crime.

The bewildered Warren listened as Ruby tried to explain ihis plot:
There is an organization here, Chief Justice Warren, if it takes my life
at this moment to say it...

there is a John Birch Society right now in
activity..

..

Unfortunately for me, [by my] giving the people the opportunity to
get in power, because of the act I committed, [this] has put a lot of people
in jeopardy with their lives.

Don’t register with you, does it?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Unfortunately for me, [by my] giving the people the opportunity to
get in power, because of the act I committed, [this] has put a lot of people
in jeopardy with their lives. Don’t register with you, does it? WARREN: NO; I don’t understand that. RUBY: Would you rather I just delete what I said and just pretend
nothing is going on? WARREN: I would not indeed. I am only interested in what you want
to tell this Commission. Ruby also said that his sister and brothers were going to be killed. Although he sounded completely irrational, his explanation for the
shooting was virtually the same one that he had given after his arrest. He mentioned his use of diet pills and suggested that this might have
been a "stimulus” on the morning of November 24, when
suddenly I felt, which was so stupid, that I wanted to show my love for
our faith, being of the Jewish faith ... the emotional feeling came within
me that someone owed this debt to our beloved President to save [Mrs. Kennedy] the ordeal of coming bock. . . . I drove past Main Street, past the [jail], and there was a crowd already
gathered there. And 1... took it for granted [that Oswald) had already
been moved. ... So my purpose was to go to the Western Union—my
double purpose—but the thought of committing the act wasn’t until I
left my apartment. . .. I realize it is a terrible thing I have done, and it was a stupid thing.

--- PAGE BREAK ---240 ..* Oswald'!

Game
but I just was carried away emotionally.

...

I had the gun in my right
hip pocket, and impulsively, if that is the correct word here, I saw him,
and that is all 1 can say.

And 1 didn't care what happened to me.

Throughout the interview, Ruby returned to the plot against him,
begging Warren to take him to Washington for a lie detector test.

1 am as innocent regarding any conspiracy as any of you gentlemen in
the room, and I don't want anything to be run over lightly.

I want you
to dig into it with any...

question that might embarrass me, or anything
that might bring up my background, which isn't so terribly spotted—
1 have never been a criminal.

...

I am making a statement now that I may not live the next hour when
I walk out of this room....

it is the most fantastic story you have ever
heard in a lifetime.

1 did something out of the goodness of my heart.

Unfortunately, Chief Earl Warren, had you been around 5 or 6 months
ago ...

and immediately the President would have gotten hold of my
true story ...

a certain organization wouldn't have so completely formed
now, so powerfully, to use me because I am of the Jewish extraction,
Jewish faith, to commit the moat dastardly crime that has ever been
committed.

..

.

The Jewish people are being exterminated at this mo-
ment.

A few minutes later, Ruby said:
It may not be too late, whatever happens, if our President.

Lyndon
Johnson, knew the truth from me....

But he has been told, I am certain,
that I was part of a plot to assassinate the President.

...

I have been
used for a purpose, and there will be a certain tragic occurrence happen-
ing if you don't take my testimony and somehow vindicate me so my
people don't suffer because of what I have done...

All I want is a lie
detector test...

And then I want to leave this world.

But I don’t want
my people to be blamed for something that is untrue, that they claim
has happened.And then I want to leave this world.

But I don’t want
my people to be blamed for something that is untrue, that they claim
has happened.

Some conspiracy theorists have taken Ruby’s remark "I have been
used for a purpose" to mean that he was "used" to kill Oswald.

Others
think that he was speaking in a sort of code and that the "certain
organization" he referred to was really the Mafia.

For some reason,
it is extremely difficult to take Ruby's testimony at face value.

Suspi- l
cious of his motives, one tends to focus on isolated details and give r
them a sinister interpretation.

One naturally feels that there is "more I
to it" and that one must probe beneath the surface to get at it.

This I
ijwwyww y,j'Pw.-wwgui.'JMn ga
Conspiracy Thinking: Bat Evidence and Other Theories ...

241
is a symptom of conspiracy thinking, the same human malady that
afflicted Ruby in a more virulent form.

But how can we be sure that Ruby wasn't faking mental illness in
order to conceal his role in a plot?

Consider the implications of that
hypothesis.

If Ruby's grief and delusions were sham, one must accept
that prior to November 22 Ruby was persuaded to feign an obsession
with the Weissman advertisement in order to legitimize the bizarre,
puzzling explanation he would give after his arrest.

Try to imagine a
conspirator actually giving Ruby those instructions.

In 1965 Ruby was seen briefly on television after he left jail for a
court appearance.

As he walked along a corridor he was heard to say,
"complete conspiracy .

..

and the assassination too ...

if you knew
the facts you would be amazed." Ruby's vision of the forces against
him eventually grew to include President Johnson.

In a letter from jail
he wrote, M.

.

.

they alone had planned the killing, by they I mean
Johnson and the others." Ironically, these comments, and others like
them, have been offered in support of the very allegation Ruby desper-
ately wanted to disprove.--- PAGE BREAK ---

. they alone had planned the killing, by they I mean
Johnson and the others." Ironically, these comments, and others like
them, have been offered in support of the very allegation Ruby desper-
ately wanted to disprove. These writers have never considered the
possibility that Ruby was talking about a different conspiracy—not
one in which he silenced Oswald on orders, but one that tried to make
it look as if he had. In December 1966 Ruby was diagnosed as having terminal cancer;
he died less than a month later. In a tape recording made two weeks
before the end, Ruby reiterated that his shooting of Oswald was pure
chance and that he acted alone, not as part of a conspiracy. Sol Dann,
one of his attorneys, told the press, "Ruby did not want to live. His
death was a merciful release."

--- PAGE BREAK ---?

18..

• Oswald’s Game
' uA» ©Mww')
.

I IN large part, the assassination of President Kennedy was the tragic
/ result of a steady accumulation of chance happenings, the elimination
of any one of which might have spared Kennedy's life.

The chain of circumstance began in Oswald’s childhood, when
someone innocently handed him a political pamphlet that gave his
anger and resentment a direction.

Six years later, be failed in an
attempt to sign away his citizenship, which meant that he would be
able to go back to the United States in 1962.

Less than a year after
he returned, a bullet intended for General Waiker missed.

Then in
September 1963, when he was trying to build a record to impress the
Cubans, Castro's warning appeared and gave him a new target.

Fi-
nally, after his trip to Cuba was blocked, a neighbor of a friend
suggested a job at a school book warehouse.

Ultimately, these coincidences came to have a horrible significance,
ut only because they happened to a particular dangerous individual
The root cause of the assassination wasn’t blind fate, but Oswald’s
sociopathic nature.

As a child, Oswald isolated himself from other people.

Raised by
a mother who was monstrously self-centered, he grew to resemble her.

He came to feel as if there were a veil separating him from everyone
else, a barrier that he preferred to remain intact.

As Evelyn Strickman
said, he withdrew into a solitary and detached existence in which he
£dn t have to obey any rules.

Marguerite encouraged this tendency
Her constant defense of his rule-breaking fed his belief that he was a
superior being who could do not wrong.

Lee Oswald saw himself as
an outsider, and he relished this role.

(He would play it from youth
242...

Oswald’s Game...

243
onward, as Marxist Marine, American defector.

Russian-speaking
returnee.) r °
With no personal relationships to anchor him in everyday life.243
onward, as Marxist Marine, American defector.

Russian-speaking
returnee.) r °
With no personal relationships to anchor him in everyday life.

Oswald created ’his own world." Robert noticed his "love of fan-
tasy, recalling that his kid brother would listen to children’s stories
on the radio and hours later would still be pretending to be one of the
characters.

It would have been an innocent pastime, but Lee’s day-
dreams included visions of power and violence.

Early on, his imagination drew him to the larger world reflected in
reP?'l
S~a
1n
.

“fe“ ‘ha‘ mUSt have seeraed raore meaningful,
more real, than his daily existence.

As Marguerite recalled, he would
stop whatever he was doing to listen to the news, because he consid-
crcd it important.

•
Edward Vocbel’s testimony reveals where his fantasy life was lead-
ing him.

From local press reports, Oswald had gotten the idea of
stealing a pistol.

One can turn this incident and see Oswald’s ambi-
tions reflected in it.

He wanted to imitate the robbers—who had defied
authority and gotten away with it.

The theft would be dangerous and
therefore exciting.

Oswald made plans, obtaining a glass cutter and
toy gun-the gun would be left in place of the stolen weapon, as a
overmen!

^ °UtWUtlng hls a<Jvers*ries, he would assert his power
Oswald's tactics and goals changed in the years ahead, but his
psychological motivations did not.

It would be for similar reasons that
he tried to deceive Sylvia Odio, in another scheme inspired by a news
report.

In fact, the patterns seen in his robbery plan would be repeated
Zink MW'!?0*' d?Ta“C ePisodes in his life
- The.defection, his
•ttackon Walker, and the president’s murder were all daring acts that
allowed him to strike back at authority and put himself in control.

In
AOU 0swald lived in his fantasies—he acted them out.

As
George de Mohrenschildt put it.

he played with his life.

rrZ Krr|IM^HftC|llV0e^,1l08t.C0n,aCt W'th hi,n’ °SWald discov'
ered Karl Marx.--- PAGE BREAK ---

he played with his life. rrZ Krr|IM^HftC|llV0e^,1l08t.C0n,aCt W'th hi,n’ °SWald discov'
ered Karl Marx. He believed that Marxism gave him the ”kev’’ to his
environment on an ideological level. But the system had a sub-
conscious appeal. By redefining himself as the victim of an evil society
defiance of authority suddenly became not only legitimate, but heroic
He began thinking of himself as an idealist who acted on lofty princi-
ple He immediately wanted to join the Communist party, a group
of political outsiders, and achieve great things. By the time Kerry
Thoroley me, him, Oswald saw Marxism as fifs religion, a m^
justifying hu life and obtaining a place in history.

--- PAGE BREAK ---244...

Oswald’s Game
i
After converting to Marxism, Oswald’s conscious motives were
political.

He considered his defection to be a courageous protest
against American military imperialism.

His explanation for attacking
Walker was also ideological: he would be eliminating a potential
Hitler, thereby saving lives.

Each time, he expected to be recognized [
as a fighter for justice.

But his inner compulsions were the same as
they had been.

On learning that the Walker bullet had missed, he was
disappointed, but Marina believed that he was also pleased “with the f
clever fellow he was” in getting away with the attempt.

He had put
one over on the police.

Strip away the politics, and Oswald’s antisocial personality is evi-
dent.

He resembles the typical St.

Elizabeths criminal seeking power,
control, and excitement.

At Youth House he had been diagnosed as
a “passive-aggressive” individual, someone whose outward compli- f
ance masked deep anger.

This characteristic shows up in his political
writings, where Oswald cast himself as a silent observer who waited r
in “stoical readiness” for the opportune moment to act.

This complex of motivation* reverberated in the Kennedy assassi- l
nation.

It would be a violent protest against American imperialism
toward Cuba and a retaliation for the plots against Castro.

But be-
neath Oswald's rationalizations, there was a continuing self-aggran-
dizement and a desire for vengeance that came from something other \
than politics.

Each of these incidents was also derived, in some way, from Os- /
wald’s reading of press reports.

His ideas were never entirely original.

Oswald’s defection was preceded by that of Guy Burgess and Donald !

Maclean, a famous case that Oswald alluded to in a conversation with
Nelson Delgado.

It wasn't so much that news stories “put ideas in his
head.” It was almost the other way around: Oswald's grandiose self-
image drove him to project himself onto the world stage.Maclean, a famous case that Oswald alluded to in a conversation with
Nelson Delgado.

It wasn't so much that news stories “put ideas in his
head.” It was almost the other way around: Oswald's grandiose self-
image drove him to project himself onto the world stage.

The interna-
tional political scene was the reality that mattered to him, and he was [
determined to make his mark on it.

As each of his efforts was frustrated, Oswald's schemes became
progressively more violent His defection resulted in a week’s public-
ity and two and a half years of obscurity.

The Walker incident gained
only a brief, anonymous attention.

Then his plan to reach Cuba was
thwarted by red tape—moreover, the Cubans didn’t take him seri-
ously.

His repeated attempts to join a revolutionary movement had
failed, leaving him as isolated and unrecognized as ever.1
After Oswald returned to Dallas in October 1963, events continued
«'"**i*m*"*im*'n J] .-I »■ mui
Oswald’s Game...

245
to narrow his path.

His perception of the plots against Castro had
already led him to threaten President Kennedy’s life on two occasions.

On October 19th, a double feature about assassinations reminded him
of “the actual situation” that existed in Cuba.

The following evening
his preoccupation was such that he didn’t think to ask about the birth
of his second child.

Having failed to get Russian visas, Oswald was stranded in Dallas.

He made plans to renew his political activities.

By “reading between
the lines” of leftist newspapers, he would determine which line to
follow.

But in November there were new developments.

His visit to
the Soviet Embassy in Mexico had understandably reawakened the
FBI's interest in him.

Cornered, feeling unjustly persecuted, Oswald
wrote a note to Hosty and a letter to the Soviets in Washington
protpting the FBI attention.

At this juncture, he learned that the
president’s motorcade would pass the building where he worked.

It must have seemed to him that fate had spoken.--- PAGE BREAK ---

At this juncture, he learned that the
president’s motorcade would pass the building where he worked. It must have seemed to him that fate had spoken. All his past life
was a rehearsal for the moment when he decided to act out his violent
fantasies against President Kennedy. After his arrest, Oswald ap-
peared calm, introspective, at peace with himself. He behaved as if he
were now in control—as, in a real sense, he was, until Jack Ruby's
own obsessions intervened. At long last, Oswald had achieved what
he had always wanted: vengeance power, and even an infamous im-
mortality. - - — • - —IIVIMIVI Ull UWI \J| laUUUIIl
violence nor a conspiracy. It was carried out as a result of Oswald’s
character and background interacting with circumstance. It's likely
that had there been no plots against Castro, Oswald would have
eventually Jailed someone, but it would not have been President
Kennedy/Castro's warning had simply deflected his aim. / J fyU hM- ^

--- PAGE BREAK ---en no plots against Castro, Oswald would have
eventually Jailed someone, but it would not have been President
Kennedy/Castro's warning had simply deflected his aim. / J fyU hM- ^

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“Vo**
r A
K
»u- *mm\*m*» > wTOtyaw^'. ! U.W)PW, M
A Selected Bibliography
BOOKS
Anson, Robert Sam. "They've Killed the President/” New York: Bantam
Books, 1975.
Becker, Ernest. Escape from EviL New York: Free Press, 1975.
Belin, David W. November 22. 1963: You Are the Jury. New York: Quadran-
gle Books, 1973.
Bishop, Jim. The Day Kennedy Was Shot New York: Funk & Wagnalls, 1968.
Blakey, G. Robert, and Richard N. Billings. The Plot to Kill the President.
New York: Times Books, 1981.
Brener, Milton E. The Garrison Case: A Study in the Abuse of Power. New
York: Clarkson N. Potter, 1969.
Damore, Leo. The Cape Cod Years of John Fitzgerald Kennedy. Englewood
Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1967.
De Bono, Edward. The Mechanism of Mind. New York: Simon and Schuster,
1969.
De Gramont, Sanche. 77ie Secret War. New York: Dell, 1963.
Eddowes, Michael. The Oswald File. New York: Ace, 1978.
Epstein, Edward Jay. Inquest' The Warren Commission and the Establish-
ment of Truth. New York: Viking, 1966.
  Counterplot New York: Viking, 1969.

Legend' The Secret World of Lee Harvey Oswald. New York:
Reader's Digest Press/McGraw-Hill, 1978.
Halperin. Maurice. The Rise and Decline of Fidel Castro. Berkeley: Univer-
sity of California Press, 1972.
Hartogs, Renatus, and Lucy Freeman. The Two Assassins. New York: Zebra
Books/Kensmgton. 1976.
Henderson. Bruce, and Sam Summerlin. 1:33. New York: Cowles, 1968.
Kan tor, Seth. The Ruby Cover-up. New York: Zebra Books/Kensington,
1978-

--- PAGE BREAK ---248 ...

Oswald's Game
Kurtz, Michael L.

Crime of the Century: The Kennedy Assassination from a
Historian's Perspective.

Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1982.

Lane, Mark.

Rush to Judgment.

New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1966.

Litton, David S.

Best Evidence: Disguise and Deception in the Assassination
of John F Kennedy.

New York: Dell, 1982.

Lockwood, Lee.

Castro’s Cuba, Cuba's Fidel.

New York: Macmillan.

1967.

Manchester, William.

The Death of a President: November 20-25, I9^3- New
York: Harper Sc Row, 1967.

Mankiewicz, Frank, and Kirby Jones.

With Fidel' A Portrait of Castro and
Cuba.

Chicago: Playboy Press, 1975.

Martin, David C.

Wilderness of Mirrors.

New York: Ballantine Books, 1980.

McMillan, Priscilla Johnson.

Marina and Lee.

New York: Harper Sc Row
1978.

Meagher, Sylvia.

Accessories after the Fact' The Warren Commission, the
Authorities, and the Report New York: Vintage, 1976.

Morrow, Robert D.

Betrayal New York: Warner Books, 1976.

Navasky, Victor S.

Naming Names.

New York: Viking, 1980.

Newman, Albert H.

The Assassination of John F.

Kennedy: The Reasons Why.

New York: Clarkson N.

Potter, 1970.

Nizer, Louis.

The Implosion Conspiracy.

New York: Doubleday, 1973.

Oswald, Robert L..

with Myrick and Barbara Land.

Lee: A Portrait of Lee
Harvey Oswald.

New York: Coward-McCann, 1967.

Schlesinger, Arthur M., Jr.

Robert Kennedy and His Times.

Boston: Hough-
ton Mifflin, 1978.

Stafford, Jean.

A Mother in History: Mrs.

Marguerite Oswald.

New York:
Farrar, Straus Sc Giroux, 1966.

Summers, Anthony.

Conspiracy.

New York: McGraw-Hill, 1980.

Warren, Earl.

The Memoirs of Earl Warren.

New York: Doubleday, 1977.

Wyden, Peter.

Bay of Pigs.

New York: Simon and Schuster, 1979.

Yochelson, Samuel, and Stanton E.

Samenow.

The Criminal Personality.

Volume I: A Profile for Change.

New York: Jason Aronson, 1976.

PUBLISHED ARTICLES
Anson, Robert Sam.

“Congress and the JFK Riddle." New Times March 19
1976.

Bergquist, Laura.“Congress and the JFK Riddle." New Times March 19
1976.

Bergquist, Laura.

“My Curious Row with Castro.” Look December 12,1967.

Branch, Taylor, and George Crile III.

“The Kennedy Vendetta.” Harper j
August 1975.

Butler, Ed.

'The Great Assassin Puzzle.” The Westwood Village Square
Summer 1968.

Committee on Ballistic Acoustics, National Research Council.

“Reexamina-
tion of Acoustic Evidence in the Kennedy Assassination.” Science October
8, 1982.

Daniel, Jean.

“When Castro Heard the News.” The New Republic December
Bibliography...

249
7, 1963.

Janos, Leo.

The Last Days of the President: LBJ in Retirement." Atlantic
July 1973.

OToole, George, and Paul Hoch.

“Dallas: The Cuban Connection.” The
Saturday Evening Post March 1976.

Restak, Richard.

“Assassin!” Science Digest December 1981.

Rodgers, Joann Ellison.

“The Malleable Memory of Eyewitnesses.” Science
82 June 1982.

Schorr, Daniel.

“The Assassins.” The New York Review of Books October 13,
The Dallas Morning News.

Dallas, Texas, April, October, and November
1963, selected issues.

77re Militant.

December 1962-November 1963.

Published in New York.

New Orleans Times-Picayune.

April-September 1963.

Time.

August 1962-November 1963, selected issues.

The Worker.

April-June 1953 (when it was called The Daily Worker), selected
issues.

August 1962-Novembcr 1963.

Published in New York.

OFFICIAL REPORTS
The Final Assassinations Report: Report of the Select Committee on Assassina-
tions.

U.S House of Representatives (New York: Bantam, 1979).

Hearings Before the President’s Commission on the Assassination of President
Kennedy.

Testimony of witnesses, Vols.

I-XV, and published exhibits
Vols.

XVI-XXVI, (Washington.

D.C: U.S.

Government Printing Offi!!e
1964).

Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President
Kennedy.

(Washington, D.C.: U.S.

Government Printing Office, 1964).

U.S., Congress, House, Select Committee on Assassinations, Investigation of
the Assassination of John F.

Kennedy.--- PAGE BREAK ---

U.S., Congress, House, Select Committee on Assassinations, Investigation of
the Assassination of John F. Kennedy. Hearings and Appendices. 95th
Cong., 2nd sess., (Washington, D.C: U.S. Government Printing Office,
1979), Volumes I-XI1. Hearing #Y4.As7;K38
U.S., Congress, Senate, Alleged Assassination Plots involving Foreign Leaders:
An Interim Report of the Select Committee to Study Governmental Opera-
tions with Respect to Intelligence Activities. 94th Cong., tst sess., (Washing-
ton, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1975), S. Rept. 94-465. Serial
Set # 13098-8. U.S., Congress, Senate, The Investigation of the Assassination of President
Kennedy: Performance of the Intelligence Agencies. Book V. Final Report
of the Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to
Intelligence Activities. 94th Cong., 2nd sess., (Washington, D C.: U.S. Gov-
ernment Printing Office, 1976), S. Rept. 94-755. Serial Set #13133-7.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

©
<•' %
...251

--- PAGE BREAK ---252...

Oswald's Game
( •
\
k
I.J
V?

W
%
%
*
I
I*
r
io.

Stuckey on Oswald: XI, 170-171.

12A.

President Johnson’s suspicions: Janos.

“Last Days of the President.” 39;
Means, King Features Syndicate column, April 24, 1975 (quoted by Schorr,
“The Assassins,” 22).

12A-14.

Schorr on Oswald’s threat: The Assassins,” 20-22.

14-14A.

Liebeler on Castro’s warning: Lifton, 57; memo of September 16.

1964, from Liebeler to Rankin, “Re: Quote from New Orleans Times-Picayune
of September 9,1963, concerning Fidel Castro’s speech,” National Archives,
Washington, D.C.

t t/>\
I4A.

Hoover's letter: Schorr, “The Assassins,” 21; letter dated June 17,1964,
from Hoover to Rankin (portions deleted), National Archives.

14A-14B.

Commission on Oswald’s trip to Mexico: WR, 308.

14B.

Slawson and Hoover’s letter: Schorr, “The Assassins,” it.

CIA plots withheld from Commission: Book V, 5-6, 7.

CHAPTER L A MOST UNUSUAL DEFECTOR
15.

Cape Cod meeting: Damore, 163.

16.

Oswald's activities in Moscow: WR, 690-693.

259-262; XYI, 96.

16-17.

Handwritten note: WR, 261, 262.

Note 1: Oswald had a learning disability (dyslexia), which he largely over-
came but which left him a poor speller (XXVI, 812-817).

In quoting Oswald’s
writings throughout the book, I have corrected his spelling and minor punctu-
ation errors for the sake of clarity.

17.

Understood legal procedure: WR, 693, 262.

"Wound up,” "rehearsing for a long time”: Epstein, Legend, 95.

Previous defector: V, 267.

17.

-18.

“Lonesome man,” quizzed on Marxist theory: V, 290.

18.

Snyder's impressions: V, 272, 290; XVIII, 98, 100, 103.

Offered military information to Soviets: XVIII, 98, 100; V, 265.

Tone of meeting: McMillan.

82.

18A.

Snyder to State Department: WR, 748; XVIII, 98-103; Epstein, Legend,
96.

19.

Refused phone calls: Oswald, 105.

Robert Oswald’s reaction: Ibid., 98-99.

20.

Letter to American ambassador: WR, 262, 263.

20- 21.

November 8 letter to Robert: WR, 694-695.

21- 24.November 8 letter to Robert: WR, 694-695.

21- 24.

Mosby interview and her reactions: XXII, 7037705; XXVI, 90; Ep-
stein, Legend.

98-99, 292 n.

r8; WR, 388, 695-696.

Note 2.* After a controversial trial in 1951, Julius and Ethel Rosenberg were
Notes...

253
convicted of conspiracy to commit wartime espionage and sentenced to death.

They had been accused of transmitting atomic bomb secrets to the Russians.

After several legal appeals were denied and President Dwight D.

Eisenhower
refused to commute their sentences to life imprisonment, they were executed
in New York’s Sing Sing prison on June 19,1953.

During the last months of
their imprisonment, a Save the Rosenbergs campaign was mounted by leftist
groups and others who felt their conviction, and especially the death sentence,
was unjust.

24- 25.

Priscilla Johnson and Kennedy: McMillan, 3-4.

25- 28.

Johnson’s interview of Oswald and her impressions: McMillan, 5,
83-85; XI, 448-449.

453; XX, *9*-305 passim; HACR.

270.

29-29A.

Second letter to Robert: XVI, 815-822; WR, 391-392.

29A-29B.

Third letter to Robert.

Oswald sent to Minsk: WR, 697.

CHAPTER 2.

MARGUERITE’S SON
(Except where noted, minor details of Oswald’s early years are taken from
the Warren Report, 377, 383, 669-679.J
39.

Father’s death and funeral: I, 225, 268; VIII, 47; XXI, 491.

505.

“The son of an insurance salesman”: WR, 395; XVI, 285.

39-39A.

Marguerite’s traits in Lee: Oswald, 23, 48.

39A.

Lillian on Marguerite: VIII, 98.

39A.

Marguerite’s comments: Stafford, 30.

39B.

Insurance policy: VIII, 47.

Sneaking out of house: Oswald, 33.

Marguerite on babysitters: I, 254-255.

40.

Oswald brothers at orphanage: Oswald.

34-35, I.

271; WR, 571.

Pic on Ekdahl: XI.

21.

Ekdahl marriage: WR, 672-673.

41-42.

Marguerite and other woman: 1, 150-131.

42.

Robert on Lee's imagination and love of Intrigue: Oswald.

46-47.

43.

Ekdahl divorce: I.

251-252; XI, 29; Oswald.

39.

Evans on Marguerite and Lee: VIII, 50-51.

43- 44.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Evans on Marguerite and Lee: VIII, 50-51. 43- 44. Marguerite on Lee and neighbor boy: Stafford, 51-52. 44. Oswald solitary: WR, 675; VIII, 52, 119. 121-122. 44- 44A. Marguerite on Lee’s childhood: I, 225. 44A-44B. "Back down in lower class”: WR, 674. 44B. Robert on “burden": Oswald, 39, 42-
Marguerite’s false affidavit: WR, 378.

--- PAGE BREAK ---254...

Oswald’s Gum
Pic's comments on Marguerite: XI, 73-74, 75.

Pic’s resentment and enlistment: Oswald, 42; WR, 378, 675.

45- Letters to Pic: XXI, 73, 74, l09-iia
Robert's enlistment and Lee's plans: Oswald, 49.

Move to New York: Oswald, 50; WR, 675.

Pic’s impressions of Lee: XI, 39; Oswald, JI.

45- 46.

Mrs.

Pic's recollections: XXII, 687.

46- 47- Pic and Marguerite on knife incident: XI, 38, 40; I, 226-227.

48.

Oswald's truancy and comments: XIX, 313, 189: VIII.

210
Truancy court and hearing: XIX, 309.

48- 49- Sokolow’s report: WR, 381
49- J2- Evelyn Strickman’s report: XXI, 483-309.

52-33.

Strickman on Marguerite: XXI, 507.

HV?Y85 °*W
/ald: VI11’ 2,4: V11’ **3-224; Hartogs and Freeman
318-320; XLX, 315, 317 (recommendation).

54- Oswalds' promise to cooperate: XIX 317.

-
Canvass by The Worker's supporters: The Worker, May 21, 1933.

54-55- Mother's Day leafletting: The Worker.

May 8, 1933.

ftne™!

Zly" °" R0Mnber*S ** Vtoi"U: Front-P“*e *rtides, June 1 and
MicSdPaine)!eW * P'0pl* “ CWdbo*rd ft«ura McMilUn, 482 (quoting
57* "The key to my environment”: XX.

300.

38.

ThomJey on Oswald’s conviction: WR.

388.

39.

Rosenberg and Mooney pamphlet: Nizer, 16.

39-60.

Robert's visit: Oswald.

61-62; L 301-302.

308-310.

60.

Pic on psychiatrist: XI.

42, 43-44.

Teacher’s report: XIX.

319.

61.

Continuation of parole and Big Brothers: WR, 678-679; XIX, 321.

CHAPTER 3.

DROPPING OUT.

JOINING UP
62.

Marguerite on averting a “tragedy”: XXI, 83.

62.

Oswald quiet and studious, read encyclopedias: VIII, 51, 55, 62, 63,178
62A.

Lillian’s recollections: VIII, 124-123.

6aB.

Move to French Quarter: WR, 68a
62B.

Bus incident: Oswald, 68; WR.

383; VIII, IJ.

I24> ,J9> ,74.

62C Voebel's testimony: VIII, 7, 9-10.

Notes...

255
63.

Plans “military service": WP*.

679.

Q
Civil Air Patrol, Ferrie: WR, 679; VIII, 14; Oswald, 69.

/HJL *)7>W A\Jf<£ tfk 11
Statements to Mosby: XXII, 703.

Margate’s knowledge of Marxist books: I, 198.

64.Margate’s knowledge of Marxist books: I, 198.

64.

Letter to school authorities, false affidavit: WR, 68o, 681.

65.

McBride’s testimony: WR.

384; XXII.

710-711.

65—66.

Eastland hearings and his comment: New Orleans Times-Picayune,
April 6, 1936; New York Times.

April 23.

1956.

40, and April 25, 25.

66.

Wuifs testimony: WR, 384; VIII, 18-21.

Note/: As McBride recalled it, Oswald wanted them to join the Communist
party to “take advantage of their social functions." But since neither Oswald
oor the Party was known to be interested in “social functions,” it’s likely that
McBride mistook his use of the word “socialist” for “social.”
67.

“I Led Three Lives”: Oswald, 47; I, 200.

67.

Weinstein and others on the typical assassin: Restak, "Assassin!” 80-82.

68.

Yocheison and Samcnow: For a summary of the book, see Science, Febru-
ary 3, 1978.

511-514; Newsweek February 27.

1978, 91.

Samenow's comments, “wraps himself in .

.

.

secrecy," and “sees himself as
unique”: Interview on “Good Morning America," ABC-TV, February 28,
1978.

69.

“The criminal believes he has been wronged”: Yocheison and Samcnow,
488.

“Although he had broken the law”: Ibid., 438.

70.

“Although he may forcefully present himself*.

Ibid., 463.

Study rejected by many: Science.

February 3, 1978.

71.

Rode bike, visited museums: WR, 679; VIII, 125.

Tried to interest classmates in Marxism: VIII, 81.

B football team, Robert's comment: VIII, 83; Oswald, 56.

Letter Socialist party: WR, 68i; XI, 210.

Note 2: Oswald’s letter was discovered in 1964 at the Duke University
library by on employee who was setting up a chronological file of a large
consignment of Socialist party papers that had been turned over to the library
in January 1959 (letter to the author from Virginia Gray, Assistant Curator
of the William R.

Perkins Library at Duke, February 27, 1970).

CHAPTER 4.

THE MARXIST MARINE
72.

Warren Report critics on enlistment: Summers, 143.

Robert and Pic on enlistment: Oswald.

49, 57, WR, 384.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Robert and Pic on enlistment: Oswald. 49, 57, WR, 384. Oswald’s explanation: De Mohrenschildt manuscript, HACH, XII, 82; II,
399-
Basic training, reading and aviation scores: WR, 681-683.

--- PAGE BREAK ---236,,, Oswald's Game
72-73.

Alien R.

Felde’s recollection: XXIII, 797.

II' U*M “ **“*• bX radar «ew.

briefings: Epstein.

Legend.

JJ.

270-
280 n.

1.

(in the late 1970s Epstein interviewed dozens of the men who had
served with Oswald in the Marines.)
Bristling at Young officers: Epstein, Legend, 68.

Powers on Oswald: VIII, 288.

74- Bar girts: Epstein, Legend, 70-71.

Gunshot wound and court-martial: Ibid., 72-73; WR, 683; VIII, 319-320.

74- 75- Second court-martial: WR, 684; Epstein, Legend, 78-79.

75- Comment on getting out of brig: Epstein, Legend.

79.

Claimed met Communists in Japan: IX, 242-243- XI 172-171
Began studying Russian: WR, 684.

75- 76- Guard duty incident: Epstein, Legend, 81-82; WR, 684.

76.

Radar crew: WR, 684.

76- 77- Donovan's comments on Oswald: VIII, 290-293, 297, 293.

293.

77- Delgado on officer-baiting: VUI, 265.

78.

"Pursue Russian": VIII, 297.

v-
Pro-Russian behavior: VIA, 322, 323, 315-316.

Subscriptions to Russian paper and Worker.

VIII, 323, 315, 320.

242.

Critics on pro-Russian behavior: Anson, 158; Summers, 149
Donovan on Oswald's politics: WR.

686.

Zfr79' 9*pl>ln B,ock: Interview with Epstein reported in Legend, 86.

"Unjustly put upon”: XI, 100.

Delgado on helping Castro: VIII, 233.

Esile raids on Dominican Republic, other countries: Halperin, 320-121
Morgan's background: Epstein, Legend.

88, 283-286 n.

2,
Delgado on Morgan and leading expeditions: VIII, 240
“Do away with Trujillo": VIII, 241.

Learning Spanish: WR, 687; VIII, 241.

80.

Oswald on Cuban purges: VIII, 240, 243, 235.

“Be part of revolutionary movement”: VIII, 241.

Contacted Cuban consulate?: VIII, 241-243.

Oswald on religion.

Dai /Capital, and Animat Farm: VIII, 262.

244, 235.

80A.

Delgado on Oswald’s marksmanship: VUI, 235.

8L Rifle scores: WR, 681-682; Time.

November 24,1975,37 (see also I, 233).

81-82.

Thomley on Oswald: XL 96, 87, 91-93, 97-98.

82A.

Extinction without meaning, "no wonder men go into a rage"- Na-
vasky, 426, 422; Becker, 64, 141.

8 '
83.Extinction without meaning, "no wonder men go into a rage"- Na-
vasky, 426, 422; Becker, 64, 141.

8 '
83.

"Come the revolution”: XI, 94-95.

Notes...

257
CHAPTER 5.

THE DEFECTION
84.

Commitment to Reserves: WR, 688-689; Epstein, Legend.

89.

Equivalency exam, college application: WR, 687; XVI, 621, 625.

Robert on cover story: Oswald.

99.

85.

Oswald’s trips to L.A.: VIII.

241, 251.

Extradition treaties, defection route: VIII, 260-261.

Oswald denies plan to go to Cuba: Epstein, Legend.

89; VIII, 244.

85A.

Letter to Robert, Marguerite's injury: Oswald, 93-94.

•
Letter to Marguerite: XVI, 581-582.

Marguerite’s affidavits, Lee’s discharge: WR, 688; HACR, 281-282.

85A-86.

Application for passport: XXII, 78.

86.

Promise not to divulge secrets: Epstein, Legend.

90-91.

86.

Claims involvement in "export”: I, 201-202, 212; Oswald, 95; WR, 689.

86.

Farewell letter to Marguerite: WR, 690.

86- 87.

On board the Marion Lykex WR, 690; XI, 115-117; Epstein, Legend.

9*-93-
87.

Arrival and departure at Southampton: WR, 690.

87- 88.

Moscow activities and "apparent suicide attempt”: WR, 691-602-
XVI, 94- '
88.

Hospital records: XVIII, 468; WR.

692.

Interviewed by new officials: XVI.

96.

Johnson on Soviets' suspicion: XX, 293.

89.

Asked for credentials: XVI, 96.

Told to “go home”: XVI, 94.

Embassy lost track of him: XVIII, 156, 120.

Suspicion of questioning by KGB: Epatein, Legend.

295 n.

4; Blakey and
Billings, 123.

Low security clearance: XXIII, 796; XVIII, 116.

89- 90- Access to confidential information: VIII, 298.

90.

Scientist defector and Air Review photograph: De Gramont, 354—355,
258.

“Will talk to a Marine about .

..

drill”: Dave Murphy, former head of CIA
Soviet operations in Berlin, quoted by Martin, 104, 157-158.

90- 91.

Application to Patrice Lumumba University, desire for education:
WR, 705; McMillan, 104-123-124; HACH, II.

217-218.

91.

Thomley on Oswald’s expectations: XI, 98.

Other defectors’ work assignments: De Gramont, 349.

353.

‘•Serves him right”: V, 294.--- PAGE BREAK ---

353. ‘•Serves him right”: V, 294. Given apartment and stipend: WR, 697, 698.

--- PAGE BREAK ---258...

Oswald's Game
92.

Disliked manuaJ work: XVIIIt 430; IX, 136; McMillan, 104.

92.

First U.S.

plans to assassinate Castro: Interim, 74, 80.

92.

1961 Stale of the Union message: Quoted in Blakey and Billings, 136.

92A- House of Representatives resolution: Ibid., 137.

93.

Church on “rogue elephant”: Baltimore Sun, July 16, 1975.

Church committee’s conclusion: Interim, 6-7.

"Nailing Jello to a wall”: Walter Mondale, quoted in the New York Times,
October 5, 1975.

Criticism of CIA and administration officials: Interim, 7.

94.

Robert Kennedy briefing, Houston's comment: Ibid., 132-133.

Notes of November 4 meeting: Schlesinger, 476.

94- 95* November 16 speech, MONGOOSE authorization and purpose: In-
terim, 139, 142.

95.

January 19 meeting notes: Ibid., 141.

95- 96.

Helms testimony: Ibid., 149, 150.

96.

Pressure from administration, McNamara's comment: Ibid., 159-160
I57“*5®*
Smathers testimony: Ibid., 325-326.

Kennedy's habit to question: McMillan, 4.

97.

Dinner party comment on Cuba: Interim, 326.

Tad Szulc interview: Ibid., 324-325.

Board of National Estimates conclusion: Ibid., 325, 136-137.

98.

Bccket situation and Mathias-Hclms exchange: Ibid., 316, 149.

99.

Date of first known plot: Ibid., 73.

CHAPTER 6.

GETTING OUT
100.

Letter to U.S.

Embassy: WR, 732; XVI, 685.

Snyder's reply: XVIII, 133.

Dispatch to State Department: XVIII, 133-134.

State Department reply: XVIII, 136.

Fear of being arrested: McMillan, 126.

100- toi.

March 12 letter XVI, 702-704.

101.

Snyder’s reply: XXII, 33-34.

First meetings with Marina: McMillan, 72-75, 93-94.

Conversation with Marina’s relatives: Ibid., 95.

101- 102.

Marina’s attraction to Oswald: Ibid., 96, 101.

102.

"Fell in love with the man": HACH, Xil, 375.

Pechorin as Marina's ideal: McMillan, 38-39, 584 n.

L
April 18 meeting and marriage: Ibid., 97-98, 107.

Notes...

259
proposal to Ella German: WR, 699, 704.

,03.

Lies during courtship and Marina’s reaction: McMillan, 97, 142.

-pd love the danger”: Ibid., 116.Lies during courtship and Marina’s reaction: McMillan, 97, 142.

-pd love the danger”: Ibid., 116.

Reaction to Bay of Pigs, comments on Castro: Ibid., 157; I, 24-
Cuban students and Oswald’s view of Cuba: McMillan, 157; IX, 37°*
,04.

May 16 letter: XVI, 705'708-
Letter to Robert: XVI, 826.

Letter to Marguerite: WR, 705.

,04-105.

May 31 letter to Robert: XVI, 828-829.

Fear of arrest, comment to Manna: McMillan, 127, 133.

Appearance at embassy, phone call to Marina: Ibid., 128, 129.

105- 106.

Embassy questioning of Oswald: XVIII, 137-1381 XI, 200.

106.

Warren Report on Oswald’s responses: WR, 706.

106- 107.

Snyder on Oswald’s anxiety about imprisonment and new attitude:
XVIII, 138-139.

107.

Marina’s reaction to Snyder’s comment: McMillan, 134, 591 n.

13.

,08.

Oswald’s "Historic Diary": XVI, 94-105.

108.

Note t: Marina has said that she first saw her husband working on his diary
in mid-July 1961, just after they relumed from the American Embassy
(McMillan, 144).

Her recollection matches internal evidence in the diary.

For
instance, in describing his initial visit to the embassy in an October 1959 entry,
Oswald referred to "Richard Snyder American Head Consular in Moscow at
that time” and to his assistant, "(now Head Counsular) McVickers [sic)"
(XVI, 96).

McVickar didn’t take over from Snyder until July 1961 (V, 306)
and left Moscow that September (V, 300; XVIII.

154).

Thus the entry reflected
the situation that existed only between those two dates.

108.

"Future readers in mind”: WR, 259, 691.

January 1961 entry and Report’s conclusion: WR, 394-395*
no.

Suggestion that Oswald return before Marina and his response: XXII, 90;
XVI, 717-718.

“If it hadn’t been for you” and Marina's reply: McMillan, 170.

Marguerite on discharge change: WR, 710.

110— in* January 30 letter to Robert: XVI, 865-867.

111— 112.

Letter to John Connally: WR, 710.

112.

February 15 letter: XVI, 870-871.

113.

Powers’s trial and defense attorney's statements: De Gramont, 282.

113A.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Powers’s trial and defense attorney's statements: De Gramont, 282. 113A. Second letter to Robert mentioning Powers: XVI, 875. 114. Writing on board Maasdanv XVI, 110-120; McMillan, 194-195*

--- PAGE BREAK ---260...

Oswald's Game
List of questions and answers: XVI, 436-439; WR, 399.

CHAPTER 7.

HOMECOMING
115.

Newspaper article on Oswald: IV, 415.

Oswalds' arrival and caution to brother: Oswald.

114-115.

Letter from Fort Worth Press writer: FBI document loau.

No.

2, National
Archives.

Marina’s first experiences in U.S.: Oswald, 118-119; XI, 53.

115-116.

Oswald’s complaints about Marina: III, 128; VIII, 135; II, 305.

Meeting with Peter Gregory: WR, 714.

Fluency in Russian: IX, 226, 259.

Fain’s interview and report: IV, 415-416, 422, 418.

117.

Refused to take lie detector test: Book V, 88.

Job and apartment: WR, 715; IX, 226.

Subscription to The Worker: XXII, 271-272; Newman, 239-240.

117A.

Letter to Socialist Workers Party: X, 113.

Wrote to Fair Play for Cuba Committee: XXIV, 341; Newman.

39.

August 16 FBI interview, Marina’s recollections: I, 20; Book V, 88.

u8.

FBI’s concern: Book V, 89; V, 105.

“Extreme allergy to FBI”: IX, 458.

Refusal to give Robert his home address: XVI, 887; IV, 422; Newman, 242
320; Oswald, 127.

’
“Nervous and irritable”: L 32, 49.

Fain closes case: V, 5.

118.

Note 1: The Justice Department didn’t prosecute Oswald for revealing
military information because the only evidence against him was his own
statement to Richard Snyder—a statement Oswald later retracted when he
was questioned by Snyder and by the FBI (HACR, 266-267).

118.

Emigres' desire to meet Oswalds: IX, 236, 267; VIII, 350-351.

Meeting Bouhe and Meller, Bouhe’s comments: VIII, 358, 355, 160-261
371-372.

.

J *
119.

Bouhe at Oswald apartment: VIII, 384, 371
Melleris impressions: VIII, 382, 381, 384.

Refusal to let Marina learn English: II, 310; IX, 310.

357.

"9-|2°_Paul Gregory and the Oawalda: LX, 145,144,155-137,148; McMillan
239; XXIII, 407.

120-iXi.

John and Elena Hall: McMillan, 247; VIII, 407-408, 411 409 an
402.

J’
121.

Oswald on Emigres: IX, 239, 250; L 10.

Notea...

261
121- 122.

De Mohrenschildt’s background and personality: WR, 283; IX, 175,
181, 183-184.--- PAGE BREAK ---

261
121- 122. De Mohrenschildt’s background and personality: WR, 283; IX, 175,
181, 183-184. 268; VIII, 377, HACH, XII, 53, 56. 122. “Leftwing enthusiast”: II. 327; IX, 266; X, 12. Relationship with Oswald: IX, 277, 266; XXII, 783. De Mohrenschildt’s testimony: IX, 243, 241, 267. •‘Looking for utopia”: IX, 246, 312. 122- 123. Oswald’s political writings: XVI, 424, 426-427, 433-434, 436. 124-126. De Mohrenschildt manuscript, “a seeker for justice”: HACH, XII,
81. Oswald on defection and Russia: Ibid., 91. 86, 103. On integration: Ibid., 127, 119-120, 133. On world politics: Ibid., 121, 307. On Hoover: Ibid., 121. On death: Ibid., 151, 93. On Marina and de Mohrenschildt’s agreement: Ibid., 121, 261. “Coup d’etat”: Ibid., 147. On President Kennedy: Ibid., 146-147. Conversations on being a revolutionary and ideology: Ibid., 81, 144-145. 126. Oswald “an idealistic Marxist”: VIII, 436. 126A Oswald on Walker and Marines: I, in. 127. Walker’s release and arrival at Love Field: New York Times, October 7,
1062, 1, and October 8, 14; Newman, 55. Emigres’ help and decision to move to Dallas: McMillan, 251-252; I, 5. 128. Rented post office box: WR. 119. Claim he had just gotten out of Marines: X, 179. Poster blowups to defense committee: X, 106. 130. Walker “another Hitler”: II, 315-316; I, 16. CHAPTER 8. TAKING ACTION . 131. “Like two friends meeting”: IX, 86, 82. Oswald’s striking Marina, rudeness: IX 86, 313. Similar treatment of Marguerite: VIII, 55, 57. 132. Marina’s admiration of Castro: IX 357; L 24; XXIII, 390. “Overblown opinion": IX, 351. Oswalds’ disagreement on priorities: III, 128; XI, 130; IX, 311, 376; XXII, 763. Katya Ford on Oswalds’ relationship: II, 305. Marina’s doubts Lee loved her: McMillan, 316, 393. 394, 395, 472-473. Alexandra Taylor's testimony: XI, 128-129. 133. Gary Taylor and Oswald: McMillan, 256; IX, 82, 81. Max Clark on Oswald's decision to leave Russia: VIII, 347, 350. See also VIII,
425; XXIII, 399; XI, 98.xandra Taylor's testimony: XI, 128-129. 133. Gary Taylor and Oswald: McMillan, 256; IX, 82, 81. Max Clark on Oswald's decision to leave Russia: VIII, 347, 350. See also VIII,
425; XXIII, 399; XI, 98.

--- PAGE BREAK ---I6J...

Otwald'f Gum , ,k (JtS
134.

Oswald’s coiicism of Kennedy: Epstein, Legend 204.

135- Attempt to join Socialist Workers party: X U3; XIX, 376-378; Newman
270-271.

136.

Mrs.

Tobias on Oswald: X, 233, 237, 248.

Alexandra's comment: XI, 140.

Marina on quarrel: XVIII, 621-622.

See also I, 11.

137.

Marina’s moving out, 6migr6s’ assistance: VIII, 386; McMillan, 263
283-284.

*37—*3®.

Marina and Valentina Ray on reconciliation: XVIII, 622-623; VIII,
418.

138A.

Only the de Mohrenschildts remained friendly: McMillan, 285-286*
WR, 282; II, 307.

‘
138A.

"Living in another world": XVIII, 624; I, 4-3.

139.

Political posters: XIX, 579; XI, 208-209 (Socialist Workers party); XXI,
674-677 (Hall-Davis committee); XXI, 721, XX, 269 (The Worker).

Subscription to The Militant.* X 109.

The Militant on Kennedy’s Miami speech: January 7, 1963, L
140.

Walker's release and ordering of gun: Newman, 39; WR, 174; L 16.

"Alek” nickname and James Bond: WR, 122; XXII, 82.

"Hideir an "altered Fidel": I, 64; V, 401.

141.

Hide!!

ID: WR.

723; McMillan, 319; Epstein, Legend.

316 n.

6.

Studying map and bus schedule: V, 417; WR, 404.

Pressuring Marina to return to USSR: I, to, 12-13.

142.

Letter to Soviet Embassy: XVI, 10; I, 35; Newman, 313.

Meeting Ruth Paine and Marina’s comment: McMillan, 344, 606 n.

11.

February 1963 Marina’s worst month: McMillan, 317.

M3-I44- Landlady’s comments on Marina: X, 239, 244, 230.

144.

Oswald’s staying out late: I, 14; X 18, 30-31; X, 243 (Tobias note);
McMillan, 353 (call to de Mohrenschildt).

144.

Decision to move, Mrs.

Tobias’s comment: McMillan, 329; X 262-263.

Study in new apartment: McMillan, 330.

143.

Pictures of Walker's house: WR, 183-186.

Notebook: Ibid., 404-405; XI, 292-293.

Rifle and pistol shipped March 20: WR, 723.

Renewed FBI interest: IV, 441-442; V, 5-6.

146.

"Cooling off period," Hoover's later reaction: Book V, 90.

Oswald’s case reopened: IV, 442."Cooling off period," Hoover's later reaction: Book V, 90.

Oswald’s case reopened: IV, 442.

146-147 Backyard photos with weapons: WR, 724; 1,15-16; XXIII, 420,408;
XI, 296; McMillan, 544
M8.

Michael Paine, April 2 dinner: II, 393.

389-39°.

402-403; XXIII, 502
(Michael’s father); McMillan, 345“346.

^Practice with rifle: McMillan, 347.

148- 148 A.

Reasons for loss of job: X 189, 190-191; XI, 479-
l48B.

Sam Ballen interview: IX.

47-53; McMillan, 278; Epstein, Legend.,
209-ito, 319 n.

11.

148B.

Pro-Castro demonstration: XX, jn; XXII, 796.

,49.

Attack on Walker: WR, 183-187; McMillan, 608 n.

4; XI, 405-410;
HACR, 59-
149- 150* Oswald's note of instructions: WR, 183-185.

151.

Marina on Oswald’s explanation: I, 16; XXIV, 47; HACH, XII, 391;
HACH, 11, 236, 232, 251.

Instructions kept in Manna’s book: XXIII, 39l-
Dcstruction of notebook: XI, 292-293.

i5tA.

On Marina’s failure to go to police: McMillan, 353-354.

607-608 n.

23.

\151B.

Seeking asylum, "grandiose plans": Newman, 338-339; McMillan, 325-
3*6LXL^96.

,5IC NUorripcident: WR, 187-189; V, 389-390,39*.

395; McMillan, 367-371;
NewmanT349
152.

Move to New Orleans: II, 457-463; McMillan, 381.

CHAPTER 9* THE ACTIVIST
154.

Castro agents among refugees: New York Times.

April 13, 1963, 41.

Guerrilla attack in Venezuela: Newman, 269-270.

MONGOOSE disbanded.

Special Group under Bundy: Interim, 170.

,54-155* Opening to Cuba proposed, "separate track": Ibid., t73-*74» *76 n.

I.

155.

Time quotes administration official: February 15, 1963, 23.

Kennedy news conference and White House estimate: Time.

February 22,
Wall Street Journal quoted: The Worker, March 19, 1963, 2; The Militant.

Alpha 66 raid and official crackdown: New York Times, March 20, 1963, 2,
March 30.

l; April 1, 1, and April 6, 1.

155A.

Kennedy April 19 speech: McMillan, 611-612 n.

2.

No ongoing CIA assassination plots: Interim, 85-86, 84.

Mafia not serious participants?: Summers, 269, 270; Blakey, 152.

156A.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mafia not serious participants?: Summers, 269, 270; Blakey, 152. 156A. Oswald at home on April 21: McMillan, 369-370. 157. Standing Group and CIA on Castro’s death: Interim, 171. o

--- PAGE BREAK ---D\X> Ccufif l\i j\ /Vurtc^?

264...

Oswald's Game
158.

Call to Lillian Murret: VIII, 133-134, 164.

Unemployment benefits and job: WR, 725, 726.

139 Lillian's testimony: VIII, 136.

Renting apartment: VIII, 59.

Mania1, dijcusiiom with Ruth and phone call: McMillan, 393.

394-395; n.

160.

Oswald,’ reunion: II, 470-471.

Card to Fair Play for Cuba and reply: XX, 531, 517.

160-161.

Oswald’, response to Vincent Lee: XX, 511-513.

i6t-t6l.

Newman on Oswald', plans: Newman, 41-43, 55-56, 71-71, 358.

161.

Marina on purpose of pro-Castro activities: I, 14-15.

163.

Oswald’s political resume: XVI, 337-346.

1963 2
S
5UbV€ni0n air,ift”: Timt' March *9.1963.

19- See also Time, March 8,
0n lrave!

ban defian«- Time, August 9, 1963, 31-32.

ouse Un-Amencan Activities Committee chairman on travelers: New Or-
leans Times-Picayune, July 24, 1963, L
Hijacking plans: I, 22, 23.

‘There’s a Cuban Embassy in Mexico”: McMillan, 447
Letter from Soviet Embassy: XVIII, 514-513.

Pressuring Marina to answer letter.

McMillan, 410-411.

165.

Marina’s letter to Ruth: XVII, 88
Handbills: XII, 796-798; WR, 728.

165A.

Letter from Vincent Lee: XX, 514-516.

166.

Post office boa rental: WR, 312.

Membership forms: XXII, 800-801,
166- 167.

Letter to Vincent Lee: XX, 518-521.

167.

No response from Fair Play Committee: WR, 412.

167- 168.

June 10 letter to The Worker XX, 257-258.

JJJJ 3if n"“ °SWald ren"d “ 0ffice: WR*29i’4o8'Bu‘ *** 8150 Epstein.

Renewed FBI interest: XVII, 794; iv.

411-413.

169.

Oswald at Dumaine Street dock: XXII, 806.

169-170.

LeBlanc's testimony: X 215.

170.

At Crescent City Garage: X 221.

Passport application: XVII, 666-667.

iVore/: Critic, have eipnwed suspicion about the speed with which Oswald
1 ’ 336: Summen’ 3fi2>- A ,u|y « story in the
Timts-Picayunt headlined "Passport, Are Now Easier to Obta.n" pointed
0\sfy%, - 0 l.lM.

Notes...

265
out that because of a new policy of decentralization, passports were being
> issued at New Orleans and other cities in 24 hours or less (Sec.Notes...

265
out that because of a new policy of decentralization, passports were being
> issued at New Orleans and other cities in 24 hours or less (Sec.

II, p.

13).

| 170-171.

Scene with Marina and letter to Soviet Embassy: I, 68; McMillan,
I 417-419; XVI, 30.

i tju Ruth’s offer to Marina: WR, 727-728.

Lost job, unemployment benefits: Ibid., 726-727.

172.

Library books checked out: XXV, 929-931.

172.

Subscriptions, Agitator a Party manual: WR, 743, 744; Epstein, Legend,
ill.

Speech at Jesuit college: XXV, 923.

924, 9*9.

9*1.

9*6-927-
173.

Robert Fitzpatrick’s recollections: XXV, 924-925.

CHAPTER 10.

“STREET AGITATION .

.

.

RADIO SPEAKER AND
LECTURER"
174.

Size of New Orleans Cuban community: Blakey and Billings, 177.

DRE shelling of Havana: X, 34.

FBI raid: New Orleans Times-Picayunt, August 1 and 2,1963; Book V, 11-u.

Guerrilla camp disbanded: Brener, vti-viii, 69-70.

175A.

Notebook entry: XVI, 67.

DRE leader Bringuier, store window sign: X 34; XXII, 823.

176.

Young boys collecting for DRE: XXVI, 767.

Oswald’s offer to Bringuier: X 35”36-
Suggestions to anti-Castro boys: X, 83, 77.

177.

T infiltrated the Cuban Student Directorate”: XIV, 280.

Note /.

Oswald may also have seen a July 17 Times-Picayune story that
began, “Hundreds of anti-Castroices were arrested in northern Camaguey
Province after a militiaman infiltrated their guerrilla ranks and reported
them” (p.

14).

178.

Bringuier incident seen as infiltration attempt: Newman, 379-380;
Blakey and Billings, >62, 364; Epstein, Legend, 222-223; Meagher, 384, 386.

178-179.

Bringuier and friends confront Oswald: X.

37-38; XVII, 761.

*79-
Note 2: Some theorists contend that the exiles’ attack on Oswald was a
prearranged mock battle, citing an August 1 letter from Oswald to Vincent
Lee that seems to describe this confrontation eight days before it occurred:
“Through the efforts of some exile ‘gusanos* (worms) a street demonstration
was attacked and we were officially cautioned by police.--- PAGE BREAK ---

37-38; XVII, 761. *79-
Note 2: Some theorists contend that the exiles’ attack on Oswald was a
prearranged mock battle, citing an August 1 letter from Oswald to Vincent
Lee that seems to describe this confrontation eight days before it occurred:
“Through the efforts of some exile ‘gusanos* (worms) a street demonstration
was attacked and we were officially cautioned by police. This incident robbed
me of what support I had leaving me alone . . (XX, 524-525; Summers,
302-303). Bul Oswald also wrote to Lee after his clash with Bnnguier’s
group, presenting his arrest as a victory for Fair Play. It makes little sense

--- PAGE BREAK ---266...

Oswald's Game
'«• M> «....

,S™?

isizej^fsrs?k> °™«»
oversight such as this wouldn't have been unu^nfl * reP°n- An
doesn't mention that Oswald had distributed ha rfh'iT* ,he.Warren Report
University campus that summer When a !

f* c“y’s Tu,ane
assassination to offer a copy he w J told i, “H* ,he FBI after «*>«
3« n.

,* XXV L 575^) '°‘d “ W“n ' needed Epstein.

Legend.

M“”“° “ ^ * » A « xvn.

m ,v.

,
Thomley on Oswald's definition of democracy: XI.

92
181-182.

Murret visit and Oswald's reaction- VIII M6 1 ,
Bnnguier on court appearance: X, 41.

* M6, 8?' 2*
183.

Oswald pleased by his arrest: McMillan, 431 I 2a-«
183A.

Purpose of pro-Castro activities: I.

24-25.

184.

Trade Mart demonstration: WR, 720
Bnogmer-s friend and Oswald: X, 41-42; I.

25
w **'??

,mproved relationship: McMillan.

446.

453
Manna , comments and his replies: Ibid., 436-437?

!.

22.

23.

84A, Manna on "games” with the rifle: XVIII.

631
185.

Stuckey’s impression of Oswald: XI.

162, 170-171.

185A-187.

Transcript of radio interview: XXI, 621-632.

r«h»nUfban A'VSL camPaign: Newman, 197, 19*.

Refw«"no ^Cd: XXIU> m Legend ,,3
Kcfugees no better source": HACH vn ,o, 5 ^
O...M MW ,o «...

„„^*2?'if* ,M
assaKSgs
6,«
6 "• ’•
sec.

I, 3.

New °rleans Tima-Picayune.

July 27, 1963.

371-
408; McMillan, 4J4.

admired Kennedy: HACH.

XII,
Stuckey.

"We fin,shed him on thrn program": WR.

4,0.

190-19,.

Stuckey and Oswald at bar XI, ,71-173; XVII.

764.

Note*...

267
192-193.

Letter to Central Committee, Johnson's reply: XX, 262-264, 265.

\ 194.

Admiration of U.S.

Party members, letter: McMillan.

438; I, 23.

Dry-firing of rifle and explanation: I, 21-22; McMillan.

452.

Andrews on Mexican and Oswald's discharge: WR, 325, 727* XI 120- Eo-
stein, Counterplot, 86.

* J ^
£95.

Oswald and the Habana Bar: XI, 341-342, 347, 351, 361.

I96A-I96.

Resume description and contents: WR, 731; XVI, 337-346- New-
man, 411-413.

196C.

Microdots: Epstein, Legend 194-196; XVI, 53, 346.

!96D.

Cuba as “last escape hatch": WR.--- PAGE BREAK ---

!96D. Cuba as “last escape hatch": WR. 414; Newman, 413. 196F. Covert operations stepped up in June: Interim, 173. 196G. Paramilitary operations and purpose: Ibid., 13. Ray Cline and Cuban raider on plots: Branch and Crile, "Kennedy Ven-
detta, 61. 196H. Renewed contact with AM/LASH. CIA cable: Interim, 86-87- Book
V. 3. *3. 14. too. 197- Attwood's efforts, comments by Robert Kennedy and Bundy: Interim
173-
Administration not informed of AM/LASH: Ibid., 173-175. 1 *97A-B. Church committee on exile assassination talk: Book V, 14. I97B. Raymond Rocca’s comment: Ibid., 15 n. 21; Blakey and Billings. 143-
1 v I?4’ ~IA memorandum dated 30 May 1975 obtained from the CIA under the
✓^LTcedonLof Information ACL portions deleted
197C. Oswald eager for Ruth Paine’s arrival: McMillan. 452. Oswald's travel plans: Ibid., 448. 461. Concealment of destination from Ruth: III, to, 27; WR, 413, 730. Oswald seen leaving apartment and on bus: WR, 730, 732. *
CHAPTER 11. THE TROUBLING TESTIMONY OF SYLVIA ODIO
198- 203 Odio's testimony: XI. 368-382; HACH. X. 26-27; Summers. 411-
414; Blakey and Billings, 163. 2°3; CI^iblc WitncSS: HACH’ * 2* #nd Summers, 589 n. 96 (doc-
£rn(fathcr*s ,ellcrfc Staff Report to the Warren Commission by
William T. Coleman, Jr., and W. David Slawson, pp. 109-110. National Ar-
chives. 203. Note t: Odio's description of "Leon" matched Oswald even in certain
details the Warren Commission didn’t notice. Odio recalled that “Leon" was
unshaven, and McMillan mentions the during the preceding summer Oswald

--- PAGE BREAK ---268 ...

Oswald's Game
became slovenly in his appearance and “by mid-July shaved only every other
day." During August he also lost considerable weight—and Odio remarked
that the shirt the American had on looked too big for him (McMillan, 415-416.

459; XI.

37')-
204.

Efforts to establish Oswald's whereabouts: Epstein, Inquest, 104.

Note 2: The Warren Report and its supporters argue that after reaching
Houston on this bus at about 10:50 P.M., Oswald called the home of Horace
Twiford, a member of the Socialist Labor party and therefore couldn’t have
been at Odio’s apartment that evening.

(In 1962 Oswald had requested litera-
ture from the New York office of the SLP, which forwarded his name and
address to Twiford.

On September U.

1963, Twiford sent him a copy of the
Party newspaper with his return address on it) The report’s claim that
Oswald made this call on September 25 isn’t supported by the affidavits of
Twiford and his wife, who spoke with Oswald in her husband’s absence.

Neither mentioned a specific date, placing the incident only in “late Septem-
ber" or "during the week" prior to September 27 (XL 179-180).

Moreover,
Mrs.

Twiford felt certain that Oswald telephoned between 7 and 10 P.M., and
made the reasonable point that a call at a later hour would have been memora-
ble.

She stated that “Oswald inquired as to how my husband had his address.

He also said that he had hoped to discuss ideas with my husband for a few
hours before he flew down to Mexico." She assumed it was a local call (XXIV,
726-727; WR, 323.

731).

If Oswald left for Houston by car on September 24,
be could have called the Twiford residence before 10 P.M.

and still had almost
twenty-four hours to reach Dallas, 245 miles away.

205.

Unemployment check: WR, 323; XXJV, 716, 388.

Not seen on Houston bus.

but on other buses: WR, 323, 732-733,736; XXIV,
717; XXV, 607; Meagher, 381.

Marina on when checks were picked up: XXIII, 388.

Check cashed on Tuesday, September 17: WR, 308.

206.Check cashed on Tuesday, September 17: WR, 308.

206.

Liebeler, "Odio may be right," and Rankin’s response: Epstein, Inquest,
105; memorandum from Liebeler to Howard P.

Willens, September 14, 1964,
pp.

4-6, National Arc hives.

Th d /J ^ ^ TTfrii&J
206-207.

Rankin’s letter to J.

Edgar Hoover: XXVI, 595-596.

207.

FBI explanation and Commission’s conclusion: XXVI, 834; WR, 324.

Collapse of FBI explanation: Meagher, 387; Summers, 4*6-417*.

HACR, 165.

208-210.

Meagher on Odio incident: Meagher.

386-387, 377.

210A.

Odio considered truthful: Anson, “Congress and the JFK Riddle," 29
(Church committee); Blakey and Billings, 364 (House Assassinations Com-
mittee).

Assassinations Committee conclusion: HACR, 166-167.

2!oA—B.

Blakey on Odio incident: Blakey and Billings, 165.

Notes...

269
212.

Marina on Oswald’s boast he was a good shot: XXIII, 409*
2ij.

Veciana and Gonzales plo(: O'Toole and Hoch, “Dallas: The Cuban
Connection," 96.

216.

Castro on plot: New York Times, October 24.

*961.

14*
217.

Odio’s referral of Martin to Miami leader.

XI.

375-
Odio on how she could have been located: XI, 380.

Rodriguez contacted by Oswald: Summers, 318, 575.

218.

Denials by JURE leaders and Amador Odio: WR, 324; HACH, X *9-
219-220.

Assassinations Committee on Cuban intelligence agents: HACR,
150-151 n.

19.

220.

"As far as taking orders .

.HACH, XII, 405-
22t.

Oswald on Marine training: VIII, 278.

Oswald legalistic: XI, 171, 477; XVIII, 98; XIX, 264.

Marina on Oswald's masquerading: HACH, XII, 43°*
221-221A.

De MohrenschUdt on Oswald: HACH, XII, 310-
CHAPTER 12.

CASTRO’S REVELATIONS
222.

McFarland testimony: XI, 214-215.

223.

At the Hotel Comercio and Soviet Embassy: WR, 733, 301.

Marina on Oswald’s travel plans: I, 23.

224.

Application for Cuban visa: XXV, 814-815.

229.

Silvia Duran in Oswald’s notebook: XVI, 54.

229-231.

Duran’s statement; XXIV, 588-590.

231.

Return visits to embassies: HACR.

147.

322*
Conditional approval of visa: XXV, 817.--- PAGE BREAK ---

147. 322*
Conditional approval of visa: XXV, 817. '•Confidential sources" in Mexico: WR, 305. 232. Phone call overheard by CIA: New York Times. September 21,1975. K
Washington Post, November 26, 1976. L . . ' - - _
CIA photographs, notification of other agencies: Epstein, Legend. 238, Sum-
mers, 380. 384. 374*
232A. Phillips on phone call: Summers, 388-389. Oswald's finances: WR, 745. ZUA-B. Ernesto Rodriguez's story: Summer*. 389 (quoting a Los Angeles
Times syndication in the Dallas Morning News. September 14. ‘975)-
ijj. Duran and philosophy professor. Contreras's account: HACR, 145-146;
Summers, 377“378*
mNot, Contreras first told his story in 1967 to 1 U.S. consul in Mexico.

--- PAGE BREAK ---270...

Oswald’s Ginte
who replied it to the CIA.

which confirmed that Contreras was a student
m.963 »nd « strong supponerofCas.ro.

When Summers spoke .0 him in .978.

^ lbe man Wh0 identlhed himself as Oswald didn't
ISS-D he pr“‘denl s aisa“ln'but thi» was not what he had told the consul
inALK, 144, 145 n.

17).

Ie‘« r “ Rfnkin- unseen by Slawson and Belin: Schorr,
e Assassins, 21; New York Timex November 14, 1976, 30.

t35:V6;J3*mSOn
0mV"tigat,On' Ferrie in P°°r health; Epstein, Counterplot,
7h 104-106, 119, 128; Brener, 80-81; Btakey and Billings, 48-49; ,Vew York
Timex May 11, 1967, 35 (Helms subpoenaed).

236-237.

Bergquist interview: Bergquist, "My Curious Row With Castro."
33~34» 5^5
237.

Turner Catledge on Castro: Wyden, 26.

£ 237ff Clarkmterview: Schorr, "The Assassins." 21-22; Summers, 39, (quot-
J CM,ro Sey* He Knew of Oswald Threat ^ICiU
^ JF K^NaiianaLEnquirer, October 15, 1967).

238.

Castro on assassination: Maakiewicz and Jones, 67.

■*» <=—
244- Castro "a disciple of Machiavelli": Halperin, 48, 60.

m 20^208°° <liffiCUl,y ge‘ting “ interview, public restaurants: HACH,
Arab restaurant: Mankiewicz and Jones, 34—35.

At all-night pizzeria: Lockwood, 243.

246.

"A former trial lawyer”: Mankiewicz and Jones, 13.

CHAPTER 13.

OCTOBER 1963—READING BETWEEN THE LINES
148.

Activities on returning to Dallas: WR, 737.

"They’re such bureaucrats”: McMillan, 471.

Apparent loss of enthusiasm for Cuba: WR.

413; McMillan, 471
Marina, “his favorite subject": V, 395.

249.

Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall recommendation: XL 478-470- XX.

1
Landlady's comment: VI, 406.

J'
Registers as O.H.

Lee: X.

294; VI, 436.

249-250.

Ruth Paine s letter: XVII, 150-153
Suggestion of job at Depository: III, 33-35; L 29; WR.

738.

TruJy s comment: XXII, 527.

Reading newspapers.

VL 352; III, 164-165, 218, n6.

440!

446-447W,edy a0d R“**“n trDOps* Ven«ue|an attacks: Newman.

441,
Note*...

271
Oswald on exploitation: II, 400-401, 411.

People ’“like cardboard” to Kim: McMillan, 482; XI, 402.--- PAGE BREAK ---

271
Oswald on exploitation: II, 400-401, 411. People ’“like cardboard” to Kim: McMillan, 482; XI, 402. Disliked Kennedy less than politicians to right: II, 414. \52. Oswald’s view of Michael: V, 393. P\ipc on Oswald as a revolutionary: XI, 402, 403, 411; II, 411. Lawrence of Arabia comparison: II, 401, 410. 252A. (Michael andbundic containing rifle: II. 414-418; IX, 437-448. 252A-53. Newspapers and magazines at Ruth’s: III, 114-116. 418
“Reading between the lines”: II, 418-419; IX. 455-456. 254. Castro speech: The Militant. October 14, 1963. 255. Birthday party. Oswalds’ improved relations: McMillan, 474; II, 422- I,
68. * ' *
Movies and Oswald’s reactions: McMillan, 475-476; XXIII, 403; I. 71-72. 257. Oswald on Sunday night: III, 39-40; McMillan, 477. 258. Oswald at Walker rally and ACLU meeting: II. 412, 403. 408. 258- 259. Krystinik's impressions: IX, 463. 259- Discussion after meeting: IX, 464-465, 468; IL 408; XXII, 714 (projec-
tiomst). 260. Conversation during drive home: II, 409, 408. 261. ACLU application, post office box: XVII, 671; XX, 172; WR, 312. 261-262. Letter to Arnold Johnson. XX, 271-273. 262A. Attwood’s efforts, Kennedy-Daniel meeting: Summers, 423-424. 262A-B. Cl A-AM/LASH meeting, weapons promised: Book V, 17-18, 101. CHAPTER 14. NOVEMBER: THE DECISION
263. FBI attempts to locate Oswald: IV, 446-448; XI, 461-462. 263-264. Hosty visits Ruth and Marina: IV. 452.449; HI. *5; 1.49; McMillan,
494-495*
264A. Marina’s remarks to Hosty: I, 37, 357; HI, 103. Hosty's address and phone number: III, 18. 264A.-265. Oswald’s reaction to FBI visit: McMillan, 499; III, ion XXII
786. 266. Second Hosty-Ruth Paine conversation: IV, 453; HI, 96, 102. 104, 129
Manna memorizes license number. McMillan, 498. 267. Marina on “a matter of privacy”: III, 100. November 8 conversation with Ruth: HI, 102, 18-19. 101. See also I, 57. 267-68. Oswald’s note to Hosty: Book V, 95-97.

--- PAGE BREAK ---| 272...

0»w«W’s Game
Note i: Hasty’s receptionist claimed that the note was partly visible inside
the unsealed envelope and that it contained a threat to blow up the FBI and
Dallas Police Department, but this is unlikely.

Hosty said the note was folded
so that the writing couldn’t be seen, and it would have been uncharacteristic
of Oswald to put an incriminating statement on paper.

Hosty’s version also
sounds more like Oswald, who frequently took his complaints to “proper
authorities.” Finally, Hosty’s reaction—putting the note aside—suggests that
Oswald made no violent threat
268-269.

Letter to Soviet Embassy: XVI, 33; III.

13; WR*
270.

Oswald’s knowledge of Azcue’s replacement: Newman, 4951 3l0'»
XXV, 817 (October 15 letter from Cuba regarding Oswald’s visa, addressed
to Alfredo Mirabal, consul of Cuba).

Marina unaware of new visa request: McMillan, 506.

270.

Note 2.* In an earlier, handwritten draft Oswald had written.

The agent
also ‘suggested’ that my wife could 'remain in the U.S.

under FBI protection,’
that is, she could refuse to return to the—” The last five words were crossed
out and the sentence completed with “defect from the Soviet Union.

Oswald
clearly felt that Hosty’s routine assurances to Marina somehow threatened his
plans to send her back to Russia.

Ruth discovered this draft lying on her desk
on November 9 (HI, 13-*.

5^ WR* 309).

Puzzled and disturbed by its
contents, she made a copy, intending to show it to Hosty if he returned.

271.

Trip to shopping center, Oswald’s mood: III, 14; IX, 39*• 394*
Oswald asked not to return on weekend.

Learner’s permit application: l, 63;
U.

5*5-5»7-
272.

Marina’s attempt to call Oswald: III, 43“44-
272- 273.

November 18 argument over alias: 1,46; III, 45; McMillan, 516-517.

273- 274.

President’s Miami speech: Newman, 509; Summers, 425, 423.

274.

Newspapers’ coverage of speech and motorcade route: XXVI, 69; New-
man, 511.

274- 275.

Marina on Oswald’s failure to call: III, 45“46*
275.274- 275.

Marina on Oswald’s failure to call: III, 45“46*
275.

Hunting rifle in Truly’s office: McMillan, 519; VII, 381-382, 387-388.

Conversation with Frazier: II, 222.

Ruth on Oswald’s arrival: III, 46-48.

276.

Oswald’s activities at Ruth’s house: McMillan, 521, 523-525.

276-276A.

President Kennedy in Fort Worth: Bishop, 25, 28, 61; Manches-
ter, 114.

nu 137; vn, 455*
276B.

Oswald on his way to shoot Walker?: Newman, 47~49-
276B.

Notes...

273
Note 3: There are other theories about where Oswald was headed.

Commis-
sion lawyer David Belin believes that he was en route to a street at which he
could have caught a bus to Mexico (Belin, 425-428).

Congressman Harold
Sawyer of the Assassinations Committee believes that Oswald was on his way
to the home of an individual identified by the Dallas press as a Communist
party defector who had helped the FBI destroy the Party in Texas.

The news
story had appeared on the same page as articles about John Abt defending
Communists in New York and the president’s proposed visit to Dallas.

The
informant’s home was two blocks farther up the street in the direction Oswald
was walking when Tippit stopped him (HACR, 673-674).

276B.

Oswald seen by shoe store manager: VII, 3-4.

CHAPTER 15.

THE ARREST
277.

Seth Kantor’s reaction: XX, 410.

AM/LASH meeting with case officer: Book V, 19-20.

277-78.

Castro’s statements: Daniel, “When Castro Heard the News.

278.

Michael Paine’s reactions: McMillan, 540-541.

Oswald', arrest: VII, 40, 5».

73: VII 54 (crowd); VII 41.

59 0" police car);
Belin, 27.

279.

Fritz on Oswald’s answers: IV, 239.

Other questioners’ impressions: XXIV, 839* 8441 135*
Oswald discusses political beliefs: WR, 610; IV, 224.

Oswald apprised of rights, declines lawyer.

IV, 216.

FBI agents join questioning: IV, 209, 210.

Oswald meets Hosty: IV, 210, 466-467.

’ 279-80.

Hosty realizes note was from Oswald: HACR, 245.

280.

Oswald’s statements on rifle, whereabouts, and pistol: WR, 619; XI, 613;
WR.

181.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Oswald’s statements on rifle, whereabouts, and pistol: WR, 619; XI, 613;
WR. 181. Denial he was in Mexico City: IV, 210. Witnesses identify Oswald: WR, 166. Concealment of Neely Street address: WR, 617. rfi Oswald a. press conference: IV. 166; Newman. 547- Ruby s personalily
J!d arrest record: XXIII. it. 11.17a. 35*. 7. “5; WR. 796. 800. Ruby s large
sums of money and pistol: WR, 797, 805. t&t-l&i. Ruby’s reaction to assassination: WR, 335. 337-33*
182. Oswald’s assertions. Jarman’s location: WR, 182, 635. *5°*
Jarman. Norman, and Williams on shooting: III, UH-icrj. 175^76
J8IA. Secret Service report: WR. 635; Oswald asks for Abu XX 441; IV. 215. VO, 3>4-
282-83. Kancor and Oswald s remarks: XX, 416.

--- PAGE BREAK ---, and Williams on shooting: III, UH-icrj. 175^76
J8IA. Secret Service report: WR. 635; Oswald asks for Abu XX 441; IV. 215. VO, 3>4-
282-83. Kancor and Oswald s remarks: XX, 416.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

276... Oswald's Game
308F. Blakey’s suspicion Castro’s denial untrue: Ibid., 146, 147-148-
CHAPTER 17. CONSPIRACY THINKING: BEST EVIDENCE AND
OTHER THEORIES
309-310. TV documentary: "J. Edgar Hoover,” ABC News Closcup, June 3,
1982.
310. Origin of Lifton’s theory: Lifton, 25-27.
311. Witnesses on casket and sheet: Ibid., 775, 777. 786-787*
31L Body bag, plain casket: Ibid., 746-747* 785* 794-
Time of arrival: Ibid., 516, 604, 605, 728.
312. “Had this been an ordinary case”: Ibid., 775.
Elizabeth Loftus on memory: Rodgers, “The Malleable Memory of Eyewit-
nesses,” 32, 34.
Lady Bird Johnson’s flight of sttin: Manchester, 236.
312-13. O'Connor and body bag: Lifton, 747-
Two other witnesses: Ibid., 794. 785-
Lifton on sutured throat wound: Ibid., 755.
Chief of surgery’s recollection: Ibid., 804, 810.
314. On vertical thinking: de Bona 7* 88.
314-315. Other theories on backward movement: Kurtz, 102-103.
315. Eddowes and assistants: Eddowes, x.
316. Varying heights: Ibid., 211, 213, 214.
316. Pic on Oswald’s appearance: Ibid., 36-37.
316-317. “Switching” of fingerprints: Ibid., 139.
317A-B. Betrayal scenario: Morrow, 108, 124-127, 176-177* i0°"i33
318A. Morrow on motivations: Morrow, 127.
318B. Evidence Oswald at Cuban Embassy, November 9 letter: Summers,
372. 374-376. 398; WR, 304-305, 309-3*0-
319. National Research Council on shots: Science, October 8, 1982, 127—*33-
319-319A. Assassinations Committee on possible conspirators: HACR, 108-
109, 109 n. 4-
319A-320. Committee conclusions on Oswald’s guilt: Ibid., 40,46-47, 53~54»
57-59*
320. “Bewilderingly well framed”: Summers, 86.
32(^-321. Ferric’s background: HACH, X, 106-m. 127.
321-322. Marina on Oswald’s saving money: McMillan, 459.
322. Oswald in Clinton?: HACR, 142; HACH, IV, 485; Summers, 334-335-
Notes ... 277
No training as electrician, HACH, XII, 400.
323. Clinton incident seen as intelligence scheme: Summers. 336-337-
u5. Sole r. During his trial Ruby passed a note to his attorney. Joseph
Tonahill, concerning his first lawyer, Tom Howard:
Joe you should know this. Tom Howard told me to say that l shot
1 * , i- A u j i/'.nnrrtv wouldn t have to come to
Oswald so that Caroline and Mrs. Kennedy wouiun
,h.“ isn't so—Ruby gave this reason for his action in a statement to aSecret
3*5 Ruby’s reactions: WR, 338, 344. 349-
325-326. Opinion poll: Henderson and Summerlin. 202-205. 207. 216-2.7.
327. Ruby’s background: WR. 779-806 passim.
327-329. Ruby's activt.es November 22-24: WR. 334-352; Kantor. 84-86.
105, uo; Henderson and Summerlin, 44-
318. Weissman a conservative: WR, 295.
329-329A. Ruby’s expectations after arrest: Kantor, 157, 224.
no-333- Ruby’s testimony: V, 181-m passim.
333. Ruby’s statements on conspiracy, tape recording, Dann s retnar
Meagher, 453* 452-
CHAPTER 18. OSWALD’S GAME
Oswald’s “love of fantasy.” radio program: Oswald, 46-47
be was the enemy of the good working people