As the new millenium unfolds, countless stories of alien abductions
have begun to penetrate the mainstream consciousness of mankind.

--- PAGE BREAK ---As the new millenium unfolds, countless stories of alien abductions
have begun to penetrate the mainstream consciousness of mankind.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

While some new insights into the human condition have been obtained,
too few of these accounts have brought such experiences to a level where
they can be consumed and digested into a proﬁtable understanding for
the individual reader.
Montauks The Alien Connection unravels the remarkable story of
Stewart Swerdlow, a gifted, mentalist who has experienced extrasensory
perception since birth. Stewart’s rare abilities not only made him a
magnet for government surveillance, but his unique genetic structure
made him a clearing house for diﬀerent alien agendas which sought him
out for their own purposes. Everyone’s sinister plans went haywire after
Stewart began a deprogramming procedure with Preston Nichols which
was designed to clear his memories and the controlling inﬂuences which
had been installed. Stewart was subsequently threatened and eventually
jailed after refusing to comply with orders to sever his ties with Nichols.
Despite this, the full truth began to work its way into his life.
Estranged from his family, Stewart was sent to prison as a
ﬁnancially destitute and hopeless, tragic ﬁgure. Despite a severe human
struggle, he was able to call on his own God-given abilities, reshuﬄe the
deck, and reevaluate his life and the various agencies and entities which
sought to utilize him. Weeding out the negative inﬂuences, Stewart was
able to recover key memories and discard those forces which sought to
entrap him as well as mankind. The most intriguing aspect of his
incredible story is that he has a valuable legacy to share.
Cover Art: The Original Butterﬂy
Artist’s conception of the prototype for the original butterﬂy who
donated DNA for Project Earth in order to create the creatures on Earth
known as butterﬂies. The glyph inlaid on the upper right of the archway
is an archetypal symbol signifying the opening up of DNA. The glyph on
the upper left of the archway represents the perfection of physical
realities. In this rendition, the butterﬂy has mixed its DNA with a human
creature. Butterﬂies on Earth monitor magnetism and know how to
adjust it so that it has a beneﬁcial eﬀect on the environment.realities. In this rendition, the butterﬂy has mixed its DNA with a human
creature. Butterﬂies on Earth monitor magnetism and know how to
adjust it so that it has a beneﬁcial eﬀect on the environment.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Montauk: The Alien Connection
Copyright © 1998 by Expansions Publishing Company

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fourth Printing, March 2015
Cover Illustration by Nina Helms
Typography and book design by Creative Circle Inc.
Editor: Peter Moon, assisted by Janet Swerdlow Published by: Sky
Books Box 769, Westbury, New York 11590-0104 website for Sky
Books:
www.skybooksu.sa .com e-mail: skybooks@yahoo .com website for
Stewart Swerdlow: www.stewartswerdlow.com e-mail: expansions @
expansions.com
Printed and bound in the United States of America. All rights
reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by
any electronic or mechanical means including information storage
and retrieval systems without permission in writing from the
publisher, except by a reviewer, who may quote brief passages in a
review.
DISCLAIMER DISCLAIMER Nothing in this book should be
interpreted to be an attack on the United States Government or its
duly appointed legal representatives. The publisher and the author
believe and fully support the United States Government as set forth
by the U.S. Constitution. It is further noted that as this book may be
considered controversial to some people, the publisher and author
wish to state their belief that all people are created with equal
human rights and that all nations, races and religions derive from a
common source that embraces the brotherhood of all creatures. No
oﬀenses or possible inadverent slights are intended toward any
race, religion or ethnicity.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Swerdlow, Stewart
Montauk: The Alien Connection 256 pages
ISBN 0-9631889-8-4 (ten digits)
ISBN 978-0-9631889-8-4 (thirteen digits)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ibrary of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Swerdlow, Stewart
Montauk: The Alien Connection 256 pages
ISBN 0-9631889-8-4 (ten digits)
ISBN 978-0-9631889-8-4 (thirteen digits)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1. Aliens 2. UFOs 3. Montauk
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 97-062051
This book is dedicated to Janet Swerdlow for her devotion, tenacity,
caring, and unconditional love. And, to all of my children, who
gave me strength and hope to go on during my darkest hours.
ǈƿŧ Tƒŧ PƒƗƯĵŠŧƯǙƒƗĵ EΎǙŧǡƗƽŧƿǵ
ǵ΅ǈ A SǵǡĵƿƄŧ CƒƗƯŠƒǈǈŠ
ǵƒǡŧŧ Tƒŧ MŧƿĵƄŧǡƗŧ
żǈǼǡ PǼœŧǡǵΏ
ﬁ΄ŧ Tŧǡǡǈǡ ĵǵ MǈƿǵĵǼƫ
ǪƗΎ O΄ŧǡǪŧĵǪ
Ǫŧ΄ŧƿ Aǵ ǵƒŧ KƗœœǼǵΖ
ŧƗƄƒǵ Tƒŧ SƗǡƗĵƿǪ
ƿƗƿŧ T΅Ɨƿ FƯĵƽŧǪ
ǵŧƿ MĵǡǡƗĵƄŧ
ŧƯŧ΄ŧƿ SǵǡĵƿƄŧ Pƒŧƿǈƽŧƿĵ
ǵ΅ŧƯ΄ŧ MΏ CƒƗƯŠǡŧƿ
ǵƒƗǡǵŧŧƿ CIA RŧŕǡǼƗǵ
żǈǼǡǵŧŧƿ SŧŕǼǡƗǵΏ RƗǪƫ
ﬁżǵŧŧƿ I Mŧŧǵ PǡŧǪǵǈƿ
ǪƗΎǵŧŧƿ Iƿ ǵƒŧ CĵǡƗœœŧĵƿ
Ǫŧ΄ŧƿǵŧŧƿ BǡŧĵƫǵƒǡǈǼƄƒ
ŧƗƄƒǵŧŧƿ CƒǡƗǪǵ
ƿƗƿŧǵŧŧƿ PǈƯƗǵƗŕĵƯ AƄŧƿŠĵǪ
ǵ΅ŧƿǵΏ AœƗƯƗǵƗŧǪ GĵƗƿŧŠ
ǵ΅ŧƿǵΏ-ǈƿŧ SŧƿǵŧƿŕŧŠ
ǵ΅ŧƿǵΏ-ǵ΅ǈ PǡƗǪǈƿ
ǵ΅ŧƿǵΏ-ǵƒǡŧŧ RŧƯŧĵǪŧ
ǵ΅ŧƿǵΏ-żǈǼǡ LƗżŧ GǈŧǪ Oƿ
ǵ΅ŧƿǵΏ-ﬁ΄ŧ Jĵƿŧǵ
ǵ΅ŧƿǵΏ-SƗΎ PĵǡĵŠƗǪŧ FǈǼƿŠ
AFTERWARD
INTRODUCTION

--- PAGE BREAK ---ŧƿŠĵǪ
ǵ΅ŧƿǵΏ AœƗƯƗǵƗŧǪ GĵƗƿŧŠ
ǵ΅ŧƿǵΏ-ǈƿŧ SŧƿǵŧƿŕŧŠ
ǵ΅ŧƿǵΏ-ǵ΅ǈ PǡƗǪǈƿ
ǵ΅ŧƿǵΏ-ǵƒǡŧŧ RŧƯŧĵǪŧ
ǵ΅ŧƿǵΏ-żǈǼǡ LƗżŧ GǈŧǪ Oƿ
ǵ΅ŧƿǵΏ-ﬁ΄ŧ Jĵƿŧǵ
ǵ΅ŧƿǵΏ-SƗΎ PĵǡĵŠƗǪŧ FǈǼƿŠ
AFTERWARD
INTRODUCTION

--- PAGE BREAK ---

As I write this introduction, humanity is undergoing a radical
change in the way it views space and time. Once thought to be the
exclusive realm of learned physicists and mathematicians, we have
learned that our “sacred” institutions and universities have lied
about space and time. If we are to be more gracious, we will say
that they have simply misstated the facts.
Fortunately or unfortunately, the secrets of space and time have not
been handed to us on a silver platter. Instead, they have been given
to us piecemeal as if a stage magician’s apprentice was leaking out
his master’s trade secrets. The magician does not want to give up
his act! Thus, we are forced to cope with whatever information
comes our way rather than attend a “University of Space-Time
Consciousness.”
The biggest secret of time and space that has been unlocked is that
these very components of our physicality can be manipulated. This
is still a novel idea to conventional scientists, scholars, and news
media who are manipulated from birth. Manipulation of
consciousness comes under the heading of “mind control,” a subject
which has never been fully embraced by major media.
Unfortunately, when we embrace the consciousness aspects of
space-time, we are dealing with mind control. The reason for this is
that our responses to the very idea of space-time are, by and large,
conditioned responses. There are few who ever seriously and
successfully question the structure of physical reality as we know it.
While the evolution of nature and the human brain might at ﬁrst
glance seem to be the innocent culprit in this equation, it is not that
simple. The human brain is actually a perfect computer which is
fully capable of serving as a tool for cosmic enlightenment to its
host. The problem is that this response in mankind has been short-
circuited due to any number of various factors. These could include
aliens, ancient priesthoods, religious indoctrination, youth groups,
and the CIA’s documented mind control program known as MK-
Ultra.
MK-Ultra was a 20th century “modernization” of ancient techniques
such as those employed by the ancient Assassins, a Middle Eastern
cult during the Middle Ages who programmed subjects to kill
through the use of hashish. After World War II, the governmenttechniques
such as those employed by the ancient Assassins, a Middle Eastern
cult during the Middle Ages who programmed subjects to kill
through the use of hashish. After World War II, the government

--- PAGE BREAK ---those employed by the ancient Assassins, a Middle Eastern
cult during the Middle Ages who programmed subjects to kill
through the use of hashish. After World War II, the government

--- PAGE BREAK ---

began to experiment with narcosynthesis or “truth serum” drugs.
This has been documented and is not really denied by the
government, however its full signiﬁcance has been minimized in the
extreme sense of the word. Books on such topics usually focus on
the treatment of prisoners of war and tend to conﬁne the subject to
wresting wartime secrets from the enemy. Sometimes, a more bold
approach will investigate the assassination potentials of mind
control and the concept of turning human beings into programmed
robots. This is a step in the right direction as far as discovering the
truth, but it does not go far enough.
If you can accept the simple premise that unscrupulous people have
worked within the sphere of the government’s truth serum project,
a far more amazing scenario presents itself. When a human being is
put under the procedure of narcosynthesis, his subconscious can be
accessed without him even being aware of what is said. Under most
conditions, he will tell the truth. What is even more remarkable is
that he can tell the truth about things he does not even know in his
conscious mind. The subject can be used to tap the collective
unconscious.
Of course, any curious and diligent researcher will go far beyond
the prospect of asking only for wartime secrets. He will ask about
God, the history of evolution, and the very nature of reality. He will
not pull any punches. Of course, some narcosynthesis subjects are
more attuned than others to this sort of research and many clinical
studies would be done. Through the human psyche, research could
be pursued that would be unprecedented in terms of human
understanding. If you put someone like Einstein under the serum,
you might begin to get some pretty interesting insights concerning
the dilemma of the universe. At some point, some researcher is
going to do his best to tap the principles of creation that remain
hidden to our perceptions of “everyday normal reality.” When one
penetrates these hidden control zones of consciousness, one
embraces what is commonly known as the “occult.”
What I have said above is a simple premise that anyone can accept
with common logic. The actual history of such research is another
matter, and although some of it is documented, the juiciest parts
tend to remain somewhat hidden. We do know that wildyone can accept
with common logic. The actual history of such research is another
matter, and although some of it is documented, the juiciest parts
tend to remain somewhat hidden. We do know that wild

--- PAGE BREAK ---common logic. The actual history of such research is another
matter, and although some of it is documented, the juiciest parts
tend to remain somewhat hidden. We do know that wild

--- PAGE BREAK ---

experimentation with LSD was indulged in the 1950’s as well as
tortuous mind control under the tutelage of Dr. Ewen Cameron.
Much of the LSD research was done under the tutelage of Dr.
Timothy Leary, a Harvard professor who became a public mockery
in the 1960’s. Although Leary claimed he was using the CIA to fund
his research, the intelligence community was also using him.
Whatever the truth was about Leary, he was just one leg of what is
known as the Monarch Project, a mind control research endeavor
that was predominant in the 1950’s. Leary and his brethren were
sometimes known as the “Monarch Boys.” The latter day evolution
of this mind control research was centered at the Camp Hero
facility at Montauk Point, New York.
Much of what we know about the research at Montauk has been
supplied by Preston Nichols, a man who was part of this mind
control research both as practitioner and victim. He has coauthored
various books on the subject with myself. A synopsis of this work
has been included in the appendix for those who are not already
familiar with it. In past books, Preston has had much to say about
“Montauk boys,” a colloquial term that refers to anyone who has
been mentally programmed through their sexual psyche. He has
also recently applied this term to women which he now refers to as
“Montauk girls.”
What is perhaps most disturbing about Preston’s research is that
there is no shortage of such programmed people. They exist in the
hundreds across Long Island and that is probably just a small
sampling. There are numerous people who could testify that they
have been part of strange mind control experiments. They usually
have fragmented memories that indulge the very bizarre. The lives
of these people are often a testimony that weirdness, usually in the
form of manipulative mind control techniques, has been perpetrated
upon them.
This brings us to our present topic and the subject of this book: an
individual who has suﬀered through such experiments and lived to
tell his story. His name is Stewart Swerdlow.
I ﬁrst heard of Stewart Swerdlow in 1992 when I was still ﬁnishing
up the manuscript for The Montauk Project: Experiments in Time.
Preston was telling me wild stories about Stewart’s deprogrammingow.
I ﬁrst heard of Stewart Swerdlow in 1992 when I was still ﬁnishing
up the manuscript for The Montauk Project: Experiments in Time.
Preston was telling me wild stories about Stewart’s deprogramming

--- PAGE BREAK ---Stewart Swerdlow in 1992 when I was still ﬁnishing
up the manuscript for The Montauk Project: Experiments in Time.
Preston was telling me wild stories about Stewart’s deprogramming

--- PAGE BREAK ---

procedure. The stories were so incredible that I personally
wondered whether or not Stewart even existed.
Later, I saw a video-taped testimony of Stewart Swerdlow and his
involvement in mind control experiments, some of which included
the Montauk Project. I knew the character was real now.
The next event I learned concerning Stewart was that he was going
to prison under the most bizarre circumstances. After beginning to
work with Preston Nichols in an eﬀort to recover his memories, the
government began to prosecute him for crimes of which he had no
proper memory. As a corporate controller, his name was forged on
checks which had been issued with the full knowledge of his
employers. The charge was embezzlement, but the real crime was
entrapment (of him).
After these charges were made against Stewart, I soon heard that
Geraldo Rivera was going to do a show on UFO abductions with
Stewart as the main point of interest. At the last minute, Stewart
pulled out of the show because he was being threatened with more
jail time if he went on the air. Even though he did not appear on
television, Stewart was given a harsh sentence. The judge was
sympathetic and seemed to believe that Stewart had limited
culpability, if any, but he claimed to have no choice but to follow
the softest of the sentencing guidelines. This meant three years in
prison.
After Stewart began serving his sentence, I started writing Montauk
Revisited. The purpose of the book was to attempt to corroborate
that the Montauk Project did, in fact, exist. There were various
degrees of proof and various trails to pursue. Stewart’s involvement
became most evident when I received a phone call from a woman I
call Elaine Donald. Stewart refers to her in this book as a woman
with a Brooklyn accent. Elaine requested I come to her apartment
and discuss Stewart with her. Nothing should be said over the
phone. Upon telling Preston of our conversation, he said Elaine was
an “FBI backed psychic.” This means that she did psychic readings
by ﬁrst telling the person she would get back to them. She then
checked them out independently. After that, she consulted their FBI
ﬁle through a contact at the agency. Of course, such a ﬁle does not
refer to ordinary criminal ﬁles. These are a hidden tier of ﬁles theked them out independently. After that, she consulted their FBI
ﬁle through a contact at the agency. Of course, such a ﬁle does not
refer to ordinary criminal ﬁles. These are a hidden tier of ﬁles the

--- PAGE BREAK ---dently. After that, she consulted their FBI
ﬁle through a contact at the agency. Of course, such a ﬁle does not
refer to ordinary criminal ﬁles. These are a hidden tier of ﬁles the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

government presumably has on all of us. It might not be the FBI but
really the CIA. I don’t know if Preston was right, but she does her
psychic readings after ﬁrst investigating the client and getting back
to them later.
Elaine was adamant about Stewart having nothing to do with
Montauk and that everything attributed to his involvement
originated from Preston. She portrayed herself as Stewart’s friend. I
thought it absurd that she had me come all the way to her house
and expect me to believe her just on her word. 1 was still skeptical
about Stewart myself, but her words convinced me something odd
was afoot. It became more absurd when she called up a friend of
hers in Massachusetts. This is a woman I call Mary Snodgrass. She
also tried to convince me that Stewart was not involved at
Montauk. This woman’s comments were even more absurd. When I
was informed that Stewart had disavowed all connection to the
Montauk Project since being in jail, I oﬀered a counter-theory. I
informed her that there is no way to ensure he wasn’t gotten to in
prison and programmed. She assured me this was not the case and,
as proof, said that the prison guards had assured her of this. A
statement like this is like getting the fox to swear that the chicken
coop is locked up and well protected. What was more absurd was
that she actually expected me to believe this. She must have
thought that my ability to discern facts was nonexistent. Preston
later informed me that Mary Snodgrass was part of the CIA
aﬃliated Aquarius Group.
When Mary read my account of her in Montauk Revisited, she was
upset, but it represented her quite accurately.
I discussed all of this with Preston and whether we should use the
above in the book. We both decided it would be best to write to
Stewart and ask him. After a few weeks, I received a typed reply
from Stewart in which he denounced Preston and the Montauk
Project. At ﬁrst glance, this seemed like a negative response to me.
What I did not know at the time was that, before he went to prison,
Stewart vowed that he was on Preston’s side in uncovering the
Montauk Project and would not recant. If he were forced to toe the
line in prison, he would go with the ﬂow. If he wrote anything
typed to Preston, that information would be considered tainted andthe
Montauk Project and would not recant. If he were forced to toe the
line in prison, he would go with the ﬂow. If he wrote anything
typed to Preston, that information would be considered tainted and

--- PAGE BREAK ---and would not recant. If he were forced to toe the
line in prison, he would go with the ﬂow. If he wrote anything
typed to Preston, that information would be considered tainted and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

written under the inﬂuence of his masters. If he wrote a letter by
hand, it would signify that those words were his real intention.
As the letter I received from Stewart was addressed to me and not
Preston, this put some doubt on the matter. Accordingly, Preston
decided we should use a ﬁctitious name to describe Stewart. I chose
the name Stan Campbell and that is how he is described in Montauk
Revisited.
I did not meet Stewart until August 12, 1996. We took a trip out to
Montauk Point. Almost immediately, he asked my opinion of Elaine
Donald. When I gave him a negative opinion, he told me that he did
not trust her and that she had not acted in his best interests. He
further disavowed Mary Snodgrass, said she manipulated people,
and had also dictated verbatim the letter he sent me. They were not
his words at all. He was just playing the tune in order to be “a good
prisoner.” He had some very interesting stories to tell. Most
important of all, there had been a concentrated eﬀort to minimize
that any of his experiences had anything to do with the mind
control operation at Montauk.
This is the story of how I came to know Stewart Swerdlow. His very
existence seemed to leak out of the government’s mind control
infrastructure. This book will also show how he came across
Duncan Cameron, Preston Nichols, and A1 Bielek. But, there is
another interesting point I would like to add about Stewart.
Before I met him, Duncan always described Stewart as being a more
advanced psychic than himself. Using his own metaphysical
terminology, Duncan says that most people walking around the
street are “sevens,” meaning they have an auric lattice structure
within their magnetic ﬁeld that manifests itself as seven' pieces of a
puzzle (seven chakras, etc.). Duncan himself says that he is a
“fourteen,” meaning he has a double lattice. Stewart, according to
Duncan, is a “twenty-one,” meaning he has a triple lattice.
Duncan explained to me that a “twenty-one” represents a “bleed
through” eﬀect from higher dimensions into physical reality. This
accounts for strange or paranormal phenomena that you may hear,
read about, or experience directly yourself. The idea is that all
manifest reality is the result of an apriori consciousness whichThis
accounts for strange or paranormal phenomena that you may hear,
read about, or experience directly yourself. The idea is that all
manifest reality is the result of an apriori consciousness which

--- PAGE BREAK ---trange or paranormal phenomena that you may hear,
read about, or experience directly yourself. The idea is that all
manifest reality is the result of an apriori consciousness which

--- PAGE BREAK ---

created or determined matter, energy, space, and time in the ﬁrst
place.
If mind control researchers were looking for an ideal subject to
explore the hidden realms of the collective unconscious, Stewart
would have been a perfect candidate. His experiences prove that. It
is with the above perspective in mind that we should embrace the
following book. Not every one of Stewart’s remarkable experiences
can be documented to have occurred in physical reality, but many
have left undeniable traces than can be veriﬁed. More importantly,
he is a remarkably intelligent and gifted individual who has
intriguing insights into the realm of the unconscious. His incredible
story oﬀers anew glimpse at the secrets of space and time and the
consciousness which regulates such. Even more important, he has a
priceless legacy to share.
1 THE PHILADELPHIA
EXPERIMENT
Aboard the steel grey ship, sailors rushed about with anticipation
and concern. They had been told that they were part of a secret
exercise that would be decisive in the outcome of the war in Europe
and Asia. Some of the men were volunteers, others had been
assigned. All were told that, if successful, they would go down in
history as the men who saved America and the world.
Anchored in the center of the harbor and away from public view,
the ship was sheltered from the scrutiny of other naval vessels at
the base. Many engineers and scientists were busy ﬁnalizing the
connections of some very strange equipment in the control center
on the top deck. At a nearby dock, a land-based control center was
ﬁlled with scientiﬁc observers from the highest echelons of
government. Communication between this center and the ship was
constant.
Johannes von Gruber slipped aboard without any fanfare and went
directly to the control room where the equipment was now ready.
He observed the young sailors stationed at designated locations intant.
Johannes von Gruber slipped aboard without any fanfare and went
directly to the control room where the equipment was now ready.
He observed the young sailors stationed at designated locations in

--- PAGE BREAK ---ruber slipped aboard without any fanfare and went
directly to the control room where the equipment was now ready.
He observed the young sailors stationed at designated locations in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

preparation for what was about to begin. He thought, “If they knew
the real mission of this ship, they would all think twice about
staying on board. Never before in the history of mankind has an
experiment of this kind been attempted on such a grand scale with
living beings. Tesla had better be right or there will be hell to
pay...literally!”
His thoughts suddenly ﬂashed back to the journey that had brought
him to America. The trip had been slow and tedious. As a high-
ranking naval oﬃcer decorated in World War I, von Gruber had
access to many sources of false documents. These enabled him to
travel in the early summer of 1943; ﬁrst, by train to Switzerland to
meet with some very secretive individuals, then by plane to Spain,
on to Portugal, and ﬁnally the United States. His mission was
personal as well as one of extreme importance to those in power
behind the scenes. So secret was this journey that even his closest
friends, family, and superiors were unaware of the event. If he
failed to return for any reason, all would be told that he had
perished in the raging war.
No longer in his uniform of the Third Reich, a glance at his U.S.
issue khakis and black boots jolted him back to his present reality.
The implications of the experiment were foremost in his mind. In
previous tests, small objects became invisible for a few seconds.
True, some lab animals failed to return to visibility, but these kinks
had allegedly been corrected. First, the scientists would render the
ship, the USS Eldridge, completely invisible, then return it to a
normal state. Next, they would actually attempt to transport the
entire ship, crew and all, to a distant location — probably in
Norfolk Harbor. Such an accomplishment would eliminate war on
Earth because whoever controlled this technology would be
invincible. The major governments of the world — the United
States, Germany, Britain, Russia, and France — would then band
together to eliminate the lesser powers and races of the Earth. Then,
they planned to beam vast conquering armies anywhere in the
universe they desired. The new world government would rule the
known universe! For this, the Reich was willing to unite with the
United States. Because of the contacts that the Reich had with a
certain group of “visitors,” the United States was also willing to lay
aside ideological diﬀerences. Each side believed that it woulde
United States. Because of the contacts that the Reich had with a
certain group of “visitors,” the United States was also willing to lay
aside ideological diﬀerences. Each side believed that it would

--- PAGE BREAK ---ause of the contacts that the Reich had with a
certain group of “visitors,” the United States was also willing to lay
aside ideological diﬀerences. Each side believed that it would

--- PAGE BREAK ---

eventually control the entire plan.
At the designated time, the equipment was turned on at low power.
After a slight shudder, lights blinked on the ship and at the land
base. Everything glowed a mild green. Johannes felt an electric
current ﬂow up his spine and a sensation of nausea. He then
watched as orders were sent from the land base to increase to full
power and complete the experiment. The ship’s public address
system broadcast an alert for all hands to remain at their stations
until the experiment was completed.
Scientists on the land base watched as electric sparks ﬂew from the
ship. The vessel turned a mustard yellow, then a bright green, and
ﬁnally a dark electric blue as it disappeared into hyperspace. At
that same moment, cameras on land recorded two unidentiﬁed
ﬂying objects hovering above the ship. As the ship faded from sight,
they both disappeared.
On board the Eldridge, von Gruber felt waves of energy pour
through and around him. Even though he felt the ﬂoor beneath his
feet, there was a sensation of falling. Blue, green, and ultraviolet
colors surrounded him. A loud crackling noise sounded like a
transformer sparking. As the entire ship took on a dreamlike
quality, he heard men yelling and screaming. The metal structure
itself appeared to waver as if it was part of an ocean. Johannes
ﬁnally focused away from his own thoughts and looked around. He
saw ship hands running as others screamed orders, their voices
muﬄed as if underwater. Johannes saw the panels on the
equipment going wildly out of control. Slowly, he moved out of the
control room.
Looking through a doorway, shock overcame him. Instead of a
harbor, he saw electric, pulsating energy ﬁelds of color, swirling
lights, and a couple of strange-looking crafts ﬂoating nearby. Von
Gruber saw sailors screaming and jumping overboard. He yelled for
them to stop, but either they did not hear him, or just did not pay
attention. As their bodies went over the railing, they seemed to
disappear into the energy streams.
Looking back into the control room, he saw men trying to destroy
the equipment with sledgehammers. He also saw the horriﬁc sightent over the railing, they seemed to
disappear into the energy streams.
Looking back into the control room, he saw men trying to destroy
the equipment with sledgehammers. He also saw the horriﬁc sight

--- PAGE BREAK ---, they seemed to
disappear into the energy streams.
Looking back into the control room, he saw men trying to destroy
the equipment with sledgehammers. He also saw the horriﬁc sight

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of sailors actually sinking into the metal ﬂooring as if nothing was
solid anymore. Everything appeared to be ﬂuid energy. This was so
frightening to Johannes that he panicked. If he stayed on deck, the
ship might explode or turn into pure energy; if he jumped
overboard, he might cease to exist. He then thought of his wife and
children in Germany. They would never know what happened to
him. He also thought of his superiors in the secret organizations.
They had never told him that this could happen. To hell with their
cause and to hell with this lunatic experiment. Over the side he
went.
At ﬁrst, it felt as if he were ﬂying fast through the air. A loud
whooshing was accompanied by an ever-present crackling sound.
Johannes thought that he was now dying. A great peace came over
him as he no longer felt his body, just the electric sensations. He
started to hear ringing in his ears. As it got louder, he felt a
sensation of pressure all around him as his body began to take form
again. His cells tingled. The colors turned to grey as he felt
something hard under his feet. The grey started to take form, and
more natural shapes and colors appeared in front of him.
Dizzy and confused, he did not know where he was. He saw dark
water surrounded by rocks and stone. Looking down, he realized
that he stood on a hard walkway located on a catwalk bordering the
dark water. Above was rock. This was some kind of indoor pool or
perhaps a manmade cave. Although it was well lit, he saw no
ﬁxtures.
Suddenly, three ﬁgures ran toward him from a cut-rock staircase
that led up a narrow slope along the wall. One was dressed in a
dark blue military uniform with American insignia. The other two
were small grey beings with large wraparound eyes. They waved
long metallic-looking wands at Johannes. He wanted to scream
from the sight of them, but nothing came out. He could not move
but was suddenly following them up the narrow staircase to an
opening in the rock wall above them. Over and over in his head, a
voice repeated, “Don’t be afraid; follow us.” The military man
followed behind them.
The next thing Johannes remembered was a dark room ﬁlled with
equipment. Strapped to a chair, his head was locked into a supportd, “Don’t be afraid; follow us.” The military man
followed behind them.
The next thing Johannes remembered was a dark room ﬁlled with
equipment. Strapped to a chair, his head was locked into a support

--- PAGE BREAK ---follow us.” The military man
followed behind them.
The next thing Johannes remembered was a dark room ﬁlled with
equipment. Strapped to a chair, his head was locked into a support

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of some kind. Scared, he was unable to move or talk. After what
seemed like hours, a small, chubby man in a green jumpsuit stood
in front of him, speaking in German.
“We understand that you are frightened, but this will all be over
soon. You are in an American underground installation. The
location is unimportant to you now. You came here by mistake, but
we are going to correct that.” Suddenly, perhaps because of
something they did, Johannes was able to speak slowly.
“Where am I, please?”
“Nowhere that is of any consequence to you.” “Please let me go
back to my family. I’ll tell you whatever you want to know.”
“Your family is dead now. This is 1960. Everything you know is
gone. Germany lost the war and all of your superiors were
executed.”
Johannes closed his eyes tightly and gasped. Surely this was a
terrible nightmare. But, the nightmare got worse when a tall, bald
being with large blue eyes entered the room and the little man left.
This being was about seven-feet tall. He was very thin, had a
pointed chin, and his skin was exceptionally white. The creature did
not talk but communicated telepathically inside von Gruber’s head.
“Do not be afraid. You are going to a more appropriate situation.”
With that, the being touched some controls. What seemed like
thousands of volts of electricity jolted through von Gruber’s body.
He shook violently for some time, then was still. He felt himself
glide upward in a funnel of light where he was soon met by
beautiful angelic beings who gently took his hands. The rest is all a
blur. There was a review of his life, a glimpse of his past lives, a
period of mourning for all the wrong that he had done, and a happy
feeling for all of the good that he had accomplished. Then he was
told he had to complete something on Earth. He was shown a
woman in labor in a brand new hospital. The next thing he knew,
he was inside a tube of light heading toward her.
•  2omplished. Then he was
told he had to complete something on Earth. He was shown a
woman in labor in a brand new hospital. The next thing he knew,
he was inside a tube of light heading toward her.
•  2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

•  3
•  4
•  5
•  6
•  7
•  8
•  9
•  10
•  12
•  13
•  14
•  15
•  17
•  18
•  19
•  20
•  21
•  22
•  23
•  24
•  25
•  26
○  GLOSSARY

--- PAGE BREAK ---ading toward her.
•  2

--- PAGE BREAK ---

•  3
•  4
•  5
•  6
•  7
•  8
•  9
•  10
•  12
•  13
•  14
•  15
•  17
•  18
•  19
•  20
•  21
•  22
•  23
•  24
•  25
•  26
○  GLOSSARY

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2 A STRANGE CHILDHOOD
Eleanor had gone into labor with her ﬁrst child later than
anticipated. At the hospital, she waited many hours in pain as
women who came after her delivered their children and left.
Aggravated and worried, she was ﬁnally examined by her
physician. He said that she needed surgery before her baby could be
born. In fact, her birth canal was almost completely sealed shut.
The doctors were baﬄed about how she became pregnant in the
ﬁrst place! It was almost a miracle. She was transported to a new
wing of the hospital that had not yet opened to the public. Even
though it was early November, the heating system was not yet
installed. That day, a specialist just happened to be visiting the
hospital. This doctor would assist with the delivery. Extremely cold,
she was grateful when they put her out.
Because the baby’s neck was somehow hooked around his mother’s
pelvic bone, the doctors used forceps to carefully disconnect his
head from her hip. They then maneuvered him down the newly
formed birth canal that they had just surgically created. When I
ﬁnally emerged into the world on November 5,1956,1 was already
bruised and battered. I weighed in at 8 pounds, 12 ounces.
The ﬁrst president of the Soviet Union was my great-uncle, Yakov
Sverdlov. He was a leader and orator of the new Bolshevik
movement. When Czar Nicholas was in power, he imprisoned Yakov
in Siberia to try to squelch the uprisings. There, he became the
cellmate of Stalin. Because of his imprisonment, Yakov developed a
seething hatred for the Czar and all that he represented. When the
royal family was ﬁnally cornered in the Ural mountain city of
Yekaterinburg, Yakov ordered the execution of the Czar and his
family. In gratitude, the new Communist government renamed the
city of their assassination Sverdlovsk. In Russian, this means “the
city of Swerdlow.” After the fall of Communism in 1989, it was
renamed Yekaterinburg. The province encompassing the city is still
called Sverdlovsk. This is the homeland of current leader Boris
Yeltsin. The newly independent country of Ukraine has renamed an
eastern city Sverdlovsk. In Moscow, there is also a Sverdlov square.ll
called Sverdlovsk. This is the homeland of current leader Boris
Yeltsin. The newly independent country of Ukraine has renamed an
eastern city Sverdlovsk. In Moscow, there is also a Sverdlov square.

--- PAGE BREAK ---. This is the homeland of current leader Boris
Yeltsin. The newly independent country of Ukraine has renamed an
eastern city Sverdlovsk. In Moscow, there is also a Sverdlov square.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

My grandfather helped form the Communist party in the United
States in the 1930’s. During World War II, it was believed that my
father’s mother spied for the USSR in Europe against the Germans.
When I was born, my father was just out of the army where he had
worked on some top secret projects for the government in the
American southwest. He underwent extensive interrogations by the
military before he was allowed to work on these projects. I often
wondered why they considered him in the ﬁrst place. Now I realize
that, because my father is a brilliant engineer, the government
probably wanted to be sure of his loyalty. My father almost never
talks about his parents or his family background. Much of what I
have learned about my great-uncle Yakov Sverdlov came from
reading Russian history books.
My mother is a sweet, generous, caring woman devoted to her
family. Her mother ran around central Europe with Gypsy caravans
travelling through the area.
When my grandmother was a little girl in Austria, she was playing
outside with two cousins when she glanced up and saw the image of
a man who looked exactly like the Jack of Spades in playing cards.
Quickly, she told her cousins to look up at it. Immediately, they fell
dead to the ground. Shortly after that incident, my grandmother
was sent to America to live with relatives. Amazingly, nearly a
century later, I was involved with a group of government related
individuals who were trying to understand the meaning of a
message from hyperspace. Beamed from outside the Earth, the
message was an image of a being who resembled the Jack of
Spades!
As a child, I saw the spirits of dead people hanging around
apartments and other people. Constant ringing ﬁlled my ears.
Colors ﬂashed before my open eyes, and I saw fragments of future
scenes that always came to pass. Plagued with nightmares, my
parents spent more time sleeping in my room to comfort me than
they did in their own bed. I was a moody and frightened child.
Although brilliant in school, I found it slow-paced and boring.
Usually I stayed home pretending to be sick, entertaining myself
with psychic and mental games. Practically friendless, I found
people my own age to be childish and stupid. Instead, I preferredoring.
Usually I stayed home pretending to be sick, entertaining myself
with psychic and mental games. Practically friendless, I found
people my own age to be childish and stupid. Instead, I preferred

--- PAGE BREAK ---yed home pretending to be sick, entertaining myself
with psychic and mental games. Practically friendless, I found
people my own age to be childish and stupid. Instead, I preferred

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the company of adults, particularly the elderly. For some reason, I
enjoyed hearing stories about the old days, especially the 1930’s
and 1940’s. I loved watching war movies, but I was ashamed to tell
anyone that I always privately cheered for the Germans because my
background is Jewish. Interestingly enough, I also cheered for the
Indians in Western movies.
Alien beings routinely pursued me in my childhood nightmares.
After capturing and examining me, they indoctrinated me, feeding
me vast amounts of information. Even though I was afraid of them,
I always wanted the aliens to win in the science-ﬁction ﬁlms and
television shows that I enjoyed watching. I am sure that there are
some therapists who would have a ﬁeld day with this. The standard
diagnosis is that I was probably abused, and the repressed fear and
anger came out in my nightmares. Despite this, four separate
therapists, all unknown to one another, have pronounced me
completely sane and have determined that I am not the victim of
abuse.
I always say that I never had a childhood—I was born an adult. I
never felt like a child nor did I ever want to play games or
participate in parties and whatever else children do. Whenever I
tried to explain my daily and nightly experiences to others, I was
ridiculed or told that I was imagining it. After awhile, I kept the
information to myself and turned into a very private little boy who
was unhappy. Teachers wrote on my report cards, “intelligent, but
never smiles.” I always thought, “Why should I smile when I know
the terrible things that are going to happen on this Earth?”
As a child, I had problems with my eyesight and hearing. After
testing me, the doctors found nothing wrong. Even so, they gave me
glasses and hoped to improve me by taking out my tonsils and
adenoids. It did not work. In fact, I am still hard of hearing and my
sight is atrocious. However, I do see auras and the archetypes and
symbols that emanate from people’s mind-patterns. I also hear
tones.
My worst childhood memories are of what are commonly called
“alien abductions.” While I now know that a few of those
experiences actually happened, others were hyperspace experiences,
and many were government generated. I vividly remember thee commonly called
“alien abductions.” While I now know that a few of those
experiences actually happened, others were hyperspace experiences,
and many were government generated. I vividly remember the

--- PAGE BREAK ---lien abductions.” While I now know that a few of those
experiences actually happened, others were hyperspace experiences,
and many were government generated. I vividly remember the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

terror of being removed from my bed in the middle of the night by
small beings wearing dark bodysuits who never spoke a word out
loud.
As a child, I was afraid to go to sleep at night because I feared that
they might take me away forever, performing those painful tests on
my body. They always told me that I was related to them; that some
time in the future they would keep me with them. Although I did
not particularly care for the Earth and its cruel population, I loved
my family and did not want to leave them. I remember asking, even
pleading, with these beings to let me go home. They obviously
always did. Still, I never trusted them.
Wherever they took me, it was always cold. Because there were
only a couple of times that I actually saw that I was not on the
Earth, I cannot say for sure that I was on board a spacecraft.
Coldhearted and unfeeling toward me, the beings did what they had
to do before returning me. I have several memories of descending
rapidly in an elevator. At our destination, I saw human men moving
about in dark blue uniforms without insignia. Some were armed;
some herded other children and adults to various rooms in this
complex. Windowless, all the walls and ﬂoors were smooth and
polished. Small vehicles silently moved through narrow corridors. A
few times, I was in cavernous spaces stacked with boxes or supplies
of some sort. Since then, I have always' hated being in large
warehouses. Once, I remember escaping from my holding pen or
room and running naked through the hallways. I hid under a table
in a small room. Several of the above-mentioned men came looking
for me. When they found me, I passed out from fear.
The most spectacular event in my life occurred when 1 was about
six-years old. I remember being aboard a small craft that ﬂew
through the air. Tiny and dark silver, it was shaped like a round
room inside with a small ladder that went up to a domed room.
That was all there was to this craft. With me was a greenish-grey
creature with a heartshaped head and round, black eyes. Almost
exactly my height, it wore no clothing and had only four ﬁngers on
each hand. Its small feet ended in two equal length toes. The
creature’s wet skin felt like a corn husk. Speaking mentally, but
slowly, it showed me a window on the wall as it directed me to looks on
each hand. Its small feet ended in two equal length toes. The
creature’s wet skin felt like a corn husk. Speaking mentally, but
slowly, it showed me a window on the wall as it directed me to look

--- PAGE BREAK ---small feet ended in two equal length toes. The
creature’s wet skin felt like a corn husk. Speaking mentally, but
slowly, it showed me a window on the wall as it directed me to look

--- PAGE BREAK ---

outside. I saw that we were above the clouds. Not far away ﬂew
two or three other crafts identical to ours. The atmosphere in the
craft was humid and thick. Even though I did not feel hot, I was
perspiring. As I followed the creature up the ladder to the domed
room, the dome suddenly became transparent. I felt like we were
ﬂying on the roof of the craft without any walls around us!
Travelling at an incredible speed, I felt my skin tighten and crawl.
My nose burned, my eyes watered, and I felt extremely nauseous.
Every now and then, the craft slowed down and I found myself
some place else over the Earth. Low enough to see the landscape
clearly, I remember ﬂying over a large ocean, then seeing large
cities through dissipating clouds. I now know one of these cities was
Paris. Another one was Rome, then Athens. I saw the pyramids in
Egypt, and a vast desert. There were tremendous snow-capped
mountains below that I believe were the Himalayas. 1 remember
travelling slowly over a beautiful and varied countryside resembling
India, then China, and then Japan. Sometimes, the name of the
place ﬂashed in my mind as we ﬂew over it. Other times, it was
simply identiﬁed on a global map that I saw inside my head. Alaska
and Antarctica were the most thrilling places because I have an
aﬃnity for icy and snowy locales, but more will be said about that
later.
I was told that we circled the globe three times west to east, then
three times north to south. There was a particular reason for this
and for seeing the places that 1 was shown. Finally, as we started to
move straight up, 1 told the creature that I wanted to go home. Still
in my pajamas, 1 did not want my parents to miss me. There was no
reply, but we ascended so quickly that I fell to the ﬂoor feeling very
sick.
The craft ﬁnally seemed to be ﬂying slowly. Suddenly, I saw the
Earth through the transparent wall. Dark outside, there were no
stars in the sky. The moon looked huge. A bright round globe in the
distance was our sun, I was told. Commanded to turn and face the
other wall, I was amazed to see that we were approaching a
gigantic dark metallic platform ﬂoating in space. Various types of
ships were all around it and on it. Some ships were disk-shaped and
others looked like globes, but the strangest ones resembled tubesgigantic dark metallic platform ﬂoating in space. Various types of
ships were all around it and on it. Some ships were disk-shaped and
others looked like globes, but the strangest ones resembled tubes

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and triangles. I could not keep my eyes open as a terriﬁc sleepiness
fell over me. I realized that 1 could not move.
When I woke up, I was ﬂoating in the air in a brightly lit place.
Standing and ﬂoating around me in a circle were beings of every
species possibly imaginable. Slowly, I descended to the ﬂoor. My
heart pounded, but I was not afraid. The fear came later when I
realized that I was not dreaming! At that point, my education
began.

--- PAGE BREAK ---imaginable. Slowly, I descended to the ﬂoor. My
heart pounded, but I was not afraid. The fear came later when I
realized that I was not dreaming! At that point, my education
began.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3 THE MENAGERIE
Standing in the center of a circle, I was surrounded by a vast array
of every conceivable type of being. The most beautiful and
imposing of all was a gigantic butterﬂy. It seemed to ﬂoat in midair
in front of a huge window, through which I saw the Earth. In my
child’s mind, I thought that this must be a magical dreamland. Too
excited to be afraid, my mouth hung open at the awesome sight
before me . After a few minutes, the thoughts of these beings
ﬂooded my mind. Sounding like gibberish, I telepathically heard a
kind of mixed hum. Slowly, I realized that I could tune into each
individual being’s stream of thinking.
I concentrated on the butterﬂy ﬁrst because it seemed so
magniﬁcent. I wanted to hang in the air just like it did. At ﬁrst, the
butterﬂy seemed startled that I chose it instead of another being. Its
surprise startled me, too! I had thought that it wanted to talk to me.
In the background, I heard/sensed the others vying for my
attention. They suddenly stopped when they observed my desire to
communicate with the butterﬂy.
As I approached the window and the wondrous creature, I did not
feel my feet move. I merely thought of getting closer, and I did! The
room was intensely cold, but for some reason, I was able to tolerate
it. I suppose that I was in a state of shock. Finally, the butterﬂy
spoke to me telepathically. I did not hear words, but I knew what it
said. Because our language patterns were so diﬀerent, it was
diﬃcult for it to talk to me, it said. As it tried very hard to translate
my thoughts and reply in a way that I could understand, it told me
that it was neither male nor female, nor did it have a name as I did.
Instead, each member of its species was identiﬁed by the others
through the tone of its individual frequency. At the beginning of
Earth’s history, this butterﬂy’s species donated DNA for Project
Earth to create the creatures on Earth known as butterﬂies.
Continuing, it said that the butterﬂies on Earth monitor magnetism
and know how to adjust it so that it has a beneﬁcial eﬀect on the
environment. Moths were created as a negative aspect of this by the
dark side. For every good thing that was created on Earth, the dark
side made an opposite to counter it.as a beneﬁcial eﬀect on the
environment. Moths were created as a negative aspect of this by the
dark side. For every good thing that was created on Earth, the dark
side made an opposite to counter it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---on the
environment. Moths were created as a negative aspect of this by the
dark side. For every good thing that was created on Earth, the dark
side made an opposite to counter it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The butterﬂy told me that its species does not create spaceships for
themselves. If they need to venture outside of their planetary
system, they travel with another humanoid group. Lush and green,
the butterﬂy’s home planet has ﬂowers in colors that do not exist on
Earth. Their planet is located in a distant sector of this galaxy, but
their species had been taken to populate other worlds in other
universes that were more suited to their needs. No matter where in
the universe they exist, they communicate within their species at
will. They have little physical contact with other species outside of
their home worlds but enjoy telepathically sending spiritual
messages to humanoids. In some cases, they even “adopt” a
humanoid as a spiritual student. That is why it had come to this
meeting. Apparently, I was its student! Finally, it said that it was
time for me to communicate with the other beings, but it wanted
me to know that for the rest of my stay on Earth, it would send
Monarch butterﬂies to greet and comfort me. Whenever I saw a
white butterﬂy at an opportune moment, there was a message for
me. As the grand butterﬂy communicated with me, pulsating glows
emanated from its beautiful wings.
Suddenly, I turned and faced the other members of this strange
gathering. Tears began to run down my face. The next creature to
communicate with me was a huge, white praying mantis. As it came
closer to me, I froze with fear. Trying to scream, nothing came out.
The mantis emitted a loud and constant clicking and chirping that
completely unnerved me. I could not stand its presence. Sensing
this, it immediately backed away. The mantis was not evil or
negative. It was simply an unconventional (non-humanoid) mind-
pattern. Insect species are truly alien in perception and context of
our reality.
The next being to stand in front of me was about ﬁve-feet tall with
a large cone-shaped head. Wearing a long silver-grey robe, its moist
skin appeared to match the color of the robe. The large, octopus-
like eyes were dull and black. There was no visible nose, and the
mouth was ﬁshlike. I immediately understood that it was
amphibious and needed to return to water soon. Telepathically, the
creature told me that he was a male and that my DNA had marine
origins. He seemed kind as he informed me that someday I would
be aware of this.and needed to return to water soon. Telepathically, the
creature told me that he was a male and that my DNA had marine
origins. He seemed kind as he informed me that someday I would
be aware of this.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n to water soon. Telepathically, the
creature told me that he was a male and that my DNA had marine
origins. He seemed kind as he informed me that someday I would
be aware of this.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The next thing that I remember is becoming dizzy and nauseous.
Falling to the ﬂoor, I awoke sitting in a chair facing a panel of
seven beings. Much too big for me, the chair seemed like a throne.
The sides of the chair were as high as my shoulders, not allowing
my feet to touch the ground. As each being spoke to me, my chair
automatically swivelled to face the speaker.
Speaking in succession from right to left, the ﬁrst one was a large
reptilian creature who looked like a lizard stuﬀed into a black
uniform. He spoke with a hissing noise in a language that sounded
guttural and severe. Simultaneously, I heard the meaning of his
words in my head. A member of a vast empire that spanned a large
portion of the galaxy, his people are attempting to occupy all of the
star systems on the outer fringes of this galaxy, eventually working
their way inward. A defector, he now advises this council on the
possible activities of these invasion forces.
According to the lizard, the Earth was invaded many thousands of
years ago by an army of his people that arrived in a huge ship that
is now the moon of Earth. Another such ship is on its way, he said,
destined to arrive before the end of this century (as we calculate
time). After being driven oﬀ the Earth by settlers from the Lyraen
Empire, his people went underground. There, they remain in stasis
until they are to be reactivated by the incoming ship. These
reptilians also maintain bases on Venus and on some of the moons
of the outer planets. Because his people are male only, they created
females for the sole purpose of breeding. Despite this, cloning is
their primary method of reproduction. In conclusion, the lizard
added that I would someday convert his people to the Light because
my soul was an emissary to them many years ago. Remembering
me, they would respect what I said to them.
The next one to speak was an amphibian-type being who looked
very much like the “Creature from the Black Lagoon.” Slimy and
moist, his body was covered with a scaly, greenish-grey skin.
Breathing heavily, his thoughts ﬂooded my brain. His civilization
was the original inhabitant of Earth before the others arrived. At
that time, Earth was mostly water and marshes. Devastated by
mankind and aliens alike, there remain only a few pockets of his
people at the deepest depths of the oceans. From time to time theyved. At
that time, Earth was mostly water and marshes. Devastated by
mankind and aliens alike, there remain only a few pockets of his
people at the deepest depths of the oceans. From time to time they

--- PAGE BREAK ---arth was mostly water and marshes. Devastated by
mankind and aliens alike, there remain only a few pockets of his
people at the deepest depths of the oceans. From time to time they

--- PAGE BREAK ---

come to dry land to sun themselves, thus creating the basis for the
legendary mermaids and mermen. This species worked closely with
the Atlanteans before that continent sank. They served as liaisons
between mankind and the whales and dolphins. He said that these
sea mammals are advanced races from another galaxy. Most of his
people were lifted oﬀ-world to underground oceans on Neptune.
This maneuver was facilitated by benevolent ET groups. Continuing,
he told me that I have dolphin DNA; therefore, I could learn to
communicate with his species in order to help mankind and the
dolphin/whale systems.
Next, a being on the opposite side of the table spoke. Looking like a
small dark-haired human, his eyes were so dark that they almost
shined. His eyes seemed to pierce right through my own, and I
found it diﬃcult to look at him. Claiming to represent the
Federation of Planets of this galaxy, he said that there are over 120
diﬀerent member civilizations. Someday, Earth will be asked to
join, but only if they are successful in repelling the invasion force.
Otherwise, Earth could become a target by the Federation until the
reptilians are removed.
This dark-haired human said that I was selected to speak with all of
these aliens because each species had contributed to my DNA
creation. I was made for the express genetic purpose of belonging to
many diﬀerent groups. Because of that, each group would be more
willing to listen to me and accept my ideas since I partially
belonged to them. Continuing, he said that my soul-personality had
agreed to this mission long ago, undergoing training in many
galaxies and alternate universes. He said that much of what they
told me now would stay hidden in my cellular memory until each
piece of information becomes necessary. Future hardships and
sadness would condition me for my mission. Not wanting to hear
any of this, I tensed up to the point of vomiting. The next thing I
remember, I was still in the chair with another being talking to me.
This creature was a pale greyish-white. He possessed large, round,
black eyes and a long nose. A short “curtain” of material draped
around the back of his large head. His thin mouth did not move as
he spoke words inside my head. With a harsh attitude, this “grey”
claimed to be from the Rigel star system. Although he did not wantd
around the back of his large head. His thin mouth did not move as
he spoke words inside my head. With a harsh attitude, this “grey”
claimed to be from the Rigel star system. Although he did not want

--- PAGE BREAK ---his large head. His thin mouth did not move as
he spoke words inside my head. With a harsh attitude, this “grey”
claimed to be from the Rigel star system. Although he did not want

--- PAGE BREAK ---

to be part of this meeting, his overlords insisted that he attend it.
His job was to monitor the procedures since I was once a part of
their race, too. His home world was once part of the Lyraen
civilization. After that culture disintegrated, the reptilians invaded
his planet. Now his people are part of that empire and as such, do
their bidding. From time to time he would send his workers, smaller
grey creatures, to check up on me. Most of the time I would not
remember it except as a bad dream.
There would come a time when these greys would be at war with
some of the worlds represented at this meeting. My job would then
be to monitor the activities and report the ﬁndings to my
controllers. My body contains chemicals needed by his race. The
grey said that his race also looked human until war contaminated
their environment, genetically degenerating them. My body was
presented to them as a temporary token of hope and peace. Allowed
to use my genetics for the purpose of upgrading their dying species,
they could not purposefully harm me, permanently kidnap me, or
allow me to remember what they did to get what they needed from
me. These were the rules that all abided by to keep the status quo
while at the same time beneﬁting from my creation.
If my mission failed, or if any of the participants in this project no
longer wished to continue, then I would be removed to a safe place
while the others fought amongst themselves, possibly even on the
surface of the planet Earth. Finally, he told me that his people
merely wished to correct the errors committed against them in
order to evolve. They wished to become independent of the
reptilians and recreate their old civilization before it was too late.
Their dilemma was that, if they attempted this, they would be
destroyed completely by their masters. On the other hand, if they
continued with their masters’ orders, they would be targeted by the
Federation planets. Because they felt hopeless, they looked out only
for themselves.
At this point, the last being at the council table, who sat in the
middle, interrupted the Rigelian. This being was very tall. Standing
up, he raised his arms to either side. The beautiful white robe he
wore was trimmed in a blue that I had never seen before. His large
head was round on top with a pointed chin. Standing with his armsup, he raised his arms to either side. The beautiful white robe he
wore was trimmed in a blue that I had never seen before. His large
head was round on top with a pointed chin. Standing with his arms

--- PAGE BREAK ---rms to either side. The beautiful white robe he
wore was trimmed in a blue that I had never seen before. His large
head was round on top with a pointed chin. Standing with his arms

--- PAGE BREAK ---

outstretched, he remarkably resembled a living ankh. His oval eyes
were brilliant blue; his skin ivory white. By far, he was the most
impressive being at this gathering. When his thoughts ﬁlled my
head, I could not even think of my own name! As he spoke, I saw
words in a strange language swirling ethereally around his head.
He told me his name, but I cannot remember it. Coming from the
planet Khoom in the binary Sirius star system, his people were
descendents of nonphysical beings who inhabited hyperspace, a
region of consciousness existing outside of linear time and space.
They created the ancient Egyptian civilization as well as the Jewish
people and gave them the Torah. The Crystal Skull was their
creation, and they were in charge of many events in the galaxy and
beyond. My soul-personality was from his people because it was the
only type advanced enough to animate such a hybrid body as my
own. Possessing the most advanced technology in the universe, all
the other species came to these Sirians for information. Now, as an
adult, I realize that this group also plays one civilization against the
other to beneﬁt evolution as well as their own species.
As I got older, he continued, more and more of my memories would
return to me; not only of this particular event, but from my
existences in other star systems and universes. I would be a teacher
of untold races and species. However, within me was also a
program of self-destruction that would eliminate my mission
forever. He said that I could not possibly understand the meaning of
my mission at this time but that was as it should be. This way, I
could not tamper with it or my programming. Many would try to
deceive me; even those I considered to be my closest allies. This
Sirian said he would always be there to guide me, stating that our
soul-personalities were connected in a way that I would understand
when I was much older. Only after several segments of my alternate
selves come together would the heart of my mission begin. Until
then my situation would, at times, be precarious. Again, the reasons
would not become apparent for a long time.
This large Sirian began to glow a white light with violet, gold, and
silver overtones. He then faded into the center of this light. Next, I
woke up screaming in my bed at home and felt a terror beyond my
imagination. The screams woke my baby sister, and my parents ransilver overtones. He then faded into the center of this light. Next, I
woke up screaming in my bed at home and felt a terror beyond my
imagination. The screams woke my baby sister, and my parents ran

--- PAGE BREAK ---e then faded into the center of this light. Next, I
woke up screaming in my bed at home and felt a terror beyond my
imagination. The screams woke my baby sister, and my parents ran

--- PAGE BREAK ---

into my room to see if someone was trying to kill me. After a long
while, I ﬁnally caught my breath; but I would not let my parents
leave my room. Even though I wanted to, I could not tell them what
I had experienced. The words would just not come out.
For many years thereafter, I had repeated nightmares about that
event. With each bad dream, I remembered more and more
information. Gradually, within two years of the experience, I began
to see images of dead people around the living. I also received
information in my head about the state of health of any person in
front of me. Simply by hearing only the name of a person, I could
tune into that person’s state of being and give an accurate
description of his or her well-being.
The nightmares became more intense as I got older, as did my
preoccupation with UFO’s and aliens. Something compelled me to
watch every science-ﬁction movie and television show possible. I
also read as much about space exploration as I could. Intuitively, I
knew if a particular story was true or false.
My frustration grew as I realized that there was absolutely no one
on the face of the Earth with whom I could converse. Invariably, I
wanted to speak about my knowledge of what lay beyond physical
reality but was afraid of others’ reactions. In those days (the late
50’s and 60’s), UFO’s were still considered to be from the land of
the mentally ill.
By the time I reached puberty, more than just my body changed.
My nightly experiences took on an even stranger aura. Almost every
night, I felt my consciousness lift out of my body and enter a room
of bright light where I was intensely instructed. Topics ranged from
my origins, to the nature of physical reality, and to the possibilities
of time travel. I always came back to my body before dawn and
woke up extremely exhausted and uncomfortable. It was as if I had
walked ﬁfty miles nonstop. Feeling too tired to want to go to
school, I played hooky often enough to have the truant oﬃcer pay
me a visit a couple of times. Whenever I was in school, I found the
entire process boring. I was way ahead of my classmates in every
subject and felt as if they weighed me down and held me back. My
mind constantly wandered to the stars, where I knew my real home
existed. The Earth was as alien to me as the farthest star in thevery
subject and felt as if they weighed me down and held me back. My
mind constantly wandered to the stars, where I knew my real home
existed. The Earth was as alien to me as the farthest star in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---t as if they weighed me down and held me back. My
mind constantly wandered to the stars, where I knew my real home
existed. The Earth was as alien to me as the farthest star in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

galaxy would be to a human being. I did not like other people, nor
did I act or think in the same ways. A complete loner, my parents
tried ceaselessly to involve me with other children. But to me,
arrogant as it may sound, the thought of playing stupid games with
other children was repulsive when I could be working on ways to
improve the NASA space program.
Night after night, I begged the star people to come and take me
away forever. Why did I have to stay on this primitive planet?
Although I was afraid of the experience when the aliens came, there
was something about being with them that made me feel
comfortable and at peace. Then one night, when I was about
eleven-years old, I had another interesting experience.
Waking up in the middle of the night in my bedroom, I had an eerie
feeling of being watched. A cold shudder went down my entire
body as I tried to scream out for my parents, but nothing came out
of my mouth. The next thing I knew, three small greyish-white
aliens were in my room. Suddenly, I shifted to a standing position
and ﬂew right out through the closed window. Immediately, I was
in a small metallic-grey room with one of the aliens standing next
to me. On the wall, I saw a screen with a conveyor belt beneath it.
Openings in the wall allowed the ends of the conveyor belt to pass
through. Telepathically, the little grey being asked me to watch the
pictures on the screen, correlating them to food that would soon
pass in front of me on the conveyor belt.
Asked to identify the pictures with the food, I was directed to say
whether or not I would ever eat it. The screen then displayed a
picture of a moving rhinoceros. Simultaneously, the conveyor belt
started to move carrying a slab of meat, which I understood to be
from a rhinoceros. I remember thinking, “Absolutely not!” Then, a
picture of a cow appeared on the screen as a steak slid out on the
moving conveyor belt. I thought, “Yes,” and immediately, the taste
of the meat was in my mouth—• uncooked! This series of pictures
and meat went on for quite some time. There were chickens, goats,
elephants, insects, worms, birds, sea life, and plants.
Eventually, I began to get tired and sick to my stomach. The small
being turned oﬀ the screen, escorting me abruptly back to my room.
As strange as it sounds, he took me through the walls of the shipEventually, I began to get tired and sick to my stomach. The small
being turned oﬀ the screen, escorting me abruptly back to my room.
As strange as it sounds, he took me through the walls of the ship

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and my bedroom simultaneously. As I was literally thrust back onto
my bed, I felt that they were angry with me for not completing the
test or whatever it was that they were doing. Morning was only
minutes away. I was really sick, but after so many times of telling
my mother that I could not go to school, I forced myself to get up.
The memory of the experience haunted me for days afterwards. I
could not stop thinking of the images on the screen, realizing that
the aliens had killed these creatures in order to get the meat. This
nauseated me most of all. My horror grew even stronger when I
remembered that the last image on the screen before I got sick was
a picture of a man!

--- PAGE BREAK ---in order to get the meat. This
nauseated me most of all. My horror grew even stronger when I
remembered that the last image on the screen before I got sick was
a picture of a man!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4 PUBERTY
My teenage years were typical by all outward appearances, but my
private life continued to be extraordinary. My abductions increased
to two or three times each week. Now, I realize that these were not
always physical abductions. In fact, actual physical abductions only
occurred two or three times each year. The rest of the times were
astral, taking only my spirit for instruction and indoctrination.
Usually, I went to sleep in my bed and “woke up” in a small
metallic room where everything seemed constructed of a single
piece without seams or lines of any kind. The room had rounded
ends with benches facing a curved wall and a ceiling that connected
directly to the ﬂoor. Always naked, I sat with other human beings
on these benches. As pictures appeared with colors and symbols,
they were accompanied with verbal instructions that manifested
from a voice behind us.
Most of our learning centered around speciﬁc circumstances such as
our role in Earth’s future. We seemed to be some kind of army or
brigade programmed to perform certain functions at a particular
time. The functions were not to be remembered until they were
needed. In my heart, I felt that this was a negative programming,
but I did not know how to get rid of it. The fact that I had such
terrible things inside of myself scared me, especially because I did
not know what they were. After several hours of these instructions,
we all stood up, turned around, and waited to be escorted to our
homes.
My family moved from Brooklyn to Suﬀolk County, Long Island
when I was thirteen-years old. Being away from the congestion and
hostility of the city gave me a sense of freedom. We moved on a
cold day in the middle of winter. The huge house had many places
to be alone. Finally, I had a private room with my own closet. A
large, wooded back yard separated the house from a drive-in movie
theater. When the leaves were gone from the trees in the winter, I
could actually watch the movies from a second ﬂoor window. I
remember watching Midnight Cowboy with Dustin Hoﬀman and Jon
Voight in 1970. My sister and I laughed at the sexual scenes. Thise winter, I
could actually watch the movies from a second ﬂoor window. I
remember watching Midnight Cowboy with Dustin Hoﬀman and Jon
Voight in 1970. My sister and I laughed at the sexual scenes. This

--- PAGE BREAK ---tually watch the movies from a second ﬂoor window. I
remember watching Midnight Cowboy with Dustin Hoﬀman and Jon
Voight in 1970. My sister and I laughed at the sexual scenes. This

--- PAGE BREAK ---

caused my parents to yell at us from downstairs, but that only made
us laugh even more.
The ﬁrst few weeks were not too bad in the new house. My dreams
were normal except for one thing. I often went to bed wearing
pajamas and covered with a blanket, but woke up naked with the
blanket on the ﬂoor. At other times, I projected out of my body and
ﬂoated through the house in what seemed to be another dimension
where everything glowed and pulsated.
Several times, I had a series of recurring nightmares. In these
dreams, I ran away from uniformed men in what appeared to be a
large warehouse without any windows. I always hid under a table
in a small room that led to a corridor. The men then burst through
the door, looked around without ﬁnding me, and left to continue
their search. After that, I crawled out from under the table just as
another group of uniformed men came through the door and
captured me. I would start to scream and wake up in my bed
gasping for air. Whenever I woke up from these nightmares and
looked at my bedroom window, I saw the face of a blond man
surrounded by red light. I always screamed, and as I did, the man
would start to laugh at me. The louder I screamed, the harder he
laughed. I felt all the energy drain out of my body. Invariably, my
mother ran into my room to ﬁnd out what happened to me. When I
looked at the window again, the face was always gone. This went
on for years. The haunting thing about it was that I felt as if I knew
this man in my window. I almost felt that he was my friend or even
a relative I could not place.
On other occasions, worse things happened. At least once or twice
each month, I woke up in a strange cold room. Naked, I was
paralyzed and unable to speak. Small grey beings were always
around the table or platform on which I lay. They refused to
respond to my thoughts or fearful looks. Sometimes, a voice spoke
in my mind and told me it would soon be over and that I would not
remember a thing. The problem was that I remembered everything.
They always had a tube going into the tip of my penis, which was
usually erect, as well as something very tight on my testicles and
nipples. On some occasions, a tube or hose went into my rectum.
All of it was extremely painful, and I always had tears in my eyes.s
usually erect, as well as something very tight on my testicles and
nipples. On some occasions, a tube or hose went into my rectum.
All of it was extremely painful, and I always had tears in my eyes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---well as something very tight on my testicles and
nipples. On some occasions, a tube or hose went into my rectum.
All of it was extremely painful, and I always had tears in my eyes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

These beings were cold and unfeeling. One of them once told me
that I was part of their project and that I knew about it and had
agreed to it. Basically, he told me to shut up since I was one of their
co-workers. At the end of these experiences, I felt myself painfully
ejaculate. I always thought that blood was coming out of me. Then
they removed the tubes and probes, making me lie on that cold
table for a long while in silence. Next, one of them examined my
eyes, nose, and ears. Long, outrageous-looking objects were put
high up into my nostrils. On these occasions, I always came back to
my bed with a nose hemorrhage. At one point, my parents took me
to a specialist to cauterize my nostrils and wash my ears out. This
still did not stop the bleeding.
Every time the greys took me, I had some sort of physical reaction.
Much of the time, my eyes were irritated since they occasionally
put what appeared to be contact lenses in my eyes. One time, they
removed a large gelatinous mass from deep in my throat. When I
saw them remove it, I immediately threw up.
These experiences produced an interesting emotional eﬀect on me
as a teenager — I had a deep longing for children. This is not what
one would expect from a teenage boy! 1 constantly felt that I was a
father who missed his children. I did not know who they were,
where they were, or if they even existed. My logical mind told me
that it could in no way be true, but my emotions persisted.
When I was seventeen, my feelings came to a realization. Waking
up inside a typical ship, if indeed that was where they took me, I
found myself sitting on a chair fully clothed. This was strange
because, until now, I was always naked, paralyzed, and lying down.
Around me were little greys and a tall blond being in a blue
uniform. In the background were two human males dressed in
military uniforms. They appeared to be observers while the tall
blond seemed to direct the entire situation.
After a few minutes, the greys took me from the chair and led me to
a small room with diﬀerent lighting. There, I was shown a tiny
infant cradled by another grey with female characteristics. This
surprised me since they always said that they were neither male nor
female as we know it. Perhaps she was a hybrid of some sort.a tiny
infant cradled by another grey with female characteristics. This
surprised me since they always said that they were neither male nor
female as we know it. Perhaps she was a hybrid of some sort.

--- PAGE BREAK ---d by another grey with female characteristics. This
surprised me since they always said that they were neither male nor
female as we know it. Perhaps she was a hybrid of some sort.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

As the grey put the baby in my arms, I realized that it felt
practically weightless. I just stared at its drawn, boney face,
noticing that its skin was pasty and pale. Its dark, slightly almond-
shaped eyes stared back from its hairless, elongated head, yet it did
not make a sound. Knowing that it was too weak to make any noise
or even move, sadness for the poor thing ﬁlled my heart. I was then
told that it was my child and that my genetics had produced several
such infants. Some had died, but the stronger ones were removed to
another location on a safe world, whatever that meant. The greys
wanted to know if sick babies respond to their parents’ touch,
especially the human ones, and if a bonding would occur. I
remember feeling happy that I had this child, but I felt anger at the
same time because it was sick and not human. I could never tell
anyone about it, nor could I ever assist with its upbringing or
education.
The tall blond appeared to be pleased with this meeting and the
infant was immediately removed from the room. I asked if it would
live and if I could see it again. I even asked if I could permanently
stay with the child. My questions went unanswered as I was
promptly returned home. Waking in tears several hours later, my
longing for my oﬀspring was stronger than ever.
Shortly after this last encounter, my habits changed. Suddenly, I felt
the need to maintain my body in top-notch condition. I began a
regimen of heavy daily exercise coupled with fasting several times
each week. Refusing any food with the slightest fat content, I only
ate once a day and drank lots of water. My routine also included
frequent sun baths when the weather was warm. My eyes started to
feel as if they were being used as cameras. Whenever I looked at
something of interest, I could almost feel another consciousness
looking through my eyes at the same time. I even turned my head
as if it were a camera panning a scene. This other pair of eyes in my
head was particularly interested in travel inside moving vehicles,
shopping in malls and department stores, and was absolutely
fascinated with wintery scenes. Whenever snow fell, my eyes
scanned the landscape for every minute detail of the patterns and
colors of the environment. Sensing that the owner(s) of the other
eyes had diﬃculty operating in the cold and snow, I intuitively
knew that my eyes provided a ﬁrst-hand view that would otherwises and
colors of the environment. Sensing that the owner(s) of the other
eyes had diﬃculty operating in the cold and snow, I intuitively
knew that my eyes provided a ﬁrst-hand view that would otherwise

--- PAGE BREAK ---environment. Sensing that the owner(s) of the other
eyes had diﬃculty operating in the cold and snow, I intuitively
knew that my eyes provided a ﬁrst-hand view that would otherwise

--- PAGE BREAK ---

be impossible for them to obtain. I wondered if this had something
to do with my diminished eyesight. Was something put into my
eyeballs which allowed others to see through them? Or, did they
observe using only their mental capacities? When I ﬁnally asked, I
was told that they saw by mentally focusing on a small organic chip
implanted in the cornea of both eyes. Yes, they coldly responded,
this might cause my natural vision to diminish. They were not very
compassionate.
During one of my subsequent abductions, I was seated in a room
with my back to a silver-grey wall. There was nothing else in the
room except a small grey standing to my left. All of a sudden, the
wall behind me became a giant screen which projected all of my
thoughts into movie form. I did not know if they were downloading
everything that was observed through my eyes or if they were
screening my thoughts. 1 played with them to test it out. Thinking
of a horse, the image suddenly changed to a galloping horse. This
seemed to annoy my grey companion as he sharply reprimanded me
to stop.
Obviously, my mind aﬀected this device. Becoming aware of scenes
of my childhood and from what appeared to be my future, I realized
that this exercise was a life reading based on my mind-patterns.
They were recording where I had been in life and where I was
headed. This scared me because I wondered if they would change
my future to suit them instead of what was best for me. This same
abduction experience occurred several times before it abruptly
stopped. Either they got all of the information that they needed to
receive, or they reprogrammed my life in a way that was beneﬁcial
to them. I do not know which was the case.
The abductions continued for the rest of my teen years and into my
twenties. Most of the time, they were for genetic reasons; but there
were occasions when I was indoctrinated, used for energy draining
(i.e., using my bodily energies for their own use), or sometimes
simply interrogated. The most heinous aspect of the greys involved
what they wanted me to do to other human children. This
particularly increased in the early to mid-70’s. I was taken to a
place that I discerned to be underground because of the rock walls
and dampness that permeated much of that environment.hildren. This
particularly increased in the early to mid-70’s. I was taken to a
place that I discerned to be underground because of the rock walls
and dampness that permeated much of that environment.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sometimes, I saw water on the ﬂoors or walls. There were never
any windows, but there was always a sound. It was the terrifying
sound of screaming children.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sometimes, I saw water on the ﬂoors or walls. There were never
any windows, but there was always a sound. It was the terrifying
sound of screaming children.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5 TERROR AT MONTAUK
T o this day, I cannot bear the sound of crying children or
frightened voices. I also have an overwhelming desire to care for all
of the abandoned children of the world. Perhaps this is my way of
penance; perhaps I will never get the images out of my mind. Or,
perhaps this explains why I have had so many children since those
awful days. Whatever the case, the story I am about to tell you is
the truth as I remember it.
My memories of being part of the Montauk Project are not pleasant
at all. When I was a prepubescent child, my role was one of
subservience. Strapped to a table, I was examined, mentally
scanned for my brainwave signature, or sexually abused in ways
that stored my energetics and magniﬁed them by computer. This
went on until puberty.
As I had only tried to escape once, I was considered cooperative in
the work with my adult supervisors. Additionally, I had not died
from the testing and therefore I was “oﬀered” a promotion of sorts.
The administrators placed me in charge of disciplining the younger
boys who were brought in, as well as preparing them for the mental
and physical testing.
The preparation of the children included teaching them to
implicitly obey orders, without any questions whatsoever. I taught
them how to mentally focus on command so that their bodily
energies could be removed by the psychic/mentalist to whom they
were assigned. I instructed them on how to know what colors and
symbols to mentally use to facilitate any given experiment. They
were also taught how to relinquish their bodies and allow
themselves to die without the innate defensive reaction of resistance
inherent to all living beings.
A mentalist is diﬀerent than a psychic. A psychic merely observes
the blueprints of reality and reports on them. This is known as a
“psychic reading.” A mentalist actually goes in and manipulates the
blueprint in order to create a diﬀerent manifestation. This is what
the government wanted. Machines and computers could easily read“psychic reading.” A mentalist actually goes in and manipulates the
blueprint in order to create a diﬀerent manifestation. This is what
the government wanted. Machines and computers could easily read

--- PAGE BREAK ---A mentalist actually goes in and manipulates the
blueprint in order to create a diﬀerent manifestation. This is what
the government wanted. Machines and computers could easily read

--- PAGE BREAK ---

a blueprint for reality, but only a mind could change it.
Working with mentalists on this scale is no easy task because the
anchor between the soul-personality and the body can be separated
so easily with a child. Unfortunately, small male children have the
proper levels of mental and physical energies necessary to boost a
mentalist or psychic working on a computer. But, the desires and
fears of these small children are directly opposed to this task,
causing breakdowns on every level. Fear, coupled with the physical
and mental strains of the work, often killed the boys.
Especially vulnerable were the preadolescents from the ages of
three to twelve. Prized for their genetic material and mind-patterns,
this group was considered to be pure and uncontaminated.
However, their overwhelming fear combined with their yearning to
return home led to scattered and disjointed energy outputs that
were of no use to the scientists. In addition, they were often the
targets of sexual abuse by an unscrupulous segment of project
workers. Because of this, these boys often went insane and had to
be terminated. There was no way that they could be returned to
their families or society in that condition because their minds were
fried and could not be reprogrammed. Death was the only solution.
Frequently, they were simply starved to death and left to
decompose in special cave-like chambers. Their remains were
ﬂushed out to sea where the marine life consumed them. On rare
occasions, childless scientists and other workers who moved to
other parts of the globe took a favorite boy with them, passing him
oﬀ as their own son. Hair color and even ﬁngerprints were changed.
Some of the boys were kidnapped, as was I, from the safety of their
beds. In a manner that deﬁes belief, time and space were folded to
accommodate their disappearances. These boys were special in the
sense that they came from families with a political or military
connection to the secret government. Treated diﬀerently than the
“common” boys, all were returned to their source of origin without
exception.
Preprogrammed for speciﬁc purposes, we were the elite of the
groups and were given unique assignments. Some of us were used
to go out into the public and “tag” other boys to be picked up later
for use in the Project. We apparently all had special implants in ourroups and were given unique assignments. Some of us were used
to go out into the public and “tag” other boys to be picked up later
for use in the Project. We apparently all had special implants in our

--- PAGE BREAK ---unique assignments. Some of us were used
to go out into the public and “tag” other boys to be picked up later
for use in the Project. We apparently all had special implants in our

--- PAGE BREAK ---

eyes. This was alien technology and was used to relay information
to our supervisors. Our minds were programmed to perform the
work when we were in school, at the mall, etc., without our
conscious knowledge. I often wonder how many helpless victims I
designated for the experiments without even realizing that I was
dooming most of them to their deaths!
I think of the stories about Dr. Mengele in the concentration camps.
When the trains arrived at the work camps, Dr. Mengele stood by as
the human cargo was unloaded, making determinations of who was
going to live and who was going to die. He decided who would be a
worker and who would be part of his bizarre experiments. Was I
any diﬀerent than that monster? Was not, after all, Johannes von
Gruber a Nazi? Was he involved in the German version of the
Montauk Project? Even today, these feelings of guilt prevent me
from having a positive self-image, causing me to be overly critical
of myself in a punishing way. Perhaps I am trying to make up for
the evil of which I was a part.
Most of the boys were from outside of the New York area because
the disappearance of so many from one single location would be too
suspicious. So, the “common” boys, who were considered
expendable, came from other parts of the country. Taken from
families where they would not be missed as much as others, they
were the children of prostitutes, drug addicts, and alcoholics, or
they came from poor rural families with many children. If there was
a child that they really wanted who did not ﬁt the proper family
proﬁle, the family simply had an accident. The child was then taken
with the public assumption that he was an accident victim. These
accidents included cars going oﬀ embankments into rivers, ﬁres
where bodies were burned beyond recognition, and natural
disasters such as tornadoes, hurricanes, and earthquakes; any place
where there was a lot of damage and many people were missing
and presumed dead.
On the other hand, the Project also utilized runaways and street
people who were accessible and not easily missed by families. These
were mostly adults that were used in the time travel part of the
Project. Live human beings were needed to observe the eﬀects of
vortex inﬂuence on the body as well as to learn how to lock onto ahese
were mostly adults that were used in the time travel part of the
Project. Live human beings were needed to observe the eﬀects of
vortex inﬂuence on the body as well as to learn how to lock onto a

--- PAGE BREAK ---lts that were used in the time travel part of the
Project. Live human beings were needed to observe the eﬀects of
vortex inﬂuence on the body as well as to learn how to lock onto a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

person from various points in time and space. Children were not
used for these purposes because their auric signatures were not the
same as the adults, and it was adults that they ultimately planned to
use in the manipulation of the time lines.
When the Montauk researchers physically took a body from a
bedroom or other location, they often bent time and space so that
virtually no time passed for the victim or those around him.
Sometimes, they left an energy pattern in the victim’s room that
deterred anyone from entering the location and ﬁnding the person
missing. Remember, they had no trouble using the equipment to
send people to diﬀerent locations in the “local present,” or current
time on the Earth within a speciﬁc geographic range. The
researchers could already easily determine the frequency rates of
vibration for any current place on the Earth. Problems only
developed when they wanted to send someone oﬀ-world or to a
distant past or future sight. Then, they had to play hit or miss until
they tuned in properly. Adult guinea pigs were used for this. Many
were lost in time and space, as they were on the Eldridge.
Eventually, scientists were able to map the various points in time
and space so that they could travel easily between them. At the
more common destinations, they placed receivers to ﬁx the signal
and make the connections easier.
My role was to prepare the boys for use with the Project psychics,
particularly Duncan Cameron, who was the lead mentalist
throughout the experiment. Used as batteries, or boosters, for his
mental energies, the creativity and imagination of a small child is
without comparison. This energy was tapped, ampliﬁed, and
plugged into Duncan to magnify his mind power to the point where
he was able to open doorways to other dimensions, thus creating a
pathway. His abilities were used to connect to hyperspace and the
astral plane where all pre-physical reality materials and blueprints
are stored. He then brought the information back in usable form so
that technologies could be built.
The boys were often drained of energy very quickly and had to rest
a lot. Whenever one of them was “burning out,” a fear program was
instigated to create a high adrenaline ﬂow. This usually extended
the ﬁnal amounts of energy out of them until they could no longerst
a lot. Whenever one of them was “burning out,” a fear program was
instigated to create a high adrenaline ﬂow. This usually extended
the ﬁnal amounts of energy out of them until they could no longer

--- PAGE BREAK ---ne of them was “burning out,” a fear program was
instigated to create a high adrenaline ﬂow. This usually extended
the ﬁnal amounts of energy out of them until they could no longer

--- PAGE BREAK ---

be used. Then, their little hearts gave out, they went insane, had a
stroke, or some combination of the above.
Whenever a teenage boy or young adult was used as a battery pack,
sexual arousal and fear programs were combined to boost energy
output. Frequently, the dead bodies of these individuals were given
to the greys because they used the blood and soft body tissue as
nutrients. Understand that the greys do not eat as human beings do.
Instead, they require the hormones stored in various organs and
tissues of other species, particularly humans, because they were
created from human genetics many millennia ago.
The smaller grey races are without digestive systems. They absorb
nutrients and excrete waste through the skin. After collecting
various organs and body ﬂuids, they store them in huge vats. The
greys sit or swim in these vats several hours to absorb the extant
nutritional energies. This fuels their bodies for several days.
“Hunger” makes them particularly belligerent.
Several centuries ago, in order to avoid detection, the grey races
genetically created beings who walked the Earth for them and
collected body ﬂuids for them. These creatures came to be known as
vampires, incubi, and succubi. Because the heat of the sun removed
the potency of the collected ﬂuids, they avoided sunlight. In
modern times, the aliens use a creature known in Latin America as
the chupacabra, or goat sucker.
Some of the other alien groups who observed these experiments
were strictly interested in the mind control aspects. Needing to
control large groups of people, they did not wish to support a large
army to do so. Particularly interested in this were the large
reptilians who came from the Draco star system.
The most painful experience for me, beyond my own pain and
suﬀering, was hearing the death screams and the cries of fear from
the boys and teenagers who were burning out during the
experiments. My actions were responsible for putting them in this
position, yet I could do nothing to help them. I thought of the
parents and relatives who would never know the truth about what
happened to their child. I also considered the children who longed
for their mommies and daddies. A lump would develop in my throatthe
parents and relatives who would never know the truth about what
happened to their child. I also considered the children who longed
for their mommies and daddies. A lump would develop in my throat

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and on my chest. To this day, I wake up in the middle of the night
gasping for air and screaming after remembering dreams of my
involvement. Looking at my own sons, I vow that no one will ever
put them through that. I realize that I did not control the events,
nor was I in a frame of mind to stop them. But, I realize that
something in my soul-personality needed to experience this, and
that frightens me. I pray that God have mercy on the souls of those
innocent victims, and also on the souls of the perpetrators.

--- PAGE BREAK ---my soul-personality needed to experience this, and
that frightens me. I pray that God have mercy on the souls of those
innocent victims, and also on the souls of the perpetrators.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6 OVERSEAS
My college days were a whirlwind of confusion. I began school at
McGill University in Montreal, but I felt so uncomfortable there that
I soon returned to the states. Drawn to Canada for many years, I
enjoyed staying with relatives in Quebec during summer vacations.
I even planned to permanently emigrate there and become a citizen.
But no matter how hard I tried to permanently leave Long Island in
those days, some strong longing always brought me back.
Finally, I wound up at a local college on the South Shore of Long
Island where I studied accounting, a subject that I hated with a
passion. I believe that I was pushed into this course of study to help
account for the daily management of the Montauk boys. Part of my
job on the Project was to help balance the left and right brain of the
computer systems through mentalist activity. In the same way, the
debits and credits in accounting taught me how to balance the two
halves of a ledger. Each part of my life supported and enhanced
activity in the other. Little did I realize at the time how unbalanced
my life really was.
An interesting allergy developed during my last year in college. At
Christmas break, I was scheduled to have four wisdom teeth and a
molar removed. During the surgery, I developed a severe reaction to
the anesthesia, sodium pentathol. My heart and breathing stopped.
Immediately, the oral surgeon gave me oxygen and used an electric
device to shock my heart. The surgery was completed while I was
awake but medicated.
Years later, several medical professionals told me that it is
extremely unusual to be allergic to sodium pentathol. Only people
who have had it used on them extensively develop such severe
reactions. Sodium pentathol is also known as “truth serum.” Given
to spies under interrogation, it is used to make them reveal secret
information that they may be concealing. Could this have been one
of the chemicals that was injected into me while I was on the table
at Montauk Point? I deﬁnitely recall the needles, but I have no idea
what they contained. Perhaps sodium pentathol can be used for
programming the human (or alien) mind.to me while I was on the table
at Montauk Point? I deﬁnitely recall the needles, but I have no idea
what they contained. Perhaps sodium pentathol can be used for
programming the human (or alien) mind.

--- PAGE BREAK ---the table
at Montauk Point? I deﬁnitely recall the needles, but I have no idea
what they contained. Perhaps sodium pentathol can be used for
programming the human (or alien) mind.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

One of my ﬁrst major trips overseas also occurred during my
college years. It was sponsored by a Zionist organization that sought
to bring volunteers to Israel and promote colonization of the arid
land there. People from all over the world were recruited,
indoctrinated, and sent to various collective farms called kibbutzim.
A kibbutz is probably the most pure form of communism that exists
in the world. No one receives any more than any other member. A
red Soviet ﬂag bearing the hammer and sickle ﬂies over every
kibbutz. Even the land is owned by the government; no individual
owns anything. The only incentives to produce are loyalty to the
homeland, plus your every need is taken care of for you.
Consciously, I did not want to go, but I was compelled beyond my
own rationalizations and the warnings of my family.
My trip to the Middle East was long and interesting. Travelling by
way of France, Italy, and Greece, I found the island of Crete to be
exhilarating and the volcano at Stromboli in Sicily to be eye-
catching. Although the Pompeii volcano near Naples seemed to
open up memories of a prior existence, I was mostly absorbed in
what lie ahead of me. During part of the trip, a French woman with
Italian citizenship tried to convince me to become a medical doctor
and marry her daughter. The entire idea seemed absurd to me at
the time, but in retrospect, perhaps I should have taken her up on
the oﬀer!
When I landed in Israel, I suddenly became overwhelmed with
emotion. As the plane descended into Lod airport over Tel Aviv,
tears welled up in my eyes. I felt as if I was ﬁnally coming home. I
have no explanation for my feelings, yet most of my consciousness
was fearful and apprehensive. I fully intended to arrive at the
airport; then take the next ﬂight back to the U.S.
At this point, I ask the reader to follow the events slowly and
carefully. Although the following passages may become a bit
confusing, I am reporting them in the way I recall them. Keep in
mind that this series of events confused me, also. However, I have
done my best to relate these illogical sequences as logically as
possible.
An inexplicably strange thing happened upon my arrival. After
leaving the plane, I found myself wandering through the gate areas.my best to relate these illogical sequences as logically as
possible.
An inexplicably strange thing happened upon my arrival. After
leaving the plane, I found myself wandering through the gate areas.

--- PAGE BREAK ---hese illogical sequences as logically as
possible.
An inexplicably strange thing happened upon my arrival. After
leaving the plane, I found myself wandering through the gate areas.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In my mind, I wanted to get to the luggage claim area to retrieve
my bags so that I could ﬁnd a ﬂight back. Looking up at a departure
board, I saw a ﬂight boarding for Teheran, Iran. I felt as if I should
be on it. I stood transﬁxed at this location until someone asked me
to move. Although I thought only a few seconds had passed, I
realized when I looked at my watch that almost an hour had
passed!
Next, a second event out of the ordinary occurred. While again
trying to ﬁnd the baggage claim area, I stopped in my tracks and
was compelled to look up. On another departure board, was a ﬂight
to Addis Ababa, Ethiopia; Nairobi, Kenya; and Johannesburg, South
Africa. Once more, I was transﬁxed. I saw myself board this ﬂight
with a group of people, then take oﬀ knowing that I would return to
Israel without anyone realizing that I was gone. Another student on
my original ﬂight jolted me awake and said that he had found a
way to retrieve our luggage. This guy claimed to be a rabbinical
student from Georgia who was here to see the Holy Land and work
on a kibbutz. I did not like him because he was arrogant and always
had nasty comments. Something told me that he was not telling the
complete truth.
After retrieving our luggage, we proceeded to the area where a
representative from American Zionist Youth Foundation was to
meet us and take us to the designated kibbutz where we would
work for the next couple of months. Three women also waited with
us.
Hours passed and no one came to take us to our destination. I do
not remember what occurred during this time except that I was
sitting on my luggage when a dark-skinned Israeli man arrived. He
said that instead of going directly to the kibbutz, he was taking us
to a place in Jerusalem for the night. Crammed into his little
Renault, we headed for the ancient city. I was so exhausted that I
did not appreciate the scenery nor the historic sights that we passed
as we climbed the mountains of Judea to the Holy City. Along the
way, we passed modern apartment buildings beside hovels as well
as remnants of destroyed Jordanian tanks and artillery installations.
By law, the city of Jerusalem is built out of “Jerusalem stone” from
the surrounding mountains. Because of this, the city blends into theants of destroyed Jordanian tanks and artillery installations.
By law, the city of Jerusalem is built out of “Jerusalem stone” from
the surrounding mountains. Because of this, the city blends into the

--- PAGE BREAK ---rdanian tanks and artillery installations.
By law, the city of Jerusalem is built out of “Jerusalem stone” from
the surrounding mountains. Because of this, the city blends into the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

countryside. From a distance, you can hardly tell where the city
ends and the countryside begins; it is a magniﬁcent sight. Jerusalem
means “City of Peace.”
Too tired to eat, all I wanted was a hot shower and a comfortable
bed. The women accompanying us were dropped oﬀ at a youth
hostel for women. The driver then took me and the unfriendly
rabbinical student to something that reminded me of a prison.
Pulling up to a large stone building with iron gates and
fortiﬁcations, there were no lights on the inside. The driver
remarked that this was an old British army barracks. The size of a
small castle, there was no one there but us! After unloading our
bags, the driver told us to follow him as he unlocked the padlocks
on the front gates. Inside, it was dark, musty, dank, and eerie. We
waited in the vestibule while he turned on the electricity. We then
followed him up a long narrow staircase to a ﬂoor that contained
bedrooms of sorts. He directed us into a small cell-like room with
two iron cots and two hard wooden chairs. A single light bulb hung
from a wire in the middle of the ceiling. Next, he showed us down a
long, dim hallway to a large bleak shower room that looked like no
one had bathed there since World War II. Telling us that he would
return in the morning, he mumbled something about going to Tel
Aviv for the night and that it was a long trip. He left abruptly.
My companion hardly spoke a word the rest of the night. We took
turns showering in the trickling water, before laying down on the
hard and uncomfortable cots to sleep. When the single light bulb
was turned oﬀ, it was pitch black in the freezing cold room. I could
feel the thoughts of all the soldiers who had stayed here. I sensed
their loneliness and longing for home. In fact, I felt the same. As
thoughts of my family in America and the comforts of home ﬁlled
my head, I decided that I must be crazy for coming here. The sound
of dogs barking and playing outside reminded me of familiar noises
from home. This made me feel even more lonely. When I heard a
muezzin (a Moslem cleric) start his call for night prayers from the
minaret of a nearby mosque, I knew that I “was not in Kansas
anymore!”
This next experience is non-sequitur. I believe that these events
were “squeezed” or “folded” into linear time. Please followthe
minaret of a nearby mosque, I knew that I “was not in Kansas
anymore!”
This next experience is non-sequitur. I believe that these events
were “squeezed” or “folded” into linear time. Please follow

--- PAGE BREAK ---rby mosque, I knew that I “was not in Kansas
anymore!”
This next experience is non-sequitur. I believe that these events
were “squeezed” or “folded” into linear time. Please follow

--- PAGE BREAK ---

carefully.
Glancing up, I noticed small balls of light appearing on the ceiling.
They seemed to swirl around in white and yellow, then turn blue
and green. I felt like I was swirling with them. I followed them with
my eyes until I simply could not keep them open anymore.
Suddenly, I was back at the Tel Aviv airport—it was the day that I
arrived and I was boarding a plane for Teheran. I had no luggage
except a small carry-on bag that was not mine. The event seemed
strange, but somehow I knew what I was doing.
I remember taking oﬀ and ﬂying northwest instead of east toward
Iran. A man sitting next to me told me in perfect Hebrew that Israeli
aircraft cannot ﬂy over Arab territory. Therefore, we were ﬂying
northwest into Turkish airspace. Next, we would turn east and
continue into Iranian territorial space. This was 1975 and there was
no peace treaty in place. In fact, there was talk of another war. As
the peaks of the Anatolian mountain range came into view, a voice
over the intercom instructed us to pull the window shades down as
we crossed into Iranian airspace. Iranian ﬁghter jets would be
pacing the plane, and if they observed an unshielded window, there
could be trouble. I was told that this was done only with aircraft
that did not ﬂy a regular route and might be suspected of spying on
Iran or surrounding territories.
I remember the dusty and minaret-ﬁlled skyline of Teheran. A few
skyscrapers appeared as testimony to the modernization program of
the Shah. Next, I remember leaving he aircraft as it stood on the
tarmac. Aline, I entered a small, shiny black car. We drove through
narrow streets, then onto a major highway that led outside the city
into high snow-covered mountains. Turning oﬀ of a one-lane road,
we travelled on twisted paths. Suddenly, we made a sharp left turn
into a black open on the side of a mountain cliﬀ. As we emergen
into the cave, I ﬂashed back to Johanannes von Gruber appearing in
the underground cavern.
At this point, I ask the reader to understand that most human
memories are linear. That is. one event follows, another in
sequential time order. In my case, my consciousness spans multiple
time lines and realities. One alternate universe bleeds through to
another, and I am cognizant of this all at once due to my mindin
sequential time order. In my case, my consciousness spans multiple
time lines and realities. One alternate universe bleeds through to
another, and I am cognizant of this all at once due to my mind

--- PAGE BREAK ---order. In my case, my consciousness spans multiple
time lines and realities. One alternate universe bleeds through to
another, and I am cognizant of this all at once due to my mind

--- PAGE BREAK ---

being opened through Kundalini activation.* I. must learn to focus
on a speciﬁc event in order to comprehend it. In this chapter, 1 am
attempting to list the events in the order I experienced them.
Actually, all the events occurred simultaneously, hut the human
mind can only decipher one at a time.
The rest of my time in Iran consists of memory ﬂashes. I heard the
Hebrew, Farsi (Persian), and German languages spoken along with
an occasional ﬂurry of Russian. For the most pari, I felt drugged and
disoriented. I remember two scientists in white coats entering the
room where I sat. They spoke to me in German. I also recall a
painful physical examination in the nude. After this, a metallic cap
was placed on my head which seemed to send ﬂashes of
information shooting into my brain. I know this was programming
me to perform some function. My captors then took me far away
from “prying eyes” as the Kundalini activation refers to all chakra
centers opening up in sequence, thus allowing the mind to be 100%
utilized and aware of many realities simultaneously.
described their reasoning. Taken to an elevator, I was strapped into
a seat beside them. The elevator then rushed downward at a
tremendous speed. At this point, I brieﬂy ﬂashed back to my trip as
a young boy in the small craft with the plant-like alien. The
pressure of the high speed caused my skin to ﬂatten against my
bones and my teeth to tightly clench together. When the elevator
jolted to a halt, I felt ill.
My legs were so heavy that it was diﬃcult to walk. In addition, I
realized that 1 had wet myself. I was placed into an elongated
diamond-shaped vehicle that waited at a platform similar to a train
station. Both in front and behind it was a tubular tunnel which
seemed inﬁnite. As the door closed behind me, I noticed two older
men dressed in black suits and white shirts already inside. The
vehicle glided along, increased rapidly in speed, then started to
hum. One of the men smiled at me, remarking that we were on a
hyperspace subway system that circled the globe. “No one knows
who built it,” he added, “but our alien friends showed us how to
use it and build more.”
I think that I must have fallen asleep because when I awoke, I was
at the airport again; this time boarding a ﬂight to Johannesburg by, “but our alien friends showed us how to
use it and build more.”
I think that I must have fallen asleep because when I awoke, I was
at the airport again; this time boarding a ﬂight to Johannesburg by

--- PAGE BREAK ---ends showed us how to
use it and build more.”
I think that I must have fallen asleep because when I awoke, I was
at the airport again; this time boarding a ﬂight to Johannesburg by

--- PAGE BREAK ---

way of Addis Ababa and Nairobi. The same two older men were
with me, apparently supporting me on either side. Even though I
thought this was odd, a part of me accepted the predicament and
knew what was happening. It was a “deja vu” of my trip to Iran. I
was confused, but in my life, the unconventional is the norm.
After taking oﬀ and heading south over the Negev desert, the plane
followed the Red Sea for some time. On the left of the aircraft was
the coastline of Saudi Arabia. On the right was Egypt, then Sudan.
My travel companions told me that anti-aircraft guns were on us
every step of the way. Any change of course to either coastline
would result in enemy ﬁre — a comforting thought while travelling
helplessly in the air! I prayed that the pilot had a steady hand on
the controls.
As we passed the coastline of Sudan, we made a sharp turn to the
west. I straightened up in my seat, trying to speak, but no voice
came out. I did not know if it was from fear, dryness, or both. One
of my companions stated that we were headed for the coastline of
Ethiopia and the mainland of Africa, and this meant that we were
safe. I always sat by the window. One escort sat on the aisle and left
an empty seat between us. The other one sat on the aisle directly
across from us. We landed in Addis Ababa only long enough to
refuel and board a few passengers. I did not leave my seat, not even
to use the bathroom. Ethiopia looked disgusting and dirty. The air
felt dry, making me cough. The surrounding area was a desert.
The short hop to Nairobi took a little over an hour. There seemed to
be more grassland and nature preserves here. Nairobi had an
impressive skyline for Africa. Even so, the airport was primitive,
hot, and without air-conditioning. Here, I was allowed to
accompany a companion to a bathroom. The toilets were ﬁlthy and
the ﬂoor was covered in sand and dirt. Lizards hung on the doors
and ceiling vents. I felt uncomfortable and out of place. Back on the
plane again, we ﬂew over beautiful and lush tropical forests on the
way to Johannesburg. I saw a magniﬁcent snow-capped mountain
that I was told was Mt. Kilimanjaro. A strange aura surrounds that
place. In fact, I would not be at all surprised to ﬁnd out that there is
an underground base of some kind located there.
In a gorgeous mountain range, I saw what looked like a volcano.surrounds that
place. In fact, I would not be at all surprised to ﬁnd out that there is
an underground base of some kind located there.
In a gorgeous mountain range, I saw what looked like a volcano.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e. In fact, I would not be at all surprised to ﬁnd out that there is
an underground base of some kind located there.
In a gorgeous mountain range, I saw what looked like a volcano.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

My escort said we were ﬂying over Zaire. As the green below turned
yellow and brown, I was told we were crossing between Zimbabwe
(Rhodesia at the time) and South Africa. As we touched down in
Johannesburg, he told me to prepare for an exciting experience.
The plane was stopped before reaching the terminal. Soldiers in
brown uniforms, who reminded me of pictures I had seen of Nazi
soldiers, whisked us oﬀ the plane and took us by jeep to a small
plane waiting at a grassy area of the runway. Watching the El Af
707 then continue towards the terminal, I told my escort that I was
afraid to ﬂy in small planes. That was a mistake because he
immediately jabbed me with something sharp in my right bicep.
The next thing I remember is waking up strapped into a small seat
by a window looking down on farmland. I was told we were going
to a very important meeting in Capetown.
I must have dozed oﬀ again because, when I awoke, I saw beautiful
beaches and a pretty city. As we landed, 1 fell unconscious again.
When I woke up, I was naked and strapped spread-eagle on a hard,
cold table in a windowless room with brick walls. I saw soldiers
with Nazi-like uniforms, an older man in a dark blue uniform that
looked American, and a hideous little grey, mostly white in color,
who reminded me of the Gumby cartoon character. Because 1 was
not wearing my glasses, I had to squint really hard to see people.
Feeling pain in my penis and groin, I looked down to see a tube
inserted into the tip of my penis. I felt clamps around my testicles.
Any movement increased the pain. Although the room was cool, I
was sweating profusely. I wanted to cry, but no tears ﬂowed. I
wanted to scream, but had no voice. The others in the room became
aware of my activity. Speaking in perfect English, the man in the
dark blue uniform told me not to be afraid. He said that I was part
of a great plan to beneﬁt mankind on many worlds— if I survived.
Thanks a lot! I must have passed out again because when I regained
consciousness, I was sitting on a bench against a wall. I was naked
except for a white towel draped over my waist. Men stood in front
of me and called my name in Hebrew. Their voices seemed kind,
but I disliked them intensely. I was embarrassed. When they asked
me how I felt, I replied with a curt, “Fine.”
Standing against the opposite wall behind them was a tall Sirianeir voices seemed kind,
but I disliked them intensely. I was embarrassed. When they asked
me how I felt, I replied with a curt, “Fine.”
Standing against the opposite wall behind them was a tall Sirian

--- PAGE BREAK ---

described earlier in the book. Telepathically, he told me that he was
an ambassador to the Israelis and their allies from the planet
Khoom in Sirius A. As part of their race, I had a mission to
complete. In time, I would understand and forgive them for what
they did. Certain cells of my body had been programmed with
information for future use. Only speciﬁc methods could extract the
information at the appropriate time. My body was built for this
purpose because I had a unique energetic structure. One day, I
would return to Khoom to help my people overcome some of their
destructive mind-patterns. My experiences here, as well as in other
star systems, was vitally important to this mission.
The next thing I remember, I was on that vehicle in the tube again,
traveling underground at high speed on the hyperspace subway.
Opening my eyes, I saw my two companions smile at me. At that
moment, I hated them, wanting to lash out and kill them; but I
could not move even one ﬁber of my being. I could only look and
hate. A moment later, I was awake on that awful cot in the barracks
in Jerusalem. Naked, I was exhausted beyond all human
comprehension and covered in grimy sweat. The nasty student was
already in the shower. My watch said 8:00 A.M. As I dragged myself
out of bed, my body felt like it was under tons of concrete. I had to
get ready to leave for the kibbutz. What had I just experienced?
Was it a hallucination? Did I remember or relive an actual event?
My mind said no; my body said yes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rete. I had to
get ready to leave for the kibbutz. What had I just experienced?
Was it a hallucination? Did I remember or relive an actual event?
My mind said no; my body said yes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7 AT THE KIBBUTZ
The women were already in a little van when we came outside to
load our luggage. We were told that there had been a change of
plans. The rich kibbutz up north in Galilee was booked solid, so we
were going to a poor kibbutz called Gvar Am, which means the
strength, or conquering, of people. This kibbutz was located next to
the Gaza Strip in the Negev desert. The nearest Israeli city was
Ashkelon. The trip to Gvar Am was horrendous. Israelis do not drive
their cars, they aim them. Stopping in Ashkelon, we waited for a
kibbutz representative to take us the rest of the way. The downtown
area teemed with Palestinian workers who had crossed the border
to earn a living. Because they would try to con us out of our
possessions, we were told to stay away from that area. The city
itself was typical of the Middle East with busy roads, hordes of
humanity, and overwhelming smells that quickly dispelled any
hunger pangs.
The representative soon arrived, whisking us away to our new
home. Housed in the ﬁrst cottages built by the original settlers from
Germany in the early 1930’s, these were the oldest buildings on the
property. The stone ﬂoors were uneven, reminding me of waves
upon an ocean. The walls and roof were wood. Inscribed over the
porch was a line from an old Hebrew song: “Heenay ma tov u ma
nayim shevet achim gom yachad...Behold how good and wonderful
for brothers to live together.” I wonder if by “brothers” they meant
the human-sized roaches or the airplane-sized wasps!
The air was hot and dry; the natives rather unfriendly. I suppose
they thought it presumptuous of foreigners to work at this kibbutz
for awhile, then return to their wealthy countries to tell tales of
building the homeland. In the meantime, they stayed and suﬀered a
miserable existence. It did not take long for the young boys of the
settlement to ask for our possessions. Remember, this was a purely
communistic society where no one was allowed to have any more
than anyone else.
Rising at 4:30 A.M. every day, we reported to the pear groves by 5
A.M. Breakfast was served at 8:00 A.M. but not before some of thesociety where no one was allowed to have any more
than anyone else.
Rising at 4:30 A.M. every day, we reported to the pear groves by 5
A.M. Breakfast was served at 8:00 A.M. but not before some of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---was allowed to have any more
than anyone else.
Rising at 4:30 A.M. every day, we reported to the pear groves by 5
A.M. Breakfast was served at 8:00 A.M. but not before some of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Scottish volunteers became exhausted and passed out from the heat.
After breakfast, we saluted the red ﬂag, complete with hammer and
sickle, then returned to work. By noon, it was too hot to work, so
we returned to our quarters for lunch. The afternoon was free, but
there was no place to go.
At this kibbutz, I made a friend from England. We enjoyed working
together and remained in contact for many years; even visiting each
other in our respective countries. Several years later, I learned that
he was an agent for both British and Soviet intelligence.
I soon had enough of Spartan communist living and decided to
escape from the kibbutz. To oﬃcially leave, their council has to
vote upon it. I was not taking any chances with their decision; so
early one morning, before sunrise, I packed my things to go.
Intending to search for relatives in the town of Holon, I found
myself in the midst of another adventure that I had not planned to
take.
The bus ride to Tel Aviv was long and hot. The air along the coast is
humid, not dry like it is inland. Sitting on the bus with my ample
luggage beside me, wary passengers eyed me for possible terrorist
activities. In those days, as in the present, terrorism on buses was
rampant. A foreigner with luggage on a bus was extremely
suspicious.
Upon my arrival at the central bus station in Tel Aviv, ! found
myself thoroughly confused. A thousand buses seemed to be going
everywhere in the country. Hordes of people tried to dash about in
a sea of humanity. After much physical exertion, I managed to ﬁnd
what I hoped was the bus to Holon. As I paid my fare, I asked the
driver, who was an older fatherly type, to kindly let me know
where to disembark. We drove for what seemed like hours. Finally,
I was the only one left on the bus. When I reminded the driver
about my stop, he replied that he had forgotten and would
personally drive me in the bus to my exact address. Unfortunately,
all I knew was the street and town. He had never heard of the
street, so he did his best by taking me to a major thoroughfare. Not
exactly the kind of treatment you ﬁnd in New York City.
He left me on a street corner just before dark. I thanked him as heof the
street, so he did his best by taking me to a major thoroughfare. Not
exactly the kind of treatment you ﬁnd in New York City.
He left me on a street corner just before dark. I thanked him as he

--- PAGE BREAK ---

drove oﬀ. Alone, tired, hungry, and scared, I started walking down
the old narrow streets, fully aware that I did not have a clue where
I was going. I decided to look for a place to sleep in the street. The
next day, I would get to the airport and ﬂy home. No place looked
safe to sleep, so I continued my aimless walking.
Suddenly, I stopped in front of a very old stone building that could
easily have ﬁt into a movie about the Casbah. Although there was
no light on in the entry way, I felt drawn inside. Ascending the
ancient stairways, I heard families chattering away in Hebrew and
Arabic. Distinct Middle Eastern smells ﬂoated around me.
Finally, stopping on the ﬁfth ﬂoor, I went to a door and knocked.
Thinking I would ask for advice or maybe a place to sleep, an old
man came to the door. His name was Leon, and he spoke only
Hebrew and Polish. When I told him my name, he smiled. He said
that he was expecting me!
As the unexpected was the norm in my life, this man turned out to
be the husband of my grandmother’s cousin. Unseen forces led me
directly to his door. He phoned his daughter, and she brought her
entire family to meet me. I returned to her home where I stayed for
the next two months. They had never met me before, nor did I even
know their names. This was truly an unexpected, but welcome,
miracle.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e. I returned to her home where I stayed for
the next two months. They had never met me before, nor did I even
know their names. This was truly an unexpected, but welcome,
miracle.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8 THE SHUNS
The apartment in Holon became my home base. From there, I left
on many trips around the region, sometimes for days at a time.
One particular adventure took place while on an excursion to the
Negev desert in the south of Israel. I had just passed the restricted
area around Dimona, a town where Israel has its secret nuclear
facility. This place is guarded by the Falasha, the Black Jews from
Ethiopia who claim to be descendents of King Solomon and the
Queen of Sheba. The Queen supposedly returned to Ethiopia with
the original Ark of the Covenant where it remained for safekeeping
until only a few years ago.
King Solomon was a powerful mystic. His advisors always discussed
the future with him. It is believed that he was warned of a future
time when Israel would be overrun with evil foreigners. The Holy
Ark of the Covenant would most likely be a prime target.
I believe that Solomon, in all his wisdom, decided to hide the real
Ark of the Covenant in a place where no one would think to look.
Conveniently, the Queen of Sheba was looking for a major token of
faith and aﬀection from her current lover. Solomon sent the Ark
back with her to Ethiopia and made a facsimile for the public to
view.
In order to solidify his trust for Sheba and the Ark, Solomon saw to
it she had his child so that she would always feel an obligation to
her child's people. His was the perfect plan.
The Queen's descendents became the Falasha, a numerous faction in
Ethiopia. At one time, it is believed that there were over 500,000
Falasha in Ethiopa. In fact, Haile Salassie, the ruler of Ethiopia until
a military coup topple his regime, called himself the "Lion of
Judah."
The Israeli Mossad, or intelligence agency helped the province of
Eritrea break away from Ethiopia because the Ark was hidden there
and the military government refused to cooperate with the Israelis.The Israeli Mossad, or intelligence agency helped the province of
Eritrea break away from Ethiopia because the Ark was hidden there
and the military government refused to cooperate with the Israelis.

--- PAGE BREAK ---or intelligence agency helped the province of
Eritrea break away from Ethiopia because the Ark was hidden there
and the military government refused to cooperate with the Israelis.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Consequently, the Israelis created their own country with whom to
negotiate. The Ark was successfully transferred to the Holy Land at
the same time the military government of Ethiopia allowed the
Israelis to airlift all of the remaining Falasha out of Ethiopia. A
strange turn of events, but one that portends the coming of the
Messiah for the Jews.
It was near Dimona that I was abducted by the Sirians for a major
adventure. As I walked around some rock formations that jutted up
out of the desert, the sun was hot and the air extremely dry.
Perspiration evaporated in a manner of seconds after appearing on
my skin. Suddenly, a tremendous ﬂash of light blinded me. Raising
my hands to shield my eyes, I realized that there were no sounds
around me; in fact, there was an eery silence all about.
Opening my eyes, I found myself in a great room that resembled an
ancient Greek or Roman throne room with huge columns and a
screen on the wall. Lighting was subdued and without a visible
source. There were no windows or doors. From a space near the
screen, a tall Sirian dressed in a white and blue robe appeared. He
was nearly identical to the Sirian I had seen as a child. About seven-
feet tall, his skin was pale. He had large pointed ears, a long
pointed nose, and big, blue almond-shaped eyes. His mouth and lips
were very small. His ﬁngers appeared long and graceful as he stood
in front of me with outstretched arms. The way his robe touched
the ﬂoor, combined with the shape of his elongated head, he looked
exactly like a living ankh! What a beautiful sight! 1 felt no fear
because 1 had seen one before and felt “at home” with it. The
screen came on behind him and allowed me to see the outline of
Earth as we moved swiftly away from it in some sort of a craft
heading toward Mars. In that room, there was no sensation of
movement. It felt soft and comfortable — even more comfortable
than home.
The being moved forward and smiled, telepathically welcoming me.
Through his thoughts, he told me that we were on our way to Mars
to see something that would help me at a later time. Continuing, he
said that his species created people from stock brought to Earth
from elsewhere. These creations are known as Hebrews, as is their
language. Much of this had been distorted and interfered with overhe
said that his species created people from stock brought to Earth
from elsewhere. These creations are known as Hebrews, as is their
language. Much of this had been distorted and interfered with over

--- PAGE BREAK ---cies created people from stock brought to Earth
from elsewhere. These creations are known as Hebrews, as is their
language. Much of this had been distorted and interfered with over

--- PAGE BREAK ---

the millenniums. His species was now in league with the remnants
of these original creations, the Israelis, to correct and purify them
before the next wave of interruptions occur. Apparently, the Sirians
felt that these Hebrew remnants were not the genetically-whole
beings that they originally created. Because it was too late to
change their physical structure, it had become necessary to change
their mind-patterns, thus enabling them to interface with other
alien beings. As he communicated, pictures of his words appeared
on the screen behind him. I actually saw history from the dim past
as though it was happening at that moment.
Next, I remember lying on a table in a brightly lit clinical-looking
room. The Sirian was there with a tall grey being who had round,
black eyes and a goofy look on its face. Identiﬁed to me as a Vegan,
it was a creation by the Sirians out of their own genetics mixed with
the little greys. Although not strapped down, I could not move, and
I realized that I was naked. For the ﬁrst time, I felt fear with the
Sirians. A bright device was placed over my face as they probed my
genitals, stomach, and chest. The Sirian said that they needed to
test for residuals of genetic resonance identifying my body with
theirs. He said they had manufactured my body in collusion with
certain Earth forces for the purpose of completing their agenda. I
was some kind of pawn in an interstellar game. What was going on
here?
To complicate matters further, he said that my soul-personality was
some type of entity from a nonphysical aspect of Sirius which was
an even higher form than himself. My body contained Sirian DNA
which was necessary for the soul-personality to operate it. As he
spoke, I began to glimpse in my mind my true identity which was
simultaneously magniﬁcently beautiful and frightening. Tears
ﬂowed uncontrollably down my face. This seemed to amuse the
Sirian and the Vegan. I thought to myself, “If I looked like either
one of you, I would not laugh!”
Next, I was stood up instantaneously. Wearing only a Sirian robe, I
could not see my feet. I felt elation, like I was on a natural high. I
cannot compare the feeling to anything another can understand
without having had the experience themselves. I felt a complete
knowing of all things; a connection to all beings. Yet, I retained myh. I
cannot compare the feeling to anything another can understand
without having had the experience themselves. I felt a complete
knowing of all things; a connection to all beings. Yet, I retained my

--- PAGE BREAK ---the feeling to anything another can understand
without having had the experience themselves. I felt a complete
knowing of all things; a connection to all beings. Yet, I retained my

--- PAGE BREAK ---

identity of self. I followed the Sirian out through the wall to what
appeared to be a maroon-colored cave with a high ceiling that
seemed to go on for miles. Glancing back, I saw the craft that I had
just been in —- it resembled a gigantic pearl. Completely white,
with a soft whitish-violet glow, there was no sound coming from it.
Instantly, I knew that it travelled through space like an electron as
it becomes a particle wave — somewhere between the physical and
spiritual planes.
In front of me, I saw a large group of men. Most of them were in
their twenties, a few were teenagers, and some were older. Digging
in unison with shovels, they moved like automatons. Large, melon-
headed beings watched them work. Apparently, these were their
overseers. A few four-foot tall greys moved about. I saw tunnels and
crafts that looked like discs. Suddenly, all the men stopped and
looked up toward a platform. Loudly, a voice called out, “The
Emissary from Rigel will speak now.”
At that moment, a ﬁve-foot being with round, black eyes appeared
on the platform. His large head was draped with a kind of short
curtain around the back of it. Dressed all in black, his clothing
appeared to be a uniform. Looking ominous, he carried a rod that
looked both metallic and crystalline at the same time. Everyone
seemed to understand his mental communication. Explaining that
this group of men had completed their service on Earth and the
Martian outpost, he told them that they would now be examined for
possible transport to Rigel for experimentation. Those not used
would be eliminated. The men were then led into the open port of a
silver disc. I noticed that their legs were chained together. The
entire scene appeared to be orchestrated just for me. I do not know
if it was. If so, what would be the purpose? Perhaps the entire
incident is an implanted memory.
The next thing I remember, I was back on the Sirian ship. Travelling
in hyperspace, I sat in a darkened room on the ﬂoor with the Vegan
and the Sirian. Soft lighting allowed me to see inside and outside
the ship simultaneously. Hyperspace was a beautiful shade of dark
blue and violet. The ship appeared to be diamond-shaped as it
travelled. The Sirian said that we were going back to our home
world, Khoom, which orbited Sirius A in that binary star system.de of dark
blue and violet. The ship appeared to be diamond-shaped as it
travelled. The Sirian said that we were going back to our home
world, Khoom, which orbited Sirius A in that binary star system.

--- PAGE BREAK ---violet. The ship appeared to be diamond-shaped as it
travelled. The Sirian said that we were going back to our home
world, Khoom, which orbited Sirius A in that binary star system.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Later, I could decide if I wanted to return to Earth. I realized we
three were the only beings aboard that great ship. Operated totally
by our will, I felt completely safe and at peace. I knew that I was
going home.
I do not remember much of my stay on Khoom. I was told that my
memory would return at the appropriate time. A frozen world
covered in ice and snow, the sun’s glare on the surface was
blinding. The inhabitants lived underground. An elaborate and
impenetrable defense system protected the entire planet. Once a
subtropical world, Khoom was pushed out of its original orbit by
war eons ago. From space, it looks blue and white. The planet has
no moons. A victim of the original battle between good and evil,
Khoom was blown from its cradle orbit by those who created the
Draco race, the reptilians who seek to dominate the galaxy and
beyond. The creators of the Draco races came from another time
and space. The ﬁrst genesis of Lucifer, their name denotes the
epitome of evil.
Occupying the same physical location as Khoom, but at a diﬀerent
vibratory resonance, is a nonphysical world governed by a council
of nine beings known as the Ohalu Council. While not the same
beings referred to as “The Nine” in other literature, they do
communicate with The Nine as well as participate in joint projects.
“The Nine” ﬁrst appeared in literature in the works of Dr. Adreja
Puharich. In his work with channelers, he came across a few
individuals who claimed to be in contact with this ET group. Uri
Geller was the ﬁrst to actually identify them as former physical
beings who transferred their minds and soul-essences into nine
advanced computers. Each one of these computer represents a
diﬀerent aspect of the Mind of God. "The Nine" communicate with a
few select individuals across the planet in an eﬀort to upgrade the
collective consciousness of humankind.
The Ohalu Council also governs the planet Khoom in the star
system Sirius since the Sirians are really the lower vibrations of the
council beings in the same way that humans are lower vibrations of
their ET selves.
1 ΅ĵǪ ǈǡƗƄƗƿĵƯƯΏ Ǫŧƿǵ ǵǈ Eĵǡǵƒ œΏ ǵƒŧ OƒĵƯǼ CǈǼƿŕƗƯ ΅ƒǈ
ŠƗǡŧŕǵŧŠ ǵƒŧ SƗǡƗĵƿǪ ǈƿ ǵƒŧ ŕǡŧĵǵƗǈƿ ǈż ƽΏ ǙƒΏǪƗŕĵƯ œǈŠΏthe
council beings in the same way that humans are lower vibrations of
their ET selves.
1 ΅ĵǪ ǈǡƗƄƗƿĵƯƯΏ Ǫŧƿǵ ǵǈ Eĵǡǵƒ œΏ ǵƒŧ OƒĵƯǼ CǈǼƿŕƗƯ ΅ƒǈ
ŠƗǡŧŕǵŧŠ ǵƒŧ SƗǡƗĵƿǪ ǈƿ ǵƒŧ ŕǡŧĵǵƗǈƿ ǈż ƽΏ ǙƒΏǪƗŕĵƯ œǈŠΏ

--- PAGE BREAK ---n the same way that humans are lower vibrations of
their ET selves.
1 ΅ĵǪ ǈǡƗƄƗƿĵƯƯΏ Ǫŧƿǵ ǵǈ Eĵǡǵƒ œΏ ǵƒŧ OƒĵƯǼ CǈǼƿŕƗƯ ΅ƒǈ
ŠƗǡŧŕǵŧŠ ǵƒŧ SƗǡƗĵƿǪ ǈƿ ǵƒŧ ŕǡŧĵǵƗǈƿ ǈż ƽΏ ǙƒΏǪƗŕĵƯ œǈŠΏ

--- PAGE BREAK ---

TƒŧΏ ǵǈƯŠ ƽŧ ǵƒŧǡŧ ĵǡŧ ƿƗƿŧ œŧƗƿƄǪ ǈƿ Eĵǡǵƒ ΅ƒǈ ĵǡŧ ƯƗƫŧ
ƽŧ. Eĵŕƒ ǈƿŧ ƗǪ ŠƗǡŧŕǵŧŠ œΏ ĵ ƽŧƽœŧǡ ǈż ǵƒŧ ŕǈǼƿŕƗƯ.
I was shown my past and future while I was on Khoom. I was taken
to a planet orbiting Sirius B that was a tropical, swampy jungle
world occupied by short, stocky beings who live in huts. Extremely
advanced, these creatures can astral project, anywhere they want to
at will. They rely on others for physical transportation oﬀ-world but
as they have no need to go anywhere else, they rarely do so.
Communicating exclusively by mind-linking, they do not have a
spoken language.
The Sirians told me of the coming Earth invasion by the Draco; that
the Orion Confederation was working with the Draco; and that
there is a war going on right now between the Sirians and Orions.
The supreme merchants of the universe, the Sirians actually
supplied the Orion groups with the weapons that are now being
used against them. However, the Sirians keep the best and most
powerful for themselves, so they never lose. The Sirians see the
Orions as bad children who play with matches. They do not seek to
destroy them, but they keep them in check. They allow humans,
Orions, and the Draco to follow their own destinies.
Despite not wanting to leave, the Ohalu Council convinced me to
return to Earth. Arriving back in Israel, I found that only three days
had passed. I was unceasingly thirsty, had lost ten pounds, and was
so tired that I could not see straight. Returning to Holon, I slept for
almost an entire week.
During my return “rest,” I “realized” that the Ark of the Covenant is
actually a communication device between the physical world and
hyperspace. The Sirians apparently gave the Hebrews instructions
for building it. A reconstruction of the device was built by the
University of Minnesota years ago, following the instructions given
in the Bible. It was so electrically charged and dangerous that it had
to be destroyed.
I believe that the Sirians are trying to undermine the plans of all the
factions involved on Earth: the New World Order, the Draco, the
Greys, the Tall Blonds, etc. Their agenda is to bring all events to a
climax, then usurp all power, possibly via the Israelis. This is onlytions involved on Earth: the New World Order, the Draco, the
Greys, the Tall Blonds, etc. Their agenda is to bring all events to a
climax, then usurp all power, possibly via the Israelis. This is only

--- PAGE BREAK ---

speculation on my part. Time will tell.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ds, etc. Their agenda is to bring all events to a
climax, then usurp all power, possibly via the Israelis. This is only

--- PAGE BREAK ---

speculation on my part. Time will tell.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9 TWIN FLAMES
I returned to the U.S. to resume my college studies. The nightly
faces in the window and various grey abductions continued with
renewed vigor. My desire for children and a life companion became
an obsession. Then one night, I was taken to a place where I met
the most beautiful girl I had ever seen. At the time, I was unaware
that she was only sixteen. I had seen her once before at a meeting
we boys had with our controllers. We were told that those of us
involved with genetic experimentation were to be mated with
speciﬁc females to produce a particular type of oﬀspring. This
project was called “The Marriage Project” or “The First Wife
Project.”
I was matched with a fourteen-year old girl from Massachusetts
whose energetic structure indicated that she was part of my own
frequency, known as a “twin soul” in current metaphysical
literature. Her name was Mia, which was apropos, since she really
was mine. Mock marriage ceremonies were performed which were
taken very seriously. Certiﬁcates were issued indicating that each
couple was oﬃcially in union for the express purpose of mating.
That evening, those of us who were wed were given a table in a
white room where we consummated our marriage. For Mia, the
experience was quite uncomfortable. Not only was she a virgin, but
many people watched us from behind a glass panel.
For the next two years, Mia and I had no physical contact. Even so,
she was constantly in my thoughts and dreams. I knew that we
would soon be reunited, hopefully for good. I spent much time and
eﬀort looking for a woman who resembled Mia, but to no avail. She
had captured my heart and soul. On many occasions, when 1
travelled at night in hyperspace, Mia was there. White and glowing,
she had the energy ﬁeld of an angel. I only had to think of her to be
healed of any ailment. I suspect that she had similar experiences to
mine at that time, but she was young and probably did not
understand or accept what was happening.
One evening, when Mia was sixteen and I was twenty-four, we were
brought together in a clinical environment under the watchful eyesyoung and probably did not
understand or accept what was happening.
One evening, when Mia was sixteen and I was twenty-four, we were
brought together in a clinical environment under the watchful eyes

--- PAGE BREAK ---did not
understand or accept what was happening.
One evening, when Mia was sixteen and I was twenty-four, we were
brought together in a clinical environment under the watchful eyes

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of scientists. Here it was explained that our genetics were perfectly
aligned with sequences that were reciprocal to one another. Mia
had more Pleiadian genetics; mine were more Sirian. This
combination would produce a child of unusual abilities. Brought
naked into a white room, we made love three times in succession.
The entire episode was dreamlike and almost a blur. At the end, I
knew inside of myself that Mia was pregnant. Lying there on the
table, she appeared dazed and listless. Subsequently, I was taken
away for an extensive examination. I imagine they did the same to
her.
One year later, I was informed that I had a child named Jaime.
When she was a few months old, I was allowed to see her. I was
told that I could have no part in her upbringing in order to avoid
contamination of her mind-patterns. She would be closely watched
and monitored as she grew up. When she was two-years old, I saw
her again. After that, 1 did not see her for almost twelve years. In
my mind, I focused on her to see her thoughts, but it pained me
deeply that I had no part in her life. I know that Mia and Jaime had
many hardships during those years. I wish that I had been allowed
to help them.
Although I desperately longed for a child, I knew that they would
always be taken away from me. I was not considered to be the kind
of father conducive to bringing up a specially created child because
I would be too controlling and domineering. In addition, they were
afraid I would teach the child my ways and beliefs, thus preventing
the natural ﬂow of information to my own creations.
Mia had a diﬃcult life with her family, eventually ceasing
communication with them. Interestingly enough, one of her
childhood neighbors became a focal point in my life years later. I
will write more about that in a subsequent chapter in this book.
Indeed, Mia and I were and are twin ﬂames. Our soul-personalities
were once one. We split oﬀ from each other aeons ago when we
sojourned on Arcturus. She agreed to a life in the Pleiades, while I
continued on to Sirius. Eventually, we both arrived on Earth but
never in the ﬂesh at the same time. This was the ﬁrst instance.
When twin ﬂames incarnate at the same time, it means one of two
things: either they have a tremendously important mission ton Earth but
never in the ﬂesh at the same time. This was the ﬁrst instance.
When twin ﬂames incarnate at the same time, it means one of two
things: either they have a tremendously important mission to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

complete for their civilization, or the end times are at hand. In our
case, it is both. Our pre-Earth history was told to me during a
deprogramming session in the early ’90’s. My memory of her soul-
personality has always been strong, even before I knew her in this
life line.
Jaime has an extremely awesome potential. She has the ability to
see into the future and all possible alternate realities, thus
determining the most advantageous path to follow. Imagine what a
ﬁnd this could be for those in power. I spend a lot of time helping
Jaime in hyperspace and healing her of any disturbances. Currently
involved in her teenage life, she does not realize her potentials. I
wrote a book exclusively to Jaime, but so far, she will not read it.
Her mother keeps it until Jaime is ready to learn her truth. I do not
want to see her make the same mistakes that her mother and I
made. She will always be protected; powers much higher than the
government and I keep watch over her.
In recent years, Mia and I became reacquainted. We are both
healing old and current wounds. Mia has come to me for counseling
and for aid in remembering our past experiences. I will always be
here for her.
Currently, Mia is experiencing a diﬃcult period. This is part of the
purging of negativity from her mind-patterns. She must choose a
path — either the light way or the dark side. If she chooses
correctly, her abilities will increase.
Jaime is also being diﬃcult and stubborn and, in many ways,
reminds me of myself. Although she is not pursuing a close
relationship with me now, the time is soon approaching when she
will need me to train her for her life’s adventure.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ways,
reminds me of myself. Although she is not pursuing a close
relationship with me now, the time is soon approaching when she
will need me to train her for her life’s adventure.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10 MARRIAGE
When I graduated from college, a family friend found a job for me
in New York City. Amazingly, the symbol of the company, Sterling
Drug, Inc., was the ankh! I detested the daily 100 mile round-trip
commute. Additionally, I got up extremely early in the morning to
prepare myself for the long day ahead. Part of my programming
compelled me to exercise at least one hour in the morning and
another hour when I returned home. My morning exercise routine
consisted of weight-lifting and isometrics. The evening one was
almost completely aerobic with some weight-training thrown in. I
did not eat breakfast or lunch unless my mother prepared them for
me. During my lunch hour, I walked rapidly around the crowded
streets for a minimum of three miles. In the summer, I was
drenched with sweat by the time I returned to the air-conditioned
skyscraper on Park Avenue. In the winter, I walked in the snow, ice,
and freezing temperatures. I simply had to move and exercise. I
could not control it; it controlled me. I did not have an ounce of fat
on my body, but even so, everyone thought that I was crazy.
During this time, my nightmares worsened. The dream about trying
to escape from an underground facility kept recurring. I was always
caught and always woke up screaming. I also kept seeing Mia in the
night. Taken to a greyish-silver room, I was shown a pregnant Mia
with a picture of the fetus on the wall behind her. Little did I know
then that this was a sonogram.
The worst of the experiences was being strapped down naked to a
metallic table and hooked up to some kind of machinery. At one
point, I saw the inside of my body on a wall screen as they
performed surgery on me. You may ask who “they” were. I really do
not know for sure. Sometimes I saw alien-looking beings of diﬀerent
species. Many times, I saw human beings wearing white medical
coats.
Once, I was strapped to a wall with my nipples and genitalia
connected to wires and a device that glowed violet and green. After
awhile, I was taken down and wrapped in a white sheet that
reminded me of a toga. Brought to an austere, drab, and dimly litnitalia
connected to wires and a device that glowed violet and green. After
awhile, I was taken down and wrapped in a white sheet that
reminded me of a toga. Brought to an austere, drab, and dimly lit

--- PAGE BREAK ---wires and a device that glowed violet and green. After
awhile, I was taken down and wrapped in a white sheet that
reminded me of a toga. Brought to an austere, drab, and dimly lit

--- PAGE BREAK ---

room, there was only a small wooden table and a chair for me to sit
upon. A woman and man soon entered wearing what appeared to
be medical uniforms. The male doctor sat on the table next to me
while the redheaded female stood in front of me holding a
clipboard. She spoke to me in Russian; the man spoke to me in
German. I answered each in their own language. They asked how I
was and told me the results of the tests that they did.
They both left the room for a few moments while I sat alone and
waited. Even though I was extremely tired, I understood perfectly
why I was there and what I had to do. I remember thinking that I
had to go to work the next morning and wanting to go back to bed.
A clock on the wall read 2:00 A.M.
When the two of them came back into the room, I was embarrassed
to talk about the sexual information that the woman asked of me.
She was older, about ﬁfty, and I
thought that if she were a man, it would be easier to answer her
questions. I looked at the man whenever she spoke to me. They
both said that the experiments could be repeated in the future using
similar types of donors. When I asked what they were talking about,
they referred to the child that I had with Mia. Next they told me
that my marriage to Mia was over, to go out in the world for
awhile, and develop a conventional life if possible. Confused, I said
that I wanted to see my child. The next thing I remember is the
alarm going oﬀ in my bedroom and realizing that I had to get up for
work. Exhausted, I was naked and all the covers were o the ﬂoor.
Feeling as if I had a hangover, I put on my robe and went to the
bathroom. My penis was red and it burned when I urinated. My
back hurt and my neck was stiﬀ. I could not get those two doctors
out of my head all day. Even now, they still haunt my thoughts.
At the time, 1 was employed by a pharmaceutical manufacturer as
an auditor This position required extensive travel for weeks at a
time and did not allow me to have much of a social life.
I met Michele, my ﬁrst wife, when I asked for and received a
transfer to a division which was permanently based in New York.
She worked as a secretary for one of the research doctors in thecial life.
I met Michele, my ﬁrst wife, when I asked for and received a
transfer to a division which was permanently based in New York.
She worked as a secretary for one of the research doctors in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---hele, my ﬁrst wife, when I asked for and received a
transfer to a division which was permanently based in New York.
She worked as a secretary for one of the research doctors in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

company. Another secretary introduced us thinking that it would be
great if it worked out because we both lived on Long Island. I really
did not care for Michele because she was nasty and opinionated,
but something made me ask her out over a holiday weekend. So
sure that we were not going to hit it oﬀ, I arranged two other dates.
I saved Michele for last since it would just be a one time date.
We went out to lunch and took a walking tour of Port Jeﬀerson, my
favorite town on Long Island. We visited all the quaint tourist
shops, watched the ferry as it left for Bridgeport, then talked about
our future plans and goals. Surprisingly, we had similar ideas. We
both wanted to get married, have children, take leisurely vacations,
and basically lead conventional lives.
By the time I took her home that evening, I knew a lot about
Michele and her family. There were things that I did not like, but
we did have many things in common. I was afraid to tell her about
my secret life in these experiments. I knew it would chase away
even the most brave-hearted of women.
I continued to see Michele even though my heart told me that it
was wrong. There was simply something about her that annoyed
me. Perhaps it was her temper, or perhaps it was the way she spoke
to people. It may even have been her dysfunctional family. I should
have heeded my own feelings, but once again, I was driven by an
order within my mind that I could not control. Michele was not my
ideal. I pined for Mia, but in the end, we married.
Our engagement took everyone by surprise, including me! I had
only known her for a month. In fact, I did not ever ask her to marry
me. One afternoon, as we sat in her car by the docks in Babylon,
everything suddenly became still. Stopping our rather ordinary
conversation, we stared at each other for what seemed like an
eternity. Then, just as suddenly, everything returned to normal as
we noticed movement again outside. Taking deep breaths at the
same time, we agreed to rush home to tell everyone about our
impending marriage. I did not want to do this; neither did she. I
guess we’ll never really know what happened, but it was a done
deal.
When I told my parents, they were unimpressed. She had the samer
impending marriage. I did not want to do this; neither did she. I
guess we’ll never really know what happened, but it was a done
deal.
When I told my parents, they were unimpressed. She had the same

--- PAGE BREAK ---. I did not want to do this; neither did she. I
guess we’ll never really know what happened, but it was a done
deal.
When I told my parents, they were unimpressed. She had the same

--- PAGE BREAK ---

reaction from her parents. I bought her a ring, making it public at
my father’s 50th birthday party. The night before his party, we
made love without any protection. This resulted in her ﬁrst
pregnancy. We decided, or rather she decided and I acquiesced, that
she would have an abortion. She did not want to look pregnant
when she walked down the aisle.
In retrospect, I am sorry that I did not try to stop her. I now believe
that abortion is wrong unless the mother’s life is in danger or the
pregnancy is a result of rape. I also understand that the soul-
personality does not enter into the body until the ﬁrst breath, but it
is that soul-personality, and no one else, that must decide whether
or not to continue the life-stream. People who do not want children
should take the proper precautions before the pregnancy, not
destroy a possible life-stream after it is created. Although that may
sound fundamentalist to some, it is what I know to be the proper
way.
Our engagement should have been a warning about our future
marriage. There were ﬁghts and disagreements. At one point, she
wanted to call it oﬀ because she was not in love with me. Well, I
was not in love with her either, but for some reason that I could not
understand, I had to be married now. There was not any time to
look for someone else! I talked her into going forward with the
plans.
After going to bed one evening, I received a mental visit from a
being that I can only describe as an energy pulse. It had no form,
yet it was familiar to me. Although it had no gender, it seemed
more masculine than feminine. Appearing to sense my distress at
my choice for a marriage partner, it literally comforted me with
waves of light energy. Speaking telepathically, it said that all was as
it was supposed to be. This woman had agreed to be the vessel for
the entry of my children into the physical plane. The marriage
would not be a permanent situation. Apparently, I had agreed to
this as part of the experiment. I was lucky not to have the same
destiny as most of the others involved in the Montauk Project. Most
of them would never know the feelings of parenthood or even have
relationships in the outside world. One day, it continued, I would
know the truth about myself, but until then, I was at the mercy oft
of them would never know the feelings of parenthood or even have
relationships in the outside world. One day, it continued, I would
know the truth about myself, but until then, I was at the mercy of

--- PAGE BREAK ---r know the feelings of parenthood or even have
relationships in the outside world. One day, it continued, I would
know the truth about myself, but until then, I was at the mercy of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

those who controlled my life.
After that experience, I acted with a renewed determination and felt
as if I was on a mission that had to be completed. Our beautiful and
expensive wedding was followed by a wonderful honeymoon in
Acapulco. Upon returning, we rented a spacious apartment in
Bayside, Queens. From the back 'windows, we could see the
Manhattan skyline. With wonderful jobs, we seemed to be on an
upward spiral, but only God and my watchers knew what lay ahead.
I wish I had known!
11 STRANGE PHENOMENA
One year after we married, we bought a lot on the South Shore of
Long Island near Patchogue. We planned to build a house upon it.
Two months after that, Michele unexpectedly became pregnant. Our
original plans for the mortgage repayment included both of us
working fulltime. This was at a time when mortgage rates were near
twenty percent.
The ﬁnancial picture at ﬁrst looked grim. To our amazement, the
builder took three percentage points oﬀ the mortgage as a buy
down deal. To move one of the last houses in his development, he
also threw in many extras. Incredibly, both Michele and I received
promotions with raises. This enabled us to pay our monthly debt
more easily. Next, Michele received an extended maternity leave
with full pay. Despite the odds against us, the “powers that be” put
everything into place to get us into that house. As it turned out,
Michele needed a Caesarean-section resulting in several extra weeks
of disability pay. Although we loved that house, it provided events
and occurrences that were more than we bargained for.
Our ranch-style house was located right over one of the tubes of the
hyperspace subway that once travelled from the North American
continent mainland out onto Long Island and ended at Montauk
Point. From our home, Montauk Point was only a ninety minute
drive by car. On several occasions, we saw strange lights over our
house traveling out either toward the ocean or the Point.
Exactly one month after we moved in, Michele’s parents came fromety minute
drive by car. On several occasions, we saw strange lights over our
house traveling out either toward the ocean or the Point.
Exactly one month after we moved in, Michele’s parents came from

--- PAGE BREAK ---car. On several occasions, we saw strange lights over our
house traveling out either toward the ocean or the Point.
Exactly one month after we moved in, Michele’s parents came from

--- PAGE BREAK ---

New Mexico. They would stay until the birth of the baby. One
freezing cold night in January, we were all at my parents’ home for
dinner. Michele and I both felt uncomfortable the entire time. As
soon as we returned home, we knew something was wrong. The
lights we left on were now oﬀ and the house had an eerie darkness
to it. Upon entering, we found the back glass door smashed to
minute pieces. A small TV and costume jewelry were missing.
Nothing else was taken and that included my father-in-law’s gun
and money!
Two plain clothes detectives arrived from the police department to
dust for ﬁngerprints, but they found nothing. Outside, the ground
was too frozen to provide footprints. When the detectives left, they
said that it was probably neighborhood kids looking for drug
money. That was hard to believe. The next day, we found the word
“Hello” etched into the unbroken side of the smashed glass door.
Whoever it was knew exactly what they were doing. It seemed they
wanted to let us know that they were around. Nothing of real value
was taken and other than the glass door, nothing was damaged, but
it was enough to put us on edge.
After my son Matthew was born, my in-laws returned home. Life
during the day was normal enough, but the night was another story.
We heard strange noises in and around the house, including the
sound of footsteps on the roof. At ﬁrst, we attributed it to the
settling of the new house. We then realized that the footsteps
always began near the garage on the far end of the house, walked
up to our bedroom, stopped, then turned around and went the other
way! We thought that it was an animal, but after a particularly
heavy snowfall, the noises continued. No animal could have legs
long enough to touch the roof through all the deep snow and ice.
On several occasions, a horriﬁc pounding on the ceiling, strong
enough to sway the ceiling fan and move the bed, jolted us out of a
deep sleep. The third time this happened, I ran outside to observe
the bedroom roof. There was nothing there. The sky was clear and
the wind was still. This unnerved us even more. What could be
doing this?
Another time, shortly after retiring for the night, I heard my house
keys jiggle. As I kept them in the kitchen, they were not close by. Istill. This unnerved us even more. What could be
doing this?
Another time, shortly after retiring for the night, I heard my house
keys jiggle. As I kept them in the kitchen, they were not close by. I

--- PAGE BREAK ---d us even more. What could be
doing this?
Another time, shortly after retiring for the night, I heard my house
keys jiggle. As I kept them in the kitchen, they were not close by. I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

felt my blood run cold, but I could not move to check it out. My
body simply would not move. The next thing I recall was waking up
in the morning after having an abduction dream.
The alien presence in my nightmares and dreams continued with
renewed fervor. Almost two or three times each week, I was
subjected to visitations in my bed with my eyes wide open. Every
time I tried to scream, nothing came out. Whenever I tried to shake
Michele awake, she was dead to the world.
Another night, just after we went to sleep, we heard a tremendous
crash from the kitchen. Certain that the burglars had returned, I
told Michele to call the police while I investigated. In the kitchen, I
found the garbage knocked over. All the doors and windows were
locked. When the police arrived, they searched outside with
ﬂashlights. They said they found nothing strange except our
children’s little footprints in the mud. I replied that we only had a
tiny baby, and he certainly was not running around outside.
Following the oﬃcers outside, I saw tiny footprints that looked like
they were from a child under the age of ten. They began under our
bedroom window and continued around the perimeter of the house.
Shortly thereafter, we installed an alarm system and built a six-foot
high stockade fence all around our property.
One evening, Michele was gone and the baby slept. I sat watching
television in the den when a ﬂash of movement from the kitchen
caught my eye. Glancing up, I saw a reﬂection move quickly past
the oven door. Thinking it was a reﬂection from a car passing on
the road outside, I realized that the oven faced away from the road,
plus all the curtains were drawn shut. About an hour later, I saw
the movement again. Then I heard one of the kitchen chairs crash
on the ﬂoor. I nearly jumped out of my skin!
Slowly, I crept toward the kitchen. All of the lights were on. One of
the dinette chairs was moved away from the table but stood
upright. These were heavy metal chairs on rollers that we always
kept close to the table when not in use. This made me quite
nervous, and when my wife came home, I told her what had
happened.
She conﬁded that ever since Matthew was born, she felt like shewe always
kept close to the table when not in use. This made me quite
nervous, and when my wife came home, I told her what had
happened.
She conﬁded that ever since Matthew was born, she felt like she

--- PAGE BREAK ---to the table when not in use. This made me quite
nervous, and when my wife came home, I told her what had
happened.
She conﬁded that ever since Matthew was born, she felt like she

--- PAGE BREAK ---

was being watched; especially when she was in the den. Whenever
she looked up, she saw a short, caped ﬁgure peering at her from
behind the corner where the den met the kitchen. As soon as she
saw it, it ﬂed rapidly down the hallway toward the bedrooms. This
occurred day or night. What was this little ﬁgure and why was it
watching us? Apparently, it did not mean any harm, but it was
either very clumsy or trying to scare us. Deﬁnitely a humanoid
shape, it only wanted to be seen long enough to let us know that it
was there.
Again, my night terrors increased with renewed fervor. Going to
sleep became a fearful, anxious experience. At least twice each
week, I woke up somewhere else.
Sometimes it was in an alien presence; at other times, I was in a
laboratory surrounded by equipment with doctors and scientists
working on panels. Invariably, I was naked, lying on a table or
platform with probes and wires attached to me.
I once woke up in a long, black tube that was extremely cold.
Through windows on the side of the tube, I saw greys working on
equipment. I was held down to a cold, metallic table. Wires and
pointed objects came out of the side of the tube and touched my
body. When I screamed that I was cold and that the instruments
hurt me, one of the greys turned to look at me through the window.
He mentally replied that it did not matter because I would not
remember it anyway. This callous being continued sending probes
into my body. One wire-like protrusion entered my penis, and I felt
it moving deep inside my body until it reached my testicles. Trying
to scream again, I realized that I had no voice. Waking up in my
bed, shivering and nauseous, I felt like I had to urinate urgently.
When I saw a white pus come out of me, my knees practically
buckled from fright.
Another time, I awoke in the middle of the night to a strange glow
in my bedroom. Turning to look up, I saw two heads without bodies
ﬂoating above my bed in midair. Neither human nor alien, they
were almost robotic. Talking to each other in a strange language,
they actually turned to face each other as they spoke. Occasionally,
they glanced down on me. Starting to yell, I had no voice. I tried to
wake my wife, but I could not move. Finally, the two heads fadedy actually turned to face each other as they spoke. Occasionally,
they glanced down on me. Starting to yell, I had no voice. I tried to
wake my wife, but I could not move. Finally, the two heads faded

--- PAGE BREAK ---face each other as they spoke. Occasionally,
they glanced down on me. Starting to yell, I had no voice. I tried to
wake my wife, but I could not move. Finally, the two heads faded

--- PAGE BREAK ---

away, returning the room to darkness. At that instant, my voice
came back. I bellowed for help and woke my wife. She was by now
accustomed to my nightmares.
Several times, my wife dreamed that she was abducted by humans
who put her on a table and examined her in front of an Oriental-
looking audience. Each time, they checked for a pregnancy.
Whenever she had this dream, she soon discovered that she was
pregnant.
Once, we both woke up with the same dream to tell each other. We
had been chased by tall, blond medical people with strange faces.
Placed on a bed for examination, we both got up and tried to run
outside but were caught and brought back to the examination room.
They told me that I was implanted with a device to increase my
sperm count for breeding purposes. I do have a subcutaneous bump
in my scrotum that suddenly appeared when I was a teenager in the
’70’s. I was also told by a medical person at the Montauk base that I
was not only a power generator for the mentalists but also used
especially for breeding purposes. The aliens were absolutely thrilled
with my sperm count.
One night, I heard a noise in the hallway as I fell asleep. A moment
later, a parade of short, fat blue people came into my room
followed by a grey who appeared to be their leader. Paralyzed, I
could not move or speak; my eyes were wide open with fear. I felt
them hoist me up above their heads and carry me like a wooden
plank. As I watched my bedroom ceiling pass by, it suddenly
changed from white plaster to a golden-bronze metallic texture with
inlaid designs. Literally propped up onto my feet, I felt my body
return to normal. There seemed to be a benevolent air about this
experience, the ﬁrst and only time that ever happened.
I was led through a door that opened like a spiral from a central
point and expanded outward into a round room with a circular
depression in the middle. Around the depression there was a railing
upon which sat a little, blond-haired girl who faced away from me.
I saw control panels around the circular walls where some greys sat
watching. Two men in military uniforms stepped up to either side
of me. They told me to go to the girl because she was waiting for
me. A small grey took my right arm and led me to her. As Igreys sat
watching. Two men in military uniforms stepped up to either side
of me. They told me to go to the girl because she was waiting for
me. A small grey took my right arm and led me to her. As I

--- PAGE BREAK ---Two men in military uniforms stepped up to either side
of me. They told me to go to the girl because she was waiting for
me. A small grey took my right arm and led me to her. As I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

approached, I saw that her head was rather large for her little body.
Her arms were very thin. She wore a sleeveless dress that might be
worn by any six or seven-year old. Putting her right arm around my
neck, she hugged me to her. Immediately, I felt an overwhelming
sensation of love and peace. I wanted to stay with this little girl
forever.
One of the military men said that she was my daughter, but she was
not human. She was being sent somewhere far away and wanted to
see me one more time since she may never see me again. The grey
then pulled her arm oﬀ of me, and she ﬁnally turned to look at me.
Her eyes were large ovals, the bluest blue that I had ever seen. Her
nostrils were small slits, and she had the very thinnest of lips. She
looked so scared and sad that I wanted to cry. Instead, I blacked
out. I awoke once more in my bed with a warm, but sad feeling. I
felt like I had truly known love.
My house became famous for attacks by the black helicopters that
usually ﬂy east towards Montauk Point. In the middle of the night,
they hovered only a few feet over the roof and caused my alarms to
go oﬀ. The batteries ran out quickly. During these “copter attacks”
the phone would ring and go dead or there would be a humming
sound on the line. Radio stations mysteriously changed and objects
disappeared for days before ﬁnally returning in odd places.
Despite all of this, coupled with the ﬁnancial strains, I loved that
house and was determined to stay there. My obsession with exercise
and physical development grew since my body had to be healthy for
the experiments. Ironically, my night fears drove me to drink
excessively and even smoke an occasional cigarette. Whenever I
drank or smoked, the aliens stayed away, but the humans worked
around it.
My life was one big ball of confusion. I was trying to ﬁnd answers
and a path to God; however, whenever I thought I was on the right
track, I had another experience which threw me back into the
confusion. Feeling as if my mind was not my own, I was unhappy
and easily depressed. I was not satisﬁed with the direction my life
was taking.ck, I had another experience which threw me back into the
confusion. Feeling as if my mind was not my own, I was unhappy
and easily depressed. I was not satisﬁed with the direction my life
was taking.

--- PAGE BREAK ---perience which threw me back into the
confusion. Feeling as if my mind was not my own, I was unhappy
and easily depressed. I was not satisﬁed with the direction my life
was taking.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12 MY CHILDREN
My wife and I had three beautiful baby boys while we lived in our
house in Patchogue. All of them were delivered by Caesarean-
section. Between pregnancies, Michele developed large and painful
ovarian cysts that required surgery to remove them. Her doctor
recommended pregnancy to give the ovaries a rest.
Shortly after we moved into the new house in 1983, Matthew was
born exactly on his due date. My wife had a dysfunctional labor; so
after twelve hours of non-progressive contractions, the baby was
delivered by Caesarean-section. Because we had taken natural
childbirth classes, this was a great disappointment to us. Weighing
over nine pounds, Matthew had rosy cheeks and big, blue eyes with
a shock of nearly black hair.
Matthew was a colicky baby. For eighteen months, he screamed
every night and refused to sleep. I was the only one who could rock
him to sleep. During this time, my wife and I had disturbing dreams
about Matthew being taken by strangers. For a long time, we said
nothing about our dreams to each other. I continued to have my
own usual nightmares of abduction and experimentation. Now, my
wife was also being disturbed in her sleep. She thought that I was
contagious! We both dreamed that people we did not know took
Matthew, later telling us that he was dead. I remember crying
hysterically in my sleep before waking up and running into the
baby’s room to make sure that the dream was not real. Sometimes I
heard my wife get up to go into the baby’ s room. She always
commented that she was just checking on him.
One morning while watching the baby play, we discussed leaving
him with a baby-sitter. I told her that I was afraid to leave him with
a stranger. Starting to cry, she said that she felt the same way and
blurted out her dreams. Feeling as if ice water was running through
my veins, I shared my identical dreams. We agreed never to leave
him alone with anyone other than close family.
During one of my night excursions, I was told that my children were
really not mine. As experiments, they are not under my jurisdiction.d never to leave
him alone with anyone other than close family.
During one of my night excursions, I was told that my children were
really not mine. As experiments, they are not under my jurisdiction.

--- PAGE BREAK ---alone with anyone other than close family.
During one of my night excursions, I was told that my children were
really not mine. As experiments, they are not under my jurisdiction.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I must surrender them whenever it was deemed necessary.
Determined not to let that happen, this was completely
unacceptable to me. At that moment, I swore that I would never
give up another child. All of the experimenters would have to kill
me ﬁrst. Little did I realize that this was not a problem for them!
Jeremy was born twenty-ﬁve months later. Daniel came along two
and one-half years after that. I loved them all more than my own
life. I refused to think that any of them might ever experience the
same physical and mental torture that I had gone through.
Determined to teach them and myself how to prevent this, I saw as
time went on that it was a losing battle.
Matthew was an intelligent child. He walked at eight and one-half
months and spoke shortly thereafter. His eyes turned dark, looking
all too alien. When he was four-years old, he told me about a tall
man with glowing red eyes. The man wore black clothing, lived
under the ground, and came into his room at night. Knowing that I
had never discussed any of my experiences with the children, there
was no way Matthew could have learned anything like this from
me. Additionally, I closely monitored the television and did not
permit him to watch any scary programs.
As he became older, I noticed that whenever a television program
involved aliens in any form, he ran from the room. He disliked grey
aliens in particular. Always covering his eyes and ears with a
pillow, he would beg me to tell him when it was over but would
never discuss the subject.
One summer afternoon, after the boys ﬁnished riding their bikes in
the backyard, we sat under a tree to rest in the shade. Matthew
remarked about the blueness of the sky; then pointed to where a
large, singular cloud drifted over us. The only cloud in the sky, an
eerie feeling compelled us to stare at it. Suddenly, as if it was
rapidly erased from one end to the other, the cloud disappeared
within a few seconds. It appeared to be peeled out of the sky. When
it was completely gone, the boys ran into the house and remained
there for the rest of that sunny afternoon.
A couple of months later, I was raking leaves in the backyard.
Matthew, who was seven at the time, asked if he could help. Afterinto the house and remained
there for the rest of that sunny afternoon.
A couple of months later, I was raking leaves in the backyard.
Matthew, who was seven at the time, asked if he could help. After

--- PAGE BREAK ---emained
there for the rest of that sunny afternoon.
A couple of months later, I was raking leaves in the backyard.
Matthew, who was seven at the time, asked if he could help. After

--- PAGE BREAK ---

talking about school and other ordinary subjects, Matthew suddenly
asked if I knew about the Earth underground. When I told him
about the geology of the Earth, he insisted that the Earth had cities
inside. He told me that the tall “man in black” came to him at night
to teach him about the underground. This man said that he came
from the underground and that Matthew was one of them. The man
had been sent to the surface to watch my wife and I so that we
would not do anything wrong. Was this the same being that Michele
and I had seen from the den since Matthew’s birth? My child
proceeded to tell me how energy was transferred all over the
underground by way of energy posts that beamed waves to each
other, thus creating a relay system. His description was so intricate
that I soon realized this could not come from a seven-year old boy!
Next, Matthew related how the “man in black” hummed in a low
pitch that translated into words inside of his head. This being told
Matthew that there were humans who lived under Long Island as
well as all over the world. Once, they lived on the surface, but now
they hid.
As the years passed, Matthew conﬁded more about his nocturnal
visitations. A couple of times each week, he was taken out of his
body in a vortex. First, he saw his body sleeping on the top bunk
bed. Next, he felt himself ﬂoat through the roof into space where he
was attracted to a bright light. After going through this light, he
was in a place where grey aliens watched him. Besides giving him
things to play with, they also showed him various technologies
including the energy pack that powers their ships. Shaped like a
football, he held it in his hands. They also showed him weapons
that looked like portable rocket launchers and told him that one
day he would use these in a battle for Earth. They also told him that
when he was older, he would experiment with combining the
genetic materials of diﬀerent species to create better ones. Ever
since that time, Matthew has been fascinated with space battles and
powerful laser weapons. He even saw himself wounded in a battle
with aliens while defending a speciﬁc area of this planet. Matthew
also sees auras and archetypes around people. He can zoom into a
person’s frequency and read their mind-patterns, just like I do.
Jeremy, my second son, is a brilliant child who is in an advancedthew
also sees auras and archetypes around people. He can zoom into a
person’s frequency and read their mind-patterns, just like I do.
Jeremy, my second son, is a brilliant child who is in an advanced

--- PAGE BREAK ---and archetypes around people. He can zoom into a
person’s frequency and read their mind-patterns, just like I do.
Jeremy, my second son, is a brilliant child who is in an advanced

--- PAGE BREAK ---

program at school. He has no interest whatsoever in aliens or
psychic phenomena. The only time he ever mentioned anything
strange was when he was two-years old. I left the book Communion,
which has a drawing of a grey alien face on the cover, out on the
coﬀee table. Strolling into the room, Jeremy commented that the
picture was of a bad man. This was the same man who came into
his room at night, took his toys, and never returned them. Indeed,
we often missed toys from his room, but we assumed that they were
simply misplaced. In fact, all through the 1980’s, items frequently
disappeared into thin air only to reappear weeks or months later.
Usually they were gone for good, but whenever they did show up, it
was always in a strange place such as the freezer, the far back
corner of a closet, or behind the oven.
My youngest son at that time, Daniel, entered into this world in an
interesting way. When my wife was four months pregnant, a blood
test revealed an odd protein level indicating a possibility of Down’s
Syndrome or spina biﬁda. Needless to say, we were upset until we
received the results of the amniocentesis indicating a normal male
child. However, shortly before the doctor called with these results, I
had a terrifying abduction experience.
Taken from my bed in the middle of the night by the four-foot
greys, I screamed but could not wake my wife. I was taken to a ship
and into a narrow, brightly lit silver-white room without furniture.
A female grey came into the room holding a small bundle. No one
told me that she was female. I simply knew that “it” was a she. As
she approached, a male voice said that she wanted to show me
something. Slowly unwrapping the top of the blanket, the female
revealed an adorable blond-haired baby. The male voice said that it
was mine, and asked if I wanted to hold it. Replying that I did, the
female started to unwrap the whole baby, revealing an octopus-like
torso with legs instead of a human body. Screaming and crying at
the same time, I told them to take it away. The same voice said that
it was going to an aquatic world and that I would never see it again.
Waking up in my bed, I prayed with all my might that Danny would
be a normal child. I cannot describe my relief when the doctor
called with the positive test results.
When Danny started to talk, he told me about a man with a clownwith all my might that Danny would
be a normal child. I cannot describe my relief when the doctor
called with the positive test results.
When Danny started to talk, he told me about a man with a clown

--- PAGE BREAK ---

face who came into his room at night to take him ﬂying. He said
that when the man put a magic wand in the middle of his forehead,
they immediately were in a place that had balloon lights of
diﬀerent colors.
Once Danny woke up with scratches all over his face. When I asked
him why he scratched himself like that, he replied that the clown
man took him to meet his baby sister. Reaching out to touch her
face, she scratched him with her nails because she had claws
instead of ﬁngers! One scratch on the bridge of his nose left a scar
that remains to this day. In fact, Danny has a scar showing stitches
on his chest even though he has never had surgery in that area of
his body.
Danny has the ability to see and communicate with Angels. He asks
them questions about the future, and they answer with amazing
accuracy. These are not alien beings but angelic entities who come
to him at night while he is wide awake. They do not take him
anywhere nor do they touch or frighten him.
CHAPTER THIRTEEN

--- PAGE BREAK ---. These are not alien beings but angelic entities who come
to him at night while he is wide awake. They do not take him
anywhere nor do they touch or frighten him.
CHAPTER THIRTEEN

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13 CIA RECRUIT
During the years in Patchogue, we took a number of family trips to
Montauk Point. Oddly, I always looked forward to going, but upon
arriving, I felt a sensation of dread and foreboding. Then, I wanted
to go home immediately. This disturbed the rest of the family who
wanted to stay and explore after driving for an hour and a half.
I had nightmares both before and after every trip to Montauk. My
thoughts constantly reverted to the night in 1976 when a UFO
followed us home after eating dinner in the town of Montauk.
Physically, I felt a cold shudder from the base of my spine to the top
of my head. Next, my hair became full of static. Goose bumps
covered my body accompanied by a constant urge to urinate and
coldness in my stomach. I felt as if a mild electrical shock had run
through my entire body.
Strangely, after visiting Montauk, I always received Hebrew letters
in my brain. They either ﬂashed in front of my eyes or simply
appeared in my thoughts. Sometimes, I woke up from a deep sleep
and remembered information about the sequences of the letters. I
became fascinated with pyramids and their relationships to Egypt
and Atlantis. I even knew that a remnant of Atlantis was located on
Long Island.
Somehow, I felt that I needed to get away from the entire situation.
My marriage was not good. We fought constantly and were verbally
abusive in front of the children. I hated my job and I started to hate
who I was: a man with an obscure past, unable to tell anyone about
it, and a future of abductions, nightmares, and obsessions. Not a
pretty picture.
For these reasons, I religiously read the “Help Wanted” section of
the Sunday newspaper hoping to ﬁnd a path out of my messy
situation. One day, a little ad in the corner of the paper popped out,
imbedding itself so deeply in my mind that 1 had to respond. The
ad said that the CIA was looking for both domestic and overseas
agents, to hand-write a letter of application, and send it to an
address in Maryland. I scribbled something in pencil on a piece ofThe
ad said that the CIA was looking for both domestic and overseas
agents, to hand-write a letter of application, and send it to an
address in Maryland. I scribbled something in pencil on a piece of

--- PAGE BREAK ---e CIA was looking for both domestic and overseas
agents, to hand-write a letter of application, and send it to an
address in Maryland. I scribbled something in pencil on a piece of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

white paper and mailed it. My wife thought that I was crazy, but
then again, she always did.
I had never seen an ad like this before nor have I seen one like it
since. Because it was such a strange ad, I mentioned it to several
people whom I knew read the want ads with the same fervor that I
did. No one had seen the ad! I started to think that I was insane
again.
Weeks went by without a word. One night, at 2:00 A.M., the phone
rang. I heard my wife say, “Do you realize what time it is?” Then,
she abruptly handed me the phone saying, “It’s for you — your
friends in Washington!”
A man’s voice told me that they received my letter and repeated
that he was my friend in Washington. Did I understand? “Yes,” I
replied. Continuing, he said that soon I would receive a large
package in the mail containing important psychological testing for
both myself and my wife. When we completed the paperwork
within the speciﬁed time period, I was to mail it back and wait for
further instructions.
Per our conversation, a special delivery envelope arrived containing
two extremely large testing booklets for Michele and I. Also
included were forms for personal information regarding relatives,
recent and childhood friends, reactions to various circumstances,
and likes and dislikes. Lastly, the envelope contained a form for a
complete physical exam. This included an extensive blood test to be
ﬁlled out by a medical doctor. We were given ten days to either
complete all of this or return everything. Rushing about like a
madman, I managed to get all of the information and complete the
required tests. Several times during these nights, I received phone
calls asking if I had any questions. Each call was made by a
diﬀerent person who gave names that I knew were ﬁctitious.
I soon received a conﬁdential letter giving me a ﬁctitious name to
use whenever I contacted them: Nathan Diton. My instructions were
to completely destroy the letter and never to reveal this name, not
even to my wife. Then, I was given a safe phone number, told to go
to a pay phone during speciﬁc hours, and call them using this name.
My call would then be routed to the appropriate person.name, not
even to my wife. Then, I was given a safe phone number, told to go
to a pay phone during speciﬁc hours, and call them using this name.
My call would then be routed to the appropriate person.

--- PAGE BREAK ---wife. Then, I was given a safe phone number, told to go
to a pay phone during speciﬁc hours, and call them using this name.
My call would then be routed to the appropriate person.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The next late night call directed me to the Hyatt Regency Hotel in
New York City. I was instructed to report on a speciﬁc day and at a
speciﬁc time to call my contact in a hotel room from the courtesy
phone in the lobby. After giving my ﬁctitious name, I had to wait
for my call to be returned. I did as I was told; then waited almost an
hour before I was paged to the hotel information desk. There, I was
told to use the courtesy phone again. I dialed the room number and
was told to come up to a diﬀerent ﬂoor and room number. Nearly
drenched with sweat, I knocked on the door as I noticed that the
room was next to a storage closet.
After a moment, a short elderly man with a ruddy face opened the
door to welcome me. Wearing a black suit, white shirt, and a black
bow tie, he looked like something out of a 1930’s spy movie.
Shaking my hand, he told me his name in a clipped British accent.
Overly polite, he told me to sit in a chair facing a mirror on the wall
adjoining the storage room. When I noticed a large black suitcase
on the bed, I immediately felt ill at ease and sorry that I came.
Sitting opposite me, he spoke in a friendly yet forceful manner.
With a half smile on his face, he remarked that his organization was
greatly interested in me. At the conclusion of a ﬂurry of personal
questions about my life, relatives, and hobbies, I mentioned that
there might be a problem with a background check due to the
activities of my great-uncle in the Soviet Union. Smiling, he waved
his hand and told me not to worry. As it turned out, the government
was interested in me because I speak ten languages. They were
looking for a linguist like myself who could travel the world posing
as a businessman to gather information from speciﬁc people. Or, I
might be used as an embassy employee posing as a state department
agent to ﬁnd out information from within an embassy. I would be
given the best of everything. In other words, it would be a life that
was the next best thing to being rich. Either I would receive two
years of all expense paid training at their school and then be moved
to Virginia, or I would be trained in a safe house in an undisclosed
location so that no one would see me enter their school.
At the end of our meeting, he stood up to shake my hand and gave
me a list of suggested reading material. Then, he told me to take an
eight-hour written test the following weekend at the New Yorkool.
At the end of our meeting, he stood up to shake my hand and gave
me a list of suggested reading material. Then, he told me to take an
eight-hour written test the following weekend at the New York

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Institute of Technology. Stating that it was by invitation only, he
handed me a numbered pass, looked me in the eye with an icy stare
and said coldly, “Do be there!”
Leaving the city, I headed straight home. My head was pounding,
my mouth bone dry, and I could not stop perspiring. For some
reason, I had an urge to go to the beach. I packed up my family and
headed for Smith Point Beach on the South Shore. While there, I
remember looking east along the shore toward Montauk Point.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN

--- PAGE BREAK ---to the beach. I packed up my family and
headed for Smith Point Beach on the South Shore. While there, I
remember looking east along the shore toward Montauk Point.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14 SECURITY RISK
The test was given in a building at the far end of the campus on the
second ﬂoor. I was among the ﬁrst to arrive, and only one door was
open. As others arrived, I noticed that no one spoke to anyone else,
as instructed. There were about twenty of us, all twenty-ﬁve to
thirty-years old and all mostly white and male. Each segment of the
test was timed and proctored by a diﬀerent person. We were not
allowed to ask any questions. Subjects included math, current
events, science, and even music. There were multiple choice, essay,
logic, and ﬁll-in-the-blank questions as well as story problems.
Grueling and torturous, the test started at 8:00 A.M. and did not
end until 4:00 P.M. with only minor food and bathroom breaks.
When I left, I could barely drive. My entire face was sore and
contorted. I had an amazing migraine headache, and my joints were
in excruciating pain. Even my teeth and jaw hurt so much that I
could not speak. I felt like I had been hit by a train. Almost forty-
eight hours passed before 1 began to feel normal.
A few weeks later, I received another phone call telling me that I
did so well that they wanted me in Washington immediately. Once
there, I would stay in a safe house hotel. I would be given a
polygraph test, go to Langley for a mental evaluation, and given
another physical examination. I made reservations to ﬂy there the
following week.
The TWA ﬂight from LaGuardia to Washington’s National Airport
was uneventful but quite beautiful as we passed over an
exceptionally clear Chesapeake Bay with its shimmering blue water
and curvaceous shorelines. I took only carry-on luggage because I
detest waiting at airport carousels. When the plane landed, I walked
through the gate area, and directly into the lobby. From there, I was
unceremoniously ushered to a waiting line of taxis and whisked into
a cab. It started moving even before I told the driver where to take
me.
The driver was a man of East Indian descent. Wearing a big smile,
he was overly friendly as he asked about me. Excitedly, he told me. It started moving even before I told the driver where to take
me.
The driver was a man of East Indian descent. Wearing a big smile,
he was overly friendly as he asked about me. Excitedly, he told me

--- PAGE BREAK ---even before I told the driver where to take
me.
The driver was a man of East Indian descent. Wearing a big smile,
he was overly friendly as he asked about me. Excitedly, he told me

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that he also was from Long Island and still had family there. When I
mentioned that I particularly enjoyed the parks and beaches, he
replied that his favorite place was Montauk Point and that he found
the Native Americans there to be very interesting. At this point, I
realized that we were leaving the D.C. area and heading into
Virginia. I had not even told the driver my destination! I asked him
how he knew where I was going. Suddenly, he acted surprised and
asked me which hotel he should take me to. Again, I never told him
that I was headed for any hotel.
I remarked to the driver that I had reservations at the Holiday Inn
inTyson’s Corners. Nodding, he said little the rest of the trip. Years
later I read that this same hotel was a CIA safe house and had been
used to entrap and capture a Soviet double agent.
As instructed, I checked into the hotel under my assumed name,
Nathan Diton. The hotel was several stories high. My room was
about halfway up. When I saw that my room was adjacent to a
broom closet/supply room, I laughed to myself and realized that I
was being observed at every moment. I became a bit annoyed when
I saw that even the bathroom mirror was on the wall next to the
supply room. Seconds after entering my hotel room, the phone
rang. A male voice welcomed me to Virginia and told me not to
leave the hotel premises for any reason. I would receive a call early
the next morning regarding the polygraph exam.
Next, I went downstairs to use the exercise room and pool. Oddly
enough, for a hotel of this size, I saw only ﬁve other people in the
entire building. In the hotel restaurant, I was again astounded to see
that I was the only dinner guest. Served by a beautiful Arab woman,
she told me that she was from Jordan. We talked about the Middle
East for awhile, and I told her about my trip to her country. Feeling
exceptionally awkward and lonely, I ate quickly. As I prepared to
leave, a group of three Japanese men sat down at the bar. They
seemed to be in good spirits, laughing and joking in Japanese.
Getting up, I paid my bill and returned to my room in anticipation
of a long, lonely night.
After my shower, I turned on the television, checked to make sure
the door was locked, and went to bed, tucking the covers under my
chin. Then, I turned on a lamp by my bed. That was the last thing IAfter my shower, I turned on the television, checked to make sure
the door was locked, and went to bed, tucking the covers under my
chin. Then, I turned on a lamp by my bed. That was the last thing I

--- PAGE BREAK ---turned on the television, checked to make sure
the door was locked, and went to bed, tucking the covers under my
chin. Then, I turned on a lamp by my bed. That was the last thing I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

remember until hearing the telephone ring. I was lying naked and
face down on the bed. My rear end was raised higher than the rest
of my body and all the bedding was on the ﬂoor. The television and
lamp were still on and the clock on the nightstand read 8:00 A.M. I
never woke up that late! I answered the phone in a daze. A diﬀerent
man’s voice told me to have breakfast and be at another room by
10:00 A.M.
As I hung up the phone, dozens of questions raced through my
head. How did I lose my clothing? How did I
get from nine o’clock at night to eight o’clock the next morning in
zero seconds? Why did my head hurt? Why were my testicles
burning and my rectum sore? Frightened and jittery, I wanted to
run — but where would I go? My eyes were sore and my chest
pounded. Was something in last night’s poached salmon?
After a light breakfast, I walked around the perimeter of the hotel
to pass the time until my next meeting. As I walked, ﬂashes of a
beautiful, tall blond woman passed through my mind. I saw her
strapped down on a gurney. I was strapped down next to her. Every
time these pictures ﬂashed in my head, I felt pains in my stomach
as well as a feeling of helplessness and being surrounded by
blackness. In addition, I smelled gasoline fumes that made me sick.
Confused, my head was spinning. Was I just nervous? Again, I
wished that I was home.
At 10:00 A.M., I went to the designated room where I was met by a
pleasant dark-haired woman who was setting up equipment. In her
late 20’s, she was slightly plump but very friendly as she told me
about the proceedings. She would go over all of the questions with
me beforehand so that there would be no surprises. They wanted
me to pass this test. She said that it would take about two hours. I
sat on a chair while she sat on the bed and read the questions to me
that I would be asked. Some were simple, such as questions about
my background and likes and dislikes. Others were pointed and
personal. They concerned my sexual appetites and the way I used
the bathroom! I was perspiring profusely when she ﬁnally hooked
me up to begin the polygraph test at 11:30 A.M. Around noon, I
glanced at the clock again.cerned my sexual appetites and the way I used
the bathroom! I was perspiring profusely when she ﬁnally hooked
me up to begin the polygraph test at 11:30 A.M. Around noon, I
glanced at the clock again.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The next thing I remember was looking at the clock. It read 3:00
P.M. In shock, I realized that I recalled nothing of the past three
hours! The woman was unhooking me as she remarked how much I
would enjoy living in Virginia. She told me to wait for ﬁfteen
minutes after she left; then clean the room to look like no one had
been there. Finally, I was instructed to drop the room key oﬀ at the
front desk, return to my room for instructions, and talk to no one. I
did as I was told.
At 4:00 P.M., a man dressed in a suit came to my room. He
reimbursed me for my airline ticket and told me that I would
receive instructions in the morning about going to Langley for the
mental evaluation. Preferring at this point to watch television and
read, I did not sleep that night. In the morning, I received a call
instructing me to return to New York without explanation. I took
the ﬁrst ﬂight back. A few weeks later, I received a phone call at
work. A male voice told me that my application process had been
stopped due to a security risk. When I pressed for details, they only
told me to try again in a few years.
CHAPTER FIFTEEN

--- PAGE BREAK ---A male voice told me that my application process had been
stopped due to a security risk. When I pressed for details, they only
told me to try again in a few years.
CHAPTER FIFTEEN

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15 I MEET PRESTON
In retrospect, the next part of my life feels like it was only a dream,
yet it really did happen. It is still diﬃcult for me to discuss.
Everything began when my employer moved, and I decided not to
go with them. Looking for alternative employment, I saw an 800
telephone number on the back of a local food distributor truck that
I followed home from work one day. The number stayed in my head
for weeks until I ﬁnally called them.
Hired immediately, I started working there within two weeks. I was
thrilled to be so close to home that I could even walk there if
necessary. From the ﬁrst few days that I began my new job, I
realized that everything just was not right. The owners were four
brothers, and they were mean and nasty. They had private meetings
amongst themselves and gave out harsh orders to their employees. I
soon found out that they were underhanded people with high
connections to organized crime, banking, politicians, and big
business. On diﬀerent Sundays, when no one was around, they had
meetings with the head of a teamsters union who was a known
crime ﬁgure. Once in awhile, the chairman of a large local bank
ﬂew in by helicopter to talk to them after business hours. Large
sums of money were deposited in their commercial accounts. They
also had strange deals with other distributors and manufacturers
that not even their big eight accounting ﬁrms could ﬁgure out.
Shortly after I was promoted to controller of the company, one of
the brothers began asking me to impersonate him on the phone
with various vendors and with his daughter’s school. All of the
brothers had spoiled children with psychological problems. I was
also asked to write letters to other businesses under the guise of
being one of the brothers. I did not like doing these things, but I
also did not want to lose my job. The brothers were wealthy,
powerful, and often made threats against their enemies as well as
each other. One of the brothers purchased Ferdinand Marcos’ home
on the South Shore of Long Island. Another one of the brothers built
a huge home on the North Shore. Unbeknownst to me at that time,
Duncan Cameron, the lead psychic of the Montauk Project, was
hired as one of the carpenters!g Island. Another one of the brothers built
a huge home on the North Shore. Unbeknownst to me at that time,
Duncan Cameron, the lead psychic of the Montauk Project, was
hired as one of the carpenters!

--- PAGE BREAK ---e of the brothers built
a huge home on the North Shore. Unbeknownst to me at that time,
Duncan Cameron, the lead psychic of the Montauk Project, was
hired as one of the carpenters!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

One day, when I had been employed there for about two years, my
boss asked me to answer a phone call that he did not want to take.
When I asked him what it was about, he replied that it had to do
with stocks and the market. He further told me to do whatever the
man wanted. He then left the building. Subsequently, the call was
transferred to me. A strange voice told me a name and a company
in Colorado that sold penny stocks. When I explained to the man
that my company did not invest in them, he changed his tone. I felt
my mind become foggy. All I can recall is that it involved a
company in Austria that sold special storm and earthquake-proof
building materials. They needed investors for their upcoming move
to the United States.
What followed for the next eighteen months was disturbing, mind-
boggling, and horriﬁc for me and my family. Somehow, I managed
to buy this stock with corporate funds by using a corporate seal that
was kept in a safe to which I did not have the combination. During
the ensuing year, I apparently embezzled over three-hundred-
thousand dollars! I use the word “apparently” because I have no
recollection of actually doing this. Even the F.B.I. determined that
the handwriting on the checks was not mine. Additionally, no one
could ﬁnd evidence in the computer that I entered in the codes for
the checks.
Now, I am convinced that I was physically manipulated in some
way to commit this crime. I do remember going to the local banks
to open checking accounts for ﬁctitious corporations. I also used
some of the funds for myself because someone told me that I could.
Some of the checks were even stamped by the brothers themselves.
Although they had full charge of the books, the auditor and the
accounting ﬁrm said nothing for over a year. The ﬁctitious accounts
were opened in the same branch bank that my employer used. If
these activities were against the wishes of my employer, how could
I have gotten away with the “embezzlement” for so long?
Thinking back to that part of my life, I felt like an observer who
watches someone from a distance rather than as an active
participant. At the time, I remember thinking, “This has to stop, but
I just cannot!” I felt as though I could not control my actions or my
thoughts. Only thoughts of my children stopped me from runningrticipant. At the time, I remember thinking, “This has to stop, but
I just cannot!” I felt as though I could not control my actions or my
thoughts. Only thoughts of my children stopped me from running

--- PAGE BREAK ---me, I remember thinking, “This has to stop, but
I just cannot!” I felt as though I could not control my actions or my
thoughts. Only thoughts of my children stopped me from running

--- PAGE BREAK ---

away. Some days, I even thought of killing myself.
Once, when I went to open some of the ﬁctitious accounts at the
Long Island Savings Bank, I remember a long line by the desk. A
red-haired woman stood up from behind the desk and walked over
to me. Speaking in a thick Russian accent, she instructed me to go
in front of everyone and sit by her desk. She told me to come
directly to her for all my banking needs. Even though I needed
proper identiﬁcation papers to open these bogus accounts, she
waived them. She even deposited the checks for me while I waited.
Looking at me strangely, she remarked that she was from Leningrad
and proceeded to tell me about my great-uncle and his family in the
Soviet Union. She said that my great-uncle made up the name
Sverdlov and that it was not his birth name. He also ordered the
deaths of the Czar and his family in Yekaterinburg. She explained
that is why they renamed the city Sverdlovsk. Her husband was a
coordinator for Radio Free Europe. She told me that he might be
interested in interviewing me for a show scheduled to be broadcast
to Russia. Oddly, I seemed to see this woman everywhere I went in
the following months. Even her car, with the Russian ﬂag on the
bumper, often appeared just ahead or behind me in traﬃc. One day,
after my legal problems began, I went to the bank to close out the
accounts. Another woman banker angrily told me that my Russian
friend was no longer working with the bank. She would not disclose
any more information, and I never saw her again.
During this same time period, I became obsessed with UFO’s and
aliens. They were in my dreams almost every night. When I saw an
ad in the local paper about forming a support group for abductees, I
called immediately. The woman who called me back seemed
friendly and outgoing. Because my home was centrally located on
the island, we agreed to use it as the weekly meeting place.
Although this greatly upset my wife, I persisted.
I became obstinate and aggressive, especially toward my family and
friends. They all have since remarked that I seemed to simply
change overnight into a very evil person. Strict with my children, I
yelled and screamed at them constantly. I wanted their toys picked
up and put away, even while they still played with them. Of course,
I now realize that set the future stage for years of therapy for them.d and screamed at them constantly. I wanted their toys picked
up and put away, even while they still played with them. Of course,
I now realize that set the future stage for years of therapy for them.

--- PAGE BREAK ---em constantly. I wanted their toys picked
up and put away, even while they still played with them. Of course,
I now realize that set the future stage for years of therapy for them.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Even my own mother started to call me Hitler. At the time, I kind of
liked it.
When I realized that the support group was an avenue for
borderline lunatics to parade through my house, I decided to end it
for awhile. Our last meeting was a trip to see Communion, a movie I
thought was a farce. Then, on the night of the Avianca crash on
Long Island, the group leader called. She wanted to visit because
she had “ﬁgured the whole thing out.” In the living room, she
leaned forward, grasped my hands, and started to speak. I was
excited to learn the answers I had waited so long to hear.
She said, “It’s all Satan. Satan runs through our minds and tells us
false stories. He makes his demons look like aliens in order to fool
us. I went to my church, they sat me in a chair, and started to pray.
Strange voices came out of me and I spoke in tongues.”
When the church members ﬁnally declared her cleared, they went
to her home and destroyed all of her UFO tapes, books, and notes.
Thanking her for coming, I quickly led her to the door. I thought
that she was nuts; even nuttier than people thought I was. But at
least, it was over for her. She would never have another question or
doubt. She had found her answers.
During the time of my insanity, I received a phone call at work
from yet another man at home on a Saturday. Speaking with a thick
French accent, he said that he worked for yet another stock
company, this time in New York. When he told me that he was from
Madagascar, my brain fuzzed over again! I cannot remember the
conversation, except I do recall that I agreed to meet his wealthy
friend, a former NASA employee.
The following week, a tall, thin man from the “Real World One”
company came to my oﬃce. John Giovanelli,
Jr. was peculiar in several ways: he always spoke in a soft
monotone voice; his skin was extremely pale; and regardless of the
outside temperature, he always wore long sleeves and a sweater.
Over the next year, this man convinced me to go into business with
him and build aﬀordable housing on the east end of Long Island.
After giving him several thousand dollars, he disappeared oﬀ theter.
Over the next year, this man convinced me to go into business with
him and build aﬀordable housing on the east end of Long Island.
After giving him several thousand dollars, he disappeared oﬀ the

--- PAGE BREAK ---ear, this man convinced me to go into business with
him and build aﬀordable housing on the east end of Long Island.
After giving him several thousand dollars, he disappeared oﬀ the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

face of the Earth.
On one occasion, the man from Madagascar, accompanied by his
Cuban wife, came to my house with plans to open a business in
Madagascar. Later, when I met him in the city, he brought a
girlfriend from Washington, D.C. She worked for the Organization
of African States and would be a good contact with the African
countries, he said. To make a long story short, this man was
arrested for trying to buy green cards and then propositioning the
female prosecutor. What a group of friends I had!
In the meantime, my problems continued to escalate. Helicopters
were practically landing on my roof on a daily basis. My abductions
and nightmares about being taken underground increased to the
point where I was afraid to stay in my own home. On Valentine’s
Day of 1990, I called the Federal Aviation Authority to complain
about the helicopters. The very next day, I received a call from the
Federal Postal inspectors. They told me that I was the target of an
investigation. My heart dropped as my life ﬂashed before me. This
was it. Everything was going to end now. I was relieved and
depressed at the same time.
My sister’s divorce attorney referred me to a criminal lawyer who
promised to get me oﬀ easy. At the time, I had no conception of the
legal system, and I trusted my lawyer. Even though I paid him a
large sum of money, I soon realized that he was not on my side. In
fact, he and the prosecutor were friends who had worked together
in the Drug Enforcement Agency. After taking two polygraph tests, I
was told that I passed one and failed the other. The investigators
told me that they thought I was guilty, but I knew that I was
manipulated. Every time I tried to tell them my side, they literally
told me to shut up.
During this awful time, I cloistered myself at home. I was even
afraid to go near the windows because I knew the house was being
watched. Sometimes, when the phone rang, I heard only breathing
or the whirring of a computer. One day, when I reluctantly
answered it, I heard the voice of a woman with a heavy Brooklyn
accent. Telling me that she was a friend of a friend, she wanted me
to write my story so that it might help others. She then invited me
to her home in Brooklyn to meet a man named Preston Nichols. Heaccent. Telling me that she was a friend of a friend, she wanted me
to write my story so that it might help others. She then invited me
to her home in Brooklyn to meet a man named Preston Nichols. He

--- PAGE BREAK ---that she was a friend of a friend, she wanted me
to write my story so that it might help others. She then invited me
to her home in Brooklyn to meet a man named Preston Nichols. He

--- PAGE BREAK ---

was giving a speech about the Montauk Project. My blood ran cold
at the mention of Montauk, but I agreed to come. Afterwards, she
arranged for Preston to drive me home. Shortly after, this woman
sent me a tape about UFO’s and Montauk. She also included a box
full of Majestic-12 papers. There were maps of underground
tunnels, alien autopsy reports, and even a photo of a dead alien!
Why was she sending all this to me?
The meeting took place on the night of my tenth wedding
anniversary. My marriage was so bad that it really did not matter; it
even seemed ﬁtting that I not be home. I was absolutely shocked at
the number of people who attended. I never realized how many
others were interested in this subject, nor did I ever imagine that
anyone was actually giving lectures on this topic. The hostess was
amicable but money-oriented. Telling me that she was coauthoring
a book, she also shared that she channelled information from an
entity who had been with her since childhood and that a reptilian
being had an amorous interest in her.
On the ride home, Preston told me more about the Montauk
experience, adding that he believed I was one of the “Montauk
boys.” These were the children used in the heinous mind control
and genetic experiments, as well as time-travel work. As he spoke of
speciﬁc events at Montauk, goose bumps and chills ran up my
spine. He seemed to be telling me about my own life. I wondered
how he could possibly be aware of my experiences. Continuing,
Preston told me that I was not alone. There were others like me. I
wanted to meet some of the others as proof to myself that I was not
insane. The following week, we arranged to meet at my house when
my wife would be gone and the children asleep.
When Preston arrived, we went to a private room. Nervous, I did
not know what to expect. As soon as Preston began his psychotronic
Wilhelm Reich procedures," I immediately went into a trance. My
body became rigid. I could not speak as I actually began reliving
experiences. I heard Preston’s voice as he asked questions, but I
could not respond. At no time did he tell me what to see or
experience.
Suddenly, I was a young teenager strapped down to a table in a
brightly lit room. Men dressed as doctors worked on me, but I wascould not respond. At no time did he tell me what to see or
experience.
Suddenly, I was a young teenager strapped down to a table in a
brightly lit room. Men dressed as doctors worked on me, but I was

--- PAGE BREAK ---t no time did he tell me what to see or
experience.
Suddenly, I was a young teenager strapped down to a table in a
brightly lit room. Men dressed as doctors worked on me, but I was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

awake and felt pain as I heard their words. They spoke of using me
for genetic material before putting something into my groin area to
make me extremely fertile. Next, I ﬂashed to a scene where I was
surrounded by little greys who asked me to perform some kind of
function, but I do not know what that was. At times, I felt like I was
ﬂoating through brightly colored energy
* These procedures involve increasing the orgone energy (life
energy) in the body so that the mind can utilize it for psychic/
hyperspace purposes. Some of this was detailed in the ﬁrst two
Montauk Project books. Psychotronics refers to the interface
between the spirit, mind, and body with particular regard to the
inﬂuence of technology.
ﬁelds; sometimes swirling around in a vortex, then lifting upwards
at tremendous speeds. Finally, I felt myself come back to my body,
but I could not move it as I slumped over in a standing position
with my hands touching the ﬂoor.
I heard Preston trying to wake me up, but I still could not move.
Ever so slowly, my body started to respond again, but it was
extremely cold. I felt dizzy and disoriented. After I told Preston as
much as 1 could, he informed me that during the session my body
became as stiﬀ as a board. He said that I had acted like someone
who had been trained to do this for a very long time.
While I was looking forward to my next encounter with Preston, I
was also anxious about opening my locked memories. As I opened
the front door, Preston came in with A1 Bielek (Duncan Cameron’s
brother from the Philadelphia Experiment) right behind him.
Following behind Al, I saw a face that hurled me back to my
childhood days when I saw that laughing face in my second-story
bedroom window. How could this be? Who was this nightmare that
had come to life? Staring in disbelief, Duncan Cameron smiled and
walked into my hallway. MY GOD, this was the face of the man
who had been in my window! It was real.. .not a dream! This was
the same face that had terrorized my teenage years!
As I was introduced to Duncan, I felt an electric current shoot
through my spine. This was a sensation that I would feel many
more times as I relived my repressed memories. It was the feeling ofears!
As I was introduced to Duncan, I felt an electric current shoot
through my spine. This was a sensation that I would feel many
more times as I relived my repressed memories. It was the feeling of

--- PAGE BREAK ---duced to Duncan, I felt an electric current shoot
through my spine. This was a sensation that I would feel many
more times as I relived my repressed memories. It was the feeling of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

an electric prod used at Montauk to bend the wills of the children
into submission. Friendly and respectful, Duncan was not at all
what I had expected. Rather than the evil mentalist that I had
experienced in my teenage nightmares, he was soft-spoken and
polite. I was thrilled to ﬁnally be able to speak without shame
about my experiences to people who understood.
Plus, they could provide documentation that would either prove or
disprove these experiences.
That night, the session was most interesting. After I was entranced,
a small white being, who looked like a typical grey, entered my
body. Speaking at ﬁrst in a strange language that only Duncan
understood, it then spoke in English as the tone became more
ominous. This being said that it had every right to take possession
of my body because I was one of them! Challenging this remark,
Preston said that I was a human being with a soul from God, and no
one was allowed to use the body except Stewart. The entity cursed
Preston and called him “Pressed On.” It said I worked for them and
was carrying out a mission vital to the success of their program on
Earth.
Both Preston and Duncan saw the physical shape of my body
change as if it were a grey alien body. The outline of my face
similarly changed. Then, the being started to move my body.
Getting up, it walked around while making nasty comments about
those present. Although my eyes were closed, my body walked
around the room as if it were wide awake.
When Preston started to ask questions about their agenda, the being
hesitated. Next, an extremely powerful entity literally pulled the
grey from my body as it took over. Identifying itself as a Draco
commander, it gave its name as “Gengeeko.” Preston immediately
understood the Draco to be powerful, reptilian warriors. The
creature told Preston that an invasion force was on its way to Earth
and that nothing could stop it. The moon orbiting the Earth was
their ﬁrst craft. It had arrived here aeons ago to control the planet.
After creating the Lemurian civilization, they had been removed
from the Earth by the Atlans and the descendents of the disbanded
Lyraen Empire with the help of the Pleiadians. Now, the Draco were
returning to reclaim the Earth and use it as a military base for entrym the Earth by the Atlans and the descendents of the disbanded
Lyraen Empire with the help of the Pleiadians. Now, the Draco were
returning to reclaim the Earth and use it as a military base for entry

--- PAGE BREAK ---tlans and the descendents of the disbanded
Lyraen Empire with the help of the Pleiadians. Now, the Draco were
returning to reclaim the Earth and use it as a military base for entry

--- PAGE BREAK ---

into the rest of the galaxy. At this point, I realized that this was why
so many races were interested in the Earth. If this planet falls, then
the rest of the galaxy is in danger.
The Draconian then stood up and rasped a warning at Preston not
to use his equipment or Pleiadian contacts to try to stop them. Next,
he physically attacked Preston! Both Duncan and Preston had to
restrain this being in my body until it ﬁnally sat down and resumed
its speech. Claiming that humans were weak, it said that humans
needed the order that an invasion would bring. This way, the
invasion would beneﬁt everyone. The Draco would receive the raw
materials, workers, and food that they needed for their invasion
into the rest of the galaxy. The Earth would be protected forever by
the Draco Empire.
Our leaders were well aware of the impending invasion, gradually
preparing the world population via television shows and movies.
Even rulers in some countries were humans with Draco soul-
personalities. The reptilian within my body expanded upon his
ideas by saying that the United Nations would be the forum for a
central planetary government. United States leaders were in league
with Draco allies without realizing it. Some of the leaders of this
planet had prepared escape plans to Mars where equipment was
already being activated, as well as to other planets and moons in
this solar system. Mars has a huge underground facility built by the
Sirians over 500,000 years ago.
Gengeeko said that my body could be used since I was once an
ambassador to their home world from the Ohalu Council, the ruler
of the Sirian star system. I was neutral and not really concerned
about who was in power. This is basically true for me; I am not a
political person. My main interest lies in helping individuals to
advance their souls and minds. Continuing, Gengeeko stated that I
was created with alien genetics and that my soul-personality was
not human nor from this star system. This explains why I have so
many mental abilities that are considered unconventional on Earth.
When I came out of this trance several hours later, my body was
dehydrated and extremely cold. Disoriented and confused, I did not
return to normal for almost two days. In addition, I suﬀered rectal
bleeding, shortness of breath, and severe shivering. Overall, it wasydrated and extremely cold. Disoriented and confused, I did not
return to normal for almost two days. In addition, I suﬀered rectal
bleeding, shortness of breath, and severe shivering. Overall, it was

--- PAGE BREAK ---y cold. Disoriented and confused, I did not
return to normal for almost two days. In addition, I suﬀered rectal
bleeding, shortness of breath, and severe shivering. Overall, it was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

not a pleasant experience.
16 IN THE CARIBBEAN
The night after the event with Gengeeko, I started remembering
details about a cruise I had taken with my wife a couple of years
earlier. On the second day, as we sailed along the coastline of Cuba,
a strange feeling came over me as I viewed the tall mountains and
small ﬁshing villages. Nearing Havana, I took pictures which, when
later developed, showed only fog and smoke. I felt as if I was there
for a reason, and I knew that I was going to be a part of something
that was going to happen in Cuba the very next day.
That night, it was rainy and the sea slightly rough. During my sleep,
I was awakened by a voice calling out the name, “David.” Opening
my eyes, I asked my wife what she wanted. There was no reply, but
hovering over my wife’s bunk was a beautiful woman dressed in a
ﬂowing white robe that seemed to blow with an imaginary wind.
Holding her hands out pleadingly to me, she again called out the
name “David.” Suddenly, she became smaller and quickly ﬂoated
backwards out the closed window. I then realized that I was
drenched in sweat and felt sick to my stomach. The cabin was pitch
black. After falling backwards onto my bed, I seemed to go into
some sort of trance.
The vision of an airliner taxiing down a runway appeared before
me. I was standing beside the fence of the airport perimeter with
several other people. My hands held a device that emitted a wave of
energy. As the plane became airborne, I was told by a person
standing next to me to shoot it down. Mentally, I turned on the
device. Glowing red, a beam of light shot towards the plane which
was now obscured by rain. Then I heard an explosion accompanied
by a man’s voice saying, “Good job!”
The next day, I awoke with a headache and stomach ache. My wife
had no recollection of my trying to call to her the night before. In
fact, she stated that she had slept rather soundly.
That day we arrived in the Yucatan in Mexico. We took a wonderful
trip to the Mayan ruins. I was impressed by the stone carvings ofnight before. In
fact, she stated that she had slept rather soundly.
That day we arrived in the Yucatan in Mexico. We took a wonderful
trip to the Mayan ruins. I was impressed by the stone carvings of

--- PAGE BREAK ---t, she stated that she had slept rather soundly.
That day we arrived in the Yucatan in Mexico. We took a wonderful
trip to the Mayan ruins. I was impressed by the stone carvings of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ﬂying serpents and beings who appeared to be at the controls of
spaceships. Climbing the steps up the steep pyramids was
exhilarating. Returning to the ship, I picked up a local newspaper in
the main lounge. In astonishment, I saw a picture of a chartered
airliner which had crashed at the Havana airport the night before in
a rain storm. Everyone on board was killed. Most of the victims
were Italian tourists returning to Rome! What had I done? How was
this possible? Had I been at that airport in my vision...or was it
more than a vision?
I could hardly speak the rest of the evening. The following day, I
argued with my wife as we sailed through the Cayman Islands. That
night, I was afraid to sleep; so on the night run to Jamaica, we went
out for some night air. Walking on the top deck, the sky was clear
and the stars magniﬁcent. Starting to relax, I felt the tension leave
my body. Suddenly, an arch of brilliant light ﬂashed over the entire
ship. Originating from the far south, it ended way to the north near
Cuba. Everyone on deck stood mesmerized.
Then it happened again; this time in a bluish-green light. As most of
the couples hurried inside, I remarked that maybe it was heat
lightening. It really looked like a stream of energy. Peering over a
railing in front of the ship, my wife and I saw that everything was
completely black. Then, from our right, a fast-moving silver ball
swooshed inches from our faces, crossed the ship, and continued
over the sea. Looking at each other, I said, “Did you see that?” As
my wife nodded in amazement, a second silver object swooshed in
from the sea, hovered inches over our heads for a split second, and
continued out over the sea. We both turned and ran inside!
Haiti was our next stop. While walking on the north coast, I was
overcome with a ﬂash of intense heat and light. I do not know
where it came from or why, but after returning home, I came down
with a severe case of radiation sickness. My skin turned red, I had
high fever, and all my body’s soft tissue was blistered. My throat
closed up, and my lips were burned. I passed whitish paste from my
penis. I could not walk, move, eat, or drink. Delirious and scared, I
lost eight pounds each day. My doctor refused to touch me or even
take samples of my body ﬂuids. I was dying. He said that if I
continued for three days like this without water, he would place med, I
lost eight pounds each day. My doctor refused to touch me or even
take samples of my body ﬂuids. I was dying. He said that if I
continued for three days like this without water, he would place me

--- PAGE BREAK ---

in a hospital in the center for exotic diseases.
Laying in bed that night, I prepared to die. I was so weak that I
welcomed the relief. Closing my eyes, I waited for the worst. At this
point, I knew that I would never make it to the hospital. When I
ﬁnally opened my eyes, I was surrounded by greys. My blood
ﬂowed through tubes that had been placed in both arms. A silver
sheet was draped over my body. Unable to move or talk, I simply
did not care. At the same time, I ﬂashed back to a memory of sitting
on a table in a stark white room. Again, tubes were in my arms as I
watched my blood ﬂow through a machine operated by two small
greys. Through a long narrow window in front of me, I saw white
rocks and hills. Further beyond, I saw the Earth! I was in a room on
the moon! As soon as I realized this, I woke up thinking how
strange it was to have a ﬂash of memory during a vision — or was
it simply a vision?
Next, I noticed that my blisters and fever were gone! I was able to
get out of bed! Looking in the mirror, I saw that my face had
returned to normal. My throat was open and did not hurt as I
gulped some much needed water. Even my urine was now clear.
Of course, no one believed me when I told them about my
experience. I cannot explain what happened. All I know is that it is
true. I have the medical records to prove it. Why I was exposed to
radiation is beyond me. No one ever told me why. In any case, I do
not ever want to repeat that suﬀering.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t it is
true. I have the medical records to prove it. Why I was exposed to
radiation is beyond me. No one ever told me why. In any case, I do
not ever want to repeat that suﬀering.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

17 BREAKTHROUGH
The next time Preston used Wilhelm Reich procedures, he brought
his tape recorder. An entity calling itself “Tubor” entered my body
with such force that I shuddered hard and nearly fell to the ﬂoor.
Claiming to be the Draco controller of a mission to prepare Earth
for occupation, Tubor’s main concern was other alien and human
inﬂuences on the population that might thwart their plans. These
reptilian beings were extremely nasty and hostile toward anyone
who questioned them. Tubor commented that it was disgusted with
my body and detested the way a human felt. Humans were
considered to be weak, fragile, and too prone to emotional
reactions.
Insisting that I had a contract with them which permitted them to
use my body before their oﬃcial arrival, Tubor said that I was also
destined to be a liaison during the invasion. Using a human in this
way would allow both sides to understand the mind-set of the
other. I had supposedly agreed to this because I was once the Sirian
ambassador to their home world as well as to Arcturus and a planet
called Ummo. As the Sirian ambassador, I had successfully
negotiated a technology contract between the Draco and the Sirians.
Sirius A agreed to provide the Draco with high technology in
exchange for free trade and passage of their vessels anywhere
within the Draco Empire. This contract upset the Orion
Confederation because, being controlled by the Draco, they would
never be free. The signing of this contract eventually provoked a
war between the Orion Confederation and Sirius A which continues
to this day.
Tubor also told us that the Montauk Project employed Sirian
technology. The Draco observed all experiments but were especially
interested in the ones that involved genetic manipulation. Because
they are an androgynous race, the Draco are exceptionally
interested in species that procreate sexually. Using sexuality as a
means of programming people and gaining mind control over the
masses was particularly fascinating to them.
Whenever Preston asked questions or stated an opinion, Tubore sexually. Using sexuality as a
means of programming people and gaining mind control over the
masses was particularly fascinating to them.
Whenever Preston asked questions or stated an opinion, Tubor

--- PAGE BREAK ---xuality as a
means of programming people and gaining mind control over the
masses was particularly fascinating to them.
Whenever Preston asked questions or stated an opinion, Tubor

--- PAGE BREAK ---

became angry. He called Preston “Pressed On” and referred to
Duncan as “Dunk Can.” At times, Tubor hissed and swung his arms
toward them. Tubor even tried to hurt my body by hitting or
twisting parts of it. About an hour later, another entity pushed into
me and threw Tubor spinning away. After falling limp to the ﬂoor,
my body then stood up again.
Claiming to be a Sirian, this being gave its name as “Mishka.” He
said that he forced his way into the body to show me how to deﬂect
hostile use of my body. Since I had Sirian DNA, I could easily learn
how to defend myself using my abilities. Mishka said that he lived
on a large Sirian space station called Calumba which orbited
between Earth and Mars. This station was designed to monitor
interference on Earth and surrounding planets. The Sirians were
independent and considered to be the merchants of the universe.
With the highest technology available in their possession, many
races came to them for help. Even all the weapons used by the
Draco came from Sirius. When Preston remarked that this made
them guilty of hurting others, Mishka had an answer. He replied
that without Sirian weapons, the Draco would use brutal force to
overwhelm their targets. In this way, the Sirians considered
themselves to be a mitigating force in the galaxy.
Over the next several months, Mishka, Mishka’s assistant Marshak,
Tubor, and Gengeeko used my body to deliver warnings and
ultimatums. I was given information that the USSR was in league
with the Draco and allowing them to use Soviet bases for advance
operations. But, the USSR would eventually break up into smaller
nations and disrupt the agreement. When this happened, I was told
that this was a deception to lull the rest of the world into a false
peace. The various Soviet governments were closely aligned with
each other. When the opportunity was right, the Soviets would
pounce on the unsuspecting countries. In this way, the Draco had a
powerful ally on Earth to do their dirty work for them.
During one of the sessions, a deeply buried memory rose to the
surface. I remembered lying asleep on my bed in that hotel room in
Virginia when four men came through the door and injected me
with something that completely paralyzed me. Wrapping my body
in a canvas tarp, they put me on a cart and rolled me to theat hotel room in
Virginia when four men came through the door and injected me
with something that completely paralyzed me. Wrapping my body
in a canvas tarp, they put me on a cart and rolled me to the

--- PAGE BREAK ---ginia when four men came through the door and injected me
with something that completely paralyzed me. Wrapping my body
in a canvas tarp, they put me on a cart and rolled me to the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

elevator. They put me in the trunk of a car and drove for at least
two hours on winding roads that seem to go uphill . I remember
exhaust fumes choking me, but I could not cry out.
When the car stopped abruptly, I was removed from the trunk. As I
was taken into the vestibule of a large house with a stone front, I
realized that I was nude. Next, I was strapped down on a gurney by
uniformed military men who carried me down a long, curved
staircase to a cold, stone basement. There I was transferred to a Y-
shaped table where I was strapped down. Something was placed on
both temples while something else that hurt was inserted into my
rectum. A man in a medical coat then injected a long, painful
needle under my penis just above the scrotum and said, “No one
will ﬁnd any marks here.”
One of the military men called this man Dr. Hans. There were many
other men in the room as well. I also heard the names Jim, Jesse,
and Colonel. After putting electrodes on my nipples, penis, and
scrotum, they injected something into my navel. I saw machines of
all types, but 1 do not know their purpose. Then, I saw a door open
in a stone wall and a little grey came through. As it touched me
with a ﬁnger that felt slimy and dirty, I squirmed and tried to
scream.
Someone said that I had to be returned to the hotel by 4:30 A.M.
They agreed to take me back to my room via the kitchen. My next
memory was waking up naked in the bed with my face down and
my bottom elevated. Preston’s opinion was that either they were
trying to get information that was stored in my body cells, or they
were storing information for future use. Either way, I did not care
for the experience.
The sessions with Preston continued at my home once or twice a
week. I needed time in between to relax and rest my body. In a
way, immersing myself in the mundane experiences of my daily
work was a welcome relief. My daily routine seemed to balance
these bizarre contacts.
One night, I set my alarm for the usual time: 4:45 A.M. But, at 2:00
A.M., I awoke to the sound of the alarm ringing. Looking at my
clock, I saw the alarm was still set. A voice in my head told me toOne night, I set my alarm for the usual time: 4:45 A.M. But, at 2:00
A.M., I awoke to the sound of the alarm ringing. Looking at my
clock, I saw the alarm was still set. A voice in my head told me to

--- PAGE BREAK ---alarm for the usual time: 4:45 A.M. But, at 2:00
A.M., I awoke to the sound of the alarm ringing. Looking at my
clock, I saw the alarm was still set. A voice in my head told me to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

quietly come into the living room. For some reason, I was not afraid
nor did I feel that anything was unusual. Walking down the
hallway, I saw that the living room was now bathed in a soft yellow
light although no lamps were on.
Sitting in a comer chair, I waited. In the opposite corner, a swirl of
dark blue light emanated from the ceiling until it reached the ﬂoor.
Two tall, thin, powerfully built beings appeared wearing black
capes that enveloped them from neck to ﬂoor. The capes had high,
Dracula-style collars. Both had long bald heads with large blue
almondshaped eyes. Their noses and chins were pointed. As one
being approached me, I noticed that his skin was extremely pale.
About seven and one-half feet tall, he almost touched the ceiling. As
he came closer, a swirl of letters and symbols ﬂew around my head
as the being said, “Now you will understand our language.”
Identifying himself as “Mishka,” he told me that he brought
someone special who wanted to meet me. The other being then
stepped forward. A little shorter, he was about six and one-half feet
tall. His features seemed more human. Mishka said that he would
leave us alone; then he disappeared with a blue ﬂash. The other
being came closer to me and held up his hand with ﬁve long ﬁngers
extended.
“Hello, Father,” he said. Quite shocked, I asked him what he meant.
Giving his name as Elsinob, he told me that his age was the
equivalent of 400 Earth years. In the mid-1500’s, he continued, my
soul-personality was a professor at a university in central Germany.
At that time, I was abducted by greys. They took a genetic sample
from me and sold my sperm to the Sirians who used it in a
hybridization experiment.
A product of that experimentation, Elsinob had always wanted to
meet his biological father. He had monitored my soul-personality
through its sojourn in time and space until I was able to accept and
understand what had occurred. His DNA was practically the same as
mine because DNA forms around the soul-personalty’s mind-pattern;
therefore, he calls me “Father.” He also wanted me to know that he
appreciated my contribution to his creation. Telling me that our
minds were linked, he said that one day I would know my mission
with him on this planet. Currently living on Calumba, the Sirianhat he
appreciated my contribution to his creation. Telling me that our
minds were linked, he said that one day I would know my mission
with him on this planet. Currently living on Calumba, the Sirian

--- PAGE BREAK ---y contribution to his creation. Telling me that our
minds were linked, he said that one day I would know my mission
with him on this planet. Currently living on Calumba, the Sirian

--- PAGE BREAK ---

space platform between Earth and Mars, he travels to Sirius and
other worlds when necessary. Our home world is called Khoom.
Even though it is now covered in ice, it is still exceptionally
beautiful.
Sirian women, he continued, were much smaller and thinner. With
their own sub-society, they did not often travel through space. He
told me that my testicles were implanted with a device to increase
sperm production and make me extremely fertile. Many races were
interested in me for my genetic material. Although he was proud of
this, he said that I should no longer allow myself to be used
indiscriminately.
The rest of the conversation involved information about the Sirian
interest in Israel and the Jewish people. The Jews, he said, were
created as a joint eﬀort between the Sirians and the Draco. The
genetic stock came from the Hebrews, a race of Sirian origin. The
Ohalu Council, comprised of the leaders of the Sirian civilization,
provided the Torah (the ﬁrst ﬁve books of Moses, i.e., the Old
Testament of the Bible) with its coded information that I would
learn to decipher. In fact, the Ohaluans are nonphysical beings who
remain in hyperspace. The Sirians are their physical descendents.
Ancient Hebrew is the language of this council. A holy language, it
comes directly from the Mind of God. Each letter is a symbol,
number, archetype, and geometric shape that is used to translate
from the spiritual into the physical.
In fact, each chapter of the Old Testament can be decoded to letter
patterns. When recurring patterns are matched against one another,
geometric shapes are formed.
These include a doughnut shape, diamonds, three-dimensional
triangles, etc. When all the patterns are enfolded on one another, a
tetrahedron is formed in multidimensionality. That is to say, the
shape can only be demonstrated on paper by drawing a three-
dimensional tetrahedron. However, its actual shape goes far beyond
anything that can be shown graphically with current technology.
All letters of the Hebrew alphabet can be seen within the shape of
the tetrahedron.
In the ancient Hebrew alphabet there are four letters that have acan be shown graphically with current technology.
All letters of the Hebrew alphabet can be seen within the shape of
the tetrahedron.
In the ancient Hebrew alphabet there are four letters that have a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

stylized “crown” on top of them. No one knew why. However, if all
of the other letters were somehow forgotten, except for those four
special ones, by using these four, the tetrahedron could be
reconstructed and all the other letters again found within the shape.
Scientists in Jerusalem and New York are only now realizing the
information encoded within the Old Testament as they review it by
computer and research the various letter patterns. What type of
mind could have created such a timeless document? Certainly not a
human one.
At the conclusion of our conversation, Elsinob told me to return to
bed. Walking back to my room, I noticed that the glow suddenly
stopped. The moment my head touched my pillow, I went into a
deep sleep. At 4:45 A.M., the alarm rang. When I awoke, I
remembered everything. That is when I became afraid.

--- PAGE BREAK ---suddenly
stopped. The moment my head touched my pillow, I went into a
deep sleep. At 4:45 A.M., the alarm rang. When I awoke, I
remembered everything. That is when I became afraid.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

18 CHRIST
Because I was now receiving information and memories on my own,
I began to dislike the sessions with Preston. The Wilhelm Reich
procedures became invasions of my privacy that I no longer needed
or wanted. In the meantime, one of Preston’s co-investigators gave
me the telephone number of a middle-aged woman in New England
who he thought could help me unravel my story. Abducted as a
child, she was left blind as a result of the experiments that had been
performed on her. Despite this, she was able to see mentally and
used her abilities to deprogram others who had been traumatized
by unconventional events.
During the several months before my sentencing that I worked with
her, I learned a lot about myself and my abilities. Even when I went
away to prison, I was on the phone with this woman every day for
several hours at a time. We worked together to heal people from
severe illnesses and accidents. I learned about my past and my
future. I introduced her to a well-known football coach and to
Preston. At ﬁrst, they all got along; but as time went on, she began
to separate me from my friends. She warned me that Preston and
Duncan had a bad reputation in their ﬁeld and disavowed any
knowledge of the Montauk Project or the Philadelphia Experiment.
Because she had become my mentor, I paid attention to her and
slowly disassociated myself with these people at her request. She
began to tell me what to say, who to talk with, what to study, and
how to act. Her phone bill and my “education” were paid for by the
chairman of a large international oil company. He became my
friend as I tried to heal him of a very advanced cancer. When he
died, the payments stopped. I did not realize it at the time, but this
woman was turning me into her own personal robot. She made
promises that she did not keep.
The best thing that this woman did for me was to reintroduce me to
Mia and my daughter who I had not seen in years. Mia immediately
became my balance in hyperspace. My abilities soared as I was able
to transcend time and space at will. I learned how to do absentee
healing and to read minds. I could communicate with
extraterrestrials whenever the urge struck.ace. My abilities soared as I was able
to transcend time and space at will. I learned how to do absentee
healing and to read minds. I could communicate with
extraterrestrials whenever the urge struck.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ared as I was able
to transcend time and space at will. I learned how to do absentee
healing and to read minds. I could communicate with
extraterrestrials whenever the urge struck.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Starting to feel arrogant and confrontational as my sentencing date
approached, I fought with my parents and sister. My marriage was
just about at an end. My children were afraid of me. Even I was
afraid of myself. Thoughts of running away or killing myself ﬁlled
my head. Asking God what my life meant, I decided that I would
rather die than go to prison. So one day, I tried to drive my jeep oﬀ
the road and into a tree. Pressing down on the accelerator, I aimed
for a tree, closed my eyes, and waited for impact. After a few
moments passed, nothing happened. I opened my eyes and found
myself driving slowly down another road! How did that happen?
My anxiety brought on chest pains, so I went to my physician who
prescribed Prozac, an antidepressant. As a result, I became anorexic
and developed severe insomnia. My physician then prescribed
tranquilizers for the night.
It was uppers in the day and downers at night. When I complained
about it, he doubled my dosage. Soon, I was passing out from lack
of eating. I lost touch with reality to the point that one hot summer
day, I decided to go outside without a coat in order to freeze myself
to death! When my wife dragged me back into the house, I ran into
the bathroom where I began slashing my wrists with a pair of
scissors. Breaking down the door, my wife pointed to my youngest
son and told me to think about his future without me. Sobbing, I
felt the lowest that I had ever felt in my entire life.
Shortly after that last incident, I was determined to leave this
world. I refused to put up with any more human laws and
deceptions. I had found out that my wife was working with the
prosecutor as well as my own lawyer. They all wanted me to
confess to committing the crime of embezzlement all on my own.
The prosecutor and my lawyer even threatened to send her to jail as
an accomplice if I did not say what they wanted me to say. Without
my knowledge, they called my wife, scheming with her to pressure
me into writing letters of guilt. No one wanted to believe what I
was saying. After my lawyer read a manuscript that I had written
about my life, he told me that I would go to prison forever if I
published it. He said that I would be labelled an insane man and
put into a federal mental institution. Whenever I went to his oﬃce,
black helicopters literally hovered outside of his window the entireublished it. He said that I would be labelled an insane man and
put into a federal mental institution. Whenever I went to his oﬃce,
black helicopters literally hovered outside of his window the entire

--- PAGE BREAK ---that I would be labelled an insane man and
put into a federal mental institution. Whenever I went to his oﬃce,
black helicopters literally hovered outside of his window the entire

--- PAGE BREAK ---

time that I was there.
Out of desperation and depression, 1 called Duncan and left a good-
bye message on his answering machine. That night, my wife was
going to be out late with her friends. After the boys went to bed, I
would take my life. I called Duncan because I believed that he was
the only one in the world who could understand my pain and
suﬀering; to know what it is like to feel that you do not belong on
this world; to be used by everyone and appreciated by no one.
Finally, my nightmare would be over.
So, after the boys went to sleep, I kissed them goodbye. I considered
what I was about to do. I thought about the pain and sorrow my
parents and children would feel. I realized that my wife would be
relieved that I was gone. I had always been an annoyance to her.
Besides, I thought that she was having an aﬀair with her boss.
After all of these considerations, I decided to proceed. My parents
and sister would grieve for awhile but then would go on with their
lives. Plus, they would have my children to love. The boys were
young enough to forget me after some time had passed. I cried for
what I could have been, and I cried for what I was. I had no
guarantee that it would be better on the other side, but I prayed to
God and His angels to protect and guide me. I asked for forgiveness,
but I could not forgive those who had forced me to make this
decision.
Opening a bottle of Russian vodka, I took my Prozac. I drank and
took pills until I could not remember what I was doing. As I slowly
slipped into a stupor, I put my head on the kitchen table. It felt
cold, but I did not care. I am not sure how much time had passed
when I felt heavy hands shaking me and voices of concern around
me. I just wanted to be left alone. With blurred vision, I looked up
to see Preston, Duncan, and A1 Bielek standing in my kitchen. They
were asking me a zillion questions. The evidence was on the table.
They knew what I had done. Duncan had gotten home that evening
to ﬁnd my message. He rallied the others to my rescue.
They called the local hospital and the poison control center in
Atlanta for help. I was conscious enough to tell them that I was not
going to the hospital. I wanted them to leave me alone to die. TheyThey called the local hospital and the poison control center in
Atlanta for help. I was conscious enough to tell them that I was not
going to the hospital. I wanted them to leave me alone to die. They

--- PAGE BREAK ---l hospital and the poison control center in
Atlanta for help. I was conscious enough to tell them that I was not
going to the hospital. I wanted them to leave me alone to die. They

--- PAGE BREAK ---

brought me into the den and put me on the couch. Someone
brought me coﬀee and cake. They stayed a long time and spoke to
me constantly. Slowly, I became increasingly conscious. I felt
embarrassed, but some part of me was glad that they came. I realize
now that my message to Duncan that day was an attempt to be
saved. I really did not want to die, I merely wanted to change my
reality. I wanted to know that someone gave a damn about me. I
am grateful to those three men for coming to save my life. It would
have been wrong to commit suicide. I would have missed so much.
In light of my state of mind, and the fact that my sentencing was
coming up soon, Preston started coming over several times each
week to help me download what was inside of me. Duncan called
almost every day to make sure that I was okay. I started having
visions of being in Jerusalem while Christ was walking to the
Temple Mount and felt surrounded by His presence.
During one intense session with Preston and Duncan, I went into a
Wilhelm Reich induced trance. Suddenly, I was strapped down on a
table at Montauk while a man behind a glass partition electrically
shocked my body. A man named Jesse (the driver of the car in
Virginia?) was at my side injecting me with a needle. Above me, a
rectangular screen ﬂashed into a scene from an old city with people
dressed in robes. Instantly, I zoomed into the picture at a
tremendous speed. As I swirled, spinning around, I felt nauseated
and dizzy. Just as quickly, I stood at the steps of a large Roman/
Middle Eastern building constructed of yellow stone. There were
columns in front. From a doorway at the top of the steps, a robed
ﬁgure emerged. Instantly, I knew that this man was Jesus. A voice
in my head repeated over and over, “Shoot him! Shoot him!” Along
the side of my left leg, I felt a gun. I had never used one before.
Despite everything inside of myself denying the order to shoot, I
pointed the gun at this elegant ﬁgure. Looking down at me from the
top of the steps, his eyes were calm and intense. He looked at me
with total peace. Dropping the gun, I ran around the corner. I could
not do it! I ran as if I had committed a crime. I had not, and no one
followed. Was I running away from the spiritual side of myself? I
knew that He forgave me.
Next, I found myself standing at the foot of a giant wooden cross.d committed a crime. I had not, and no one
followed. Was I running away from the spiritual side of myself? I
knew that He forgave me.
Next, I found myself standing at the foot of a giant wooden cross.

--- PAGE BREAK ---I had not, and no one
followed. Was I running away from the spiritual side of myself? I
knew that He forgave me.
Next, I found myself standing at the foot of a giant wooden cross.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Looking up, I saw that same face peering down at me. As blood
dripped from his forehead, I saw a gash in his right side. Suddenly
feeling something in my left hand, I glanced down to see an empty
glass vial. Glancing at my right hand, I saw a needle. Where did
they come from? Intuitively, I knew that I had to ﬁll the vial with
this man’s blood. Because I could not reach his head or side, I
jabbed the needle into his left foot, or more speciﬁcally, his big toe.
He did not even ﬂinch. He just kept staring at me with his head on
his chest. Moving the vial up to his toe, I ﬁlled it. He was bleeding
profusely from the small wound that I had made. Looking up at his
face, I saw him smiling back me. Did He know that I could not help
myself? Did He know that this was the way it had to be? Inside, I
wished that it were me on the cross instead of Him.
As I covered the top of the vial with my thumb, I instantaneously
found myself standing in a cold, sandy desert with a tannish-red
cast. Complete silence surrounded me. The sky was pinkish-red, and
it was diﬃcult to breathe in the atmosphere. In that moment, I
knew that I was on Mars. Holding the vial in my right hand, I
walked slowly as my shoes sank into the soft sand. At the top of a
nearby hill, I saw a tall ﬁgure wearing a hooded robe that was tied
at the waist by rope. The ﬁgure appeared grey against the pinkish-
red background. I knew I was supposed to give it the vial. As I
handed it over, the ﬁgure reached for the vial with its left hand and
simultaneously pulled back the hood with its right hand. There was
Duncan smiling at me! He put his arm around me as we walked
toward a cave-like opening in the side of a rock wall.
Abruptly coming out of the trance, I felt tears running down my
face. My body felt like ice. Duncan was comforting me as he was
upset, too. I remembered that the blood of Christ was to be used to
clone a body with an android brain. A duplicate of Jesus, it would
have a government mind! The second coming would be staged! If a
blood sample was taken from the ﬁgure, it would match the blood
on the Shroud of Turin; thus leaving no doubt that this was the real
Christ. It was a perfect plan to control the masses. There was no
better place to hide this than at the Mars underground. The
government had used this abandoned alien facility since the 1950’s.
The secret ship, Aurora, which was built by the secret government
using technology obtained from captured and crashed UFO’s, ﬂewThe
government had used this abandoned alien facility since the 1950’s.
The secret ship, Aurora, which was built by the secret government
using technology obtained from captured and crashed UFO’s, ﬂew

--- PAGE BREAK ---

here every week from its base at Area 51 in Nevada.
The government also hoped to activate the defense systems on Mars
and the Moon before the Draco invasion force arrived. This was a
race against time. The government needed to have the people of
Earth trust them and believe everything they were told. Who more
would they trust than Jesus Christ Himself?!

--- PAGE BREAK ---s was a
race against time. The government needed to have the people of
Earth trust them and believe everything they were told. Who more
would they trust than Jesus Christ Himself?!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

19 POLITICAL AGENDAS
After remembering the Jesus episode, I began feeling guilty about
all of the work that I had done for the government. I realized that
most of the children with whom I had worked were either dead or
in bad mental states. I also knew that those who had survived the
torture and mind submission were “sleepers.” That is, they were
programmed to perform a speciﬁc function at a speciﬁc time. Only
a speciﬁc event, word, or sound could activate the programming.
Most of them were unaware of what was inside of them.
Some of these “sleepers” were programmed to act as vigilante
groups to eliminate government opposition in a time of chaos.
Others were to form satanic enclaves and bring in new blood for the
experiments on an ongoing basis. Still others were programmed to
create acts of sabotage against invading forces and disrupt
communication systems wherever possible. I now realize that some
of these groups have been prematurely activated, or perhaps are
being tested in light of current events. I am sure that the
programmers want to ensure that everything and everyone
functions “properly.” They do this by selecting a test group and
transmitting a signal that activates a software sequence. These
programs are buried in the subconscious minds of the hosts of the
sequences. A given signal starts the software rolling. This is as if a
diskette is temporarily placed into the computer drive of the mind
and runs a new program. The individuals then act out the sequence.
When this program is over, the diskette is removed and the original
software begins running again. In some cases, the new software is
activated prematurely. In other cases, it simply does not stop
running.
This instigates speciﬁc events such as the Oklahoma City bombing,
the explosions on Paris subways, attacks against civilians in the
Middle East, and even the 1996 bombing of the Olympic Games in
Atlanta. Taken singularly, these incidents mean nothing to the
unsuspecting public. But, when all the events are viewed as a
whole, one begins to see a rather ugly picture.
During my training, I was taught how to blend into any scene inidents mean nothing to the
unsuspecting public. But, when all the events are viewed as a
whole, one begins to see a rather ugly picture.
During my training, I was taught how to blend into any scene in

--- PAGE BREAK ---to the
unsuspecting public. But, when all the events are viewed as a
whole, one begins to see a rather ugly picture.
During my training, I was taught how to blend into any scene in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

any country. I was shown how to act, told what to say to avoid
suspicion, and how to solicit trust from others so they would
conﬁde in me. I was even taught how to make myself an integral
part of any organization and then disappear without a trace. In fact,
I could have become an academy award winning actor. Actually, I
was sent to Hollywood for a few days to play the role of a tourist on
a bus. You would never believe how many conﬁdences I created in
only a few days.
Much of what I learned was drilled into my head by trainers and
teachers during long hours of ﬁeld training. This occurred primarily
in the Middle East and Hawaii. For example, a young Japanese
woman in Honolulu was posing as a tour guide and brought me to
ﬁeld agents in an apartment on Kuhio Boulevard. These agents were
rather large Eurasian-type men with deﬁnite Japanese connections.
For several days, they indoctrinated me about the ﬂow of power
from that region. Most of the money in the tremendous Japanese
banks was actually tunneled there from the U.S. and Great Britain
through third channels to avoid identifying its source. The Japanese
government however is controlled by Beijing, a city which still
fancies itself as a dynasty from thousands of years ago.
The Chinese have always had secret but enduring ties to Jerusalem.
Stories have existed of Chinese Jews since the time of the Roman
invasions of ancient Israel. These Israeli refugees reached western
China where they converted thousands of people. Although the
Jews as a people are not known for proselytizing and converting,
please recall that Solomon indoctrinated the Queen of Sheba into
Judaic beliefs, creating an entire culture of Black Ethiopian Jews.
Also, Jews usually refuse intermarriage unless the spouse converts.
This is why there are so many blond-haired, blue-eyed Jews from
Northern and Eastern Europe. This type of slow but methodical
conversion occurred in Western and Central China over 1000 years
ago.
By the end of the Middle Ages, there were supposedly millions of
Chinese Jews who controlled most of the trade and commerce. This
has been kept secret for generations. Even today, the Israelis
secretly supply the Chinese with technology and advice.
In exchange, the Chinese will help with a planned invasion of thecommerce. This
has been kept secret for generations. Even today, the Israelis
secretly supply the Chinese with technology and advice.
In exchange, the Chinese will help with a planned invasion of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---been kept secret for generations. Even today, the Israelis
secretly supply the Chinese with technology and advice.
In exchange, the Chinese will help with a planned invasion of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Moslem fundamentalist countries in the near future. They will
attack from the east while the Israelis attack from the west.
Hundreds of millions of Chinese could literally simply walk over
Iran and Iraq without encountering much resistance. The Israelis
could easily annihilate Jordan, Syria, and the Gulf states with
nuclear weapons. They could also use the laser/sonic weapons
given to them by the Sirians. The Moslem fundamentalists are the
only resistance force that would be detrimental to the Draco
invaders upon their arrival. Accordingly, the Draco want them
eliminated to ensure a smooth transition of power.
Additionally, it is in the best interests of the Chinese and Israelis to
keep India and Pakistan sparring with each other so that they will
not be strong enough to take sides. This also explains the Chechen
uprising in the former Soviet Union. These are clever diversions to
weaken the armies of those countries so that when the time is right,
there will not be any aid available to the Moslems.
I was also given information about the future of black Africans and
their descendents. The black race was created aeons ago by a group
of aliens interested in slave labor to work in the mines of Africa and
Asia. Consequently, they have been enslaved for generations
because they were genetically programmed to maintain a lowly
status. In addition, the genetic memories of the other races perceive
them as slave labor. This must change as the black race continues to
advance into a higher level of existence. In fact, there is an entire
planet available to them which will avoid outside interference in
their progress. Leaders such as Louis Farrakhan and Jesse Jackson
are preparing the group mind-pattern by teaching them that they
are diﬀerent and to remain separate from mainstream society.
Personally, I do not support ideas of separation though I do believe
that gross mistreatment of the black race has occurred. However,
they may welcome the opportunity to develop their own unique
civilization: one of beauty, naturalism, and abundance.
I also learned that there were originally twelve root races on the
Earth at the beginning of life on this planet. What this means is that
there were twelve original alien races that agreed to genetically
manipulate and seed life on this planet as part of a great
experiment. The purpose was to determine if all of the mains means is that
there were twelve original alien races that agreed to genetically
manipulate and seed life on this planet as part of a great
experiment. The purpose was to determine if all of the main

--- PAGE BREAK ---e were twelve original alien races that agreed to genetically
manipulate and seed life on this planet as part of a great
experiment. The purpose was to determine if all of the main

--- PAGE BREAK ---

frequencies in the galaxy could live together harmoniously or if
they would destroy one another.
These twelve alien races monitored their contributions to the
experiment over the millennia. Some lost interest while some
completely altered their original ideas. In any event, the twelve
races are returning to remove or aid their part of the project before
invasion forces arrive on Earth and usurp all of the resources and
people. The outcome of this invasion is yet to be determined.
Many of the original races keep bases in this solar system to watch
the Earth. A Sirian base on Mars has existed for many thousands of
years. The Amphibians have bases on Neptune and on Titan, a
moon of Saturn. The Draco, who are the invading reptilians, have
bases on Venus as well as under the Earth. The Pleiadeans have a
base on a moon of Jupiter. Many others maintain platforms or
stations in orbit around the Earth and other planets in this solar
system. Most of them do not want to be discovered...yet.
In the early 1990’s, I was contacted by a man in Los Angeles on
behalf of Marina Popovich, the Soviet cosmonaut who was on a
lecture tour in this country. Secretly, she was investigating the
disappearance of a Soviet spacecraft that had been on a
reconnaissance mission to Mars. While approaching Phobos, a
Martian moon, a strange-looking craft emerged from behind that
moon, ﬁred something at the Russian probe, and the ship was never
heard from again.
Ms. Popovich knew my family history in Russia (remember, my
great-uncle was the ﬁrst president of the Soviet Union), and she
knew about my background and training. She was interested to hear
what I had to say about the missing Russian craft.
After several attempts to converse via phone, Marina was suddenly
sent back to Moscow. To my knowledge, she never returned. I never
had the chance to tell her that a Sirian vessel destroyed the Soviet
probe on behalf of the U.S. government and the Israelis!
Apparently, there were those people who did not want the world to
ﬁnd out about the monuments on Mars. These same people did not
want the public to know that Americans were already working in
the underground vaults on the red planet trying to activate alienworld to
ﬁnd out about the monuments on Mars. These same people did not
want the public to know that Americans were already working in
the underground vaults on the red planet trying to activate alien

--- PAGE BREAK ---

technology. The Russians were working with beings from Tau Ceti
who were the progenitors of the Slavic races. Although the Sirians,
Tau Cetians, Russians, Israelis, and Americans were theoretically all
working together against the Orion Confederation and the Draco
Empire, each had their own agenda and withheld information from
each other. The Americans and the Israelis wanted primary control
so they can eventually dominate the world. They reasoned that the
government with the most exclusive information and technology
would win.
While in the U.S., Marina Popovich appeared on many television
shows to explain the Russian awareness of UFO’s and aliens.
Unfortunately, her agenda did not ﬁt in with the American schedule
of disseminating information and disinformation. So, she was
manipulated into the background and forced to return home. Only
those people authorized by the U.S. government or those who
control the government are allowed to speak about sensitive alien
issues. These people can only repeat what they are told to say. Carl
Sagan was such a man. So are some famous Hollywood producers
who write science-ﬁction and political screenplays.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ssues. These people can only repeat what they are told to say. Carl
Sagan was such a man. So are some famous Hollywood producers
who write science-ﬁction and political screenplays.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20 ABILITIES GAINED
My personal training, which increased my abilities to see auric
ﬁelds and read mind-patterns, began when I was a little boy. After
my ﬁrst encounter with an alien being, I came away with a
“knowing.” I literally read the minds of other people who were near
to me simply by looking at them. At the time, I did not realize that
this was odd; I assumed that everyone did it. When I mentioned this
to my mother and grandmother, they thought that I was making up
stories. After that, I immediately dropped the subject and
discontinued the ability.
My abilities seemed to increase with every alien encounter. By the
time I was ten-years old, I could look into a person’s body and see
what was wrong with it. I was even able to look inside my own
body and correct or heal any illness or pain. The knowledge seemed
to come naturally, as if pre-programmed. This particular ability in
healing and reading minds developed as a result of DNA sequences
opening up in my body. This is a form of Kundalini activation
which everyone goes through to some degree. To further explain,
DNA codes are the instructions that tell your body what to do and
be. Some instructions are running at birth. These dictate that you
will have blue eyes, two legs, two arms, etc. Others activate later in
life, such as health conditions, abilities to play music, sing, etc.
Along the human spinal column there are seven main nerve
bundles, called ganglions, which are esoterically called chakras, a
word which means “wheels” in Sanskrit. They form along the “S”
curve of the spine which looks like a snake. In Sanskrit, Kundalini
means snake. Kundalini activation refers to the opening up of all
the chakra centers along the spine. This results in activation of all
DNA codes and sequences in the body. When activated prematurely,
this can result in insanity, illness, and/or death.
During some of my alien abductions, I remember being
indoctrinated in a variety of subjects, including the future of
mankind. The rest was personal information involving mind control
techniques and healing. These indoctrinations were not verbal.
Usually, I was with a group of people sitting on curved benches in
an alien craft. With our backs toward some type of large device andol
techniques and healing. These indoctrinations were not verbal.
Usually, I was with a group of people sitting on curved benches in
an alien craft. With our backs toward some type of large device and

--- PAGE BREAK ---aling. These indoctrinations were not verbal.
Usually, I was with a group of people sitting on curved benches in
an alien craft. With our backs toward some type of large device and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

screen, we felt information ﬂow into our minds. I did not
consciously remember the exact details until I needed it. Then, the
information ﬂowed to the front of my mind. Certain triggers
activated the information, such as a word, smell, color, picture, or
an event. After the trigger, the sequence implanted in the brain
activated, allowing me to access this knowledge at will. This
experience is similar to ﬁnding a secret bank account that you never
knew you had. Once you get the account number, you can make
withdrawals at any time.
As I moved into my teenage years, the learning took on a diﬀerent
twist. Besides the alien indoctrination, I sometimes “dreamed” that I
was in school but not the Earthly kind. While in the sleep state, I
went to a large “hyperspace academy.” Again, I was with a group of
people being instructed on many topics ranging from healing, to
world changes, to ancient history on Earth and elsewhere. Teachers
tested us by scanning our minds to see if the information was
assimilated. Usually, they were kind and caring, but sometimes they
were ﬁrm and scary. For the most part, they were angelic beings;
some appeared only as balls of light. Still others appeared extremely
alien. A few looked human. These were departed people working
their way up the ladder to a higher state of existence. These human
teachers were usually watched by angelic beings who observed and
graded them much like they did their students. This learning
occurred for a period of about twenty years in my life.
In contrast, the government work was not pleasant at all. It even
caused physical damage. At the Montauk installation, much of my
training involved adverse conditioning. Using this method, the
student is punished mentally and/or physically for a negative
response or incorrect answer. My experience was that we (the
Montauk boys), were all together in a cold, damp room. Stripped
naked, we were literally hit and slapped by our commanders. If
anyone was diﬃcult during a training session, the teachers
sometimes grabbed and squeezed our genitals very hard. They stuck
us with sharp instruments and electric shock devices. This was
supposed to teach us how to respond to interrogations and hide
during a mission. At times, we were told about who we were as
experiments and how we were carefully placed with our families.
We were told that the U.S. was only a facade of the real power thatd hide
during a mission. At times, we were told about who we were as
experiments and how we were carefully placed with our families.
We were told that the U.S. was only a facade of the real power that

--- PAGE BREAK ---ion. At times, we were told about who we were as
experiments and how we were carefully placed with our families.
We were told that the U.S. was only a facade of the real power that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

existed and that we were expected to profess unconditional loyalty
to this power behind the government. There were days when the
entire lecture was given in another language like German, Russian,
or Hebrew. I understood those languages, but I wondered if the
others did. These were the easy days.
The really brutal lessons occurred when we were tied down to
tables and given injections that altered our consciousness. While in
an altered state, a device was put on my temples and genitals. I
heard a whirring noise accompanied by a vibration that I felt all
over my body. Usually this was painful and made me nauseous and
afraid. I could not wait for these sessions to end. I now believe that
information was encoded into my body cells for storage much in the
same way that the aliens stored information in my mind. Through
the use of Wilhelm Reich procedures, information was retrieved or
added. In this way, the subject of an interrogation could not reveal
any information unless the interrogator knew how to alter the
subject’s mind and activate the proper body cell sequences. Loading
the information or retrieving it in this way was an extremely
delicate maneuver because the wrong sequences could kill a person
or drive them permanently insane.
At Montauk, I was also trained to feed energy and information to
the psychic in the chair who was hooked up to mind control
computers. While strapped into a chair, I actually listened to
instructions via headphones. After I was linked telepathically and
energetically with the psychic, communication then switched to
purely mental instructions. I gave him energy directly from my
mind and body in order to boost his power during an experiment. In
turn, the computers boosted my own abilities, enabling me to travel
astrally or into hyperspace. Over time, I learned how to do this at
will and without the machinery or anyone else inﬂuencing my
direction. Once my controllers found out about this, they kept me
under close supervision. I was known to have a temper, and I used
it to ruin their experiments through mental interference.
To prevent this, they assigned me to prepare the novice children.
Their reasoning was to focus my abilities on people of their choice,
rather than on them. 1 enjoyed this hideous job, I suppose, because
I had that Nazi Johannes von Gruber inside of myself. I was veryheir reasoning was to focus my abilities on people of their choice,
rather than on them. 1 enjoyed this hideous job, I suppose, because
I had that Nazi Johannes von Gruber inside of myself. I was very

--- PAGE BREAK ---o focus my abilities on people of their choice,
rather than on them. 1 enjoyed this hideous job, I suppose, because
I had that Nazi Johannes von Gruber inside of myself. I was very

--- PAGE BREAK ---

compulsive with the groups I was given to train. Starting out with
young boys from four to ten years old, I quickly graduated to
teenagers and young adults up to about twenty-ﬁve years old.
Rarely did I see anyone over the age of twenty-ﬁve. Beyond that
age, I was told that their mind-patterns were too ﬁxed and that
breaking them could quickly kill them. In fact, most of those boys
died or went berserk. The stronger ones were sent to work as
physical laborers for the greys on other worlds. Sometimes, their
bodies were used in time travel experiments in order to align
calibrations in the time ﬁelds. Losing a body was not considered a
matter of any signiﬁcance.
I was also given books and pamphlets to read about healing
techniques and mind control. Then, I was given exercises to perform
to test my abilities. I always passed with ﬂying colors. In fact, it was
through the manipulation of colors in the auric ﬁeld that I did my
best work. As a result of this experimentation and abuse, my
eyesight and hearing diminished substantially. Instead of seeing and
hearing like other people, my brain mainly picks up energy ﬁelds
and colors. Rather than seeing the physical body of a person, I
primarily perceive their mind-patterns and DNA sequences.
Electromagnetic devices such as telephones, computers, and
televisions amplify these energy ﬁelds and mind-patterns, allowing
me to easily use them to do “readings” for other people.
The high rates of energy that ﬂowed through my body damaged my
nervous system, making me irritable and moody. My digestive
system was severely damaged. I have ulcerations throughout my
intestinal lining which causes internal bleeding and weakness at
times. I also experience severe abdominal pain and massive
headaches. Not a pretty picture, but I can diagnose a patient from
across the globe and feel an earthquake thousands of miles away. I
can also communicate at will with beings in other dimensions or
galaxies. Every ability has a price.
I must also add that the woman in New England (who spent several
years deprogramming me) activated my entrained ability to read
and understand mind-pattern archetypes. For this, I am grateful. I
am also appreciative of Preston ’ s procedures of retrieving my
suppressed memories that also activated buried abilities. I do wishd
and understand mind-pattern archetypes. For this, I am grateful. I
am also appreciative of Preston ’ s procedures of retrieving my
suppressed memories that also activated buried abilities. I do wish

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that there was an easier way for me to learn all of this, but it
appears that my soul-personality chose this diﬃcult path. I guess it
was do or die. Therefore, I am happy that I survived to tell my story
and use my knowledge to help others.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t it
appears that my soul-personality chose this diﬃcult path. I guess it
was do or die. Therefore, I am happy that I survived to tell my story
and use my knowledge to help others.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

21 SENTENCED
Through all of this, my legal case was reaching a conclusion. After a
two-year delay, my sentencing was set for February 27, 1992. My
lawyer promised that in exchange for my coerced confession, I
would receive a four-month sentence at a nearby country club
prison camp and perhaps even half of that would be in a halfway
house in New York City.
Two weeks before a sentencing date was set, I received information
that a major power was planning to send a nuclear missile into a
small Middle Eastern country. Through certain channels that I had
in that country, I warned its government of the impending attack. I
would like to think that I had some small role in saving the citizens
of that land. But, it brought an unexpected tragedy to my personal
freedom.
One week after I sent the warning, my lawyer told me that the
sentencing had been moved up and to prepare a remorseful letter to
read to the judge. I was in a state of shock because I had not
expected the sentencing to come up so fast. Even though I had
given him my last dime, this lawyer constantly hounded me for
money. Repeatedly, he told me that he would continue to represent
me even if I admitted to committing the most heinous of crimes. I
just could not understand him. It seemed that the prosecutor, who
was his friend, and the government had all teamed up with my wife
to drain every last asset from me for as long as possible; then
discard me when there was nothing left. I suppose that this is
typical of the legal profession.
My lawyer also made me use an accountant who was a friend of his.
He reﬁled previous years’ income tax returns so that I could not be
accused of income tax evasion. I claimed all of the money that was
taken from the company for which I worked; even the amount
returned to them. For this, I am forever under the harassment of the
federal and state tax collectors. The picture emerges that 1 was
supposed to be perpetually ﬁnancially strapped and needy. Such a
person would always be under the scrutiny of credit companies and
collection agencies. Under these circumstances, a person could notas
supposed to be perpetually ﬁnancially strapped and needy. Such a
person would always be under the scrutiny of credit companies and
collection agencies. Under these circumstances, a person could not

--- PAGE BREAK ---rpetually ﬁnancially strapped and needy. Such a
person would always be under the scrutiny of credit companies and
collection agencies. Under these circumstances, a person could not

--- PAGE BREAK ---

aﬀord to cause trouble for the government.
On the day of my sentencing, my parents, sister, wife, Preston, and
Duncan all showed up at the court. The football coach who I had
helped was also there. Because the docket was busy that day, it took
a couple of hours to reach my case. The prosecuting attorney had
previously agreed to ask the judge for leniency, but instead, he sent
a proxy who refused to say anything on my behalf.
Finally, I was sentenced to thirty-three months in a federal prison
camp and was asked to self-surrender in thirty days. The judge said
that he did not believe in the sentencing guidelines and gave me the
lowest end of the scale allowed. He said that his hands were tied
and that I should appeal. Thank God there were witnesses to what
the judge said because his words mysteriously disappeared from the
court transcript!
I truly did not believe that I could survive that long in prison. My
lawyer had obviously lied to me. In addition,
I later found out that he had withheld important information. For
example, I was convicted under a new law that was in eﬀect since
1987. It said that such sentences must be served for at least 85% of
the imprisonment. Prior to 1987, one only had to serve 33.3% of
the sentence. My lawyer falsely told me that I would be free in
eleven months. In fact, I had to serve almost twenty-three months
plus six months in a halfway house.
One week before surrendering, I called the federal marshals to ﬁnd
out where I was going. I was shocked when they told me Ashland,
Kentucky! I had never heard of such a place. Besides, it was out of
my federal region, and it is illegal to send a prisoner more than 500
miles from their home, unless it is for their protection or if they are
a local threat. Obviously, I was being emotionally punished by
being sent from the reach of my family. I realized that I would
hardly see my children during this time. At that moment, I would
rather have been executed. I hated the government and my lawyer
with a passion. As diﬃcult as it has been, I have since forgiven
them as I know that, by their own actions, they have chosen a
diﬃcult path.er have been executed. I hated the government and my lawyer
with a passion. As diﬃcult as it has been, I have since forgiven
them as I know that, by their own actions, they have chosen a
diﬃcult path.

--- PAGE BREAK ---d. I hated the government and my lawyer
with a passion. As diﬃcult as it has been, I have since forgiven
them as I know that, by their own actions, they have chosen a
diﬃcult path.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I booked my one-way ﬂights for a Friday morning. I had to report to
the prison camp by 2:00 P.M. or be considered an escapee. I was
scheduled to leave Islip, New York on a ﬂight to Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania; then transfer to a ﬂight to Huntington, West Virginia.
From there I would take a taxi across the river to Kentucky. Keep in
mind that I had self-surrendered. At no time was I ever
accompanied by law enforcement personnel of any kind; not even
when I transferred to another camp or went to a halfway house.
My last thirty days of freedom I spent cloistered in my house. I
stayed close to my children, ate my favorite foods, and drank a lot
of vodka. On exceptionally depressing days, my mother and/or
Duncan came over to comfort me. Most days, I just wanted to be
left alone in a drunken stupor. I had been seeing a therapist for
about a year, but he was more fascinated by my abduction stories
while under hypnosis than he was in my mental status.
Much of the time, after the boys went to school and my wife went
to work, I sat alone in the den and cried my eyes out until I did not
think that I could produce any more tears. I worked almost daily on
the phone with my female deprogrammer in New England. She was
a tremendous comfort but also a tremendous controller. I now know
she had ulterior motives. All the phone calls were paid for by a
former chairman of Sunoco Oil who lived in Toronto. As was said
earlier, this man was dying of cancer. As part of my deprogramming
deal, I worked with him on his healing. A kind and generous man, I
will always remember him fondly.
On the morning that I was scheduled to leave for prison, I had a
nervous breakdown. I simply could not get out of bed! I refused to
get up because I knew that I would never return to that bed again. I
was certain that I would either die in prison or on the plane going
there. My wife immediately called my deprogrammer and put me
on the phone. She told me that I was to do great work in prison
with men who desperately needed my help. She told me that prison
was my assignment by the extraterrestrial with whom she worked.
There is a diﬀerence between aliens and extraterrestrials (ET’s). An
alien is a physical being who lives on another physical world. An ET
is a being who lives in a higher state of existence, somewhere
between physical and angelic levels. They are extremely advancedAn
alien is a physical being who lives on another physical world. An ET
is a being who lives in a higher state of existence, somewhere
between physical and angelic levels. They are extremely advanced

--- PAGE BREAK ---cal being who lives on another physical world. An ET
is a being who lives in a higher state of existence, somewhere
between physical and angelic levels. They are extremely advanced

--- PAGE BREAK ---

beings who can become physical when necessary. My Ohalu Council
is comprised of ET’s. My deprogrammer’s group was called the EF s
because they did not name themselves. Beyond the conﬁnement of
names, El stood for “Extraterrestrial Intelligences.”
She told me that when I looked out the plane window during my
trip the EI’s would give me a sign. Reassuring me that all would be
well, she said that the plane would not crash since it would not be
fair to the other people on board. She then instructed me to
visualize violet hands holding the plane in the sky.
At the airport, I experienced the most traumatic moments of my
life. I could not leave my children. I hugged them so tight that none
of us could breathe. Staring at their innocent little faces, tears rolled
down my cheeks uncontrollably. My heart felt like a lead weight.
The deep sorrow was indescribably painful. I simply could not step
foot onto the jetway to the plane. I must have caused quite a scene
because my wife sharply yelled at me to go. I turned one last time
to look at their sweet faces. I did not want to live anymore.
As the plane taxied down the runway, part of my soul took oﬀ from
my body, never to return. At that moment, I imagined the pathos of
the concentration camp victims as they said goodbye to their loved
ones forever. Quickly, we were above the cold, snowy clouds and
the brilliant sunshine jolted me back to my painful reality. I could
not believe that I was voluntarily turning myself over to a jailer for
something I was told to do for my government.
Trying to bury my thoughts in a book, I found that I could not
concentrate. As I stared out of the window, I wondered when I
would ever see my children again. I would miss so much of their
young lives. How unfair. I had not taken anyone away from their
families! Why was I punished this way? Then, I remembered the
little Montauk boys. Some of those parents would never see their
children again. Perhaps justice was done here, but I was not in
control of that experiment. I, too, was a victim. Looking at the tops
of the clouds, I saw how the sunlight shimmered on them. Then I
saw the message. In tremendous block letters made out of the
clouds themselves, I saw the initials “El”!
As we landed in Pittsburgh, I seriously considered taking a planeght shimmered on them. Then I
saw the message. In tremendous block letters made out of the
clouds themselves, I saw the initials “El”!
As we landed in Pittsburgh, I seriously considered taking a plane

--- PAGE BREAK ---

out of the country. It was all that I could do to get on the ﬂight to
Huntington. After seeing the initials in the sky, I was more at peace
but still emotionally overwhelmed by the situation. The short ﬂight
was bumpy, landing in West Virginia in the midst of a snow squall.
It was like traveling backwards in time. I thought that I was in a
movie about the Beverly Hillbillies. I simply could not believe that
people like this existed except as cartoon characters. The culture
shock was incredible.
The cab driver took me to Kentucky but ﬁrst brought me to a state
penitentiary on the other side of the road. I nearly had a heart
attack thinking that this was the federal camp. He laughed when he
realized his mistake. As we pulled up to the front entrance to the
camp, I thought it looked like a high school campus. Then I rang
the bell.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s the federal camp. He laughed when he
realized his mistake. As we pulled up to the front entrance to the
camp, I thought it looked like a high school campus. Then I rang
the bell.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

22 PRISON
A lumpy, middle-aged guard let me in and patted me down. He was
friendly as he led me to a room where a female guard took
inventory of my belongings. Again, I thought of the Holocaust
victims. This time, I pictured the arriving inmates at Dachau or
Auschwitz as their possessions were taken away from them and
they were told to disrobe. Although it was not quite the same
scenario, the premise was similar.
A male guard took me into a back room, stripped me, examined my
body oriﬁces, and issued me a green army-type uniform. I was then
taken to another room for psychological evaluation. Apparently,
someone in the New York prosecutor’s oﬃce wrote on my
paperwork that I was a suicide candidate. When the head
psychologist came in to talk to me, I broke down uncontrollably. I
could not speak or answer any questions. I could only think of the
way my children looked when I left them in the airport. I did not
think that I would ever see them again. Remembering my wife’s
promise to bring the children to visit me during their Easter
vacation was my only comfort. This was only three weeks away.
After several hours of sobbing until exhaustion, I was taken into the
camp population and introduced to another inmate who showed me
around. Kind and understanding, he had a wife and daughter who
he missed terribly. I went to my dorm and met the rest of my fellow
inmates. They gathered around me like ﬂies to honey. I could
hardly understand their deep southern accents. They explained to
me about the old law versus the new law. This was the ﬁrst time
that I had heard about it. Realizing that I would serve 85% of my
sentence, not 33% like my bastard lawyer had told me, 1 was
devastated even more, if that was possible.
These country boys had never seen a New Yorker before. As I was
not supposed to be this far from home, they were sure that I was
Maﬁa. Most of them were drug dealers or pot farmers with long
sentences. To be in a federal prison camp, you have to have less
than ten years left on your sentence. One prisoner was an old coal
miner with black lung. He was given six years because he wasth long
sentences. To be in a federal prison camp, you have to have less
than ten years left on your sentence. One prisoner was an old coal
miner with black lung. He was given six years because he was

--- PAGE BREAK ---o be in a federal prison camp, you have to have less
than ten years left on your sentence. One prisoner was an old coal
miner with black lung. He was given six years because he was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

visiting his son’s property when the Drug Enforcement Agency
raided it. There were also old men serving time for tax evasion.
These were not violent people. Not one of them should have been
away from their families. All should have been home with their
loved ones, doing community service, and paying oﬀ their debts.
Most of their marriages would dissolve. Most would never have a
decent job again. I just could not believe how nice and good-
hearted these men were. Why would our government spend so
much taxpayer money to put them away?
I do not want this chapter to be a blow by blow description of my
life in the prison camps. Suﬃce it to say that I learned a lot about
the tactics of our so-called legal system. 1 saw men die for lack of
medical care or from poor medical treatment. I saw the waste in
spending for the fancy oﬃces and resort-like recreation halls built
for the administrators and the prison guards. I saw and ate from
boxes of food stamped “Unﬁt for Human Consumption.”
What I saw was a travesty of justice. True, most were guilty of
white collar crimes, but most should not have been in prison! Their
prosecutors were guilty of more heinous crimes than any of these
men.
Because I was one of the few people with a full mouth of teeth, the
camp dentist and his assistant posted my name for frequent
appointments. They had never seen so many good teeth in one
mouth. The dental assistant was a former neighbor of Billy Ray
Cyrus, the famous country music star, so I spent hours with my
mouth stuﬀed with cotton as I listened to her stories about him in
her thick drawl.
Because of my education, I was quickly promoted to head teacher in
the GED (General Equivalency Degree) program and even wrote my
supervisor’s weekly reports. I became the liaison between the camp
and correspondence courses provided by local colleges. The head
psychologist often asked me to counsel new inmates who were
despondent. He thought that if I could make a life there, anyone
could. I also joined a spiritual group headed by a Gideon chaplain
who was a former helicopter pilot for John F. Kennedy. He visited
the camp once or twice each week to help the inmates. I wrote an
article for him that was published in the Gideon’s magazine. I owein
who was a former helicopter pilot for John F. Kennedy. He visited
the camp once or twice each week to help the inmates. I wrote an
article for him that was published in the Gideon’s magazine. I owe

--- PAGE BREAK ---helicopter pilot for John F. Kennedy. He visited
the camp once or twice each week to help the inmates. I wrote an
article for him that was published in the Gideon’s magazine. I owe

--- PAGE BREAK ---

him a lot for his support and inspiration.
My proudest accomplishment was a course proposal I made to the
camp education director. I developed a course to teach stress
reduction and color therapy. It was approved, provided that I give a
copy of each lesson to my supervisor, who I had befriended. My
course was a huge success. I had the entire camp learning about the
language of colors, archetypes, and mind-patterns. I did extensive
dream analysis as well. Soon, inmates lined up outside of my
cubicle at all hours in order to get private sessions with me. My
bunkmate had to start making appointments for me and turning
people away just so I could get some sleep. In my class, I helped
fellow inmates cure themselves of all types of ailments including
high blood pressure, obesity, diabetes, arthritis, and even the
common cold.
At the same time, I spent hours on the phone every day with my
deprogrammer. She was a big help to me when my stress was
especially high. She asked me to use my mental abilities to heal
patients of cancer, AIDS, and other severe illnesses. I was even
doing work for Uri Geller, the famous Israeli psychic, at his request.
I kept copious notes on all my patients so that I would know which
mental work was most beneﬁcial. Most of my research was done in
the prison camps.
At night, and even in the day, I received messages from a council
called “The Nine.” Unemotional and matter-of-fact, they are nine
aspects of the Mind of God projected into physical reality to help
mankind. During my time in the camps, I heard from them almost
daily; today, for some reason, I hardly ever hear from them.
I also received messages in the clouds. Whenever I looked up, I saw
strings of hyperspace symbols or archetypes as clear as day. As soon
as I read them, they vanished! To prove to myself that I was not
crazy, I asked others to tell me what they saw. They were all
dumbfounded as they saw the same cloud formations. People were
even more amazed when I erased the clouds simply by looking at
them!
Preston tried to send me messages by mail, but all I ever got were
empty envelopes. All of the prison mail was read, and all of theeven more amazed when I erased the clouds simply by looking at
them!
Preston tried to send me messages by mail, but all I ever got were
empty envelopes. All of the prison mail was read, and all of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---n I erased the clouds simply by looking at
them!
Preston tried to send me messages by mail, but all I ever got were
empty envelopes. All of the prison mail was read, and all of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

phone calls were taped and monitored. Sometimes, I threatened the
government on the phone, but no one took me away. Once, I even
caused a small earthquake in Kentucky because I could not contain
my anger.
What made me the angriest was the way the administration played
with the inmates’ minds. They promised things without ever doing
them, put people in solitary conﬁnement for stupid reasons, and
raided cubicles to ﬁnd contraband and lock a man up. It was bad
enough that we were all there. Why make it worse with
psychological warfare?
Another thing that made me angry was my realization that my wife
and her boss were involved in some way. As soon as I left, she
began inviting him to her home for dinners and going out on his
boat. Next, she told me that he was going to buy our home. She
started going out with her friends to nightclubs and bars and made
it clear that I was no longer welcome. No wonder she worked with
the prosecutor to put me away. The worst thing of all was when she
reneged on her promise to visit me during the children’s Easter
vacation. I was devastated. Eventually, she did bring the children
three times to Kentucky to visit me, and she also sent me money for
phone calls and commissary purchases. However, like my dear
grandmother used to say, “What good is the cow that gives a full
bucket of milk and then kicks it over?”
To be fair, I do not blame her for not wanting to spend her life with
me. We simply did not get along, and my abilities and beliefs got
me into a lot of trouble. Although I wanted to keep trying for the
children’s sake, the relationship just did not work. She was helpful
to me at times. For instance, she was instrumental in getting me a
furlough transfer to another camp on top of a mountain in central
Pennsylvania. The government wanted to send me to the Great
Lakes area because at this point I was becoming too knowledgeable
about the truth.
In the camps, we learned many things about the New World Order.
For example, we learned that the prison camps were a model for
what the world of the future would be like: forced labor for food
and shelter. We learned that the large Japanese banks were a front
for U.S. and German monies. We even learned that humans wereel for
what the world of the future would be like: forced labor for food
and shelter. We learned that the large Japanese banks were a front
for U.S. and German monies. We even learned that humans were

--- PAGE BREAK ---

already cloned and that some had been released into society for
testing.
A friend of mine proved that the U.S. Postal Service was a front for
a British bank and that it only costs two cents to mail a letter when
the true legal code is imprinted on the face of a letter. We learned
that foreign troops were secretly being trained in the U.S. for a time
when all governments would defer to the United Nations as the sole
government of the Earth. I even learned that AIDS was created in an
American laboratory and tested in 1967 on an unsuspecting patient
in a hospital in St. Louis, Missouri.
I learned so much that, before my transfer to Pennsylvania, I was
locked in my supervisor’s oﬃce for two nights and interrogated. I
was asked many questions. Where do my loyalties lay? If the U.S.
were invaded, who would I support? Would I use my abilities
against the U.S.? Would I speak about what I had learned in public?
Do I support an alien invasion of this planet?
I was threatened that if I spoke about my interrogation or my
beliefs, the government would declare me insane and lock me up
forever. I assure you that I answered all questions in a way that was
beneﬁcial to me! All of this conﬁrmed my beliefs about our
government. I also learned from the country folk in the camp that
there were rebels in the mountains with vast arsenals. They are
waiting for the day to revolt. That day is already upon us.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t. I also learned from the country folk in the camp that
there were rebels in the mountains with vast arsenals. They are
waiting for the day to revolt. That day is already upon us.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

23 RELEASE
My trip to Pennsylvania was a brief taste of freedom. I took several
buses through Kentucky, Ohio, West Virginia, and Pennsylvania.
Remember, I was unaccompanied and could have escaped at any
time. If I had done so, I would have been a hunted man and never
able to return to my family again. During my overnight bus ride, I
sat next to a number of upstanding American citizens. Smiling
ironically to myself, I thought about their reactions if they knew
that I was going from one prison to another. I looked as free as they
did, yet I was still a prisoner of the U.S. government.
When I ﬁnally arrived in Minersville, I looked for a phone to call a
cab. There were no public booths on the one street in town, so I
asked at the local bank if they had a phone booth. The nice, middle-
aged ladies behind the counter were overly hospitable and let me
use their private phone behind the teller’s counter. Asking if I was
new in town, I replied, “Yes.” They asked if I had a job, and I again
replied, “ Yes.” When they asked where I was going, I told them,
“To the federal prison camp up in the local mountains.” The blood
drained away from their faces. After all, they were alone with me in
a bank, waiting for me to return to prison. I saw their visions of
robbery and rape as they nervously and politely stepped farther
away from me. Quickly, I added that I was a teacher for the
prisoners, but by this point, they were wary of me. I took my
luggage outside and waited for three hours for the only taxi in
town.
This camp was very diﬀerent from the one in Kentucky. It was more
like a secret government installation. The Kentucky camp was old
and in the middle of town. Children played across the street in the
school yard. Here, there were only cold mountains and stark
buildings. During my processing, I could tell that these guards were
more apathetic than their southern counterparts and maybe even
dumber, if that was possible. Perhaps it was all that coal in the
ground that had dulled their senses.
Resembling an apartment building, the dorms here were more
compact. These prisoners, mostly from the northeast, werepossible. Perhaps it was all that coal in the
ground that had dulled their senses.
Resembling an apartment building, the dorms here were more
compact. These prisoners, mostly from the northeast, were

--- PAGE BREAK ---t was all that coal in the
ground that had dulled their senses.
Resembling an apartment building, the dorms here were more
compact. These prisoners, mostly from the northeast, were

--- PAGE BREAK ---

unfriendly, arrogant, and wealthy. Many were lawyers and this
actually pleased me. I felt that they were ﬁnally where they all
belonged except that they were still breathing!
Because it was only a ﬁve hour drive from where she lived, my wife
visited me more often. As the visits became more tense and
argumentative, I realized that this marriage was not going to work
out. When I thought of the children, it broke my heart, so I
continued to persevere.
Once again, I quickly worked my way up to the position of head of
the education department. I taught GED and ESL (English as a
Second Language) classes. Most of my students were illegal aliens
from Latin American countries. There were a few Arabs, Chinese,
and Europeans. My lessons sometimes swerved from English to the
truth behind the American government. Some of my students were
former terrorists, so they were enthralled by what I told them.
When guards passed by, I quickly switched back to the lesson of the
day. I was not supposed to teach classes without a guard or
supervisor monitoring me. But, I became so trusted that I was left to
devise my own lessons and agenda without prior approval. In fact,
the main supervisor of the prison’s entire educational department
often asked me to review my own supervisors! Of course, some
inmates interpreted this as a sign that I was really a spy for the
administration. No matter. I had a good position and even wrote a
book on how to teach GED and ESL which was quickly usurped by
the government as their own. My coworkers were presidents and
vice-presidents of major corporations. They were great advisors to
me and I shall always remember them.
In Pennsylvania, I met my best friend, Peter Filatov. At ﬁrst, I did
not like him. 1 thought that he was aloof and arrogant, but he
persisted. One day, I returned to the dorm to ﬁnd my bed and
belongings moved into Peter’s cubicle. I was dismayed, but we
stayed up all night talking and discovered that we had similar
backgrounds. He was Ukrainian, and I was Russian. We both
enjoyed exercise. We both felt betrayed by people we had trusted. I
told him my story, thinking that he would be scared of my insanity,
but he understood and wanted to learn more. So, I taught hi m
about mind-patterns, color therapies, and dream analysis. Oversted. I
told him my story, thinking that he would be scared of my insanity,
but he understood and wanted to learn more. So, I taught hi m
about mind-patterns, color therapies, and dream analysis. Over

--- PAGE BREAK ---story, thinking that he would be scared of my insanity,
but he understood and wanted to learn more. So, I taught hi m
about mind-patterns, color therapies, and dream analysis. Over

--- PAGE BREAK ---

time, he learned about my mental abilities and decided that I
should write some of my information to share with others. At ﬁrst I
refused, but Peter was persistent.
The result of our collaboration is a book titled, As Ye Sow, So Shall
Ye Reap, and its companion workbook, The Healing of the Mind.
Peter and I have been best friends ever since. He was the ﬁrst to
suspect the motives of the woman who was deprogramming me. I
refused to believe that she was anything but good, but Peter saw
how she controlled and decided my every move.
One day, I received a letter from Peter Moon asking my permission
to tell my story in the Montauk books. When I spoke to my
deprogrammer about it, she exploded in anger and promptly
dictated a letter for me to send to Mr. Moon telling him where to
go. So, imagine my surprise when Craig, a fellow inmate, came
down to my cubicle to get my autograph. In his hands was a book
that his mother had sent him from Florida. It was the ﬁrst Montauk
book — with my name in the acknowledgments! Soon, I was a
celebrity at the camp. Everyone thought that I was a spy. They
could not imagine the kind of experiences that I had with time
travel and genetic experiments. Craig told me that his mother was a
radionic practitioner and wanted to talk to me, but I just did not
want to get involved. More on that connection later.
The camp guard who processed the mail was a beautiful woman
who I shall call Jane. An ex-marine with a body that could kill
faster than a grenade, she befriended me and gave me my mail
privately. Often, she sneaked up on me while I was exercising and
made comments about my body. She was the cutest little creature
that I had ever seen. I enjoyed our time together, but we both could
have gotten into severe trouble if anyone knew. Jane allowed
contraband to come into the camp for me and let me ship things out
without permission. Eventually, she conﬁded that my mail was the
only mail she was supposed to read, but it scared her to death. She
never elaborated on why she had to read my mail, but she said that
she found me fascinating and the people who wrote to me very
exotic.
At one point, I worked with an actor named Dack Rambo who was
a star on the television show Dallas. Dack had contracted AIDS, andt
she found me fascinating and the people who wrote to me very
exotic.
At one point, I worked with an actor named Dack Rambo who was
a star on the television show Dallas. Dack had contracted AIDS, and

--- PAGE BREAK ---nating and the people who wrote to me very
exotic.
At one point, I worked with an actor named Dack Rambo who was
a star on the television show Dallas. Dack had contracted AIDS, and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

a Californian friend of my deprogrammer asked me to work on his
case. Dack became a good friend as well as a client. He was
controlled by his mother and sister who both made his life
miserable. I was extremely upset when he died because the AIDS
had gone into remission. When his doctors in Los Angeles insisted
that he go for radiation and chemotherapy for Karposi syndrome, I
warned him against it. These treatments weakened his heart until it
ﬁnally stopped. I still see Dack in hyperspace, and he advises me
from time to time. I promised him that I would fulﬁll his dream of
opening a healing center for terminally ill patients. I hope to
complete my promise to him some day.
My wife’s boss was friendly with a congressman from Long Island.
She spoke to this congressman about transferring me to a work
cadre in Philadelphia. Using his speciﬁc instructions, I wrote a
personal letter to him delineating my needs, what I wanted him to
do, and added the facts that we had inadequate food, poor medical
care, and the administration wasted government money on pet
projects at the expense of the inmates. Imagine my shock and
surprise when I found out that the congressman forwarded my letter
to the warden! From that point on, I was carefully monitored and
ﬁrmly admonished by the camp administrator. I had apparently
embarrassed him in front of Congress. Fearing retribution, I
promptly informed my wife of the situation. The congressman then
called the warden who assured him of my safety. Within weeks, I
was transferred to the military base in Philadelphia. It was adjacent
to the shipyard where the Eldridge had been docked! I had come full
circle.
My time in Philadelphia was brief — only four and one-half
months. During that time, I learned that the government has vast
stockpiles of materials hidden all over the country for use in
national or global emergencies.
1 was also told that under the base and shipyard was an immense
array of complex tunnels and roads that were miles long.
I wondered if they connected to the series of subterranean tunnels
used for high speed trains like the ones I saw and used at Montauk.
These vehicles are so fast that they actually defy time and space.
They enter into a subterranean hyperspace so that one can travelused for high speed trains like the ones I saw and used at Montauk.
These vehicles are so fast that they actually defy time and space.
They enter into a subterranean hyperspace so that one can travel

--- PAGE BREAK ---trains like the ones I saw and used at Montauk.
These vehicles are so fast that they actually defy time and space.
They enter into a subterranean hyperspace so that one can travel

--- PAGE BREAK ---

from Southern California to Maine in less than an hour! Our entire
planet is crisscrossed with these tunnels and tubes. They were found
earlier this century, and no one will admit that they know who built
them. Aliens used them to travel back and forth to their
underground bases. There are several entry points in the U.S., and
the government has a map of all the locations. Montauk lies on one
of the routes for these tubes.
1 spent several hours on the phone each week with my
deprogrammer. We worked with Richard Hoagland and NASA on a
mysterious image being beamed from the “String of Pearls” comet
that was approaching Jupiter. The image was said to be similar to
the Jack of Spades seen in a deck of playing cards. Imagine my
surprise when I heard this, for it was the exact same image that my
grandmother had seen as a little girl in the mountains of Austria! As
you remember from the ﬁrst chapter, two of my grandmother’s
cousins fell dead to the ground when she directed them to look at it.
Hoagland was interested in this story as well as my ability to
understand ancient Hebrew glyphs and letters. Apparently, these
letters were being transmitted to Earth from this so-called comet
and no one understood what they meant. In addition, these letters
were interspersed with hyperspace symbolism. The combinations of
numbers and archetypes were confusing to NASA and other
agencies who were studying them.
Every day, 1 called my deprogrammer and gave her the meanings
of the latest set of transmissions. For the most part, they were
instructions for the upgrading of human DNA and mind-patterns,
but others were warnings about aliens and catastrophes on Earth. I
understood these messages came from an advanced ET civilization
similar to the Ohalu Council that communicated with me. The
messages also stated that the String of Pearls comet was a created
event designed to turn Jupiter into a sun which would in turn melt
the nearby frozen moons of Jupiter and Saturn. This would then
create many Earth-like planets that would be habitable for
colonization. I was even given a listing of each unfrozen world with
the possible population it could hold.
I was now down to the last six months of my sentence which I got
to spend in a “wonderful halfway house in beautiful Bedford-listing of each unfrozen world with
the possible population it could hold.
I was now down to the last six months of my sentence which I got
to spend in a “wonderful halfway house in beautiful Bedford-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ozen world with
the possible population it could hold.
I was now down to the last six months of my sentence which I got
to spend in a “wonderful halfway house in beautiful Bedford-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Stuyvesant in Brooklyn, New York.” Walking down the streets, I
made sure that I did not confront any gangs. Continuous shooting
spewed forth from a building adjacent to mine; we were even told
to stay away from the windows at night.
During a routine sign-in after being out all day, I was taken into a
bathroom by a security guard under the guise of being given a urine
analysis for drugs. Once the door was closed, the guard took out
Soviet satellite photos of Area 51 in Nevada and asked me to
identify the buildings and runways. After that, he came to my room
several times every week to talk about UFO’s and what the
government knew about them. One time, he became quite
emotional and actually cried. The topic frightened him. He was glad
that he had someone like me to talk to about it. After I left the
halfway house to return home, he called and asked if he could bring
a group of people to discuss UFO’s, but he never came.
Shortly after that, my deprogrammer brought the author of “The
Man Who Knew Too Much” to my home to interview me for a
special HBO television show. Staying the entire weekend, he took
my personal notes which he then kept for several months. Nothing
ever came of the show, and my relationship with my deprogrammer
deteriorated after that. She started taking credit for my information
that I shared with her and told others that she had put it inside my
mind when she visited me in prison. I soon started to realize how
she was manipulating me and interfering in my fragile marriage.
My calls to her became less frequent. Her calls to me were only to
get information about the messages I was receiving or to criticize
Preston and Duncan. In any event, I was glad to be home with my
children and was trying to make my marriage work. It did not.
CHAPTER TWENTY-FOURion about the messages I was receiving or to criticize
Preston and Duncan. In any event, I was glad to be home with my
children and was trying to make my marriage work. It did not.
CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR

--- PAGE BREAK ---es I was receiving or to criticize
Preston and Duncan. In any event, I was glad to be home with my
children and was trying to make my marriage work. It did not.
CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR

--- PAGE BREAK ---

24 LIFE GOES ON
There were few jobs available on Long Island when 1 returned
home. Finally, I accepted a low paying job in a day treatment center
for mentally retarded and mentally handicapped adults. Because
their auric ﬁelds and DNA patterns told me what was really wrong
with them, I knew that most of them had been mistreated and
misdiagnosed from an early age. This created additional stress for
me since I was not allowed to comment on any client or their
treatment. I longed to treat them with colors and mind-pattern
alterations to improve their current conditions.
Working at this agency was worse than being in the prison system.
People tattled on everything they saw. The supervisors were not
much older than my children and had no experience in the real
world. They wrote nasty reports on employees simply because they
could. One had to be exceptionally careful about what was said or
done in front of a client because anything could be construed as
abuse. This experience reminded me of the Montauk days when the
little boys were trained to work with the master psychics like
Duncan. If only there were people watching those commandants to
stop them from committing atrocities. Perhaps a higher power had
placed me here to learn a lesson in humility and forgiveness.
These people were helpless and completely dependent upon others
for their every need. There were times in my own life when I felt
that way, too. I realized that to angels and ET’s, human beings are
retarded and developmentally disabled. Humans hope that higher
beings will treat them with compassion and help them to advance.
With this in mind, I made it my goal to do the same for the clients
who were placed in my classroom. I opened a new seniors class for
elderly and ill clients. Fortunately, none of my clients were violent,
but many dangerous clients roamed the hallways. Although the staﬀ
was trained to deal with their outbursts, they were still injured on a
daily basis.
The amount of money wasted by the state to care for these people
amazed me. I suppose the state was avoiding another Willowbrook
situation at all costs. Willowbrook, as you may recall, was a mentals.
The amount of money wasted by the state to care for these people
amazed me. I suppose the state was avoiding another Willowbrook
situation at all costs. Willowbrook, as you may recall, was a mental

--- PAGE BREAK ---ey wasted by the state to care for these people
amazed me. I suppose the state was avoiding another Willowbrook
situation at all costs. Willowbrook, as you may recall, was a mental

--- PAGE BREAK ---

institution on Staten Island, New York that was exposed in the early
1970’s by Geraldo Rivera. He went undercover as an employee with
a hidden camera and ﬁlmed abuse of mentally retarded children
and adults by state employees. This expose propelled Geraldo to
fame and fortune. By perpetrating and tolerating this abuse, the
state created an unnatural environment staﬀed with unqualiﬁed
people who squandered taxpayer dollars. Beneath the facade of a
mental healthcare agency was a regular business owned and
managed by a few individuals who cared only about money. The
people at the top made extraordinary money. The hands-on workers
earned barely enough to survive.
While working at this job, my personal life fell further apart. My
wife refused to try and make the marriage work. She became
increasingly hostile towards me. Even though she cooked and did
laundry for herself and the children, she refused to do so for me.
Through all of this, I continued to dean the house and help with
meal preparations.
In retrospect, I realize that she enjoyed her freedom while I was
away and had become very independent. But, she failed to realize
that her independence was facilitated by her boss, a wealthy
lawyer, who gave her extra money for herself and the children. He
gave her money for a new car and even bought our house under the
guise of saving it from bankruptcy. There were also private dinners
and dates. Under the pretense of doing nice things for my family, he
was really attempting to get me out of the house and win my
children’s aﬀection by buying them gifts. His wife, a Joan Rivers/
Barbra Streisand type, turned her head away from the obvious.
Unwilling to give up her life-style and social status, she allowed her
husband to philander wherever he wanted. When I tried to discuss
this with her, she turned against me and tried to use my Montauk
experiences to prove that I was unstable and insane. As with
everyone, I am sure they both will ultimately face diﬃcult lessons
that will force them to take long, hard looks at themselves.
During this time, I moved into a converted garage apartment on the
side of our house. I refused to leave the premises permanently until
the divorce agreement was signed. That way, my wife could not
accuse me of abandonment. Because I had always been fascinatedon the
side of our house. I refused to leave the premises permanently until
the divorce agreement was signed. That way, my wife could not
accuse me of abandonment. Because I had always been fascinated

--- PAGE BREAK ---ouse. I refused to leave the premises permanently until
the divorce agreement was signed. That way, my wife could not
accuse me of abandonment. Because I had always been fascinated

--- PAGE BREAK ---

by the devices used to program me, and the ones that Preston had
introduced to me, I used this opportunity to study radionics and
eventually became a radionics teacher and consultant. My teacher
was my friend Craig’s mother, the friendly reverend in Florida.
Caroline trained me via telephone, videos, and audio tapes.
Together, we developed templates incorporating both dolphin
frequency and ancient Hebrew archetypes to heal mind-patterns on
the radionic machines. They are the only ones in existence on this
world. For those unfamiliar with radionic templates, they are
schematic designs used to form a basis for creating a new concept.
In radionics, they are used as the source of a vibrational broadcast
that is delivered to a target for the purpose of healing and/or
changing a mind-pattern.
These circumstances also allowed me to continue the healing
experiments that I began in prison. Photographing each client from
my workplace, I took it upon myself to use these photos in radionic
treatments for them. The results were impressive. Using my
machines, I was able to keep the entire building under control so
that no one got hurt. After I learned to recognize the electrical
storm that builds in the minds of epileptics, I developed a series of
radionic templates to stop the seizures. I also invented a hat/helmet
for epileptics that removes the excess currents in their brains and
thus prevents seizures.
I was able to see the strange auric patterns that exist around mental
patients and learn how to change their auric patterns to a more
proper pattern. This successfully eliminated aggressive behavior on
many occasions. Actually, I learned this technique from the
Montauk Project experiments. One of the experiments involved the
psychic mentally altering a target’s auric ﬁeld to determine if the
mind-pattern changed. They were trying to ascertain if the mind-
pattern had to ﬁrst be changed before the auric ﬁeld could be
altered. This experiment showed that changing an auric ﬁeld was
like helping a symptom. Changing a mind-pattern was going right
to the source of a problem. Results showed that manipulating the
colors and symbols in an auric ﬁeld temporarily changed the mind-
pattern long enough to enter the desired programming. However, a
more permanent change occurred when the mind-pattern was
changed ﬁrst. This then aﬀected the auric ﬁeld.temporarily changed the mind-
pattern long enough to enter the desired programming. However, a
more permanent change occurred when the mind-pattern was
changed ﬁrst. This then aﬀected the auric ﬁeld.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

One day, Caroline called to tell me about a woman that she had just
met over the phone. She thought that this woman had a lot in
common with me and that we would be like brother and sister. This
woman was married and lived in Oregon, on the Idaho border. She
was 3000 miles away from me. What in the world would I say to
her and why? But, because Caroline had been so good to me, I
could not refuse her suggestions. So, one evening I called and
luckily got her answering machine. Leaving a hurried, matter-of-
fact message for Janet Dian, I silently prayed that this would be the
end of that. I called Caroline, told her that I left a message for
Janet, but felt I would probably never hear from her.
In the meantime, I met a professional model at a class that I taught
in New Jersey. When this woman walked in, the entire room lit up.
Even though Mia and Jaime had driven down from Massachusetts
to see me lecture, my attention was torn between them and this
beautiful model.
CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE

--- PAGE BREAK ---entire room lit up.
Even though Mia and Jaime had driven down from Massachusetts
to see me lecture, my attention was torn between them and this
beautiful model.
CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE

--- PAGE BREAK ---

25 JANET
After a few dates with the model, I realized that she would not be a
good stepmother for my children. Still, I pursued her for her beauty.
At the same time, I was also trying to maintain contact with Mia
and Jaime. Much was going on in my mind. This included
frustration and depression over losing my family. Then, while lying
in bed one evening, the phone rang.
Janet’s voice sounded so gentle and soft, almost like a whisper. Her
angelic-like quality showed no trace of anger or hostility, all the
things that I was accustomed to in a woman. Extremely shy during
the ﬁrst part of our conversation, she told me that she had never
travelled to New York and had been married to the same man for
twenty-two years. After exchanging background information, we
discussed our current situations. The facts were that we were both
married to other people and lived 3000 miles apart. In my mind, I
kept thinking that I certainly did not need another phone pal.
The conversation turned towards my involvement in the Montauk
Project. She had barely heard of it before but promised to get the
books and read more about it. As I spoke to her about my Montauk
experiences, I started to remember certain things about Janet that I
did not consciously know before. I recalled being with her in a
diﬀerent place and time on another planet a millennia ago. Trying
to push these images from my mind, new images ﬂowed in. I saw
her leaving her husband, moving East, marrying me, and having my
child. For some unknown reason, I blurted all of this out in what
seemed like a few seconds. There was silence on the other end of
the phone for what seemed like forever. I thought that I had opened
my big mouth again and ruined what could have been a nice
friendship. Incredibly enough, she was receptive to these plans. We
discussed the prospect of her visiting New York right after she
returned from her trip to Peru.
When I hung up the phone, I realized that I was really out of line.
Here was a woman I had never spoken to before. I told her to leave
her husband and life, give up her lucrative job, move across the
country to marry me, and have my child! I think I moved just aline.
Here was a woman I had never spoken to before. I told her to leave
her husband and life, give up her lucrative job, move across the
country to marry me, and have my child! I think I moved just a

--- PAGE BREAK ---an I had never spoken to before. I told her to leave
her husband and life, give up her lucrative job, move across the
country to marry me, and have my child! I think I moved just a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

little too fast. After all, we had not even had our ﬁrst date yet!
I surmised that after thinking about my call, she would determine I
was crazy and never call me again. Surprisingly, she wrote letters to
me and shared her memories of our past together. She also sent me
healing products to calm my nerves and purify my body. When she
called me from her oﬃce in Idaho, I always knew it was her.
Sometimes, when I got the urge to call her, she answered the phone
by saying, “Hello, Stewart.” At night, I ﬂew into hyperspace to be
with her soul energy. We made love every night in this state and
this bonded our mind-patterns in a special way. I thought about her
every second. My parents and sister thought I was crazy to be in
love with a married woman 3000 miles across the country.
Remember, I was still living in a garage on the side of a house
occupied by my wife and children. No one took me seriously. Once
again, I doubted my own sanity.
On Mother’s Day, about one month after I called Janet, my wife and
I got into a terrible ﬁght. She put the boys in the car, came back
into the house, and struck me repeatedly on the head with her ﬁsts.
The last thing I remember seeing was a chair ﬂying at my head as I
tried to stagger to the phone. After being unconscious for nearly
two and one-half hours, I awoke on the ﬂoor of the den to see
Emergency Medical Technicians trying to revive me. They took me
by ambulance to the hospital emergency room where I was treated
for a concussion and neck trauma. At this point, I realized that I
could no longer keep my marriage alive. It was more dead than I
wanted to admit, but I simply did not want to start over again with
someone else. This was the fear that made me keep trying to keep it
together. The truth is that I should never have married this woman
in the ﬁrst place.
Shortly after this incident, my ﬁnal divorce papers were signed and
I moved into my parents’ home. The night before I left, I had
another strange experience. Waking up paralyzed in the middle of
the night, I saw a swirling dark energy in my room. Then I blacked
out. When I woke up the next morning, I was so sick with nausea
and stomach pains that I could hardly function. But, my best friend,
Peter, came through for me as usual. He drove nearly 100 miles to
my house, helped me pack, and took everything to my parents’usea
and stomach pains that I could hardly function. But, my best friend,
Peter, came through for me as usual. He drove nearly 100 miles to
my house, helped me pack, and took everything to my parents’

--- PAGE BREAK ---ns that I could hardly function. But, my best friend,
Peter, came through for me as usual. He drove nearly 100 miles to
my house, helped me pack, and took everything to my parents’

--- PAGE BREAK ---

home. I could not have done it without him.
That night in my new bedroom, I felt the loneliest and saddest of
my entire life. I missed my children and my life with them. In
prison, I lived on the knowledge that someday I would be free and
have a life back with my family. Now, I knew that there was no
hope of this and I would never be a family with them again. My
heart felt so heavy. I was helpless and lost. I cried the entire night
until I thought that there could not possibly be any tears left.
I wanted to talk to Janet, but she was in Peru and had her own
problems with her husband. After she told him about me and her
plans to leave him, he begged her not to go. Then, he called all of
her family and friends to tell them that Janet was physically and
emotionally unstable and should be committed. He failed to tell
them how he used to beat her and threaten her life.
Janet was afraid that he would not let her leave. He moved into
their guest house and took all of his guns with him. Janet’s mother
came to Oregon from Missouri to act as a balancing force to protect
her. Janet left Oregon with as many of her belongings as she could
quickly pack. Her mother shipped many of them to Missouri. Janet
told her husband that she would return after her trip to Peru and
work things out; otherwise, she knew that he would prevent her
from leaving. Her intentions, however, were to go from Peru to
Missouri and then permanently to New York where she would live
with me. This was a tremendous leap of faith for her, but she was
driven by an inner knowing of her future, as well as the desire to be
released from twenty-two years of physical and emotional abuse.
During the time that we corresponded by letter, we both had similar
memories of a distant past on a far away world. I was a diplomat
and scientist; Janet was a teacher. Although humanoid, we were not
completely human-looking. We were a couple but not married as
known in Earth terms. Our home world was dark and grey with a
cool temperature, all caused by an abundance of clouds. Later, we
realized that this was due to the result of a massive attack by
aggressive and negative aliens.
During a lull in the battle, I decided to leave the planet to ﬁnd help
and supplies to aid in the war. I intended to return before the nextesult of a massive attack by
aggressive and negative aliens.
During a lull in the battle, I decided to leave the planet to ﬁnd help
and supplies to aid in the war. I intended to return before the next

--- PAGE BREAK ---ttack by
aggressive and negative aliens.
During a lull in the battle, I decided to leave the planet to ﬁnd help
and supplies to aid in the war. I intended to return before the next

--- PAGE BREAK ---

attack and make an oﬀering to the invaders via a neutral third
party. Because she was afraid that the ship would be attacked in
space, Janet was totally against the trip and refused to accompany
me. We remembered saying good-bye to each other at a launching
point. It was dark and heavy outside. After touching her hand, I
went into the ship with several other people. Here, our memories
split. She remembers watching the ship launch before exploding
and killing all on board. I remember a ﬂash of orange-yellow light
underneath my feet and outside the window. After that, everything
went black.
I believe that incident began our physical separation in this
universe. It took many millennia to reverse, and we had to go
through vast periods of learning to ﬁnd our way back to each other.
I believe this experience is the root of Janet’s fear of abandonment
and my fear of exploding aircraft. Additionally, we both fear that
the other will leave for one reason or another.
The day that Janet arrived, I went to work as usual but I was
nervous and could hardly concentrate on anything. We had already
decided that if we did not like each other, there would be no strings
attached. I, however, was driven by a force that I could neither
control nor explain. A few days earlier, I mysteriously found my
only remaining credit card. It was to a large store. Once there, I
used all of my credit to purchase an engagement ring. I also made
reservations at a local hotel so that we could spend some time
together before meeting my parents.
After work, I purchased a bouquet of wildﬂowers to bring to the
airport. I then went home to pack and nervously headed for the
airport. When I arrived, the ﬂight was only a few minutes away
from landing. Perspiration poured out of me and my hands began to
shake. As I walked to the arrival gate with the ﬂowers in my hand,
a few stewardesses made comments about them as they passed by. I
felt like everyone was looking at me. My throat closed up, and my
boots felt like iron weights. Propping myself up against a wall, I
was sweating, shaking, and dehydrating. I thought of bolting for the
exit. What if she was ugly? What if she was nuts?
The plane taxied for the gate and passed a nearby window. If I left
now, she would never be able to ﬁnd me. As my chest pounded, Iof bolting for the
exit. What if she was ugly? What if she was nuts?
The plane taxied for the gate and passed a nearby window. If I left
now, she would never be able to ﬁnd me. As my chest pounded, I

--- PAGE BREAK ---exit. What if she was ugly? What if she was nuts?
The plane taxied for the gate and passed a nearby window. If I left
now, she would never be able to ﬁnd me. As my chest pounded, I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

was sure that I was having a heart attack. The gate door opened to
let the passengers through. They all looked strange. Maybe one of
them was her and I missed her. What if she thought I was ugly or
nuts and wanted to leave or refused to identify herself? I would be
crushed. Finally, a thin, pale, reddish-haired woman walked
through the door carrying heavy bags. It was the face on the back of
her books that she had sent me.
She looked very pretty and wore a white, angelic outﬁt. Before I
knew it, my feet shuﬄed over to her and I handed her the ﬂowers.
As she took them, I realized that I had held them so tightly that I no
longer had any sensation in my hand. As we embraced and kissed,
she literally melted into my arms. She then sat down to collect
herself. I was speechless and felt stupid. Nothing I said seemed to
come out right. Janet seemed taller than her pictures and very
delicate. By the time we retrieved the rest of her luggage and
reached my car, I felt much more at ease. In fact, I felt as if I had
known her all my life. She felt the same. Of course, on some level,
we had always been in mental and spiritual contact since we had
last seen each other aeons ago.
We spent a wonderful weekend at the hotel. When we ﬁnally went
to meet my family, everyone got along very well. Even my children
liked her right away. However, my mother explained that she could
not understand how we could be so close as we had never met
before. Further, out of respect for my children, Janet could not live
in her house with me so soon after my separation. My divorce was
not yet ﬁnal. Although disappointed, we had to work with the
circumstances. Janet decided to return to her mother’s home in
Missouri until we could be together permanently.
Back in the hotel, while talking about my Montauk experiences,
Janet used her abilities to remove an etheric object from my solar
plexus. My whole being felt uplifted as this object came out. I did
not even know that it was there. Janet explained that the object
belonged to the lady deprogrammer in Massachusetts. With its
removal, the woman would lose her hold on me. From that moment
on, the deprogrammer never called me again! This woman then
began a negative campaign against me and told others that I used
her materials and distorted her teachings. If this was true, why didmoment
on, the deprogrammer never called me again! This woman then
began a negative campaign against me and told others that I used
her materials and distorted her teachings. If this was true, why did

--- PAGE BREAK ---grammer never called me again! This woman then
began a negative campaign against me and told others that I used
her materials and distorted her teachings. If this was true, why did

--- PAGE BREAK ---

she ask for my help and advice right up to the day that Janet
arrived? I believe she realized that Janet would now allow me to
see the truth clearly for the ﬁrst time and that she could no longer
control me. Whatever the reason, she was now gone from my life
for good.
The day that Janet left for Missouri, I cried until I had no more
tears left. Hardly able to get out of bed, I was distraught because I
did not know when I would see her again. I spent the next two
weeks talking to her on the phone and sending love letters. Her
mother was upset about our relationship but trying to cope with it.
Early one morning, Janet called to tell me that the pregnancy test
she just took indicated that we were about to be parents. With this
news, her mother could no longer understand or tolerate Janet’s
chosen path. It was necessary that she return to New York whether
anyone agreed to it or not.
Of all places, my parents were vacationing at Montauk Point. I had
to tell them when they got home because Janet was arriving the
next day. I nervously called a family meeting in the dining room the
second that they pulled into the driveway. Everyone was tired and
hungry. My sister had a sheepish grin on her face. I had already
asked her to tell them about Janet’s arrival, but she refused and said
that it was not her place.
I began by thanking them for their hospitality and for taking me in
after my divorce. Taking a deep breath, I continued by saying that
Janet’s mother was no longer happy with her visit in Missouri and
Janet had to leave. Because she had no place to go, she was coming
here tomorrow. She would only bring her suitcase; the rest of her
belongings would be shipped later. Janet expected her divorce to be
ﬁnalized within two to three months. Her settlement would allow
us to move out on our own; thus, we expected her stay to be very
temporary.
My mother and father listened silently to my speech. When I
ﬁnished, my mother calmly looked at me and said, “Oh, is Janet
pregnant?” My jaw almost hit the ground. Incredulously, I asked
how she knew. She replied that my sister told them over a week
before! How could she possibly have known when I only found out
about it the day before? My sister then confessed that she receivesasked
how she knew. She replied that my sister told them over a week
before! How could she possibly have known when I only found out
about it the day before? My sister then confessed that she receives

--- PAGE BREAK ---

telepathic messages from our passed-over relatives. That is also how
she is able to make a Ouijaboard move quickly and give valid
information.
At that moment, I breathed a deep sigh of relief. As usual, my
parents were polite and kind. Janet could stay as long as she needed
provided that when my children came for visits, we sleep in
separate rooms in order not to oﬀend or confuse them so quickly
after the divorce. Although I did not like the request at the time, I
do understand it now. For my parents to even allow such an
arrangement in the ﬁrst place was a magnanimous gesture.
Immediately, I called Janet to tell her that everything was okay. I
missed her so much that it hurt. The weekend that we had spent
together was so beautiful and perfect that it will remain in my
memory forever. I had never before known such complete and
unconditional love. A part of me could not believe that it was real.
She was so peaceful and kind and never used a harsh word. There
was never any upset or anger. I kept waiting for something bad to
happen, but it never did. I found it diﬃcult to believe that someone
loved me so much and really meant it. After all of the years of
abuse, manipulation, mind games, and restrictions, I felt like I was
waking up from a long coma!
* Janet Dian is the author of the “In Search of Yourself” series, a set
of three books that are a guide to knowing yourself through the
Oversoul.

--- PAGE BREAK ---I was
waking up from a long coma!
* Janet Dian is the author of the “In Search of Yourself” series, a set
of three books that are a guide to knowing yourself through the
Oversoul.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

26 PARADISE FOUND
The couple of months that we expected to live in my parents’ home
turned into almost a year. Janet’s ex-husband was diﬃcult and
refused to give her what was rightfully hers. Finally, she accepted a
low settlement to put an end to that part of her life.
The pregnancy was not easy. At six months, Janet went into
preterm labor. Frequent hospital visits eventually led to ten weeks
of bed rest. My mother and sister treated her royally. I have been
blessed with a wonderful family who always support me; even
when they think I am crazy or hasty.
Originally, Janet wanted the baby delivered by a holistic midwife
and was totally against the use of any drugs. However, her induced
labor was exceptionally painful. In the end, she was grateful for the
traditional gynecologist as well as the copious amount of drugs used
to help make her comfortable during and after the delivery of the
baby.
Janet was not dilating, and the fetal monitor started showing signs
of distress. When Zachary was ﬁnally born by Caesarean-section at
6:05 A.M. (weighing interestingly 6 pounds, 5 ounces), the
umbilical cord was wrapped twice around his neck. Without a
Caesarean, Zachary would have strangled on the cord. Our doctor,
an excellent woman, was both considerate and patient.
Within hours of birth, Zachary had successfully nursed and held his
head up. He was not supposed to do that yet, but he immediately
began to show signs of being an old soul who was not planning on
being a baby too long. From the beginning, he acted as an adult. He
drank water out of a regular glass when he was only three months
old, walked at seven and one-half months, and said his ﬁrst word at
eight months.
For Janet, Zachary is a gift that she never expected. She is an
excellent mother naturally. Even after many sleepless nights, she
never loses her temper or patience with the baby. I admire her
tenacity, calmness, energy, and devotion. She should be a rolehe is an
excellent mother naturally. Even after many sleepless nights, she
never loses her temper or patience with the baby. I admire her
tenacity, calmness, energy, and devotion. She should be a role

--- PAGE BREAK ---other naturally. Even after many sleepless nights, she
never loses her temper or patience with the baby. I admire her
tenacity, calmness, energy, and devotion. She should be a role

--- PAGE BREAK ---

model for all mothers everywhere. I still do not understand how
come she loves me so much.
Now that we have our own place and life has calmed down, Janet
and I often talk about my memories and experiences. She is a good
sounding board because she does not take everything literally, asks
a lot of questions, and expresses doubt when necessary. Janet has
enabled me to clarify my memories and explain circumstances that
might otherwise have remained forever in a cloudy haze.
Because Janet is my “other-half,” she is able to feel what I feel and
able to say words that open up hidden memory segments within
me. There is a lot of misunderstanding about the terms “other-half’
and “twin soul.” A twin soul is a separate entity that originated
from the same spark of an Oversoul.* The spark split, becoming an
identical, but separate, entity. Usually, twin souls do not
* An Oversoul is the “Father/Mother” of its children. Each Oversoul
is the master identity that oversees its many subdivisions in many
realities. Together, all Oversouls create the Christ Consciousness.
incarnate at the same time unless there are unusual circumstances.
An “other-half “ is exactly that: the reciprocal energy of the same
entity. These always incarnate together since their experiences need
to be similar. “Other-halves” have one mind and almost one
personality. They usually must marry each other. One represents
the right-brain (male) and the other the left-brain (female) of the
same personality of an Oversoul.
A twin soul is similar to two shoots growing from one seed. An
“other-half’ happens when one of these shoots splits and grows side-
by-side. The plant world holds many analogies for existence. That is
why the Bible refers to a “Tree of Life,” and Jesus is referred to as
the grapevine.
I sometimes ﬁnd Janet’s calmness and peacefulness almost
unnerving because I am so unused to that. I ﬁnd that I have to
retrain myself not to expect bad things. Janet has taught me that I
deserve all the gifts in the universe and that God provides me with
everything that I will ever need. I always had that knowledge but
have now learned how to put it into practice. Because of this, wedeserve all the gifts in the universe and that God provides me with
everything that I will ever need. I always had that knowledge but
have now learned how to put it into practice. Because of this, we

--- PAGE BREAK ---ts in the universe and that God provides me with
everything that I will ever need. I always had that knowledge but
have now learned how to put it into practice. Because of this, we

--- PAGE BREAK ---

live in a brand new town house, drive a brand new car, and my
relationship with my children is superb. I also have a wonderful
new job. I never thought any of this possible with my
circumstances. I can only compare my earlier experience to having
a great new computer with every accessory except an outlet. Now, I
have the outlet. It was always there; Ijust had to locate it.
I am devoting the rest of my life to helping others in any way
possible. With my mental abilities, I give readings which usually
include health counseling and mind-pattern analysis. I also help
those who have had traumatic experiences of an unconventional
nature and do not know how to help themselves. These people
include survivors of the Montauk Project and projects like it, those
who have gone through Kundalini activation, people who are
possessed or who consider themselves walk-ins, abductees,
contactees, AIDS and cancer patients, prisoners, victims of abuse or
drugs, and people with mental illness.
I would like to take the knowledge that I acquired through my
experiences and use it for the beneﬁt of mankind. I welcome all
readers to join me in an eﬀort to save our planet and mankind from
destruction. My life has taught me that nothing is impossible. The
Montauk Project proved that whatever is inside the mind is possible
to create. Let us all join together to create a perfect world where
only harmony exists. Thank you for letting me share my story with
you.
AFTERWARD
You have just read an incredible tale by a remarkable individual.
While none of us are in a position to pass judgement on the
objective truth of Stewart’s personal experiences, we can safely
make some conclusion based upon the obvious.
First, we can be grateful that our current times and moral climate
do not necessitate labeling these experiences as the ranting of an
insane individual. In years past, this information would have been
dismissed simply because the prevailing mentality of the day would
not have been comfortable with the implications.
We can also safely conclude that Stewart is a highly intelligention would have been
dismissed simply because the prevailing mentality of the day would
not have been comfortable with the implications.
We can also safely conclude that Stewart is a highly intelligent

--- PAGE BREAK ---dismissed simply because the prevailing mentality of the day would
not have been comfortable with the implications.
We can also safely conclude that Stewart is a highly intelligent

--- PAGE BREAK ---

individual who ﬂuently speaks over ten languages. Anyone who
meets him personally will soon realize that he not only has the gifts
of a high I.Q. and expanded intellect but that he is also blessed with
an inordinate amount of ESP.
It is also evident from his life story that there have been numerous
attempts to manipulate Stewart so as to access his rare gifts in order
to serve various agendas.
The relative truth concerning the various anecdotes he has relayed
are not as important as the fact that he has survived. In many ways,
he is no less mystiﬁed as to you or I as to what exactly happened to
him and how it ﬁts in to what we call “objective reality.”
The silver lining in his life is that the life force within him was able
to persevere and reach out for the love that would deliver him from
the clutches of manipulation. Above all, Stewart’s life story is a
dramatic rendition and deliverance of the highest aspect of love.
The principle of love will ultimately be the salvation of each and
every one of us. There is no other way. Thus, we had better start
learning.
The most remarkable aspect of Stewart is his ability to interface
with energies and phenomena which are typically described as
paranormal or interdimensional. While these phenomena are not
always easy to construe in human terms, Stewart views these
matters in an organized, scientiﬁc format. He calls it the language
of hyperspace. By this, he is referring to the symbols and archetypes
within our subconscious upon which our words, thoughts and
minds depend. While we all utilize the language of hyperspace on a
continual basis, it is not readily available to our typical conscious
mind. In our normal consciousness, we use only fragments of the
original language of man. Sometimes called the “Language of
Babylon” or “Vril,” Stewart has a unique rendition of it to share
with us. One of his personal goals is to give to mankind a workbook
by which each of us can understand these many symbols which
exist in our individual psyches and inﬂuence the daily life of each
of us. When you begin to interact with your subconscious in such a
manner, you begin to clear out the cobwebs of your existence and
separate the dark from the light. Most important of all, the so-called
gray areas become much less fuzzy. This is a language which willmanner, you begin to clear out the cobwebs of your existence and
separate the dark from the light. Most important of all, the so-called
gray areas become much less fuzzy. This is a language which will

--- PAGE BREAK ---clear out the cobwebs of your existence and
separate the dark from the light. Most important of all, the so-called
gray areas become much less fuzzy. This is a language which will

--- PAGE BREAK ---

take us to the next octave.
I know this personally because in the process of working with
Stewart, I have also become one of his students. I have experienced
dramatic life changes, and I am only just beginning. In many cases,
Stewart has exceeded the expectations of those who have sought his
help.
Consequently, Stewart is writing a book, not only to teach mankind
this language but to help each individual enhance or repair their
own lives. The tentative title selected for his new work is The
Psychic Handbook.
The information he has to share is so vast that Janet Swerdlow and
I will be given the task of editing it in such a manner that it can be
easily digested and used by the average individual. Although it will
likely be more than one volume, our ﬁrst task is to bring the ﬂavor
of Stewart’s workshops and the intense practicality of his hands-on
work into a book form where each one of you who reads it will be
moved beyond your current horizons and propelled to new vistas of
consciousness. Ultimately, this means happiness and harmony in
your personal lives. Whether you are bored, abducted, or being
strangled by a member of your domestic environment, there is a
new reality which awaits you.
All of you probably know that I receive many letters and
solicitations from people to help them with their various projects.
Consequently, I have to pick and choose what I do very carefully.
Stewart’s future book is the most worthwhile activity I have found
to pursue. I have enjoyed working with him immensely, and I look
forward to what he will share with us in the future. Next, I would
like you to hear from Stewart with regard to what he has to say on
the language of hyperspace.
THE LANGUAGE OF HYPERSPACE
The road that led me to where I am today was long and diﬃcult. I
wish that there had been an easier way, but obviously it was my
soul’s intention to learn hard and unconventional lessons. My
experiences left me with two major questions. First, what do I do
with these experiences now? And, what beneﬁt is served fromly it was my
soul’s intention to learn hard and unconventional lessons. My
experiences left me with two major questions. First, what do I do
with these experiences now? And, what beneﬁt is served from

--- PAGE BREAK ---intention to learn hard and unconventional lessons. My
experiences left me with two major questions. First, what do I do
with these experiences now? And, what beneﬁt is served from

--- PAGE BREAK ---

experiencing all of these hardships?
I now know that my purpose is to reach out and help the people in
this world, and perhaps beyond, to prevent and/or heal their
traumatic life experiences. My goal is to eliminate the need for
medical doctors, psychiatrists, and generally therapists of all types
by teaching everyone how to heal themselves through analyzing
their own mind-patterns. By determining where and why your
thought processes began, you can learn to erase or undo the
negative eﬀects that attract your negative experiences.
This is not an easy process — only you can do this for yourself. If
someone tries to impose a healing or correction upon you, and you
do not correct the mind-pattern behind it, then the condition will
eventually return. When that happens, it is sometimes worse than it
was previously because you must be more motivated to initiate a
ﬁnal healing and correction. Negative impulses promote corrective
action.
Now, my life’s work is to motivate people into self-healing. I am
creating a handbook for this purpose that will allow individuals to
assist themselves whenever necessary. Included will be Information
on numeric values and symbols, how to receive and translate
hyperspace sentences, dream analysis, mind-pattern analysis, auric
ﬁelds, healing techniques, radionic templates, time travel, reading
DNA, the Angelic Hierarchy, communicating with the departed,
astral and hyperspace travel, and also a hyperspace dictionary. All
these physical and mental healing techniques will focus on
eliminating negative mind-patterns that prevent you from
connecting and communicating with your true self.
The Mind of God does not think in low-grade standards like
verbiage or written language. Instead, It thinks in color, tone, and
archetype, creating the Triad of communication and understanding.
Cosmic, interdimensional, and interuniversal, it is the basis of all
creation. Those who understand the language of hyperspace can
successfully communicate with any mind, anywhere, anytime. The
language of hyperspace goes beyond space and time conﬁnements.
Understanding color therapy, which is part of the language of
hyperspace, is a fundamental aspect of learning how to control your
own mind-patterns.hyperspace goes beyond space and time conﬁnements.
Understanding color therapy, which is part of the language of
hyperspace, is a fundamental aspect of learning how to control your
own mind-patterns.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ond space and time conﬁnements.
Understanding color therapy, which is part of the language of
hyperspace, is a fundamental aspect of learning how to control your
own mind-patterns.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Imagine falling asleep in your own bed or favorite chair, then
suddenly ﬁnding yourself ﬂying at incredible speeds over a strange
land. The sky is a diﬀerent color with multiple suns. As the scene
progresses, you begin to see symbols that look like geometric shapes
and weird hieroglyphics. Glowing in various colors, they arrange
themselves in strange sequences. Information pulsates through your
entire being, possibly agitating and confusing you. For a brief
instant, you experience an all-pervading knowing. Everything
makes sense; you feel absolute joy. Abruptly, you jolt awake with a
light-headed sensation, instantly forgetting all the great information
that you knew only moments ago. Your jaw, neck, back, and head
feel tense — as if you have been through an extremely stressful
situation.
Did you have a nightmare? Is it from the chili dog you ate for
dinner? Are you losing your mind? The answer to all of these
questions is “No.” You experienced a trip to the hyperspace plane
— where time or space do not exist and all events happen
simultaneously.
This level of reality instantly demonstrates the thought patterns to
your consciousness. Taking the form of colored geometric shapes,
these thought patterns are called “archetypes.” Archetypes are the
visual representation of a person’s mind-pattern. Whatever a person
thinks, whatever ideas, emotions, or beliefs make up that
individual, it is immediately shown in this colored archetypal form.
The reason for the joy and the instant “knowing” is because you can
now “read” for yourself who and what you are! You immediately
forget that information upon returning to the physical plane
because this information is not readily or easily available to your
brain which is trained only to decipher the physical parts of life on
Earth.
Underlying physical reality are layers of various energies that
manipulate the atomic structures of all existence. These energies are
controlled by MIND. To further explain, whatever is thought directs
energies to create that thought. Humans do this automatically as
individuals, families, racial groups, nationalities, and as mankind.
Obviously, the larger the group which thinks in the same way, the
more powerful and faster the manifestation on the Earth plane. Thisdividuals, families, racial groups, nationalities, and as mankind.
Obviously, the larger the group which thinks in the same way, the
more powerful and faster the manifestation on the Earth plane. This

--- PAGE BREAK ---racial groups, nationalities, and as mankind.
Obviously, the larger the group which thinks in the same way, the
more powerful and faster the manifestation on the Earth plane. This

--- PAGE BREAK ---

is how destinies of people and nations are played out.
The mind-pattern symbol of archetypes and associated colors is the
most pure form of language and communication that exists, taking
place on the God-frequency which is common to all beings
everywhere. Using the language of hyperspace, one can understand
and communicate with any creature, anywhere. As a consciousness
descends away from this purity towards the density of physical
realities, this pure form becomes tainted. The colors and archetypes
translate through the brain as picto-grams in the individual or
group mind. Next, they become verbal language, then written
language, and ﬁnally for very primitive societies, physical gesture.
Frequently, the dream state contains archetypes that cannot be
communicated from the super or subconscious minds to the
conscious mind primarily because the conscious mind is subject to
societal rules which preclude attention to the unconventional.
People who “see” symbols or visions are considered to be on the
fringe of “normal.” So, dream symbols are extremely important.
Keeping a dated dream journal to review allows a message or
important information to become apparent after you learn how to
interpret these symbols. One of the reasons for the handbook I am
writing is to help you interpret your dream symbols.
Mind-pattern archetypes have an important relationship to the
physical body. Energies from the thoughts behind the archetypes
create the DNA sequences that develop the body. Therefore, as you
think, so you are! Mind-patterns create “sentences” of archetypes in
groups of four. Four proteins comprise every person’s DNA. Each
protein is the translation of an archetype sequence into a DNA
sequence. People who understand archetypes and their sequences
can literally completely change themselves by manipulating the
archetypes and sequences with thought/color. Certain color/
archetype codes can unlock speciﬁc DNA codes. This will also be
discussed in the handbook.
Guidance in this process is important to prevent uncontrolled
Kundalini activation, or, the opening up of major DNA sequences
before their appointed time. Without guidance, a person can
become insane, possessed, terminally ill, suicidal, or addicted to
chemical substances. Improper training presents a dangerousDNA sequences
before their appointed time. Without guidance, a person can
become insane, possessed, terminally ill, suicidal, or addicted to
chemical substances. Improper training presents a dangerous

--- PAGE BREAK ---

situation and is cosmically illegal. This might be compared to giving
the keys to a fancy sports car to a child, then telling him or her to
drive — it just should not be done! In physical reality, your body is
your vehicle; your mind is the driver. Only a sane, trained, rational
driver should be allowed to navigate your personal vehicle.
Anyone who has seen crop circles has seen archetypes. Most crop
circles are complicated, comprised of several archetypes, or
universal symbols, that must be dissected to be understood. Each
crop circle is a sentence or sometimes even a paragraph. Who made
them and what they mean will be discussed in my next book.
It is my intention that my forthcoming book will aid all readers in
their quest to be discerning, careful, and knowing beings.
Stewart Swerdlow is available for lectures, workshops, and
counseling. Services included are as follows:
• Color therapy
• Mind-pattern and DNA analysis
• Dream analysis
• Name analysis
• Alternative healing programs ® Special programs for mentally
challenged; epileptics • Personalized weight-loss programs ®
Personal trainer for body, mind and soul * Radionic programs
Those in interested in contacting the author may write to: PO Box
12, St. Joseph, MI 49085, USA or call 269-429-8615 fax
269-429-8616
E-mail at expansions@expansions.com Web site: http://
www.expansions.com
APPENDIX
For those who are not familiar with the Montauk Project and the
previous books written on the subject, this prelude is designed to

--- PAGE BREAK ---com Web site: http://
www.expansions.com
APPENDIX
For those who are not familiar with the Montauk Project and the
previous books written on the subject, this prelude is designed to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

familiarize you with the story line of the entire series so that you
may readily grasp the references to it in the present book.
The Montauk Project: Experiments in Time was released in June of
1992 and was a concise and summarized brieﬁng on one of the
most amazing and secretive research projects in recorded history.
Colloquially known as the Montauk Project, the origins of this
bizarre operation date back to 1943 when invisibility experiments
were conducted aboard the USS Eldridge, a newly built destroyer
escort. As the Eldridge was stationed at the Philadelphia Navy Yard,
the events concerning the ship have commonly been referred to as
the “Philadelphia Experiment.” The objective of this experiment
was to make the ship undetectable to radar and while that was
achieved, there was a totally unexpected and drastic side eﬀect. The
ship became invisible to the naked eye and was removed from time
and space as we know it.
Although this experiment was a remarkable technological
breakthrough, it was a catastrophe to the people involved. Sailors
had been transported out of this dimension and returned in a state
of complete mental disorientation and horror. Some were even
planted into the bulkheads of the ship itself. Those who survived
were discharged as as “mentally unﬁt” or otherwise discredited.
Although the entire aﬀair was covered up, research continued after
the war under the tutelage of Dr. John von Neumann who had
directed the technical aspects of the Philadelphia Experiment. His
new orders were to ﬁnd out what made the mind of man tick and
why people could not be subjected to interdimensional phenomena
without disaster. A massive human factor study was begun at
Brookhaven National Laboratories on Long Island, New York.
Brookhaven Labs got its start after World War II as the ﬁrst major
atomic research facility in the world. Prior to the war, the
immediate area had served as the headquarters for the largest
contingent of Nazis in the United States. They were known as the
Bund.
John von Neumann was a logical choice to head up this new project
at Brookhaven. Not only was he the inventor of the modem
computer and a mathematical genius in his own right, he was able
to draw on the enormous resources of the military industrialthis new project
at Brookhaven. Not only was he the inventor of the modem
computer and a mathematical genius in his own right, he was able
to draw on the enormous resources of the military industrial

--- PAGE BREAK ---Brookhaven. Not only was he the inventor of the modem
computer and a mathematical genius in his own right, he was able
to draw on the enormous resources of the military industrial

--- PAGE BREAK ---

complex. These included the vast data base of Nazi psychological
research acquired by the Allies after World War II. It was against
this background that von Neumann attempted to couple computer
technology with sophisticated radio equipment in an attempt to link
people’s minds with machines. Over time, his eﬀorts were quite
successful. After years of empirical experimentation, human
thoughts could eventually be received by esoteric crystal radio
receivers and relayed into a computer which could store the
thoughts in terms of information bits. This thought pattern could in
turn be displayed on a computer screen and printed out on a piece
of paper. These principles were developed and the techniques were
enhanced until a virtual mind reading machine was constructed. At
the same time, technology was developed so that a psychic could
think a thought which could be transmitted through a computer
and potentially aﬀect the mind of another human being. Ultimately,
the Montauk Project obtained a superior understanding of how the
mind functions and achieved the sinister potential for mind control.
A full report was made to Congress who in turn ordered the project
to be disbanded, at least in part for fear of having their own minds
controlled.
Private concerns that helped to develop the project did not follow
the dictate of Congress and sought out to seduce the military with
the idea that this technology could be used in warfare to control
enemy minds. A secret group with deep ﬁnancial resources and
some sort of military tie decided they would establish a new
research facility at Camp Hero, a derelict Air Force Station at
Montauk Point, New York. This locale was chosen because it housed
a huge Sage radar antenna that emitted a frequency of
approximately 400-425 Megahertz, coincidentally the same band
used to enter the consciousness of the human mind. In the late ’60s,
the reactivation of Camp Hero began despite no funding from the
military. By 1972, the Montauk Project was fully underway with
massive mind control experimentation being undertaken upon
humans, animals, and other forms of consciousness that were
deemed to exist.
Over the years, the Montauk researchers perfected their mind
control techniques and continued to delve further into the far
reaches of human potential. By developing the psychic abilities ofto exist.
Over the years, the Montauk researchers perfected their mind
control techniques and continued to delve further into the far
reaches of human potential. By developing the psychic abilities of

--- PAGE BREAK ---ears, the Montauk researchers perfected their mind
control techniques and continued to delve further into the far
reaches of human potential. By developing the psychic abilities of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

diﬀerent personnel, it eventually got to the point where a psychic’s
thoughts could be ampliﬁed with hardware and illusions could be
manifested both subjectively and objectively. This included the
virtual creation of matter. All of this was unparalleled in the history
of what we call “ordinary human experience” but the people who
ran the Montauk Project were not about to stop. They would reach
even further into the realm of the extraordinary. Once it was
discovered that a psychic could manifest matter, it was observed
that the manifestation could appear at diﬀerent times, depending
upon what the psychic was thinking. Thus, what would happen if a
psychic thought of a book but thought of it appearing yesterday? It
was this line of thinking and experimentation which led to the idea
that one could bend time itself. After years of empirical research,
time portals were opened with massive and outrageous experiments
being conducted. The Montauk Project eventually came to a bizarre
climax with a time vortex being opened back to 1943 and the
original Philadelphia Experiment.
None of this information would have come to light except for
Preston Nichols, an electronic genius who one day discovered that
he was an unwitting victim of the experiments. Working for a Long
Island defense contractor, Preston was researching telepathy in
psychics and found that persistent radio waves were being
transmitted which were blocking the people he was working with.
A radio and electronics expert, Preston traced the radio signals
directly to the Montauk Air Force Station and began exhaustive
research that lasted over a decade. He acquired much of the
equipment that was used during the Montauk Project and
discovered to his dismay that many people from Montauk
remembered him working there. It came to a culmination point
when his cousin’s husband insisted that he had been at Montauk.
The two men almost came to blows over Preston’s contention that
he had never been at Montauk. Shortly after this argument, Preston
began to get glimmers of a life he’d not previously been aware of.
After talking to many diﬀerent scientists and engineers who had
some sort of association with the Montauk Project, Preston was able
to put together what had happened. Somehow, he had survived on
two separate time lines. On one, he worked at Montauk; on the
other, he worked at a diﬀerent location.Montauk Project, Preston was able
to put together what had happened. Somehow, he had survived on
two separate time lines. On one, he worked at Montauk; on the
other, he worked at a diﬀerent location.

--- PAGE BREAK ---eston was able
to put together what had happened. Somehow, he had survived on
two separate time lines. On one, he worked at Montauk; on the
other, he worked at a diﬀerent location.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Preston’s discoveries were conﬁrmed when a strange man by the
name of Duncan Cameron appeared at his door in 1985. Duncan
had an uncanny aptitude for psychic research and claimed to have
been trained in this ﬁeld by the NSA (National Security Agency).
Without mentioning his own ordeal with Montauk, Preston took
Duncan out to Montauk and was surprised to discover that he knew
the entire layout of the base and remembered working there.
Duncan was considered to be the primary psychic used in the time
travel experiments and also remembered having been aboard the
USS Eldridge during the original Philadelphia Experiment with his
brother Edward (now recognized as A1 Bielek).
According to the accounts of both Preston and Duncan, the
Montauk Project culminated on August 12,1983. A full-blown time
portal was fully functioning, but things were out of control and
Duncan called together a group of people and decided to crash the
project. While sitting in the Montauk Chair (a device connected to
esoteric radio receivers studded with crystals that sent thoughts out
of a giant transmitter), Duncan unleashed a giant beast from his
subconscious which literally destroyed the project. The people who
had been working on the base suddenly abandoned it. The air shafts
and entrances to the major underground facility beneath the base
were subsequently ﬁlled with cement. The full circumstances
behind all of this remain a mystery to this day.
Although an unauthorized video was distributed regarding this
story and several lectures had been given on the Montauk Project,
no book was forthcoming on the subject. Diﬀerent writers had
attempted to undertake the task but were either mentally incapable
of dealing with the subject or were frightened oﬀ one way or the
other. One science reporter for the New York Times started the
project but backed oﬀ when he discovered to his own surprise that
the Montauk Project was indeed quite real.
I came upon Preston while researching an elaborate sound system
he had invented and soon found myself listening to a spectacular
story that was at least better science ﬁction than I had ever heard.
After several months, I decided to undertake writing The Montauk
Project: Experiments in Time. That book was written without
consulting anyone other than Preston (who wanted to protect hisever heard.
After several months, I decided to undertake writing The Montauk
Project: Experiments in Time. That book was written without
consulting anyone other than Preston (who wanted to protect his

--- PAGE BREAK ---veral months, I decided to undertake writing The Montauk
Project: Experiments in Time. That book was written without
consulting anyone other than Preston (who wanted to protect his

--- PAGE BREAK ---

sources). Rather than do a costly and time consuming investigation,
my strategy was to get the information out as fast as possible and
use the book to gather other clues that would corroborate or
eventually prove the existence of this incredible story.
As The Montauk Project was published, further research and events
continued that would indeed establish that there was a real scenario
behind the wild information Preston was talking about. These were
chronicled in our second book, Montauk Revisited: Adventures in
Synchronicity, but the most spectacular of all these corroborations
was the discovery that the Montauk Project was inextricably linked
to the most infamous occultist of all time: Aleister Crowley, often
described as “the wickedest man in the world.” According to
reports, Crowley had used the practice of sexual magick in order to
manipulate time itself, communicate with disembodied entities, and
to travel interdimensionally. It was even suggested that the the
Philadelphia Experiment could have been the outward expression of
Crowley’s secret magical operations.
The startling proof of Crowley’s association developed over a long
period of time, but the discovery began to take shape in my very
ﬁrst conversation with Preston when he seemed to blurt out of the
blue that he was connected to the magician Aleister Crowley. In an
earlier life, he believed that both himself and Duncan had been
Preston and Marcus Wilson, respectively. These brothers were twins
and had been the ﬁrst manufacturers of scientiﬁc instruments in
Great Britain. In addition to being friends of Aleister Crowley’s
family, they had also been involved in a joint business enterprise
with them.
All of the above sounded like one more wild story, so I began to
look for any references to the Wilsons in Aleister Crowley’s various
books. None turned up. To my surprise though, I discovered that
not only had Crowley visited Montauk (in 1918) but he had
mentioned a “Duncan Cameron” in his autobiography. Subsequent
to this, numerous instances of synchronicity between the Cameron
and Crowley families were discovered, (these are detailed in
Montauk Revisited), but I still could not ﬁnd any references to the
Wilson brothers.
The meaning of these various synchronicities (between the Cameronfamilies were discovered, (these are detailed in
Montauk Revisited), but I still could not ﬁnd any references to the
Wilson brothers.
The meaning of these various synchronicities (between the Cameron

--- PAGE BREAK ---vered, (these are detailed in
Montauk Revisited), but I still could not ﬁnd any references to the
Wilson brothers.
The meaning of these various synchronicities (between the Cameron

--- PAGE BREAK ---

name and Crowley) began to be explained when I found out about a
woman who called herself “Cameron.” She is perhaps most famous
for having been married to Jack Parsons, the world’s ﬁrst solid fuel
rocket scientist and a disciple of Crowley. Together, they had
participated in an interdimensional activity known as the Babalon
Working (a ceremonial act which included sex magick and has been
hailed by some as the greatest magical act of the century).
Through a further series of incredible synchronicities, I ﬂew to
Southern California on other business and met one of Cameron’s
friends quite by “accident.” Soon discovering that she lived in West
Hollywood, I suddenly found myself telling her in person about the
Philadelphia Experiment, the Montauk Project, and the Crowley/
Cameron relationship. To my surprise, she informed me that her
real name was not Cameron at all. It was Wilson!
It now became obvious that Preston’s story about being a Wilson
could not be discounted nor could his general credibility be denied.
Perhaps more importantly, it revealed that some very strange
correspondences were at work that had to do with
interdimensionality.
I would receive an astonishing letter several months later that
would close the case as regards to whether or not the Wilson
brothers had existed. It was from a man named Amado Crowley
who claimed to be an illegitimate son of Aleister Crowley. Not only
did he remember his father talking about the Wilson brothers, but
he also provided clues which revealed that the odds of his lying
about his parentage were nil.
Amado not only veriﬁed the existence of the Wilson brothers, he
gave a spectacular account of his father’s whereabouts on August
12,1943 (the day of the Philadelphia Experiment). Aleister had
directed a magical ceremony at Men-an-Tol in Cornwall, England
where a large donut-style rock lays upright in the water. According
to Amado, Aleister put him through the hole in the rock whereupon
a line of rough water ran from the coast of England to Long Island,
New York. In ancient times, a stone like Men-an-Tol was utilized in
a ritual such as this in order to invoke the goddess. Obviously, a
major occult correspondence was at work.England to Long Island,
New York. In ancient times, a stone like Men-an-Tol was utilized in
a ritual such as this in order to invoke the goddess. Obviously, a
major occult correspondence was at work.

--- PAGE BREAK ---and,
New York. In ancient times, a stone like Men-an-Tol was utilized in
a ritual such as this in order to invoke the goddess. Obviously, a
major occult correspondence was at work.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

As Montauk Revisited went to press, another astonishing discovery
was made. A photograph from the turn of the century turned up
and revealed that ancient pyramids had once existed at Montauk
Point. Further investigation revealed that Camp Hero, the name of
the base where the Montauk Project took place, was located on
sacred Native American ground that rightfully belonged to the
Montauks or Montaukets, the ancient ruling tribe of Long Island.
Unfortunately for the Montauks, a New York State court had
declared their tribe legally extinct in what some legal experts call
the most ﬂagrant case of injustice in the history of Native American
relations. In a further instance of synchronicity, it was revealed that
the family name of the Montauks’ royal family is Pharoah.
The above information was included in the third book of the series,
Pyramids of Montauk. Further connections were made evident
between the Pharoahs of Montauk and the Pharaohs of Egypt. A
deeper examination of Aleister Crowley’s writings and the science
of sacred geometry revealed Montauk Point to be an ancient grid
point rivaling Stonehenge, the pyramids of Giza or the like. It was
through Montauk that the project operators sought to control the
evolutionary “computer program” of planet Earth in an attempt to
inﬂuence how people and other life forms think, feel and develop.
This “computer system” of evolution is identiﬁed as the
morphogenetic grid, an ever changing and adapting program of
birth, growth, death, and consequent recycling of the life force. It is
this grid of evolution that certain mystery traditions seek to control.
Many factions vie for the lead role in this quest to dominate.
Evidence of clandestine operations at Montauk has since been
demonstrated beyond that shadow of a doubt. Not only has there
been testimony from personnel who participated in the project, but
strange and sometimes illegal radio transmissions have been proven
to emanate from Montauk Point. The local media on Long Island
refuses to investigate the matter or even to seriously consider the
proposition.
The release of Pyramids of Montauk brought forth world wide
recognition of the plight of the Montauks. It was hoped by myself
that public outrage would start the wheels in motion so that
Montauk Point would be restored to its rightful owners. While some
progress has been made, there is an unfortunate situation within theelf
that public outrage would start the wheels in motion so that
Montauk Point would be restored to its rightful owners. While some
progress has been made, there is an unfortunate situation within the

--- PAGE BREAK ---age would start the wheels in motion so that
Montauk Point would be restored to its rightful owners. While some
progress has been made, there is an unfortunate situation within the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

tribe itself. There are two rival factions which do not agree with
each other and at this writing, there is no uniﬁed front. This has
hampered the legality of the Montauks applying for legal
recognition because the government is not going to recognize both
parties. This is a very complicated scenario which I cannot become
personally involved in as it is a tribal matter. The entire scene is
further aggravated by political scandals and upheavals in Suﬀolk
County and East Hampton, the county and town in which Montauk
is located.
One of these scandals occurred when Robert Cooper, a Montauk
tribal leader and East Hampton Town Councilman, was attacked in
the press and sued for defamation of character. The lawsuit was
from Tom Scott, the local police commissioner. Although Cooper
had only requested that allegations against the police force at
Montauk be “looked into,” Scott ignited a huge legal battle which
cost the town of East Hampton a fortune in legal bills. After a
mammoth attack on Cooper, Scott ﬁnally dropped the case as he
had no chance of winning it. The details of this case were covered
in The Montauk Pulse newsletter.
Further evidence of scandalous behavior concerning Montauk was
relayed to me by a court oﬃcer who had personal knowledge of the
Cooper case. This person reported that during the legal battle, a
state judge requested the District Attorney of Suﬀolk County, James
Catterson, Jr., to conduct an oﬃcial investigation to determine
whether police abuse existed in in the East Hampton police force.
The investigation was a whitewash, according to the court oﬃcer,
with no police abuse being found. Of course, this turned out not to
be the case. The police abuse was later proven and reported on in
detail in the local press. Separate investigation of my own revealed
some very interesting information on the oﬃcial who
“whitewashed” the investigation on behalf of the District Attorney.
He is known for having previously stored business papers on the
“derelict” Montauk Air Force Station. The irony was very bizarre.
District Attorney Catterson got into the act once again when he
arrested John Ford, the founder and president of the Long Island
UFO Network. John had visited me in March 1996 as he was
planning to write a book that included considerable insideonce again when he
arrested John Ford, the founder and president of the Long Island
UFO Network. John had visited me in March 1996 as he was
planning to write a book that included considerable inside

--- PAGE BREAK ---arrested John Ford, the founder and president of the Long Island
UFO Network. John had visited me in March 1996 as he was
planning to write a book that included considerable inside

--- PAGE BREAK ---

information on the Long Island defense industry and dubious
political connections. A retired court oﬃcer (and not the same court
oﬃcer who informed me of the above investigation), John Ford has
a long standing reputation as a law-abiding individual who uses the
court system to right injustices. He is also a meticulous researcher
who covers all bases. In June, John was arrested for allegedly
conspiring to kill three Suﬀolk County executives by sneaking
radium into their toothpaste. The New York media and Long Island
newspapers covered the arrest with gala coverage despite the
ridiculous nature of the charge. It was even stated in some news
reports that experts had determined that radium in such doses is not
lethal and might take several years to have any eﬀect, if any. Ford
was also charged with possession of illegal weapons but this was
dropped as there was no evidence.
The information on the alleged conspiracy of John Ford came from
“inside information” that has yet to be substantiated in a court of
law. The search warrant itself was dated after the search of John
Ford’s premises where cans of radium were found and seized. Those
who know Ford say he uses radium from time to time to calibrate
his Geiger counter. Apparently, the entire arrest was a set-up by a
“friend” who asked Ford to move some radium cans. The “friend,”
who just happens to work for the Navy, was also arrested as part of
the conspiracy.
From June of 1996 to at least September of 1997, John Ford has
languished in jail without a trial. A year since the arrest, there is no
serious news coverage or any light seen at the end of the tunnel.
Ford claims his own attorney is not working in his best interests. A
prime example of this occurred when Ford’s attorney arranged for a
mental examination to be done on his client which declared him to
be incompetent. This means that Ford will be declared a ward of
the court and no trial will take place. He will probably be
institutionalized. I mention his case to demonstrate the contentious
behavior of the political climate around Montauk.
In the wake of all this, Long Island experienced the horrible tragedy
of TWA Flight 800 where hundreds of individuals died as the result
of an unexplained in-ﬂight mishap. Although many theories have
been put forward, the media refuses to seriously investigate theagedy
of TWA Flight 800 where hundreds of individuals died as the result
of an unexplained in-ﬂight mishap. Although many theories have
been put forward, the media refuses to seriously investigate the

--- PAGE BREAK ---800 where hundreds of individuals died as the result
of an unexplained in-ﬂight mishap. Although many theories have
been put forward, the media refuses to seriously investigate the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

most probable cause of the situation: a particle beam emitted from
a Brookhaven Labs facility which activated a nuclear missile.
According to sources in the intelligence community, military
exercises were being conducted oﬀ the coast of Long Island when a
low ﬂying missile was emitted from a ﬂying craft. This heat-seeking
missile was in fact a deactivated nuclear warhead being used for
drill purposes only. As part of the drill, the deactivated missile was
pursuing a heat-generating target tailing a C-130 plane. When the
heat-generating target malfunctioned, the missile inadvertently
sought out the closest heat generating source: TWA Flight 800. As it
was designed to do, the missile circled the plane. At the same time,
a particle beam emitted directly from either Brookhaven or a S.D.I.
(Strategic Defense Inititative or “Star Wars”) satellite, activated the
bomb. The rest is history. Although the intelligence sources have
oﬃcially requested that I identify the above theory as a “rumor,” I
do not doubt they are far oﬀ at all. The fact that the media has
refused to even mention the possibility of a particle accelerator
being involved is a sheer indicator that it was.
All of the above tells us that the political situation on Long Island is
very hot. There is a trail of dead bodies from the crash and many of
them are French. I have spoken to the French press about Flight 800
and they have interviewed Preston Nichols in more detail about the
matter. I do not know what the French printed but people are
slowly beginning to learn the truth.
The situation concerning Montauk itself is equally volatile. A
political consultant who works for Bill Clinton told me that
Montauk is the hottest political football in America. Between the
mind control potential and the rights of the Native Montauks, this
consultant said everyone is watching Montauk but no one is saying
anything. As the electronic anomalies concerning mind control can
be easily veriﬁed, members of Congress have no choice but to take
whole matter very seriously. The Montauks’ right to their sacred
land is a straight forward case. Everyone in political control zones is
on edge. This “edginess” can be viewed quite readily in the U.S.
military, which took considerable heat for their alleged role in the
downing of TWA Flight 800.
In early 1997, we saw a few close encounters between commercialcan be viewed quite readily in the U.S.
military, which took considerable heat for their alleged role in the
downing of TWA Flight 800.
In early 1997, we saw a few close encounters between commercial

--- PAGE BREAK ---readily in the U.S.
military, which took considerable heat for their alleged role in the
downing of TWA Flight 800.
In early 1997, we saw a few close encounters between commercial

--- PAGE BREAK ---

airliners and military ﬁghter planes. Intelligence sources inform me
that these close calls were purposely provoked by the military so
that their own air space would be more clearly deﬁned. No one was
injured but commercial pilots were made uneasy and forced to
maneuver out of harm’s way. The explosion of Flight 800 was
apparently a result of a vague delineation of the military’s right to
access the air. If the particle beam was emitted on purpose, the
military could have been set up. It is also possible that the nuclear
transmission was some sort of accident. In any case, the military
wants to distance itself from any more such incidents because they
do not claim to be responsible for what happened. There is a
mysterious variable at work in this entire equation which most
likely comes from the C-130.
The above scenario betrays an entire breakdown in the power
politics of the United States. It used to be, more or less, one united
front that stood against Russia or the perceived enemy of the day.
Today, we have unmarked black helicopters, U.N. peace keeping
forces and upstart militias that threaten the sovereignty of the
central government as we have previously known it. Many factions
within the military, intelligence, and political communities are all
vying for dominance. There are forces in American politics who
want the Constitution to be trashed. The military, who derive their
legally appointed power from the Constitution, do not want to be
dismantled and replaced by a United Nations peace-keeping militia.
The subject becomes rather complex and could warrant a book in
its own right. The point here, and as was made in The Montauk
Project, is that the powers behind the operation at Montauk were
not operating within the legal laws of the United States or the
martial laws of the military. They are a rogue group who inﬁltrate
and use whatever institution or group they can get their hands on.
In order to understand this group and the source of its power, we
need to undercut the obvious, for if we stand up and rail against it,
it can surely destroy us.
All of the above helped lead me to a further investigation of the
esoteric powers behind Montauk. By tracing many of the previous
leads, particularly the Nazi connection, I was led to astonishing
revelations which demonstrated a trail of occult power that is
undeniable in its presence inﬂuence. This has been revealed in Theious
leads, particularly the Nazi connection, I was led to astonishing
revelations which demonstrated a trail of occult power that is
undeniable in its presence inﬂuence. This has been revealed in The

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Black Sun: Montauk’s Nazi-Tibetan Connection, a book which a new
look at the history of the Nazis, the powers behind them and its
esoteric connection to Montauk.
With Montauk, we are dealing with a story that never ends. It is the
eternal quest to understand life.