:;17C1:::: 301 '473-8136 
RE* .OOR^-r: 
7, Frederick, '3.

15'5'67 
Defir !Ar.

i'Tsus, 
Thank you for your latter of December 1.

I cm ebout to le^v® and 
apcrrci fc® knowing I 4o net fceva to kerb tfce eight of the 11th open.

?our reason for not wonting tc 4c the show by phone is not real, end 
x wonder if it io because ycu have n var cone it before.

I have done thin 
rrgulcriy, witb portion s o dozen CBS t-tatione alor.e, *>id one thi« week for a 
Florida station.

It worked so well they’re going to repent, in s sense, the 
use of the phone ad's interest Hike the masked singer bit) end aimer.si^n, for 
listeners readily understand that it mekes possible what otherwise might not 
be.

li this ie your recson, that you think it does not work, or if it is that 
you fesr it notnhsvin.- done it h fore, let me suggest that, you phone FBUI 
fencing, producer for Jerry ill inns -it "iBKf.

I think 1 h*v?

done such shows for 
them it laeat throe times and possibly four.

Ditto for Rorv Morgan, KGBS, Sen 
Fr> p.ciaco, where- i have dono not fewer that four shows, several of which ran three 
he-Ts.

~n fact, I can re cell one?

when Karv had e sore throat he phoned re and I did 
most of’his show for him by phono, from accros- the* entire continent.

1 regret it “Iso bet -use 1 think there in much good that could come of 
any sxcfcon-* bf't."e°n jslies citizens rr.3 me.

If you ere familiar with what.

I have 
written, pay ehd think, pe rhaps you wil understand this, -vise, I believe the 
oppressive feeling of guilt th?t 1 em told h-ngs over could be considerably 
mitigated in several ways: first if the people know that tbcce who say the 
official account of the as'sssinetion i false also do not believe the city 
can be bl mod, -and second, by telling something of the involvement of another 
city-not all the people, not.

the- government, iu?t s very small pert of the 
people in l.'r.w ("rlosnc, o tiny front ion.I have 
written, pay ehd think, pe rhaps you wil understand this, -vise, I believe the 
oppressive feeling of guilt th?t 1 em told h-ngs over could be considerably 
mitigated in several ways: first if the people know that tbcce who say the 
official account of the as'sssinetion i false also do not believe the city 
can be bl mod, -and second, by telling something of the involvement of another 
city-not all the people, not. the- government, iu?t s very small pert of the 
people in l.'r.w ("rlosnc, o tiny front ion. Unfortunately, the ''scavenging" bit i3 phoney, .’ith the exception of 
lane, none of us has shewn a rrefit. I an deep in debt, 1 hev ■ a small nublisher 
for my *.'ew Orleans book arc: be can afford but little promotional expenditure. I 
thir'* you cn realize that if the book is "variable in Do lip a (end it in only 
to n very limited degree in Dew Crlean3I), a sale much greeter than radio exposure 
could oc ount for would not begin to repay the cost of the trip. ..owever, 1 do vary much appreciate your invitation. If it i? e:v?r possible 
to «?jeopt it, ax, for example, when I em not far away or flying from ccuct tc 
coast (nr 1 plon to do in February), 1 certainly 7/iilpc ask for the r< j.n check. **y rscent trip to the coa=?t mn so well received that before I left _ ?;os getting 
return invitations from universities rand TV end redio stations. I do h®ve a firm 
date for February 3. -Vieenrhile, should yo u chance your mind. I’ll be spending next week working 
iif Nev Orleans. You can then reach me through Jim Garrison’s office, 304/822-2414. Sincere ly, 
HeroId eisberg