FewFBI Officials


Face Reprimajid

FBI Director Clarence -M... Kelley suggested
yesterday that only a small numher of FBI officials

“three or four on up" — ^would he disciplined for

FBI misconduct because lower-level agents were
acting on their orders. ^

Kelley also said he would not submit a formal
offer to resign if Democrat Jimmy Carter Is elected
nithmiffh said he did not know if


Carter wants to replace him.

Internal investigations and lawsuits by groups
subjected to FBI break-ins are continuing in several
areas. Charges also have been leveled that some
top FBI officials engaged in financial wrongdoing
with public funds.

Thus far, only Nicholas P. Callahan, formerly
associate director of the FBI, has resigned as a
result of internal agency Investigations.

Kelley, citing the investigations and a $37 million
damage suit by the Socialist Workers Party and its
youth affiliate, the Young Socialist Alliance, for
years of FBI surveillance and illegal entries, dec-
lined to reveal details of FBI misconduct or ela-


borate on Callahan's dismissal July 18.

Kelley was interviewed on "Face the# Nation"
CCBS, WTOP). His appearance was the first in a
series of planned appearances in which he will
defend the FBI.

Pressed for a "ballpaik” figure on how many
FBI personnel might be disciplined, Kelley said,
"I cannot say how many will be involved in this
thing. A ballpark figure possibly could" be from


three or four on up." -

Asked about reports that 30 or more agents were
involved in illegal break-ins, Kelley said; •'When
you go into the figure of 30, you possibly are en-
compassing the situation Involving surreptitious
entries. Those might well be construed as not doing
anything . other than following the authority that
they think stems from those higher up."

Kelley said unidentified FBI personnel "had
deceived me" by providing him information, given
to Congress, that FBI break-ins stopped in 1986.
Later Information revealed many break-ins occurred
in 1972 and 1973.

But said he still did not know who provided the
false Information or who gave a judge in the SWP
case false information. He said InvestigaUons were
continuing. • >

•He defended the pace of internal Investigations:
‘T am not waiting around without action. I*m insist-
ing that these be delved into very carefully. I am
insisting there be no cover-up. We are going ahead
just as rapidly as we possibly cap to get all the
facts, but until the facts are presented, we can’t
do anything about these particular things."
