* • 
NUMBER OP SHOTS - INJURIES TO GOVERNOR 
* 
Testimony of - Governor and Mrs. John Bowden CONNALLY 
April 21, 1964, 4 H 129-49 
The Governor is preceded on t he stand by Drs. Shaw and Gregory. 
The Governor*s first account in his narrative of the shots, who 
they hit, what he observed and recalls, is lucid, credible, and by its 
detail reveals he did, in fact, maintain consciousness and knew exactly 
what was happening. It is as though he anticipated the fiction the 
J • — 
Commission was goAng to create, that he sustained a delayed reaction, 
« 
because in advance he answered it. As I believe he points out later, 
* 
the bullet travels faster than its sound, and he would have felt the 
first bullet before hearing it had it hit him. 
The following excerpt it at the bottom of p.132 and occupies most 
. 
of p.133: 
"We had Just made the turn, well, when I heard what I thought was 
m 
a shot. I heard this noise which I immediately took to be a rifle shot. 
I Instinctively turned to my right because the sound appeared to come 
from over my right shoulder, so I turned to look back over TOJ right 
shoulder, and I saw nothing unusual except just people in the crowd, 
m 
but I did not catch the ^resident in the comer of my eye, and I was 
interested, because once I heard the shot in my own mind I identified 
* 
it as a rifle shot, and I immediately - the only thought that crossed 
f« 
my mind was that this is an assassination attempt. 
"So I looked, failing to see him, I was turning to look back over 
♦ 
my left shoulder into the back sett, but I never got that far in my turn. 
I got about in the position I am in now facing you, looking a little bit 
I 
to the left of center, and then I felt like someone had hit me in the 
back. 
"Mr. Specter. What is the best estimate that you have as to the 
time span between the sound of hhe first shot and the feeling of someone

--- PAGE BREAK ---elt like someone had hit me in the 
back. 
"Mr. Specter. What is the best estimate that you have as to the 
time span between the sound of hhe first shot and the feeling of someone

--- PAGE BREAK ---

JU 
2 - Connally 
hitting you in the back which you just desctibed? 
"Governor Connally. A very, very brief span of time. Again my 
trend of thought just happened to be, I suppose along this line, I 
immddiately thought that this - that I had been shot. I knew it when I 
just looked down and I was covered with blood, and the thought immediately 
passed through my mind that there were either two or three people involved 
or more in this or someone was shooting with an automatic rifle. These 
were just thoughts that went through my mind because of the rapidity of 
these two, of the first shot plus the blow that I took, and 1 knew I 
had been hit, and I immediately assumed, because of the amount of blood, 
a 
and, in fact, that it had obviously passed through my chest, that I had 
probably been fatally hit. 
» 
"So I merely doubled up, and then turned to my right again and 
began to - I Just sat there, and Mrs. Connally pulled me over to her 
lap. She was sitting, of course, on the jump seat, so I reclined with 
my head in her lap, conscious all the time, and with my eyes open, and 
then, of course, the third shot sounded, and I heard the shot very 
clearly. I heard it hit him. I heard the shot hit something, and I 
assumed again - it never entered my mind that it ever hit anybody but 
% • • ^ 
the President. I heard it hit. It was a very loud noise, just that 
4 
audible, very clear. 
"immediately I could see on my clothes, my clothing, I could see 
on the interior of the car which, as I recall, was a pale blue, brain 
tissue, which I lmmddiatijy recognized, and I recall very well, on my 
trousers there was one chunk of brain tissue as big as almost my thumb, 
thumbnail, and again I did not see the President at any time either 
after the first, second, or third shots, but I assumed always that it 
was he who was hit and no one else.big as almost my thumb, 
thumbnail, and again I did not see the President at any time either 
after the first, second, or third shots, but I assumed always that it 
was he who was hit and no one else.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

•(< 
>«■»*» »»4 PI - . 
***** 
3 - Connally 
"i immediately, when I was hit, I said, *0h, no, no, no.' And 
then I said, ’My God, they are going to kill us all,* Nelli^,when she 
pulled me over into her lap - 
"Mr, Speoter, Nellie is Mrs, Connallyft 
"Governor Connally, Mrs. Connally, When she pulled me over into 
her lap, she could tell I was still breathing and moving, and she said, 
/'Don't worry. Be quiet. You are golmg to be all right.' She just 
kept telling me I was going to be all right. 
"After the third shot, and I heard Roy Kellerman tell the driver, 
•Bill get out of line,* And then I saw him move, and I assumed he was 
or 
moving a button/something on the panel of the automobile, and he said, 
'Get us to a hospital quick.* I assumed he was saying this to the 
patrolman, the motorcycle police who were leading us. 
,fAt about that time, we began to pull out of the cavalcade, out 
> 
of the line, and I lost consciousness and didn’t regain consciousness 
until we got to the hospital." (p.133) 
a i 
Gov. Connally expresses so clearly what happened that I shall, 
for the most part, just excerpt his testimony. 
He repeated his appraisal of the rapidity of the shots and the 
thought that if it was one person he would use an automatic rifle: 
2"lt was extremely rapid, so much so that again I thought that whoever 
was firing must be firing with an automatic rifle because of the rapidity 
of the shots; a very short period of time." (p.134) 
• - d 
On what Mrs. Kennedy said: "Yes; she said, I hear^ her say one 
time, *1 have got his brains in ray hand.¥" (p.134) 
They then get into his wound (p,134)» °n the thigh wound: 
"Mr. Specter, Can you describe the nature of the wound in the 
thigh?

--- PAGE BREAK ---ime, *1 have got his brains in ray hand.¥" (p.134) 
They then get into his wound (p,134)» °n the thigh wound: 
"Mr. Specter, Can you describe the nature of the wound in the 
thigh?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I 
4 - Connally 
Governor Connelly. ^6llj just a rawj open wound, looked like a 
fairly deep penetration." (p.l 35) 
His further explanation, including why he didn't hear the bullet 
t w 
*• 
that hit him: 
"Mr. Specter. In your view, which bullet caused the injury to 
I 
your cheat. Governor Connally? 
Governor Connally# The second one# 
**r. Specter. And what is your reason for that conclusion, sir; 
Governor Connally. Well, in my judgment, it just couldn't con- 
ceivably have been the first one because I heard the sound of the shot/ 
* 
In the first place, I don't know anything about the velocity of this 
particular bullet, but any rifle has a velocity that exceeds the speed 
of sound, and when I heard the sound of o that first shot, that bullet 
had already reached where I was, or it had reached (p#13^) that far, 
and after I heard that shot, I had the time to turn to my right, and 
- start to turn to ray left before I felt anything# 
% 
It is not conceivable to me thatl could have been hit by the first 
which 
bullet, and then 1 felt the blow frem something was obviously a 
bullet, which I assumed was a bullet, and I never heard the second shot, 
didn't hear it. I didn't hear but two shots. I think * heard the first 
shot and the third shot. 
4 
Mr. Specter. Do you have any idea as to why you did not hear the 
seoond shot? 
Governor Connally. Well, first, again I assume the bullet was 
traveling faster than the sound. I was hit by the bullet prior to the 
time the sound reached me, and I was In either a state of shook or the 
, • , ♦ 
impact was such that the sound didn't even register on me, but I was 
never conscious of bearing tbe second shot at all# 
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---e, and I was In either a state of shook or the 
, • , ♦ 
impact was such that the sound didn't even register on me, but I was 
never conscious of bearing tbe second shot at all# 
4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

* 
5 - Connally 
-1 
Obviously, at least the major wound that I took in the shoulder 
through the ohest couldn't have been anything but the second shot. Ob- 
• « 
viously, it couldn't have been the third, because when the third shot 
was fired I was in a reclining position, and heard/ it, saw it and the 
effects of it, rather - I didn't see it. I saw the effects of it - so 
it obviously could not have been the third, and oouldn't have been the 
first, in my Judgment." (p,136<) 
There is further discussion of the Governor's wounds. He un- 
clothed himself so the Commission could better see the scars. The 
% 
doctors came forward and offered further explanations and interprets- 
tions. Asked the angle of the chest wound. Dr. Shaw estimated it from 
25 to 30°. With a caliper, he said it was right at 25°. (p.137) There 
6 
is then explanation of the nature of othe treatment, including the 
measures necessary for drainage and to present infection, things of 
that sort. The entry point of the woundon the Governor's thigh is 
located at 3 or 6 inches frmra his kneee. 
a « 
Connally again explains himself: 
•• A 
"Mr. Dulles. How did you happen to turn then to‘the left, do you 
remember why that was? . ' . 
Governor Connally. Yes, .sir; I know exactly. I turned to the 
right both to see, because it was an instinctive movement, because that 
is where the sound came from, but even more important, I immediately 
thought it was a rifleshot. I immediately thought of an assassination 
attempt, and I turned to see if I could see the President, to see if he 
was all right. Failing to see him over my right shoulder, I turned to 
look over my left shoulder. 
Mr. Dulles. I see. 
Governor Connally. Into the back seat, and I never completed that

--- PAGE BREAK ---ll right. Failing to see him over my right shoulder, I turned to 
look over my left shoulder. 
Mr. Dulles. I see. 
Governor Connally. Into the back seat, and I never completed that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6 - Connally 
j 13$) 
turn. I/got no more 4 than substantially looking forward, a little bit 
to the left of forward, when I got hit," (p.139) 
* 
When shown the Commission*a artist*s conception (Exhibit 689, 
-17 H 3I+6) and asked if it represents the approximate position or "the 
alinement with your right hand being on your left leg as you have Just 
described?", he replied, "No; it looks like my right hand is up on my 
chest. But I don't know. I can't say with any degree of certainty 
where my right hadd was, frankly." (p*139) 
This exhibit does show the Governor's right hand on or near his 
chest. It does not show his hand on his thighji. (p.139) 
Gov. Connally* s opinion: "I assumed that I had turned as I de- 
scribed a moment ago, placing my right hand on my left leg, that It 
hit my wrist, went out the center of the wrist, the underside, and then 
into ray leg, but it might not have happened that way at all." (p.li|0) 
They then go into questioning abufct any threats from Oswald, 
whether or not Connally thought there was a conspiracy, etc, (p.li|0) 
• / 
Oswald'8 attitude toward Connally was friendly, according to 
Dulles, who said, "I think I can say without violating any confidence, 
t|aat there is nothing in the record to indicate that there was - in 
wife . 
fact, Marina, the jt±££, testified, in fact, to the contrary* There was 
no animus against you on the part of Oswald ••• (p*lUl) 
0 
On the marksman*s targets: 
nRepresentative Boggs* You have no doubt about the fact that he 
was deliberately trying to hit you? 
Governor Connally. Yes, I do; I do have doubt. Congressman. I 
am not at all sure he was shooting at me. I think I could Ha with some 
logic argue either way. The logic in favor of him, of the position that 
he was shooting at me, is simply borne out by the fact that the man firedhe was shooting at me. I think I could Ha with some 
logic argue either way. The logic in favor of him, of the position that 
he was shooting at me, is simply borne out by the fact that the man fired

--- PAGE BREAK ---me. I think I could Ha with some 
logic argue either way. The logic in favor of him, of the position that 
he was shooting at me, is simply borne out by the fact that the man fired

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7 - Connally 
three shots, and he hit each of the three times he fired. He obviously 
was a pretty good'marksman, so you have to assume to some extent at least 
that he was hitting what he was shooting at. 
On the other hand, I think I could argue with equal logic that 
obviously his prime target, and I think really his sole target, was 
4 
President Kennedy. His first shot, at least to him, he could not have 
but known the effect that it might have on the President, His second 
shot showed that he had clearly missed the president, and his result to 
him, as the result of the first shot, the President slumped and changed 
his position in the back seat just enough to expose my back. I haven't 
seen all of the vatious positions,-but again I think from where he was 
*• ^ i 
shooting I was in the diroct lino of fir© immediately in front of o the 
President, so any movement on the part of the President would expose 
i \ 
me, 
The Chairman, Have you seen the moving pictures, Governor? 
J b 
Bovernor Connally. Yes, sirj I have, Mr, Justice." (p.llt-l) 
The thigh wound, Connally says, has no exit point. 
Dr0 Gregory describes the scars on the wrist as well healed and 
about an inch and a half on one side and a half inch on the other. (p.U|.l) 
Connally then identifies the clothing he was wearing. (Exhibits 
* > 
683-8, 17 H 3^0-5). In the photographs, the coat and trousers are so 
arranged that the entry and exit points of the missile are not visible. 
On the shirt, which contains many markings, presumably of blood, certain 
'V. 
markings on the front and back are encircled, apparently indicating the 
point of entry and exit of the bullet. 
Specter gives dignity to rumorsby referring to information in the 
• / k. 
following excerpt from p.ll|2: 
"Mr. Specter. Governor Connally, In 1963 we were informed thatentry and exit of the bullet. 
Specter gives dignity to rumorsby referring to information in the 
• / k. 
following excerpt from p.ll|2: 
"Mr. Specter. Governor Connally, In 1963 we were informed that

--- PAGE BREAK ---e bullet. 
Specter gives dignity to rumorsby referring to information in the 
• / k. 
following excerpt from p.ll|2: 
"Mr. Specter. Governor Connally, In 1963 we were informed that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

*- 4 
8 - Connally 
f. 
Lee Harvey Oswald paid a yisitiaxAsgx to Austin, Tex., and Is supposed 
s also 
to/have visited your office. Do you have any knowledge of such a visit? 
Governor Connally. No, sir." (p.llj.2) 
♦ « 
After Connally*s statement that he was unconscious on the short 
trip to the hospital: 
"Mr. Specter. Do you have recollection of your arrival at the 
* 
hospital itself, at the Parkland Hoapital? 
Governor Connally. Yes. I think when the car stopped the driver 
was obviously driving at a very rapid rate of speed, and apparently, 
as he threw on the brakes of the car, it brought me back to conscious- 
ness. 
! Again, a strange thing - strange things run through your mind and, 
) i 
perhaps, not so strange under the circumstances, but I immediately - 
; jump 
the only thought that occurred to me tras that I was in the seat 
next to the door, that everyone concerned, was going to be concerned 
^ - 
with the President; $hat I had to get out of the way so they oould get 
* % 
to the President. So although I was reclining, and again Mps. Connally 
holding me, I suddenly lurched out of her arms and tried to stand tip- 
right to get myself out of the car. 
! I got - I don't really know how far I got. They tell me I got 
almost upright, and then Just collapsed again, and someone then picked 
me up and put me on a stretcher. I again was very conscious because 
this was the first time that I had any real sensation of pain, and at 
♦ 
this point the pain in the cheat was excruciating, and I kept repeating 
just over and over, fMy God, it hurts, it hurts,1 and it was hurting, 
l it was excruciating at that point. 
* • - 
I was conscious then off and on during the time I was in the 
* 
emergency room, I don't recall that I remember everything, but I remem- 
It was hurting, 
l it was excruciating at that point. 
* • - 
I was conscious then off and on during the time I was in the 
* 
emergency room, I don't recall that I remember everything, but I remem- 
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---was excruciating at that point. 
* • - 
I was conscious then off and on during the time I was in the 
* 
emergency room, I don't recall that I remember everything, but I remem- 
I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

,)V r J?nii»iiin»i—m 1.1 
- >_ — » 
9 - Connally ( 
ber quit© a bit. I remember being wheeled down the passageway, I 
. ' 
remember doctors and various people talking in fahe emer gency room, 
I remember them asking me a number of questions, too, which I answered 
, 3 
but that was about it.” (p.lij.#). 
There were no bullets or bullet fragments in Connally1 s body or 
&s 
clothing/ Jie was placed on the stretched at Parkland Hospital, so far 
as he knows (p»H+3)« 
Asked again about the shots, Connally qualifies himself as an 
I 
expert with long experience: " ... I have all my life been familiar 
*• 
with the sound of a rifleshot, and the sound I heard X thought was a 
rifleshot# at the time I heard it I didn*t think it was a firecracker, 
or blowout or oanything else. I thought it was a rifleshot. I have 
/ y 
hunted enough to think that my perception with respect to directions is 
4 • 
very, very good, and this shot I heard came from back over my right 
shoulder, which was in the direction of the Shhool Book depository, no 
question about it. I heard no other. The. first and third shots came 
from there. I heard no other sounds that would indicate to me there 
was any commotion or disturbance of shots or anything else on the over- 
pass." (p.llji|) 
Specter asks Connally if he had seen the films and the clips or 
slides, and when Connally affirms he had. Specter asks at approximately 
what point Connally was hit. Connally placed it at after frame 230 and 
by frame 23U» He identified the location as "just after we came out 
of the sign ...” (p.ll*5) 
There are no questions about the cleaning andlaundering of the 
Governor's clothing, which have been placed in the archives of the state 
of Texas. 
Mrs. Connally*s testimony begins at the bottom of p.li+6. Herno questions about the cleaning andlaundering of the 
Governor's clothing, which have been placed in the archives of the state 
of Texas. 
Mrs. Connally*s testimony begins at the bottom of p.li+6. Her

--- PAGE BREAK ---he cleaning andlaundering of the 
Governor's clothing, which have been placed in the archives of the state 
of Texas. 
Mrs. Connally*s testimony begins at the bottom of p.li+6. Her

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10 - Connally 
dramatic description of the events that immediately followed upon her 
telling the President that Dallas loved him, completely corroborates 
her husband * s account of these events* Note especially that she saw 
him react to the second shot. She saw him recoil from it. She clearly 
distinguished between the first, the second and the third shots, 'there 
are often weaknesses in eyewitness accounts, but the testimony of the 
two Connallys taken together requires a lot more than the conjecture 
of the Commission to refute its 
"Mrs. Connally. ... Then I don't know how soon, it seems to me 
it was very soon, that I heard a noise, and not being an expert rifle- 
0 
man. I was not aware that it was a rifle* It was just a frightening 
noise, and it came from the right. I turned over my right shoulder and 
looked back, and saw the President as he had both hands at his neck. 
Mr. Specter. And you are indicating with your own hands, two 
hands crossing over gripping your own neck? 
Mrs. Connally. Yes; and it seemed to me there was - he made no 
utterance^, no efyfyJcry. I saw no blood, no anything. It was just sort 
of nothing, the expression on his face, and he just sort of slumped down 
Then very soon there was the second shot that hit John. As the first 
shot was hit, and I turned to look at the same time, I recall John say- 
ing, / 'Oh, no, no, no.' Then there was a second shot, and it hit John, 
and as he recoiled to the right, just crumpled like a wounded animal to 
the right, he said, »My God, they are going to kill us all.' 
I never again - . 
Mr. Dulles. To the right was into your arms more or less? 
Mrs. Connally. No, he turned away from me. I was pretending 
that I was him. I never again looked in the back seat of the car after 
my husband was shot. My concern was for him, and I remember that heMrs. Connally. No, he turned away from me. I was pretending 
that I was him. I never again looked in the back seat of the car after 
my husband was shot. My concern was for him, and I remember that he

--- PAGE BREAK ---e turned away from me. I was pretending 
that I was him. I never again looked in the back seat of the car after 
my husband was shot. My concern was for him, and I remember that he

--- PAGE BREAK ---

IUL J*** U4* 
« «|ik ;i 
• «N..I.« ^>< .. >4 ■ «>te ^ .i(t>Hu 
% 
* • 
I 
11 - Connally 
turned to the right and then just slumped down into the seat, so that 
I reached over to pull him toward me, I was trying to get him down and 
me down. The Jump seats were not very roomy, so that there were reports 
that he slid into the seat of. the car, which he did not; that he fell 
over into my lap, which he did not. 
I just pulled him over into my arms because it would have been impossi- 
ble to get us really both down with me sitting and me holding him. So 
that I looked out, I mean as he was in my arms, I put my head down over 
head 
his head so that his head and my luug& were right together, and all I 
► 
♦ 
could see, too, were the people flashing by. I didn't look back any more. 
The third shot that I heard I felt, it felt like spent buckshot falling 
all over us, and then, of course, I too could see that it was the matter, 
brain tissue, or whatever. Just human matter, all over the car and both 
w 
of us. I thought John had been killed, and then there was some imper- 
ceptible movement, just some little something that let me know that there 
« 
was still some life, and that is when I started saying to him, 'It's all 
right. Be still.»" (p.1^7)0 
Of the arrival at the hospital, she confirms her husband's testi- 
mony, saying "John just sort of heaved himself up. He did not rise up 
in the car, he just sort of heaved himself up, and then collapsed down 
into the seat." $p.l48) Mrs. Connally also recalls Mrs. Kennedy saying — 
she had her husband's brains in her hand. 
She recalls the presence of two waiting stretchers and the trip . 
into the emergency room with them at a run. She ran along, she said. 
(Pcl48) Mrs. Connally describes her feelings and observations in the 
hospital. 
She saw the frame from the Zapruder film and said she is "in agree- 
ment with the Governor. I am not sure 1 remember the numbers, so correctdescribes her feelings and observations in the 
hospital. 
She saw the frame from the Zapruder film and said she is "in agree- 
ment with the Governor. I am not sure 1 remember the numbers, so correct

--- PAGE BREAK ---

,L' 
V ‘ 
12 - Connally 
me, but I thought at the time that It was that 229 - It could have been 
through the next three or four frames." (p.1^9) 
t