SOUTHERN RESEARCH COMPANYINC.
304RICOU-EEWSTER0LDG
BOH MAAITIME BUILDING
EPHONE424-1484
WESBCLING
TELEPKONEJA2-3338
TITLE
DAVID WILLIAM FERRI&,AKA
David W.Foxrie,"oavon
BACKGROUNO
SYHOPSIS
Subject arzoeted S0,Jeiterton Parish,Lt.,S/u/61 and 8/22/6l,
charged wfth carnal knowledge,.Contributing to Dolinguency of
Juvendle,Indecent Behavior,and Crine ageinat nature. Chargas
stiil pending but' dlsaissal anticipated.Subjoct arrested New
Orleane PD a/1o/62 and chazged xolative to extoxtlon.
Charge
ponding and Now Orleans DA anticipatos moving to ttial.Now Orleans
Louielana Avenue Pazkway,Nev Orlsans,Ls.Too anall acoounts for
collection, two news clippings reiative to his axtests,no other
derogatory data. Subject eaployed as investigmtor for local attorney
wbo repreaents hia on crininal charges.reRRIB owmor of Ip6o Ford
Tudot 8edan bearing 1968 La, registration 300=60l.Car ia being
finnced and last paymont on acccunt dated 9/26/62. 1939 Ford
Alexandria, La., but efforts to idantify nogativu to date.
Neigb-
of involveoent in actvitfes c orogutary nature. observation of
subjeet after working hoursii/o,1o ano 1i/oa TeTlocta subject
INVESTIGATION CONDUCTED FOR
Tolalavestitioncd.M：.
Norenbex,1962
DATEOFREPORT
COPIES
Novem
.M.Tolan
8SRC
-STRICTLYCONFIDENTIAL-
tbe personolly responsible for ony damage orislng froma violation of eny of the obove provisione.
LEGAL&BUSINESSINVESTIGATIONS
AGENTSOF THEF BI

--- PAGE BREAK ---.M.Tolan
8SRC
-STRICTLYCONFIDENTIAL-
tbe personolly responsible for ony damage orislng froma violation of eny of the obove provisione.
LEGAL&BUSINESSINVESTIGATIONS
AGENTSOF THEF BI

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SYNOPSIS CONTINUED
Bfforts continuing to confirn association and obtain movies of
activities.
PENDIMG
DETAILS!
Investigation in this Batter is predicated upon a reguest dated
November l,1962 from Xr. THoMAs M.TOLAN,245 East Ssth Street,Mow
York, New York, to Mr. CMARLaS R. CARSoN, Sou thern Roooarch Copany.
Inc., 8o8 Karitime Bullding, Now Qrleans, Louislana, requesting that
organization detormine the history and status of criminal charges
pending in Jefferson Pariah,Loulsiana against e forner Bastern
Air Linos pilot, Captaia DAVID WILLIAM PERRIB,ssl Atherton Driveg
MetalriegLoulsiana.
Nr. ToLAN advlsed that FBRRIB was eapleyed as a pilet foz
Bastern Air Lines,Inc. nntil hie arrest by Jeffezaon Pariah muthorities
on August 8, 196l Yor indecent eopogure. An sdditienal chargo or
l96l. Infoznation has been received that these pending charges are to
be diamiased and that FerRls intends to apply to Bastern for reinstate-
ment to flying duties,as well as for back pay.
The history and status of these charges, as well ae lntoraation
concezning why they are to be dismissec, was reguested by Mr.roAn.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e-
ment to flying duties,as well as for back pay.
The history and status of these charges, as well ae lntoraation
concezning why they are to be dismissec, was reguested by Mr.roAn.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11-N-224
11/10/62
interviewed for background o the case and to determine if any
pressure has been aoxarted by anyone to have the cnse diemlssed.
A complete surveillance of the eubject was requested in order to
deteraine his present eaployment and activi ties and to detoradme if
thesa activities might show a behavior pattern whlch would disguality
FeRRls for reinstatmont with Eastern Air Linos.
On November 8.1962,GoRGs L.RIsLEY xeviewnd the oentral
records file of tho Identification Bureau, Hoadquarters,Louisiane
State Polioe, Baton Rouge,Louiaiana, and the following grimiael
rocord 智as obtained for DAVID WILLIAK FERRIE：
Leuieiana 8tate Police #55386l:
CONTRIBUTOR OP
NAJEE AND
ARRESTRD CR
RECBIVRD
FINBRPRINTS
30,Gretna,La.
DAVID W.FBRRIE
a/e/sl Contrib.to mel.
ahoa
09729
ofe Juv.,Caxnal
Knowledge
SO,Gretna, La.
DAVID WILLIAN
8/33/61
Indec. behavior,
(None showm）
FBRRIR #9729
Crine against
Wature,Contrib.
te Del.ef a Juv.
2/16/6s Rel to extortioa
Pending
PD, New Orleans
DAVID WILLIAM
La.
FERRIE #107O62
AT NEW ORLBANS.LOUISIANA:
The Identification files of the New Orleans Police Departnent
were reviewed November l, 1962 by RONALD HUBNER and an index card
located which reflects that DAvID WrLLrAN FERRIs, white,aale,boxn

--- PAGE BREAK ---ation files of the New Orleans Police Departnent
were reviewed November l, 1962 by RONALD HUBNER and an index card
located which reflects that DAvID WrLLrAN FERRIs, white,aale,boxn

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11-N-224
11/19/62
March 2s, 191s, was arrested under Pollce Item Mumiber B-79o4-62,
on February 16, l962, by Patzolmen ROLAND FOURNrBR and CHARiss JONAU
ef the First District, and that parRIs was subneguontly chargod oa
Arridavit l7s-ool,with vielation of Loulsiuna Reviaed statutee l4,
Article 66,Paragzaph 2,relative to extortion. This charge ls
presently ponding. An effert was ande at thie tine to revow the
actual investigative rile but efficials advised tane lile could sot
be released fer reviou wi thout the signod pazmlsaion et tae' Jubge er
the Juvenile Court ex the District Atternay.No furthex effart was
ande to see the file through these sources.
On Novenber S,l962,records of the New Qrleans Retailers Credt
Buream were onanined by B: M' BAvIs, and zeflect the following
infernstion!
There was no pexsonnel foxa in file on subject PnrriB. He ls
asalgned Code 6o0. As of Septamber,1957,his addross llsted was
4615 Orleans Avemue, cuployed by Bastera Air Lines. Former addresoes
were listed as l302 Clay Stroet, 209 Vlnet, 704 Airlime Paxk. As of
April, 1962, hie addross was lieted as 333o Linuiafame Avenwe,
eaployed by G. w. RAY Guild, presunable Attozney G. VRAY auLL,
previous addrese listed as 33l Atherton Drive,Metalrie,Louieiara.
Agaln",dated February 17,1962; “Farzie Innocant or Cme Charge",
dated Tebruaxy aa, 1962. Judge LBo w. Nc Cunm, Jeffereon Parieh

--- PAGE BREAK ---ese listed as 33l Atherton Drive,Metalrie,Louieiara.
Agaln",dated February 17,1962; “Farzie Innocant or Cme Charge",
dated Tebruaxy aa, 1962. Judge LBo w. Nc Cunm, Jeffereon Parieh

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11-N-224
11/19/62
Juvenile Court,was presiding Judge on lattex case.
The following claims for collection were in the above file:
F 600, June 13, 1962, Dr.DAVID W.FERRIB, 3330 Louieiana Avenue
Parkway, New Orleans 15, Louisiana,uptown B9l-9309,Southexn Bell
Telephone Company, $i04.83,employment listed as Rosearch Peycbologist;
P-60o,DAVID W,FERRIE, October 26, 1962,Louisiana Powex & Light,
Metairie,$15.28, address 3330 Louisiana Avemue,New Orloans 25,
Louisiana, ex-address 331 Atherton Drive, Metairie, Loulaiana.
Criss-Crose Dlrectory reflects telephone assigned to 3330
Louisiana Avemue Pariway, is Tw g-7048. Call made to this muuber
the above address any longer.
The following was observed at 33l Atherton Drive, Metairie.
Louisiana, on November 2,3 and 5,1962:
1954 Oldsnobile sedan parked in yard at the above address,
bearing 1962 Louisiana Licenke 325-644. The following autos were
parked next door, at Lakeside: 1962 0ldamobile,light gzoen,1962
Louisiana License 98l-26l; Tord Falrlane,1962 Loulslana license
212-668; Ford Station Wagon, 1962 Louisiana 1icense 212-667. None
of the above cars were registered to DAVID w.FBRRIB. No activity
ofa pertinent nature was observed at the above address on any of the
above dates.
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---Louisiana 1icense 212-667. None
of the above cars were registered to DAVID w.FBRRIB. No activity
ofa pertinent nature was observed at the above address on any of the
above dates.
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11-N-224
11/19/62
On November 5,1962,a secretary in G.wRAY GILL's office
that information was roceived froa another souroe that Grll was
acting as attorney for FERRir and PeRRIs was doing Lnveetigatiwe work
for Grll in partial paymont of his fee.
A name cbeck of the Notor Vehicle Divielon, State or Louisiana,
on Noveaber 7,l962 by Ganor L. RisusY reflocts the following data
concerning the subject:
Zitle Mumber M-24li95s is issued to DAVID W. FzRRIB,331 Atherton
Driwe, Metalrie,Loulaiana, for a 1960 Ford Tudox Sedan, Motor
Number 0A3ivls0735, purchased as a used vahicle on June a,1960 for
an aneunt of sa,Si8.So.This car was financed by Gemeral Pinance
Corporation, 4l35 South Carrollton Avezue, Now Orleans, Louiaiana.
The l96s Loulsiana regietration for this cax ie 30o-60l.
The alphabetical listings at the Motor Vehicle Division also
xeflect a 1959 Tord is currently reglstered to a DAVID W. FERRIB, JR.,
whose current residence is apum as UsuC, USs Mathes, AKA-96, San
Francieco, Callfornia. PRRRin, JR, ls lietod ae a Lieutenant in the
U.S. Marine Corps, and hie hone address on the auto title ie ll
Prospect Street, Alexandria, Louisiana. This car has Moter Muaber
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---ia. PRRRin, JR, ls lietod ae a Lieutenant in the
U.S. Marine Corps, and hie hone address on the auto title ie ll
Prospect Street, Alexandria, Louisiana. This car has Moter Muaber
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11-N-224
11/19/62
On Noveaber 7,1962,Mrs.L.C.CHAMPAGNE,Account Clerk,
Goneral Finance Corporation, 4i3s South Carrollton Avenme, furnished
the foliowing information from her rocords conoerning the subject's
account:
FERRlB purchased the sbove described l96o Ford and finsnosd it
through thei: office on June 2,1960. He borzowed $2,si8.56 and was
to repay it in thirty-six monthly Installnents of S69.96 each. His
last payment rocorded on this account was on September 26,1962 and
his present balance is $888.54. Mrs.CHAMPAGNB stated that,as of
October 30,1962,he was sbown residing at 3330 Louisiaaa Avemue,
New Orleans,Louisiana. The file reflects Bo relatives or associates
of the subject and Mrs. ChANpAane said sbe rated the acoount as a
of collection papers and procedures they hawe had to Lnstitute to
date in an effozt to have him repay the loan.
Information was received from a confidential source on Novesber 6,
1962 that he had been discussing another matter wdth Bastern Air Lines
Captain GBORGB B. GREINER that date and the Bame of FERRIE was brought
up. GREINER related he had been approached on or about Noveaber 5,
1962 by Jelferson Parish Dietrict Attorney FRANx LANRIDos,Atterney
G.WRAY GILL and & Xr.CROUCHET, father of ERIC CROOCIET. GRBINER
said these persons had asked that FzRRie be reinstated in his duties
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---ish Dietrict Attorney FRANx LANRIDos,Atterney
G.WRAY GILL and & Xr.CROUCHET, father of ERIC CROOCIET. GRBINER
said these persons had asked that FzRRie be reinstated in his duties
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11~N-224
11/19/62
with Eastern. GRBINER was informed by this group that charges
against the subject in Orleans Pariah was slated to be diamisaed in
view of the reluctance of the complaining witanss, ERIC CRouchsT, to
substantiate hie original statement.
Captain GREInER told the source be had advised this group that
the matter of the subject's reinstatemont was not within the realn
of his authority.
In view of the above informatien,Orleans Parish District
Attorney RuDoLP Y. BBckER,IIl. was contacted November 7, l962 and
pending cherge againet ParRis relative to iatimidntion and oxtortion
agaimet the complaining wl tness,ERIc CRoucHeT, xegardless ot
CRoucar's feelings at the present time.BscxsR stated that in vlew
of the statement pxeviously furndshed by CRoucHET in this matter the
District Attorney intended to proceed in due course and allow hin
the opportumity cf repudiating said statemont undez oath if croucHET
so desired.
On Noveaber 7.1962,Lieutenant ALVIN C.IBSTER,6s24 Louis XIV
Street, was interviemed at this address by BoMARD M. DAvis. He
advi sed be was now asaisting in the training at Cadets of the ArcAP,
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---1962,Lieutenant ALVIN C.IBSTER,6s24 Louis XIV
Street, was interviemed at this address by BoMARD M. DAvis. He
advi sed be was now asaisting in the training at Cadets of the ArcAP,
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11-N-224
11/19/62
Civil Air Patrol, at Now Orleans Airport. He advi sod he was undex
the conaad of Major BDNARD W. CHRISTIANSEN, JR., APCAP Lialson
Officer,1723 Xaaonic Tenple Building,Phone S29-241l, Exteneion
6701, Mow Orleens, Louisiana. He advieed that be had known DAvrD
FHRRI& soveral yours, thnt he first knew PRRRIE when FERRIE bad
FRRRis bad sever been married,had no fanily other than his mother,
phe was posedbiy residing in Mew Crleans.. The subject had no
ailitaxy cecord know to hiu. He advised that subject hated woneng
seoned to hate Southerners, and at one time threatened to sue him
yaRRIs appeared to be well educated and in his, MrEsTtR'e,
opinion had been edteated in a seninary school. He advised the
FERRIE had attended a school in Clevoland, Ohio, having a double
namo which he could not recally this is possibly Western-Reserve.
He advisad FaRRIB also ailegedly attended Phoenix Uaiversity but thig
was not contirmed.
He advised the subject organised and trained C.A,P.Cadete in
do so, and had mo Charter under F.A.A. for this activity. FBRRIE
was later reported to be training Metairie Palcons, a C.A.P.Cadet

--- PAGE BREAK ---the subject organised and trained C.A,P.Cadete in
do so, and had mo Charter under F.A.A. for this activity. FBRRIE
was later reported to be training Metairie Palcons, a C.A.P.Cadet

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11-N-224
11/19/62
unit, but this alao had no Federal Charter to operate. Lt. MIesTER
advioed that anyone wearing C.A,P.Cadet uni foras, unless under
Federal Charter,was in violation of Federal law.
Lt. NIEszBR advised that in September,196O, Bomeone unknowm had
stolen all the persounel rocords of the C.A.P.Cadets fron a room
used by this unit noar the New Orleans Airport. He kcnaw a JBRRY wALKER,
a Cadet in 1958, who at that time resided on Tulane Avanue Juet off
Claiborne. Ne advised that WALkBR was now in the Dnited States Marines.
FERRIB wears a toupee,possibly eelf-made, is a very aggressiwe
person, highly obnoxious at times, vwery influential dth poople. He
advlaed that he bad heard through Cadet sources, whon he did not naneg
that subject is possibly a honosexual.
ArsTsr advieod that he know an individual, whon he refusod to
neo,that had made the statenent, "Ir chaxges againat the subject
MIBsTeR advieed that the recoxds of all C.A.P. Uaits in the
New Orleans aze& are maintained at Bilington Air Force BaBe, Texas,
under the sapervision of Colonel PAUL C. AsHwor TH, that all authorised
units are under Federal Charter, and that any othera operating, other
than those go chartered, are doing so illegally.
MIEsTER advised that sbortly before Christmas, 196l, there were
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---are under Federal Charter, and that any othera operating, other
than those go chartered, are doing so illegally.
MIEsTER advised that sbortly before Christmas, 196l, there were
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11-N-224
11/19/62
two men from P.A.A., Washington, D.C., investig&ting FERRIe's pilot
status. He advleod he did not know the outcome or this investigation
A confidential source advleed on November 7.1962 that skic N.
CRooaET, 949 St. Mary Street,New Orleans,had addreeaed a letter
dated october 20, 1962, to Captaia GBORa REINER, Chier Pilot,
Eastern Airlines, New Orleans,in which he said that charges filed
against D.W.FaRzg were false end that actually PeRRIr was being
franed on these charges.This same source also determdned that
PERRIE's present address is 3330 Louiaiana Avenue Paricway.Anothex
pereon vhe will know of PsRRIB's address if be Movee is ERLE PRINZ,
bookieeper,573s Vezmillion Boulevard, telephome 268-1360.
It was detexxined on Noveaber 7,1962 that all reoords in the
New Orleans azea on alrline pilots are maintalned at the FAa,Alr-Tec
Center Building, Dovman Road, sear the New Orleans Municipal Airport,
under tbe mupervlsion of Mr. JoNn PowRLl.
An attenpt was made te contact Nr.PoweiL or Noveuber 7.1962
but he was not in his office. His secretary revlewed the indlces
for the subject but was unable to find any record for hin. She
advised that the local office usaally mcinained a file containing
the pilot's certificate mumber, ratings and all other data for a
period of two years after which it was foxwarded to the FAA,Aiznon

--- PAGE BREAK ---local office usaally mcinained a file containing
the pilot's certificate mumber, ratings and all other data for a
period of two years after which it was foxwarded to the FAA,Aiznon

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11-N-224
11/19/62
Recorde Branch, 62l North Robison, Oklahoma City,Oklaboma. She
added the subject was unknown to her.
HARRY HouARD, Attorney, l807 Pere Marquette Building, New Orleans,
advioed on November 13,1962 that be represented KERRY KiNG in charges
that grew out of the so-called "sex Ring in Jefferson Pariah, This
group was conposed almost entirely or juveniles. Mx. HomARD said he
did not reaember the nane DAviD reRris ever badng mentioned in that
case. He went thxough his file on this case and none of the juveniles
in that case were the sane as those aontloned in various cbaxges
against FRRRIR.
On Noveaber 1s,1962,an individual formerly eployed as an
investigator fox a Federal law enforcenent agency advised he once
Lnvestigated DAVID WILLIAN FERRIR in connection with FERRIE's involve-
ment in a missing pexson complaint as well as an alleged vlolation of
the law regarding the theft of Government property.
This source advised the investigative file is Do longer available
to hin nor is he in a position to testify to the results of his
findings. Howevex, the following account is his best xecollection
of the informatlon be developed during the course of his inquiry.
The case was asalgned in Auguet, l96l, follouwing a visit to the
agency by the parenta or a white,male Juvenile whose wihereabouts
was unknown. (In all probability this is the incident concerning
12

--- PAGE BREAK ---ned in Auguet, l96l, follouwing a visit to the
agency by the parenta or a white,male Juvenile whose wihereabouts
was unknown. (In all probability this is the incident concerning
12

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11-N-224
11/19/62
美r.and Mrs.ALEXANDRR LANoRY and their son,AL,JR.,althougb the
source could not remoabex the names of the parties involved.)
Acoording to the parents, their son had been associating with the
FERRIn throngh activlties of tbe Civil Air Patrol. From inforaation
gained through diecussion wlth parente ol other children who were
also in the CAp uni t, the parents of the missing youngeter bad oom
to have serious doabts as to the legal status of the unit PsRRiB
conmanded. They had heard that this CAP unit was without ofricial
sanction.The source advised that before any eoxtenaive inquizy was
with PERRIE.
Information was roceived by thie source that PeRRlE allegedly
had taken and kept in his posoession sone filn or movies that were
technically the property of the Ualted states Air Foroe. Inguiry
was then made to detezmine whether or not FerRIE wae lnvolved in the
Theft of Govexnsnt Property.
At this time the source interviewed the Air Force Liaiaon
Officer for the Louisiana Wing of the Civil Air Patrol in an effort
to gain background information concerning FRRRIB. This officer,a
13

--- PAGE BREAK ---the source interviewed the Air Force Liaiaon
Officer for the Louisiana Wing of the Civil Air Patrol in an effort
to gain background information concerning FRRRIB. This officer,a
13

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11-N-224
11/19/62
Captain whose name is not ramembered by the source, advisec hat
PBRRIe's association with the CAP was not legitimate as hie reaoval
froa that group had been reguested and effected approxinately tw
years previously as a result of several incidents whlch occuxcm in
the Suzmer of l958 or 1959 during the Patrol'o Susner encaapnoat at
Keesler Air Force Base, Mississippi.
On that occasion the members were sssigmed to various barracks.
The Senior Advisors, Squadron Commandaats &nd officers were assigned
quarters other than those given the cadets. FERRIE cowplained
bitterly that be should be permitted te reside vi th the mrabers of
his groap in their barracks. This was strictly against all exdsting
policy and when FeRRlE Continued hls insistence that he be quartered
with his group ef boys he was ordered by his superior officers not to
stay in the cadet barracks.
Shortly after this order,PERRIR was discovered living in the
barracke in defiance of the order and in the ensuing uproar he was
ordered to leave the base. He deperted end took most of the members
of his group with him altbough the encampaent was not ended. He then
formed his own squadron without official sanction.
The Air Force Liaison Officer told the souxce that during the
subsequent inquiry by the CAP and Air Force investigative agenciesy
several ruimors were received concerning FERRIa's actions with the
boys under his supervision.
14

--- PAGE BREAK ---hat during the
subsequent inquiry by the CAP and Air Force investigative agenciesy
several ruimors were received concerning FERRIa's actions with the
boys under his supervision.
14

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11-N-224
11/19/62
The source stated that this sane Air Force Liaison Officer
might still be assigned to this area and could be contacted for
further informa tion about FERRIE's activlties as discovered by that
group.
No information was developed regarding prosecution in the
alleged Theft of Government Property violation and the investigation
was discontinued. According to this source, no information was
developed reflecting any associates or incidents concerning the
subject in Alexandria,Louisisna. He added that no inquiry had been
conducted by his agency in the Houston, Texas area vhicb might identify
any associates or FERRIE there.
AT ALEXANDRIA,LOUI SIANA;
In connection vith information previously developed through
Motor Vehicle registrations concerning a l959 Ford registered to
Lt.DAVID W.FERRIB, JR., USMC, residence listed at 1l Pro6pect
Street, Alexandria,Louisiana, &s well as refeTence to SUSAN CARDE,
P.O.Drawer 1151,that city,in statement on February 18,1962 of
ALVIN ROLAND FBAUBOUEF, Chief of Police STAPFORD RICHE,AlexandTia,
was telephonically contacted by GEoRGe L.RISLEY on Novenber 15,1962
at which time he furnished the followiing informntlon:
A review or his department's idontification files revealed no
criminal record or complaint filed for the subject or DAVID W. FERRIE,
JR. Neither of these individuals were known to the chief. He advised
15

--- PAGE BREAK ---nt's idontification files revealed no
criminal record or complaint filed for the subject or DAVID W. FERRIE,
JR. Neither of these individuals were known to the chief. He advised
15

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11-N-224
11/19/62
jurisdiction. A check with his Juvenile Division faiied to discern
any file or couplednt on the subject,FBRRIs, JR., SUSAN CARDEN or
anyon using the above names.
RiCH stated he had overbeard some dlccussion amoag sambers ot
an individual by the nano oi JuNrAu,who reoidod in the vieinity of
Prospect Street, was a honosexmal.No overt acts were reperted to his
department and no inquiry ever was initiated in the abeenoe ef any
complaints. A check oi the city directory by Ricm during the call
revealed a DANIEL L. JUNEAU residing at 31 Prospect Street. Ric
Baid this would not be the individual he had referred to as DAnisL
JuNEAu who was employed as a Captain in the Pire Departaont and
Wao personaliy knowm by RIcHm.He added the JuNEAu femily in that area
The directory showed no listing for anyome by the name of FERRIB.
At this same time,RIch had one of his men guerie the Rapides
Parich Sherirr's Office concering FERRIE and SUSAN CARDBN. This
office reported that a search of their ldentification and juvenile
files failed to reveal any criminal record for these individuals.
The New Orleans Retail Credit Bureau advised GBORGE L.RlSLEY
on November 15,1962 that & check with the Alexandria,Louisiana
Credit Bureau revealed there was no record for DAVTD W. FBRRIE, JR.
11 Prospect streot, nd no prior inquiries received there about him.
16

--- PAGE BREAK ---hat & check with the Alexandria,Louisiana
Credit Bureau revealed there was no record for DAVTD W. FBRRIE, JR.
11 Prospect streot, nd no prior inquiries received there about him.
16

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11-N-224
11/19/62
A confidential source known to GBoRGs L.RIsLEY who is employed
November 15,1962 that Captain DANTEL L. JUNrAu, age forty.ls eaployod
wd th 'the Alexandria Pire Department, ie Barriod to LBTA ROBBRTs JUNEAU,
age thirty-seven, and both are patiente ef the clinic. No derogetery
information is known about the JunmAus and both are well regarded by
local residents.
This source furthez advised that the residence of ll Prospect
Street is ownod by PRANx PAcHBLIx, JR., who rasidee there with his
wife, BSTELLE, and their son, FRANO PACHOLIK, III. The fathex and
son are owners of and actively engaged in the operation of Alexandria
Rapides Street. This abop is located about five blocks fren their
residance.The PAcHoLrKs are also zegarded very highly by their
neighbors aad associates,according to this source.
The followdng persons were interviewod on the dates indicated
in an effort to develop information on FeRRIB's activities involving
juveniles dud ng his recidonce at the various addresgea listed. No
any information obtained which might provide furthax investigative
leads fron these sources.

--- PAGE BREAK ---activities involving
juveniles dud ng his recidonce at the various addresgea listed. No
any information obtained which might provide furthax investigative
leads fron these sources.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11-N-224
11/19/62
Thursday. Novenber 8.1962
MTS. GRACE PBRBS
4616 Orleans Avemwe
Mow OrLeans
DELOS RAY CRAIN
461s Orleans Avome
Now Orleame,Apt.A
Dr.PILIP P.PIORI2O
46ls Orleans Avenao,Now Orleana
It is peinted cut there are no residnnoes on the opposite side of
wednesday. November 14.1962
LRON BDd MARGARBT SPANIER
R7oo Airline Park,Metairie,Louisiana
ALLAN F.HOMGREN
701 Aixline Park,Metairie,Louisiana
ROEBRT F.RBTIF
705 Airllne Park,Netairie,Louislana
J.T.MATTINGLY
712 Airline Park,Metairie,Louislana
DONALD J.BAILBY
6409 Ithaca Street, Metairie.
Louisiana and formerly ot 712
Airline Park
LAWRBNCB aDd DOROIHY A.
LASHLBY
33s Atherton Drive,etairle
ALBBRT B.PATERSON,JR.
325 Atherton Drive,Metairie
MANFIBLD A. ROTH
330 Atherton Drlve,Motairie
WILLIAN H.And GLADYS
LESTER
1303 Clay Street,Kenner,Louisiana
JOSRPH A.NOOAKER
1305 Clay Street,Keanex,Louisiana
Zhuraday.Noveaber 15.1962
MARION C. ADd DORIS D.KEBGAN
212 vinet Street,Jefferson Parish
MLae ALMEDA C. HODSON
213 vinet Street,Jefferson Parish
RBINARDT ANd EUNICE E.
BAEMR
208 vinet street,Jefferson Parisn
On Novembex 13,1963,Kr. ToLAN advised Nx. CARsON that on
attention wben the youth called their office in Houston to see about
areturn ride to Mew Orleans.The records refleot this boy's nane
WaS GBORGR PIAZZA.
18

--- PAGE BREAK ---dvised Nx. CARsON that on
attention wben the youth called their office in Houston to see about
areturn ride to Mew Orleans.The records refleot this boy's nane
WaS GBORGR PIAZZA.
18

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11-N-224
11/19/62
The curxent New Orleans City Directery reflects three persons
with the name GEORGE PlAzZA,houwever, the most Liloely one is GECRGE
with the Louisiana Air National Guard.It wae Getezalinod through a
pretost telephone call to BrAn C. FiAzzA at that address that her
hueband, Borz, is presently attending the School ef Law at Loyola
Uni versity. She advi sed he ie enployed by the Louisiana Air National
Cuard as an alert pilot, when he is not attending class.
Attonpte were Bade to interview GBorGa PlAzzA on Novenber 14
and 15,1962 with negative results.
On Novembex 16, 1962, GEORGB L. RISLEY Interviewed GBORG PIAZZA
the followdng infozmation!
PiAzzA readily adnittod be was the indivldual iavolwed in the
particular Lncident referred to by Mr. TOLAn. PIAzzA met PuRRIk
sometime in late l9ss when he was ln the prooess of obtaining his
private pilot's liconee at the New Orleane Airport. At the tine he
anotber pilot who flew his own airplane from the field. PIAzzA said
FERRIE owned a Stinson Voyager,mhich is still kapt at the Now Orleans
Airport by FaRRIB.
During the course or their contacts through the mmtual interest
of flying,FBRRIE made his plane available to PIAzzA for flying time.
19

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11-N-224
11/19/62
He offered instruction as well, according to PIAzzA.
At this time, PuRRIe ran a CAP Squadron there and PIAzZA joined.ane available to PIAzzA for flying time.
19

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11-N-224
11/19/62
He offered instruction as well, according to PIAzzA.
At this time, PuRRIe ran a CAP Squadron there and PIAzZA joined.

frequently talce cross-oountry tripe to Houston, Corpus Chrieti and
San Antonio, Texas. On many occasione, PiAzzA acccupanied FBRRis to
Cleveland, Ohio wbere they would vieit FBRRIn's mothax, when sbe was
still alive. FERRIr has a brother,uhose aame is not recalled, who
Akron, chio.
FeRRIs has no children either by adoption or marriage end to
PIAzzA'g knowledgo, he has nevez been married.
Dud ng these frequent flying tripe wi th FERRIB, uoually in his
by Bastern crews. PiAzzA can only recall one occasion when they
was on one occasion when they visi ted Corpus Christi, Texas and spent
the night at the rectory of a Catholic Church. mhe priest there.
wbose name is mot rocalled by PIAzzA, was a friend of FERRIE and
provided xooms fex them.
PIAzzA is or the recollectlon that PeRRTB bas a close friend
in Houeton, Texas whom he visits, but this individual is connected
is unknown. PIAzzA said be Bet many friends of FERRIE in Houston
20

--- PAGE BREAK ---e recollectlon that PeRRTB bas a close friend
in Houeton, Texas whom he visits, but this individual is connected
is unknown. PIAzzA said be Bet many friends of FERRIE in Houston
20

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11-N-224
11/19/62
but it is his belier that they were all conmected with Eestern in
some capacity of eapioyaent. He can recall no outside associates of
the subject in that area.
Referring to tbe incident on June 8,l9st, PIAzzA said be
believed that FsRRIE was scheduled for a trip fron Mew Orleans to
before contimaing his flight to Brounsville, Bacas, returning to
Houston and thence to New Orleans.rerrIs asled PrAzzA to aooompany
hin on the trip. PrAzzA said be mentloaod the subject of the cost and
the ticket wbereupon Psrrle told him that matter was already reaolved
and net to worry.PiAzzA said he is of the impression mow that
net clear on this peint. They flew to Houston and PiAzzA said he
boarded the flight as A regalar passenger. Once the plane was airborne,
FERrie invdted hin to the pilot's coapartment wbere he remained until
they reached Houston. They stayed at the botel previ eusly referred to
by PiAzzA but wboee nove he cannot recall. It is his reoollection
that he was to stay in Houston while FBRRIs aade the rrun to Brownsville
to New OrloanB. PIAzzA said be overslept and was awakoned by FBRRIB
field. PsrRin told him be had to go on to Hew Orleans and stated he
had left a ticket for PlAzzA at the Bastern Alr Lines deek at the
21

--- PAGE BREAK ---aid be overslept and was awakoned by FBRRIB
field. PsrRin told him be had to go on to Hew Orleans and stated he
had left a ticket for PlAzzA at the Bastern Alr Lines deek at the
21

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11-N-224
11/19/62
terminal. PlAzzA said he had called there about the tichet and they
could not locate it. He returned to New Orleans and that is all he
recalle about the Lncident.
PIAzzA said his friondehip contimued wi th the sabject uatil
about Angust, los4. PiAzzA had gzadbated in June of that year from
high school and was seeking enployment. He stated that duzing the
tdme he had fixat met PBRRYs,tbe latter had helped hin obtain his
commercial and Lmstrument xatings.PiAzzA dncidod not to attend
college and PERRIn told hin ara job available in Wildwood, New
Jersey. Thia job was with a non-schedaled airline. FsRRIs told him
to contact RALPH Cox with Uaitod states Overseas Aizways and he did so.
PiAzzA flew to aklahoma City.met cox and an aunt of cox, where the
throe of them flew to wildwood, New Jersey. PIAzzA said he wab hited
1954.At that time he decided to return to New Orleans and attend
college. For somo reason, his decision to do this irritated FrRRIB
and their asbociation and contact terminated. PiAzzA said be had no
argument with the eubject nor was there uny bostility from the occasion.
He has only sean FErRIE on two oz three brief occasions sinoe that
time.PiAzzA entered the Air Force in l956 and upon his honorable
discharge returned to New Oriea ns to attend Law School.
PIAzzA omphatically stated that during the entire time he was
closely associatod with FERRlE he can never recall any occasion vherein
22

--- PAGE BREAK ---urned to New Oriea ns to attend Law School.
PIAzzA omphatically stated that during the entire time he was
closely associatod with FERRlE he can never recall any occasion vherein
22

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11-N-224
11/19/62
the aubject displayed any tendency townrd any homoeesrality or sexc
deviation. PRrrrl mever suggested or atteapted any such xelationahip
with PiAzzA at aay tiue during thedr acgsaimtanoe and he lcnowe of no
with the subjoct he spent a groat deal of time with hin. He stated
this was ef sone ooocern to his parents at the time but that he had no
disagreanents wi th then about the relationship other than the aount
of time he devoted to associating wdth flying and related activities.
He had no fanily crises with then other than the normal opes for a
youth of hie age, and PIAzzA said these were brought on by himoelf
rather than at the suggestion or direction of PBRRIn. PuRRlE never
PERRIe is the type indlvidual who fancies hinself an eoxpert in all
matters and, hencs, believes himself infallible. To this end,
whon he disagreed. Howevez, PiAzzA said that FERRIE had never done
this to the PiAzzAs.
FERRIB oeemod to have a certain talent and backgroumd in the
use Qr psychology and would use this as well as his philosophical
ideas to influence coae of the yonths in the CAp Squadron. PIAz.zA
said he frequently diaagreed vith the subject and his beliefs and that
FERRIE deeply resents critieiea.
23

--- PAGE BREAK ---phical
ideas to influence coae of the yonths in the CAp Squadron. PIAz.zA
said he frequently diaagreed vith the subject and his beliefs and that
FERRIE deeply resents critieiea.
23

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11-#-224
11/19/62
FBRRIE told PIAzzA he was attending Tulane Daivezsity to obtain
   o  ue    
In diaeuseden of his activities during the years of World waz Il.,
FsrrIn gave the Lapzession he was e flight instructor. He never
stated mhetber he was a member of the araed servicos or a civllian
The only clooe friend ef FERRIE that PiAzzA conld recall was
an individual by the name of Jin LEwALlan, who le mow working in
PLAzZA met LatALLRN ia i9S4 when FaRRII was readding ou Vimet
Street in Jef feraon Parish. LsmALlsN was aeaployud and had come to
New Orleans espzessly to look up PsRRIs. FeRRIB belped obtaia
enployment fox LswALiaN at Eastern Air Lines in the Daggage departmeat.
LauALlBH xesided for Bome time with FERkIE at che Vinet Stroet
address. PIAzzA said he does not know whethez LEwALlRN is still
friendly with the oubject or not. LewAlLEN is believed eaployed with
National Car Rentals at New Orleans International Alrport at the
present tiae.
The subjact had several acquaintancee in Alescandria, Louisiana
through his activities with the Civil Air Patrol, aooording to PiAzzA,
but the identities of tbese persons are unicnowm.
PIAzzA knows of no other troubles ia the past in hich the
Bubject was involved. He stated he was anased when he read the
24

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11-N-224
11/10/62
hewspaper accounts of PBRRIE's arrest. PIAzZA was quite candid
during thie interview and appeared to be truthful in every respect.
interests.
Becamse of his preparation for the practice of law be is
most anxdious to avodd any attention at all to any connection with
FERRIE,bowever innocent it was at the timo
p26+ithpunhilivg
m--11
77/51111
Surveill nijubjetantAssociotu
25