Apz'il 2, 1969 
The Honorable lUchard G, Kleindiennt 
Deputy Attomey General 
Department of Juiitico 
Washington* D.C. 
Dear to. Kleindionet: 
Yostez'day, I was inforxned that the Dcpart'r.ent of Justice had 
decided to proceed \;dth a now trial of James Ntillor. Ihis was a tragic ei-ror . 
which I Suii confident will be corrected if someone in the Depai’tmont whose career 
is not involved in the prosecution takes a hard look at the facts. 
On June 19, 3.96^, federal and state officials, accompanied by the 
press, arrested Janas Kdller in his beauty shop in Milford, Connecticut. The 
charge^VOS conspiracy to smuggle narcotics. The pz'ess I'cporbed that Miller 
was a "key cog in the Hevr York Underworld," principal in the largest intemationed 
narcotics smuggling ring ever "broken up." Bic announcoix-nt was attributed to 
Attorney General Robert Kennedy, 
In fact, 03 the Coverntnent veil knew, Jiiller VEUJ a legitiirLate 
businessman and was not and never had been a "key" cog" in the ?;ev York or any 
other underv/orld. Four and a half years of negotiation and litigation followed, 
culminating most recently in the Second Circuit's reversal of ^tLller•3 I966 
conviction. 
I have eoi'lier stated, in & motion to the Court of Appeals, that 
the Miller case is the moat inexcusable i>ei’veroion of Justice in the recent 
histoi:y of the federal criminal process. I have not modified that view. Leaving 
aside all questions of IhirncGs which have been raised in the past four and one- 
half years, I v;ill sketch belo^*: the particulars of isy proofs that (l) Jamas 
is i^ocent and numerous persons in the Departnwnt of Justice should know 
i'fcj (2) Ttie pursuit of an initial hunch has hardened over the years into total 
incapacity to think and has prevented responsible officials from investigating 
the guilt of those who actually comrjiitted the crimes (3) The crijae was actually 
perpetrated by i^axio r^atalizio, Anthony DiPasqua, Rosario Ippolito and others. 
DiPasqua and Ippolito wore veil knovr. to the Depnrtiuent as high level narcotics 
smugglers before 1963, yet during the period when this crime should have been 
investigated, they were appax*exitly removed from the minds or the records of the 
Organized Crime Section. 
In a letter to yoi^ predecessor, Mr. 1/arren Christopher, I requested 
an audience and urged a full scale review of the case, suggesting"that the 
Department night want to clean, out its closets before your adi'.iinistration took 
*Mr. 1/arren Christopher, I requested 
an audience and urged a full scale review of the case, suggesting"that the 
Department night want to clean, out its closets before your adi'.iinistration took 
*

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Honorable Richard G.

Kleindienst 
April 2, 1969 
over, ^ty‘ request was denied, my suggestion disregarded.

I now request a dismissal 
because the evidence of Killer’s innocence and the incompetent investigation of 
the case is now so clear that a retrial will be (a) an inhumne imposition on 
Miller and his family, (b) a source of embarrassment to the Department, (c) a 
peipetuation of the present immunity of the racketeers who cotronitted the crime, 
(d) a pointless proceeding, since there will almost certainly be on acquittal 
and, if not, further appeals until Justice is finally found.

If the evidence 
outlined below does not persuade you, I urgently request the assignment of on 
unbiased Investigator, to whom I will in return for a modicum of cooperation, 
disclose virtually all the evidence in iry files — much of which has not yet 
been produced in court.

The story begins with the arrest, on October 10, 1963, on the 
Texas border,-of Joseph Mchaal Caron, who confessed that three weeks before 
(September 2l) he had delivered a cargo of heroin to an unknown man in Bridgeport, 
Connecticut; and that four weeks before that (August 22) he had delivered another 
load to the same man at the same place.

Caron thought the man’s name was "Franlt.” 
He described the transferee as veiling about 200 hundred pounds, about forty, 
five feet ten, and "Italian or Jewish .

• .

Roman nose, curly black hair, dark 
complexioned." Miller, six feet, veiglis^,about 170, is neither Italian nor 
Jewish, does not have a Roman nose, and is light coirplexioned.

Caron then 
selected the photo of a man named Frank Mancuso.

-A few days later, he said of 
Miller’s photos (having been sho'./n three shots of Hiller in a stack of eight 
or teni), they "look like him, but I can’t be sure.

I would like to see him in 
person." Four months later, Caron was sho\/n Miller and told '*}1hen you see him 
let me know," Re made no positive identification.--- PAGE BREAK ---

-A few days later, he said of 
Miller’s photos (having been sho'./n three shots of Hiller in a stack of eight 
or teni), they "look like him, but I can’t be sure. I would like to see him in 
person." Four months later, Caron was sho\/n Miller and told '*}1hen you see him 
let me know," Re made no positive identification. Wot until the next day, when 
shown Miller again, did Caron "identify" him. After first swearing she had not seen the nan in Bridgeport and 
couldn’t identiftr him, and fully aware that her husband’s freedom depended on 
his testif/'ing against Miller, Mrs. Caron at trial pointed her finger at Miller. There was virtually no other evidence at trial, except Caron’s 
statement, made after twenty-three months of incarceration and during on intensive 
three day inten^ogation, that his boss, Rivea’d, had said "Frank" is a **hairdresser. Apart from this statement, the case ag^nct tliller was purely and simply an eye- 
witness identification case — the kind of case which puts more innocent people 
in prison than all others combined, as the Government agents should have known. Against the Caron identification of Mdller, there ore business 
records and sworn testimony of customers that he was working in his beauty shop 
at all times when Caren was transferring his cargo to the guilty man, both in 
August and September, 1963. The transfers, which took considerable time, both 
occurred in early afternoon, on normal working days, a twenty minute drive from 
Miller’s place of business.

--- PAGE BREAK ---and September, 1963. The transfers, which took considerable time, both 
occurred in early afternoon, on normal working days, a twenty minute drive from 
Miller’s place of business.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

-3- 
ThG Uouorable Ricbord Gt Klelndienst 
April 2, 1969 
Miller took a truth serum test from a prominent psychiatrist. 
Dr. G.H. Gerov/, of V/estport, Connecticut. Dr. Gerow in convinced, os a result 
of the test, that Miller is innocent. 
Miller also took a polygraph test from Dr. TOiomos McShane, head 
of the Department of Psychology, Pace College, formerly in charge of polygraphs 
for the FBI. Miller passed the test and convinced Dr. McShane that he is 
innocent. 
According to the testimony of respected psychiatrists, Caron's 
identification testimony was worthless, his testimony attributing to Rivard the 
statement about "Fr-cmk" being a "hairdresser" was a fabrication "to a certainty," 
and Caron's misidentlfication of Miller was cemented into his mind by the 
Incompetent administration of hypnosis, three months before trial, by none 
other than the federal prosecutor, Mr. William Butler. 
In addition to quoting Rivard as saying "Frank" is a "hairdresser," 
Caron said, that Riveird had remarked that he had eaten steak in "Frank's" backyard. 
Testimony in court was xmcontradicted that the Itlllers had never served steak in 
their yard end had never had a Canadian as a guest. 
, Lucien Rivard, now in prison, swore that he had never met nor 
heard of James Miller and had never said onything^to Caron about a hairdresser. 
He offered to submit to a polygraph on these sworn statements. 
Even if the above were not enough to establish Miller's probable 
innocence, there is much more, to-vit, proof beyond reasonable doubt that the 
crime was committed not by Miller but by one Mario Natalizio end his confederates. 
Natalizio confessed to Killer in a tape recorded conversation in I965 
(which Mr. Henry Peterson, head of the Organized Crime Section, claiiaed as late 
os January, I960, contained nothing which incriminated Natalizio — proving 
either that Mr. Peterson can't hear, can't read, or can't be bothered). He olso 
confessed in writing in July, 1967, and orally, in great detail, to two private 
investigatox's, in August, 1967. He since has repeatedly admitted that he 
committed the crime, and his underworld associates are well aware that he, not 
Miller, is the guilty party. 
Natalizio perfectly fits the description Caron gave of the culprit 
throe weeks e^er the event. He gave Government agents a written statement denying 
he had been in Bridgeport in August and September, 1963, and told numerous other 
witnesses to Ho for him and saj' that he hod not left ^jicm5.. lie exq)lalned that 
he needed a false alibi because he had "been smuggling gold." He has since admitted 
vinder oath that he lied to the Government and that he was in Bridgeport in the 
Bxjmmer of 1963.exq)lalned that 
he needed a false alibi because he had "been smuggling gold." He has since admitted 
vinder oath that he lied to the Government and that he was in Bridgeport in the 
Bxjmmer of 1963.

--- PAGE BREAK ----U- 
The Honorable Hichord C.

ICLelndienst 
April 2, 1969 
There is o&iple other evidence corroborating Katalizlo's guilt and 
inplicating other narcotics SHUgglers: 
(1) Roger Boaucheisin, Rivard's courier on a delivery to Flint, 
Michigan, three weeks before Caron's first delivery in Bridgeport, testified 
that the men in charge of receiving his cargo in Flint was referred to by 
Rivard os "Frank" and ansvrered to the name "Frank".

This man he positively 
Identified as Solvatore Ciglio, (high level narocites trafficker).

Beauchemin 
also testified that he helped load the narcotics into a 1950 Buick bearing 
Florida license plates.

(2) Assistant U.S.

Attorney \7illia»n Butler admitted in Court that 
one of the participants in Bridgeport was believed to have been Salvatore Ciglio.

(3) Hatalizio's landlord during 1963, and the landlord's wife, 
testified that Katalizio, who had confessed to two private detectives that he 
had done the Job with "two men on the lam", had in fact lived with two fugitives 
in Miami, one of whom was Anthony DiPaoqun (a hi^i ranking narcotics smuggler 
associated with Rivard and Ciglio), Ciglio had made visits to Hatalizlo and 
the other two men and had held secret conferences with then, after which Katalizio 
and one of the others would malce trips.ft In mid July, I963, after a visit from 
Gifello, Katalizio and the other fugitive, who went under the name "Sabbatini" 
(later identified as Rosario Ippolito), borrov'odlooney to go "north on a score", 
which they said would .take them, oraong other places, to Bridgeport, Connecticut.

They made the trip in 'sabbatlnijs green 1958 B\iick bearing Florida license plates.

They retirmed toward the end of Augvist, and repaid the loan.

Katalizio said 
that they had been both to Flint, Michigan and.to Bridgeport, Connecticut.

About 
a week later, another trip was made to Bridgeport, This time, both fugitives 
ended up, along with natolizio, in Bridgeport, where they stayed for about two 
weeks.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Katalizio said 
that they had been both to Flint, Michigan and.to Bridgeport, Connecticut. About 
a week later, another trip was made to Bridgeport, This time, both fugitives 
ended up, along with natolizio, in Bridgeport, where they stayed for about two 
weeks. Near the end of September they returned to Klituai. Before they came back, 
however, Katalizio asked his landl.ord to cany back for him an el^t-inch stack 
of ceush. A month or so after they returned to Miami (not long after Caron had 
been arrested on the Mexican border and had confessed), Katalizio told his 
fugitive friends to "screw" and they moved out Immadlately, leaving some 'of their 
belongings. Katalizio then Induced several people to lie for him and to state 
that he had never left Miami in the summer or fall of 1963. His explanation was 
that he and the fugitives had been "smuggling gold" on their trips north. (h) Charles Schnee submitted affidavits relating that he had seen 
Katalizio in Bridgeport in August and September, 1963, csid that in Ko^-ember, 1963, 
Katalizio had offered him $500 to extract registration cards from the Bridgeport 
and Fairfield Motor Inns (Sabbatini, according to Hatalizio's former landlord, 
had stayed in the Fairfield duidug the Septeniber "score"). One of the names, 
Schnee recalled, "sounded like 'tinl'", was on Italian natse, and "could very 
veil have been" Sabbatini, Katalizio later thi’catened that he 'would get Schnee 
if he revealed H?.taliaio's role in the registration removal atteript, end told 
Schnee to "talto the fifth" if called before a grand Jury.

--- PAGE BREAK ----5- 
The Honorable Richard G.

Kleindienst April 2, I969 
(6) Louis Schnee and Joseph Bceda, both of Bridgeport, corroborated 
much of Charles Schnce^s affidavit.

That is the cerest sketch of the evidence corroborating Natalizio’s 
guilt.

Details are contained in Appellant's most recently filed appellate 
briefs, which are enclosed.

In August, 196T> I informed the United States Attorney in 
Connecticut, Mr.

Jon Newman, that iny sources indicated that Anthony DiPasqua 
(who had recently been arx»ested after being a fugitive for seven years on an 
old narcotics indictment) had been involved in the Bridgeport transfers with 
Hatalizio.

I repeated this in a letter to the Solicitor General end again, 
in January, I960, in a conference in V/oshingten with Mr.

Peterson, hir.

Peterson 
did not know who DiPcisqua was, despite the fact that he is listed, in the 
Department’s submission to the McClellan Committee in 1963, as one of New York’s 
largest narcotics traffielders, dealing, through Salvatore Giglio, with the Cotronl 
(Rivard) organization in Canada.

In September, 1968, I revealed, through testimony of an investigator 
for the Coimittee for Justice (a group of concerned citizens), extensive evidence 
regarding the identity end whereabouts of Harry Sabbatini (since identified as 
Rosario Ippolito, a parole violator, since I96I, from a New York murder charge, 
end a close associate, in narcotics smuggling, of-DiPasqua and Angie Tuiainaro).

Ho one in the Covemjnsnt seemed to luiow or care anything about Sabbatini or his 
past or present criminal activities.

Indeed, the Government has not yet seemed 
willing to concede that Sabbatinl-Ippolito e>dLsts.

The evidence already produced in court is more than enou^ to 
convict Natalizlo of the crime for which ItLller was convicted.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Indeed, the Government has not yet seemed 
willing to concede that Sabbatinl-Ippolito e>dLsts. The evidence already produced in court is more than enou^ to 
convict Natalizlo of the crime for which ItLller was convicted. It is more than 
enough to convince any rational, person that Ittller was the victim of a fontastic 
miscarriage of Justice, \lhat is plain is that the persons responsible for the 
prosecution and conviction of Miller —- who were told about Np,talizlo’s guilt 
in I96U — are desperately trying to avoid a confrontation with the truth and 
their ovm laziness or stupidity. They not only wouldn’t investigate — and won’t 
now — they won’t even examine and consider the evidence produced by the defense. I assert categorically and without the slightest fear of disproof 
that no person in the eirq^loy of the United States Government, hon so zmich as a 
working familiarity with the facts of this case. I challenge the Government to 
produqe any agent or any attorney who can relate \d.th substantial accuracy and 
completeness the evidence which has been produced in open court in this case. I could recount proof alter proof of the abysmal ignorance of the agents and 
attorneys in the Goveranent of these facts. I referred above to Mr. Peterson’s 
ignorance of the existence of one of the most significant narcotics traffickers 
in the northern hemisphere, despite several references in lettex’s to the Depart- 
ment, to this very same man and his role in this case.' United States Attorney 
Jon 0. Newman, who is probably more knowledgeable about the case than anyone else

--- PAGE BREAK ---•6- 
,^^^The Honorable Hi chard G* Kleiudlenst 
April 2, 1969 
In the Government, hoc.

repeatedly shown that he has not exaiiilned oi' considered 
evidence preferred by the defense* J\iot yesterday, vhen he informed me of the 
decision of some nameless persons in the Department to go fon/ord ■vrith a re- 
trial, I suggested that he ought to listen to the taped conversations between 
Richard Lano and Mario Natolizio# He said that he had never heard that any such 
tapes existed.

I pointed out that these very same tapes had been offered in 
evidence in a post-trial motion for new trial, excluded over h:^ objection and 
made part of the record as on offer of proof.

He still replied that he had 
been unai/are that there had been any tapes.

Several knowledgeable people have expressed the opinion that the 
only way to explain the Miller case is the existence of on agent who is on 
DiPasqua's payroll.

There is xiaxch px'ecedent for this plausible theory.

However, I em convinced, on the evidence vrhlch literally abounds, that there is 
a far more mundane proximate cause of the Miller monster — namely, the sheer 
unwillingness of anybody in the Government to spend two Xfeeks studying the case.

VJliore the stakes are as high as they are here, such laziness is every bit as 
culpable as ovei-t coirruption, and equally destructive of the rule of lav, 
I became involved in this case because of its crude and slii5)le 
Injustice.

As the evidence accunulated,-however, I became equally concerned 
about the apparent Inability of the Government ~^in this case if not in others ~ 
to conduct a decent investigation and to come up ^th proof against the guilty 
parties.

It is shocking enough that the Government, with all its resources, 
prosecutes the wrong man; it is positively revolting to realize that in doing so 
the Government has been actively defending the mafia.

It is time for the 
Deportment to get back in the business of prosecuting criminals, not persecuting 
hoirdressex's.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is shocking enough that the Government, with all its resources, 
prosecutes the wrong man; it is positively revolting to realize that in doing so 
the Government has been actively defending the mafia. It is time for the 
Deportment to get back in the business of prosecuting criminals, not persecuting 
hoirdressex's. I am willing and EUIXIOUS to explain or otherwise rebut any evidence 
or innuendo in Government files which might tend to corroborate Caron*s identifica- 
tion of Miller. I have made this offer x*epeatedly. I have always been told that 
there is no such evidence or innuendo. If it-now appears that I was misled, and 
there realOy is some undisclosed theory or rumor tending to cast doubt on Miller*s 
claim of innocence, fundamental fairness, long denied in this case, requires an 
opportunity to bo heard before a firm decision on retrial is made. In closing, I repeat iry request for a session with you personally, 
and with a capable subordinate who is willing to get on top of the facts in this 
cose, and who owes no allegiance to anyone responsible for bringing it to its 
present shabby sate. Such a session will save the Government both monej*' and 
respect. It will also help to stop the trafficking in narocites now carried on 
by DiPasqua, Sabbatini and Hatalizio right in front of the glazed eyes of the 
Government. Sincerely, 
SD/jnf 
Enc. Steven Duke