TERROR


HE  INSIDE  STORY  OF  SOVIET  RULE  IN  GERMANY


l


THE  TERROR  MACHINE


The  inside  story
of  the  Soviet  Administration
in  Germany


GREGORY  KLIMOV


translated  from  the  German  by
H.  C.  Stevens

introduced  by

EDWARD  CRANKSHAW

and  ERNST  REUTER
Burgomaster  of  Berlin


PRAEGER  — NEW  YORK


2


BOOKS  THAT  MATTER


Published  in  the  United  States  of  America

in  1958

by  Frederick  A.  Praeger  Inc.,  Publishers
105  West  40 th  Street,  Net o York  18,  N.Y.
All  rights  reserved


Library  of  Congress  Catalog  Card  Number:  58-8080


3


Contents

Preface  by  Edward  Crankshaw  page  7

Author’s  note  ^

Introduction  by  Ernst  Reuter,  Burgomaster  of  Berlin  18

1.  The  Military  College  17

2.  Soldier  and  Citizen  85

3.  The  Song  of  the  Victor  82

4.  The  Rational  Basis  88

5.  The  Berlin  Kremlin  BR

6.  Occupation  Authorities  at  Work  115

7.  In  the  Control  Commission  185

8.  The  Fruits  of  Victory  182

9.  The  Soviet  Supreme  Staff  187

10.  A Major  in  the  State  Security  Service  218

11.  King  Atom  282

12.  Prisoners  of  the  System  251

13.  Between  Two  Worlds  278

14.  The  Dialectical  Cycle  292

15.  The  Marshal’s  Emissaries  820

16.  Stalin’s  Party  881

17.  A Member  of  the  Politbureau  850

18.  The  Wings  of  a Slave  871


4


Preface  by  Edward  Crankshaw

the  now  we  know  a good  deal  about  the  brutalities  inflicted  by
the  government  of  the  Soviet  Union  upon  those  who  incur  its
displeasure.  The  independent  testimonies  of  survivors  add  up  to  a
circumstantial  and  terrible  indictment,  so  that  it  may  be  fairly
said  that  anybody  who  still  denies  the  evidence  is  the  sort  of  person
who  would  deny  anything-or  the  sort  of  person  who,  to  preserve
his  own  illusions,  will  stop  his  ears  to  the  cries  of  the  dying  and
condemned.

Where  we  are  less  well  informed  is  about  the  effect  of  the  regime
on  the  great  mass  of  Soviet  citizens  who  have  managed  to  keep  out
of  serious  trouble.  It  is  not  enough  to  be  told  by  Soviet  refugees
what  Russia  looks  like  through  spectacles  acquired  in  Paris,  London,
or  New  York.  We  want  to  know  what  it  looked  like  when  they  were
still  in  Moscow,  Odessa,  or  Novosibirsk,  before  they  began  to  dream
of  escaping  to  the  West,  or  at  least  before  they  knew  enough  about
the  West  to  make  comparisons.  This  is  not  idle  curiosity:  it  is  the
only  way  of  getting  even  a faint  idea  of  how  the  r6gime  appears  to
those  who  must  still  live  under  it.

Major  Klimov's  book  is  very  helpful  in  this  matter.  It  is  a sober,
yet  vivid,  account  of  life  as  lived  inside  the  Soviet  bureaucracy
seen,  as  far  as  it  is  possible  for  an  outsider  to  judge,  very  much  as
it  appeared  to  the  narrator  before  he  decided  to  break  away-as
it  must  therefore  appear  to  countless  other  intelligent  Russians  who
are  engaged  at  this  moment  in  making  the  machine  work.  And
this  account  has  an  added  value  because  in  these  pages  the  machine
is  seen  functioning  not  in  the  mysterious  hinterland  of  the  Soviet
Union,  where  anything  may  happen  and  where  events  cannot  be
related  to  life  as  we  know  it,  but  in  the  middle  of  Western  Europe,
on  the  familiar  ground  of  occupied  Germany.  Major  Klimov  and  his
colleagues  at  the  Soviet  Army  headquarters  in  Berlin  were  grappling
not  with  Russians  but  with  Germans.


5


Preface


All  this  is  not  to  suggest  that  Major  Klimov  is  in  every  way  typical
of  his  compatriots.  Obviously  he  is  not,  or  he  would  not  have
written  this  remarkable  book.  He  has  an  intelligence,  a detachment,
perhaps  an  honesty  of  mind  well  above  the  average.  But  although
he  saw  through  the  hypocrisies  of  Stalinism  more  clearly  and
uncompromisingly  than  most  of  his  colleagues,  his  basic  emotional
reactions  and  mental  processes  do  not  seem  to  have  marked  him
off  from  them.  With  one  important  difference  he  accepted  what  they
accepted,  rejected  what  they  rejected,  and  for  a long  time  was
prepared  to  serve  his  government  as  a patriotic  citizen,  whether
on  the  battlefield  or  on  the  General  Staff.

The  important  difference  was  that  lie  was  too  stubborn  to  join,
as  a matter  of  convenience,  the  Communist  Party,  which  he,  like
most  of  the  rank  and  file  of  its  members,  despised.  He  was  prepared
to  put  up  with  the  regime  but  not,  if  he  could  help  it,  to  hand  himself
over  body  and  soul  to  it.  This  attitude  is  more  characteristic  of
Soviet  citizens  than  some  of  us  care  to  think.  It  is  probably  true
to  say  that  the  majority  of  them  accept  the  r6gime  and  try  to  make
the  best  of  it  not  so  much  because  they  have  no  choice  but  rather
because  it  has  never  occurred  to  them  that  they  may  in  fact  have  a
choice.  They  do  not  spend  sleepless  nights  brooding  over  the
iniquities  of  the  MVD:  like  all  human  beings  everywhere  they  take
life  as  they  find  it,  enjoy  it  when  they  can,  and  keep  their
reservations  to  themselves.  Klimov  differed  from  the  majority  in  that  he
was  not  prepared  to  keep  all  his  reservations  secret.  His  failure
to  join  the  Party  could  only  be,  interpreted  as  some  sort  of  a
demonstration.  And  it  was  because  of  this  that  he  found  himself
driven  in  the  end,  quite  suddenly,  to  take  the  decisive  step  and
abandon  his  homeland.  There  were,  to  be  true,  only  six  million  or
so  Party  members  at  that  time;  but  these  included  most  go-ahead
young  engineers  who  wanted  to  make  a career.  To  join  it  was
interpreted  as  an  act  of  total  submission.

Our  own  attitude  towards  the  Soviet  r6gime  (I  speak  of  people
who  have  taken  the  trouble  to  read  and  weigh  the  evidence)  is
coloured  above  all  by  horror  and  disgust  at  the  physical  brutalities,
as  expressed  in  police  beatings,  enforced  confessions,  arbitrary
prison  sentences  and  slave-labour  in  sickening  conditions.  The
reader  of  this  book  will  observe  with  interest  that  Major  Klimov
takes  the  physical  aspects  of  the  terror  in  his  stride:  the

degradation  of  the  prisoner  plays  a less  important  part  in  his  image  of  the  Soviet


6


Union  than  it  does  in  ours.  In  this  he  is,  I think,  characteristic
of  the  majority  of  Russians,  who  are  less  concerned  with  the  details
of  what  the  security  police  do  to  their  victims  than  with  the  simple
fact  of  their  ubiquity  and  power,  What  Major  Klimov  brings  up
with  extreme  sharpness  of  focus  is  something  far  less  frequently
and  effectively  reported  than  the  torturing  and  the  slave-driving:

I mean  the  sustained  and  terrible  pressure  on  the  minds  and  spirits
of  men  who  are  technically  free.  We  are  not  allowed  to  forget  that
this  pressure  has  its  fulcrum  in  physical  fear;  but  we  are  invited
to  contemplate  not  the  by  now  familiar  manifestations  of  that
pressure  but  its  effect  on  those  whose  lives  are  largely  spent  in  trying
to  avoid  the  midnight  arrest  and  the  labour  camps  of  the  Far
North.  The  price  they  pay  for  their  technical  freedom  is  the
corruption  of  their  minds  and  the  atrophy  of  their  will.

Different  readers  will  find  different  centres  of  interest  in  Major
Klimov's  narrative.  For  example,  it  may  be  read  as  an  enthralling
behind-the-scenes  account  of  the  workings  of  a Soviet  Army
headquarters,  or  as  a revelation  of  the  Soviet  way  with  occupied
territory.  But  for  me  its  chief  fascination  lies  in  the  slowly  emerging
picture  of  what  the  Soviet  regime  is  making  of  the  minds  and
characters  of  its  subjects.  Without  overstatement,  without
generalizing,  simply  by  recounting  his  own  personal  experience
of  life  under  Stalin,  Major  Klimov  shows  us  a system  which  is
rotten  at  the  core.  If  he  showed  us  only  that,  it  would  be  a simple
story-the  story  of  a system  which  fears  all  independence  of  mind
and  spirit  and  in  killing  it  digs  its  own  grave.  But  it  is  not  a simple
story.  The  truth  about  the  Soviet  Union  is  as  complicated  and  as
unattainable  as  the  truth  about  human  nature.  Because,  as  Major
Klimov  also  shows,  perhaps  unconsciously,  the  human  spirit  is  so
resilient  that  although  whole  areas  of  it  may  be  effectively  paralyzed
in  a multitude  of  individuals,  life  still  persists,  finding  its  fulfillment
in  a job  well  done,  or  in  the  heroic  fighting  of  a patriotic  war.  This
is  good  news  about  human  nature.  But  in  the  context  of  the  Soviet
Union  it  has  an  ironic  sting.  For  it  is  this  stubborn  spark  of
spiritual  life,  surviving  in  spite  of  all  the  efforts  of  authority  to
stamp  it  out,  which  alone  saves  the  regime  from  collapsing  under
its  own  dead  weight.  We  may  see  in  it  our  future  hope;  but  we
must  also  see  in  it  some  part  of  the  Kremlin's  present  strength.


7


Author's  Note


The  author  of  this  book  is  quite  an  ordinary  Russian,  soldier,
and  citizen.  He  has  rather  less  reason  to  take  offense  at  Stalin  than
the  majority  of  Russians.  He  was  born  about  the  time  of  the
October  Revolution  of  1917,  and  can  be  said  to  have  begun  active,
practical  life  in  the  early  days  of  the  war,  in  1941.  His  thoughts
and  experiences  are  those  of  the  young  generation  of  Soviet  people.
He  is  not  a renegade  communist,  for  he  has  never  been  a member
of  the  Soviet  Communist  Party.  He  has  come  to  know  the  theory
and  practice  of  Stalinist  Communism  in  the  same  way  as  every
other  Russian  has  come  to  know  them,  in  life  and  blood.  So  he  is
in  no  way  an  exception  to  the  rule  of  present-day  Soviet  society.

He  loves  freedom  and  democracy  no  more  and  no  less  than  any
other  Russian.

This  book  is  in  the  nature  of  a diary,  but  it  does  not  pretend
to  tell  the  author's  life-story.  It  reports  on  the  Soviet  man  of  the
present  day,  on  those  who  today  are  wearing  gold  epaulettes  and
are  driving  tanks  and  flying  aeroplanes,  those  who  are  living  and
working  behind  the  Iron  Curtain.

If  these  lines  ever  happen  to  find  their  way  to  Berlin,  many
Soviet  soldiers  and  officers-and  their  number  is  greater  than  is
indicated  in  this  book-will  secretly  think:  'This  book  reports  on
me.’


8


Introduction  by  Ernst  Reuter

The  decisive  problem  of  our  time  is  that  of  relations  with  the
totalitarian  Soviet  system.  Despite  all  the  astonishing  results  that
have  been  achieved,  not  only  in  western  Germany  but  in  other
European  countries  during  recent  years,  the  quite  understandable
disposition  of  a large  part  of  the  western  world  to  be  concerned
with  its  own  anxieties  and  to  devote  considerable  energy  to  the
restoration  of  its  own  conditions  cannot  dispose  of  the  fact  that
there  can  be  no  peace  in  the  world  so  long  as  the  Soviet  problem  is
not  solved.  Today  the  Soviets  stand  in  the  heart  of  Europe;  Lubeck
and  Hamburg,  as  well  as  Kassel  and  Frankfurt-on-Main,  lie  in  a
sense  at  their  gates;  the  bounds  between  the  two  worlds  run  along
the  Elbe  in  Germany,  the  geographical  centre  of  Europe;  and
countries  like  Poland,  Czechoslovakia,  Hungary  and  Rumania  are
under  the  domination  of  a foreign  power  which  is  never  prepared
to  give  up  its  ultimate  goal.  And  all  these  facts  show  that  there
can  be  no  serious  peace  so  long  as  they  endure.

They  cannot  endure,  because  they  will  not  be  regarded  as  a
lasting  solution  by  the  people  living  under  the  Soviet  yoke.  They
could  only  endure  if  the  western  world  were  to  compound  with  them.
But  the  western  world  cannot,  and  dare  not,  compound  with  these
conditions.  It  must  clearly  recognize  that  this  enemy  will  never
abandon  his  goal,  and  by  his  very  nature  cannot  renounce  his
conquests,  still  less  his  aim  to  incorporate  those  countries  not  yet
under  his  subjection.

Given  this  situation,  which  even  today  is  not  clearly  realized
by  many  millions  of  the  western  peoples,  it  is  of  decisive  importance
whether  we  can  keep  the  way  open  to  the  subjected  peoples,  and
also  find  a way  to  the  peoples  who  are  suffering  most  of  all
under  the  Soviet  yoke.  I mean  the  peoples  of  the  Soviet  Union,
and  above  all  the  Russians  themselves.  More  than  any  other
place,  Berlin  has  drunk  the  bitter  cup  of  Soviet  occupation  to  the
dregs,  and  it  is  by  no  means  fortuitous  that  it  is  in  Berlin  that  the
point  has  been  made  most  persistently  and  urgently  that  our
spiritual  and  political  dispute  is  not  with  the  Russian  people  but
with  the  Soviet  system.  Again  and  again,  we  in  Berlin  have  stressed
that  we  have  no  hatred  and  no  aversion  for  the  Russian  people,
whose  tremendous  cultural  achievements  we  all  know  and  recognize,
but  that  we  wish  to  live  and  could  live  in  true  friendship  with  that
nation.

In  the  present  historical  conditions  we  are  confronted  with  an
unprecedented  phenomenon.  I refer  to  the  fact  that  we  are


9


witnessing  an  emigration  from  Soviet  Russia  of  people  who  have  never
consciously  experienced  any  other  but  the  Soviet  regime,  In  all
the  former  periods  of  world  history,  emigrants  have  regularly
carried  with  them  memories  of  the  past.  When  they  were  compelled
to  leave  their  native  land  they  took  with  them  the  memory  of  what
they  regarded  as  a better  past,  the  memory  of  values  in  which  they
believed  and  which  they  considered  it  their  duty  to  defend,  even  in
emigration.  This  is  true  not  only  of  emigrants  from  Germany.  All
through  history,  every  emigration  has  had  this  traditional  back
ward  look.  But  now  we  find  that  'Soviet  men',  if  we  may  use
those  dreadful  words,  are  essentially  cutting  themselves  off  from
the  system  under  which  they  have  grown  up,  from  a system  whose
horrible  and  profoundly  inhuman  nature  they  have  been  forced
to  recognize  often  against  their  will,  and  only  after  a long  inward
struggle.

Today  we  see  that  the  identification  of  all  Germans  with  National
Socialism,  and  the  consequent  demand  for  'unconditional  surrender',
is  one  of  the  mistakes  for  which  all  of  us,  victors  and  vanquished,
must  alike  pay  heavily.  It  has  taken  time  for  this  error  to  be  men
tally  overcome,  and  meanwhile  tensions  have  been  engendered
which  it  would  have  been  better  to  avoid.  This  serious  political  and
psychological  error  must  never  be  repeated  on  any  future  occasion.
The  Russian  people  and  all  the  other  peoples  suffering  under  the
Soviet  yoke  cannot  and  must  not  be  made  responsible  for  their
regime.

One  of  the  most  important  tasks  of  the  present  time  is  to  develop
the  western  world's  understanding  of  the  internal  struggle  and
stress  of  relations  inside  Soviet  Russia.  We  must  work  for  realization
of  the  fact  that  often  men  who  carry  Soviet  passports  axe  even
compelled  to  become  members  of  the  Soviet  Communist  Party;  and

we  must  work  for  understanding  of  the  reason  why  such  men
cannot  be  made  politically  and  morally  responsible  for  the  regime
under  which  they  are  themselves  suffering.

Major  Klimov's  book  is  an  unusually  valuable  contribution  to
the  very  difficult  problem  of  understanding  what  is  going  on  inside
Soviet  Russia.  He  gives  a frequently  dramatic  description  of  his
own  process  of  development,  and  of  his  very  rich  experience  and
observation,  which  should  be  studied  by  all  who  have  the  future  of
the  West  at  heart.  Russia's  internal  development  during  the  war,
the  concessions  made  by  the  Stalin  regime  to  the  natural  and
inevitable  patriotic  feelings  of  the  Russians  who  were  called  upon
to  defend,  and  did  defend,  their  country  against  an  enemy
conqueror,  but  who  hoped  that  something  new  would  emerge  out  of


10


their  very  defense,  and  then  the  monstrous  post-war  reaction,
provide  a key  to  an  understanding  of  all  that  is  happening  in  that
country.  His  story  shows  the  profound  weaknesses  of  the  regime,
it  reveals  how  responsive  the  Russians  will  be  if  the  western  world
becomes  convinced  that  our  quarrel  is  not  with  Russia  as  such,  but
with  the  Soviet  regime.

In  our  own  German  history  we  have  experienced  something
similar  on  a small  scale.  After  the  61  an  of  the  war  for  freedom  of
1813  there  was  a reaction  which  made  genuine  freedom,  and  with
it  a genuine  unification  of  Germany,  historically  impossible.  We
must  get  out  of  the  habit  of  regarding  this  dispute  as  in  the  nature
of  a quarrel  between  East  and  West,  or  even  between  Germans  and
Russians.  In  Germany  especially,  but,  unfortunately,  not  only  in
Germany,  all  old-style  politicians  are  still  inclined  to  think  in
categories  derived  from  the  past.  They  do  not  realize  that  the  true
realities  of  life  are  the  hidden  forces  and  processes  at  work  within
the  people.  They  fail  to  realize  that  in  our  own  fight  for  freedom  our
strongest  allies  are  to  be  found  in  the  Russian  people  themselves:
people  who  are  no  less,  and  possibly  even  more,  freedom-loving
than  those  who  are  so  quick  to  turn  up  their  noses  at  the  alleged
and  actual  cultural  backwardness  of  the  East.  On  a former  occasion,
in  a statement  on  German-Russian  friendship,  I said  that  I still
hoped  to  have  another  opportunity  to  eat  'kasha'  with  a Russian
peasant  in  his  hut.  Perhaps  those  who  cannot  understand  the  depth
of  this  longing,  since  they  do  not  know  Russia,  will  get  some  under
standing  of  what  I had  in  mind  when  they  read  Klimov's  dramatic
description  of  a highly  placed  Russian  Party-general's  visit  to  his

peasant  father's  home.  For  those  who  can  read  and  understand,
Klimov's  book  gives  an  unequivocal  answer  to  the  question,
continually  being  asked,  how  we  are  to  solve  the  apparently  insoluble
problem  of  dealing  with  the  Soviets.  The  problem  will  be  solved
if  all  of,  us,  freed  from  the  domination  of  past  power-conceptions,
realize  that  the  peoples  themselves  must  be  liberated;  it  will  be
solved  when  the  peoples  realize  that  their  own  internal  freedom
will  only  be  secure  again  when  the  freedom  of  all  peoples  is  secure.
Klimov's  book  reveals  what  profound  possibilities  there  are  of  a
solution  on  the  lines  of  freedom  in  Russia.  So  it  is  a message  of  hope
for  us  all.  But  it  is  necessary,  too,  for  the  world  to  understand  how
difficult,  indeed,  practically  insoluble,  is  this  task  for  any  one
people,  if  it  has  to  live  under  such  a satanic  regime  as  the  present
Soviet  regime.  Klimov  reveals  so  impressively  the  dreadful  con
sequences  of  this  regime,  with  its  destruction  of  all  human  and
natural  inclinations  and  associations,  that  it  is  to  be  hoped  the
nonsensical  idea  which  millions  still  hold,  that  the  Russians  as  such


11


cannot  be  trusted  and  that  they  are  responsible  for  the  regime  under
which  they  are  suffering,  will  be  abolished.

There  are  still  only  a few  who  realize  that  we  must  win  the
genuine  friendship  of  the  Russian  people.  That  realization  is  more
present  in  the  minds  of  those  who  are  professionally  occupied  with
the  question.  It  must  be  our  task  to  bring  it  home  to  everybody.

Out  of  it  a force  of  explosive  effect  can  develop.  No  iron  curtain,
no  terror  measures  adopted  by  the  Soviet  regime,  will  be  able  to
hinder  the  long-distance  effect  within  Russia  of  an  inner  change  in
the  western  world's  attitude  to  that  country.  In  this  direction  we
can  forge  weapons  more  effective  than  tanks,  grenades,  and  atom
bombs.  In  this  direction  we  can  forge  weapons  that  will  free  the
world  without  resort  to  bloodshed.  Our  real  task  is  to  gather  around
us  men  who,  like  Klimov,  have  gone  through  the  purgatory  of
their  regime  and  have  retained  intact  an  extraordinary  strength  of
will  and  a genuine  love  of  truth.  I hope  that  this  book  will  do  even
more  than  descriptions  by  foreign  observers  to  help  in  shaping  our
determination  to  free  this  world,  and  with  it  the  whole  world  too.

ERNST  REUTER,

Burgmaster  of  Berlin.

Aschau  (Cheingau),  21  August  1951.


12


CHAPTER  ONE
The  Military  College

IAs  the  call  filtered  through  the  thick  cloth  of  my  military  great
coat  it  seemed  to  be  coming  from  an  immense  distance.  Surely  I
had  dreamt  it!  It  was  so  warm  under  my  coat,  I drew  it  right  up
over  my  ears.  My  bed  of  fir  branches  was  so  soft  and  comfortable.
Of  course  I'd  dreamt  it!

"Captain  Kli-mov!"

The  shout  again  disturbed  the  nocturnal  silence.  Then  someone
muttered  something  to  the  guard  pacing  up  and  down  between  the
rows  of  tents.

".  . . He's  ordered  to  report  immediately  to  the  staff  headquarters
of  the  front,"  the  voice  said  to  the  guard.  Then  once  more  came
the  shout:

"Captain  Klimov!"

"Hell!  Staff  headquarters!  That's  no  joke!"  I threw  off  my  great
coat,  and  at  once  felt  the  damp  air  from  the  nearby  swamp,  mingling
with  the  omnipresent,  distinctive  smell  of  front-line  soldiers.  In
visible  mosquitoes  were  buzzing.  Taking  care  not  to  disturb  my
comrades,  I crawled  out  of  the  tent  backward.

"What's  up?"  I muttered,  still  half  asleep.  "Whom  were  you
shouting  for?  Did  you  say  'Klimov'?"

"Comrade  Captain,  here's  a courier  for  you  from  the  staff,"
the  guard  reported  through  the  darkness.

"Where  is  he?  What's  it  all  about?"

"Comrade  Captain,  here's  an  order  for  you."  A sergeant  in  a
leather  helmet  handed  me  a document.  By  the  light  of  a torch  I
read:

'Captain  G.  P.  Klimov  is  ordered  to  report  to  the  Personnel
Department  of  the  Leningrad  front  staff  headquarters  on  July  17,
1944,  at  eight  hours.'  At  the  bottom  of  the  paper  was  a hand
written  note  from  my  commanding  officer:  'Order  to  report  at
once.'


13


'Hm,  this  might  be  interesting'  I thought.  "Have  you  anything
further  to  communicate?"  I asked  the  sergeant.

"I'm  ordered  to  take  you  to  the  staff  at  once,"  he  answered  as
he  kicked  down  the  starter  lever  of  his  motor-cycle  combination.

In  the  side-car  I quickly  forgot  my  weariness.  We  jolted  over
the  pot-holes  of  the  forest  road,  then  passed  through  a
half-destroyed,  deserted  village.  Against  the  slowly  lightening  sky  I
discerned  the  dark  chimneys,  the  roof  joists  splintered  by  artillery  fire.
The  motor-cycle  wheels  spun  in  the  sand;  then  we  made  a precarious
crossing  of  a grassgrown  ditch,  and  I was  relieved  to  feel  the  smooth
surface  of  the  Leningrad  high  road  beneath  us.

A light  early  morning  haze  was  hovering  over  the  steaming  earth,
and  now  the  little  houses  of  the  Leningrad  suburbs  began  to  appear
amid  the  green  of  trees.  In  the  distance  rose  the  chimneys  of  the
city's  factories  and  industrial  works.

What  was  behind  this  urgent  summons  to  staff  headquarters?

Away  back  in  the  tent  my  comrades  would  be  just  waking  up.

When  they  saw  my  empty  place  they  would  feel  pretty  glad  that
it  was  not  they  who  had  been  called  out.  But  then,  when  they
learned  that  I had  been  taken  urgently  to  the  staff,  they  would
scratch  their  napes  thoughtfully  and  exchange  uncertain  glances.

At  this  time  I was  serving  in  a K.U.K.S.  force,  undergoing  a
course  for  advanced  training  of  officer  personnel  for  the  Leningrad
front.  The  K.U.K.S.  was  a very  unusual  type  of  military  formation,
a 'curiosity  shop',  as  the  members  of  the  course  themselves  called
it.  It  consisted  of  comparatively  young  men  with  beards  and  whiskers
of  extraordinary  shapes  and  sizes.  These  grim-looking  individuals
had  a queer  habit  of  wearing  fur  hats  in  the  hottest  of  weather.

In  fact  they  were  former  officers  and  commanders  of  partisan
detachments,  who  were  being  purged  of  their  partisan  ideas  and
spirit  and  were  having  army  discipline  drummed  into  them.

Shortly  after  the  liberation  of  Leningrad  from  the  German
blockade  in  January  1944  the  city  celebrated  the  triumphal  entry
of  partisans  of  the  Leningrad  province.  But  within  a month
Narcomvnudel  Special  Brigades  had  to  be  ordered  hurriedly  to  the  city
to  disarm  the  overzealous  men  of  the  woods.  The  partisans  were
behaving  like  the  conquerors  of  an  enemy  fortress  and  were  using
hand-grenades  and  automatic  pistols  against  the  militia  who  tried
to  reduce  them  to  order.  They  regarded  every  militiaman  as  an
hereditary  enemy  and  openly  boasted  of  how  many  they  had
bumped  off.

After  the  partisans  had  been  disarmed  they  were  packed  quietly


14


into  cattle-trucks  and  sent  to  special  Narcomvnudel  camps.  The
newspapers  had  glorified  the  'wild'  partisans  as  patriotic  national
heroes,  but  when  they  emerged  from  their  forests  into  the  light  of
day  they  at  once  came  under  the  sharp  eyes  of  the  Narcomvnudel.
Those  partisans  who  were  members  of  the  regular  detachments
built  up  out  of  Red  Army  personnel,  and  the  semi-regulars  under
commanders  sent  from  the  central  command  and  obeying  orders
issued  by  the  central  radio  and  air  force,  were  acceptable.  But
anyone  who  had  fought  in  the  forests  and  had  had  to  resort  to
straightforward  'food  requisitioning"  when  their  stocks  of  home
made  vodka  and  fat  bacon  came  to  an  end-God  help  them.  The
N.K.V.D.  put  them  through  a thorough  purging  before  passing
them  on  to  the  regular  army,  and  their  commanders  were  sent  to
receive  special  training  in  the  K.U.K.S.,  such  as  the  one  for  the
Leningrad  front.

While  in  the  K.U.K.S.  I often  heard  the  enigmatic  questions:

"Where  are  you  from?  Out  of  the  Eighth?"

"No,  the  Ninth,"  the  answer  would  come  reluctantly.

After  a time  I found  out  that  the  'Eighth'  and  the  'Ninth'  were
storming  battalions  on  the  Leningrad  front.  'Storming  battalion'
was  the  official  name  for  punitive  battalions  in  which  officers  served
as  rank-and-file  soldiers  and  were  sent  as  such  into  battle.  If  they
came  back  alive  they  were  restored  to  their  previous  officer's  rank.

The  losses  of  storming  battalions  regularly  amounted  to  90  and
even  95  per  cent  of  the  strength  in  every  engagement.

As  the  Red  Army  went  over  to  the  offensive  and  began  to  liberate
the  occupied  areas,  all  the  former  Soviet  officers  found  in  these
areas  were  rounded  up,  and,  like  the  partisans,  were  sent  to  special
Narcomvnudel  camps.  Those  whom  the  N.K.V.D.  did  not  regard
as  worthy  of  dying  on  the  gallows  were  given  a preliminary  purge,
and  then  sent  to  the  next  department  of  the  'cleansing  institution',
to  a storming  battalion.  There  they  were  afforded  plenty  of
opportunity  to  purge  their  crime  against  the  Fatherland  with  their  blood.

Let  them  fight!  There  would  be  time  to  deal  with  them  properly
after  the  war!

Those  who  survived  the  ordeal  by  fire  were  usually  sent  straight
from  hospital-freedom  from,%  storming  battalion  was  gained  only
at  the  price  of  blood-to  the  K.U.K.S.  for  final  retraining.  A
number  of  my  comrades  in  the  K.U.K.S.  had  paybooks  which  after
the  denotation  'soldier'  or  'infantryman'  gave  the  rank  of


15


'regimental  commissar'  or  'squadron  commander'  in  brackets.

Yes,  there  was  some  very  interesting  human  material  in  our
K.U.K.S.!  In  reality  it  was  a permanent  reserve  for  the  Leningrad
front.  The  officers  being  retrained  were  not  allowed  to  lounge  about,
they  had  to  play  at  soldiers  in  deadly  earnest.  The  former
commander  of  a machine-gun  company  had  to  learn  how  to  take  to
pieces  and  reassemble  a machine-gun  of  the  Maxim  pattern,  while
the  commander  of  a rifleman's  battalion  was  instructed  in  the
workings  of  the  unsurpassable  '1891  muster'  rifle.

There  was  a large  percentage  of  Ukrainians  in  the  K.U.K.S.

When  the  Red  Army  retreated  from  the  Ukraine  many  soldiers  who
came  from  that  area  simply  threw  their  arms  into  the  nearest  ditch
and  'went  home'.  But  when  the  Red  Army  began  to  drive  the
Germans  out  again  these  'sons  of  the  soil'  were  hastily  rounded  up,
weapons  were  thrust  into  their  hands,  and  they  were  sent,  just  as
they  were,  even  without  uniforms,  into  the  front  line.  The  banks
of  the  Dnieper  were  strewn  with  corpses  in  civilian  clothing.

Ordinary  soldiers  were  simply  returned  to  active  service,  usually
without  any  preliminary  purge  by  the  N.K.V.D.  Personal  accounts
between  State  and  individual  could  be  settled  later;  at  that  moment
there  was  more  need  of  cannon  fodder  for  the  army  than  labour
power  for  the  concentration  camps.

Though  the  feeling  never  came  into  the  open,  there  was  constant
tension  between  the  Ukrainians  and  the  Russians  in  our  K.U.K.S.
The  Ukrainians  usually  kept  their  mouths  shut,  like  younger
brothers  with  bad  consciences.  The  Russians  only  let  fall  a good
natured:  "Ah,  you  Khokols!"  ( Russian  term  of  contempt  for
Ukranians.  )

"Ah,  those  Germans!"  The  Ukrainians  sighed  in  reply.  "They
abused  our  trust,  the  blighters  !"

One  day  questionnaires  were  circulated  through  the  battalions  of
the  K.U.K.S.;  the  command  was  attempting  to  establish  which  of
the  members  of  the  course  were  Crimean  Tatars.  I remember  noting
Lieutenant  Chaifutinov's  anxious  face  as  he  sat  filling  in  the
questions  inquiring  into  his  family.  We  had  heard  rumours  that
by  the  Kremlin's  order  the  entire  Tatar  population  of  the  Crimean
Autonomous  Republic  was  to  be  deported;  several  million  people
were  to  be  transferred  to  Siberia,  and  their  republic  abolished,
because  of  their  'disloyal  attitude  to  the  Soviet  regime  during  the
German  occupation'.  This  order  provoked  conversations  like  the
following  among  members  of  our  course:

"Do  you  know  how  the  Kalmuks  behaved  at  Stalingrad?  The


16


Germans  attacked,  but  they  prepared  the  way.  They  cut  the
throats  of  whole  Soviet  regiments  in  the  night."

"I'd  like  to  know  why  the  Don  and  Kuban  cossacks  looked  on
and  did  nothing,"  someone  interjected.

"What  else  were  the  cossacks  to  do?"  remarked  a third.  "You
won't  find  a single  real  cossack  in  the  cossack  forces  today."

These  officers  saw  nothing  surprising  in  the  fact  that  the  Kalmuks
had  exterminated  their  regiments,  they  were  only  amazed  that  the
cossacks  had  stood  by  idly.  For  in  the  past  the  Don  and  Kuban
cossack  districts  had  been  famous  as  centres  of  opposition  to  the
Soviet  regime.  The  artificially  created  famine  disaster  of  1933  had
been  forced  through  in  those  districts  with  more  than  the  usual
brutality.  Down  to  1936  the  cossacks  had  been  the  only  national
group  not  called  up  into  the  regular  army.  And  so  it  seemed  in
credible  that  the  cossacks,  who  had  been  renowned  throughout
history  for  their  love  of  freedom,  had  not  risen  against  the  Soviets.

Among  the  participants  in  the  course  were  many  former  political
officers  of  the  Red  Army.  A number  of  men  in  this  category  had
lost  their  heads  already  in  the  Narcomvnudel  special  camps,  and
those  few  who  survived  both  these  camps  and  the  storming  battalions
must  have  had  an  unusually  tenacious  grip  on  life.  And  hardly  had
they  arrived  at  the  K.U.K.S.,  than  they  began  with  true  communist
wolfishness  to  clutch  at  their  former  jobs  as  shepherds  of  the  human
herds.  Despite  all  the  sifting  and  purging  they  had  experienced
through  the  N.K.V.D.  even  in  the  K.U.K.S.  they  managed  some
how  to  get  into  positions  as  commanders  of  sub-divisions  of  our
course.  The  other  officers  took  every  opportunity  to  address  them
as  'Comrade  Political  Director'  or  'Comrade  Commissar',  though
these  ranks  had  been  abolished  in  the  army  for  some  time.

Despite,  or  even  because  of  the  fact  that  the  'curiosity  shop'

'",as  such  a haphazard  collection  of  widely  varied  types,  there  was

always  much  coming  and  going.  Almost  every  day  mysterious
commissions  visited  us  in  quest  of  various  kinds  of  'commodities'.  For
instance,  one  commission  came  in  search  of  partisans  for
Yugoslavia.  The  conditions  were:  25,000  roubles  in  cash,  a month's  leave,
then  a parachute  drop  into  that  country.  Our  men  needed  no  special
training  for  such  activities.  There  was  a queue  of  candidates,  the
majority  being  former  partisans  who  could  not  endure  army
discipline.

Then  came  a general  search  for  men  with  Polish  surnames,  as
recruits  for  the  Polish  'National'  Army.  Then  there  was  a call  for
candidates  to  the  Red  Army  Intelligence  School.  Conditions:
nobody  accepted  under  the  rank  of  major,  and  graduation  from


17


high  school.  Yet  even  these  strict  standards  could  be  met  over
and  over  again.

These  'trading  activities'  were  due  to  the  great  shortage  of  special
cadres,  which  were  particularly  lacking  in  the  army.  And  the
K.U.K.S.  contained  a mass  of  fresh,  still  unsorted  human  material,
which  had  not  been  available  until  recently,  because  it  had  been
isolated  in  partisan  bands  or  in  the  occupied  areas.

The  majority  of  my  K.U.K.S.  comrades  were  men  almost  literally
from  the  other  world.  One  youngster  had  fled  right  across  Europe
from  a German  prisoner-of-war  camp  in  France.  When  he  reached
the  Russian  area  under  German  occupation  he  was  captured  a second
time,  put  into  a concentration  camp,  and  then  escaped  again.

Twice  he  had  been  set  up  against  a wall  and  had  fallen  seriously
wounded,  getting  away  by  worming  his  way  out  from  under  his
comrades'  corpses  in  the  mass  grave.  He  had  had  two  years  as  a
partisan  in  the  swamps  and  forests  around  Leningrad.  And  as
a reward  for  his  love  of  the  fatherland  he  had  been  'purged'  in  a
Narcomvmudel  camp,  had  experienced  bloodbaths  in  a storming
battalion,  and  at  last  had  found  the  quiet  haven  of  the  K.U.K.S.
Practically  every  member  of  the  course  had  had  a similar  past.

They  were  the  few  survivors.  Naturally,  they  were  not  very  fond
of  telling  their  life-stories.

In  such  company  I was  a real  greenhorn,  as  innocent  as  a new
born  babe.  I had  been  sent  to  the  K.U.K.S.  after  serving  in  the
96th  Special  Regiment  of  Reserve  Officers.  I had  been  wounded  in
the  fight  for  Novgorod,  and  had  spent  three  months  in  hospital.

It  was  during  my  stay  in  hospital,  which  was  the  former  Leningrad
Palace  of  Engineers,  that  all  the  city  was  staggered  by
unexpected  news.  By  order  of  the  Leningrad  City  Soviet  all  the
important,  historical  streets  and  squares  were  to  have  their  former,
pre-revolutionary  names  restored  to  them.  Thus  the  Prospekt  of
October  25th  was  renamed  once  more  the  Nevsky  Prospekt;  the
Field  of  Mars  was  relieved  of  its  tongue-twisting  revolutionary  name
and  became  again  the  Field  of  Mars.  The  changes  left  us  gaping,
if  things  moved  at  this  rate  even  the  collective  farms  would  be
abolished  ....

The  staff  of  the  Leningrad  front  had  its  headquarters  in  the
horseshoe-shaped  former  General  Staff  building,  opposite  the  Winter
Palace.  The  way  to  the  Personnel  Department  lay  through  the
famous  and  historic  Arches  of  the  General  Staff.  It  was  through
these  Arches  that  the  revolutionary  sailors  and  red  guards  of
Petrograd  had  stormed  the  Winter  Palace  in  1917.

On  the  broad  window  sills  of  the  reception  room  I found  several


18


officers  sitting,  dangling  their  legs.

"Do  you  want  this  place  too,  Captain?"  one  of  them  asked  me.

When  I nodded  he  asked  me  the  unexpected  question:  "Can  you
speak  any  foreign  language?"

"Why,  what's  going  on  here?"  I asked  in  turn.

"At  the  moment  it's  an  examination  in  foreign  languages,"  a
lieutenant  explained.  "It's  something  to  do  with  selection  for  some
special  school,  or  possibly  a college,"  another  added.  "The  first
requisite  is  knowledge  of  some  foreign  language,  and  graduation  in
secondary  education.  Obviously  it's  something  important.  It's  even
said  to  involve  return  to  Moscow  he  said  in  a nostalgic  tone,
and  clicked  his  tongue  hopelessly.

An  officer,  very  red  and  sweating,  shot  through  the  door.  "Oh,
hell!  ...  What's  the  German  for  'wall'?  I knew  'window',  I knew
'table',  but  I simply  couldn't  remember  'wall'.  Damn  it  all!  Listen,
boys!  Mug  up  all  the  names  of  things  you  find  in  a room.  He  points
with  his  finger  and  asks  their  names."

Of  the  officers  in  that  reception  room,  two  knew  Finnish,  one
Rumanian,  and  the  others  had  school  knowledge  of  German  and
English.  I knew  well  enough  what  'school  knowledge'  meant.  But
the  less  chance  a man  has,  the  greater  becomes  his  desire  to  reach
the  mysterious  spot  where  this  linguistic  knowledge  is  required.
Everything  in  any  way  associated  with  the  thought  of  'abroad'
automatically  stimulated  one's  curiosity  and  imagination.

I couldn't  help  smirking.  So  here  we  wouldn't  be  concerned  with

the  five  parts  of  the  breech  of  an  1891  rifle  I stretched  myself
comfortably  on  a distant  bench  and  attempted  to  continue  my  rudely
interrupted  sleep.  When  my  name  was  called  I went  in,  clicked  my
heels  with  all  the  precision  laid  down  by  Hitler's  army  regulations
and  reported  in  German  in  such  a thunderous  voice  that  the  major
sitting  at  the  desk  started  back  in  alarm.  He  stared  at  me  in
astonishment;  possibly  he  was  wondering  whether  he  should  ask  me
the  German  for  'table'  or  'window'.  Then  lie  asked  me  a question
in  Russian.  I answered  in  German.  He  spoke  again  in  Russian,  I
once  more  answered  in  German.  At  last  he  had  to  laugh.  As  he
invited  me  to  sit  down  he  asked:

"Where  have  you  picked  it  up,  Captain?"

I took  out  the  documents  relating  to  my  civilian  life  before  call-up
-it  was  a miracle  that  I still  had  them  safely-and  laid  them  on
the  table.


19


"Ah,  this  is  wonderful!"  he  remarked.  "I  really  took  you  for  a
German  at  first.  I'll  present  you  to  the  colonel  at  once."

He  showed  me  into  the  next  room  and  introduced  me  to  the
head  of  the  Personnel  Department.  "Comrade  Colonel,"  he  said,  "I
think  we've  got  a genuine  candidate  this  time!  You  needn't  worry
about  his  language,  he  really  put  the  wind  up  me.  I thought  he
must  be  a diversionist."  He  laid  my  papers  on  the  desk  and
withdrew.

The  colonel  took  his  advice,  and  did  not  bother  about  language
tests.  He  started  at  once  on  the  moral  aspect.  The  moral  and
political  reliability  of  an  officer  is  the  most  important  factor,  and
he  is  subjected  to  strict  tests  in  this  respect.

"You  see,  Captain  Klimov,"  the  colonel  began,  "we're  thinking
of  sending  you  to  a responsible  and  privileged  higher  s h 1)1  of
the  Red  Army."  He  spoke  in  tones  of  great  solemnity.  "You  will
understand  me  better  if  I describe  the  position  to  you.  Moscow
demands  a fixed  quota  of  candidates  from  us  every  month.  We  send
them  to  Moscow,  and  there  all  those  who  fail  to  pass  are  sent  back
to  us.  We  send  all  failures  to  a punitive  company,"  he  remarked
casually,  giving  me  a meaning  look.  "Every  day  Moscow  bombards
us  with  the  demand:  'send  us  men'.  But  we  haven't  any.  That's
one  aspect  of  the  problem.  Now  for  the  second.  You're  in  the
K.U.K.S.,  and  there  are  a lot  of  men  with  doubtful  pasts  in  the
K.U.K.S.  I don't  ask  you  your  record.  But  one  thing  is  sure:  you've
got  to  be  spotlessly  clean!  Otherwise  you'll  find  yourself  in  a different
place  from  the  one  we  propose  to  send  you  to.  And  we've  got  to
send  you!  Get  that?"

I liked  the  colonel's  unusual  frankness.  I assured  him  that  I was
quite  immaculate.

"I  don't  care  a damn  whether  you're  immaculate  or  not,"  he
answered.  "You've  got  some  extraordinary  fellows  in  your  K.U.K.S.
Only  yesterday  one  of  your  former  colonels  swore  to  me  that  he
was  a lieutenant  of  infantry.  We  wanted  to  send  him  to  the
intelligence  corps  school,  but  he  dug  his  feet  in  like  a mule  and  said
he  couldn't  write."

I was  not  in  the  least  surprised.  Men  who  had  held  responsible
posts  and  had  passed  through  the  usual  preliminaries  to  K.U.K.S.
lost  all  desire  for  rank  and  responsibility  and  had  only  one  wish-a
quiet  life.

"You  may  try  to  think  up  something  on  those  lines,"  the  colonel
went  on.  "So  I repeat,  this  is  a serious  matter.  If  we  consider  it
necessary  to  send  you  we  shall  send  you!  And  no  monkey  tricks,  or


20


we'll  report  you  as  refusing  to  perform  military  service.  You  know
what  that  means  Field  court-martial!"  he  explained  weightily.  He
knew  well  enough  that  members  of  K.U.K.S.  courses  and  former
storming  battalion  men  were  not  to  be  intimidated  with  threats
of  punitive  companies.  Only  a court-martial,  with  certain  death  to
follow,  made  any  impression  on  such  cases.

He  gave  me  a critical  glance  and  picked  up  the  telephone  to  get
contact  with  the  staff  of  my  K.U.K.S.

"We're  sending  your  Klimov  away.  Get  his  documents  ready.

He  must  leave  for  Moscow  by  the  twelve  noon  train,"  he  told  the
chief  of  staff.  "And  one  other  thing:  why  do  you  let  your  men  go
around  looking  like  tramps?  Fit  him  out  at  once.  He  mustn't  bring
shame  on  our  front  when  he  arrives  in  Moscow."

A few  minutes  later,  in  an  adjoining  room,  I was  handed  a sealed
and  stamped  packet  which  contained  my  personal  documents  and
traveling  passes  for  Moscow.

Back  in  the  reception  room,  I was  surrounded  by  an  excited
crowd  of  candidates.  "Well,  how  did  it  go?  Sunk?  Were  the
questions  lousy?"

I shrugged  my  shoulders  and  showed  my  order  for  Moscow.  "So
it  really  is  Moscow!"  they  exclaimed.  "Well,  good  luck!"  and  they
shook  my  hands.

Out  of  the  cool  twilight  of  the  archways,  I stepped  into  the

sunlit  Winter  Palace  Square.  I simply  couldn't  believe  that  I wasn't
dreaming!  In  three  hours  I would  be  on  the  train  to  Moscow!

Such  luck,  such  incredible  luck,  made  me  feel  queer.  I knew  of  lots
of  officers,  men  whose  homes  were  in  Leningrad,  who  had  served  on
the  Leningrad  front  for  three  years  without  a single  leave  in  the
city.  Even  in  the  K.U.K.S.  officers  who  came  from  Leningrad  were
not  allowed  local  leave.  When  we  went  to  the  town-baths  or  on
sightseeing  tours  we  were  marched  in  formation.  As  for  Muscovites,
even  such  a short  and  official  visit  to  their  home  city  was  an  un
realizable  dream.  Was  it  really  possible  that  I was  going  home?

I looked  about  me.  Yes,  this  was  Leningrad,  but  in  my  pocket
was  a voucher  opening  my  way  to  Moscow.  Standing  in  the  middle
of  the  empty  Winter  Palace  Square,  I took  it  out  and  read  it.  I
deliberately  refused  to  give  way  to  the  patrols  in  green  caps  who
were  to  be  seen  everywhere  on  the  sidewalks  and  at  the  street
crossings.  Leningrad  was  in  the  frontier  zone,  and  the  patrols  of
the  Narcomvnudel  frontier  regiments  were  particularly  strong  in
the  city.  The  greencaps  were  the  bitterest  enemies  of  all  men  in
uniform.  It  was  not  so  long  since  I myself  had  spent  two  days  and


21


nights  in  a cold  cell  at  their  headquarters,  without  food  and  without
cigarettes,  until  an  officer  armed  with  a machine-pistol  had  come
from  K.U.K.S.  to  take  me  back.  My  crime  had  been  that  I had  left
the  baths  and  gone  out  into  the  street.  While  our  command  was
having  a steam-bath  I had  a quick  wash  and  slipped  out  into  the
fresh  spring  air.  Right  outside  the  door  I had  been  picked  up  as  a
deserter  by  the  greencaps.  But  today  I could  cock  a snook  at  them.
Today  I was  going  to  Moscow.

In  the  K.U.K.S.  staff  headquarters  a princely  reception  was
awaiting  me.  In  half  an  hour  I was  completely  refitted  from  head
to  foot;  new  cap,  new  uniform,  even  a new  pack,  filled  with  cans
and  cigarettes.  Punctually  at  midday  I presented  my  traveling
voucher  at  the  October  railway  station  ticket  office.

"Fifty-six  roubles,"  the  booking  clerk  said.  I felt  hurriedly  in
my  pockets.  Hell,  of  course  I needed  money!  The  one  thing  I lacked.
During  my  soldiering  I had  quite  forgotten  what  it  was.  My  pay
was  sent  home  automatically.  A hopeless  situation?  Not  at  all!

Under  socialism  everything  is  very  simple,  life  is  absurdly  easy.  I
darted  out  into  the  station  square,  tore  open  my  pack,  and  whistled.
Hardly  had  I got  the  pack  open  when  customers  came  running  up.
Five  minutes  later,  lighter  by  a few  cans  of  food,  but  with  my
pockets  full  of  roubles,  I was  back  at  the  ticket  office.  And  ten
minutes  later  the  train  was  carrying  me  to  Moscow.

Through  the  carriage  window  I gazed  at  the  straw-thatched  roofs
of  villages,  at  poverty-stricken  fields  and  glittering  lakes,  bombed
out  stations.  And  yet  I felt  very  light-hearted.  Despite  all  the
German  resistance,  our  army  was  advancing,  The  scales  of  history
were  sinking  slowly  but  surely  in  our  favour.

It  was  not  much  more  than  a month  since  the  K.U.K.S.  had
buzzed  like  an  excited  swarm  of  bees:  the  Allies  had  landed  at  last
on  the  Normandy  coast.  For  several  days  we  had  lived  in  the  fear
that  the  landing  troops  might  be  thrown  back  into  the  sea,  or  that
it  was  only  another  diplomatic,  not  a military,  manoeuvre.  I had
no  connection  with  the  men  in  the  Kremlin  and  had  no  idea  what
they  thought  about  it.  But  we  in  the  Red  Army  had  read  all  the
Soviet  papers  with  their  continual  appeals  for  help,  and  even  their
frequent  charges  that  the  Allies  were  pursuing  a policy  of  deliberate
inactivity.

We  who  were  serving  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  front  knew
only  too  well  what  sacrifices  were  called  for  in  an  offensive,  what
sacrifices  lay  behind  the  laconic  report  of  the  Information  Bureau:
'On  the  Narva  front,  no  change.'  We  knew  that  whole  divisions  were
being  slaughtered  to  the  last  man  in  fruitless  attempts  to  break
through  the  Narva  front.  The  Estonian  detachments  fighting  with


22


the  German  Army  held  those  positions  on  the  frontier  of  their  native
land,  and  they  held  out  to  their  last  breath;  they  were  even  more
obdurate  than  the  Germans.  But  the  Information  Bureau  reported:

'No  change'.  The  only  important  things  were  visible  results,  not
human  lives.  And  that  is  the  case  wherever  war  is  waged.

But  now  we  felt  grateful  to  our  Allies,  not  only  for  their  mountains
of  canned  foods,  soldiers'  greatcoats,  and  even  buttons,  but  for  the
blood  they  were  shedding  in  the  common  cause.  An  iron  grip  had
closed  round  Germany's  throat.  Even  though  life  was  hard,  though
hungry  women  and  children  held  out  their  hands,  begging,  at  every
railway  station,  despite  everything  we  were  going  forward  to
victory.  We  believed  in  victory,  and  even  more  strongly  in  some
thing  different  that  would  come  after  the  victory.

The  story  goes  that  when  he  heard  the  Allies  had  landed  in  France
Stalin  stamped  his  foot  with  rage.  I don't  know  whether  the  story
is  true,  but  I know  we  soldiers  were  filled  with  joy.  The  politicians
share  out  Europe,  we  soldiers  shared  out  our  bread  and  our  blood.

So  now  I was  returning  to  Moscow.  My  thoughts  wandered  back  to  the
day  I had  left  it.  It  seemed  ages  and  ages  ago.  After  a fine  day  in
the  country  Genia  and  I were  returning  in  the  cool  autumn  evening  by
th  suburban  electric  train  to  Moscow.  I took  the  city  military
commmand's  order  that  I was  to  re-register  out  of  my  pocket  and
remarked:  "I'll  go  along  and  get  them  to  stamp  my  exemption  tomorrow
morning,  and  then  I'll  come  along  to  you.  And  we'll  see  about  it ...

But  supposing  they  keep  you  there!"  Her  voice  quivered  with
agitation,  her  black  eyes  looked  at  me  anxiously.  I was  terribly
grateful  for  those  words  and  that  look.

"Don't  talk  rubbish!  It  isn't  the  first  time!"  I answered.

Next  morning  I went  in  my  padded  military  jacket,  in  my  blue
trousers  thrust  into  my  military  boots,  and  my  extraordinary
headgear,  to  report  to  the  Military  Commissariat.  By  wartime
standards  I was  dressed  like  a gentleman.  It  was  common  form
to  be  dressed  like  that  in  wartime  Moscow,  and  it  saved
you  a lot  of  hostile  scowls.  In  my  pocket  I had  Conan  Doyle's
The  Sign  of  Four,  which  I read  in  the  Underground  to  practise
my  English.

After  handing  in  my  papers  at  the  Second  Department  of  the
Military  Commissariat  I slipped  into  a corner  and  took  out
to  pass  the  time.  The  room  was  crowded  with  an  extraordinary
collection  of  men:  chalk-white  faces,  unshaven  cheeks,  shabby
clothes  much  too  light  for  the  time  of  year.  Two  militiamen
were  leaning  lazily  against  the  door.  I read  while  I waited  for  my


23


exemption  paper  to  be  handed  back,  stamped:  re-registered',
out  with

After  some  time  the  head  of  the  department  came  out  with
a list.  He  read  out  a number  of  names,  including  mine.  I had  no  idea
what  the  list  was  for.  The  moment  he  left  the  room  the  militiamen
gave  the  order:  "Fall  in  in  the  street".

We  were  all,  including  myself,  with  my  index  finger  still  between
two  pages  of  my  book,  driven  out  into  the  yard.  What  joke  was
this?  They  couldn't  do  this  to  me!  I'd  got  exemption!  I tried
to  turn  off  to  the  left,  and  found  myself  looking  into  the  muzzle  of

revolver.  To  the  right:  another  revolver.

"No  protests!"  the  militiamen  shouted.  "So  long  as  you're  in  our
charge  you're  prisoners.  When  we've  handed  you  over  at  the
assembly  point  you'll  be  free  again  ...

Thus  I marched  through  Moscow,  guarded  by  militiamen  with
revolvers  at  the  ready.

A mistake,  you  think?  Nothing  of  the  sort.  There  was  a terrible
shortage  of  reserves  for  the  front.  Yet  the  needs  of  the  rear  were
just  as  great.  The  rear  issued  exemptions  from  military  service.

But  the  front  carried  off  the  men,  together  with  their  exemptions.
Behind  it  all  was  the  'Plan'.

According  to  the  Plan  the  Military  Commissariat  had  to  send
fifty  men  to  the  assembly  point  that  day.  What  else  could  they  do
but  rake  them  in  wherever  they  could?  So  they  hauled  the  short
term  prisoners  out  of  the  prisons-most  of  them  were  in  for  turning
up  late  or  slacking  at  work-took  them  under  escort  to  the  Military
Commissariat  and  then  to  the  assembly  point.  And  if  they  were  still
short  of  men  for  the  Plan,  they  threw  in  a few  'exempted'  men.

And  that  was  how  an  exempted  scientific  worker  in  the  Molotov
Energetics  Institute,  which  had  been  awarded  the  Order  of  Lenin,
became  a soldier.  Neither  Lenin  nor  Molotov  made  any  difference.
This  was  more  exciting  than  Conan  Doyle.  The  one  pity  was  that
I had  no  chance  to  say  goodbye  to  Genia.

I soon  learned  to  march  as  bravely  as  the  rest.  We  were  des
patched  to  the  front,  and  I bawled  out  the  Russian  folk-song  at  the
top  of  my  voice:

"Nightingale,  nightingale,  little  bird,  why  don't  you  sing  me  a
cheerful  song


24


All  the  songs  of  the  pre-war  period,  about  the  'Leader',  the
proletariat',  and  similar  eyewash,  had  been  swept  out  of  the  army
as  though  by  the  mighty  incantation  of  a magician.  Instead,  the
genuine  Russian  marching  songs  conquered  the  soldiers'  hearts.

Even  quite  unmusical  fellows  bawled  them  out,  simply  because
they  were  now  again  allowed  to  sing  about  neighing  steeds,  old
mothers,  and  young  beauties.  The  magician  in  the  Kremlin  realized
that  sue  h things  were  closer  to  the  soldiers'  hearts  than  Karl  Marx's
beard.

Now  I was  returning  to  Moscow.  Only  yesterday  I had  not  dared
even  to  dream  of  such  a thing.  I recalled  when  I had  last  thought
of  Moscow,  one  sunny  spring  day,  as  I wandered  through  a lonely
glade  in  the  dense  forest  of  the  Karelian  Peninsula,  I had  come  upon
a deep  shell  crater  overgrown  with  young  green.  At  the  bottom,
greenish  bog-water  shimmered  like  transparent  glass.  Forest  water,

as  clear  as  crystal,  which  we  often  scooped  up  in  our  helmets,
drink.  But  there,  head  in  the  water,  his  arms  flung  out  in  a I
spasm,  lay  the  body  of  an  enemy  soldier.

As  I descended,  digging  my  heels  into  the  soil,  clumps  of
earth  rolled  down  into  the  pool.  Little  ripples  wrinkled  the  surface  a
set  the  dead  man's  hair  in  gentle  movement  with  their  mournful
caresses.  Oppressed  by  this  close  union  of  life  and  death,  I squat
down.  But  at  last  my  curiosity  overcame  my  respect  for  death.,
carefully  opened  the  man's  breast-pocket  and  took  out  a packet  I
papers.

The  usual  military  documents,  with  the  eagle  astride  the
swastika  letters  from  home,  and  the  photo  of  an  attractive,  fair-haired  gi
in  summer  dress.  The  photo  was  carefully  wrapped  in  paper
its  back  was  written:  'To  my  beloved  from  his  beloved"  the  date
and  the  name  of  a town  far  away  in  the  south  of  the  Reich.  I looked
at  the  dead  man's  hair  in  the  green  water,  then  again  at  the  face  if
the  girl  on  the  bank  of  the  Rhine.  Where  she  was  the  orchards  were
now  in  full  bloom  and  the  vines  were  showing  green  on  the  slopes
One  warm  spring  night  this  girl  had  gently  caressed  the  hair  of  her
beloved;  now  it  was  being  caressed  by  the  cold  bog-water  of  a forest
somewhere  in  Russia.

I took  out  my  notebook  and,  sitting  on  the  edge  of  the  crater
wrote  a melancholy  note  to  Genia:  'Perhaps  tomorrow  I too  will
be  lying  somewhere  with  my  face  turned  upward,  and  nobody
will  tenderly  caress  me,  not  even  the  green  water  of  a bomb  crate-
Women  like  a touch  of  the  romantic.  And  1 , too,  am  not  exactly


25


made  of  iron.


At  that  time,  when  I had  no  hope  of  seeing  Genia  again  for  a
long  time,  I had  written  simply,  as  all  soldiers  write  to  their
sweethearts.  Letters  are  almost  the  soldier's  only  joy  and  comfort.
Stepping  out  of  the  Komsomolsk  railway  station  in  Moscow,  I
plunged  into  the  bustle  of  the  Underground,  whistling  a frontline
song  as  I went.  I had  given  a whole  eternity  to  the  State.  It  could
not  be  regarded  as  a great  crime  that  I now  wished  to  devote  a few
minutes  to  myself  Besides,  Genia  would  never  have  forgiven  me  if
I had  preferred  any  military  unit  whatever  to  her.

I found  her  door  locked,  pushed  a little  note  through  the  crack
threw  my  pack  over  my  shoulder  again,  and  gave  myself  the  order:

'Left  turn,  quick  march'  Having  dealt  with  my  personal  affairs  I
returned  to  affairs  of  State.

Half  an  hour  later  I arrived  at  my  service  destination.  As  I walked
down  a long  corridor  I was  amazed.  True,  there  were  many  men
in  uniform  scurrying  around  like  ants  disturbed  from  their  ant-hill,
but  the  place  reminded  me  more  of  a university  during  finals  than
an  army  unit.

Some  men  put  their  books  down  open  on  window-sills  to  enter
into  an  excited  argument,  others  hurriedly  repeated  their  lessons,
wrote  notes,  and  hurriedly  took  them  off  somewhere.  Nobody
taking  any  notice  of  distinctions  of  rank,  or  shoulder-tabs,  nobody
thinking  of  saluting.  They  all  had  other  cares.  Most  of  them  wore
expressions  very  different  from  those  of  army  officers,  whose  faces,
as  well  as  their  souls,  are  imprinted  with  the  stamp  of  barracks  drill.
Close  by  me  two  officers  were  conversing  in  some
incomprehensible  language.  I noted  shoulder-tabs  of  all  kinds,  from  air
force  to  infantry.  And  even  the  black  coats  of  the  navy.  But  most
astonishing  of  all  was  the  large  number  of  women  and  girls  in
uniform.  Hitherto  only  a few  women  had  been  accepted  for  propaganda
purposes  in  certain  military  schools.  Here  was  a very  different
situation.

I felt  a little  awkward,  and  decided  to  try  to  get  my  bearings.

At  one  of  the  windows  I noticed  a first  lieutenant  in  a sand-coloured
greatcoat,  and  riding  breeches  of  similar  material.  He  must  be  from
Leningrad!  I was  wearing  exactly  the  same  sort  of  uniform,  and
I had  never  come  across  it  outside  the  Leningrad  sector.  When
the  Americans  were  preparing  for  the  landing  in  North  Africa  they
ordered  an  enormous  number  of  cool,  silky,  sand  coloured  uniforms
for  their  soldiers.  Later,  they  found  they  had  such  a superfluity  of
this  'African'  clothing  that  in  their  friendship  for  their  Russian


26


allies  they  transferred  it  to  us.  So  our  resourceful  supreme  command
presented  this  tropical  attire  to  the  very  coldest,  namely  the
Leningrad,  sector  of  the  front.  And  thenceforth  we  had  no  difficulty
in  picking  out  our  colleagues  from  that  front  on  any  occasion.

"Tell  me,  lieutenant,"  I addressed  the  officer  in  the  sand-coloured
uniform.  "Are  you  from  Leningrad  too?"

"Yes,  the  Karelian  sector,"  he  answered  very  readily.  Apparently
in  this  hubbub  he  felt  as  lost  as  I did,  and  wag  glad  to  meet  a
friendly  colleague.

,,Well,  how  are  things?"

"So  far,  not  bad.  I think  I've  fallen  on  my  feet,"  he  answered.

But  despite  the  confident  answer  there  was  a hint  of  disillusionment
in  his  tone.

"But  what  is  this  show:  a boarding-house  for  respectable  girls?"  I
asked  him.  "I've  only  just  arrived,  and  I don't  get  it  at  all."

"The  devil  himself  wouldn't  get  it!  For  instance,  I've  been  assigned
to  Hungary.  The  devil  can  take  the  whole  of  Hungary!"  The
disillusionment  in  his  voice  was  now  more  pronounced.  I grew  more
and  more  puzzled.  "Now  if  I could  get  into  the  English
Department,"  he  sighed.  "But  that  is  hopeless,  unless  you've  got
connections.  You  have  to  be  a general's  son  at  the  least.  See  them  swarming
around?  And  every  one  of  them  with  a letter  of  recommendation  in
in  his  pocket!"

He  pointed  to  a door.  On  it  was  a notice:  'Head  of  the  Training
Department,'  and  before  it  was  crowded  a group  of  officers  in  elegant
boots  of  the  finest  leather  and  in  extra-smart  uniforms.  They

certainly  didn't  look  like  front-line  officers.

"Then  what's  the  best  way  of  tackling  the  situation?"  I asked.

"What  languages  do  you  know?"

"A  little  German,  a little  English,  a certain  amount  of  Russian..

"Quit  fooling  and  tell  them  you  know  only  English.  The  English
Department  is  the  best  of  the  lot,"  the  future  Hungarian  advised
me.

From  various  conversations  I began  to  realize  that  this  mysterious
educational  institution  was  concerned  with  training  personnel  for
abroad.  None  of  the  novices  appeared  to  know  its  name.  But  after
I had  had  a talk  with  a flying  officer,  a student  at  the  air  force
college,  who-apparently  through  influential  connections-were
attempting  to  get  transferred  from  the  third  course  of  the  college
to  the  first  course  of  this  mysterious  school,  I felt  convinced  that


27


the  place  must  offer  considerable  advantages.

During  the  next  few  days  I filled  in  a sheaf  of  questionnaires
which  attempted  to  establish  all  my  past:  whether  I had  any
relations  or  acquaintances  abroad;  whether  I had  any  relations  'in
areas  temporarily  occupied  by  the  Hitlerite  land-robbers';  whether
I had  ever  belonged  to  or  had  any  sympathies  with  groups  hostile
to  the  Party  or  was  planning  to  have  such  sympathies;  whether  I
had  ever  had  any  doubts  of  the  correctness  of  the  Party  line.  The
questions  which  showed  interest  in  the  negative  aspects  of  my  life

far  exceeded  those  that  were  concerned  with  my  positive  qualities.

I had  already  brought  all  these  questionnaires  with  me  in  a scaled
envelope  from  Leningrad;  now  I had  to  fill  them  in  all  over  again.

I remember  a scandal  that  occurred  over  a questionnaire  which
one  of  my  colleagues  of  student  days  had  filled  in  for  the  Special
Department  of  his  Institute.  He  gave  his  year  of  birth  correctly  as
1918.  The  next  question,  'What  were  you  doing  when  the  revolution
broke  out  in  1917?'  he  answered  with  the  precise  statement:  'I  was
in  the  underground  movement.'  Because  of  this  answer  he  was
summoned  again  and  again  to  the  Narcomvnudel  for  interrogation.

I spent  several  days  being  examined  in  German  and  English.

Those  who  failed  in  the  language  tests  were  excluded  from  further
tests  and  were  returned  to  their  previous  units.  However,  the
favourites  of  patronage  were  an  exception:  they  were  all  assigned  to
the  first  course,  and  were  not  subjected  to  such  strict  requirements.
All  others  were  thoroughly  sifted  out;  if  they  had  sound  knowledge
they  were  assigned  to  one  of  the  higher  courses,  otherwise  they
were  returned  to  their  units.

After  the  questionnaires  and  the  language  tests  came  examinations
in  Marxism-Leninism.  In  my  twenty-six  years  of  life  I had  passed
all  the  half  dozen  normal  and  three  State  examinations  in  this
branch  of  knowledge.  These  were  followed  by  quite  insignificant
tests  in  philosophy  and  dialectical  materialism,  in  general  and
military  history,  the  Russian  language,  and  economic  geography.

All  this  procedure  left  me  pretty  indifferent.  There  was  no
knowing  when  the  war  would  end,  but  one  thing  was  certain:  it
had  already  passed  its  critical  phase  and  was  coming  to  its  close.  My
one  idea  was  to  get  out  of  uniform  as  soon  as  possible  after  it  was
over.  Against  that,  this  educational  establishment  might  prolong
my  time  of  service  in  the  army,  if  not  extend  it  into  eternity.  For
the  majority  of  the  youth,  this  school  was  a means  of  learning  a
profession  which  would  enable  them  to  earn  their  living  after  the


28


war.  I was  less  interested  in  that  aspect.  But  the  army  was  the  army;
here  orders  were  supreme,  and  one  could  only  obey  them.

It  was  a fierily  hot  summer.  Entire  caravans  of  barges  laden  with
timber  were  being  hauled  along  the  River  Moskva.  All  through
the  war  Moscow  had  been  heated  exclusively  with  wood,  even  the
locomotives  were  burning  wood  instead  of  coal.  The  city  was  un
commonly  still  and  peaceful.  The  only  variety  was  provided  by  the
patrols  of  the  town  command,  who  checked  your  papers  at  every
step.  They  treated  me  with  particular  distrust:  I had  a front-line
Officer's  tabs  on  my  shoulders,  but  I sauntered  about  like
idler.

All  my  private  plans  had  collapsed  like  a house  of  cards  on
being  drafted  into  the  army.  When  I returned  to  Moscow  I had
unconsciously  assumed  that  now  life  would  return  to  its  old  courses.

But  life  doesn't  stand  still,  and  1,  too,  had  changed,  after  my
experiences  of  front-line  life.  And  now,  during  my  aimless  wandings
around  the  battlemented  walls  of  the  Kremlin,  I felt  only
vague  yearning  and  an  empty  void.  Just  one  thing  seemed  to  be
clear:  the  war  must  be  brought  to  an  end.  For  so  long  as  this  war
lasted  there  would  be  room  neither  for  private  life  nor  for
personal  interests.

After  I had  passed  the  questionnaires  and  the  tests  I was
summmoned  to  the  head  of  the  Educational  Department,  Colonel  Gorok
hov.  Behind  a large  desk  sat  a little  man  with  the  blue  tabs  of  a
cavalry  officer  and  a cranium  that  was  as  bald  as  a billiard  ball.

In  his  sly,  foxy  face  twinkled  colourless,  watery  eyes.

"Sit  down,  Comrade  Captain,"  he  said  courteously,  pointing
to  a chair  on  my  side  of  his  desk.

This  was  a very  different  reception  from  normal  army  discipline.

It  was  much  more  like  the  atmosphere  of  a university  lecture  hall
and  absentminded  professors.  The  colonel  ran  his  thin  fingers
through  the  numerous  documents  devoted  to  my  moral  and  political
standing,  the  attestation  of  my  participation  in  battles,  my
questionnaires  and  test  reports.  "So  you're  an  engineer!  Well,
well!"  he  observed  in  a friendly  tone.  Speaking  quite
generally,  we  don't  give  a warm  welcome  to  engineers.

We  have  a few  here  already.  Too  self-opinionated  and  not
sufficiently  disciplined.  What  is  your  view  of  your  future  career?)'

As  the  interests  of  the  State  require,"  I answered  prudently,
but  without  the  least  hesitation.  I wasn't  to  be  caught  by  such
questions.


29


"Do  you  know  what  sort  of  educational  establishment  this  is?"
he  asked.

When  I answered  vaguely  he  began  to  tell  me  slowly  with  many
pauses:  "It  is  the  Military-Diplomatic  College  of  the  General  Staff
of  the  Workers'  and  Peasants'  Red  Army.  You  must  be  aware  of  the
fact  that,  according  to  the  law,  men  with  military  high  school
training,  in  other  words  men  who  have  graduated  from  the  milita
colleges,  are  obliged  to  give  life-service  in  the  army.  The  State  spends
an  enormous  amount  on  your  education,  and  so  it  cannot  allow  the
men  to  do  as  they  like  afterwards.  The  State  has  poured  out  quite  a
considerable  sum  on  you  personally."  He  glanced  at  my  diploma
testifying  that  I was  a graduate  of  the  Industrial  Institute.

"I  should  feel  very  sorry  to  sacrifice  more  time  and  money  on
you,"  he  continued  with  the  air  of  an  economical  housewife.  "And
so  I must  make  it  perfectly  clear  that  if  You  are  accepted  in  the
college  you  must  throw  overboard  all  your  civilian  stuff  and  forget
all  about  demobilization.  There  are  some  who  think  that  when  the
war's  over  they  can  slip  away  out  of  sight.  Forget  it!  You  are  of
interest  to  us  in  so  far  as,  judging  from  your  documents  and  tests,
you  have  a solid  groundwork  of  knowledge,  such  as  we  need.  You
will  give  us  less  trouble  to  train  than  others.  For  that  reason,  and
solely  for  that  reason,  we  are  interested  in  your  case."

After  this  introduction  he  proceeded  to  details.  "VMat  made
you  take  up  foreign  languages  after  you  had  graduated  from  the
Industrial  Institute?"

"I  considered  a knowledge  of  foreign  languages  was  essential  for
an  engineer."

"Good!  But  what  the  devil  made  you"-he  took  another  glance
at  my  papers-"  graduate  from  the  First  Moscow  Institute  for
Foreign  Languages,  and  the  Pedagogical  Department  at  that?

Didn't  you  like  being  an  engineer?"

The  colonel  was  well  posted  in  all  the  subtleties  of  the  changes  of
interests  and  professions  which  so  frequently  occur  in  present-day
Soviet  society.  Owing  to  the  comparative  ease  with  which  one  could
get  higher  technical  education  in  pre-war  days,  the  students  at  the
technical  high  schools  included  quite  a large  percentage  who  were
completely  unsuitable.  As  soon  as  they  started  practical  work  they
found  it  unsatisfactory  both  morally  and  economically,  so  they
packed  their  diplomas  away  and  went  off  to  seek  a more  lucrative  or
less  responsible  profession.  For  engineers  were  frequently
inprisoned  for  the  most  trivial  of  technical  mistakes,  and  they  received


30


relatively  low  pay.  Also,  many  women  with  high  school  education
preferred  to  get  married  and  stay  at  home  rather  than  follow
their  profession,  provided  their  husband's  salary  was  large  enough.

If  not,  they,  too,  went  in  search  of  a new  profession.  And  so  people
travelled  with  their  diplomas  from  one  end  of  the  country  to  the
other.  The  State  took  steps  to  stop  this:  it  tied  the  young  specialist

down  to  a definite  works  or  factory  for  five  years,  and  if  he  broke
his  contract  arbitrarily  he  was  imprisoned.

"How  did  you  come  to  know  foreign  languages  at  all?"  the  colonel
continued.  "You  must  have  had  a governess,  surely?"

This  was  as  good  as  a Narcomvnudel  interrogation  In  my
childhood,  to  have  a governess  signified  that  you  belonged  to  the
people  of  the  'old  days'.  But  now  the  word  'governess'  no  longer  had
this  compromising  connotation:  in  the  Moscow  parks  swarms  of
children  from  the  Kremlin's  upper  circles  were  to  be  seen
accompanied  by  governesses  who  talked  to  them  in  French  or  English.
After  they  had  overthrown  and  libelled  their  predecessors  the
new  'upper  ten'  had  quickly  adopted  their  habits.

"I  learned  languages  parallel  with  my  other  subjects.  I took  my
finals  in  languages  and  the  State  examination  as  an  internal  student
at  the  Moscow  Institute  at  the  one  time,"  I answered.

"Aha!  So  you  studied  at  two  institutes  simultaneously.  You
must  be  very  studious!"  the  colonel  deduced,  and  stroked  his  bald
head  thoughtfully,  as  though  some  new  idea  had  occurred  to  him.

I simply  don't  know  what  made  me  decide  to  study  foreign
languages.  Every  student  has  some  bee  in  his  bonnet.  I happened
to  discover  that  in  the  Moscow  city  library  there  was  a mass  of
unsorted  and  uncatalogued  works  in  foreign  languages.  There  was
nobody  to  put  them  in  order  and  submit  them  to  the  censorship.

Yet  until  they  had  been  censored  they  could  not  be  used.  I quite
quickly  obtained  permission  to  work  on  these  materials,  and  a
completely  new  world,  closed  to  all  others,  was  opened  to  me.

My  linguistic  knowledge  was  far  from  brilliant,  but  in  Soviet
conditions  even  restricted  knowledge  of  foreign  languages  was
exceptional.  A Soviet  citizen  has  such  a small  chance  of  making
practical  use  of  such  knowledge  that  it  doesn't  occur  to  anybody
to  waste  time  studying  languages.  'It  might  easily  bring  you  to  the
notice  of  the  Narcomvnudel',  was  the  way  people  reasoned.

"Well,  now  to  business."  The  colonel  tapped  his  pencil  on  my
papers.  "We  can  pack  whole  street-cars  with  German  linguists.

And  we've  got  more  than  we  need  of  English.  But  as  I see  you're
studious  and  you're  not  a child  ' I'll  make  you  a much  better
proposal."  He  paused  significantly,  carefully  watching  my  reaction.

"I'll  assign  you  to  an  exceptionally  important  department.  In
addition  I guarantee  that  after  you've  passed  out  you'll  work  in


31


San  Francisco  or  Washington.  What  do  you  say  to  that?


I didn't  bat  an  eyelid.  What  was  lie  after?  Neither  English  nor
German  ....  Work  in  Washington  ....  I know:  as  a liftboy  in  some
embassy!  I had  heard  rumours  of  such  things  happening.

"I'll  assign  you  to  the  Eastern  Faculty,"  he  added  in  a
condescending  tone.  I went  hot  and  cold.  "The  Japanese  Department,"  he
said  in  a tone  of  finality.  "And  you'll  find  more  use  for  your  English
there  than  anywhere  else."

I shivered  a little  across  the  shoulders,  and  felt  thoroughly  un
comfortable.  "Comrade  Colonel,  isn't  there  something  just  a little
less  complicated?"  I said  feebly.  "I've  only  just  recovered  from  a
head  wound.  . - ."

"This  isn't  a shop.  The  choice  is  limited."  His  face  changed
completely,  it  went  cold  and  hard.  He  was  obviously  regretting  the
time  he  had  wasted  on  me.  "Two  alternatives:  either  the  Japanese
Department,  or  we  send  you  back  to  your  unit.  That's  settled.  I
give  you  two  hours  to  think  it  over."

The  colonel  in  Leningrad  had  threatened  me  with  a court
martial  if  I was  sent  back.  And  here  I was  faced  with  lifelong  forced
labour  on  the  Japanese  language.  'It  strikes  me,  my  dear  Klimov,
you're  in  a jam!'  I thought.

When  I left  the  room  I was  surrounded  by  a lively  group  of  my
new  acquaintances,  all  anxious  to  know  the  result  of  so  protracted
an  interview.

"Well,  how  did  it  go?  Where  are  you  assigned  to:  the  Western
Department?"  they  clamoured.

"The  geisha  girls!"  I answered  dejectedly.

For  a moment  they  stared  at  me  in  silence,  then  there  was  a roar
of  laughter.  They  thought  it  a good  joke;  but  I didn't  see  it.

"Do  you  know  how  many  signs  they  have  got  to  their  alphabet?"
one  man  asked  sympathetically.  "Sixty-four  thousand.  An  educated
Jap  knows  about  half  of  them."

"There  have  been  three  cases  of  suicide  here  during  the  last  year,"
another  told  me  cheerfully.  "And  all  three  were  in  the  Japanese
Department."

One  of  them  took  my  arm.  "Come  and  I'll  show  you  the
Japanese,"  he  said.


32


When  he  opened  the  door  of  the  department  I saw  a dishevelled
creature  sitting  with  his  legs  tucked  under  him  on  a bed;  he  was
ivearing  pants  and  horned  spectacles.  He  took  no  notice  of  us  what
ever,  but  went  on  with  his  occupation,  muttering  some  exorcism

and  simultaneously  describing  mysterious  figures  in  the  air  with
his  finger.  I saw  several  other  similar  individuals  in  the  room.  They
were  all  in  various  stages  of  Buddhistic  trance;  their  naked  skin
showed  through  their  undergarments.

"These  are  your  future  colleagues,"  my  companion  informed  me
cheerfully.  "Here  is  the  source  of  all  wisdom.  And  every  one  of  them
is  an  epileptic,  so  beware!"

A swarthy-skinned,  lean  and  lanky  lieutenant-the  only  man  in
the  room  still  wearing  epaulettes-was  sitting  at  a desk,  describing
artistic  figures  on  paper.  He  had  begun  at  the  bottom  right-hand
corner  and  was  continuing  his  course  upward,  from  right  to  left.
Outside  the  window  was  the  hot  Moscow  summer;  hopeful  youngsters
were  swarming  in  the  corridors,  but  these  poor  wretches  were  stuck
here  with  the  droning  flies  on  the  wall  and  were  harassing  them
selves  stupid  in  their  endeavour  to  split  the  granite  of  eastern
wisdom.

During  the  next  few  days  I wandered  about  the  college  like  a
deceived  lover.  I had  been  promised  a fabulous  beauty,  but  behind
the  veil  I had  seen  a toad.  I made  the  firm  decision  to  drop  Japanese
at  the  first  opportunity.  But  as  I saw  no  possibility  of  doing  so  at
the  moment  I began  to  settle  down  in  the  college.

It  had  only  recently  returned  from  evacuation,  and  had  been
given  temporary  accommodation  in  several  four-storied  buildings
standing  on  Tagan  Square.  The  various  faculties  were  scattered  all
over  the  environs  of  Moscow.  Our  building  was  in  a quiet  side-street
high  above  the  granite  embankment  of  the  River  Moskva.  The
windows  looking  out  over  the  river  afforded  a view  of  the  Stone
Bridge  and  the  Kremlin  walls  on  the  farther  side.

Of  an  evening  we  frequently  enjoyed  the  cheerful  and  fascinating
sight  of  the  victory  salutes  thundering  over  the  city.  The  picture
of  the  city  lit  up  by  the  fire  was  one  of  exceptional  beauty.  The
batteries  were  grouped  round  the  Kremlin  in  concentric  rings.  It  was
said  that  Stalin  often  went  up  one  of  the  Kremlin  belfries  to  enjoy
the  sight.  Our  Military-Diplomatic  College  had  been  founded  in  the
war  years,  when  changed  international  relations  necessitated  the
extension  of  military-diplomatic  ties  with  countries  abroad  * By
the  repeated  changes  in  the  college  curriculum  it  was  possible  to
trace  the  course  of  Soviet  foreign  policy  for  several  years  ahead.


33


The  college  was  based  on  the  pattern  of  the  High  School  for
Diplomacy,  the  Military  Intelligence  High  School,  the  Institute  for


Eastern  Culture,  and  several  other  higher  military  and  civilian
educational  institutions.  To  give  an  idea  of  the  difficulties  attending
the  selection  of  candidates,  one  need  merely  mention  that  the  High
School  for  Diplomacy  only  accepted  men  with  completed  secondary
education  and  who  in  addition  had  at  least  five  years'  Party
membership.

The  Eastern  Faculty  of  the  college  covered  not  only  Japanese
and  Chinese,  but  Arabic,  Turkish,  Persian,  Indian,  and  Afghan
Departments.  In  addition  to  English,  German,  and  French,  the
Western  Faculty  had  Norwegian,  Swedish,  Finnish,  Dutch,  Italian,
and  other  departments.  There  was  also  a Naval  Faculty,  which  had
departments  for  all  the  various  naval  powers.  The  Air  Force  Faculty
had  been  temporarily  transformed  into  a Faculty  for  Parachute
Groups,  with  special  emphasis  on  countries  with  which  Soviet  forces
might  shortly  be  making  contact.  As  the  college  itself  had  been
founded  only  recently,  the  students  attending  the  first  course  were
numbered  in  thousands,  those  in  the  second  course  in  hundreds,
and  the  third  course  students  numbered  only  a few  dozen.  The  last,
the  fourth  course,  was  only  in  process  of  organization.  In  the  case
of  the  Eastern  Faculty  there  was  an  additional  fifth  course.  For  entry
to  the  higher  courses  the  requirements  were  extremely  high,  while
the  number  of  candidates  was  very  small,  and  so  suitable  men  had
to  be  sought  all  over  the  Soviet  Union.  Foreigners  were  not  allowed
to  attend  the  college,  but  on  the  other  hand  Russian  citizens  with
a knowledge  of  foreign  languages  were  a rarity.  Approximately
half  of  the  students  in  the  first  course  were  the  children  of  generals
or  high  officials  in  the  Party  or  State  service;  it  was  practically
impossible  for  a man  of  'ordinary'  origin  to  get  accepted  in  that
course.  However,  'Heroes  of  the  Soviet  Union',  young  officers  who
had  particularly  distinguished  themselves  in  the  war,  and  celebrities
generally  were  the  exception  to  this  rule.

All  the  college  knew  the  young  Tadjik  girl  named  Mamlakat.

During  the  'thirties  her  picture  had  been  distributed  all  over  the
Soviet  Union.  In  distant  Tadjikistan  the  little  Manilakat  had
achieved  a record  in  cotton  picking.  About  that  time  a conference
of  Stakhanovite  workers  on  collective  farms  was  being  held  in
Moscow,  and  so  Mamlakat  was  brought  to  the  city  and  decorated
with  the  Order  of  Lenin  at  the  conference.  Stalin  personally  gave
her  a gold  wrist-watch  and  was  photographed  in  a fatherly  pose
with  her.


34


so

Since  then  years  had  passed.  Mamlakat  had  long  since  stopped
picking  cotton,  but  she  still  sunned  herself  in  her  fame  and  the  favour
of  her  leader.  There  were  smirks  as  the  college  students  told  the  details
of  her  career.  On  returning  to  the  luxurious  apartment  of  the  Hotel
Moskva  after  the  conference,  she  had  been  so  excited  over  her  fame
and  Stalin's  gift  that  she  jumped  into  her  bath  without  stopping
to  take  off  the  watch.  The  watch  stopped,  and  she  put  the  whole
hotel  in  turmoil  with  her  wild  wailing.  Now  she  was  twenty  years
old.  Since  that  time  she  had  graced  four  different  institutes  in
succession  with  her  presence,  attacking  each  in  Stakhanovite  tempo,,
and  now  she  had  entered  the  haven  of  our  college.  She  found  it
necessary  to  change  her  subjects  and  place  of  study  after  each
examination.  But  if  Lenin  Orders  and  Stalin  watches  cannot  affect
cerebral  activity,  at  least  they  open  many  doors  to  their  possessors.

It  was  rumoured  that  Mamlakat  was  again  on  the  point  of  changing
the  scene  of  her  operations.  The  college  students  included  a number
of  such  parasites  living  on  past  glories.

Somewhere  on  the  outskirts  of  Moscow  a second  educational
institution  existed  which  had  tasks  similar  to  those  of  our  college,
but  where  the  students  were  all  foreigners,  being  trained  on  the
recommendation  and  instigation  of  the  officially  dissolved,  but  in
fact  highly  active,  Comintern.  They  formed  a reservoir  for  Soviet
foreign  agents.  They  had  no  diplomatic  passes  at  their  disposition,
but  their  labours  were  more  important  and  in  any  case  far  more
active  than  those  of  the  official  diplomats.

In  addition,  many  well-known  foreign  communists,  such  as
Rakosi,  Dimitrov,  and  Anna  Pauker,  took  training  courses  at  the
Sun  Yat  Sen  University  or  at  the  Lenin  Political  Academy.  You
don't  know  everything!  Our  college  wasn't  talked  about  much,  for
that  matter,  though  its  objects  were  quite  legal,  namely,  the
training  of  personnel  for  Soviet  military  missions  abroad.  An  interest
ing  and  quite  safe  job.  If  you  did  happen  to  come  to  grief,  you  were
only  sent  back  home.  What  happened  when  you  got  home  was
another  matter.

Strange  to  say,  Jews  were  rigorously  excluded  from  our  college.

Here  for  the  first  time  I found  official  confirmation  of  certain  rumours
which  had  been  persistently  circulating  in  the  country.  On  the
nationalities  question  the  Kremlin  had  taken  a largely  unexpected
course.  Until  recently  the  Jews  had  played,  and  they  still  do  play,
an  important  part  in  Soviet  diplomacy  and  the  foreign  service


generally.  Yet  now  the  doors  of  a diplomatic  college  were  closed


35


to  them.  Perhaps  Stalin  could  not  forgive  the  fact  that  in  the
Moscow  trials  of  1935-38  a large  number  of  the  accused  were  Jews.

I could  not  help  recalling  certain  incidents  that  had  occurred
comparatively  recently.  During  the  retreat  of  1941,  Jews  were  not
evacuated  from  the  abandoned  areas,  but  were  left  quite
deliberately  to  be  exterminated  by  the  Germans.  The  people  of  Moscow
well  remember  the  autumn  days  of  1 941 . Hardly  any  of  the  Moscow
Jews,  apart  from  the  Party  and  government  officials,  obtained  per
mission  to  leave  the  city.  When  the  Germans  captured  the  approaches
to  Moscow  on  October  16,  thousands  of  people  sought  salvation  in
panicky  flight.  The  majority  were  Jews,  for  the  ordinary  Muscovites
had  neither  the  possibility  nor  the  desire  to  flee.  Stalin  sent  Nar
comvnudel  forces  to  block  the  Moscow-Gorky  main  road,  and  gave
them  orders  to  shoot  at  sight  anybody  who  tried  to  flee  without
an  evacuation  pass.  This  order  was  published  only  after  the
Narcomvnudel  forces  had  been  posted,  and  the  result  was  hecatombs
of  Jewish  bodies  on  both  sides  of  the  Moscow  high  road.

During  the  war  years  the  unity  of  the  peoples  of  the  Soviet
Union  was  put  to  a severe  test.  The  national  minorities  had  not
justified  the  Kremlin's  hopes.  In  the  army  a new,  incomprehensible
insult  came  into  use:  'Yaldash'.  In  the  language  of  the  Asia  Minor
peoples  the  word  means  'Comrade'.  Introduced  to  them  during  the
revolutionary  period  as  an  official  form  of  address,  it  was  now
transformed  into  a term  of  contempt.

Another  Asiatic  word  which  enriched  the  Soviet  army  vocabulary
during  the  war  was  'Belmeydy'.  In  the  early  days  the  national
minorities  went  over  to  the  Germans  en  masse,  practiced  self
mutilation,  and  later  resorted  to  the  passive  'Belmeydy',  'I  don't
understand'.  With  true  Asiatic  impassivity  the  Turkmen  and
Tadjiks  called  up  for  the  army  answered  every  question  with  the
brief  'Belmeydy'.  And  if  they  were  ordered  'left  turn'  they  un
hesitatingly  turned  right.

General  Gundorov,  the  President  of  the  Pan-Slav  Committee,
was  responsible  for  putting  into  circulation  the  term  'Slavonic
Brothers'.  And  after  that,  whenever  some  filthy  trick,  some  act  of
looting,  or  some  senseless  stupidity  was  observed  and  discussed  in
the  army,  the  remark  was  made:  'That's  the  Slavonic  Brothers!'

This  was  the  ordinary  soldiers'  own  way  of  criticizing  certain  things
that  were  encouraged  by  the  higher  authorities,  things  which

unleashed  the  dark  instincts  of  the  less  responsible  sections  of  the
army.  When  each  of  these  'campaigns'  had  served  its  turn  the  same
higher  authorities  threw  the  whole  blame  on  to  those  who  had
carried  it  through,  issuing  an  indignant  order  and  having  the


36


scapegoats  shot.


The  derisive  term  'Slavonic  Brothers'  was  often  applied  to  the
Polish  and  Baltic  formations  of  the  Red  Army.  The  Red  Army  men
spoke  of  the  Estonians  and  other  Balts  who  fought  on  the  German
side  with  more  respect.  The  Soviet  soldiers  had  no  idea  what  sort
of  'autonomy'  the  Germans  contemplated  conferring  on  the  Balts,
but  they  knew  quite  well  what  sort  of  'independence'  these  people-
had  received  from  the  Soviet  regime  in  1940.  The  Russian  soldiers
had  been  thoroughly  trained  in  the  spirit  of  abstract  internationalism,
but  during  the  war  they  had  had  an  opportunity  to  view  events  from
the  national  aspect,  and  they  appreciated  even  their  enemies'  fight
for  national  freedom.

"They  hold  on,  the  devils!"  they  frequently  remarked  with  more
respect  than  anger  in  their  tones.

Some  months  after  the  war  had  begun,  during  the  construction
of  the  second  ring  of  landing  grounds  around  the  city  of  Gorky,  I
came  across  thousands  of  foreigners  engaged  in  excavating  and
leveling  the  sites.  Their  dress  at  once  revealed  them  as  foreigners.
Their  faces  were  sullen.  They  were  former  citizens  of  the  Estonian,
Lithuanian,  and  Latvian  Soviet  Republics,  who  had  worked  hand
in  hand  with  the  new  Soviet  rulers.  They  had  become  militiamen
and  Party  and  State  officials  of  the  new  republics.  When  they  fled
before  the  Nazi  forces  into  the  homeland  of  the  world  proletariat,
spades  were  thrust  into  their  hands,  so  that  they  could  learn  what
it  meant  to  be  proletarians.  Later  still  they  were  transferred  to  the
Narcomvnudel's  forced-labour  camps.  And  when  in  due  course  it
became  necessary  to  organize  national  army  units,  they  were  sent
into  the  Estonian  and  other  national  brigades,  where  the  majority
of  them  finished  their  days.  Such  is  the  career  of  the  petty
opportunists.

August  passed  into  September,  and  we  began  regular  instruction.

I still  could  not  reconcile  myself  to  being  condemned  to  a
diplomatic  career  in  Japan.  When  I talked  it  over  with  acquaintances
they  laughed  as  though  they  thought  it  a good  joke.

One  day,  as  I was  hurrying  across  the  college  yard,  I collided
with  a woman  in  military  uniform.  A military  man's  first  glance  is


at  the  tabs.  Astonished  to  see  a woman  with  the  high  rank  of  major,
I looked  at  her  face.

"Olga  Ivanovna!"  I exclaimed  joyfully,  surprised  at  this  un-
expected meeting.


37


Olga  Ivanovna  Moskalskaya  was  a doctor  of  philology,  and  had
been  professor  and  dean  of  the  German  Faculty  in  the  First  Peda
gogical  Institute  for  Foreign  Languages.  I had  met  her  there  in
the  days  of  peace,  and  she  had  been  pleasantly  touched  by  my
interest  in  foreign  languages.  She  was  a woman  of  great  culture  and
unusual  personal  charm.

"Comrade  Klimov!"  she  exclaimed,  just  as  astonished  as  1 . She
gave  me  a swift  look  up  and  down.  "In  uniform?  What  a d i
here?"

"Oh,  don't  ask,  Olga  Ivanovna!"  I replied,  rather  crestfallen,
am.

"But  all  the  same  . . . Have  you  taken  up  German  again?  "

"No,  Olga  Ivanovna;  even  worse  . . . Japanese  !"  I answered
gloomily.

"What?  Japanese?  Impossible!  You're  joking!"

"It's  no  joke,  I can  tell  you."

"I  see!"  She  shook  her  head.  "Come  along  to  my  room  and  we'll
have  a chat."

On  the  door  of  her  room  was  the  inscription:  'Head  of  the  Western
Faculty',  and  her  name.  So  she  held  an  important  position  in  the
college.

"What  idiot  has  put  you  in  the  Japanese  Department?"  she
asked.  I saw  at  once  that  she  was  well  acquainted  with  conditions
in  the  college.

"It  wasn't  an  idiot,  it  was  Colonel  Gorokhov,"  I answered.

"Would  you  agree  to  being  transferred  to  the  German

Department?"  she  asked  in  a curt,  businesslike  tone.  When  I said  yes,  she

added:  "I'm  just  engaged  in  making  a selection  of  candidates  for

the  last  course,  and  I'm  racking  my  brains  to  know  where  to  get

the  people  from.  If  you  don't  object  I shall  ask  the  general  this  very

day  to  have  you  transferred.  What  do  you  think?"

"Only  for  God's  sake  don't  let  Colonel  Gorokhov  think  it's  my
Personal  wish  . . . Otherwise  I don't  know  what  will  happen,"  I
replied  as  I gratefully  shook  her  hand.

"That's  my  headache,  not  yours.  See  you  again  soon!"  she
laughed  as  I left  her  room.


38


Next  day  the  head  of  the  Japanese  preparatory  course  sent  for

me.  As  though  he  were  seeing  me  for  the  first  time  in  his  life  he  asked
distrustfully:

"So  you're  Klimov?"

"Yes,  Comrade  Major,"  I answered.

"I've  received  an  order  from  the  general  to  transfer  a certain
Klimov"-he  contemplated  the  document-"to  . . . the  fourth
course  of  the  Western  Faculty."

He  gave  first  me,  then  the  paper,  a sceptical  look.

That  look  was  quite  understandable.  Conditions  in  the  college
were  decidedly  abnormal.  The  students  of  the  preparatory  course
lived  in  a state  of  bliss.  Those  assigned  to  the  first  course,  especially
those  concerned  with  the  'leading'  nationalities,  were  inflated  with
conceit.  Those  attending  the  second  course  were  regarded  as  made
for  life.  Of  the  members  of  the  third  course  it  was  secretly  whispered
that  they  must  have  pulled  unusually  effective  strings.  As  for  the
fourth  and  last  course,  little  was  known  about  it,  but  it  was  regarded
as  the  dwelling-place  of  the  gods.

"Do  you  know  anything  about  this?"  he  went  on  to  ask
suspiciously.

"Oh  no,  Comrade  Major,"  I replied.

"Very  good!  Here's  the  order-as  we  haven't  any  other  Captain

Klimov  at  the  moment-and  you  can  go  off  to  the  West.  But  I
think  there  must  be  some  mistake,  and  we'll  be  seeing  each  other
again  soon,"  he  added.

"Very  good,  Comrade  Major!"  I clicked  my  heels.

So  now  I was  in  the  final  course  of  the  German  Department.

Fortune  had  smiled  on  me  after  all.


39


CHAPTER  TWO
Soldier  and  Citizen

The  victory  salutes  thundered  over  Moscow,  while  the  struggle
continued  at  the  front.  Superficially  the  city  showed  little  sign  of
the  war.  Anyone  who  had  heard  of  the  desperate  air-battles  over
Moscow  would  have  been  amazed  not  to  see  any  destruction  that
could  be  attributed  to  bombing.  In  Gorky  Street  only  one  house
had  been  destroyed  by  bombs.  I passed  by  the  ruins  more  than
once  without  even  noticing  them.  Boards,  painted  like  a gigantic
film  set,  concealed  them  from  the  eyes  of  passers-by.  Bomb  damage
generally  was  rare,  and  there  was  nothing  in  the  nature  of  planned
strafing  from  the  air.

The  same  was  true  of  Leningrad.  The  Leningrad  houses  were
pitted  with  shell-scars,  practically  all  the  wooden  houses  in  the
suburbs  were  pulled  down  and  used  for  fuel  by  the  people  themselves
during  the  blockade.  But  in  Leningrad,  too,  there  were  no  extensive
signs  of  bomb  damage.

In  Moscow  there  were  many  who  wondered  whether  it  really
was  not  possible  for  the  Germans  to  drop  at  least  one  or  two  bombs
on  the  Kremlin.  Just  as  a joke,  to  put  the  wind  up  its  residents  !

It  could  not  have  done  any  harm,  for  a bomb-proof  shelter  had
been  built  for  the  government  in  the  nearest  Underground  Station,
Kirovskaya,  and  it  was  connected  with  the  Kremlin  by  an  under
ground  passage.  The  Moscow  people  firmly  believed  that  the
shelter  had  been  constructed  long  before  the  outbreak  of  war.  In
1942  the  government  was  evacuated  to  Kuibishev,  but  the  news
papers  proudly  emphasized  that  Stalin  himself  was  remaining  in
Moscow.  Of  course  the  Muscovites  added  that  a tunnel  was  hurriedly
being  constructed  all  the  way  from  Moscow  to  the  Volga  town.

By  1944  the  majority  of  the  government  departments  had
returned  to  Moscow,  and  the  city  throbbed  with  a bustling,  almost
peace-time  activity.  The  barrage  balloons  sent  up  for  the  defence  of
Moscow  every  evening  seemed  an  obsolete  procedure.  The  chief  sign
that  the  war  was  still  going  on  was  the  great  number  of  uniforms  to  be
seen  in  the  streets.  There  were  more  uniformed  people  than  civilians.
The  Moscow  command  had  very  strong  patrols  in  the  city,  and
they  not  only  checked  documents,  but  saw  to  it  that  uniforms
were  scrupulously  neat  and  boots  and  buttons  polished.  The  patrol
posted  at  the  escalators  of  the  Baumanskaya  Underground  station
were  rather  worried  about  the  swaggering  fellows  in  uniform  who


40


had  been  using  this  station  regularly  for  some  time  past.  They  wore
the  normal  soldier's  shoulder-straps,  but  the  red  ground  was  edged  by
a very  unusual  gold  piping.  And  almost  all  of  them  wore  new  officers'
coats  of  green  English  cloth.  In  addition,  they  had  new  Russian
leather  boots  which  were  the  object  of  the  patrol's  envy,  officers'
swordbelts  with  a red  star  and  swordknot,  and  fur  caps  dashingly
worn  over  one  ear.  Even  these  caps  were  not  of  the  usual  lambswool,
but  of  grey  caracoul.  To  crown  everything,  many  of  these  foppish
soldiers  carried  document-cases.  In  the  army  the  function  of  the
hands  is  to  extend  down  the  seams  of  trousers  or  to  salute,  not  to
carry  document-cases.

At  first  the  military  patrols  were  dumbfounded  at  such  disregard
of  all  the  army  regulations.  Then,  licking  their  lips  at  the  thought
of  having  such  a rich  booty  in  the  guardhouse,  they  asked  these
youngsters  to  show  their  documents.  When  they  presented  crimson
personal  identity  cards  bearing  the  State  escutcheon  and  the
words  'Military  College'  in"  gold  lettering  the  patrols  involuntarily
saluted  these  extraordinary  soldiers  and  shrugged  their  shoulders
helplessly:  'Soldiers'  tabs  and  officers'  documents!'

Not  all  the  students  in  the  first  course  were  officers.  When  the
son  of  some  Moscow  proletarian  leader  was  called  up  the  leader
phoned  the  head  of  the  college,  General  Biyasi:  "Nikolai  Nikolaich!
How's  things?  I'm  sending  my  son  along  to  see  you  today.  Have  a
chat  with  him."  That  was  one  way  of  doing  your  military  service,
even  in  wartime,  without  leaving  your  hearth  and  home,  and  with
the  opportunity  of  learning  a valuable  profession  into  the  bargain.
Unlike  the  students  of  other  colleges  we  did  not  have  to  live  in
barracks,  but  could  occupy  private  dwellings.  As  each  student
successfully  completed  each  course  he  was  advanced  in  rank.  At


the  end  of  the  first  course  an  ordinary  soldier  became  an  officer,
and  a first  lieutenant  a captain.  In  this  way  a man  who  held  no
officer's  rank  at  all  when  he  entered  the  college  could  leave  it  with
a captain's  commission.  On  the  other  hand,  a captain  might  have
to  start  in  the  first  course.  The  important  thing  was  not  one's  rank,
but  the  faculty  and  course  which  one  was  attending.  The  members
of  a first  course  waited  in  a queue  until  it  was  their  turn  to  enter  the
dining  hall,  but  members  of  other  courses  walked  in  without  having
to  queue.  The  members  of  the  fourth  course  enjoyed  many  privileges
and  liberties.  They  could  even  take  their  rations  home,  a right  that
even  officers  on  the  teaching  staff  did  not  possess.

In  my  time  there  were  only  eight  students  altogether  in  the  fourth
course  of  the  German  Department  of  the  Western  Faculty.  They
had  been  drawn  from  all  over  the  U.S.S.R.,  and  most  of  them  had


41


attended  a university  before.  Their  knowledge  was  of  a very  high
standard,  but  so  were  the  demands  made  of  them  by  the  college
curriculum.  They  had  to  work  hard  and  intensively.  In  addition  to
taking  the  normal  subjects  of  the  fourth  course  they  had  to  get
through  the  so-called  'special  subjects'  of  preceding  courses,  for
instance,  'army  service  regulations',  'army  equipment',  'army
organization',  and  'army  special  training'.  The  discreet  phrase
4special  training'  connoted  secret  service  and  defence.  And,  of
course,  the  'army'  covered  by  the  German  Department  was  not  the
Soviet,  but  the  German  force.  Outside  his  own  special  province,  no
Soviet  officer  knew  as  much  about  the  Red  Army  as  a student  in  our
college  had  to  know  about  all  the  formations  of  his  'army',  whether
German,  British,  or  other  army  covered  by  his  particular  department.

For  study  of  the  special  subjects  the  educational  material  provided
usually  consisted  of  handwritten  matter  or  the  service  regulations  of
the  respective  army.  It  was  forbidden  to  take  notes  on  subjects
which  had  to  be  kept  very  secret,  and  those  concerned  with  the
immediate  past.  But  duplicated  and  carefully  numbered  rough  notes
could  be  obtained  on  these  subjects,  against  the  student's  signature
and  deposit  of  his  personal  documents.  But  these  notes  could  be
used  only  in  the  hall  set  apart  for  the  purpose.  The  contents  of  these
rough  notes  were  always  kept  up  to  date,  they  were  never  more  than
a month  old.  The  information  covered  not  only  the  actual  position
at  the  moment,  but  even  matters  that  were  only  in  the  planning  or
preliminary  stage.  Frequently  photo-copies  of  the  original  documents
were  attached  to  the  notes.  The  quality  of  the  photograph  indicated

whether  the  document  had  been  photographed  legally,  so  to  speak,
or  whether  it  had  been  done  in  rather  less  convenient  and  normal
conditions.  Sometimes  one  could  tell  quite  easily  that  it  had  been
taken  with  a micro-film  camera.  Such  cameras  can  be  built  into  a
buttoti,  into  the  fastener  of  a lady's  handbag,  etc.

We  in  the  German  Department  were  taught  some  very  interesting
things.  We  had  to  study  the  medieval  originals  of  literature  in
Gothic  and  old  High-German,  languages  which  would  completely
baffle  a twentieth-century  German.  From  the  manner  in  which  a
man  pronounced  the  words  "Gebratene  Gans"  we  had  to  determine
exactly  where  he  came  from,  to  within  a few  kilometers.  We  had  to
know  the  local  food  and  drink  of  the  various  parts  of  Germany,  how
the  people  in  various  districts  dressed  and  what  were  their
characteristic  habits.  We  had  to  know  the  smallest  detail  of  the  distinctive
features  of  each  national  group,  and  learned  to  distinguish  any
faded  German  wine  label  with  absolute  certainty.  We  were  told
which  of  the  German  national  groups  cannot  stand  one  another,  and
why;  and  what  were  their  usual  terms  of  abuse  for  one  another.  We


42


were  shown  the  historical  genesis  of  all  the  present  and  past  political
and  economic,  ideological  and  religious  antagonisms  inside  the
German  nation.

The  history  of  the  Communist  Party  of  Germany  as  we  learnt  it
was  very  different  from  that  to  be  found  in  the  usual  handbooks.

The  lecturer  usually  referred  to  the  Party  by  the  phrase  'our
potential'  or  other,  more  precise  terms,  but  one  might  listen  to  a two-hour
lecture  without  hearing  the  words  'communist  party'  at  all.  These
lectures  would  have  been  of  great  interest  especially  to  German
communists.  Many  of  them  honestly  believe  they  are  fighting  for  a
better  Germany.  A political  movement  is  to  some  extent  only  a trap
for  the  credulous.  Of  course  the  leaders,  who  are  in  touch  with  the
Comintern,  are  better  informed  on  this  delicate  question.

Once  one  of  our  students  asked  the  lecturer:  "Why  don't  we  get
any  communist  come-overs  from  Germany  these  days?"

"Think  it  over  and  you'll  find  the  answer  for  yourself,"  the
lecturer  answered.  "I  can't  waste  the  other  students'  time  in  giving
explanations  of  such  an  elementary  matter.  We  don't  want  any
come-overs.  They're  much  more  use  to  us  when  they  work  outside."

In  addition  to  lecturing  at  our  college,  this  lecturer  was  an
instructor  at  the  Red  Army  Secret  Service  High  School,  his  subject
being  'Underground  work  in  the  rear'.


Despite  what  he  said,  if  the  issue  be  examined  more  closely  certain
questions  remain  unanswered.  What  has  happened  to  the  enormous
German  Communist  Party?  Germany  was  the  first  world  power  to
enter  into  commercial  and  friendly  relations  with  Soviet  Russia.

She  had  the  strongest  Communist  Party  and  the  most  clearly  defined
industrial  proletariat  in  all  Europe,  and  for  us  Russians  they  were  the
shining  example  of  proletarian  consciousness  and  solidarity.  At  one
time  communism  had  struck  its  roots  deep  into  the  souls  of  the
Germans.  It  had  been  regarded  as  axiomatic  that  Germany  would  be
the  next  link  in  the  chain  of  world  revolution.  Thalmann's  cap  was  as
familiar  to  us  as  Karl  Marx's  beard.  And  now  ...

Now  the  Germans  were  fighting  like  devils,  and  our  propaganda
had  thrown  overboard  all  the  principles  of  class  approach.  Instead,
all  Germans  were  branded  as  fascists  and  all  we  were  expected  to  do
was:  'Kill  the  Germans!'  Hitler  couldn't  have  thrown  all  the
communists  in  Germany  into  concentration  camps.  Even  our  propaganda
did  not  go  so  far  as  to  say  that.  And  yet  Nazism  seemed  to  be  growing
stronger  and  stronger  among  them.  So  what  had  happened  to  the
communist  consciousness,  the  proletarian  solidarity,'  the  class
struggle,  and  so  on?


43


After  a time  our  college  transferred  to  new  accommodation  in
a building  right  opposite  the  Stalin  Academy  for  the  Mechanization
and  Motorization  of  the  Red  Army,  in  Lefortovo  Street.  Under  the
old  regime  the  building  had  been  a Junker  school;  then  it  had  be
come  an  artillery  school.  The  place  was  rather  uncomfortable,  it
stank  of  a barracks.  On  the  other  hand,  this  removal  solved  one  of  the
most  important  problems  of  our  command:  now  wee  were  all  under
one  roof,  behind  one  fence.  There  was  a parade  ground  in  the  middle,
and  a guardhouse  somewhere  in  the  background.

In  those  autumn  days  of  1944  one  often  saw  an  edifying  sight:
students  sauntering  about  the  courtyard  under  the  guard  of  other
students.  The  prisoners  had  been  relieved  of  their  sword-straps  and
tabs,  and  they  carried  brooms  and  spades  " With  perfect  equanimity
they  swept  up  the  leaves  that  the  autumn  wind  sent  flying  from  the
trees.  The  work  was  about  as  productive  as  bailing  out  water  with  a
Sieve.  ]3ut  the  prisoners  didn't  worry  about  that.  Midday  was  still
a long  way  off  and  life  was  boring  in  the  clink.

Other  students  did  their  best  to  cheer  up  the  prisoners.  "What
Kolya,  you  in  again?  What  heroic  deed  have  you  done  this  time?  How

long  have  you  got?"  Others  stopped  to  stare  atone  of  the  generals'sons
long  have  you  got?"  Others  stopped  to  stare  atone  of  the  generals'sons
among  the  prisoners.  A very  piquant  situation:  the  father  a general  and
the  son  collecting  cigarette-butts  under  the  eyes  of  a guard  !

The  victims  were  usually  first  course  students,  many  of  whom
were  not  yet  accustomed  to  army  discipline.  Their  punishment
consisted  mainly  of  sweeping  up  the  leaves  and  collecting  cigarette-butts.
This  was  the  method  used  to  purge  them  of  any  desire  for
independent  thought  and  to  drill  into  them  unquestioning  submission  to
orders.  Someone  at  some  time  or  other  had  carefully  carved  the  words
on  the  door  of  the  guardhouse:  "I'll  teach  you  to  love  freedom!"

This  phrase  was  fashionable  in  the  army  about  this  time.  Generals
shouted  it  at  the  officers  when  they  came  upon  signs  of  indiscipline
during  inspections.  Sergeants  shouted  it  into  the  faces  of  recruits,
usually  garnishing  it  with  strong  language  and  emphasizing  it  with
blows  of  the  fist.

To  this  phrase  there  was  one  mysterious,  but  eloquent  answer:

'Till  the  first  battle.  . .'  There  is  good  reason  for  the  change  made
in  the  new  service  regulations,  as  the  result  of  which  officers  march,
not  at  the  head  of  their  unit,  but  in  the  rear.

Many  of  us  officers  were  genuinely  angry  at  the  methods  used  to


44


train  reserve  soldiers  before  transferring  them  to  the  front.  They  were
drilled  almost  entirely  in  the  manner  of  the  parade  ground;  they
learned  to  react  to  the  orders  'right'  and  'left',  to  salute  their  officers
in  the  regulation  style,  to  march  in  close  order,  etc.  All  through
their  training  they  used  only  dummy  weapons,  and  they  often
reached  the  front  without  having  fired  a single  shot  from  a rifle  or
other  arm.  The  men  themselves  grumbled  about  this  at  first,  but
then  they  got  used  to  it  and  submitted.  This  sort  of  thing  often  had
its  origin  in  local  circumstances,  but  the  general  direction  came  from
above  and  had  a deeper  significance.

For  the  outcome  of  a war  it  is  of  no  importance  whether  one  man
falls  or  another.  But  it  is  important  that  he  should  obey  orders.  And
that  is  a decisive  factor  in  training.

The  winter  passed.  I gradually  got  used  again  to  study,  and  made
acquaintances.  I don't  remember  how  I first  got  to  know  Lieutenant
Belyavsky.  Some  thirty-one  years  old,  lean  and  upright,  he  seemed
to  possess  an  imperturbable  calm  and  unconcern.  But  in  reality  he
was  very  passionate  by  nature,  and  capable  of  great  enthusiasms.

At  one  time  he  had  studied  at  the  Leningrad  University,  and  then
had  taken  special  courses  preparatory  to  work  abroad.  He  was


master  of  several  languages.  During  the  Spanish  civil  war  he  was
sent  to  Spain,  and  for  some  time  passed  as  a Spaniard.  For  some
mysterious  reason  he  had  remained  with  the  rank  of  lieutenant  for
nearly  ten  years,  whereas  all  his  former  Spanish  comrades  had  by
now  achieved  much  higher  rank  and  responsible  service  posts.

He  had  a great  love  of  the  theatre,  and  brought  tickets  for  an  the
Moscow  first  nights  a month  in  advance.  I sometimes  thought  he
suffered  from  the  spiritual  malaise  which  affects  so  many  Leningrad
people,  and  that  he  turned  to  the  theatre  for  temporary  oblivion.

For  he  had  gone  right  through  the  worst  period  of  the  Leningrad
blockade,  and  you  could  never  get  him  to  say  a word  about  those  days.
All  the  college  knew  Valentina  Grinchuk,  generally  and
affectionately  called  Valia  for  short.  While  fighting  with  partisans  she  had
been  seriously  wounded,  had  been  brought  out  by  air,  and  sent  to
a hospital  just  outside  Moscow.  On  her  recovery  she  was  sent  to  our
college  to  study.  She  looked  like  a child;  her  head  reached  no  higher
than  my  waist.  In  all  the  warehouses  of  the  Moscow  military
district  not  one  pair  of  boots  could  be  found  to  fit  her,  so  a pair  had
to  be  made  to  measure  for  her,  on  a children's  last.  Yet  few  of  our
students  could  wear  so  many  decorations,  genuine  battle  orders,  as
that  child.  They  were  in  such  contrast  to  her  clear,  childishly
innocent  face  that  one  could  not  help  looking  round  as  she  passed.


45


Even  officers  of  superior  rank  to  her  involuntarily  saluted  her  first.
Before  the  war  she  had  been  a fourteen-year-old  girl,  running
barefoot  through  her  forest  village  to  take  a bucket  to  the  well.  She
had  had  no  idea  who  Hitler  and  what  Germany  were.  Then  one  fine
June  morning  the  war  violated  the  peace  of  her  childlike  heart.  The
Germans  occupied  her  village;  in  the  first  intoxication  of  easy  victory
they  did  as  they  liked  in  the  new  'eastern  space'.  With  a child's
instinct  she  began  to  hate  these  strange  men  in  grey-green  uniform.

By  chance  she  happened  to  come  into  contact  with  the  members
of  a regular  partisan  unit  which  had  been  detached  from  the  Red
Army  for  operations  in  the  German  rear.  At  first  they  used  her  as  a
scout.  It  never  occurred  to  the  Germans  that  this  straight-haired,
skinny  little  girl,  who  looked  no  more  than  twelve  years  old,  could
be  in  touch  with  the  dangerous  partisan  movement.  Soon  after  this,
she  was  left  an  orphan,  and  she  went  off  to  join  the  partisans.  She
acted  as  machine-gunner,  saboteur,  and  sniper,  she  volunteered  for
long  treks  as  a liaison,  she  carried  out  highly  dangerous  acts  of
espionage.  Many  a German  who  thought  of  her  as  only  a child  had  to

pay  for  his  negligence  with  his  life.  She  had  no  real  knowledge  of  life,
and  possibly  for  that  reason  she  looked  death  fearlessly  in  the  face;
her  soul  was  steeled  in  the  fight.

Just  one  thing  was  lacking  in  her-she  never  smiled.  She  had  no
knowledge  of  laughter,  happiness,  and  joy.  The  war  had  robbed  her
of  her  chance  of  knowing  the  brighter  aspect  of  life.

Now  she  was  an  attractive  girl  of  eighteen,  attending  a privileged
Moscow  college.  Her  contemporaries  were  still  attending  school,  but
this  child  wore  the  insignia  of  a first  lieutenant,  she  had  spent  years
in  fighting,  her  officer's  tunic  carried  rows  of  active  service  decorations
and  gold  and  silver  wound  stripes.

A flying  officer,  a second-course  student,  once  invited  Valia  to  go
to  a concert  with  him,  and  she  readily  agreed.  Nobody  knows  exactly
what  happened  that  evening.  It  was  only  known  that  he  tried  to
treat  Valia  as  he  thought  girls  who  had  fought  at  the  front  were  used
to  being  treated.  Officers  who  had  not  themselves  been  at  the  front
were  always  making  this  sort  of  mistake.  When  Valia  sharply  told
him  where  he  got  off  he  shouted  at  her  in  a rage:  "Everybody  knows
how  you  got  all  those  orders!  You're  all  . . ."

A little  later  he  was  found  lying  in  the  street  with  a head  wound
inflicted  by  a pistol  butt.

When  the  head  of  the  college,  General  Biyasi,  sent  for  Valia  and
demanded  an  explanation  she  curtly  answered:  "He  can  think  him


46


self  lucky  he  got  off  with  his  life."  The  general  did  not  know  what  to
say  to  that,  and  only  ordered  Valia  to  hand  over  her  pistol.  But  after
that  even  the  most  presumptuous  critics  of  front-line  women  fighters
treated  her  with  respect.

February  1945.  The  German  counter-offensive  in  the  Ardennes  was
drowned  in  its  own  blood.  The  Allied  invasion  armies  were  preparing
to  leap  over  the  Rhine  and  break  through  the  notorious  Siegfried
Line.  After  prolonged  preparations  our  troops  on  the  Oder  had  gone
over  to  the  offensive,  had  broken  the  resistance  of  the  East  Wall
and  had  enlarged  the  bridgehead,  ready  for  the  last  blow  against  the
heart  of  Germany.  The  war  was  nearing  its  end.

Strange  to  say,  conditions  in  Moscow  had  improved  a little  by
comparison  with  the  previous  years;  possibly  the  difficulties  had  been
stabilized  and  the  people  had  grown  accustomed  to  them;  possibly  the
successes  at  the  front  and  the  hope  of  a speedy  end  to  the  war  made

it  easier  to  endure  the  difficulties.  In  the  army  and  all  over  the
country  there  was  a clear  improvement  in  morale.  A miracle  had
been  achieved:  instead  of  being  exhausted  by  the  long  years  of  war,
the  army  was  technically  and  morally  stronger.  Towards  the  end
it  was  using  a vast  number  of  planes,  tanks,  automatic  weapons,
munitions,  and  equipment;  in  other  words,  it  now  had  all  that  was
so  disastrously  lacking  at  the  beginning.  That  was  difficult  to  under
stand,  and  many  of  us  racked  our  brains  over  the  problem.

It  would  be  naive  to  assume  that  this  miracle  was  due  solely  to  our
military  efforts  and  the  moral  transformation  that  had  occurred  in
the  nation's  soul  during  the  war;  nor  could  it  be  ascribed  simply  and
solely  to  Allied  aid.  For  one  thing,  by  the  end  of  the  war  the  Soviet
war  industry  potential  was  lower  than  at  its  beginning.  The  moral
factor  played  a great  part,  especially  when  one  remembers  that  at
the  beginning  it  completely  failed  to  come  up  to  the  Kremlin's
expectations;  but  then,  as  the  result  of  skillful  internal  propaganda
and  the  enemy's  mistakes,  it  was  brought  up  to  specification  again.
The  military  aid  provided  by  the  Allies  was  enormous;  it  greatly
lightened  the  burden  of  the  Russian  soldiers  and  the  Russian  people,
it  made  up  for  many  defects  in  the  Kremlin's  military  apparatus,  and
shortened  the  war.  But  not  one  of  these  factors  determined  the  out
come  of  the  war.

War  is  like  chess,  it  is  susceptible  of  innumerable  variations.  The
single  moves  may  change  in  accordance  with  circumstances,  but
the  game  as  such  is  determined  from  the  beginning  by  the
fundamental  strategy  of  the  players.  In  this  war  the  Kremlin  developed
a strategy  that  at  first  deliberately  resorted  to  a gambit  opening,
in  order  that  reserves  could  be  thrown  in  at  a later  stage  with  all


47


the  greater  force.  This  quite  clearly  occurred  during  the  final  phase.

We  students  of  the  college  often  discussed  the  'three  stages'.  While
we  were  of  various  opinions  in  regard  to  details,  fundamentally
we  were  in  complete  agreement  as  to  the  general  interpretation  of
our  war  strategy.  These  discussions  had  their  origin  in  the  very
restricted  circle  of  the  Kremlin  and  Red  Army  general  staff  milieus.

There  was  good  reason  for  the  fact  that  our  college  was  secretly  known
as  the  'Kremlin  college';  not  for  nothing  did  many  of  our  students
have  their  'papas'  on  the  General  Staff.  In  the  college  one  learned  a
great  deal  which  was  quite  unsuspected  by  the  ordinary  soldier.

It  is  very  significant  that  all  who  took  part  in  such  discussions
emphasised  that  they  paid  no  attention  to  the  official  statements  and

rumours.  Many  'rumours'  were  deliberately  put  into  circulation
by  the  'rumour-mongers'  of  the  Narcomvnudel.  The  Kremlin  made
use  not  only  of  an  official  propaganda  machine  in  the  form  of  the
press  and  radio,  but  also  of  a remarkably  efficient  network  of  'rumour
mongers'  organized  by  the  Narcomvnudel,  with  the  task  of
systematically  leading  the  people  into  error  in  the  direction  the  Kremlin
desired.  It  need  hardly  be  said  that  the  Kremlin  never  publicly
admitted  adoption  of  the  gambit  strategy  known  as  the  'three  stages'.
According  to  this  interpretation,  the  story  of  the  war  can  be
divided  into  three  stages,  or  phases.  The  first  phase  began  the  day
the  Soviet-German  Pact  of  Friendship  was  signed.  The  following  day,
in  September  1989,  1 was  to  start  my  course  of  training  in  practical
work  at  the  Rostov  Agricultural  Machinery  Works  (Rostselmash),
the  largest  producer  of  agricultural  machinery  not  only  in  the  Soviet
Union,  but  in  all  Europe.  When  I went  to  the  reaper-combine
department,  to  which  I was  assigned,  I was  struck  by  a remarkable
sight.  The  most  important  feature  of  this  shop  was  the  U-shaped
conveyor  belt,  on  which  the  combines  were  assembled.  The  conveyor
was  mounted  on  the  floor,  and  each  combine  was  fastened  to  a hook
rising  from  the  belt,  so  traveling  round  the  shop.  But  now  the
conveyor  was  at  a standstill,  the  combines  stood  motionless,  half
assembled.  And  literally  every  square  yard  of  space  between  the  conveyor
belt  and  the  workmen's  benches  was  packed  with  a new  production
line:  thousands  of  munitions  chests  for  anti-tank  guns.  They  had
been  made  overnight,  after  the  conclusion  of  the  Pact  of  Friendship.

A similar  sight  was  to  be  seen  in  all  the  other  shops.

On  the  day  the  Pact  of  Friendship  was  signed  with  Germany
telegraphed  orders  were  sent  out  from  Moscow  to  put  into  operation  a
secret  mobilization  plan;  this  plan  had  been  kept  in  the  safe  of
the  secret  department  attached  to  every  Soviet  factory  and  works.

During  all  the  three  months  I worked  at  Rostselmash  every  shop,  au
of  which  in  normal  times  were  concerned  only  with  production  for


48


peaceful  purposes,  was  engaged  in  turning  out  military  material.  Not
only  that,  but  from  the  very  first  day  of  the  works'  existence  so
called  'special  departments'  had  worked  uninterruptedly  on  orders
connected  with  the  production  of  military  weapons.

In  the  course  of  my  work  I frequently  had  to  visit  the  goods  yards
in  Rostov  station,  and  could  not  help  seeing  the  endless  trains  loaded
with  armaments  which  were  being  produced  by  the  Rostov  industries
which  had  been  engaged  in  peacetime  production.  I must  make  it


clear  that  I am  not  referring  to  the  normal  armaments  works,  each
of  which  had  its  own  railway  lines,  and  whose  production  did  not
come  under  public  notice.

If  one  may  digress  into  the  field  of  political  economy,  the  Soviet
industry  engaged  in  producing  means  of  production  could  be
analysed  into  two  basic  categories:  the  armaments  industry  as  such,
producing  exclusively  military  material;  and  the  other  industries,  which
can  be  described  as  industries  for  peace  production,  but  which,  even  at
the  time  of  their  inauguration,  were  so  planned  that  they  could  be
turned  over  to  armaments  production  in  a moment.  It  is  very
difficult  to  draw  the  line  between  the  two  categories.  Machinery
construction  appears  at  first  sight  to  be  a peace  industry,  but
ninety  per  cent  of  the  machinery  produced  goes  to  equip
armaments  works.  And  in  September  1989  even  this  second  category,
which  hitherto  had  been  working,  within  limits,  on  the  production
of  consumer  goods,  was  geared  wholly  and  completely  to  the
mobilization  plan,  and  from  then  on  worked  exclusively  for  war  purposes.
Like  myself,  the  other  students  of  our  Industry  Institute  had  to
undergo  practical  training,  being  sent  to  hundreds  of  the  larger
works  all  over  the  Soviet  Union.  They  all  reported  the  same  picture
everywhere.  The  open  preparations  for  war  were  obvious,  even  in
September  1989.  The  only  uncertainty  was:  whom  was  this  war  to
be  waged  against?  There  were  many  who  rather  assumed  that  the
Kremlin  had  decided  to  join  with  Germany  in  sharing  out  the  world.

The  events  in  Finland,  the  Baltic  States  and  Bessarabia,  which
followed  soon  after  the  Pact,  seemed  to  confirm  this  view.  In  any
case  the  Kremlin  had  already  decided  that  the  time  had  arrived  for
an  active  solution  of  the  foreign  policy  problems.  So  the  Kremlin
prepared  all  its  war  machinery  for  the  struggle.  Friendship  with
Germany  was  made  to  serve  the  same  end.  U-boats  bought  in
Germany  arrived  in  Kronstadt,  where  the  German  distinguishing  'U'  was
painted  over  with  the  Soviet  letter  for  'shch',  after  which  the  Soviet
naval  men  called  them  'pike',  since  the  'shch'  letter  was  the  first
letter  in  the  Russian  word  for  'pike'  (shchuka).  These  U-boats  served


49


as  prototypes  for  the  Soviet  dockyards  to  turn  out  'pikes'  by  the
dozens.  Later  on  battleships  were  ordered  in  Germany,  but  their
armaments  were  to  be  supplied  by  the  Kirov  works  in  Leningrad,  where
they  were  to  be  mounted.  But  these  battleships  did  not  arrive  in  time.

At  a certain  moment  in  this  'friendship'  period-the  historians
could  establish  the  exact  date-unexpected  changes  occurred  in  the

relations  between  the  'high  contracting  Parties'.  Both  the  partners'
appetites  had  grown  immensely.  Apparently  Hitler,  intoxicated  with
his  successes,  now  felt  convinced  that  he  could  manage  to  eat  all
the  cake  himself,  without  the  aid  of  his  be  whiskered  friend.  Any
Soviet  General  Staff  officer  would  laugh  outright  if  anyone  were  to
tell  him  that  Germany's  attack  on  the  Soviet  Union  took  the
Kremlin  by  surprise.  And  with  justice,  for  no  other  regime  in  the
world  is  so  well  informed  on  the  situation  in  neighbouring  countries
as  is  the  Kremlin.

The  myth  of  the  unexpected  'perfidious  attack'  was  put  out
in  order  to  justify  the  Kremlin's  mesalliance  to  the  world.  Weeks
before  the  start  of  fighting  on  the  Soviet-German  front  many  citizens
of  the  Soviet  Union  heard  the  British  radio  reporting  the  transfer
of  170  German  divisions  to  the  eastern  frontier  of  the  Reich.  And  did
the  innocent  children  in  the  Kremlin  have  cottonwool  in  their  ears?
Anyone  who  did  not  happen  to  hear  the  radio  transmissions  could
draw  his  own  conclusions  from  the  official  Tass  "dement":  'The  foreign
press  recently  has  contained  provocative  reports  of  a concentration
of  German  forces  on  the  Soviet  frontier.  From  well  informed  sources
Tass  is  authorized  to  state  that  these  reports  are  completely  un
grounded  fabrications.'  The  Soviet  people  knew  Tass  far  too  well  not
to  know  that  the  truth  was  exactly  the  opposite  of  this  statement.

By  the  early  spring  of  1941  the  Kremlin  knew  that  war  was
inevitable  during  the  next  few  months.  An  extraordinary  session
of  the  Politbureau  was  held  to  draw  up  the  basic  decrees  covering
the  strategy  to  be  adopted  in  the  event  of  a 'change  in  the  situation'
i.e.,  in  the  event  of  war.  A Defence  Committee  was  set  up  at  the  same
time,  though  its  existence  was  made  public  only  after  the  outbreak
of  war.

The  Kremlin  knew  the  power  relationships  perfectly,  far  better
than  did  the  German, Supreme  Command.  Despite  all  the  enormous
war  preparations  it  knew  that  Russia  was  at  a disadvantage  in  this
respect.  The  only  hope  of  salvation  lay  in  wearing  down  the  enemy
by  means  of  a protracted  war,  in  thorough  exploitation  of  the
country's  vast  territory  and  her  material  and  human  reserves,  and
therefore  in  the  application  of  the  Kutuzov  strategy  adapted  to  the
requirements  of  modern  war.  It  was  about  this  time  that  the


50


Kremlin  decided  on  a gambit  opening.  This  form  of  defence  strategy  was
to  cost  the  country  dearly;  it  was  completely  contrary  to  the
Kremlin's  pre-war  propaganda,  which  had  always  talked  of  a 'bloodless
war  on  enemy  soil'.  Naturally  these  new  plans  could  not  be  made
public.  They  were  the  Kremlin's  deepest  secret  since  the  first  days
of  the  Politburo.

Even  at  that  stage  the  lines  of  retreat  were  foreseen  and

approximately  determined,  the  presumable  losses  and  the  available  reserves

were  balanced  against  each  other;  even  then  Stalingrad  was

recognized  to  be  the  farthest  point  of  retreat.  They  coldbloodedly

worked  out  on  paper  operations  involving  tens  of  millions  of  human

lives,  and  the  results  of  the  toil,  sweat  and  blood  of  a whole

generation.  The  members  of  the  Politbureau  could  feel  the  ropes  round

their  necks,  it  was  a question  of  saving  their  own  skins.  The  price....

Even  at  that  stage  the  war  was  divided  into  phases,  and  it  was
calculated  what  must  be  held  in  reserve  for  the  'third  phase'.  All
else,  everything  that  did  not  seem  to  be  required  for  the  'third
phase',  was  condemned  to  be  sacrificed  in  the  'second  phase'.

When  the  war  broke  out,  men  were  sent  to  the  front  with  old,
quite  unserviceable  uniforms  and  weapons.  Yet  millions  of  sets  of
complete,  modern  equipment,  armaments,  and  automatic  weapons
were  lying,  packed  to  resist  the  ravages  of  time,  in  scaled  warehouses:
these  were  predestined  for  the  'third  phase'.  When  the  Germans
advanced  more  swiftly  than  the  Kremlin  plans  had  provided  for,
such  stocks  were  destroyed  or  they  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy;
but  in  no  case  were  they  distributed  to  the  forces  ahead  of  schedule.

In  the  'second  phase'  there  was  much  that  did  not  go  according
to  the  Kremlin  plan.  Most  of  all  they  erred  in  their  estimation  of
the  people's  moral  state.  The  Russian  people  made  it  quite  clear
that  they  had  no  desire  whatever ' to  defend  the  Politbureau.  The
morale  of  the  troops  was  much  lower  than  expected,  and  so  the  loss
in  human  material  was  much  higher.  In  order  to  retrieve  the
situation  the  Kremlin  was  compelled  to  resort  to  extraordinary  measures
and  declare  the  war  a national  patriotic  war  for  the  fatherland.

The  loss  of  territory  was  more  or  less  in  line  with  the  'plan',  but
fulfillment  of  the  'territorial  plan'  cost  far  more  human-  lives  than
had  been  expected.  The  losses  in  material  corresponded  with  the
calculations;  the  forces  thrown  into  defence  received  only  out-of-date
equipment  and  weapons;  'old  stock',  planes  and  tanks  of  the  most
ancient  type,  were  disposed  of.  This  held  good  of  the  human  material
too.  Sixty-year-old  men,  and  women,  were  sacrificed  to  the  'defence
phase',  while  reserves  for  the  'third  phase',  the  'offensive  phase',

Waited  in  the  Far  East  for  the  day  when  they  were  to  be  thrown  in.


51


At  the  critical  moment  a new  and  favourable  factor  came  into
the  reckoning.  The  western  democracies,  who  in  the  period  of
Stalin-Hitler  friendship  had  been  reviled  as  bitter  enemies,  were
now,  willy-nilly,  the  Soviet  Union's  allies.

This  was  when  the  great  game  began.  The  Kremlin  showed  that,
if  it  was  not  clever,  it  was  at  least  cunning.  Its  aim  was  to  spare  its
own  reserves  and  to  squeeze  all  the  help  possible  out  of  the  western
democracies.  And  then,  at  the  end,  it  would  play  its  trump  card,  the
reserves  held  in  readiness  for  the  'third  phase',  and  the  Russian  bear
would  not  only  be  left  alive,  but  going  forward  to  victory.

The  farther  the  Red  Army  advanced  westward  during  the  third
phase,  the  greater  was  the  quantity  of  first-class  equipment  of-
Soviet  production  that  reached  the  front.  It  was  no  secret  to  staff
officers  that  in  1945  great  masses  of  arms  were  thrown  in,  much  of
it  bearing  a pre-war  production  mark.

But  since  in  the  early  stages  the  Kremlin  had  spared  its  man
power  less  than  its  material,  toward  the  end  of  the  war  there  was
an  acute  shortage  of  soldiers.  Moreover,  the  industries  not  regarded
as  of  'war  importance'  were  no  longer  able  to  fulfill  the  tasks  set  them,
and  so  during  the  'third  phase'  there  was  a disastrous  shortage  of
transport  and  other  'war-unimportant'  details,  whereas  Soviet,
produced  tanks  and  planes  were  available  in  adequate  quantities.

The  majority  of  the  military  transport  lorries  and  the  like  were  of
American  production.  The  situation  was  still  worse  in  regard  to
food.  The  food  shortage  was  terrible.  But,  after  all,  that  was  nothing
unusual  in  Soviet  conditions.  It  was  much  more  important  to  keep
the  war  industry  running  at  full  speed.

Such  was  the  theoretical  explanation  of  the  war  successes  put
forward  by  Moscow  military  circles.

The  Yalta  conference  came  and  went.  After  they  had  settled
their  military  problems,  the  Big  Three  turned  to  the  problem  of
restoring  order  in  the  world  after  the  war.

In  connection  with  the  Yalta  conference,  'high  circles'  of  the
Kremlin  openly  talked  of  two  attempts  to  enter  into  peace
negotiations  between  Hitler  and  the  Soviets.  The  first  attempt  to  sound
the  ground  for  a separate  peace  on  the  eastern  front  was  made  by
Hitler  when  the  Red  Army  gained  a foothold  on  the  right  bank  of
the  Dnieper.  The  Kremlin  was  quite  ready  to  talk,  and  stipulated
that  observance  of  the  Soviet  1941  frontier  was  the  most  important
prerequisite.  This  shows  how  little  the  Kremlin  then  hoped  for  any
great  successes.  Their  only  concern  was  to  save  their  flayed  hide


52


from  being  worried  any  more.  But  Hitler  still  doubted  whether  the
wheel  of  history  had  begun  to  turn  to  his  disadvantage,  and  he
demanded  the  Ukraine  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Dnieper  as  his
price.  In  this  instance  both  the  totalitarian  opponents  played  with
their  cards  on  the  table;  at  least  they  were  more  frank  than  they
were  with  their  democratic  opposite  numbers.

The  second  attempt  to  conclude  a separate  peace  was  made  by
Hitler  when  the  noose  was  already  round  Germany's  neck,
immediately  before  the  Yalta  conference.  On  the  eve  of  Stalin's
departure  for  Yalta  he  had  no  hesitation  in  entering  into  preliminary
negotiations  with  Hitler.  Who  would  offer  him  more,  Hitler  or  the
democracies?  This  time  Hitler  was  asked  to  pay  dearly  for  his
immoderate  demands  in  the  earlier  negotiations.  Now  the  Kremlin
no  longer  insisted  simply  on  the  retention  of  its  pre-war  frontiers;
it  required  a free  hand  in  the  Balkans,  possession  of  the  Straits,  and
extensive  concessions  in  the  Near  East.  This  time  it  was  Hitler
who  was  offered  his  former  frontiers.  Now  the  dream  of  world
domination  had  come  to  birth  in  another  brain.  The  policy  of  keeping
trumps  up  the  sleeve  was  justified;  it  brought  not  only  salvation,
but  also  the  possibility  of  continuing  the  game.

Hitler  flatly  rejected  the  Kremlin's  conditions.  To  accept  them
would  have  been  a moral  defeat  for  him.  He  preferred  to  suffer  both
moral  and  physical  defeat,  and  to  drag  his  whole  nation,  his  Reich,
down  into  the  pit  with  him.

The  Yalta  conference  appeared  to  achieve  complete  unanimity
among  the  partners.  And  then  Stalin  threw  overboard  all  thoughts
of  a separate  peace  with  Germany  and  concentrated  all  his  attention
on  the  diplomatic  game  with  the  western  democracies.  In  the
castle  of  Livadia  he  felt  far  more  confident  than  he  had  been  in
Teheran.  But  even  now  he  preferred  not  to  make  great  demands,
but  to  apply  the  tactic  of  squeezing  out  aid  and  concessions  in
exchange  for  promises  and  guarantees  which  he  had  no  intention  of
keeping.  It  was  still  too  early  to  show  his  strength.  The  Kremlin's
strength  was  only  just  beginning  to  develop,  and  the  Kremlin  itself
had  no  clear  idea  of  its  immensity.  It  was  best  to  gain  time,  and
meanwhile  get  as  much  as  possible  in  negotiations.

The  western  allies  proved  very  complaisant.  They  were  quite
convinced  that  the  Kremlin  was  not  strong  enough  to  overrun
Europe,  and  that  the  'coup  de  grace'  would  be  administered  by

them,  while  the  Soviet  bear  would  remain  stranded  somewhere  on
the  frontier  of  Poland.  They  made  many  concessions  in  the  belief
that  the  Kremlin  would  not  be  in  a position  to  take  advantage  of
them.  Only  the  prudent  and  farsighted  Churchill  perceived  the


53


danger,  hence  his  proposal  to  build  up  a second  front  in  the  Balkans
and  so  protect  Europe  from  the  Red  peril  advancing  from  the  East.

The  execution  of  this  plan  would  have  cost  the  Allies  far  more  dearly
than  the  invasion  on  the  Atlantic  seaboard,  so  its  opponents  won  the
day  and  it  was  decided  to  give  the  Soviet  bear  a further  opportunity
to  burn  its  paws  in  pulling  the  chestnuts  out  of  the  fire  for  them.

The  Soviet  bear  pulled  out  the  chestnuts,  but  he  put  them  into
his  own  mouth,  even  while  he  went  on  complaining  of  his  weakness
in  order  to  obtain  further  deliveries  of  commodities.  Quite
convinced  that  he  was  bleeding  to  death,  the  Western  Allies  readily
threw  him  further  milliards  in  the  form  of  lend-lease  deliveries,  and
the  bear  prudently  locked  them  away  in  his  store-room.

So  the  'high  contracting  Parties'  shook  one  another's  hands'
and  signed  the  communique,  which  at  least  one  of  them  did  not
believe  for  one  moment,  having  no  intention  of  observing  its  terms.

The  communique  was  published,  and  all  mankind,  with  the  exception
of  the  signatories,  believed  in  it  and  were  overjoyed.  The  future  lay
before  us  like  a sunny  May  day,  or  like  the  blue  sky  above  the  Yalta
shore.  True,  the  only  thing  the  ordinary  Russian  knew  about  current
policy  was  that  bread  in  Moscow  cost  fifty  roubles  a kilogram.

I took  the  final  course  examinations  in  the  middle  of  February
1945.  As  I was  credited  with  several  subjects  which  I had  taken
during  my  studies  at  other  schools,  I was  set  free  ten  days  earlier
than  my  colleagues.  After  much  difficulty  I succeeded  in  getting  a
week's  leave.  I obtained  an  official  'order'  from  the  college,  and
an  official  travel  voucher  to  correspond,  and  so  was  enabled  to  visit
my  home  town  in  the  south  of  Russia.

This  trip  was  not  a very  cheerful  one.  The  town  gave  me  the  same
sort  of  impression  as  that  conveyed  by  an  autumn  garden  after  a
stormy  night:  l)are  boughs,  leaves  rustling  underfoot,  broken  twigs.

In  my  heart  I felt  desolation  and  emptiness.

Before  the  war  Novocherkass  had  been  famous  for  its  high
spirited  youth.  There  were  five  higher  educational  institutions  to
its  hundred  thousand  inhabitants,  and  students  dominated  the
town.  But  now  I walked  along  the  main  street  from  the  station  at
twelve  o'clock  midday  and  met  only  a few  wizened  old  women.  The
typical  picture  of  the  Soviet  rear.  I walked  beneath  the  cool
colonnades  of  my  alma  mater.  The  pictures  my  memory  conjured  up  out
of  the  past  seemed  far  finer  than  the  present  reality.  But  had  the
reality  changed  so  much,  or  had  my  wanderings  about  the  world
led  to  my  applying  a different  yardstick?

At  the  street  corners  women  in  rags  were  sitting,  selling  sun


54


flower  seeds  and  home-made  fruit  drops.  Just  like  1923!  Only  now
I had  to  give  my  little  cousin  a thirty-rouble  note  to  buy  the  same
quantity  of  seeds  as  five  kopeks  had  bought  in  those  days.  The
need,  the  poverty,  were  so  hopeless,  so  completely  without  the
least  ray  of  light,  that  even  the  modest  conditions  of  pre-war  times
seemed  like  a golden  age.  What  we  had  thought  wretchedness  then
passed  for  prosperity  now.

As  I left  the  station  at  Moscow  and  plunged  into  the  midst  of

the  great  metropolis's  swirling  hurry  and  activity,  I felt  as  relieved

as  a man  returning  home  from  the  cemetery.  In  Moscow  there  was

an  upsurge  of  hopeful  life.  But  in  all  the  rest  of  our  vast  country

men  were  conscious  only  of  the  bony  hand  of  hunger,  they  felt  only

utter  hopelessness.  Now,  after  the  German  yoke  had  been  thrown

off,  something  much  worse  had  taken  its  place:  dread  of  a settle

ment  of  accounts.  Men  did  not  know  what  crime  they  had  com

mitted,  they  knew  only  that  there  would  be  no  escaping  the  reckon

ing.  Enormous  areas  of  the  Soviet  Union,  and  over  half  its

population,  had  been  under  German  occupation.  And  now,  over  every  one

of  these  people  hovered  the  spectre  of  a reckoning  for  'betrayal  of

the  fatherland'.

At  the  end  of  February  all  the  graduates  of  our  course  were  sent
to  the  front  and  attached  to  the  active  army;  before  taking  their
State  examination  they  had  to  have  a period  of  experience  on  active
service.  I was  attached  to  the  staff  of  the  First  Byelorussian  Army.

During  those  days  the  divisions  of  the  First  Byelorussian  and
the  First  Ukrainian  Armies  were  fighting  desperately  to  overcome
the  latest  achievements  of  German  fortifications  technique.  After
breaking  through  the  East  Wall  a fight  began  to  enlarge  the  Oder
bridgehead.  Inspired  by  their  successes,  the  Soviet  troops  were
burning  to  tear  on  into  the  heart  of  Hitler's  Germany,  on  to  Berlin.

Towards  the  end  of  April,  just  as  the  street  battles  in  Berlin  had
reached  their  height,  I was  unexpectedly  recalled  to  Moscow.


55


CHAPTER  THREE
The  Song  of  the  Victor

The  music  flowed  in  caressing  waves  through  the  twilight  hall,
under  the  great  crystal  chandeliers,  between  the  lofty  marble
columns.  The  air  was  heavy  with  the  warmth  of  human  bodies,  the
titillating  scent  of  subtle  perfume,  all  the  characteristic  respiration
of  the  life  of  a great  city.  I thrust  my  fingers  behind  my  belt  and
looked  about  me  eagerly.  I could  hardly  believe  that  only  yesterday
I had  felt  the  Berlin  sidewalks  still  shaking  with  explosions,  that
around  me  men  in  field-grey  coats  had  been  falling,  never  to  rise
again.  I had  the  feeling  that  my  uniform  was  still  impregnated  with
the  pungent  stench  of  the  Reich  capital,  the  smell  of  burning,  of
powdered  mortar  and  rubble,  of  gunpowder.

From  the  platform  came  the  familiar  words  of  a soldiers'  song
simple,  moving,  intimate.  Where  had  I heard  that  song  last?  Of
course,  it  had  been  a favourite  of  the  tank-driver,  Sergeant  Petrenko.
A young,  dashing  fellow,  he  often  sang  it  to  the  sounds  of  an
accordion  he  had  knocked  off.  He  was  a great  lad,  was  Petrenko.  He
didn't  quite  get  to  Berlin:  he  was  burned  alive  in  his  tank  somewhere
among  the  sand-dunes  of  Brandenburg.

Lieutenant  Belyavsky  was  sitting  next  to  me.  We  had  met  in
the  college,  and  he  had  mentioned  that  he  had  tickets  for  a concert
to  be  given  by  artists,  every  one  of  them  decorated  with  the  order:
Meritorious  Artist  of  the  Soviet  Union.  "Come  along  with  me,"  he
said.  "You  need  a little  cheering  up."  He  slapped  me  on  my  back.

And  that  was  how,  the  day  after  my  return  to  Moscow,  I found
myself  sitting  in  the  Pillared  Hall  of  the  House  of  the  Trade  Unions.
During  an  interval  we  went  to  the  foyer.  For  two  months  I had  been
in  the  most  exposed  section  of  the  front-reason  enough  for  watching

Moscow  life  with  hungry  eyes.  Even  after  a brief  absence  one  notices
many  things  which  the  regular  inhabitants  -don't  see  at  all.

The  great  majority  of  this  audience  consisted  of  officers  working
in  the  defence  ministry  or  members  of  the  Moscow  garrison,  students
at  military  colleges,  and  front-line  officers  in  Moscow  for  short  leave
and  seizing  the  opportunity  to  attend  a concert  again.  Practically
all  the  male  members  of  the  audience  were  wearing  military  uniforms;
any  man  in  civilian  dress  was  regarded  either  as  a hopeless  cripple
or  as  a doubtful  sort  of  individual.  There  were  many  war-wounded,
also  in  uniform,  but  without  shoulder-tabs.  And  a large  number  of
the  audience,  civilians  included,  were  wearing  orders  or  ribbons.


56


The  authority  of  the  military  profession  grew  enormously  during
the  war.  Before  1939  officers  were  shown  little  consideration,  they
were  regarded  as  drones  and  parasites.  But  in  the  war  years  the
officer  corps  was  enlarged  by  a mass  of  reserve  officers.  The  army
became  an  inseparable  part  of  every  family;  people  began  to  regard
military  service  as  a necessary  and  honourable  obligation.  The
external  and  internal  reforms  in  the  army  and  all  over  the  country
forced  everybody  to  revise  their  ideas  of  the  military  class.  The
front-line  officer  was  of  all  men  the  most  respected.  Before  the  war
the  civilians  had  looked  down  with  some  condescension  on  the
military,  but  now  the  situation  was  diametrically  opposite.  The  men
in  dark  blue  worsted  civvies  were  inferior  beings.  The  majority
of  them  looked  pale  and  worried;  the  feverish  strain  of  unremitting
labour  had  left  its  mark  on  them.  The  women,  too,  had  the  same
grey  look  of  chronic  undernourishment,  everyday  anxieties  and
need,  in  their  faces  and  clothes.  Their  features  were  indifferent,
pasty,  weary.  Even  the  youngsters  had  lost  the  unconstrained,  in-
vincible, carefree  air  of  pre-war  days.  The  general  war-weariness  was
much  more  perceptible  at  home  than  at  the  front.

The  so-called  'Narcomatics',  the  higher  officials  of  the  People's
Commissariats,  were  in  a class  by  themselves;  they  were  well-dressed,
well-fed,  and  repellently  self-satisfied.  One  could  recognize  them  at
once  in  the  street  by  their  light-brown  leather  coats,  which  they  had
all  started  wearing  as  one  man  on  one  day.  The  Americans  had  sent
these  leather  jackets  over  in  1943  as  part  of  lend-lease  deliveries,
together  with  hundreds  of  thousands  of  brand-new  lorries.  The  jackets
had  been  intended  as  service  clothing  for  the  drivers  of  the  lorries.

The  lorries  were  sent  to  the  front,  but  the  leather  jackets  remained
Moscow  as  official  equipment  for  the  higher  functionaries  of  the

commissariats.  They  were  a quite  unnecessary  luxury  for  the  men
at  the  front,  and  ever  since  the  early  days  of  the  revolution  So
functionaries  have  had  a childish  weakness  for  any  kind  of  leather
garment.  In  Moscow  it  was  rumoured  that  the  Americans  were
greatly  astonished  to  find  high  Soviet  officials  decked  out
chauffeurs'  uniforms.  Perhaps  they  thought  it  indicated  the
proletarian  modesty  of  the  Soviet  bosses.

After  Belyavsky  and  I had  wandered  about  aimlessly  for  some
time  among  the  brilliant  orders  and  pale,  hungry  faces  in  the
foyer  came  to  the  glass  showcase  of  the  buffet.  Behind  the  glass  were
marvelous  delicacies,  the  sort  of  thing  one  found  in  Moscow  only
in  the  best  of  the  pre-war  years.  But  the  prices!  It  was  painful  to
see  men  gathering  round  the  case  as  though  it  were  a museum-piece


57


then  turning  away  with  hungry  looks  and  empty  hands.

"I'm  glad  we  haven't  any  ladies  with  us,"  Belyavsky  remarked
with  stoic  calm.  "Why  the  devil  do  they  put  such  things  on  show?

I'd  rather  not  have  my  imagination  stimulated  like  that!"

The  second  part  of  the  concert  consisted  of  a performance  by  the
State  jazz  orchestra,  directed  by  the  'Meritorious  Artist  of  the
R.S.F.S.R.',  Leonid  Utiessov.  Utiessov  was  the  most  popular  jazz
band  leader  in  the  Soviet  Union:  he  was  assigned  the  ticklish  task
of  adapting  western  European  jazz  music  to  the  frequently  changing
demands  of  the  'social  command'.  His  repertoire  consisted  of  fox
trots  on  the  motifs  of  Stakhanovite  songs,  and  blaring,
anti-impperialistic  marches.  But  now,  with  the  help  of  trombones  and
saxophones,  he  was  celebrating  the  demise  of  fascist  Germany.
Utiessov,  a tubby  man,  showed  off  quite  unconcernedly  on  the
platform.  He  was  wearing  the  artist's  traditional  uniform:  evening
dress  complete  with  boiled  shirt.  In  his  buttonhole  he  had  the  Order
of  the  Red  Banner  ribbon.  He  waved  his  arms  in  a fever  of  patriotic
exaltation,  squeezing  the  last  drops  of  the  'Waves  of  Leningrad'  out
of  the  perspiring  band.

Utiessov  had  achieved  a great  public  success  with  his
'confidential  talks'  from  the  platform.  "My  father  lives  in  luxury.  I
myself  earn  twenty  thousand  roubles  ....  My  daughter  brings  home
a little  more,  some  five  thousand  ....  And,  of  course,  her  husband
-he's  an  engineer-he  helps  a little  too  ....  He  contributes  a full
six  hundred  roubles  a month."  This  talk  received  wild  applause
but  of  course  he  had  to  withdraw  it  quite  quickly.  Rumour  has  it
that  in  the  end  he  was  snapped  up  by  the  Narcomvnudel.

Suddenly  silence  fell.  The  orchestra  came  to  an  unexpected  stop,
there  were  excited  whispers,  a feeling  of  uneasiness  spread  through
the  audience.  From  the  back  of  the  hall  spotlights  were  switched  on,
focusing  into  a ring  of  light  on  the  platform.  Utiessov  stood  in  the
spotlight,  a sheet  of  paper  in  his  hand,  a strand  of  hair  hanging  over
his  sweating  face.

,, Comrades  ...  friends!"  he  shouted.

The  entire  hall  held  its  breath  expectantly.

Speaking  slowly,  brokenly,  he  cried  to  the  silent,  excited  audience:
"An  order  of  the  day  ...  of  the  ...  Supreme  Command  ....  This
day,  2 May  1945,  the  troops  of  the  First  Ukrainian  Army  and  the
troops

His  voice  billowed  from  the  platform,  but  I did  not  see  where  it
was  coming  from.  It  beat  in  my  own  breast,  it  rose  in  my  own


58


throat,  it  might  have  been  my  own  voice.  So  this  was  victory!  In
very  truth,  in  the  rumbling,  stony  gorges  of  the  Berlin  streets,  in  the
turret  of  a staff  tank,  iii  the  everyday  existence  of  a soldier,  all  the
pathos  of  struggle  and  victory  was  much  more  simple  and  plain
than  it  was  here,  in  this  Pillared  Hall  of  Moscow.  There  it  was  only
the  accomplishment  of  a military  task.  Here  it  was  the  climax  of
years  of  straining  expectation,  a moment  of  boundless  joy  and  un
restrained  pride.

The  people  of  the  home  front  were  sick  with  a chronic  psychosis.

They  were  filled  with  an  unshakable  conviction  that  the  day  of
victory,  the  day  marking  the  end  of  the  war,  would  be  like  a fairy
story,  would  not  only  bring  deliverance  from  all  the  fevered  night
mares  of  wartime,  but  would  bring  something  bigger  and  better  than
had  existed  before  the  war.  This  mass  psychosis  which  marked  the
final  phase  of  the  war  was  visible  in  the  eyes  of  every  man  and  every
woman.  Clenching  their  teeth,  they  advanced  to  the  victory  like  a
runner  making  his  final  spurt:  a last  dash  to  breast  the  tape,  and  then
drop  exhausted.  Then  all  would  be  well.  Then  there  would  be  a pleas
ant  rest,  the  well-earned  reward  for  all  the  arduous  labour,  the  sweat
and  the  blood.

I closed  my  eyes  so  as  not  to  see  the  man  on  the  platform.  The
voice  swelled  in  the  silence,  grew  even  stronger,  rose  in  a triumphant
shout:

"Today,  after  bitter  and  bloody  struggles,  our  troops  have
conquered  the  heart  of  Hitler-Germany,  the  city  of  Berlin."

The  entire  hall  rose  as  one  man.  The  thunder  of  the  applause  shook

the  marble  columns.  These  walls  had  surely  never  heard  anything
like  it  before.  We  clapped  till  our  hands  smarted,  and  we  looked  one
another  in  the  eyes.  During  the  ordinary  applause  of  official
ceremonies  Soviet  people  avoid  one  another's  eyes.  But  today  we  had
nothing  to  be  ashamed  of,  today  we  could  give  free  rein  to  our  true
feelings.

I looked  around.  This  was  no  highly  organized  ovation  in  honour
of  the  Party  and  government  leaders,  when  each  participant  would
watch  out  of  the  corner  of  his  eye  to  see  whether  his  neighbour,
was  clapping  hard  enough,  and  secretly  waited  for  the  chairman  of
the  Presidium,  the  conductor  of  this  show,  to  stop  clapping,  thus
officially  bringing  the  ovation  to  an  end.  This  was  a genuinely
spontaneous  demonstration.  For  the  first  time  in  my  life  I did  not
feel  ashamed  of  clapping;  I was  taking  part  in  an  honest  and  passion
ate  expression  of  feeling.  The  Russian  people  were  thanking  the


59


Russian  soldiers  for  fighting  so  hard  and  well,  for  shedding  their
blood.

From  a long  distance  the  words  reached  my  ears:  "To  celebrate  the
victory  over  Berlin  I order,  today,  2 May  1945,  at  22  hours  Moscow
time,  a salute  of  twenty  guns  from  two  hundred  and  twenty  cannon,
in  the  city  of  Moscow,  and  in  the  heroic  cities  of  Stalingrad,  Lenin
grad,  and  Odessa."

We  left  the  hall  and  went  out  into  Sverdlov  Square.  The  crimson
of  the  sunset  had  not  yet  faded  on  the  horizon.  The  sky  was  bright
over  the  victorious  city  sunk  in  the  dusk.  The  house  roofs  emerged  in
marvelous  silhouettes  against  the  darkening  azure.  The  May
evenings  in  Moscow  are  wonderful  at  any  time.  But  in  the  light  of  victory
salutes,  under  the  nimbus  of  military  glory,  they  are  fabulous.  '
Somewhere  far  to  the  west  another  city,  a vanquished  city,  was
lying  in  total  darkness;  its  inhabitants  had  no  feeling  of  joy  that
day.  The  ruins  that  once  had  been  habitations  were  still  smoking;
bodies  were  still  lying  in  the  street,  the  bodies  of  men  who  yesterday
had  had  no  thought  of  death.  The  survivors  huddled  trembling  in
their  locked  rooms,  without  light  or  heat,  starting  fearfully  at  every
sound  outside  the  door.  For  them  the  future  was  heavy  with  the  chill
of  the  grave.  Yet  they  hardly  even  thought  of  the  future.  They  were
still  unable  to  measure  all  the  depth  of  the  abyss  into  which  human
arrogance  had  plunged  them.

The  fire  of  the  last  salute  died  away.  In  the  ensuing  stillness  the
closing  words  of  the  order  of  the  day  rang  in  my  ears:  "Glory  and
honour  to  the  heroes  who  have  fallen  in  the  struggle  for  the  freedom
and  independence  of  our  native  land."

'May  the  blood  you  have  shed  not  have  flowed  in  vain,'  I mentally
added.

Everybody  in  Moscow  knows  the  monument  to  Minin  and
Pozharsky.  The  bronze  figures  of  these  Russian  patriots'  have  stood
on  the  Red  Square,  close  to  the  Kremlin  wall,  for  many  years.  The
dreary  rains  of  autumn  wash  them,  the  harsh  December  Winds  comb
their  beards  with  prickly  snow,  the  spring  sun  caresses  them.  The
years  pass  over  them  like  clouds  across  the  sky.  Tsars  and  dictators
come  and  go  behind  the  walls  of  the  Kremlin,  but  Minin  and
Pozharsky  stand  inviolably  in  their  place.

Surreptitiously  crossing  themselves,  the  old  women  of  Moscow
whisper  the  story  from  mouth  to  mouth  that  sometimes  the  bronze
giants  let  their  eyelids  droop  and  close  their  cold  eyes  in  order  not  to
see  what  is  happening  all  around  them.


60


Yet  once,  just  once  in  all  the  long  years,  they  expanded  their  lungs
to  the  full,  they  drew  themselves  up  to  their  full  height,  looked  each
other  joyfully  in  the  eyes,  embraced  and  kissed  each  other
fraternally.  The  old  women  swear  that  on  this  occasion  the  cold  bronze  shed
hot  tears.  And  why  shouldn't  they,  these  men  of  the  Russian  soil?

I can  well  believe  it,  and  every  Russian  who  was  in  Moscow  on  that
sunny  morning  of  9 May  1945,  will  confirm  it.

For  some  days  rumours  had  been  running  through  Moscow  that
the  Western  Allies  and  representatives  of  the  German  Supreme
Command  were  engaged  in  secret  negotiations.  Nobody  knew  any-
thing exactly,  but  the  uneasiness  increased,  the  atmosphere  of
strained  expectation  came  to  a climax.

The  true  circumstances  of  the  capitulation  were  not  made  known
in  the  Soviet  Union.  It  took  place  at  the  staff  headquarters  of
General  Eisenhower,  a small  schoolhouse  close  to  Rheims,  in  France,
on  7 May  1945,  at  14.41  hours  Central  European  time.  On  the  Ger-
man side  it  was  signed  by  Colonel-General  Jodi,  chief  of  the  German
General  Staff,  on  the  Allied  side  by  General  Eisenhower's  Chief  of
Staff,  Lieutenant-General  W.  Bedell  Smith,  and  on  the  Soviet  side

' Two  heroes  of  the  'Troublous  Times'  at  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth
century,  who  organized  and  led  the  force  that  freed  Moscow  from  Polish  troops,
1612-Tr.

by  General  Susloparov.  The  final  capitulation  document  was  signed
on  8 May  at  12:01  Central  European  time  in  the  Berlin  suburb
of  Karlshorst.  nd  was  officially  announced  at  once.  In  the  Soviet
Union  Stalin  himself  announced  the  news  of  the  capitulation  in  a
broadcast  on  the  8 19  May.

On  the  morning  of  May  9,  as  I lay  in  bed,  I was  struck  by  earthquake.

Someone  was  shaking  me  madly  by  the  shoulder.  Even  before  he  spoke
I read  the  news  in  Belyavsky's  dilated,  jubilant  eyes,

I dressed  feverishly,  buttoned  up  my  tunic  with  trembling  fingers.  He

urged  me  to  hurry  still  more,  and  I did,  although  I didn't  really
know  why.  I still  had  my  boots  to  polish;  on  such  a day  they  must  be  as
dazzling  as  the  sun.  And  I must  put  on  a clean  collar,  and  polish  my
buttons  with  a sleeve  of  my  greatcoat  epaulettes.  Never  before  had  I
felt  automatically  to  make  a military  uniform  absolutely  brilliant.

I automatically  slipped  the  strap  of  my  swordbelt  under  my  greatcoat
epaulettes  though  swordbelts  were  worn  over  the  greatcoat  only  on
parade  and  during  guard  duty.  There  wasn't  to  be  a parade  today  ! But
let  anyone  try  pulling  me  up  today  for  violating  the  regulations!  We


61


dashed  downstairs.  We  longed  to  be  among  the  people,  in  the  joy,  the
triumph,  the  jubilation.


The  college,  was  buzzing  like  a disturbed  beehive.  All  the  students
fell  in  in  the  Yard,  by  faculties,  to  hear  the  order  of  the  day
issued  by  the  commander-in-chief.  The  sun  shone  in  the  sky.  And  the
orders  sparkled  on  the  officers'  breasts.  Trumpets  blared.  Two
adjutants  with  drawn  swords  marched  in  front  of  the  crimson  silk
flapping  in  the  wind,  its  golden  tassels  swinging;  the
standard-bearer  and  the  adjutants  were  all  'Heroes  of  the  Soviet
Union'.  The  Head  of  the  college  read  out  Stalin's  order  of  the  day,
which  marked  the  end  of  the  Russian  people's  heroic  four-year
struggle  against  Hitler  Germany.  Then  the  head  of  the  Western
Faculty,  Colonel  Jachno'  spoke  to  us.  But  his  remarks  seemed  feeble
and  hackneyed.  They  could  not  express  all  the  greatness  of  this
moment  that  we  had  waited  for  so  that  we  had  paid  so  dearly  for.  We
all  wanted  to  get  out  into  the  streets,  among  the  people,  where  the
joy  of  victory  was  unconstrained,  exuberant.  Without  waiting  for
breakfast  a number  of  us  hastened  to  the  city  centre.  On  the  way  we
turned  into  an  'Amerikanka'  (snack  bar)  to  drink  a glass  of  beer  at
the  bar.  Only  recently  had  it  become  possible  to  buy  beer  again  in
Moscow,  at  16  roubles  a glass.  One  day's  officer's  pay  for  a pint  of
beer!

Several  of  us  hadn't  enough  money  in  our  pockets  to  pay  for  a glass;
our  comrades  helped  us  out.

"You're  better  off  at  the  front  than  at  home,"  one  of  us  remarked.

"You  have  got  something  to  drink,  at  least,  at  the  front."

"Don't  worry!  Soon  we'll  have  everything!"  another  assured  him.

"We've  already  got  beer.  Before  many  months  have  passed  we  shall
be  living  like  in  a fairy-tale.  We  haven't  fought  for  nothing.  You
wait,  you'll  soon  see  !"  His  tones  expressed  an  unshakable  belief  in
the  miracle  that  would  shortly  occur;  you  would  have  thought  he
already  knew  a present  was  waiting  for  him,  only  it  mustn't  be
mentioned  at  the  moment.  If  any  of  us  had  expressed  any  doubt,
he  would  have  called  him  a traitor  to  his  face.  He  wouldn't  have
known  why  or  how  it  was  treachery,  but  he  would  have  been
perfectly  sure  the  man  was  a traitor.

We  didn't  talk  much  about  such  things,  and  the  papers,  too,
did  not  write  about  them  in  so  many  words,  though  they  made
obvious  hints.  This  mysterious  and  intangible  something  was  in  the


62


air,  we  drew  it  in  greedily  into  our  lungs,  and  it  intoxicated  us.  The
name  of  that  intoxicating  feeling  was  hope.  We  were  hoping  for
something.  And  that  something  was  so  drastic,  was  perceived  as  so
unattainable,  that  we  could  not  bring  ourselves  to  speak  about  it
or  even  hardly  to  think  of  it.

What  were  we  hoping  for?  The  past  would  not  return  and  the  dead
would  not  live  again.  Perhaps  we  were  glad  that  we  would  be  re
turning  to  the  peaceful  existence  of  the  pre-war  years?  Hardly!  Our
great  joy  that  day  arose  from  the  fact  that  we  stood  at  a frontier,
a frontier  that  marked  the  end  of  the  darkest  period  of  our  life,
and  the  beginning  of  a new,  still  unknown  period.  And  every  one  of
us  was  hoping  that  this  new  period  would  fulfill  the  promise  of  the
rainbow  after  the  storm,  would  be  bright,  sunny,  happy.  If  anybody
had  asked  us  what  we  really  expected,  the  majority  would  have
expressed  our  common  feeling  very  simply:  "To  hell  with  all  that
was  before  the  war!"  And  every  one  of  us  knew  exactly  what  had
been  before  the  war.

I have  witnessed  many  Moscow  celebrations  and  parades.  The
strongest  impression  one  got  from  them  was  that  the  people  would
much  rather  have  really  made  merry  and  enjoyed  themselves  than  be
forced  to  demonstrate  their  merriment  and  joy.  They  were  simply
Puppet  shows,  and  one  could  not  rid  oneself  of  a loathsome  feeling  of
hypocrisy.  Most  of  the  people  tried  to  avoid  thinking  that  the  main

reason  for  their  presence  at  the  celebration  was  the  haunting  desire
not  to  be  put  on  the  list,  not  to  give  offense  by  being  absent.

That  day  the  feeling  was  quite  different.  There  was  no  organized
demonstration,  nor  was  it  necessary.  The  streets  of  Moscow  were
packed  with  people,  everywhere:  on  the  sidewalks,  in  the  roads,  at
the  windows,  on  the  roofs.  In  the  centre  the  streets  were  so  crowded
that  wheeled  traffic  came  to  a standstill.  All  the  population  of  Moscow
had  taken  to  its  feet.

As  we  walked  along,  a group  of  girls  in  bright  spring  clothes  came
towards  us,  happy  and  excited.  They  had  flowers  in  their  hands.

In  wartime  Moscow  flowers  had  been  as  rare  as  they  are  at  the  North
Pole.  Measured  by  European  standards,  they  were  more  precious
than  a bunch  of  black  orchids,  or  roses  in  January.  Just  in  front  of  us
several  flying  officers  were  talking  together  animatedly;  they  were
obviously  members  of  the  Moscow  garrison.  One  of  them,  was  in
civilian  clothes;  his  right  sleeve  was  empty.  The  left  breast  of  his
jacket  was  studded  with  orders,  and  above  the  breast-pocket  shone
two  five-cornered  gold  stars:  the  stars  of  a 'Hero  of  the  Soviet  Union'.
One  of  the  girls,  her  eyes  glittering  like  stars,  rushed  up  to  the  airmen


63


as  though  she  had  been  looking  for  them  for  a long  time.  She  kissed
one,  two,  all  the  whole  lot  of  them.  She  kissed  them  heartily,  and
they  seemed  embarrassed.  But  why?  Proud  and  happy,  in  the  sight
of  all  Moscow,  she  was  kissing  the  men  who  had  risked  their  lives
to  defend  the  Moscow  sky.

She  thrust  her  flowers  into  the  wounded  man's  hand,  and  he
awkwardly  pressed  them  to  his  chest.  The  tender  petals  caressed  the
cold  metal  of  the  orders.  The  girl  was  particularly  warm  in  her
embrace  of  him,  and  did  not  want  to  release  him.  They  said  not  a
word  to  each  other.  Their  feelings,  ardent  human  feelings,  were  more
eloquent  than  words.

We  saw  an  old  woman  in  a white  kerchief,  peering  about  her  un
certainly,  as  though  looking  for  someone  in  this  seething  torrent  of
human  beings.  Obviously  she  was  not  accustomed  to  the  bustle  of  the
city.  Just  a homely,  Russian  mother.  We  had  come  across  thousands
of  such  mothers  as  we  entered  the  villages  evacuated  by  the  re
treating  Germans.  And  hardly  had  we  taken  one  step  across  the,
thresholds  of  their  cottages  than  we  were  calling  them  'mother'.
Without  a word  they  thrust  a hunk  of  bread  into  our  greatcoat
pockets  and  surreptitiously  signed  the  cross  over  us  as  we  turned
away.

Two  elderly  soldiers  in  ragged  front-line  uniforms  were  leaning
against  a house-wall.  Their  faces  were  unshaven  and  bristly;
wretched  packs  hung  over  their  shoulders.  You  could  see  they  had
either  come  straight  from  the  front  or  were  on  their  way  back  to  it.

But  they  were  in  no  hurry;  today  they  had  no  reason  to  fear  the
military  police  patrols.  They  warmed  themselves  peacefully  in  the
sun  and  stared  blankly  at  the  people,  who  seemed  to  have  lost  their
senses.  The  two  men  calmly  rolled  themselves  cigarettes  from  their
favourite  home-grown  tobacco  and  a strip  of  newspaper,  just  as  if
they  were  at  the  front.  What  more  does  a soldier  need  than  a piece
of  bread  in  his  pack,)  a small  packet  of  tobacco  in  his  pocket,  and  the
sun  shining?

The  old  woman  in  the  kerchief  pushed  uncertainly  through  the
crowd,  and  went  up  to  the  two  soldiers.  She  spoke  to  them  in  an
agitated  voice  and  tried  to  pull  them  by  the  sleeve.  The  soldiers
looked  at  each  other.  Of  course  they  must  do  as  she  asked:  she  was  a
mother.

How  many  sons  had  she  given  for  the  sake  of  this  sunny  morning?

The  sons  who  were  to  have  been  her  support  and  comfort  in  her  old
age  had  been  taken  from  her.  All  through  the  war  she  had  held  on


64


to  an  expensive  bottle  of  vodka,  not  exchanging  it  even  for  bread.
She  had  suffered  hunger  and  cold,  but  that  bottle  of  vodka  was
sacred.  Her  son  Kolya  had  fallen  at  Poltava;  Peter  the  sailor  had
gone  down  in  a sea-fight;  her  happy-go-lucky  Grishka  had  vanished
without  trace.  But  now  her  heart  was  no  longer  suffering  in  its
loneliness.  She  had  gone  into  the  street  to  find  her  sons,  to  invite
the  first  soldiers  she  met  to  celebrate  the  victory  with  her.  Today
the  bottle  of  living  water  would  be  brought  out.  These  two  men
should  know  the  heart  of  an  old  mother,  the  mother  they  had
sung  so  often  in  their  soldiers'  songs.

Comintern  Square.  Outside  the  American  embassy,  between  the
Hotel  Metropole  and  the  block  of  the  Moscow  University,  there  was
the  same  solid  mass  of  human  beings  as  everywhere  else.  Women
were  gazing  curiously  out  of  the  open  Embassy  windows;  they  were'
wearing  clothes  so  brightly  coloured  that  they  could  never  have  been
mistaken  for  Moscow  inhabitants.  Cameras  were  clicking.  The
embassy  was  calm  and  silent.  Old  Glory  fluttered  sluggishly  in  the
gentle  breeze.

The  people  in  the  square  stared  up  inquisitively,  as  though  they
expected  the  American  ambassador  to  step  on  to  a balcony  and

speak  to  them  at  any  moment.  The  crowd  eddied  round  the  building
like  water  streaming  over  shallows.  But  the  ambassador  had  gone
to  the  Kremlin.  What  had  he  to  do  with  this  grey,  impersonal  mass?
And  besides,  it's  hardly  politic  for  a diplomat  to  speak  to  the  people
over  the  heads  of  their  government.

The  consulate  automobile  made  its  way  slowly  through  the  mass
of  people.  Then  an  American  officer  in  cream-coloured  trousers  and
green  tunic  attempted  to  get-  to  the  embassy.  If  he  did  not  know  of
the  Russian  habit  of  tossing  people  into  the  air,  he  must  have  been
rather  alarmed  when  he  went  flying  up.  Up  he  soared  into  the  sky
then  dropped  gently  into  many  outstretched  hands  and  went  up
once  more.  Thus  he  was  carried  above  the  people's  heads,  thrown
up  again  and  again  by  dozens  of  hands,  till  he  reached  the  embassy.
He  pulled  down  his  wrinkled  tunic  and  went  up  the  steps,  cap  in
hand,  smiling  with  embarrassment  and  obviously  not  knowing
whether  to  say  "Okay!"  or  "Goddamn!"

The  sun  shone  down  graciously  on  jubilating  Moscow.  People
embraced  and  kissed  one  another  in  the  street.  Strangers  invited
one  another  into  their  homes.  Everything  was  set  on  the  table,
the  pockets  were  unloaded.  Life  had  been  difficult,  but  now  it  was
all  over.  We  had  held  out  and  won.  Now  an  end  had  been  put  to


65


the  bloody  battles,  to  all  th  * e difficulties  and  privations.  The  leader
would  thank  the  people  for  their  faithful  service  to  the  fatherland
The  leader  would  not  forget!

The  psychiatrists  are  well  acquainted  with  the  phenomena  of
psychosis.  But  in  its  mass  aspect  it  remains  unexplained.  Yet  any
one  who  was  in  Moscow  on  9 May  1945,  and  who  had  gone  through
what  every  Russian  had  gone  through  during  the  years  of  the  war,
knows  exactly  what  mass  psychosis  is.  I have  seen  and  experienced
it  only  once  in  my  life,  and  I am  not  likely  to  experience  anything
like  it  again.  It  was  the  discharge  of  a nervous-system  accumulator
the  discharge  of  a force  that  had  been  accumulating  for  years.  Many
did  not  understand  it,  but  all  felt  it.

During  the  last  years  of  my  studies  at  the  Industry  Institute,
examination  time  was  a difficult  period  for  all  the  students.  Later,
at  the  front,  I seldom  saw  any  man  really  worked  up  before  going
into  battle.  But  I do  remember  that  while  waiting  outside  the  door
of  the  examination  hall  the  students  suffered  nervous  convulsions.

At  the  front  a man  can  only  lose  his  life.  During  examinations  we
risked  losing  hope.  For  the  soul  of  man  that  is  a much  more  important
matter.  During  the  actual  examination  I myself  was  superficially
cairn  and  never  felt  any  great  excitement.  But  after  it  was  over  I
lay  on  my  bed  for  days  without  moving,  as  though  I were  paralyzed.
So  was  it  that  day  in  Moscow.  A prolonged  and  complex  psychic
process  in  the  soul  of  the  nation  was  finding  vent  at  last.  The  out
break  of  war  had  initiated  the  process.  The  people  regarded  it  with
relief,  as  an  opportunity  to  free  themselves  of  the  hated  conditions
of  the  existing  regime.  The  curve  of  this  feeling  of  relief  gradually
flattened  as  the  people  realized  that  their  hopes  had  been
disappointed.  This  was  followed  by  a period  of  comparative  stability,
when  the  people  were  aware  of  only  one  thing:  the  vanity  of  all
hope.  Then  the  process  of  charging  the  human  accumulators  began.

Simultaneously  with  the  growth  of  a negative  attitude  towards  the
external  factor  of  the  war  a new  hope  was  sown  and  began  to  strike
root-the  hope  that  a better  future  could  be  achieved  by  their
own  power,  once  the  foreign  enemy  was  defeated.  At  that  point  the
external  factor  became  their  enemy.  Driven  by  their  hate  for  the
enemy  and  by  their  growing  hope  of  a better  future  after  the  war,  the
people  went  through  unimaginable  difficulties.  The  Russians  smashed
the  Germans  out  of  their  desire  for  vengeance,  vengeance  for  the
unfulfilled  hopes,  the  shattered  wishful  thinking.  But  still  stronger
burned  the  guiding  star  of  a new  hope.  They  would  never  have
fought  in  defence  of  the  fatherland  they  had  known  before  the  war.
And  at  first  they  had  no  desire  to  fight,  they  hoped  the  Germans


66


would  bring  them  to  the  Promised  Land.  But  then  they  turned  and
fought  because  they  thought  they  saw  the  Promised  Land  on  the
other  side.

On  9 May  1945  the  charge  of  the  people's  psychic  accumulator
had  reached  its  culminating  point,  the  overcharge  was  causing
sparks  to  fly.  And  now  came  the  discharge.  No  wonder  Moscow
lived  as  though  governed  by  electric  impulses,  no  wonder  strangers
embraced  us  and  kissed  us  simply  because  we  wore  uniform,  no
wonder  men  wept  openly  in  the  street.

Outside  the  History  Museum  I ran  into  Lieutenant  Valentina
Grinchuk.  A smile  was  playing  on  her  face,  as  though  she  could  not
understand  all  this  bustle  and  excitement.  She  had  found  her  way
infallibly  through  the  darkness  of  the  forests  in  her  partisan  days,
but  here  she  was  like  a little  child,  lost  in  the  primeval  forest  of
human  elements.  She  did  not  even  notice  the  admiring  looks  of  the
men  who  turned  to  stare  after  her.

"Well,  Valia,  congratulations  on  the  victory,"  I said,  as  I ha
said  already  a dozen  times  that  day.  I looked  into  her  violet-blue
eyes,  took  her  by  the  chin  as  though  she  were  a child,  and  raised
her  head.  Those  blue  eyes  shone  at  me  earnestly  and  a little  sadly
"Congratulations  on  victory,  Valia."  I bent  down  and  kissed
her  on  the  lips.  She  did  not  resist,  she  only  looked  helplessly  with
her  dilated  eyes,  staring  into  the  distance.  Beneath  the  hard  leather
of  her  belt  I felt  her  delicate,  girlish  figure.

(You  seem  so  very  tiny  today,  Valia.  What's  up?  Why,  you  have
more  right  to  enjoy  this  day  than  anyone  else.  Open  your  blue  eyes
still  wider,  you  child  with  orders  on  your  breast  and  wounds  of
your  girlish  body.  Fix  this  day  in  your  memory  for  all  your  life,  this
day  for  which  you  have  sacrificed  your  youth.).

She  and  I spent  a long  time  wandering  through  the  city,  right
along  Gorky  Street,  past  the  Bolshoi  Theatre,  along  the  embank
ment  below  the  Kremlin  wall.  One  would  have  liked  to  absorb  all
the  spirit  of  the  victory-drunk  metropolis  that  day.  One  would  have
liked  to  soar  high  above  the  world  and  thus  observe  all  that  was
happening  below,  to  memorize  for  ever  this  day  in  all  its  unique
greatness  and  exaltation.  For  not  to  everyone  was  Fate  so  kind  as  to
allow  them  to  be  in  Moscow,  to  be  in  the  centre  of  those  vast  events.
Valia  and  I walked  in  silence,  each  sunk  in  his  or  her  thoughts.  If
there  can  be  such  a thing  as  perfect  happiness  in  this  world,  then  I
was  perfectly  happy  that  day.  Humanity's  golden  dream  of  peace
all  over  the  world  came  down  to  earth,  that  sunny  day  of  9 May.


67


The  evil  forces  had  been  routed.  The  majestic  hymns  of  the
victorious  powers  were  sounding  over  the  world.  They  proclaimed
freedom  to  the  peoples.  Freedom  from  anxiety  for  their  own  lives,
freedom  from  the  race-hatred  of  Nazism,  from  the  class-enmity  of
communism,  freedom  from  fear  for  one's  freedom.  Were  not  the
words  of  the  Atlantic  Charter  eloquent  in  their  sublimity?

Our  leaders  had  turned  their  backs  on  the  doctrine  that  it  was
impossible  for  the  capitalist  and  the  communist  systems  to  co-exist.
With  the  blood  of  their  soldiers  the  western  democracies  had  won
the  indissoluble  friendship  of  the  peoples  of  our  lands.  The  mutual
relations  of  peoples  and  nations,  of  states  and  governments,  had
been  forged  in  the  fires  of  war.  Such  historical  cataclysms  sweep
political  systems  and  states  from  the  face  of  the  earth,  change  the
political  map  of  the  world.  The  war  which  had  now  ended  must
lead  inevitably  to  a fundamental  change  in  the  Soviet  system.  With
good  reason  had  the  Party  and  the  government  given  the  people
clearly  to  understand  that,  during  the  last  years  of  the  war.

I glanced  down  at  Valia  out  of  the  corner  of  my  eye.

4, Why  are  you  so  quiet,  Valia?"  I asked.  "What  are  you  dreaming
about?"

"Oh,  nothing,"  she  replied.  "I  just  feel  a bit  down,  somehow.  So
long  as  the  war  was  on  one  simply  went  on  fighting.  If  you  ever,
stopped  to  think  about  it,  you  only  hoped  that  it  might  soon  be
ended.  That  end  seemed  so  splendid,  but  now  it's  all  so  ordinary.

And  this  day  will  pass,  and  once  more

She  did  not  finish  her  remark,  but  I knew  what  she  was  thinking.

I suddenly  felt  sorry  for  her.  Without  doubt  she  was  thinking  of  the
straw-thatched  roofs  of  her  forest  village,  the  crane  over  the  well,
and  the  little  barefoot  girl  with  water-buckets  in  her  hands.  In
her  own  soul  she  was  pondering  on  the  question  that  now  confronted
every  one  of  us.  She  was  afraid  the  hope  that  had  kept  us  going
all  through  the  years  of  the  war  might  vanish,  and  that  then  once
more  ....

Through  the  dusk  that  was  falling  over  the  city  the  aluminium
balloons  of  the  barrage  swam  slowly  into  the  sky.  They  were  rising
for  the  last  time,  to  take  part  in  the  last  victory  salute.  Search
light  batteries  were  posted  all  round  the  Kremlin;  young  girls  in
field-grey  military  greatcoats  efficiently  controlled  the  mechanism
of  those  gigantic  electric  eyes.  Today  their  beams  would  grope
across  the  sky  of  Moscow  for  the  last  time.

I said  goodbye  to  Valia  and  joined  another  group  of  officers  from
our  college.  We  made  our  way  slowly  to  the  Red  Square.  Soon  now


68


the  guns  would  be  firing  their  salutes,  and  the  Red  Square  afforded
the  best  view.  No  official  demonstration  had  ever  drawn  such  an
enormous  crowd  outside  the  Kremlin  walls.  It  was  impossible  to
do  anything  but  let  the  torrent  take  charge  and  carry  one  away
as  it  wished.

Amid  this  human  ferment  the  Kremlin  stood  silent  and  lifeless,  like
a legendary  castle  fallen  into  an  enchanted  sleep.  The  granite  block
of  the  Lenin  Mausoleum  rose  above  the  heads  of  the  crowd.  The
leaders  and  minor  leaders  stand  on  that  platform  on  days  of  parades
and  demonstrations  and  smile  amiably  from  a safe  distance  behind
tile  bayonets  of  the  armed  Narcomvnudel  guards.  Now  the  granite
Platform  was  empty.  And  the  bayonets  were  absent.  That  day  the
Red  Square  belonged  solely  to  the  people.

Hundreds  of  thousands  of  heads.  Since  early  morning  people
had  filled  the  Red  Square,  Waiting  and  staring  as  though  they  we
expecting  something.  But  the  powerful  loudspeakers  which  we
ranged  in  numerous  batteries  round  the  square  were  silent.  More  a
more  people  poured  into  that  vast  open  space.  What  was  drawing
them  there?

The  Kremlin  remained  silent  in  its  sleep.  The  silvery  firs  stood
guard  along  the  ancient  walls.  The  pointed  pinnacles  of  the
towers  pierced  the  darkened  sky.  The  ruby-red  stars  gleamed  high  a
on  the  invisible  points  of  the  towers.

When  I was  a child  we  used  to  be  told  that  the  red  five-pointe
star  was  the  symbol  of  communism.  The  symbol  of  the  blood  tha
had  been  shed  by  the  proletariat  of  all  five  continents.  Truly,  much
blood  had  flowed  on  account  of  those  ruby-red  stars  on  the  Kremlin
The  earth  began  to  thunder  under  our  feet.  Above  the  black  out
line  of  the  Kremlin  the  sky  turned  crimson  with  gunfire.  Lightning
from  hundreds  of  cannon  illuminated  the  battlemented  walls,  th
pinnacled  towers,  the.  black  cube  of  the  mausoleum,  the  sea  o
human  heads  turned  upward.  Hundreds  of  lines  of  fire  drilled  int
the  sky  above  the  victorious  city,  driving  away  the  darkness  of  th
night.  The  fire  streamed  higher  and  higher,  hung  motionless  in  th
zenith  for  a moment,  then  burst  downward  in  sparkling,  multi  -
coloured  little  stars.  The  stars  shivered,  sank  slowly  earthward,  the
fell  faster,  ever  faster,  to  die  in  their  flight.  Hardly  had  the  last
sparkles  faded  when  the  air  was  shattered  with  the  rolling  thunder
of  a salvo.  The  first  salute  to  final  victory!  The  last  seconds  of  a
glorious  epoch.  Open  your  eyes,  open  your  hearts,  fix  those  seconds
for  ever.  The  earth  drummed  again,  the  crimson  fire  of  the  victory
salute  lit  up  the  walls  of  the  Kremlin,  the  sky,  and  the  soul  of  the


people.  Once  more  the  fire  shot  into  heaven,  once  more  the  little
stars  shone  out  like  rays  of  hope,  and  faded.  This  was  victory
captured  in  a point  of  light.  You  saw  the  victory,  you  felt  its  breath
on  your  face.

The  fountain  set  upon  the  historic  place  of  execution  in  the  Red
Square  began  to  play,  to  gush  in  a vehement  rainbow.  As  the
fountain  sent  the  water  running  over  the  square  it  splashed  in  little
streams  under  our  boots.  The  arrows  of  the  searchlights  quivered
and  danced.  The  ancient  cathedral  of  St.  Basil  the  Blessed  was  thrown
up  somberly  in  the  flaming  salutes.  A boundless  sea  of  men  and
women  surged  under  the  Kremlin  walls.

From  the  mist  of  the  past  another  Red  Square  emerged  in  my
memory.

The  morning  of  7 November  1941,  was  leaden  and  dull.  A flurry
of  falling  snow  blurred  the  face  of  Moscow.  The  Kremlin  was  feeling  a
draught.  The  enemy  was  at  the  gates!  Moscow  was  threatened  ! The
crenelations  and  pinnacles  of  the  Kremlin  walls  showed  gloomily  in
wintry  twilight.  The  cupolas  of  the  Kremlin  churches  were  obscured
under  palls  of  snow.  Cold  and  raw  was  the  Red  Square  that  day.

In  full  field  equipment  the  troops  marched  past  the  granite
mausoleum.  A man  in  a soldier's  greatcoat,  standing  on  the  platform,
stretched  out  his  hand  to  the  troops  as  if  he  were  a beggar.  With
outstretched  arm  the  man  greeted  the  divisions  that  were  to  march
from  the  Red  Square  straight  to  the  fight  at  the  gates  of  Moscow.

My  ears  still  hear  the  words  of  the  marching  song  of  those  days:

"For  my  Moscow,  for  the  dear  city  . . ."  We  kept  our  oath  of
allegiance,  leader!  Now  it  is  your  turn.

But  now,  on  that  day  in  May,  the  Kremlin  was  silent.  The  crimson
stars  on  its  towers  glowed  like  blood.  Nobody  knew  what  the  men  in
the  Kremlin  were  thinking.  Hand  in  hand  with  the  people  they  had
won  the  victory.  Would  they  not  be  stretching  out  their  hands  to  the
people's  throats  again  tomorrow?

Not  far  from  us  two  elderly  workmen  were  standing,  rather  un
steady  on  their  feet.  They  were  wearing  caps  with  broken  peaks;
their  white  shirts  were  open  at  the  collar.  Because  they  found  it
difficult  to  keep  their  feet  they  supported  each  other.  Probably  they
had  been  drinking  beer  on  an  empty  stomach.

"Come  home,  Stepan,"  said  one  of  them,  a man  with  reddish,
tobacco-stained  whiskers.

"Home?  I'm  not  going  home,"  the  other  protested.


70


"What  d'you  want  to  hang  about  here  for?  The  midnight  mass  is
ended.  Come  along  !"

"Wait  a bit,  Ivan...  There's  sure  to  be  a decree."

"You've  already  got  your  decree:  don't  oversleep  your  knocking
on  time  in  the  morning."

"But  I tell  you  there's  sure  to  be  another  decree.  Do  you  or  don't
You  know  what  a decree  is?  As  soon  as  twelve  strikes  a decree  will  be
issued.  It  will  shine  out  in  the  sky  like  a star ....  Where's  the  star?"

He  swayed  as  he  stared  upward.

"There's  your  star."  His  companion  pointed  to  the  red  star  on  a
Kremlin  tower.  "Come  along,  do  !"

"There's  something  wanting;"  one  of  my  companions  turned  to
me.  "It's  twelve  o'clock,  but  the  people  are  still  hang
showing  no  signs  of  going.  They  know  quite  well  there's  nothing
more  to  be  seen,  yet  they're  still  waiting."

"Shall  we  go?"  I asked.

"No,  let's  wait  a little  longer."  He  hesitated.  "There  may  be
something  yet."

We  wandered  aimlessly  about  the  square  for  a long  time.  Th
people  looked  at  one  another,  looked  about  them,  and  went  on
waiting  for  the  belated  wonder.  At  last,  when  the  hands  on  the  clock
tower  above  the  Spasskaya  Gate  drew  near  to  one  o'clock,  they
began  to  stream  away  to  the  Underground  station.  The  trains  would
stop  at  1 a.m.  They  must  get  home,  so  as  not  to  be  late  next  morning.

"Pity  the  day's  gone  so  quick!"  my  companion  said.  "There  wa
obviously  something  lacking."

We  took  the  Underground.  Opposite  us  sat  an  elderly  woman  in
threadbare  military  uniform.  She  looked  as  though  she  had  com
straight  from  the  front.  Her  eyes  were  closed  with  fatigue'  and  sh
swayed  to  the  movement  of  the  train.  At  the  next  stop  a lieutenant
got  in.  All  the  seats  were  already  occupied,  so  he  glanced  at  th
epaulettes  of  the  seated  military  people.  In  Moscow  the  regulation  i
strictly  observed  that  the  junior  in  rank  gives  up  his  seat  to  a
superior  officer.  The  lieutenant's  eyes  rested  on  the  sleeping  woman  in  front
line  uniform.  He  stepped  across  and  ordered  her  brusquely:  "Ge
up!"  She  opened  her  eyes  in  bewilderment  and  sprang  up  automatic
ally.  The  lieutenant  roughly  pushed  her  aside  and  sat  down  in  h
seat.


71


"There's  your  reward  to  the  victor,"  my  companion  remarked
"Get  up  and  give  your  place  to  someone  else."

May  time  in  Moscow  is  rarely  accompanied  with  such  filthy  weather
as  we  experienced  on  24  May  1945.  A fine  veil  of  rain  had  hung  about
the  city  since  early  morning.  Vainly  did  we  stare  up  at  the  sky  in  the
hope  that  the  clouds  were  breaking.  It  was  as  though  the  celestial
powers  were  deliberately  out  to  ruin  our  festive  spirit.  For  it  was  a
day  set  apart  for  a great  celebration:  by  special  order  of  the  day
issued  by  the  commander-in-chief,  a great  victory  parade  was  to  be
held  in  the  Red  Square.  A review  of  the  best  of  the  best.  The  parade
had  been  long  and  carefully  prepared.  Soldiers  and  officers  who
had  distinguished  themselves  in  the  war  had  been  recalled  to  Moscow
during  April.  The  choice  fell  chiefly  on  those  who  had  most
distinctions,  orders,  and  medals  to  wear  on  their  chests.  On  arrival  in
Moscow  they  were  allocated  to  special  units,  and  were  issued  with  new
dress  uniforms,  such  as  we  had  seen  hitherto  only  in  pictures.  Special
training  for  the  parade  went  on  for  more  than  a month.  The  people  of
Moscow  were  lost  in  conjecture  as  to  why  these  fine  companies  and
battalions  of  men  hung  about  with  decorations  from  head  to  foot
were  marching  in  full  dress  uniform  through  the  Moscow  streets  while
desperate  battles  were  still  going  on  at  the  front.

Those  of  us  students  who  were  selected  to  take  part  in  the  parade
wore  through  more  than  one  pair  of  soles  as  the  result  of  our  daily
four-hour  exercises  on  the  parade  ground.  We  were  drilled  very
strictly,  for  military  exercises  were  not  regarded  as  of  much
importance  in  the  college,  and  so  normally  they  were  neglected.  Now  we
were  forced  to  acquire  the  infantry  knowledge  that  we  lacked,  lit
preparation  for  the  parade  we  polished  our  buttons  and  buckles
till  they  dazzled,  and  tried  on  our  new  uniforms  again  and
again.

And  now  this  endless  steady  drizzle  was  failing.  We  knew  that  if
the  weather  was  unfavourable  the  civilian  demonstration  would  not
be  held,  only  the  military  parade.  Soldiers  are  used  to  being  wet  to  the
skin.

In  the  Red  Square,  the  gigantic  crimson  banners  on  the  buildings
of  the  All-Union  Executive  Committee  and  the  History  Museum  hung
in  heavy  folds.  In  broad  daylight  the  square  looked  very  different
from  its  aspect  at  night  under  the  gunfire  of  the  salutes.  Sober  and
plain.  As  if  the  road  did  not  end  but  only  had  its  beginning  here.  A
grey  road  into  a grey  future.

Eyes  right!  There,  on  the  platform  of  the  mausoleum,  stood  the


72


leader,  our  sorrow  and  our  glory.  In  honour  of  the  victory,  today
he  had  abandoned  the  modesty  of  his  usual  parade  uniform  and  was
decked  in  the  brilliant  uniform  of  a generalissimo.  When  Joseph
Vissarionovich  signed  the  order  conferring  the  rank  of  generalissimo
of  the  Soviet  Union  on  Comrade  Stalin,  he  must  have  smiled  wryly
at  the  thought  of  his  colleagues,  Franco  and  Chiang  Kai-shek.

The  parade  was  headed  by  the  picked  regiment  of  the  People's
Commissariat  for  Defence  and  the  Moscow  garrison.  It  was  followed
by  the  picked  regiment  of  the  First  Ukrainian  Army,  which  had

always  been  flung  in  where  the  main  battle  was  to  be  fought,  and
which  had  stormed  into  Berlin.

The  picked  regiments  of  victory  and  glory  marched  past:  tankmen
in  blue  Overalls  and  leather  helmets,  cossack  cavalry  units  in  long
Caucasian  cloaks  with  red  and  blue  hoods;  airmen  with  golden  wing
badges.  The  glorious  infantry  marched  past  in  an  endless  grey-green
band,  men  of  various  complexions,  various  tongues.  Now  they  all
had  one  thing  in  common:  on  the  chest  of  each  one  burned  the
tokens  of  intrepidity  and  heroism,  the  orders  and  medals  of  the
great  patriotic  war,  the  proofs  of  faithful  war-service  to  the  father
land.

At  the  head  of  each  picked  regiment  marched  the  outstanding
generals  from  the  various  fronts.  Grey-blue  uniforms,  silver  belts  and
swordbelts,  lacquered  boots.  Gold  on  their  buttons,  their  caps,  their
orders.  The  stars  glittered,  the  medals  gleamed.  They  were
transformed,  were  those  once  so  mod~st  proletarian  generals.
Amplified  through  batteries  of  loudspeakers,  the  greetings  of  the
party  and  government  leaders  thundered  over  the  Red  Square
to  the  victorious  army.

One  after  another  the  captured  banners  of  the  German  divisions,
the  standards  of  the  S.S.  storm  troopers,  were  thrown  down  at  the
foot  of  the  mausoleum.  Symbols  of  departed  glory,  once  proudly
fluttering  over  Europe,  they  lay  in  a formless,  pitiable  heap  at  the
foot  of  the  Kremlin  wall.

Despite  the  rain,  despite  our  soaked  uniforms,  we  felt  light  and
joyful  at  heart.  This  was  the  last  solemn  act  of  the  great  struggle.

We  had  sacrificed  so  much  for  this  day:  flourishing  towns  and
villages,  millions  and  millions  of  human  lives.  The  bloody  wounds  that
those  in  search  of  'living-space'  had  inflicted  on  us  would  be  gaping
for  long  yet.  For  many  years  to  come  the  husbandman's  plough
would  go  on  turning  up  alien  bones  from  the  Russian  earth,  and  for
many  years  to  come  would  the  burnt-out  hulls  of  tanks  go  on  rusting


73


in  the  midst  of  cornfields.


But  all  this  lay  behind  us.  We  had  emerged  from  the  struggle  as
heroes  and  victors.  Through  hard  work  we  would  heal  the  wounds,
we  would  begin  a peaceful  and  happy  life.  We  would  begin  a new
life,  and  all  would  be  better  than  before  the  war.  There  was  much  that
we  forgot  in  our  consciousness  of  victory,  as  we  looked  hopefully
to  the  future.

An  old,  sturdy  sergeant  marched  along  with  a weighty  step.

A real  rock  of  a man.  Thick  whiskers,  like  those  shown  in  the  picture
of  the  oldtime  Zaporozhe  cossack  camp;  sunburnt  face,  heavily  lined.
Rows  of  orders  and  distinctions  glittered  across  his  chest.

All  his  life  he  had  flourished  the  hammer  and  sickle,  but  he  had
never  been  able  to  endure  their  representation  on  a red  ground
with  all  the  trimmings  of  communist  fripperies.  Nonetheless,  today
he  threw  out  his  chest,  with  its  many  orders  bearing  these  symbols.

At  the  front  the  sergeant  had  had  less  regard  for  his  head  than  for
his  luxuriant  whiskers.  During  the  years  of  collectivization  he  had
shortened  them  considerably,  in  order  not  to  be  taken  for  a kulak.

In  those  days  things  had  been  worse  than  they  ever  were  at  the
front.  In  those  days  nobody  knew  whether  and  when  fate  would
knock  at  their  door.  But  now  a free  wind  seemed  to  be  blowing.  You
could  even  grow  your  whiskers  long  again.

During  the  war  many  quite  young  soldiers  and  officers  had  let
their  beards  and  whiskers  grow.  Before  the  war  such  liberties  had
been  risky.  A small  beard  was  regarded  as  Trotskyist,  a thick  beard
indicated  a kulak,  a long  beard  a priest.  Then  there  were  merchants'
beards,  archbishops'  beards,  and  generals'  beards.  The  position  was
just  as  bad  in  regard  to  moustaches.  A small  moustache  was  regarded
as  'white-guard',  a bigger  one  suggested  a Tsarist  policeman.  Over
such  superficial  social  distinctions  one  might  find  oneself  behind  bars!
But  today  the  old  sergeant  didn't  know  whether  to  be  more  proud  of
his  orders  or  his  whiskers.

There  had  been  great  changes  during  the  war  years.  Before  the
war,  would  anyone  have  dared  even  to  mention  the  George  Crosses
of  the  Tsarist  days?  The  chevaliers  of  the  Cross  of  St.  George  had
thrown  their  medals  away,  or  buried  them  deep  in  the  earth.  But
today  the  o ' Id  sergeant  marched  across  the  Red  Square,  past  the
Kremlin  walls,  with  four  George  Crosses  hanging  on  his  chest  beside
the  Soviet  orders.  After  that,  let  anyone  tell  me  that  the  Soviet
regime  had  not  made  any  revolution,  that  the  collective  farms  might
not  be  abolished  tomorrow!  And  weren't  the  churches  open  again,


74


weren't  the  bells  ringing  from  their  belfries?

Before  the  war  hundreds  of  thousands  of  priests  had  been
liquidated  as  propagators  of  'opium  for  the  people'.  Of  those  few  who
were  left  in  freedom  the  Soviet  people  knew  only  one  thing  with
certainty:  they  were  agents  of  the  Narcomvnudel.  Every  week,
under  cover  of  darkness,  they  slipped  through  the  doors  of  the
Narcomvnudel  with  reports  on  their  flocks.

But  now  religious  freedom  was  proclaimed.  A clerical  training
college  had  been  opened  in  Moscow,  and  a Special  Committee  for
Religious  Affairs  had  been  set  up  under  the  Council  of  People's
Commisars  of  the  U.S.S.R.,  with  Comrade  Karpov  in  charge.  The
church  had  been  harnessed  to  the  service  of  the  State.  It  was  wiser
now,  and  would  obey.

Only  one  thing  astonished  us  in  all  this  comedy.  The  newly  opened
churches  were  filled  with  people.  Church  weddings  had  become  quite
fashionable,  especially  in  the  country.  Despite  everything,  it  had
not  been  possible  to  cut  religion  out  of  the  people's  souls.  Even  I
often  felt  a hankering  to  enter  the  open  church  doors.  But  as  a
student  in  a Kremlin  college  I knew  certain  things  only  too  well.

I could  not  risk  the  possibility  that  later  the  head  of  the  college
would  hand  me  a photograph  taken  of  me  in  the  church,  with  the
observation:  "You  appear  to  have  forgotten  that  students  of  the
college  are  strictly  forbidden  to  let  themselves  be  photographed  any
where  else  but  in  the  college's  special  photo-studio."  That  was  the
kind  of  false  step  that  often  served  as  a ground  for  expulsion  from
the  college.

Now,  from  time  to  time,  church  bells,  miraculously  saved  from
destruction,  sounded  over  Moscow.  Priests  were  hurriedly  brought
back  from  Siberia,  straight  from  forced  labour  to  the  altar.  Before
the  callouses  had  vanished  from  their  hands  they  were  offering  up
prayers  for  victory  and  asking  heaven  to  grant  the  leader  health.

The  people  listened  with  unconcealed  joy  to  the  bells.  But  nobody
had  any  doubt  that  the  new  priests  were  in  close  contact  with  the
Narcomvnudel.

The  Narcomvnudel  never  forgets  its  old  clients.  When  they
have  done  their  eight  or  ten  years  in  a punitive  camp,  on  their
discharge  the  majority  of  its  prisoners  are  invited  to  serve  it  as
informers.  "Justify  the  trust  we  are  putting  in  you,  in  giving  you
back  your  freedom,"  is  the  way  it  is  put.  In  reactionary  countries,
when  a prisoner  has  served  his  time  he  is  left  to  his  own  devices.

But  we  show  greater  thought  for  the  man.  Freedom  is  granted  him


75


as  an  act  of  grace,  which  he  must  be  thankful  for,  working  to  justify
the  'trust'.

Innumerable  orders  glittered  on  the  Red  Square.  Many  new
decorations  had  been  created  during  the  war  years.  Even  they  had
made  their  evolution  backward.  The  rank-and-file  Glory  medals
instituted  in  1944,  and  the  medal  for  'Participation  in  the  Great
Patriotic  War  1941-5,'  were  a direct  borrowing  from  the  black
and  orange  ribbons  of  the  Tsarist  George  Cross.  New  orders,  the
Ushakov  and  the  Nakhimov,  were  instituted  for  admirals  and
captains  in  the  navy,  and  medals  similarly  named  for  the  sailors.

The  army  generals  were  adorned  with  Suvorov  and  Kutuzov  orders,
the  higher  officers  with  the  Alexander  Nevsky  and  Bogdan  Khmiel
nitzky  orders.  But  the  most  widely  distributed  of  all  was  the  Order
of  the  Patriotic  War.  Not  just  any  war,  but  the  Patriotic  War!  And
for  marshals  there  was  a special  Victory  order,  made  of  gold,
platinum,  and  diamonds,  and  worth  200,000  gold  roubles.

Though  they  retained  five-pointed,  the  stars  of  these  orders
were  very  similar  to  those  issued  by  Katherine  1 1 . And  there  were
Guards  regiments  again,  Guards  standards,  and  Guards  distinctions.
But  in  pre-war  days?  God  protect  a man  from  letting  the  word
'Guards'  slip  out! '

The  impersonal  greeting,  'Good  day,  Comrade  Colonel,'  had  been
replaced  by  the  official  'Zdravia  Zhelayu'  (I  wish  you  health).  And
the  gold  epaulettes?  In  past  days  the  worst  charge  an  investigating
officer  of  the  Narcomvnudel  could  have  made  against  anyone  would
have  been  to  designate  him  a 'wearer  of  gold  epaulettes'.  The
generals,  marching  along  on  parade  just  like  the  portraits  of  former
Tsarist  generals,  had  mottled  silver  belts.  The  'International'  had
been  superseded  by  the  new  'Hymn  of  the  Soviet  Union'.  Even  the
slogan  'Proletarians  of  all  countries,  unite!'  had  vanished  from  the
front  page  of  Pravda.

According  to  a recent  decree  of  the  U.S.S.R.  Supreme  Soviet,
on  retirement  generals  were  to  receive  a piece  of  land  for  life  tenure,
and  interest-free  loans  for  the  erection  of  their  country  houses.  There
we  have  the  aristocracy  of  socialism!  The  only  snag  to  all  these
blessings  was  the  circumstance  that  so  many  of  the  Soviet  generals
ended  their  careers  in  the  Narcomvnudel.

The  people  simply  went  dizzy  with  all  these  innovations.

The  victorious  army  marched  in  parade  step  across  the  Red
Square.  The  drumming  of  their  feet  found  an  echo  in  my  breast,

To  me,  today,  the  army  meant  not  simply  military  service:  in  the
army  I had  first  found  my  fatherland.  Before  the  war  I had  lived


76


in  an  illusory  world  of  new  concepts:  communism,  socialism,  Soviet
farms,  collective  farms.  The  papers  had  given  me  astronomical
figures,  fine  words  and  slogans,  talk  of  tractors  and  factories,  new
houses  and  construction  works.  Nonetheless,  like  everybody  else,

in  my  own  life  I had  experienced  inhuman  difficulties  and  privations,
though  I justified  them  all  by  reference  to  the  necessities  of  'the
great  upheaval'.

But  when  the  war  broke  out  I saw  all  the  wretched  impotence  o~
the  world  in  which  the  Soviet  man  lived  hypnotized  by  propaganda.
Yet  as  it  went  on  I recognized  something  greater,  I recognized  the
nation.  I felt  for  the  first  time  that  I was  a member  of  the  nation
and  not  merely  a unit  in  a Marxist  classification.  I was  not  the  only
one  to  realize  that:  it  was  shared  by  millions.  It  did  not  come  to
us  as  the  result  of  the  new  manoeuvres  of  Kremlin  policy,  suddenly
switched  over  to  emphasis  on  the  national,  fatherland  aspect.  That
manoeuvre  was  rather  simply  a consequence,  a forced  way  out  of  the
situation  that  had  been  created.

The  war  stirred  the  country  to  its  innermost  depths,  brought  to
the  surface  things  that  hitherto  had  been  concealed  in  those  depths.
AU  the  artificial  trimmings  were  pushed  into  the  background,  and
the  true  power,  man,  was  restored  to  the  foreground.  The  man  as
he  really  is.  In  blood  and  agony  is  man  born;  in  blood  and  agony
men  learn  to  know  one  another.

In  the  light  of  real  life,  among  living  men,  all  the  theories  of
dialectical  materialism  faded  and  were  put  in  the  shade.  I realized
that  all  that  for  which  we  had  made  incredible  sacrifices  over
twenty-five  years  was,  if  not  the  product  of  an  experimenter's
delirious  fantasy,  at  any  rate  only  an  experiment  that  called  for  great
improvement.  Now  as  I marched  across  the  Red  Square  I still  saw
no  way  out.  But  I was  thoroughly  convinced  of  the  falsity  of  that
which  we  had  lived  for  in  pre-war  days.

The  victory  parade  thundered  across  the  Red  square.  Dashing
soldiers  in  blue  overalls  stuck  their  heads  out  of  the  open  turrets  of
the  heavy  tanks.  Proud  of  their  gold  epaulettes  and  their  George
ribbons,  they  signaled  with  their  red  flags,  saluting  the  Kremlin
walls  and  their  leader.

Generalissimo,  today  we  greet  you  and  congratulate  you  on  the
victory!  Just  as  you  greet  and  congratulate  us.

Yet  we  remind  you:  do  you  think  of  the  summer  of  1 941  ? Do
you  remember  how  you  suddenly  struck  up  a new  tune?  'Dear
brothers  and  sisters,  citizens  and  citizenesses.  . .'you  said.  We  could


77


hardly  believe  our  ears.  For  twenty-five  years  you  had  set  brother
against  sister,  sister  against  brother.  Until  that  summer  of  1941
the  word  'citizen'  was  commonly  used  only  by  the  investigating
official  sitting  behind  his  desk  in  the  Narcomvnudel,  using  it  as  a
form  of  address  to  an  alien,  enemy  element.  Where  had  your  com
munists,  your  commissars,  political  functionaries  and  other
'comrades'  got  to  then?  You  were  right  in  calling  us  'citizens  and
citizenesses'.  We  were  not  your  comrades!  When  you  felt  the  rope
round  your  neck  you  called  to  the  people  for  help.  And  we  came.  We
died,  but  we  fought.  We  hungered,  but  we  laboured.  And  we  con
quered.  Yes,  we  conquered,  and  not  Generalissimo  Stalin  and  his
communist  party.

But  today,  in  honour  of  the  victory,  I shout  a thunderous,  triple
cheer.  And  may  the  wars  of  the  Kremlin  tremble  !

Thus  victory, came.  And  whenever  my  thoughts  turn  to  that
V-day  I recall  the  thrill  in  my  heart,  the  feeling  that  rose  in  my
throat.  The  victor  raised  his  head  and  sang  his  victory-song.  And
he  rejoiced  at  the  road  that  lay  open  before  him,  the  road  into  the
future.


78


CHAPTER  FOUR
The  Rational  Basis

In  the  spring  of  1945  one  of  the  officers  studying  at  the  college  was
the  victim  of  an  extraordinary,  an  idiotic  incident.  He  had  just
graduated  from  the  last  course  of  the  Japanese  Department,  and
had  already  been  nominated  to  a senior  post  in  the  foreign  service;
in  addition,  he  was  happily  married.  He  seemed  to  be  on  the
threshold  of  a brilliant  future.  And  yet ...

Two  of  the  college  buildings  fronted  on  to  the  street,  with  a gap
of  some  fifty  yards  between  them.  This  gap  was  blocked  by  an
ordinary  fence,  and  General  Biyasi,  who  took  great  pride  in  the
outward  appearance  not  only  of  the  students  but  of  his  buildings,
ordered  the  old  fence  to  be  taken  down  and  one  more  worthy  of
the  college  erected.  When  the  old  fence  was  taken  down  the  students
found  they  had  a very  convenient  route  through  to  the  car-stop  on
the  street,  whereas  previously  it  had  been  necessary  to  make  a
considerable  detour  to  leave  by  the  main  door.  As  a result,  all  the
college  began  to  come  and  go  through  the  'new  gateway'.  When  the
general  discovered  what  was  happening  he  had  a one-man  guard
posted  at  the  gap,  giving  him  the  strict  command  that  nobody  was
to  be  allowed  to  pass  through.  But  how  can  one  man  be  expected  to
hold  a fifty-yard  front  against  an  entire  college,  his  own  comrades
into  the  bargain?  So  the  general  sent  for  the  guard  and  personally
gave  him  a dressing-down,  threatening  him  with  the  clink.

"But  what  am  I to  do,  General?"  the  man  pleaded.  "Shoot?"

"Of  course!  A guard  post  is  sacred.  You  know  your  service
regulations,"  General  Biyasi  answered.

At  the  close  of  studies  for  the  day  a crowd  of  officers  once  more
poured  through  the  gap.  The  guard  shouted  and  threatened  them
till  he  was  hoarse.  In  vain.  But  in  the  distance  the  general's  tubby
form  was  to  be  seen  on  a tour  of  inspection.  At  that  very  moment
the  'Japanese'  captain  was  passing  the  guard,  taking  no  notice  of
his  shouts.

"Halt!"  the  man  shouted  desperately.

The  captain  went  on  his  way,  apparently  sunk  in  thought.

"Halt,  or  I'll  fire!"  the  guard  roared  again.

The  captain  went  on;  but  the  general  steadily  drew  closer.


79


Almost  frantic,  the  guard  threw  up  his  rifle  and  shot  without
taking  aim.  It  was  four  in  the  afternoon,  the  street  was  crowded
with  people,  and  the  man  was  so  agitated  that  if  he  had  taken
deliberate  aim  he  would  almost  certainly  have  missed.  But  now  the
captain  dropped  to  the  sidewalk  with  a bullet  through  his  head.

During  the  war  he  had  not  spent  one  day  at  the  front,  he  had  never
heard  the  whistle  of  a bullet;  but  a few  days  after  the  war  had  ended
be  was  struck  down  by  a comrade's  deadly  bullet,  in  a Moscow  street.
Of  course  nothing  happened  to  the  guard.  Although  the  affair  was
really  scandalous,  the  general  sent  him  a message  expressing  his
gratitude  for  'exemplary  performance  of  his  duty'.  In  such  cases
the  guard  is  free  from  blame.  The  army  regulation  says  on  this  point:
'When  on  guard  it  is  better  to  shoot  someone  who  is  innocent  than
to  miss  an  enemy.'

This  incident  involuntarily  turned  my  thoughts  to  reflections  on
fate.  'No  man  can  avoid  his  destiny,'  our  forefathers  used  to  say.

We  don't  believe  that  any  more;  or  rather,  we  have  been  taught
not  to  believe  it.  Then  there  is  more  room  for  belief  in  the  leader.

At  that  moment  I had  every  reason  to  reflect  on  my  destiny.  I
had  finished  the  college  course,  and  was  standing  on  the  threshold
of  a new  phase  in  my  life.  I saw  clearly  the  crossroads  that  lay
before  me,  but  I saw  even  more  clearly  that  once  I had  set  out  along
any  one  of  those  roads  there  could  be  no  turning  back.  At  the
moment  I had  at  least  some  possibility  of  choice,  so  I must  give
ample  thought  to  the  choice.  Recently  I had  heard  rumours  that

I was  being  considered  as  a candidate  for  a teaching  post  at  the
college.  One  could  not  have  had  a more  brilliant  prospect.  Practically
speaking,  that  represented  the  finest  opportunity  a graduate  could
have.  The  teaching  staff  was  in  a continual  state  of  flux,  for  it
constituted  an  immediate  reserve  for  the  army  General  Staff,
which  always  gave  close  consideration  to  the  claims  of  college  staff
when  there  were  special  tasks  to  be  performed  abroad.  Today  one

might  be  sent  to  somewhere  in  Europe,  tomorrow  to  America.

Truly,  the  chosen  individual  usually  went  as  an  unassuming  auxilary
member  of  an  impressive  delegation,  but  he  always  had  independent
and  responsible  special  commissions  to  execute.  And  on  return
Moscow  he  reported  not  to  the  civil  authorities  who  had  sent  th
delegation,  but  to  the  corresponding  department  of  the  General
Staff.

Only  a short  time  before,  one  of  the  college  staff  had  been  sent  on
a round  tour  of  Czechoslovakia,  Austria,  and  other  countries  of
central  Europe.  He  had  gone  as  an  'interpreter'  for  a world-famous


80


Soviet  botanist,  a member  of  the  Soviet  Academy  of  Sciences.  It
is  easy  enough  to  guess  what  sort  of  plants  the  professor  had  in
mind  to  bring  home  with  the  aid  of  such  an  'interpreter',  and  who
was  principal  and  who  subordinate.

Once  attached  to  the  college  staff,  one  was  at  the  starting  point
of  many  highly  promising  paths.  The  staff  was  very  well  informed
on  the  backstairs  questions  of  the  General  Staff.  And  personal
understandings,  patronage,  connections,  played  a great  part.  In
such  a post  one  could  always  bring  unobtrusive  influence  to  bear.

In  a few  words,  membership  of  the  college  staff  was  the  surest  start
to  a career  of  which  the  majority  'of  the  students  could  only  dream.
When  I first  heard  that  I was  being  considered  for  such  a prospect
I had  decidedly  mixed  feelings.  On  the  one  hand,  it  meant  life  in
Moscow,  mingling  in  the  new  leading  circles,  the  broadest  of
possibilities,  an  extensive  field  of  activity,  alluring  prospects.  But ...
There  was  a very  weighty  'but'.  That  road  led  in  one  direction.

One  glance  back  or  aside  and  you  were  finished.  If  you  wished  to
travel  that  road,  you  must  be  completely  free  from  inner  conflict
and  possess  perfect  faith  in  the  rightness  of  what  you  were  doing.

Of  course  there  are  substitutes  for  these  things:  hypocrisy,  careerism,
lack  of  principle  in  the  choice  of  means.  I was  an  educational  product
of  the  Stalin  era  and  had  had  ample  opportunity  to  see  that  in  the
Soviet  Union  these  substitutes  played  a fundamental  role.  And  yet,
could  I be  satisfied  with  them?  I was  not  a naive  youngster,  nor  was  I
a philanthropist:  I could  justify  the  application  of  dubious  means  in
order  to  achieve  a higher  end.  But  before  I could  do  so  in  this  case  I
had  to  be  perfectly  sure  that  the  final  goal  was  beyond  criticism.  And,
despite  my  own  personal  desires,  I did  not  feel  that  surety.

After  the  jubilant  days  of  victory  the  atmosphere  in  Moscow  had
grown  grey  and  monotonous.  A fresh  breeze  was  blowing  in  Europe,
a great  historical  transformation  was  being  accomplished  there.

College  students  who  returned  from  short  official  journeys  to  the,
west  had  interesting  things  to  report.  It  would  do  me,  too,  no  harm  to
get  to  know  the  patient  I would  be  called  upon  to  cure.

For  me,  personally,  the  best  thing  would  be  to  be  sent  to  one  of  the
European  occupied  countries.  There,  in  a new  environment,  in  lands
where  we  had  gained  the  victory,  in  creative  work  I could  recover  my
shaken  equilibrium  and  return  to  Moscow  full  of  confidence,  full  of
faith.  In  any  case,  I would  still  be  part  of  the  General  Staff  Reserve.
These  reflections  provided  the  stimulus  to  a conversation  I had
with  Lieutenant-Colonel  Taube.

Professor  Baron  von  Taube  was  one  of  Colonel  Gorokhov's


81


deputies  in  the  Educational  Department.  In  the  college  he  was  regarded
as  a kind  of  museum  piece,  and  yet,  because  of  his  extraordinary
range  of  knowledge,  and  his  capacities,  he  was  irreplaceable.  Despite
his  compromising  'von',  his  name  carried  weight  and  his  word  was
quite  often  of  decisive  significance.  The  students  regarded  him  as  an
extremely  cultivated  man,  a practical  and  observant  officer  and
teacher,  with  whom  one  could  talk  openly.

Besides  Lieutenant-Colonel  Taube,  Major-General  Ignatiev,  too,
had  a good  name  in  the  college.  In  his  youth  he  had  been  a page  to
the  last  tsar,  and  then  had  studied  at  the  tsarist  General  Staff
Academy;  later  he  had  been  tsarist  military  attach6  in  Paris  for  many
years.  After  the  revolution  he  remained  abroad  quite  a long  time  as
an  emigre,  but  in  the  'thirties,  for  unknown  reasons,  he  took  the  road
to  Canossa.  His  memoirs,  Fifty  Years  in  the  Ranks,  enjoyed  a great
success  among  the  students.  Now  the  former  Guards  officer,  Count
Ignatiev,  was  wearing  a general's  uniform  again,  and  had  been
appointed  historian  of  the  Red  Army.  Naturally,  he  was  not  trusted,
and  his  chief  task  was  to  proclaim  the  Soviet  regime's  tolerance
towards  repentant  sinners.  In  his  memoirs  he  gave  a vague  reason  for
his  return,  but  in  Moscow  it  was  openly  said  that  he  had  got  tired  of
washing  dishes  in  Paris  restaurants.

During  the  last  year  or  so  of  the  war  a number  of  more  or  less  well
known  emigres  had  returned  to  the  Soviet  Union.  For  instance,  the
once  famous  writer  Kuprin  had  recently  arrived  in  Moscow.  It  is  said
that  when  he  walked  out  of  the  railway  station  he  put  down  his  case
and  knelt  to  bow  his  head  to  his  native  earth  in  sight  of  all  the  people.
When  he  got  up  he  found  his  case  had  vanished.

Only  recently,  Belyavsky  and  I had  heard  a concert  given  by
Alexander  Vertinsky.  His  public  appearance  was  quite  unexpected,

and  most  people  were  delighted,  regardiiig  it  as  confirmation  of  a
new-  liberal  course  in  governmental  policy.  It  is  true  that  he  could
appear  only  at  small  clubs  in  the  suburbs.  But  the  very  fact  that  he
could  appear  was  more  important  and  more  pleasant  than  his
performance.

A smell  of  morphia  came  from  the  stage,  and  the  human  Wreck  that
walked  on,  accompanied  by  his  wife,  a young  singer,  made  a wretched
and  sentimental  impression.  The  past  is  more  pleasant  in  memory
than  in  its  resurrection  as  a corpse  from  the  grave.

It  may  not  have  been  in  their  minds,  but  the  government  took
a clever  step  in  letting  the  young  generation  see  the  old  world  in
this  form.  With  our  own  eyes,  without  propaganda,  we  clearly  saw


82


how  far  our  world  and  our  interests  had  advanced  in  the  meantime,
Lieutenant-Colonel  Taube  listened  closely  to  my  superficial
arguments-naturally,  I made  no  mention  of  the  personal  reasons
leading  me  to  ask  to  be  sent  abroad-and  promised  to  speak  in  favour
of  the  -proposal  to  the  higher  authorities,  while  not  withdrawing  my
candidature  'for  the  college  staff.

Besides  the  lieutenant-colonel,  I brought  influence  to  bear  on
other  people  who  had  some  say  in  the  allocation  of  posts  to  college
graduates.

Some  time  later  I was  summoned  to  Colonel  Gorokhov.  He  greeted
me  as  an  old  acquaintance.

"AN,  Major  Klimovl  I'm  glad  to  see  youl"  he  began  affably,  as
though  to  see  me  was  all  he  wanted  of  life.  I at  once  took  guard.  The
more  affable  he  was,  the  more  unexpected  the  conversation  might
prove  to  be.

"So  you  didn't  follow  my  advice  after  all.  You  turned  your  back  on
the  Eastern  Department."  He  shook  his  head  mournfully.  "I
wouldn't  forgive  you,  except  that  you've  had  such  good  reports."

I remained  silent,  waiting  for  him  to  come  to  the  point.

"So  you  would  like  to  have  the  opportunity  to  work  in  perfect
freedom?"  came  the  friendly  question.

I raised  my  eyebrows  in  astonishment.

"We  were  thinking  of  keeping  you  here,"  he  went  on.  "But  now
it's  proposed  to  give  you  an  opportunity  to  prove  yourself  in  a
different  post.  I take  it  that  this  has  come  about  not  entirely  with
out  your  intervention

He  looked  at  me  ironically.  No  doubt  he  had  guessed  long  since
what  part  I myself  had  played  in  getting  transferred  from  the
Eastern  to  the  Western  Faculty.

I do  not  object  to  your  being  sent  abroad,"  he  said  after  a brief
silence.  "I  think  you  don't,  either."

I tried  to  look  unconcerned.  It  is  better  for  an  Officer  of  the  C,  eneral
Staff  to  avoid  displaying  excessive  curiosity.

"You  have  just  one  defect,"  he  continued.  "Why  haven't  you  yet
joined  the  Party?"

"I've  been  at  the  college  only  a year,  Comrade  Colonel,"  I replied.

"And  one  has  to  have  the  recommendation  of  three  Party  raembers,
one  of  whom  must  have  worked  together  with  the  candidate  for  at


83


least  two  years."

"And  before  you  came  to  the  college?"

"I've  never  had  the  opportunity  to  remain  two  years  in  one  post."

I felt  like  telling  the  colonel  frankly  that  I considered  a man  should
join  the  Party  only  when  he  had  become  a leading  member  of
society,  and  not  in  order  to  use  his  membership  as  a springboard
for  his  career.  The  majority  of  the  present-day  'true  communists'
worked  to  the  latter  principle.  It  was  they  who  made  the  tnost  stir,
in  order  to  show  how  'true  to  the  Party  line'  they  were.  But  those
who  had  achieved  something  by  their  own  merits,  and  in  con
sequence,  for  good  or  ill,  had  to  join  the  Party,  were  usually  passive
and  silent  camp-followers.

But  could  I have  told  him  all  that?  It  would  have  meant  that  I was
myself  uncertain,  dubious.  And  if  a Soviet  citizen  wishes  to  live,
from  the  day  of  his  birth  he  must  believe  absolutely  in  the  infallibi
lity  of  the  Party  line.  I would  have  shown  myself  a poor  student  of
his  college  if  I had  told  the  colonel  such  things.

"I  hope  that  by  our  next  meeting  you  will  have  remedied  this
defect,"  he  said  in  conclusion.  "Apart  from  that,  our  reports  on  you
are  excellent.  Your  case  will  be  remitted  to  the  army  Personnel
Department,  and  they  will  notify  you  of  your  future  post.,,

After  this  conversation  I waited  to  go  through  the  usual  examina
tion  by  still  higher  instances.

The  students  of  our  college  normally  had  to  pass  very  thorough-
going tests,  but  before  being  appointed  to  a post  abroad  even  they
were  customarily  subjected  to  a questionnaire  test  by  the  Mandate
Commission  of  the  Red  Army  Personnel  Department  and  the  Foreign
Department  of  the  Soviet  Communist  Party.  One  could  never  be
sufficiently  on  one's  guard.  It  was  always  possible  that  rineanwhile
someone  or  other  had  become  'wormeaten',  or  important  changes
might  have  occurred  among  his  or  his  wife's  relations.

One  of  the  most  unpleasant  features  of  Soviet  life  is  the  collective
responsibility  of  all  one's  relatives.  No  matter  how  beyond  reproach
a man  may  be  as  a member  of  Soviet  society,  if  any  even  of  hid
distant  relations  comes  into  conflict  with  the  Narcomvnudel  he  is
automatically  entered  in  the  category  of  'politically  unreliable'.

During  the  war  there  was  a special  category  of  'unreliables',
who  were  not  called  up  for  military  service.  Many  of  them  had  to
serve  in  labour  battalions.  They  were  not  issued  weapons  and  were
kept  at  a safe  distance  from  the  front.  They  consisted  mainly  of
people  whose  relatives  had  made  too  close  acquaintance  with  the


84


Narcomvnudel.  Anyone  who  had  personally  come  into  contact  with
the  Narcomvnudel  or  was  on  their  black  lists  was  rounded  up  and
interned  in  the  first  few  days  of  the  war.  If  any  'unreliable'  offered  to
go  as  a volunteer  to  the  front,  he  was  arrested  at  once  and  sent  to  a
Narcomvnudel  camp.  The  military  command  knew  what  value  to  set
on  this  kind  of  patriotism.  The  Soviet  government  reckoned  that
despite  the  long  years  of  re-education,  the  feeling  of  loyalty  to  one's
father,  or  mother,  an4  one's  own  blood  was  stronger  in  the  Russian
soul  than  the  husks  of  communist  teaching.

During  the  later  years  of  the  war,  owing  to  the  great  shortage
of  manpower  some  of  the  'unreliables'  were  taken  into  the  regular
army.  Although  the  majority  of  them  had  had  higher  education  and
were  officers  on  the  reserve,  they  had  to  go  to  the  front  as  privates.
During  the  many  years  of  the  Soviet  experiment  the  number  of
those  who  had  suffered  repression  reached  such  an  enormous
figure  that  without  doubt  the  automatically  'unreliable'  group
constitutes  the  most  important  social  stratum  of  the  new  Soviet
society.  Both  sides  have  got  to  seek  a way  out  of  this  complicated
situation.  Men  want  to  live,  and  the  regime  needs  men.  But  between
the  reconcilement  of  these  two  necessities  there  is  an  insurmountable
obstacle:  the  questionnaire.  Many  of  these  'unreliables'  have  never
seen  their  'evil  genius',  they  have  never  had  anything  to  do  with  him,
and  naturally  they  make  no  mention  of  him  when  filling  up  their
questionnaires.  The  authorities  know  quite  well  that  the
questionnaire  is  not  filled  in  with  strict  accuracy,  but  they  often  find  them
selves  forced  to  'overlook'  this  inexactitude.  Their  terror  policy  has
driven  the  Soviet  rulers  into  a blind  alley:  if  one  accepts  the  Soviet
classification,  there  are  fewer  immaculate  and  reliable  citizens  in  the
Soviet  Union  today  than  there  were  thirty  years  ago.  And  so,  if  the
case  is  not  highly  important,  or  if  there  is  urgent  need  for  any
particular  individual,  they  check  the  details  of  his  questionnaire
less  strictly-  On  the  other  hand,  in  important  cases  they  trust  no
questionnaires  whatever,  nor  even  the  opinion  they  have  themselves
formed  concerning  the  person  under  consideration,  so  they  put  him
under  examination  again  and  again,  with  hysterical  distrust  and  a
meticulous  scrupulosity.

Between  three  and  six  months  elapse  between  the  first  candidature
and  the  final  appointment  to  a foreign  post,  during  which  period  the
candidate  is  subjected  to  various  checks.  Thus,  the  local  Narcomv
nudel  in  his  place  of  residence  has  to  check  his  statements  relating
thereto,  and  if  it  is  established  that  some  distant  relative,  it  may  be,
has  vanished  without  trace  in  mysterious  circumstances,  that  in
itself  is  sufficient  to  dispose  of  the  candidate.  Any  circumstance
not  clarified  is  taken  as  a negative  factor.


85


I was  expecting  to  be  summoned  to  the  Personnel  Department
of  the  General  Staff,  but  a few  days  later  I received  the  order  to
report  to  the  head  of  the  college.  This  was  outside  the  normal
routine,  and  I was  rather  troubled  to  know  what  lay  behind  it.

Opinions  concerning  the  head  of  the  college,  General  Biyasi,
were  wildly  contradictory.  One  section  of  the  students  rather
suspiciously  expressed  great  enthusiasm  for  his  unusual  ability
and  declared  that  he  was  a highly  cultured  man,  that  at  one  time  he
had  been  Soviet  minister  to  Italy  and  was  not  only  perfect  in  all
the  languages  covered  by  the  college,  but  could  even  read  human
hearts  and  discover  one's  most  secret  thoughts.  No  doubt  these
students  would  climb  higher  up  the  diplomatic  ladder  than  those
who  declared  that  the  general  had  begun  his  career  by  selling  Halva
and  fruits  in  the  Tiflis  market,  and  who  considered  that  his  only  out
standing  qualities  were  his  glossy  exterior  and  his  floridly
melifluous  manners  and  speech.

Anybody  summoned  to  the  general's  room  could  never  be  certain
of  the  outcome.  We  were  always  ready  at  any  time  for  the  greatest  of
surprises.  For  instance,  only  recently  the  entire  Japanese
Department,  with  the  exception  of  the  last  course,  had  been  reorganized  for
the  preparation  of  army  translators  in  a short  course  of  instruction.

The  disillusioned  would-be  diplomats  were  assured  that  it  was  only
a temporary  measure,  that  they  would  all  have  the  opportunity  to
continue  their  studies  later.  But  meanwhile  they  were  sitting  all  day
grinding  at  Japanese  military  terminology.  This  reorganization
Occurred  immediately  after  the  Yalta  Conference,  and  the  rate  of

instruction  was  accelerated  to  such  an  extent  that  the  students  gave
one  another  unequivocal  glances.  The  plan  clearly  indicated  the  date
by  which  the  training  had  to  be  completed,  and  therefore  the  wa
by  which  the  wind  was  blowing.  For  that  matter,  from  the  beginning
the  secret  clauses  of  the  Yalta  agreement  were  no  secret  for  us.  We  saw
the  point  when  we  were  informed  that  the  members  of  the  foreign
delegations  would  be  very  glad  to  make  the  acquaintance  of  any  of  us.
Before  that,  if  any  one  of  us  had  ventured  to  exchange  a few  words
with  a foreigner  in  the  streets  of  Moscow  without  special  permission,
he  would  have  been  presuming  too  much  on  the  powers  of  his
guardian  angel.

Before  taking  up  a post  abroad  certain  of  the  students  were  put
through  a special  course  of  instruction  in  rules  of  conduct  and  good
manners  in  relations  with  foreigners.  In  such  courses  a student
would  often  be  given  individual  instruction  suited  to  the  country  to
which  he  was  assigned.  And  frequently  special  emphasis  was  laid


86


on  learning  the  modem  dances  of  western  countries  or  the  art  of
relations  with  ladies,  including  the  art  of  breaking  hearts,  which
is  one  way  of  getting  to  diplomats'  private  safes.  In  these  courses
General  Biyasi  had  no  rival  as  an  instructor.

After  my  rather  gloomy  reflections  I was  not  a little  surprised
when  he  briefly  informed  me  that  by  the  command  of  higher
authorities  I had  been  posted  to  the  staff  of  the  Soviet  Military
Administration  in  Germany.  Evidently  I was  regarded  as  so  reliable
and  so  thoroughly  proved  that  a further  check-up  before  my
departure  was  superfluous.

"We  can  be  proud  of  you  in  every  respect,"  the  general  explained.
"But  don't  forget:  wherever  you  may  find  yourself,  you  are  and  will
remain  one  of  us  !"  He  put  special  emphasis  on  'us'.  "From  now  on
you  are  under  a different  command,  but  we  can  order  your  recall
at  any  moment  we  wish.  If  necessary  you  are  fully  entitled  to  get
into  contact  with  us  over  the  head  of  your  future  superior  officers.

As  you  know,  that  is  strictly  forbidden  in  the  army,  but  we  are  an
exception  to  the  rule.  Your  future  destiny  depends  on  how  you  show
up  in  your  practical  work.  I hope  we  shall  meet  again  later.  . ."

The  general's  words  left  me  unusually  calm.  During  the  war  I had
been  full  of  enthusiasm  and  ardor  for  all  I experienced;  I had
definite  objectives  in  front  of  me.  But  now  I was  filled  only  with  icy
calm.  The  same  calm  that  I had  felt  in  June  1941,  on  the  outbreak
of  war.  Then  it  had  been  due  to  the  tense  expectation  of  coming
experiences.  But  now  I simply  could  not  understand  why  it  was.
our  inner  world  is  the  reflection  of  our  surroundings.  Now  I was
quite  deliberately  putting  my  inner  world  to  the  test.  In  active  work,
in  the  interplay  of  international  interests,  I would  find  the  rational
basis  of  our  Soviet  existence.  One  could  hardly  have  a more  suitable
spot  for  that  than  Berlin.

,1 1 feel  sure  you  will  justify  the  trust  the  fatherland  is  placing  in
you,  in  sending  you  to  the  most  important  sector  of  the  post-war
front.  The  work  to  be  done  there  is  more  important  and  more
responsible  than  in  war-time,"  he  ended,  as  he  shook  my  hand.

1 1 1 wish  you  every  success'  Major!"

"Thank  you,  Comrade  General!"  I replied,  looking  him  straight
in  the  eyes  and  responding  to  his  vigorous  handshake.  After  all,
wasn't  I going  to  Berlin  in  order  to  come  back  to  Moscow  a better
Soviet  citizen  than  I could  be  today?

During  the  winter  I had  solved  a riddle,  that  puzzled  me  in  regard
to  Genia.  Her  mother  had  returned  to  Moscow  in  January;  all
through  the  war  she  had  worked  as  a doctor  in  front-line  hospitals,


87


in  order  to  be  near  her  husband.  Now  she  had  been  demobilized.

Anna  Petrovna  was  the  exact  opposite  of  her  daughter  Genia.

Her  greatest  interest  in  life  was  to  talk  about  her  husband.  I needed

no  little  patience  and  endurance  to  listen  to  the  same  story  and

display  the  same  interest  for  the  umpteenth  time:  how  they  had  got

remarried,  how  he  was  never  at  home  because  he  devoted  all  his  time  to

his  service,  how  hard  it  was  to  be  the  wife  of  a professional  officer.  She

gave  me  long  descriptions  of  her  and  his  parents,  simple  people;  of

his  gradual  advancement,  and  then  his  breathtaking  career  during

the  war.  Anna  Petrovna  was  extremely  pleasant  and  frank.  Though

,she  was  the  wife  of  a well-known  general,  she  was  not  at  all  conceited

about  his  position;  on  the  contrary,  she  had  a partiality  for  telling

stories  about  the  lack  of  culture  and  the  ignorance  of  the  new  aristocracy.  She

had  a clear  realization  of  the  responsibility  her  hus

band's  high  position  placed  on  her,  and  she  tried  her  utmost  to  keep

up  with  the  times  and  with  him.  Both  outwardly  and  in  her  character

she  fully  justified  the  place  she  held  in  society.

There  was  a general  tendency  among  Soviet  people  to  regard  the
new  aristocracy  very  sceptically,  as  a lot  of  upstarts.  To  a large  extent

this  was  because  quite  unknown  people  had  come  to  the  top  during
the  revolution.  That  had  been  perfectly  natural.  Later  on  these
same  people  were  appointed  to  leading  State  positions,  for  which  the,
were  often  fitted  neither  by  their  knowledge  nor  by  their  capacity
for  the  particular  job.  One  thing  has  to  be  granted  to  the  leading
Soviet  officials,  they  had  a restless  energy  and  inexhaustible  perseverance
As  time  passed  the  revolutionary  old  guard  grew  still  older,  the
outlived  their  day,  and  their  incapacity  for  the  new  tasks  showed  up
more  and  more  obviously.

Meanwhile  new  cadres  of  specialists  were  being  developed  in  al
branches  of  activity.  They  came  from  the  masses  of  the  people,
but  they  had  the  requisite  education  and  special  professional  training
and  they  acquired  practical  experience  in  responsible  a,  vii  y.

The  bureaucratic  ulcer  burst  at  the  beginning  of  the  war,  and  i
became  necessary  to  replace  the  tarnished  heroes  of  the
revolutionary  period  by  younger  leaders  of  the  Soviet  school.  Inevitably
during  the  war  years,  and  especially  in  the  army,  new  and  talented  military
leaders  who  had  been  vegetating  unrecognized  came
to  the  forefront.

The  pre-war  Party  and  bureaucratic  aristocracy  spent  their  days
in  the  same  luxury  and  magnificence  that  the  tsarist  aristocracy  had
formerly  been  reproached  with.  During  the  war,  in  order  to  save  the
situation,  they  were  replaced,  perhaps  only  temporarily,  by  the  finest
members  of  the  nation.  Genia's  father  belonged  to  this  elite.  And


88


Anna  Petrovna  was  unusually  proud  of  her  husband's  career.  Her
only  regret  was  that  it  had  practically  put  an  end  to  their  family  life.

I had  not  seen  Genia  while  I was  taking  my  State  examination,

and  had  only  phoned  her  occasionally.  But  now  I had  my  assignment

to  Berlin  in  my  pocket,  and  I could  call  on  her  again:  I hardly

expected  the  affectionate  reception  she  gave  me;  it  was  so

demonstrative  that  even  Anna  Petrovna  shook  her  head  disapprovingly.  "Don't

forget  that  I'm  here  too,"  she  remarked.

"Grisha!"  Genia  said  as  she  whirled  me  like  a top  round  the  room.

"Daddy's  been  home  two  whole  weeks  ....  Just  imagine:  two  whole
weeks!  Come  and  see  what  he's  brought  me."

Full  of  pride,  she  showed  me  quite  a number  of  presents  her  father
had  given  her.  Even  before  this,  whole  cases  of  trophies  had
collected  in  their  apartment.  Each  time  one  of  the  staff  officers  traveled
from  the  front  to  Moscow  he  brought  with  him  presents  from
the  general.  That  was  common  in  all  the  officers'  families  during  the

Red  Army's  advance  into  East  Prussia.  The  junior  officers  sent  only
small  articles,  but  the  seniors  even  sent  back  solid  items  like
furniture  and  pianos.  From  the  legal  aspect,  robbery;  in  the  wartime
language  they  were  called  trophies.  And  besides,  everybody  considered
that  this  was  only  taking  back  from  the  Germans  what  they  had
taken  from  us.

About  this  time  there  was  a story  running  through  Moscow  about
a front-line  officer  who  sent  a case  of  soap  home  to  his  wife.  She  did
not  stop  to  think  about  it  but  sold  the  whole  lot  at  once  in  the  market.

A few  days  later  she  received  a letter  from  her  husband,  in  which  he
mentioned  that  one  of  the  cakes  of  soap  had  a gold  watch  concealed
in  it.  The  story  had  various  endings:  one,  that  the  woman  hanged  her
self;  another,  that  she  took  to  drink;  a third,  that  she  drank  poison.

A massive  radio  set  was  standing  in  the  General's  living  room.  At
first  glance  I could  not  decide  whether  it  was  a receiver  or  a
transmitter.  In  fact  he  had  got  hold  of  a set  perfectly  fitted  to  his  rank:  it
was  a super-receiver,  the  latest  model.  I was  about  to  plug  it  in  and
switch  it  on  when  Anna  Petrovna  raised  her  finger  admonitorily:

'Grisha!  For  goodness'  sake  don't  switch  it  in.  Kolia  [her  husband]
has  strictly  forbidden  it."

"But  what  are  you  afraid  of?"  I asked.

"It  mustn't  be  touched.  Not  for  anything,  not  till  the  ban's  raised.

Even  Kolia  hasn't  switched  it  on  yet."

What  do  you  make  of  that?  A month  after  the  war  had  ended  a


89


victorious  Soviet  general  did  not  dare  to  listen  to  the  radio  until  the
Kremlin  had  expressly  given  him  permission.

"Grisha,  look  at  this!"  Genia  broke  in.  "A  golden  pistol!"  She
excitedly  threw  me  something  heavy  in  a yellow  leather  case.

Thinking  to  find  some  original  design  of  cigarette-lighter,  or  some
feminine  trinket,  I opened  the  case  and  took  out  a gleaming  gilded
Pistol  of  the  German  'Walter'  pattern.  I noticed  two  lightning
flashes,  the  sign  of  the  S.S.  And  an  inscription:

"To  S.S.  General  Adreas  von  Schonau,  in  the  name  of  the  Great
German  Reich.  The  Fuhrer."

"Now  you'd  better  behave  yourself !"  Genia  said  as  she  produced
a clip  of  cartridges.  "It's  all  ready  for  use."

As  she  threw  it  down,  the  clip  slithered  like  a snake  over  the  sofa
cushion.  I noticed  the  small  red  heads  of  the  cartridges.

"What  an  idea,  to  give  anyone  a pistol!"  I said.  "And  you  above
all."

"Don't  get  the  wind  up.  If  you  behave  yourself  nothing  will
happen  to  you,"  she  reassured  me.  "And  he  brought  two  Opel
cars  back  with  him,"  she  chattered  on.  "The  'Admiral'  he'll  drive
himself,  and  the  'Captain's'  for  me.  So  see  that  you  turn  up  tomorrow
morning.  You  must  teach  me  to  drive."

"But  listen,  Grisha,  what  are  your  plans  for  the  future?"  she  asked
playfully,  her  new  toys  already  forgotten.  With  the  same
unconstraint  with  which  she  had  handled  her  gold  pistol  she  laid  my  head
on  her  breast  and  described  a large  questionnark  with  her  finger  on
my  forehead.

I hated  to  spoil  her  cheerful  spirits.  In  my  heart  I began  to  feel
regret  that  I would  have  to  leave  all  this  world  behind  the  very  next
morning.  But  it  had  to  be,  and,  anyway,  it  was  not  for  ever.

"Tomorrow  I'm  flying  to  Berlin..  ."  I said  slowly,  staring  up  at  the
ceiling.  I spoke  very  quietly,  as  though  I were  somehow  in  the  wrong.
"What?"  she  said  incredulously.  "Is  this  another  of  your  silly
jokes?"

"It  isn't  a joke.  .

"You're  not  flying  anywhere.  Forget  it!  Get  that?"

"It  doesn't  depend  on  me."  I shrugged  my  shoulders  helplessly.

"My  goodness!  I'd  like  to  skin  you  alive  !"  she  exclaimed.  "If  you


90


simply  must  see  what  it's  like  abroad,  go  and  spend  an  evening  at
the  operetta.  Don't  you  feel  any  regret  at  going  away  again  and
leaving  me  behind  here,  with  my  everlasting,  boring  lessons?"

She  looked  almost  with  entreaty  into  my  eyes;  they  revealed  more
than  a mere  request  or  whim.

"It  isn't  what  I want,  Genia.  Duty.  .

"Duty,  duty!"  she  echoed.  "I'm  sick  of  that  word."

All  her  carefree,  joyful  spirits  were  gone.  Her  voice  was  sad  and
earnest  as  she  said:

"I  was  so  happy  to  think  you  were  not  a professional  officer.  I
suppose  you  think  I've  had  a happy  home  life.  If  you  want  to  know
the  truth,  I'm  an  orphan  !"

She  suddenly  sat  straight  up.  Her  face  was  pale,  her  slender
fingers  played  nervously  with  the  silk  fringe  of  the  cushion.

"All  my  life  I've  only  seen  my  father  once  a week,  so  to  speak.

We're  almost  strangers  to  each  other.  Have  you  ever  stopped  to
wonder  why  he  overwhelms  me  with  presents?  He  felt  just  as  I do.

First  it  was  China,  then  it  was  Spain,  then  something  else.  And  so  all
my  life."

Her  voice  shook,  her  eyes  filled  with  tears.  She  lost  her
self-control,  the  words  poured  from  her  lips  like  a passionate
complaint,  like  a reproach  against  fate.

"My  friends  say  I'm  lucky;  my  father's  chest  is  loaded  with  orders  .

...  But  I hate  those  orders  ...  They've  taken  my  father  from  me
...  Every  one  of  them  means  years  of  separation.  Look  at  mother!

Hardly  has  she  got  over  her  tears  of  joy  for  father  being  home  again,
alive  and  well,  when  there  are  more  tears  over  something  new.  Often
we  go  a whole  year  without  a letter  from  him  ...  And,  he,  too,  always
says:  'Dutyl.  Dutyl'  And  now  you  ...  I don't  want  to  live  a life  like
my  mother's  ...  I don't  want  to  live  only  on  your  letters  . . ."

She  covered  her  face  with  her  hands,  her  shoulders  shook
spasmodically.  Then  she  buried  her  face  in  the  cushion  and  wept  bitterly,  like
a sick  child.

I silently  stroked  her  hair  and  gazed  at  the  sunlit  roofs  of  the
house  opposite,  at  the  blue  vault  of  the  summer  sky,  as  though  it
might  prompt  me  to  an  answer.  What  was  I to  do?  Here  at  my  side
was  the  woman  I loved  and  who  love7d  me;  and  somewhere,  a long
way  off,  was  duty.


91


I spent  the  evening  with  Anna  Petrovna  in  the  living  room.

Genia  had  spread  out  her  books  on  the  dining-room  table,  and  sat
chewing  her  pencil;  she  was  preparing  for  her  finals.  Anna  Petrovna
complained  as  usual  about  her  lonely  life.

"He  was  offered  a post  in  the  Artillery  Department;  but,  no,  he
must  go  and  stick  his  nose  in  hell  again.  At  Konigsberg  he  was
wounded  in  the  head,  but  that  isn't  enough  for  him.  You'd  think
he'd  got  enough  orders  and  decorations,  and  a high  enough  rank.  But
now  he  declares  he's  going  to  be  a marshal.  Stalin  himself  told  him  so
at  the  reception.  And  now  he's  continually  repeating  it  like  a parrot."
The  general  had  been  urgently  recalled  to  Moscow  a few  days
before  the  capitulation  of  Germany.  On  10  May  1945  he  was  present,
with  other  high-ranking  officers  of  the  Red  Army,  at  the  Kremlin
reception  which  the  Politbureau  gave  in  celebration  of  the  victory.

Now  another  Lenin  order  decorated  his  broad  chest,  another  star
was  added  to  his  gold  epaulettes.  But  Anna  Petrovna  was  not
destined  to  enjoy  her  husband's  company  for  long.  He  had  been
entrusted  with  a new,  secret  commission;  he  spent  all  his  days  in  the
General  Staff,  and  whenever  she  asked  him  where  he  was  going  this
time  he  only  answered:  "You'll  see  when  you  get  a letter  with  the
field-post  address."

She  discovered  where  he  had  been  sent  only  months  later,  when
the  war  with  Japan  broke  out.  And  even  then  she  learnt  it  from
the  newspapers,  which  announced  that  the  Presidium  of  the
Supreme  Soviet  had  awarded  him  a further  distinction  for  special
services  in  the  struggle  against  Japan.

"How  can  he  become  a marshal  now  the  war's  over?"  I asked  her.
"Whom  will  he  be  fighting  next?"

"I  don't  know,"  she  sighed.  "He  avoids  talking  politics  with  me.

He's  grown  so  cock-a-hoop  since  his  last  visit  to  the  Kremlin.

They're  obviously  thinking  something  up,  if  they're  talking  on
those  lines.  Stalin's  the  be-all  and  end-all  of  existence  for  him.  If
Stalin  tells  him:  'You'll  become  a marshal,'  he'll  drag  the  marshal's
star  down  from  heaven  if  necessary."

'What  new  devilry  is  afoot  now?'  I thought  to  myself  'The
Kremlin  doesn't  talk  idly.'  But  I saw  all  the  import  of  Anna
Petrovna's  words  only  later,  when  sitting  at  the  conference  table  in
the  Berlin  Control  Commission.

That  was  my  last  day  in  Moscow.  Next  morning  I went  to  the
central  aerodrome.  It  was  early,  a mist  hung  over  the  earth;  every
thing  was  very  still  and  quiet.  Innumerable  transport  machines,


92


all  of  them  'Douglases',  stretched  their, great  wings  over  the  out
fields.  My  heart  was  as  light  as  the  fresh  morning  air,  as  calm  and
still  as  the  hoarfrosted  field  of  the  landing  ground.  I would  be
returning  to  Moscow  in  twelve  months.  And  then  the  city  would  be  even
more  dear  to  me  than  it  was  now.

Two  officers  came  up;  evidently  they  were  traveling  with  me.

"Well,  how's  things,  Major?"  One  of  them  greeted  me.  "Off  to
Europe?"

"Not  a bad  idea  to  see  for  yourself  what  old  mother  Europe
really  looks  like,"  the  second  added.

The  aerodrome  came  to  life.  Several  other  officers  arrived,  all  of
them  assigned  to  the  staff  of  the  Soviet  Military  Administration.

The  S.M.A.  had  its  own  machines  servicing  the  Berlin-Moscow
route.  On  their  return  journey  from  Berlin  to  Moscow  they  were
so  heavily  laden  with  important  and  urgent  freight  that  they  could
hardly  gain  height., But  from  Moscow  to  Berlin  they  flew  only  half
loaded.  Our  pilot  waited  a little  longer,  then  shrugged  his  shoulders
and  signaled  for  permission  to  take  off.


93


CHAPTER  FIVE
The  Berlin  Kremlin

The  Douglas  S.  47  described  a spiral.  Below,  as  far  as  the  eye
could  see,  extended  a cemetery  of  ruins.  We  must  be  over  Berlin.

The  prospect  beneath  resembled  a relief  map  rather  than  a city.  In
the  slanting  rays  of  the  sinking  sun  the  burnt-out  skeletons  of  the
walls  threw  sharply  cut  shadows.

During  the  fighting  in  the  streets  of  Berlin  it  had  not  been
possible  to  see  all  the  immensity  of  the  destruction.  But  now,  from
above,  Berlin  looked  like  some  dead  city,  the  excavations  of  some
prehistoric  Assyrian  town.  Neither  human  beings  nor  automobiles
in  the  streets.  Only  endless  burnt-out  stone  chests;  gaping,  empty
window-holes.

I had  gained  all  my  knowledge  of  Berlin  from  books.  I had  thought
of  it  as  a city  in  which  the  trains  were  more  reliable  in  their
punctuality  than  a clock,  and  all  the  human  beings  went  like  clockwork.
I thought  of  Paris  as  a city  of  continual  joy,  of  Vienna  as  one  long
carefree  song;  but  I thought  of  Berlin  as  everlastingly  grim,  a city
without  smiles,  a city  whose  inhabitants  had  no  knowledge  of  the
art  of  living.

I had  first  come  to  know  Berlin  in  April  1945,  at  a season  when
the  blood  pulses  faster  through  the  veins,  as  the  poets  say.  But  it
was  not  love  that  sent  it  coursing  faster,  but  hate.  And  it  flowed  not
only  in  the  veins,  but  over  the  roadways  of  the  Berlin  streets.

Our  first  encounter  reminded  me  rather  of  an  American  wild
west  story.  All  means  of  killing  one  another  were  justified.  A dead
soldier  lying  in  the  street  flew  into  the  air  at  the  least  touch,  thus
taking  revenge  on  the  victors  even  in  death.  Individual  soldiers
were  shot  down  with  anti-tank  guns  intended  for  tank  battles.  And

the  Russian  tanks  stormed  down  the  stairs  into  the  underworld
of  the  Berlin  Underground  and  danced  madly  in  the  darkness,
spurting  fire  in  all  directions.  War  till  'five  minutes  past  twelve'.

Now  I was  returning  to  Berlin  for  the  purpose,  in  the  language
of  official  documents,  of  demilitarizing  Germany  in  accordance
with  the  agreement  between  the  victorious  powers.

A major  in  the  Army  Medical  Service  stared  through  the  round
window  at  the  picture  of  Berlin  slowly  flowing  beneath  us.  His  face
was  thoughtful,  expressive  of  regret.  He  turned  to  me  and  remarked:
"After  all,  these  people  didn't  have  such  a bad  life.  So  you  can't
help  asking  yourself  what  else  they  wanted."


94


The.  Adler  airport.  All  round  the  edges  of  the  flying  field  were
Junkers  with  their  tails  up,  like  gigantic  grasshoppers.  Above  the
administration  building  rose  a bare  flagpole.  In  the  control  room  the
officer  on  duty,  an  air  force  captain,  was  answering  three  telephones
at  once  and  trying  to  reassure  an  artillery  colonel  whose  wartime
wife  had  got  lost  in  the  air  between  Moscow  and  Berlin.

A lieutenant-colonel  walked  up  to  an  air  force  lieutenant  standing
close  by  me — evidently  the  colonel  had  more  faith  in  junior  officers.
Five  paces  earlier  than  necessary  he  saluted,  and  asked  with  an
artificial,  hopeful  smile:  "Comrade  Lieutenant,  could  you  be  so
kind  as  to  tell  me  where  the  Bugrov  household  is  to  be  found?"'

( At  this  time  most  of  the  troop  formations  were  famliarly  called
'households',  being  distinguished  by  the  name  of  the  formation's
commander.  )

He  spoke  in  a whisper,  as  though  betraying  a secret.

The  lieutenant  stared  in  amazement  at  the  lieutenant-colonel's
tabs,  and  was  obviously  unable  to  decide  whether  he  was  suffering
from  an  acoustical  or  an  optical  illusion.  Then  he  ran  his  eyes
blankly  over  the  lieutenant-colonel,  from  head  to  foot.  The  senior
officer  was  still  more  embarrassed,  and  added  in  the  tone  of  a help
less  intellectual:  "You  see,  we've  got  our  orders,  but  we  don't  know
where  it  is  they  order  us  to."  The  lieutenant  gaped  like  a fish,
then  snapped  his  mouth  shut.

What  was  this  'lieutenant-colonel',  really?  A diversionist?

I,  too,  began  to  take  an  interest  in  the  lieutenant-colonel.  He  was
wearing  a new  uniform,  new  military  boots  and  a rank-and-file
waist-strap.  Any  real  officer  would  rather  have  put  on  a looted
German  officer's  belt  than  a private's  strap.  On  his  shoulders  were
brand-new  green  front-line  tabs.  Normally,  real  officers  even  at  the
front  preferred  to  wear  gold  tabs,  and  since  the  end  of  the  war  it  was
rare  to  find  a front-line  officer  wearing  the  front-line  tabs.  A pack
hung  over  his  back,  and  he  was  clearly  not  used  to  it.  But  officers
generally  aren't  fond  of  packs  and  get  rid  of  them  at  the  first
opportunity.  His  belt  was  stranded  well  below  his  hips,  a challenge  to
every  sergeant  in  the  Red  Army.  All  his  uniform  hung  on  him  like
a saddle  on  a cow.  At  his  side  was  an  imposing,  Nagant-type  pistol
in  a canvas  holster.  No  doubt  about  it,  he'd  come  out  to  fight  all
right ! But  why  did  he  use  such  a tone  in  speaking  to  a lieutenant?

A real  army  lieutenant-colonel  would  strictly  observe  regulations  and
never  speak  to  a lieutenant  first;  if  he  wanted  him,  he  would  beckon
the  junior  officer  across.  And  without  any  'would  you  be  so  kind'!

A little  distance  off  there  was  a group  of  fellows  looking  equally


95


comical,  hung  about  with  packs  and  trunks,  and  clinging  to  them
as  tightly  as  if  they  were  on  a Moscow  railway  station.  I turned  to
the  flying  officer  and  asked,  with  a glance  at  the  lieutenant-colonel
and  his  companions:  "What  sort  of  fish  are  they?"

The  officer  smiled,  and  answered:  "Dismantlers.  They've  been
so  intimidated  at  home  that  they're  afraid  to  stir  hand  or  foot  now
they're  here.  They  take  their  trunks  around  with  them,  even  to  the
toilet.  What  are  they  afraid  of,  the  dolts?  Here  in  Germany  nothing's
ever  stolen,  it's  simply  taken.  That's  what  they  themselves  have
come  here  for.  They're  all  dressed  up  as  colonels  and  lieutenant
colonels,  but  they've  never  been  in  the  army  in  their  life.  However,
they're  pretty  harmless.  They'll  strip  Germany  of  her  last  pair
of  pants.  Those  colleagues  of  theirs  who  have  been  here  for  some
time  have  settled  down  so  well  that  they're  not  only  sending  home
dismantled  installations,  but  even  cows,  by  air.  Not  to  mention
gas-fires  and  pianos.  I'm  on  the  Moscow-Berlin  route  myself,  so  I
know  !"

Our  talk  was  interrupted  by  a furious  roar  from  an  automobile
engine.  A little  way  off  a small  tourer  automobile  stood  puffing
out  blue  exhaust  gas,  and  trembling  all  over.  Red  pennons  were
fluttering  at  the  front  mudguards.  A thickset  major  was  at  the
wheel,  working  the  gear  lever  and  pedals  determinedly.  His  neck  was
crimson  with  the  unaccustomed  exertions.  He  was  attempting  to
drive  the  car  away,  but  each  time  he  engaged  either  the  fourth  or
the  reverse  gear.  Unfortunate  gears!  Against  human  stupidity  not
even  Krupp  steel  would  be  of  avail!  At  last  the  poor  victim  started
off  and  vanished  in  clouds  of  smoke  and  dust,  just  missing  a con
crete  post  at  the  gate.

I turned  to  the  flying  officer  again:  "Who  is  that  ass?"

He  was  silent  for  a moment,  as  though  the  subject  did  not  deserve
an  answer.  Then  he  replied  with  the  contempt  that  the  men  of  the
air  always  have  for  infantry:

"Some  riffraff  from  the  commandatura.  They're  introducing
cleanliness  and  order  here!  Before  the  war  that  man  was  digging
up  potatoes  in  some  collective  farm.  But  he's  struck  lucky,  he's  a
major,  and  he's  out  to  make  up  for  all  his  past  dog's  life.  Strip  him
of  his  epaulettes  and  he'll  mind  cows  again."

After  a while  we  managed  to  get  through  on  the  telephone  to  the
staff  of  the  Soviet  Military  Administration,  and  to  order  a car.  In
the  evening  twilight  we  drove  to  the  S.M.A.  headquarters.

The  staff  of  the  Soviet  Military  Administration  had  taken  up
quarters  in  the  buildings  of  the  former  pioneer  school  at  Karlshorst,


96


a suburb  of  Berlin.  In  this  place,  a month  earlier,  one  of  the  most
remarkable  historical  documents  of  our  times  had  been  signed.  On
8 May  1945  the  representatives  of  the  Allied  Supreme  Command,
Marshal  Zhukov  and  Air-Marshal  Tedder  for  the  one  part,  and
representatives  of  the  German  Supreme  Command  for  the  other
part,  had  signed  the  document  of  the  unconditional  capitulation
of  the  German  armed  forces  on  land,  on  sea,  and  in  the  air.  The
headquarters  consisted  of  several  three-storeyed  buildings,  rather
like  barracks,  unequally  distributed  round  a courtyard,  and
surrounded  by  a cast-iron  railing,  in  a typical  quiet  suburb  of  Eastern
Berlin.  From  this  place  we  were  to  re-educate  Germany.

The  day  after  my  arrival  in  Karlshorst  I reported  to  the  head  of
the  S.M.A.  Personnel  Department,  Colonel  Utkin.  In  the  colonel's
office  I clicked  my  heels  according  to  regulations,  raised  my  hand
to  my  cap,  and  reported:  "Major  Klimov,  under  orders  from  the
Central  Personnel  Department  of  the  Workers'  and  Peasants'  Red
Army,  reports  for  duty.  May  I present  my  documents,  Comrade
Colonel?"

"Hand  over  whatever  you've  got."  He  stretched  out  his  hand.

I took  out  my  documents  and  gave  them  to  him.  He  opened  the
carefully  scaled  packet  and  began  to  glance  through  my  numerous
testimonials  and  questionnaires.

"So  you  were  in  the  Military-Diplomatic  College  too?  We've
already  got  some  men  from  there,"  he  said  half  aloud.  Then  he
asked:  "Which  course  did  you  attend?"

"I  graduated  with  the  State  examination,"  I replied.

"Hm  ...  hm  ...  How  did  you  do  that  so  quickly?"

"I  was  posted  straight  to  the  last  course,  Comrade  Colonel."

"I  see  . . . 'Awarded  the  rank  of  rapporteur  in  the  diplomatic
service,"'  he  read.  "In  that  case  we'll  have  plenty  of  work  for  you.
Where  would  you  prefer  to  work?"

"Wherever  I can  be  of  most  service."

"How  about  the  Juridical  Department,  for  example?  Issuing  new
laws  for  Germany.  Or  the  Political  Adviser's  Department?  But  that
would  be  rather  boring,"  he  added  without  waiting  for  my  reply.

"What  would  you  say  to  the  State  Security  Service?"

To  turn  down  such  a complimentary  suggestion  outright  would


97


have  been  tantamount  to  admitting  my  own  disloyalty,  it  would
have  been  an  act  of  suicide.  Yet  I did  not  find  the  idea  of  working  in
the  secret  police  very  attractive;  I had  passed  the  age  of  enthusiasm
for  detective  novels.  I attempted  to  sound  the  ground  for  an
unostentatious  retreat:  "What  would  my  work  there  consist  of,  Comrade
Colonel?"

"Fundamentally  it's  the  same  as  in  the  Soviet  Union.  You  won't  be
kicking  your  heels.  Rather  the  reverse,"

"Comrade  Colonel,  if  you  ask  me  my  opinion,  I think  I'd  be
of  most  use  in  the  industrial  field.  I was  an  engineer  in  civilian
life."

"That's  useful  too.  We'll  soon  see  what  we  can  find  for  you."

He  picked  up  a telephone.  "Comrade  General?  Pardon  me  for
disturbing  you."  He  drew  himself  up  in  his  chair  as  if  he  were  in  the
general's  presence,  and  read  the  details  of  my  personal  documents
over  the  phone.  "You'd  like  to  see  him  at  once?  Very  good  !"  He
turned  to  me.  "Well,  come  along.  I'll  introduce  you  to  the  supreme
commander's  deputy  for  economic  questions."

Thus,  on  the  second  day  of  my  arrival  in  Karlshorst  I went  to
General  Shabalin's  office.

An  enormous  carpeted  room.  Before  the  window  was  a desk  the
size  of  a football  field!  Forming  a T with  it  was  another,  longer
desk,  covered  with  red  cloth:  the  conference  table,  the  invariable
appurtenance  of  higher  officials'  offices.

Behind  the  desk  was  a grizzled  head,  a square,  energetic  face,
deeply  sunken  grey  eyes.  A typical  energetic  executive,  but  not

an  intellectual.  General's  epaulettes,  and  only  a few  ribbons  and
decorations  on  his  dark-green  tunic;  but  on  the  right  hand  breast
was  a red  and  gold  badge  in  the  shape  of  a small  banner:  'member
of  the  C.C.  of  the  C.P.S.U.'  So  he  was  not  a front-line  general,  but  an
old  party  official.

The  general  leisuredly  studied  my  documents,  rubbing  his  nose
occasionally,  and  puffing  at  his  cigarette  as  if  I were  not  there.

"Well  ...  Are  you  reliable?"  he  asked  unexpectedly,  pushing  his
spectacles  up  on  to  his  forehead  in  order  to  see  me  better.

"As  Caesar's  wife,"  I replied.

"Talk  Russian!  I don't  like  riddles."  He  drew  the  spectacles

back  on  to  his  nose  and  made  a further  examination  of  my  documents.


98


"Then  why  haven't  you  joined  the  Party?"  he  asked  without
raising  his  eyes.

'So  the  badge  is  talking  nowl'l  thought.  "I  don't  feel  that  I'm  quite
ready  for  it  yet,  Comrade  General,"  was  my  reply.

"The  old  excuse  of  the  intelligentsia!  And  when  will  you  feel
you're  ready?"

I answered  in  the  customary  Party  jargon:  "I'm  a non-party
bolshevik,  Comrade  General."  In  ticklish  cases  it  is  always  wise  to
fall  back  on  one  of  Stalin's  winged  words.  Such  formulae  are  not  open
to  discussion;  they  stop  all  further  questions.

"Have  you  any  idea  of  your  future  work?"

"I  know  it  will  be  concerned  with  industry,  Comrade  General."

"Here  knowledge  of  the  industrial  sphere  is  not  sufficient  in  itself.

Have  you  permission  to  work  on  secret  matters?"

"All  the  graduates  of  our  college  receive  permission  automatic
ally."

"Where  was  it  issued  to  you?"

"In  the  State  Personnel  Department  [G.U.K.]  of  the  Workers'
and  Peasants'  Red  Army,  and  in  the  Foreign  Department  of  the
C.P.S.U.  Central  Committee."

This  reply  made  an  impression  on  him.  He  compared  the  documents,
asked  about  my  previous  work  in  industry,  and  my  service  in  the
army.  Evidently  satisfied  with  the  result,  he  said:  "You'll  be  working
with  me  in  the  Control  Commission.  It's  excellent  that  you  know
languages.  My  technical  experts  are  duffers  at  languages,  and  my
interpreters  are  duffers  at  technical  matters.  Have  you  ever  worked
abroad  before?"

"No."

"You  must  understand  now,  once  for  all,  that  all  your  future
co-workers  in  the  Control  Commission  are  agents  of  the  capitalist
espionage.  So  you  must  have  no  personal  acquaintance  with  them
whatever,  and  no  private  conversations.  I take  it  you  know  that
already,  but  I may  as  well  remind  you  of  it.  Talk  as  little  as  you  can.


99


But  listen  all  the  more.  If  anyone  talks  too  much,  we  cut  out  his
tongue  by  the  roots.  All  our  walls  have  ears.  Bear  that  in  mind.  It  is
quite  possible  that  attempts  will  be  made  to  enlist  you  in  a foreign
secret  service.  What  will  you  do  in  that  case?"

"I  shall  agree,  but  making  my  terms  as  stiff  as  possible,  and
establishing  really  practical  conditions  for  the  work."

"Good,  and  then?"

"Then  I report  the  matter  to  my  superior  authorities.  In  this
instance,  to  you."

"Do  you  play  cards?"

"No.  9$

"Do  you  drink?"

"Within  the  permitted  limits."

"Hm,  that's  an  elastic  conception.  And  what  about  women?"

"I'm  a bachelor."

He  took  a deep  draw  at  his  cigarette,  and  blew  out  the  smoke
thoughtfully.  "It's  a pity  you're  not  married,  major."

I knew  what  he  meant  better  than  he  thought.  The  college  had  a
strict  law  that  bachelors  were  never  sent  to  work  abroad.  This,  how
ever,  did  not  apply  to  the  occupied  countries.  It  was  quite  common
for  an  officer  to  be  summoned  in  the  middle  of  the  school  year  to
the  head  of  the  college,  to  be  notified  that  he  had  been  assigned  to  a
post  abroad,  and  at  the  same  time  to  be  told  to  find  a wife.  It  was  so
common  that  men  who  anticipated  being  sent  abroad  looked  about
them  betimes  for  a suitable  partner  and  ...  hostage.

"One  thing  more,  Major,"  he  said  in  conclusion.  "Be  on  your  guard
with  those  people  on  the  Control  Commission.  Here  in  Berlin  you're
in  the  most  advanced  line  of  the  post-war  front.  Now  go  and  make
the  acquaintance  of  my  chief  adjutant."

I went  into  the  outer  office,  where  a man  in  major's  uniform  was
sitting.  By  my  look  the  adjutant  realized  that  the  interview  had  had  a
favourable  outcome,  and  he  held  out  his  hand  as  he  introduced  him
self:  "Major  Kuznetsov".  After  a brief  talk  I asked  him  about  the
kind  of  work  that  was  done  in  the  general's  department.


100


"My  work  consists  of  sitting  in  this  seat  until  three  in  the

morning  as  adjutant  to  the  general.  As  for  your  work  ...  you'll  soon  see

for  yourself,"  he  answered  with  a smile.

I did  see,  quite  quickly.  And  I was  reminded  of  the  general's
advice  to  be  careful  in  my  contacts  with  the  Allies.  A morning
or  two  later  the  door  of  the  general's  room  flew  open  violently  and
a brisk  little  man  in  major's  uniform  shot  out.  "Comrade  Klimov?

The  general  wishes  to  see  you  for  a moment."  I did  not  know  who
this  major  was,  but  I followed  him  into  the  general's  office.  Shabalin
took  a file  of  documents  from  him  and  handed  it  to  me:

"Examine  those  papers.  Take  a typist  who  has  permission  to  han
die  secret  matters  and  dictate  to  her  the  contents  of  the  material  you
will  find  in  them.  The  work  must  be  done  in  the  Secret  Department.

You  may  not  throw  anything  away,  but  hand  it  all  back  to  me,
together  with  your  report,  as  soon  as  you've  finished."

As  I went  past  the  adjutant  sitting  in  the  outer  room  I asked  him:

"Who  is  that  major?"

"Major  Filin.  He  works  in  the  Tagliche  Rundschau,"  he  answered.

I shut  myself  into  the  Secret  Department  room  and  began  to
study  the  contents  of  the  file.  Some  of  the  documents  were  in  English,
others  in  German.  There  were  lots  of  tables,  columns  of  figures.  At
the  top  was  a sheet  of  paper  stamped  'Secret'  in  red  in  one  corner.  An
anonymous  rapporteur  stated:

'The  intelligence  service  has  established  the  following  details  of
the  abduction  of  two  workers  in  the  Reich  Institute  for  Economic
Statistics,  Professor  D.  and  Dr.  N.,,  by  agents  of  the  American
intelligence  service.  The  Americans  sent  agents  to  call  on  the  above
named  German  economists,  and  to  demand  that  they  should  make
certain  statements  to  the  American  authorities.  The  two  Germans,
who  live  in  the  Soviet  sector  of  Berlin,  both  refused.  They  were
forcibly  abducted,  and  returned  home  only  several  days  later.  On
their  return  Professor  D.  and  Dr.  N.  were  examined  by  our
intelligence  service  and  made  the  following  statement:

' "During  the  night  of  July  - we  were  forcibly  abducted  by
officers  of  the  American  espionage  and  taken  by  plane  to  the  American
economic  espionage  headquarters  in  Wiesbaden.  There  we  were
examined  for  three  days  by  officers  of  the  espionage  service  ...  The
data  in  which  the  American  officials  were  interested  are  cited  in  the
appendix." '

The  appendix  consisted  of  further  statistics  taken  from  the  Reich
Institute  Economic  Statistics-  This  material  had  obviously  duplicated


101


run  off  in  many  copies,  and  and  it  contained  no  profound  secrets.

Evidently,  it  had  been  issued  before  the  capitulation,  to  serve
internal  German  requirements.  Despite  their 'forcible
abduction'  the  two  Germans  thoughtfully  abstracted  the  material
from  the  Institute  archives  and  had  given  one  copy  to  the  Americans.

Then  with  the  same  forethought  they  had  given  another  to  the
Russians.  The  documents  in  English  were  more  interesting.  Or  rather,
it  was  not  the  documents  that  were  so  interesting,  b t the  very  fact
of  their  existence.  They  were  copies  of  the  American  reports  on
the  examination  of  the  German  professors  made  in  Wiesbaden  to-
gether with  copies  of  the  same  Institute  material,  only  now  in  English.
Clearly  our  intelligence  service  did  not  entirely  trust  the  Germans'
statements,  and  had  followed  the  usual  procedure  of  counter-check.

The  American  documents  had  no  official  stamps,  nor  serial  numbers,
nor  addresses.  They  had  come  from  the  American  files,  but  not
through  official  channels.  So  it  was  clear  that  our  intelligence  service
had  an  invisible  hand  inside  the  American  headquarters  of  economic
intelligence.  Evidently  Major  Filin  was  used  to  working  with  unusual
accuracy,  and  the  Tagliche  Rundschau  was  engaged  in  a decidedly
queer  line  of  journalism.

A few  days  later  a bulky  Packet  addressed  to  General  Shabalin
arrived  from  the  American  headquarters  in  Berlin-Zehlendorf.  The
Control  Commission  was  not  yet  functioning  Properly,  and  the
Allies  were  only  now  beginning  to  make  contact  with  one  another.

Ill  a covering  letter  the  Americans  courteously  informed  us  that
as  the  terms  of  establishment  of  the  Control  Commission  provided
for  the  exchange  of  economic  information  they  wished  to  bring
certain  material  relating  to  German  economic  affairs  to  Soviet  notice.
Enclosed  I found  the  same  statistical  tables  that  Major  Filizi  had
already  supplied  by  resort  to  'forcible  abduction'.  This  time  the
material  was  furnished  with  all  the  requisite  seals,  stamps,  addresses,
and  even  a list  of  recipients.  It  was  much  more  complete  than  the
file  Filin  had  provided.  It  was  interesting  to  note  that  whereas  we
would  stamp  such  material  'secret'  the  Americans  obviously  did
not  regard  it  as  in  the  least  secret,  and  readily  shared  their
information  with  the  Soviet  member  of  the  Commission.

I went  to  the  general,  and  showed  him  the  covering  letter  with  the
sender's  address:  'Economic  Intelligence  Division'.  He  looked  through
the  familiar  material,  scratched  himself  thoughtfully  behind  the  -ar

with  his  pencil,  and  remarked:  "Are  they  trying  to  force  their  friend


102


ship  on  us?  It  certainly  is  the  same  material."  Then  he  muttered
through  his  teeth:  "It's  obviously  a trick.  Anyhow,  they're  all
spies."

The  Administration  for  Economy  of  the  Soviet  Military

Administration  was  established  in  the  former  German  hospital  of  St  Antonius.
The  hospital  had  been  built  to  conform  with  the  latest  technical
requirements;  it  stood  in  the  green  of  a small  park,  shielded  from
inquisitive  eyes  and  the  roar  of  traffic.  The  park  gave  the  impression
of  being  uncultivated;  last  year's  leaves  rustled  underfoot;  opposite
the  entrance  to  the  building  the  boughs  of  crab-apple  trees  were
loaded  to  the  ground  with  fruit.

The  main  building  of  the  administration  accommodated  the
Departments  for  Industry,  for  Commerce  and  Supplies,  for  Economic
Planning,  Agriculture,  Transport,  and  Scientific  and  Technical.

The  Department  for  Reparations,  headed  by  General  Zorin,  and  the
Administrative  Department  under  General  Demidov  were  in  two
adjacent  buildings.  The  Reparations  Department,  the  largest  of
all  those  in  the  administration,  enjoyed  a degree  of  autonomy,  and
maintained  direct  relations  with  Moscow  over  Shabalin's  head.

General  Zorin  had  held  a high  economic  post  in  Moscow  before  the
war.

The  Administration  for  Economy  of  the  Soviet  Military

Administration  was  really  the  Ministry  for  Economics  of  the  Soviet  zone,  the

supreme  organ  controlling  all  the  economic  life  in  the  zone.  At  the

moment  it  was  chiefly  concerned  with  the  economic  'assimilation'  of

Germany.  In  those  days  it  was  by  no  means  clear  that  its  real

function  was  to  turn  Germany's  economy,  the  most  highly  developed

economy  in  Europe,  completely  upside  down.

When  I arrived  in  Karlshorst  General  Shabalin's  personal  staff
consisted  of  two:  the  adjutant,  Major  Kuznetsov,, and  the  head  of  the
private  chancellery,  Vinogradov.  The  plans  made  provision  for  a
staff  of  close  on  fifty  persons.

According  to  those  plans  I was  to  be  the  expert  on  economic
questions.  But  as  the  staff  was  only  now  beginning  to  develop,  I ha' d
quite  other  tasks  to  perform.  I accompanied  the  general  on  all  his
journeys  as  his  adjutant,  while  the  official  adjutant,  Kuznetsov,
remained  in  the  office  as  his  deputy,  since  he  had  worked  for  many
years  with  the  general  and  was  well  acquainted  with  his  duties.

Kuznetsov  was  very  dissatisfied  at  this  arrangement,  and  grumbled:

"You  go  traveling  around  with  the  general  and  drinking  schnapps,
and  I stay  at  home  and  do  all  your  work  !"  Many  of  the  departmental


103


heads  preferred  to  deal  with  Kuznetsov,  and  waited  for  the  general
to  go  out.  The  major's  signature  was  sufficient  to  enable  a draft
order  to  be  put  through  to  Marshal  Zhukov  for  ratification.

I once  asked  Kuznetsov  what  sort  of  fellow  Vinogradov  really  was.

He  answered  curtly:  "A  T.U.  official."  "What  do  you  mean?"  I
queried.  "He's  a T.U.  official,  that's  all."  I soon  realized  what  he
meant.  To  start  with,  Vinogradov  was  a civilian.  He  had  a habit  of
running  up  and  down  the  corridors  as  though  he  hadn't  a moment,  to
lose,  brandishing  documents  as  he  went.  One  day  I caught  a glimpse
of  one  of  these  documents,  and  saw  that  it  was  a list  of  people  who
were  assigned  a special  civilian  outfit  for  their  work  in  the  Control
Commission.  Vinogradov's  own  name  headed  the  list,  though  he
had  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  Control  Commission.

Outwardly  he  was  not  a man,  but  a volcano.  But  on  closer
acquaintance  one  realized  that  all  his  exuberant  activity  was
concerned  with  pieces  of  cloth,  food  rations,  drink,  apartments,  and  such
things.  In  distributing  all  these  benefits  he  was  governed  by  the  law
of  compensation,  what  he  could  extract  from  those  on  whom  he
bestowed  them.  He  kept  the  personnel  files,  occupied  himself
with  Party  and  administrative  work,  and  stuck  his  nose  in  every
body's  business.  There  was  only  one  thing  lie  was  afraid  of,  and  that
was  hard  work.

Once  I saw  his  personal  documents.  Kuznetsov  was  right;  he  was
nothing  but  a T.U.  official.  He  had  spent  all  his  life  organizing:
labour  brigades,  working  gangs,  enthusiasm,  Stakhanovism.  He  had
had  no  education,  but  he  had  an  excess  of  energy,  impudence,
and  conceit.  Such  people  play  no  small  part  in  the  Soviet  state
machinery,  functioning  as  a kind  of  grease  to  the  clumsy  works,
organizing  the  song  and  dance  round  such  fictitious  conceptions
as  trade  unions,  shock  labour,  socialist  competition,  and  enthusiasm.

Soon  after  my  arrival  a Captain  Bystrov  was  inducted  as  head
of  the  Secret  Department.  He  spent  the  first  few  nights  after  his
appointment  sleeping  on  the  table  in  the  Secret  Department  room,
using  his  greatcoat  as  a blanket.  Later  we  learned  the  reason  for  this
extraordinary  behaviour.  There  was  no  safe  in  the  Secret
Department  and,  in  order  to  foil  the  plans  of  the  international  spies,  General
Shabalin  ordered  the  captain  to  make  a pillow  of  the  secret  documents
entrusted  to  him.  Captain  Bystrov  treated  Vinogradov  with
undisguised  contempt,  though  the  latter  held  the  higher  position.  One
evening  Bystrov  met  me  in  the  street  and  proposed:

"Let's  go  and  drop  in  on  Vinogradov."


104


'What  on  earth  for?"  I asked  in  astonishment.


"Come  along  ! You'll  laugh  your  head  off!  Haven't  you  ever  run
across  him  at  night?"

"No."

"He  prowls  around  Karlshorst  like  a jackal  all  night,  looking
for  loot  in  the  empty  houses.  Yesterday  I met  him  just  as  dawn  was
coming:  he  was  dragging  some  rags  across  the  yard  to  his  apartment.
His  place  is  just  like  a museum."

I didn't  want  to  give  offense  to  my  new  colleague,  so  I went  with
him.  Vinogradov  opened  the  door  half  an  inch  and  asked:

"Well,  what  do  you  expect  to  see  here  this  time?"

"Open  the  door,"  Bystrov  said,  pushing  at  it.  "Show  us  some  of
the  treasures  you've  collected."

"Go  to  the  devil  !"  Vinogradov  protested.  "I  was  just  off  to  bed."

"Going  to  bed?  I don't  believe  it ! You  haven't  ransacked  all
Karlshorst  yet,  surely?"

At  last  Vinogradov  let  us  in.  As  Bystrov  had  said,  his  apartment
was  a remarkable  sight,  more  a warehouse  than  a living-place.  It
contained  enough  furniture  for  at  least  three  apartments.  The
captain  looked  about  him  for  things  he  hadn't  seen  on  previous
occasions.  A buffet  attracted  his  notice.  "What's  that?"  He  asked.

"Open  it  up  !"

"It's  empty."

"Open  it,  or  I will!"  Bystrov  raised  his  boot  to  kick  in  the  polished
doors.

Viiiogradov  knew  that  the  captain  would  not  hesitate  to  do  as
he  had  said.  He  reluctantly  took  out  a key.  The  buffet  was  full  of
crockery.  Crockery  of  all  kinds,  obviously  taken  from  abandoned
German  houses.

"Would  you  like  me  to  smash  the  lot?"  the  captain  asked.  "You
can  always  lodge  a complaint.  Shall  I?"

"You're  mad  ! Valuable  articles  like  them,  and  you  talk  about
smashing  them  !"  Vinogradov  protested.


105


I looked  round  the  room.  This  man  talked  more  than  anybody
else  about  culture,  our  regard  for  the  human  being,  our  exalted
tasks.  And  yet  he  was  nothing  but  a looter,  with  all  his  thought
and  activity  concentrated  on  personal  enrichment.  Bystrov  thrust
his  hand  into  an  open  chest  and  took  out  several  packages  in  blue
paper  wrappings.  He  tore  one  of  them  open,  and  roared  with
laughter.  I,  too,  could  not  help  laughing.

"What  are  you  going  to  use  these  for?"  He  thrust  a bundle  of
ladies'  sanitary  towels  under  Vinogradov's  nose.  "For  emergencies?"
Only  after  much  persuasion  did  I succeed  in  getting  him  to  leave
Vinogradov's  apartment.

During  the  early  days  of  my  stay  in  Karlshorst  I had  not  time
to  look  about  me.  But  as  the  weeks  passed  I learned  more  and  more
about  our  relations  with  the  rest  of  Berlin.  For  security  reasons
Karlshorst  lived  in  a state  of  semi-siege.  The  whole  district  was
ringed  with  guard  posts.  All  street  traffic  was  forbidden  after  9 p.m.,
even  for  the  military.  The  password  was  issued  only  in  cases  of
strict  necessity,  and  it  was  changed  every  evening.  I frequently  had
to  be  out  with  General  Shabalin  on  service  affairs  until  two  or  three
in  the  morning.  As  we  went  home,  at  every  fifty  yards  an  invisible
sentry  called  through  the  darkness:  "Halt!  The  password  !"

The  general  lived  in  a small  one-family  house  opposite  the  staff
headquarters;  most  of  the  S.M.A.  generals  lived  in  the  vicinity.

The  guards  posted  here  were  still  stronger,  and  special  passes  were
required.

Later,  as  we  grew  more  familiar  with  conditions  in  Karlshorst,
we  often  laughed  at  the  blend  of  incredible  strictness  and  vigilance
and  equally  incredible  negligence  and  indolence  which  characterized
the  place.  The  front  of  the  S.M.A.  staff  headquarters,  where  Marshal
Zhukov's  private  office  was  situated,  was  guarded  in  full  accordance
with  regulations.  But  behind  the  building  there  was  sandy  wasteland
with  dense  forest,  quite,  close  up,  beyond  it.  But  here  no  guard  was
posted  at  all.  Anybody  acquainted  with  conditions  in  Karlshorst
could  have  brought  a whole  enemy  division  right  up  to  the  marshal's
back  door,  without  giving  one  password  or  showing  one  pass.

Major  Kuznetsov  and  Shabalin's  chauffeur,  Misha,  had  their
quarters  in  a small  house  next  to  the  general's.  The  general  had  a
sergeant,  Nikolai,  an  invariably  morose  fellow,  in  his  house  to  act
as  batman,  though  batmen  are  not  recognized  in  the  Soviet  army.
There  was  also  a maidservant,  Dusia,  a girl  twenty-three  years  old,


106


who  had  been  brought  from  Russia  by  the  Germans  for  forced
labour.

I asked  her  once  how  she  had  got  on  under  the  Germans.  She
answered  with  unusual  reserve:  "Bad,  of  course,  Comrade  Major."

Her  words  conveyed  something  that  she  left  unexpressed.  Without
doubt,  like  all  the  Russians  waiting  for  repatriation,  she  was  glad
of  our  victory;  but  there  was  something  that  took  the  edge  off  her
joy  for  her.

From  time  to  time  groups  of  young  lads  under  armed  escort
marched  through  Karlshorst.  They  wore  Soviet  military  uniforms,
dyed  black.  These  lads  were  former  forced  labourers  brought  from  the
east,  whom  we  had  organized  into  labour  battalions  to  do
reconstruction  work.  They  looked  pretty  miserable.  They  knew  that
they  could  not  expect  anything  pleasant  on  their  return  to  the
Soviet  Union.

Apart  from  the  buildings  on  Treskow-Aflee,  and  certain  other
large  buildings  occupied  by  various  offices  of  the  S.M.A.,  the  Karls
horst  district  consisted  mainly  of  small  one-family  residences,
standing  amid  gardens  and  trees,  behind  fences.  Most  of  them  had
been  occupied  by  the  German  middle  class.  They  were  plain  and
tasteless  outside,  built  of  smooth  concrete  blocks  and  surmounted
by  red  tiles.  But  the  internal  arrangements,  all  the  domestic  fitments
and  equipment,  greatly  surpassed  anything  Soviet  people  were
accustomed  to.  The  doors  often  showed  traces  of  bayonets  and
rifle-butts,  but  the  handles  were  not  loose,  the  hinges  did  not
squeak,  the  locks  were  effective.  Even  the  stairs  and  the  railings
shone  with  fresh  paint,  as  if  they  had  been  newly  decorated  for
our  arrival.  No  wonder  we  were  struck  by  their  apparent  newness.

In  the  Soviet  Union  many  of  the  houses  haven't  been  redecorated
since  1917.

During  my  first  few  days  in  Karlshorst  I was  accommodated  in
the  guest-house  for  newly  arrived  S.M.A.  officials.  But  after  I
had  settled  down  and  familiarized  myself  with  conditions,  I simply
took  over  an  empty  house  standing  surrounded  with  trees  and
flowering  shrubs.  Everything  was  just  as  its  former  inhabitants  had
left  it.  Evidently  Vinogradov  hadn't  been  there  yet.  I made  this
house  my  private  residence.


107


CHAPTER  SIX

Occupation  Authorities  at  Work

"Go  and  wait  for  me  in  the  auto,"  the  general  told  me  when  I
reported  to  him  one  day.  He  had  a habit  of  not  revealing  where
we  were  going.  We  might  be  visiting  the  Control  Commission,  or
we  might  be  going  to  the  flying-ground  to  fly  to  Moscow  or  Paris.

Either  he  considered  that  his  subordinates  should  guess  his  thoughts,
or  he  kept  the  route  secret,  in  the  manner  of  prominent  personages,
to  prevent  attempts  on  his  life,  His  secrecy  did  not  prevent  his
grumbling  at  his  fellow-travellers  for  not  making  preparations  for
the  journey  and  arming  themselves  with  the  requisite  materials,
or  even  for  traveling  with  him  at  all.  Before  the  war  he  had  been
the  first  secretary  of  the  Party  District  Committee  in  Sverdlovsk.

During  the  war  he  was  a member  of  the  War  Council  and  commander
of  the  rear  behind  the  Volkhov  front-line  army  group;  he  was  the
Party's  eyes  and  ears  in  the  army  organization.  These  Party  generals
never  directly  intervened  in  the  planning  or  execution  of  military
operations,  but  no  order  was  valid  until"they  had  countersigned  it.

I found  Major  Kuznetsov  sitting  in  the  auto.  "Where  are  we
going?"  I asked.

"Somewhere  or  other,"  the  adjutant  replied  unconcernedly.

lie  was  used  to  the  general's  ways  and  did  not  worry  his  head  about

the  object  of  the  journey.

We  took  the  autobahn  and  drove  to  Dresden,  where  we  drew
up  outside  the  Luisenhof.  It  was  surrounded  by  innumerable
red-pennoned  automobiles.  On  the  steps  of  the  hotel  a group  of
generals  was  standing,  among  them  the  double  hero  of  the  Soviet
Union,  Colonel-General  of  the  Tank  Army  and  military  governor
of  Saxony,  Bogdanov.  These  generals  were  the  various  military


commanders  of  Saxony,  and  they  had  been  summoned  to  Dresden
to  report  to  the  high  command  of  the  S.M.A.  Dresden  and  Berlin.
The  S.M.A.  had  received  a mass  of  complaints  and  accusations
concerning  the  activities  of  the  local  commandaturas.  The  various
military  commanders  had  received  no  instructions  whatever  after
the  capitulation,  and  each  was  pursuing  whatever  policy  he  thought
fit.  The  majority  of  them  were  half-educated  men  who  had  come  to


108


the  forefront  during  the  war,  and  they  were  completely  unfitted
for  the  tasks  arising  from  peacetime  occupation.

Before  General  Shabalin  went  off  with  General  Bogdanov  to
have  a consultation  prior  to  the  conference  he  whispered  something
into  his  adjutant's  ear.  Major  Kuznetsov  turned  away  and  took  me
with  him.  "Come  and  help  me  look  for  an  automobile,"  he  said.

"What  sort  of  automobile?"  I asked  in  surprise.

"One  for  the  general,"  he  said  briefly.  "You'll  see  how  it's  done."

With  the  air  of  people  objectively  interested  in  car  models  we
walked  along  the  row  of  cars  in  which  the  commandants  of  the
Saxony  towns  had  come  to  the  conference.  As  soon  as  a commander
took  over  a city  after  the  capitulation,  thus  becoming  its  absolute
ruler,  his  first  concern  had  been  to  requisition  the  finest  car  available.
So  now  we  were  attending  an  exhibition  of  the  finest  models  of  the
German  automobile  industry,  from  the  rather  conservative  May
bach  to  the  most  modem  creations  of  Mere6d6s-Benz.  The  new
owners  were  already  gone  to  the  hotel,  leaving  the  drivers,  ordinary
soldiers,  in  the  cars.

Major  Kuznetsov  made  a leisurely  examination  of  the  various
cars,  kicking  the  tires  with  his  toe,  testing  the  springs,  and  even
looking  at  the  speedometers  to  see  what  mileage  had  been  covered.
Finally  his  choice  fell  on  a Horch  cabriolet.

"Whose  car  is  this?"  he  asked  the  soldier  lolling  comfortably
behind  the  wheel.

"Lieutenant-Colonel  Zakharov's,"  the  soldier  answered  in  a tone
suggesting  that  the  name  was  world-famous.

"Not  a bad  little  bus,"  Kuznetsov  decided.  He  ran  his  fingers
over  the  buttons  of  the  instrument-panel,  took  another  look  at  the
car,  and  said:  "Tell  your  lieutenant-colonel  he's  to  send  this  car
to  Karlshorst,  for  General  Shabalin."

The  man  gave  the  major  a sidelong  glance,  but  only  asked
distrustfully:  "And  who  is  General  Shabalin?"

"After  the  conference  your  lieutenant-colonel  will  know  exactly
who  he  is,"  Kuznetsov  answered.  "And  report  to  him  that  he's  to
punish  you  for  not  saluting  General  Shabalin's  adjutant."

Looting  activities  were  organized  strictly  in  relation  to  rank  and
merit.  The  ordinary  soldiers  acquired  watches  and  other  small
items.  Junior  officers  picked  up  accordions;  senior  officers...  The
classification  was  complicated,  but  it  was  closely  observed.  If  fate
put  a lieutenant  in  the  way  of  acquiring  a double-barreled  sporting


109


gun  of  the  Dreiringe  mark,  it  was  no  use  his  hoping  to  keep  it.  It  was
better  for  him  to  relinquish  it  voluntarily  rather  than  have  it  taken
from  him.  Sooner  or  later  it  would  find  its  way  into  a major's
possession.  But  it  would  not  remain  with  him  long,  unless  it  was
well  concealed.  This  general  principle  was  applied  with  particular
severity  to  cars.  You  couldn't  hide  a car.

The  Saxony  commandants  had  lost  their  sense  of  proportion
through  their  exercise  of  local  plenipotentiary  powers  and  had
committed  a tactical  error  in  bringing  such  a large  number  of
attractive  cars  to  their  superiors'  notice.  They  paid  for  this  by
losing  half  the  cars  that  were  parked  outside  the  hotel.  When
a second  conference  was  held  some  months  later  many  of  the
commandants  arrived  almost  in  carts.  Of  course  they  had  got
hold  of  quite  good  cars  again  by  then,  but  they  had  left  them
behind.

Some  three  hundred  officers,  ranking  from  major  upward,  were
assembled  for  the  conference.  They  included  several  generals,  the
commandants  of  Dresden,  Leipzig  and  other  large  cities,  who  also
were  to  take  part  in  the  exchange  of  experiences.  The  heads  of  the
Dresden  S.M.A.  were  seated  at  the  presidium  table,  which  was
covered  with  red  cloth.  General  Shabalin  sat  with  them  as  the
representative  of  the  S.M.A.  supreme  authorities  at  Karlshorst.

General  Bogdanov  opened  the  conference  by  stating  that  certain
things  had  come  to  the  ears  of  the  S.M.A.  which  suggested  that  the
commandaturas  had  a warped  idea  of  their  tasks.  He  called  on  the
officers  present  to  'exchange  their  experiences'  and  to  submit  the
defects  in  the  commandaturas'  work  to  pitiless  criticism.  He  gave
it  to  be  understood  that  the  S.M.A.  was  much  better  informed  than
they  realized.  So  it  would  be  better  to  discuss  these  defects  them
selves  rather  than  wait  for  the  S.M.A.  to  attack.  In  other  words,  if
any  one  of  them  felt  guilty  he  should  expose  as  many  of  his
neighbours'  sins  as  possible  in  order  to  obscure  his  own.

A lieutenant-colonel  was  the  first  to  speak:


"Of  course  there  are  certain  defects  in  the  work  of  the
commandaturas,  but  they're  chiefly  due  to  the  lack  of  control  from  above.
The  military  commandaturas  are  left  to  their  own  devices,  and  that
leads  to  . . . The  officer  who  had  undertaken  the  task  of
self-castigation  began  very  uncertainly  and  looked  round  at  his  comrades
though  seeking  their  support.  But  they  all  had  their  eyes  fixed
attentively  on  their  toe-caps.  General  Bogdanov  tapped  his  pencil
expectantly  on  the  table.  The  lieutenant-colonel  went  on:  "Many


commandants  are  losing  sight  of  their  duty;  some  of  them  have  been
demoralized  and  bourgeoisified.  So  far  as  they're  concerned  the  moral
cleanliness  of  the  Soviet  officers  is  ...  er ...  er . . ."  He  felt  that  he
had  flown  too  high,  and  resolved  to  bring  the  question  down  to
earth.  "Take  Major  So-and-so,  head  of  the  commandatura  in  the
town  of  X,  for  example

"No  pseudonyms,  please,"  General  Bogdanov  interrupted.  "We're
all  friends  here."

"Well  then,  take  Major  Astafiev,  for  example,"  the  lieutenant
colonel  corrected  himself.  "Since  his  appointment  as  commandant
of  the  town  of  X it's  notorious  that  he's  gone  to  pieces.  A little  way
outside  the  town  there's  a castle,  formerly  belonging  to  a prince,
which  he's  made  his  residence.  And  there  he  lives  in  a style  that
not  even  the  tsarist  courtiers  and  boyars  knew.  He  keeps  more
servants  in  the  castle  today  than  its  former  owners  had.  Every
morning,  when  Major  Astafiev  deigns  to  open  his  eyes,  he  hasn't
got  the  least  idea  where  he  is  until  lie's  drunk  half  a bucket  of
pickled-cucumber  liquor  to  clear  his  head  after  the  previous  night's
drinking  bout.  And  then,  as  befits  a real  gentleman,  the  major  sticks
out  his  dainty  feet  and  one  German  woman  draws  the  stocking  on
to  his,  left  foot  and  another  German  woman  draws  on  the  right.

A third  stands  ready  with  his  silk  dressing-gown.  And  he  can't  even
put  on  his  trousers  without  help  from  abroad."

There  was  a ripple  of  laughter  in  the  hall.  The  gallant  major's
style  of  living  obviously  impressed  the  conference.

"But  these  are  only  the  flowers;  the  fruits  are  still  to  come,"  the

lieutenant-colonel  exclaimed.  "Major  Astafiev  has  reduced

cohabitation  with  German  women  to  a system.  He  has  a special  commando

squad  whose  one  task  is  to  scour  the  district  to  get  hold  of  women

for  him.  They're  locked  up  for  days  in  the  commandatura  cellars

before  they  arrive  at  the  major's  bed.

"Recently,  after  one  of  his  regular  orgies,  the  major  felt  quite  a
longing  for  some  fish  soup.  Without  thinking  twice  about  it  he
ordered  the  sluices  of  the  castle  lake  to  be  opened  so  that  the  fish
could  be  caught  for  him.  He  had  a few  small  fishes  for  his  supper,  but
many  hundredweight  offish  perished.  Surely,  comrades  and  officers,
such  behavior  must  arouse  your  indignation?"

His  words  provoked  amusement  rather  than  indignation.  Each
of  the  officers  recalled  similar  incidents  within  his  own  experience,
and  shared  his  impressions  with  his  neighbors.

"Major  Astafiev's  case,"  the  speaker  ended,  "is  of  interest  simply


111


because  it  is  typical.  The  situation  is  fundamentally  the  same  in
commandatura  after  commandatura.  It  is  our  duty  to  show  up
and  brand  such  shameful  activities,  to  call  the  fools  to  order  and
make  them  realize  the  existence  of  proletarian  legality."

The  look  of  amusement  vanished  from  the  other  officers'  faces,
their  eyes  again  studied  their  boots.  With  the  mention  of
responsibility  and  legality  the  affair  had  taken  an  unpleasant  turn.

The  Soviet  officers  were  well  acquainted  with  Soviet  law.  It  is  based
on  the  principle  of  the  psychological  education  of  the  collective,  and
so  it  often  resorts  to  the  use  of  'scapegoats'  who  have  to  atone  for
the  collective  sins.  In  such  cases  the  law  is  applied  with  unusual
severity,  as  a deterrent.  ,

Soviet  law  turns  a blind  eye  to  peccadilloes.  A man  is  not  run
in  for  simply  knocking  out  someone's  tooth  or  breaking  a window.

There  are  more  important  matters  to  be  attended  to;  for  instance,
a man  can  be  given  ten  years  for  gleaning  socialist  ears  of  com  from
the  fields,  or  five  years  for  stealing  a piece  of  socialist  sugar  in  a
factory.  Teeth  and  window-panes  are  still  private  property,  and
so  do  not  merit  the  protection  of  socialistic  law.  The  result  is  that
all  feeling  for  legality  is  lost,  and  if  this  process  goes  too  far,  steps
are  taken  to  find  a 'scapegoat'.  It  is  highly  unpleasant  to  be  a
scapegoat.  One  can  get  away  with  a great  deal,  only  to  find  one  is  in
danger  of  death  for  some  really  trifling  offense.  If  the  higher
authorities  of  the  S.M.A.  had  decided  to  put  salutary  measures  into  force
under  the  pretext  of  harmless  self-criticism,  the  situation  must  be
pretty  bad.  And  then  some  of  the  town  commandants  would  be
going  before  a military  tribunal.  Who  would  be  the  scapegoat?

There  was  a distinct  feeling  of  strain  and  nervousness  in  the
hall.

General  Bogdanov's  calculation  was  sound.  The  lieutenant
colonel's  opening  speech,  which  quite  possibly  had  been  arranged  in

the  S.M.A.,  was  followed  by  a succession  of  recriminations.  The
commandants  devotedly  flung  muck  at  one  another,  while  the
secretaries  took  down  every  word  in  shorthand.  Finally  it  came  to
the  generals'  turn;  the  commandants  of  Dresden  and  Leipzig  added
their  say.  It  was  a rare  sight  to  see  a general  standing  like  a schoolkid
in  the  centre  of  the  hall  and  making  confession  of  his  sins.  And  if  he
referred  to  his  general's  epaulettes  and  tried  to  justify  his  conduct
a voice  shot  at  him  derisively  from  the  presidium:  "No  mock,
modesty,  General.  We're  all  friends  here."

It  revealed  the  mentality  of  a mass  trained  in  absolute  obedience.


112


If  the  order  comes  from  above  to  confess  their  sins,  they  all  confess.

Those  who  cannot  boast  of  past  sins  confess  their  future  ones.  The
commandants  expose  their  'deficiencies'  and  swear  to  be  good
children  in  future,  and  pay  attention  to  papa.  For  the  papa  in  the
Kremlin  is  always  right.

Someone  in  the  hall  rose  and  addressed  the  presidium:  "May  I
ask  a question,  Comrade  General?  It  isn't  quite  to  the  point,  but
I'd  like  to  have  advice. 7

"Well,  out  with  it.  What's  troubling  you?"  Bogdanov  said  in  a
friendly  tone.

"My  commandatura  is  right  on  the  Czech  frontier,"  the  speaker
began.  "Every  day  a horde  of  naked  people  are  driven  over  the
frontier  into  my  area.  I've  put  them  all  into  cellars  for  the  t.,me
being,  we  can't  have  them  running  about  the  streets  like  that,
and  I've  nothing  I can  dress  them  in."

"How  do  you  mean,  'naked'?"  General  Bogdanov  asked.

"Just  naked,"  the  commandant  replied.  "Like  newborn  babes.

It's  shameful  to  see  them."

"I  don't  understand.  Where  do  these  naked  people  come  from?"

"They're  Sudeten  Germans  from  Czechoslovakia.  The  Czechs
first  strip  them,  and  then  send  them  across  the  frontier  to  me.  They
tell  them:  'You  came  here  naked,  and  you  can  go  back  naked.'

They're  being  transferred  to  Germany  under  the  Potsdam

Agreement.  It's  a joke  for  the  Czechs,  but  it's  a headache  for  me.  What  am

I to  dress  them  in,  when  my  own  men  are  going  about  in  rags?"

"There's  a bank  in  my  town,"  another  commandant  added  his
bit.  "The  bank  director  and  I have  inspected  the  private  safes  in
the  strongroom.  They  contain  a large  quantity  of  gold  and  diamonds,
a real  mountain  of  valuables.  I've  ordered  it  all  to  be  sealed  up.  But
what'am  I to  do  with  it?"

It  was  characteristic  that  not  one  of  the  commandants  complained
of  difficulties  with  the  German  population.  They  had  no  diversionist
activities  to  report,  or  unrest.  They  were  given  much  more  trouble
by  their  own  men.

"The  occupation  machinery  must  be  in  control  of  the  tasks  set
by  our  occupation  policy,"  General  Bogdanov  told  the  assembly.

"We  must  maintain  the  prestige  of  our  army  and  our  country  in


113


the  eyes  of  the  people  of  the  occupied  country.  The  commandaturas
are  the  lowest  link  in  our  contacts  with  the  German  population."

After  the  conference  there  was  a banquet  for  all  who  had  been
present.  Major  Kuznetsov,  an  officer  of  the  S.M.A.  Dresden,  and  I
had  a table  in  a window  niche.  The  commandants  had  recovered
a little  from  the  unpleasant  experiences  of  the  conference  and
were  trying  to  restore  their  lost  self-confidence  by  relating  their
heroic  deeds  of  wartime.  In  this  they  had  much  assistance  from  the
unlimited  amount  of  drink  available.  The  officer  of  the  Dresden
S.M.A.  looked  round  the  hall  and  remarked  to  me:

"This  reminds  me  of  the  Moscow  Underground.  The  Under
ground's  wonderful,  but  the  people  using  it  don't  match  it.  Marble
all  round  you,  and  hunger  clothed  in  rags."

I asked  Major  Ruznetsov,  who  because  of  his  position  as  adjutant
was  familiar  with  the  general,  procedure:  "What  do  you  think  will
happen  to  Major  Astafiev  and  the  others  who  have  been  censured?"

"Nothing  !"  he  answered  with  a smile.  "In  the  worst  case,  they'll
be  transferred  to  other  commandaturas.  Even  professional  rogues
are  needed.  Besides,  these  dolts  are  genuinely  devoted  to  the  Party,
and  to  such  men  much  is  forgiven."

I was  surprised  to  hear  the  major  and  the  other  officer  expressing
their  opinions  so  frankly.  But  the  frankness  was  due  to  the  remark
able  atmosphere  that  prevailed  in  the  Party  and  all  over  the  Soviet
Union  after  the  war.  Everybody  had  the  feeling  that  they  had  won
their  freedom,  they  had  come  out  victorious.  The  feeling  was  general,
but  it  was  strengthened  in  those  who  had  contacts  with  the  west
and  could  observe  the  striking  contrasts  between  the  two  worlds.

During  our  stay  in  Dresden  General  Shabalin  was  a guest  of
General  Dubrovsky,  head  of  the  Administration  for  Economy  of
S.M.A.  Saxony.  Dubrovsky's  villa  had  formerly  been  the  residence
of  some  big  German  business-man.  It  had  a beautiful  garden,  and
after  the  conference  Major  Kuznetsov  and  I walked  about  the  garden
for  a time.  While  we  were  out  there  Misha,  the  general's  chauffeur,

brought  us  an  order  that  we  were  to  go  at  once  to  General
Dubrovsky's  room.

There  we  found  a rather  different  kind  of  meeting  in  progress.

The  two  Soviet  generals  were  sitting  on  one  side  of  the  desk,  and
opposite  them  were  the  German  city  fathers,  the  head  of  the
German  administration  for  Saxony,  and  the  burgomaster  of  Dresden.


114


The  burgomaster  spoke  perfect  Russian,  and  until  recently  he  had
been  a lieutenant-colonel  in  the  Red  Army.  They  were  discussing
Saxony's  economic  tasks  under  the  occupation  regime.  This  subject
was  disposed  of  with  amazing  ease.  The  burgomaster  was  not  only
an  obedient  executive,  but  a valuable  adviser  as  to  local  conditions.
We  made  no  orders  or  demands;  the  burgomaster  recommended
efficacious  measures,  and  we  confirmed  them.

Only  once  did  the  burgomaster  clearly  reveal  any  consciousness
of  his  German  origin.  When  the  great  shortage  of  pitprops  came  up
for  discussion  General  Shabalin  proposed:

"There's  plenty  of  forest  around  here,  cut  it  down."

The  burgomaster,  the  former  lieutenant-colonel  in  the  Red  Army,
clapped  his  hands  in  horror.  "If  we  cut  down  the  forests,  in  five
years  our  flourishing  land  of  Saxony  will  be  a desert"  he  exclaimed.

A compromise  decision  was  come  to,  to  look  for  other  resources,  and
meanwhile  to  exploit  the  local  forests.

The  head  of  the  German  Saxony  administration  was  only  a
figure-head;  a member  of  some  democratic  party,  he  was  a feeble
creature,  ready  to  sign  any  document  without  looking  at  it.  At  his
back  was  our  man,  a German  who  yesterday  had  been  wearing
Soviet  uniform,  but  today  a hundred  per  cent  German,  a burgo
master.  He  shrank  from  no  effort  to  extract  as  large  an  amount  of
reparations  as  possible.  The  'class-enemy'  had  been  displaced
overnight,  the  other  members  of  the  population  were  paralyzed  with
terror,  and  our  people  worked  under  the  guise  of  a 'new  democracy'.
Next  day  we  drove  to  Halle,  the  capital  of  the  province  of  Saxony.

Here  Shabalin  met  his  old  friend  General  Kotikov,  head  of  the
S.M.A.  Administration  for  Economy  at  Halle.  Later,  General
Kotikov  acquired  wider  fame  as  the  Soviet  commandant  of  Berlin.

He  was  a very  pleasant  man,  and  a hospitable  host.

At  Halle  there  were  similar-  conferences  to  those  at  Dresden.  First
an  intermezzo  with  the  town  commandants,  and  then  General
Shabalin  checked  up  on  the  work  of  the  new  democracy.  The  local
German  leader  had  lived  for  fifteen  years  in  Pokrovsky  Street,  in
Moscow,  so  he  and  I were  almost  neighbors.  He  was  even  more
assiduous  in  his  task  than  his  colleague  at  Dresden.  General  Shabalin
had  to  dampen  his  ardor  as  he  presented  a long  list  of  measures  to
be  taken  in  the  direction  of  socialization.

"Not  so  fast !"  Shabalin  said.  "You  must  take  the  special  features
of  the  German  economy  and  the  transition  stage  into  account.  Put


115


your  proposals  before  General  Kotikov  for  consideration."

On  our  way  back  to  Berlin  there  was  an  unforeseen  delay:  one
of  our  rear  tires  burst.  Our  driver  had  neither  a spare  cover  nor  a
spare  inner  tube,  and  not  even  repair  materials.  The  general  raged.
Whatever  happened  he  wanted  to  be  in  Berlin  before  nightfall.
Apparently  he  had  no  great  trust  in  the  efficiency  of  the  city
commandatura.

Kuznetsov  and  I exchanged  glances:  we  would  have  to  do  some
thing  to  get  hold  of  a tire,  for  in  his  fear  Misha  had  lost  all  the
powers  of  invention  for  which  Soviet  drivers  are  renowned.  There
was  only  one  possibility:  we  would  have  to  'organize'  a tire  from  a
passing  auto.  Nowadays  that  was  an  everyday  incident  on  the
German  country  roads.  We  blocked  the  road  according  to  all  the
rules  of  the  military  art,  held  up  cats  and  submitted  them  to  a
thorough  inspection.  We  found  not  one  tire  to  fit  our  'Admiral's'
wheel.  To  the  amazement  of  the  people  we  held  up,  they  were  allowed
to  continue  their  journey.  Our  control  post  must  have  been  an
imposing  sight:  the  general  himself  stood  at  our  side,  displaying  his
badges  of  rank.

After  some  time  a remarkable  procession  of  automobiles  came
slowly  along:  several  covered  lorries,  painted  in  rainbow  colours,
and  plastered  with  garish  playbills.  A traveling  circus.  Only  a black
haired  Carmen  was  lacking  to  complete  the  scene.  The  picturesque
column  was  closed  by  a jeep  with  an  American  captain  at  the  wheel.

I tried  to  discover  who  was  in  charge  of  this  show.  But  while
I was  wondering  what  language  I would  need  to  use  in  order  to
make  myself  understood,  a modern  Carmen  jumped  out  of  the
jeep  and  addressed  us  in  the  genuine  washerwoman's  lingo  of  the
Berlin  district  of  Wedding.  For  a moment  Major  Kuznetsov  and  I
forgot  what  we  had  halted  all  these  lorries  for.  That  flower  from
Wedding  was  devilishly  beautiful  No  wonder  the  American  captain
was  risking  the  dangerous  journey  along  the  roads  of  the  Soviet
zone.  For  such  a woman  one  would  forget  all  Eisenhower's  and
Zhukov's  regulations  taken  together.


We  tore  ourselves  with  difficulty  from  the  enchanting  view  and
began  to  examine  the  tires.  Finally  we  came  to  the  jeep.

"What  about  the  jeep?  Will  its  wheels  fit?"  Kuznetsov  asked
Misha.

"The  holes  fit.  We'll  limp  a bit,  but  they'll  get  us  home."

So  the  problem  was  solved.  Soon  we  would  have  a supplementary


116


delivery  on  lend-lease  account.  In  any  case  the  jeep  had  a spare
wheel:  an  unnecessary  luxury.

I told  Carmen  what  we  wanted,  and  pointed  to  the  jeep's  spare
wheel.  The  general  mentally  recalled  the  Potsdam  agreement  and
the  technique  of  intimidation.  "Ask  the  American  if  he  has  a pass
for  the  Soviet  zone.  And  what  he's  driving  in  these  parts  for?"

But  both  the  artiste  and  her  patron  were  glad  to  get  away  so
cheaply  without  any  psychological  pressure:  a car  wheel  in  exchange
for  violating  the  Potsdam  Agreement  and  a journey  through  the
Soviet  zone!  I made  a note  of  the  captain's  Berlin  address,  so  that
we  could  return  the  expropriated  wheel  to  its  owner.  Later  I told
Misha  more  than  once  to  do  so,  but  I fear  the  wheel  got  transformed
into  a bottle  of  vodka  and  found  its  way  into  his  stomach.  If  the
American  captain  should  ever  chance  to  read  these  lines,  I express
my  thanks  to  him  again  and  my  apologies  for  the  incident.

Night  was  falling  as  we  approached  Berlin.  The  general  grew
fidgety  and  told  Misha  he  was  not  to  drive  through  the  American
sector  on  any  account.  He  was  to  find  a road  through  Rudow.

That  was  easier  said  than  done.  Whichever  way  we  turned,  we
found  ourselves  on  roads  running  through  the  American  sector,
and  so  in  the  end  we  had  to  pass  through  it.  The  general  flatly  refused
to  take  the  normal  route  along  the  Potsdamerstrasse,  and  ordered
Misha  to  wind  his  way  through  the  southern  suburbs  until  we
reached  the  Soviet  sector.  Misha  only  shook  his  head.  To  have  to
travel  through  Berlin  at  night  in  the  summer  of  1945,  and  through
unknown  suburbs,  was  a difficult  task.

The  general  was  pulling  the  wool  over  our  eyes.  He  could  not
have  been  seriously  afraid  of  an  attempt  on  our  lives  or  some  under
hand  design.  There  was  no  ban  on  Allies  traveling  through  one
another's  Berlin  sectors  at  that  time.  We  had  no  secret  documents
with  us.  So,  obviously,  even  on  this  occasion  he  was  putting  across
some  ideological  bluff.  Our  auto  crept  slowly  through  the  back
streets.  From  time  to  time  our  headlamps  picked  out  the  figure  of
an  American  sentry.  Or  rather,  figures,  for  they  were  always  in  pairs!

The  gallant  soldier  blinked  angrily  in  the  powerful  beam,  but  his
lady-friend  quickly  got  over  her  alarm  and  smiled.  Needless  to  say,
they  had  no  suspicion  that  a Soviet  general  was  gazing  at  them
from  the  darkness  of  the  car.  Shabalin  snorted;  it  was  all  further
evidence  of  the  moral  degeneration  of  the  American  army.

After  long  wanderings  among  the  ruins  and  allotments  of  the
Berlin  suburbs,  in  the  light  of  our  headlamps  we  saw  a yellow  arrow
with  the  inscription:  Karlshorst.


117


The  first  post-war  conference  of  the  Big  Three  was  held  in  Pots
dam  from  17  July  to  2 August;  it  has  gone  down  in  history  as  the
Potsdam  Conference.

In  thinking  of  the  Big  Three  at  the  Potsdam  Conference  one  is
inevitably  struck  by  a gap:  the  familiar  name  of  President  Roosevelt
was  missing.  He  had  died  only  a few  days  before  the  victory  to  which
he  had  devoted  so  much  strength  and  energy.  One  may  find  some
consolation  in  the  circumstance  that  he  did  not  have  to  witness  the
crumbling  of  his  illusions,  on  which  he  had  based  all  his  plans  for  a
new  ordering  of  the  post-war  world.

During  the  conference  Stalin  went  with  the  supreme  representatives
of  the  Western  Allies  on  a car-tour  of  Berlin.  One  consequence  of
this  trip  was  an  order  to  the  experts  of  the  S.M.A.  Air
Administration  to  make  a report  to  Stalin  himself  on  the  details  of
the  Allied  attacks  on  the  city.  The  ruins  of  Berlin  spoke  more
clearly  than  the  newspaper  reports  and  the  statistics  of  bomb
tonnage.  As  one  drove  through  Berlin  and  saw  the  endless  ruins,  one
might  have  thought  that  someone  had  shattered  the  enormous  city  with
an  equally  enormous  hammer.  A comparison  of  the  effects  of  the.
German  air  attacks  on  Moscow  with  the  state  of  Berlin  after  the
Allied  attacks  was  provocative  of  thought.  It  was  no  casual  interest
that  prompted  Stalin  to  call  for  a special  report.

While  the  Big  Three  were  negotiating,  the  S.M.A.  was  going  on
with  its  work.  One  of  the  first  Soviet  measures  to  have  a radical
influence  on  the  internal  structure  of  German  economy  was  Marshal
Zhukov's  Order  No.  124.  In  this  he  decreed  the  confiscation  of  the
vast  wealth  of  former  National  Socialists  and  further,  apparently
quite  incidentally,  issued  directions  that  preparations  were  to  be
made  for  the  State  to  take  over  basic  industries  and  for  a plan  of  land

reform  to  be  drawn  up.  The  German  authorities  were  not  yet  used
to  Soviet  methods,  and  could  not  read  between  the  lines.  Order
No.  124  contained  no  precise  figures.  It  was  packed  with  demagogic
phrases  and  it  conferred  comprehensive  powers  on  the  German
authorities.  The  German  'people',  in  the  persons  of  their  'finest
representatives',  were  themselves  to  draft  the  plan  and  present  it  to
the  S.M.A.  for  consideration  and  confirmation.  Simultaneously
with  the  issue  of  Order  No.  124,  General  Shabalin  was  given  secret
instructions  on  how  it  was  to  be  put  into  force.  These  instructions
laid  down  the  precise  nature  of  the  reforms  whose  formulation  was
ostensibly  to  be  left  to  the  German  autonomous  authorities.


118


I had  more  than  one  opportunity  to  see  how  the  process  of  creating
a land  reform  was  carried  through  in  General  Shabalin's  private
office.  A solid-looking  Maybach  auto  drove  up  to  the  entrance  of  the
Administration,  and  a colourless  individual  in  civilian  clothes  got  out
irresolutely.  He  was  the  Landrat,  by  favour  of  the  S.M.A.  the  head
of  a district  administration,  and  one  of  the  'finest  representatives'
of  the  German  people.  In  the  general's  waiting  room  he  stood  in  a
cringing  attitude,  his  coat  over  his  arm,  a shabby  document-case
gripped  under  his  elbow,  his  hat  pressed  against  his  belly  as  though
to  defend  him  against  a blow.  With  an  ingratiating  smile  he
cautiously  lowered  himself  into  a chair  and  waited  patiently  for  an
audience.

At  last  lie  was  summoned  into  the  general's  room.  An  interpreter
explained  to  Shabalin  the  Germans'  plan  for  land  reform  in  the
federal  State  of  Saxony.

"What  do  they  propose  as  the  upper  limits  of  land-holdings  this
time?"  the  general  asked.

"One  hundred  to  two  hundred  morgens,  according  to  the
individual  case,  Comrade  General,"  the  interpreter  answered  after  a
glance  at  the  land-reform  draft  in  his  hand.

"Idiots!  The  third  draft  and  still  no  good  whatever!  Tell  him  we
can't  agree  to  it."

The  interpreter  translated.  The  Landrat  kneaded  his  document
case  helplessly  between  his  hands,  and  began  to  explain  that  the
proposed  draft  had  been  drawn  up  to  secure  the  greatest  possible
economic  advantages  from  the  land,  in  view  of  the  conditions  of  the
State.  He  tried  to  explain  the  specific  conditions  of  Saxony's
agriculture,  and  said  that  under  the  hard  conditions  imposed  by
nature  it  was  absolutely  vital  to  observe  a close  constructive
relationship  between  cattle-breeding,  forestry,  and  agriculture.

Then  he  dealt  with  the  peculiar  features  of  the  thorough
mechanization  of  German  agriculture,  a mechanization  based  on  small  farm
conditions.  He  expressed  a genuine  desire  to  find  the  best  solution
to  the  problem  raised  by  Order  No.  124.

Even  when  it  was  not  absolutely  necessary  that  I should  attend,

I always  tried  to  be  present  at  discussions  of  this  kind.  On  closer
inspection,  Germany's  apparently  planless  economy  proved  to  be
organically  so  interlocked  that  it  afforded  a very  interesting  study
for  a Soviet  expert.  It  was  an  exceptionally  precise  and  complicated
piece  of  mechanism,  in  which  there  was  very  restricted  scope  for


119


experiment.  Frequently  I saw  the  German  experts  throw  up  their
hands  in  despair  when  the  general  gave  them  advice  or  submitted
demands  which  would  have  perfectly  fitted  Soviet  conditions  in
new  planning  or  reconstruction.  They  exclaimed  with  one  voice:

"That's  equal  to  suicide."

And  so  it  happened  this  time.  The  general  played  with  his  pencil,
puffed  thoughtfully4y  at  his  cigarette,  blew  out  the  smoke  in  rings.  He
did  not  even  ask  for  the  German's  arguments  to  be  translated  to
him.  He  regarded  it  all  as  empty  noise.  When  he  considered  he  had
given  enough  time  to  the  matter  he  knitted  his  brows  and  turned  to
the  interpreter:

"Tell  him  the  plan  has  got  to  be  revised.  We  must  look  after  the
interests  of  the  German  peasantry,  not  those  of  the  large  landlords."
The  general  was  a classic  example  of  the  Soviet  'official,  who,
being  only  an  automatic  executive  organ,  is  incapable  of  considering
argument  put  forward  by  the  other  side  or  of  subjecting  an  issue  to
independent  criticism.  Yet  he  was  deciding  the  whole  economic
future  of  the  Soviet  zone.

The  German  rose  to  his  feet  in  consternation.  All  his  arguments
had  been  useless.  The  draft  of  the  land  reform  would  be  subjected
to  many  further  revisions,  until  the  'independent'  German  proposal
corresponded  in  every  detail  with  the  secret  instructions  which  the
general  kept  in  his  safe.

The  land  reform  was  not  so  much  an  economic  as  a political
measure.  Its  object  was  the  destruction  of  one  of  the  strongest
groups  in  German  society,  above  all  economically,  and  to  create  a
new  group  in  sympathy  with  the  new  regime.  In  the  next  phase,
i.e.,  after  the  consolidation  of  the  new  regime,  the  first  group  would
be  physically  destroyed,  while  the  second  would  make  acquaintance


with  the  formula  so  well  known  in  the  Soviet  Union:  'The  land  to
you,  the  fruits  to  us.'

I often  felt  sympathy  for  the  Germans  I met  in  General  Shabalin's
office.  The  majority  were  communists.  In  one  way  or  another  they
had  fought  the  Hitler  regime,  and  many  of  them  had  suffered  for
their  convictions.  After  the  German  collapse  they  welcomed  us
joyfully,  some  regarding  us  as  their  liberators,  others  as  their
ideological  allies.  Many  came  to  see  us  because  they  wanted  to  work
for  the  benefit  of  a future  Germany.  It  goes  without  saying  that


120


among  them  were  the  inevitable  opportunists.

Before  any  German  was  entrusted  with  any  responsible  position
the  S.M.A.  subjected  him  to  a thorough  test  of  his  political  reliability.

As  they  regarded  us  as  their  ideological  allies,  they  did  not  hesitate
to  express  their  views  frankly.  And  then  one  saw  all  too  clearly
what  a great  conflict  there  was  between  the  convictions  and  desires
many  of  them  possessed  and  the  instructions  they  received  from
the  S.M.A.  The  S.M.A.  wanted  silent  executives,  not  equal  partners.

The  time  was  bound  to  come  when  these  men  would  be  faced  with  a
choice:  either  to  carry  out  orders  without  protest  and  become
obedient  tools,  or  clear  out  and  make  room  for  others.

We  had  other  visitors  to  the  administration  besides  the  German
official  authorities.  The  Scientific  and  Technical  Department  had  some
particularly  interesting  callers.  Before  the  war  the  head  of  the
department,  Colonel  Kondakov,  had  been  head  of  the  Department  for  Higher
Military-Educational  Institutions,  a sub-section  of  the  All-Union
Committee  for  Higher  School  Affairs.  He  was  an  elderly  and  very
cultivated  man  who  knew  his  job  and  had  much  human  understanding.

One  day  Kondakov  came  up  to  me  in  the  corridor.  He  had  a look
of  despair  on  his  face.  "Gregory  Petrovich,"  he  said  to  me,  "be  a
good  sort  and  give  me  a hand."

"Why,  what's  wrong,  Comrade  Colonel?"  I asked.

"Some  German  in  my  room's  reducing  me  to  despair.  He's  in
vented  some  devilish  device  and  is  offering  it  to  us.  He  won't  tell  us
the  details,  and  we  can't  make  any  sense  of  what  he's  saying."

In  the  colonel's  room  I found  a fairhaired  German;  he  introduced
first  himself  then  his  young,  doll-like  wife  to  me.

"Well,  what  is  it  you've  got?"  I asked.

"First  of  all,  Major,  I must  draw  your  attention  to  the  fact  that
I am  greatly  interested  in  offering  my  invention  to  the  great  Soviet
Union,  where  it  will  be  used  for  the  benefit  of  the  toilers.  . .

"Good,  but  what  is  it?"  I interrupted  as  he  paused  for  breath.

"I  don't  want  my  invention  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Americans,
though  I know  they'd  pay  me  more.  I don't  like  the  imperialists.  I'm
a convinced  communist  and  . . ."

"All  right!  We'll  take  that  for  granted,"  I interrupted  again.

"What  exactly  is  your  invention?"

After  an  hour  I was  still  no  more  able  to  make  any  sense  of  his


121


remarks  than  the  colonel  had  been.  He  had  invented  some  very

mysterious  motor  with  an  incredible  performance  and  many  other

attractive  features.  He  gave  us  to  understand  that  it  would  bring

about  a revolution  in  warfare,  and  assured  us  he  had  kept  it  secret

for  years  at  the  risk  of  his  life,  because  he  didn't  want  the  'fascists'

to  use  it  to  the  detriment  of  humanity.  He  asked  to  be  given  the

opportunity  to  carry  on  his  work  and  prepare  models.  The  trouble

was  that  all  his  calculations,  plans  and  models  had  been  destroyed

during  the  American  bombing  attacks.  In  exchange  for  our

assistance  he  bound  himself  to  place  the  patent  at  the  service  of  the  Soviet

government.

I asked  him  to  supply  me  with  a list  of  the  things  he  needed  for
his  work.  As  though  that  was  all  he  had  been  waiting  for,  he  opened
his  case  and  handed  me  a statement  which  included  all  the  desires
of  the  heart:  money,  means  of  existence,  even  cigarettes,  but  none
of  the  things  which  were  necessary  to  an  inventor  of  such  a machine.

He  asked  for  a period  of  six  months  in  which  to  carry  it  all  through.

I felt  a strong  desire  to  kick  him  out,  and  was  sure  he  was  trying
the  same  trick  on  all  the  four  occupation  authorities.  The  colonel
decided  to  give  him  a chance  to  justify  his  claims.  But  he  muttered  to
himself:  "You  wait ! If  you're  trying  to  make  a fool  of  me  you'll  find
yourself  in  a cell."

Such  characters  were  regular  visitors  to  all  our  departments.

But  it  goes  without  saying  that  the  Scientific  and  Technical
Department  was  chiefly  occupied  with  more  important  work.  The  people
it  was  interested  in  did  not  come  to  the  S.M.A.  of  their  own  accord.

Usually  they  had  to  be  sought  for  and  brought  in.

The  Scientific  and  Technical  Department  was  really  only  a
collecting  and  clearing  point  for  the  similarly  named  department
attached  to  the  Narcomvnudel.  Colonel  Kondakov  sifted  the
incoming  material,  assessed  its  value,  and  passed  it  on  to  the  cognate
department  of  the  Narcomvnudel  in  Potsdam,  where  highly  qualified
Soviet  experts  in  all  branches  of  science  and  technique  were  installed.

From  which  one  can  assume  that  Moscow  had  more  faith  in  the
Narcomvnudel  than  in  the  S.R.A.

The  chief  task  of  the  S.M.A.  Department  was  to  search  for  brains.

Moscow  had  a high  estimation  of  German  brains.  So,  for  that  matter,
had  the  Western  Allies,  and  consequently  from  the  very  first  day
of  the  occupation  a bitter  struggle  went  on  between  the  western
and  eastern  allies.  At  the  capitulation,  Thuringia  and  a large  part  of
Saxony  were  in  the  hands  of  the  Americans.  Two  months  later,  in
accordance  with  agreements,  this  area  was  handed  over  to  the


122


Soviet  occupying  authorities.  During  his  inspection  tours  General
Shabalin  asked  the  military  governors  how  far  the  S.M.A.  order  to
seek  out  and  register  German  experts  had  been  carried  through.  U.
was  astonished  and  indignant  at  the  rapid  and  thorough  work  which
the  'damned  Allies'  had  put  in.  During  their  brief  stay  in  Thuringia
and  Saxony  the  Americans  had  mopped  up  all  the  cream  of  the
German  scientific  and  technical  spheres.  Outstanding  scientists,
valuable  research  laboratories,  technical  archives,  were  all  carried
off.  Scientists  who  received  instructions  to  be  evacuated  could  take
with  them  not  only  all  the  material  they  needed  for  their  work,  but
whole  establishments  together  with  their  scientific  collaborators,  .
they  thought  fit.  In  this  province  the  Soviet  authorities  found  only
comparatively  unimportant  lecturers  and  assistants.  The  Zeiss
works  at  Jena  were  regarded  as  particularly  valuable  booty.  But  from
Jena,  too,  the  Americans  had  been  able  to  withdraw  all  the  leading
technical  staff.  Zeiss  could  manage  to  carry  on  with  the  staff  that
remained,  but  it  could  not  advance.  The  same  applied  to  the  research
institutes  in  Dresden  and  Leipzig.

Another  circumstance  of  great  importance  was  the  fact  that  the,
majority  of  the  leading  German  scientists  had  fled  westward  while
the  Red  Army  was  advancing.  And  so  the  Kaiser  Wilhelm  Institite,
one  of  the  greatest  scientific  institutions  in  the  world,  and  of  especial
interest  to  Moscow,  proved  to  be  as  useful  to  us  as  the  ruin's  Of  the
Colosseum.

To  put  up  a good  show  to  Moscow,  the  SMA.  did  its  best  to
represent  that  the  third-rate  scientists  who  fell  into,  their  hands
were  men  of  the  utmost  importance.  Assistants  in  Messerschmitt's
laboratory  were  declared  to  be  his  closest  collaborators,  The  usual
methods  of  Soviet  leadership:  the  plan  descended  from  above  and  sand
was  flung  up  from  below.

On  the  plea  that  it  was  a necessary  step  to  secure  the  peace,
the  S.M.A.  sought  all  over  Germany  for  military  experts.  Its
representatives  hunted  assiduously  for  constructors  of  V2's,  jet
planes,  and  heavy  tanks.  And  swarms  of  petty  swindlers  haunted  the
S.M.A.  offices,  offering  their  services  in  the  perfection  of  deadly
weapons.

Colonel  Kondakov's  assistant  in  the  Scientific  and  Technical
Department  was  a Major  Popov.  One  day  he  and  I were  discussing
the  latest  technical  achievements  of  the  air-arm,  with  particular
reference  to  the  Luftwaffe  and  the  American  Flying  Fortresses,  the
B.29's.  "We've  got  them  now,"  he  said  casually.  "You  remember  the
papers  reporting  in  1948  that  several  Flying  Fortresses  went  off  their


123


course  after  a bombing  attack  on  Japan,  and  were  interned  in  the
Soviet  Union?"

"Yes,  I remember,"  I answered.

"That  was  a really  delicate  affair,"  he  commented.  "And  rather
different  from  how  the  papers  reported  it.  When  the  Forts  were
discovered  over  our  territory  a squadron  of  specially  fast  Soviet
fighters  was  sent  up  after  them.  They  overtook  the  Americans  and
signaled  to  them  to  land.  The  Americans  had  been  ordered  that  they
were  not  to  land  in  any  unknown  area  with  Flying  Fortresses.

The  Forts  were  the  latest  achievement  of  American  aviation
technique,  and  they  were  a dead  secret.  In  the  event  of  a forced  landing
being  necessary,  the  crews  had  orders  to  take  to  their  parachutes  and
blow  up  their  machines  in  mid-air.  So  the  Forts  continued  to  fly  over
the  Siberian  taiga  without  taking  notice  of  our  pursuit ' The  Soviet
fighters  fired  a warning  salvo  with  their  rocket-guns,  broke  up  the
bomber  formation  and  forced  one  to  land  on  the  landing  ground  at
Khabarovsk.  The  crew  was  given  a right  hearty  reception.  But
despite  all  attempts  to  persuade  them,  the  Americans  refused  to  leave
their  machine  until  an  American  consul  had  arrived.  A consul  wasn't
to  be  found  all  that  easily,  but  in  the  presence  of  the  crew  the  whole
machine  was  sealed  up,  from  nose  to  tail.  Our  people  solemnly  stuck
the  seal  in  the  American  commander's  pocket,  and  assured  them  that
everything  was  in  order,  they  could  spend  a couple  of  hours  quietly
in  the  Intourist  hotel  until  the  consul  arrived.  But  while  Intourist
was  entertaining  the  crew  with  all  the  pleasures  of  earth  the  cables
between  Moscow  and  Khabarovsk  hummed  with  secret  requests  and
answering  secret  orders.  Planes  loaded  with  the  finest  Soviet  experts
were  hurriedly  dispatched  from  Moscow.  The  Americans  were
persuaded,  and  where  necessary  forced,  to  spend  the  night  in  the

hotel,  and  meanwhile  a feverish  activity  set  in  on  the  landing  ground.
The  seals  were  removed,  and  the  Soviet  engineers,  technicians,  and
constructors  swarmed  over  the  machine  by  the  light  of  searchlights.

I was  one  of  the  technicians  sent  to  carry  out  the  Kremlin's  order
'to  commit  everything  to  paper'.  We  spent  several  days  studying
the  bomber,  while  the  American  crew  were  kept  interned."

The  fact  that  a B.29  had  landed  in  the  Far  East  of  Soviet  Russia
was  reported  at  the  time  by  Tass,  and  one  could  take  it  for  granted
that  everything  went  as  Major  Popov  declared.  But,  after  discussing
the  difficulties  of  the  job  and  the  services  he  personally  had  rendered,
he  gave  the  story  a more  romantic  ending:

"One  of  the  members  of  the  crew,  who  suspected  that  there


124


was  something  wrong  somewhere,  managed  to  get  out  of  the  hotel  at
night  and  make  his  way  to  the  landing  ground.  There  he  saw  what
was  happening  to  the  'sealed'  machine.  He  returned  and  told  his
comrades.  They  had  a short-wave  transmitter  which  was  to  be  used
in  emergencies,  and  they  at  once  sent  a code  message  to  American
headquarters.  Meanwhile  Washington  and  Moscow  were  engaged  in
a lively  exchange  of  notes  over  the  interned  aircraft.  By  the  time  the
crew's  report  reached  Washington  the  Soviet  technical  brigade  had
done  its  job.  The  crew  was  escorted  to  the  landing  ground,  and  the
commander  was  solemnly  invited  to  convince  himself  that  the  seals
had  not  been  broken.  Stalin  sent  an  extremely  cordial  cable  to
President  Roosevelt,  informing  him  personally  of  the  machine's
release.  A few  minutes  before  the  B.29  was  due  to  leave,  Stalin
received  a cable  from  the  President:  'Accept  the  B.29  as  a present
from  me.'

"When  the  Soviet  pilots  took  over  the  gift  in  order  to  fly  it  to
Moscow,  they  came  up  against  unexpected  difficulties.  It  was  far  from
easy  to  get  the  gigantic  craft  airborne.  So  one  of  our  best  test  pilots
for  heavy  machines  was  specially  sent  from  Moscow.  After  studying  it
for  two  weeks  he  managed  to  get  it  up  and  flew  it  safely  to  Moscow.

For  which  he  was  awarded  the  title  of  'Hero  of  the  Soviet  Union'.

"Several  of  the  Central  Construction  Bureau  attached  to  the

People's  Commissariat  for  Aviation  In  Industry  were  assigned  the

task  of  preparing  the  manufacture  of  this  type  of  machine.  The

first  test  machines  were  ready  by  the  last  year  of  the  war.  A little

later  a number  of  aviation  works  in  the  Urals  began  serial

production.  Tupolev  and  the  gifted  designer  Petliakov  were  entrusted  with

the  creation  of  the  Soviet  'Flying  Fortresses'."

As  time  passed  more  people  arrived  to  work  in  the  S.M.A.  On
entering  General  Shabalin's  outer  office  one  day  I saw  a young
woman  leaning  back  in  an  armchair.  She  had  one  leg  crossed  over  the
other,  a cigarette  in  one  hand,  and  was  conversing  gaily  with  Major
Kuznetsov.  She  left  brilliant  crimson  traces  of  lipstick  on  her
cigarette  when  she  took  it  out  of  her  mouth.  She  threw  me  a swift,
appraising  glance,  then  turned  back  to  the  major.  There  was  some
thing  distinctive  about  her  behavior,  the  exaggeratedly  slovenly
attitude,  the  way  she  took  deep  draws  at  her  cigarette,  the  twist  of
her  carmined  lips.  She  was  waiting  to  see  the  general.  When  she  had
gone  in  I asked  Kuznetsov:

"Who  is  that  beauty?"

"She's  been  an  interpreter  to  one  of  the  dismantling  generals.


125


Now  he's  gone  back  to  Moscow  and  the  chief  of  staff  has
recommended  her  to  our  boss.  Apparently  she's  to  be  his  interpreter."
And  so  Lisa  Stenina  became  General  Shabalin's  interpreter,  his
private  interpreter,  as  she  always  emphasized.  She  spoke  German
perfectly,  was  well  educated,  well  read,  and  clever.  And  she  had
several  other  unusual  qualities.

She  used  make-up  far  too  much.  Although  she  looked  at  least
twenty-five,  she  maintained  that  she  was  not  more  than  seventeen.

And  although  all  her  documents  referred  to  her  as  Elizaveta
Yefimovna,  she  always  introduced  herself  as  Elizaveta  Pavlovna.
Yefimovna  was  plebeian,  but  Pavlovna  sounded  like  a Pushkin  heroine.

Lisa  was  not  in  the  army,  but  she  always  wore  an  officer's  coat
with  lieutenant's  insignia  over  her  silk  dress,  declaring  she  had
nothing  else  to  wear.  Of  course,  that  was  sheer  imagination:  she  wore
the  coat  only  for  show.  She  had  an  unbridled  tongue.  And  she  was
fond  of  discussing  very  delicate  political  questions.  But  above  all
she  liked  to  impress.  At  every  opportunity  she  mentioned  that  her
sister  was  married  to  General  Rudenko.  If  her  audience  failed  to  show
any  sign  of  interest,  she  added  that  General  Rudenko  was  head  of  the
Soviet  Purchasing  Commission  in  America.  And  if  that  didn't  do
the  trick,  she  confided  that  he  wasn't  simply  our  trade  representative
in  America,  he  was  head  of  Soviet  intelligence  there.

Once  she  was  absent  from  the  office  a whole  day  without

permission.  She  turned  up  in  the  interpreters'  room  late  in  the
evening,  but  in  a shocking  state:  terribly  scratched,  her  clothes
torn,  her  head  bound  up.

I was  informed  by  phone  of  her  arrival  ten  minutes  before  the
close  of  office  hours.  I went  to  find  out  what  had  happened.

"Where  have  you  been?"  I asked  her  anxiously.

"A  colonel  invited  me  to  go  for  a ride  and  took  me  into  the  forest.

Well,  and  then

"And  then  I suppose  you  made  a fool  of  him,"  I surmised.

"Where's  your  cap?"  someone  asked.

"Lost,"  she  answered,  to  convey  all  the  seriousness  of  the  situation
from  which  she  had  emerged  victorious.

"And  have  you  lost  nothing  else,  my  dear  Lisa?"  I asked,  in  an
assumed  anxious  tone.  She  gave  me  a devastating  look.


126


Now  what  are  we  to  do  with  you?"  I asked  conmiseratingly.


"As  you're  a lieutenant,  you  should  be  put  under  arrest  for  arbitrary
absence  from  duty.  What  will  the  general  say?"

"That's  my  concern;,  you  needn't  worry  about  that,  Comrade
Major.

"Poor  Lisa  !"  I sighed.

A day  or  two  later  Major  Kuznetsov  remarked  to  me  casually:

"I  hear  you're  always  teasing  Lisa.  You  want  to  be  careful  with
her."

"But  why?"

"Take  my  advice.  Even  the  general's  afraid  of  her.  Give  it  a
moment's  thought.  She  hasn't  been  assigned  to  the  general  by
chance.  Understand?"  He  lowered  his  tone.  "I  tell  you  as  a friend:
don't  play  with  fire."

Later  on  I learned  rather  more  about  Lisa  Stenina  and  her  past.


127


CHAPTER  SEVEN
In  The  Control  Commission

One  afternoon  General  Shabalin  sent  for  me.  When  I reported
he  handed  me  an  invitation  from  American  headquarters,  asking
him  and  his  co-workers  to  take  part  in  a conference  at  Frankfurt-on.
Main  to  discuss  the  liquidation  of  the  I.G.  Farben  Industry.  "Take
my  car,"  he  said,  "and  drive  to  Zehlendorf.  Hand  in  the  list  of  our
delegation,  and  find  out  when  the  plane  leaves.  If  there  isn't  a plane,
obtain  passes  for  us  to  use  our  cars  for  the  journey."

It  was  five-fifteen  when  I arrived  outside  the  American  head
quarters.  'Well,  now  I shall  have  to  wait  an  hour  for  an  interview,'

I pondered.  'And  I've  got  to  see  Eisenhower's  economic  adviser,
but  I haven't  any  letter  of  introduction,  only  my  personal
documents.'

I stopped  the  car  at  the  gate  and  took  out  my  documents.  The
American  guard,  in  white  helmet,  white  canvas  belt,  and  white
gaiters,  raised  his  white-gloved  hand  in  salute  and  seemed  to  be
completely  uninterested  ' in  my  documents.  To  give  some  excuse
for  stopping  the  car,  I asked  him  some  meaningless  question.

Without  speaking,  he  pointed  to  a board  with  an  arrow  and  the
one  word:  'Information'.  I drove  past  the  Information  Bureau
slowly,  and  glanced  back  casually  to  see  whether  anybody  was
watching  me.  'I'll  find  what  I want,  myself;  it's  a good  opportunity
to  have  a look  round  without  trouble.  I'll  see  what  sort  of  fellows
these  Americans  are.  They  may  not  pull  me  up  at  once.  And  if
necessary  I'll  simply  say  I took  the  wrong  way.'

I strictly  ordered  Misha  to  remain  in  the  car  and  not  stir  a step.

Who  knows  whether  he  might  be  kidnapped,  and  then  I'd  lose  my
headl

I went  along  a corridor.  All  the  doors  were  wide  open,  the  rooms
were  empty.  Here  and  there  German  women  cleaners  were  sweeping
the  floors.  On  each  door  was  an  ordinary  tablet:  'Major  So-and-so'
or  'Colonel  So-and-so',  and  the  name  of  the  department.  What  on
earth  did  it  all  mean?  Not  a sign  of  security  precautions.  We  Soviet
authorities  did  not  hang  out  *name-boards  on  the  doors  to  inform
our  internal  and  external  enemies  who  was  inside.

I felt  a little  uncomfortable,  almost  queer,  with  anxiety.  As
though  I had  got  into  a secret  department  by  accident  and  was
afraid  of  being  caught.  In  search  of  the  right  room  I looked  at  one


128


name  plate  after  another  and  felt  as  though  I was  a spy  going  through
the  card  index  of  an  enemy  General  Staff.  And  I was  in  full  Soviet
uniform,  tool

One  of  our  officers  had  once  told  me  there  was  no  point  in  visiting
an  American  office  after  five  p.m.  "After  that  they're  all  out  with
German  girls,"  he  explained,  and  I couldn't  be  sure  whether  his
words  expressed  contempt  or  simply  envy  of  American  methods.

"They  think  anyone  who  sits  in  an  office  after  office-hours  doesn't
know  how  to  work  or  arrange  his  time."

'He  was  right,'  I thought  now.  'The  Americans  obviously  don't
intend  to  work  themselves  to  death. 'General  Shabalin's  working
day  really  begins  at  seven  in  the  evening.  I suppose  I must  apply
to  "Information"  after  all.'

In  the  Information  Bureau  I found  two  negroes  extended  in  easy
chairs,  their  feet  on  the  desk.  They  were  chewing  gum.  I had  some
difficulty  in  getting  them  to  understand  that  I wanted  to  speak  to
General  Clay.  Without  stopping  his  chewing  one  of  them  called
something  incomprehensible  through  a small  window  into  the  next
room.  Even  if  I had  been  President  Truman,  Marshal  Stalin,  or  a
horned  devil,  I doubt  whether  he  would  have  removed  his  feet'from
the  desk  or  shifted  the  gum  from  his  right  to  his  left  cheek.  And  yet
'Information'  functioned  perfectly:  a sergeant  behind  the  window
said  something  into  a telephone,  and  a few  minutes  later  an  American
lieutenant  arrived  and  courteously  asked  me  to  follow  him.

In  General  Clay's  outer  office  a woman  secretary  was  turning
over  the  pages  of  a glossy  magazine.  'She'll  probably  put  her  feet
on  the  typewriter  too,'  I thought,  and  prudently  sat  down  at  a safe
distance.  While  I was  wondering  whether  to  remain  silent  or  enter
into  conversation  with  the  'Allies',  a long-nosed  little  soldier  burst
through  the  door  leading  to  the  general's  room.  He  tore  through
the  outer  office  and  snatched  his  cap  down  from  a nail,  saying  a few
hurried  words  to  the  secretary.

'The  general  must  be  a bit  of  a martinet,  if  his  men  rush  about
like  that,'  I thought.

At  that  moment  the  soldier  held  out  his  hand  to  me  and  let  loose
a flood  of  words  which  overwhelmed  my  weak  knowledge  of  English.
"General  Clay,"  the  secretary  said  in  an  explanatory  tone  behind
my  back.  Before  I could  recover  my  wits  the  general  had  vanished
again.  He  wasn't  a general,  he  was  an  atom  bomb  ! All  I had  under
stood  was  'Okay';  and  that  the  necessary  order  had  already  been
issued.  And  in  addition,  that  here  it  wasn't  at  all  easy  to  tell  the


129


difference  between  a general  and  a G.l.  The  privates  stretched
themselves  out  with  their  feet  on  the  desk  while  the  generals  tore
around  like  messenger  boys.

Another  officer  appeared  at  the  same  door,  and  invited  me  into
his  room.  This  time  I prudently  glanced  at  his  tabs.  Another
general!  Without  offering  me  a chair,  but  not  sitting  down  himself,  the
general  listened  to  me  with  cool  efficiency.  Then  he  nodded  and
went  out.

I looked  round  the  room.  A modest  writing  desk.  Modest  ink
stands.  A thick  wad  of  newspapers.  A number  of  pencils.  Nothing
unnecessary.  A room  to  work  in,  not  to  catch  flies  in.  When  a writing
desk  adequate  for  General  Shabalin's  rank  was  required,  all  Karl
shorst  and  all  the  booty  warehouses  were  turned  upside  down.  The
inkstands  were  obtained  specially  from  Dresden  for  him.

A little  later  the  American  general  returned  and  told  me,
apparently  on  the  basis  of  a telephone  conversation,  when  the  aero
plane  would  be  ready.  I had  plenty  of  opportunities  to  see  later  on
that  where  we  Soviet  authorities  would  demand  a 'document'
signed  by  three  generals  and  duly  stamped,  the  Americans  found
a telephone  conversation  sufficient.

I did  not  have  to  present  the  list  of  the  Soviet  delegation  at  all.

Here  everything  was  done  without  resort  to  a liaison  service,  and
without  any  counter-check  by  the  Ministry  of  Internal  Affairs  ! The
general  handed  me  a packet  of  materials  on  the  I.G.  Farben
Industry,  so  that  we  could  familiarize  ourselves  with  the  tasks  of  the
conference.

Next  morning  the  Soviet  delegation,  consisting  of  General
Shabalin,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Orlov,  Major  Kuznetsov,  myself,
and  two  interpreters,  went  to  the  Tempelhof  landing  ground.  There
187

the  sergeant  on  duty  explained  that  he  had  been  fully  informed
concerning  us,  and  spent  a little  time  in  phoning  to  various  offices.
Then  he  asked  us  to  wait,  as  our  plane  would  be  starting  rather
later  than  arranged.  I had  the  feeling  that  the  Americans  were
holding  up  our  departure  for  some  reason.  Machines  rolled  slowly
on  to  the  tarmac  in  the  distance,  but  not  one  of  them  showed  the
least  intention  of  taking  us  with  it.  The  general  swore,  and,  as  he
did  not  know  whom  to  vent  his  anger  upon,  he  turned  to  me.  "What
did  they  really  say  to  you  yesterday?  Why  didn't  you  get  it  in


130


writing?'


"I  was  quite  clearly  informed,"  I answered;  "this  morning  at  ten,
the  Tempelhof  airground.  A special  machine  would  be  waiting  for
us,  and  the  airport  commandant  was  notified."

The  general  clasped  his  hands  behind  his  back,  drew  his  head
down  between  his  shoulders,  and  marched  up  and  down  the  con
crete  road  outside  the  building  without  deigning  to  give  us  another
glance.

To  pass  the  time,  Major  Kuznetsov  and  I began  to  make  a closer
inspection  of  the  landing  ground.  Not  far  away  an  American  soldier
in  overalls  was  hanging  about,  giving  us  inquisitively  friendly
glances,  and  obviously  seeking  an  excuse  to  speak  to  us.  Now  a
blunt-nosed  Douglas  rolled  up  to  the  start.  During  the  war  these
transport  machines  had  reached  the  Soviet  Union  in  wholesale
quantities  as  part  of  the  Iend4ease  deliveries;  every  Russian  knew
them.  The  American  soldier  smiled,
said:

"S.47."

I looked  to  where  he  was  pointing,  and  corrected  him:  "Douglas."
He  shook  his  head  and  said:  "No  ...  no.  S.47.  Sikorsky  ...  Russian
constructor

'Was  it  really  one  of  Igor  Sikorsky's  designs?'  I wondered.

Sikorsky  had  been  the  pioneer  of  Russian  aviation  in  the  first  world
war,  and  the  constructor  of  the  first  multi-engined  machine,  Ilya
Mourometz.  I knew  that,  like  Boris  Seversky,  he  was  working  in
the  field  of  American  aviation,  but  I had  not  known  that  the
Douglas  was  his  job.  It  was  interesting  that  Pravda  hadn't  taken
the  opportunity  to  make  a big  song  of  it.

The  soldier  pointed  his  finger  first  at  the  clock,  then  into  the  sky.

he  imitated  a plane  landing,  and  explained  as  he

pointed  to  the  ground:  "General  Eisenhower."

pointed  to  the  machine,  and

With  his  hand

'Well,  if  General  Eisenhower's  arriving,'  I thought,  'that
probably  explains  why  we  couldn't  start.'

While  we  were  talking  to  the  soldier  a machine  grounded  just
behind  us,  and  a group  of  cheerful  old  gentlemen  poured  out  of  it.
Like  a horde  of  children  just  out  of  school  they  surrounded  General
Shabahn  and  began  to  shake  his  hand  so  heartily-  that  you  would


131


have  thought  it  was  the  one  thing  they  had  flown  from  America  for.

The  general  was  carried  away  by  their  exuberance-  and  shook  their
hands  in  turn.  Later  it  transpired  that  they  had  mistaken  Shabalin
for  General  Zhukov.  Meanwhile,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Orlov  had
found  out  somewhere  that  these  gay  old  boys  were  American
senators,  who  were  on  their  way  to  Moscow.  H-e  whispered  this
news  into  the  general's  ear,  but  it  was  too  late.  Shalbalin  had  already
exchanged  cordial  handshakes  with  these  sworn  enemies  of  the
communist  order.

All  around  them,  camera  shutters  were  clicking.  The  senators
seemed  to  get  a great  kick  out  of  posing  with  General  Shabalin,
holding  his  hands.  The  general  had  little  wish  to  be  photographed
in  such  compromising  company,  but  he  had  to  put  a good  face  on  it.
He  was  quite  convinced  that  all  these  photos  would  find  their  way
into  the  archives  of  some  foreign  secret  service,  and  thence  into
the  archives  of  the  Narcomvnudel.  And  then  the  fat  would  be  in
the  fire.

Major  Kuznetsov  asked  Lieutenant-Colonel  Orlev  incredulously:

"But  are  they  really  senators?"

"Yes,  and  the  very  worst  of  them  all,  the  Senate  Political  Com
mission,"  Orlov  replied.

"But  they  don't  look  at  all  like  capitalists."  Kuznetsov  still  felt
dubious.

"Yes,  they  look  quite  harmless;  but  they've  got  millions  in  their
pockets.  They're  cold-blooded  sharks,"  Orlov  retorted.  Evidently
he  regarded  it  as  a mortal  sin  to  have  money  in  one's  pocket.  But
then,  he  was  a dyed-in-the-wool  party  man.

"So  they're  the  lords  of  America,  and  they  behave  like  that.  Now
if  one  of  our  ministers  . . . ."  Kuznetsov's  reflections,  were  interrupted
by  the  arrival  of  a column  of  closed  cars  which  drove  straight  on
to  the  landing  ground.  A group  of  Soviet  officers  stepped  out.  The
gold  braid  on  their  caps  and  the  red  piping  on  their  costs  showed
that  they  were  generals.

"Now  we're  in  for  a parade  !"  Kuznetsov  muttered.  "That's

Marshal  Zhukov  and  all  his  staff.  We'd  better  take  cover  in  the
bushes."


132


General  Shabalin  seemed  to  be  of  the  same  opinion.  He  had  not
been  invited  to  this  meeting,  and  to  be  an  uninvited  guest  of  Marshal
Zhukov  was  rather  a ticklish  matter.  But  his  general's  uniform  made
it  impossible  for  him  to  hide  behind  others'  backs.

In  this  hour  of  need  the  lively  old  gentlemen  from  America  came
to  the  rescue.  With  unreserved  'Hallos',  friendly  handshakes  and
back  slappings,  an  unstrained,  friendly  atmosphere  was  created.

"I  like  these  senators  !"  Kuznetsov  enthused.  "They  slap  hands
together  like  a lot  of  horse-dealers  at  a market.  Great  old  boys  !"  He
licked  his  lips  as  though  he  had  just  drunk  to  brotherhood  with  the
American  senators.

Marshal  Zhukov,  a medium-sized,  thickset  man  with  a prominent
chin,  always  dressed  and  behaved  with  unusual  simplicity.  He  took
hardly  any  notice  of  the  bustle  all  around  him,  but  seemed  to  be
waiting  for  the  moment  when  they  would  come  at  last  to  business.
Unlike  many  other  generals  who  owed  their  career  to  the  war,  by
all  his  bearing  he  clearly  showed  that  he  was  only  a soldier.  It  was
characteristic  of  the  man  that,  without  any  encouragement  from
official  Kremlin  propaganda,  he  had  become  known  all  over  Russia
as  the  second  Kutuzov,  as  the  savior  of  the  fatherland  in  the
second  great  patriotic  war.

The  airground  grew  more  and  more  animated.  Forces  of  military
police  in  parade  uniforms  marched  on.  The  servicing  personnel
hurried  to  and  fro.  A guard  of  honor  took  up  its  position  not  far
from  us.

A four-engined  machine  landed  quietly.  The  swarm  of  autograph
hunters  suffered  disillusionment:  a double  row  of  guards  swiftly
and  thoroughly  cut  them  off  from  the  landing  spot.

Major  Kuznetzov  looked  at  the  guards  and  remarked:  "Clean
work!  Look  at  those  cut-throats.  They  must  have  been  taken  into  the
army  straight  from  gangsterdom."

The  first  line  of  military  police  were  certainly  an  impressive  lot.

They  looked  pretty  sinister,  even  though  they  were  cleanshaven.

The  second  line  might  well  have  been  pugilists  and  cowboys,
mounted  not  on  horses  but  on  motor-cycles  that  made  more  noise
than  aeroplanes.

Meanwhile  the  guard  of  honour  had  begun  to  perform  some
extraordinary  exercise.  The  men  raised  their  arms  shouldering
and  spread  out  as  though  about  to  do  Swedish  gymnastics.  Decidedly
inept  and  unmilitary  by  our  standards.  "It  reminds  me  of  operetta,"
Kuznetsov  said  to  the  lieutenant-general.  "What  are  they  doing


133


that  for?


Orlov  waved  his  hand  contemptuously.  "Like  senators,  like
soldiers!  They're  chocolate  soldiers.  Give  them  black  bread  to  eat
and  they'd  be  ill."

"Are  you  so  fond  of  black  bread  then?"  Kuznetsov  sneered.  "Or
are  you  simply  concerned  for  the  well  being  of  your  fellowmen,  as
usual?"

Orlov  ignored  the  questions.  He  was  attached  to  our  delegation
as  a legal  expert.  Also,  he  was  public  prosecutor  to  the  military
court,  and  knew  well  enough  what  might  be  the  consequences  of
talking  too  frankly.

General  Eisenhower  stepped  out  of  the  plane,  wearing  a soldier's
greatcoat,  the  usual  broad  grin  on  his  face.  He  greeted  Marshal
Zhukov.  Then  he  signed  a few  autographs,  asked  where  they  could
have  breakfast,  and  took  Zhukov  off  with  him.

Hardly  had  the  distinguished  guests  departed  when  the

dispatcher  announced  that  our  plane  was  ready  to  start.  Now  we  knew

why  we  had  had  to  wait  so  long.

A man  in  the  uniform  of  an  American  brigadier-general  addressed
General  Shabalin  in  the  purest  of  Russian.  Apparently  he  had
learnt  that  we  were  flying  to  Frankfurt,  and  now  he  offered  us  his
services.  He  spoke  better  Russian  than  we  did,  if  I may  put  it  so.

He  had  left  Russia  thirty  or  more  years  before,  and  spoke  the  kind
of  Russian  common  in  the  old  aristocratic  circles.  Our  speech  had
been  modified  by  the  new  conditions,  it  was  contaminated  with
jargon  and  included  a mess  of  new  words.

I had  no  idea  why  Eisenhower  and  Zhukov  were  flying  to
Russia.  The  Soviet  papers  carried  no  official  communique  on  the
subject.  A week  later,  as  I was  making  my  usual  report  to  General
Shabalin,  he  asked  me.,  "Do  you  know  why  Eisenhower  flew  to
Moscow?"

"Probably  to  be  a guest  of  honour  at  the  recent  parade,"  I
answered.

"We  know  how  to  be  hospitable,"  the  general  said.  "They
entertained  him  with  such  excellent  vodka  that  he  sang  songs  all
night.  Arm  in  arm  with  Budionny.  They  always  bring  out  Budionny
as  an  ornament  on  such  occasions."  Apparently  that  was  all  the

general  knew  about  Eisenhower's  visit  to  Moscow;  but  he  put  his
finger  to  his  lips,  then  wagged  it  admonitorily.


134


Such  small  incidents  clearly  revealed  the  true  position  of  the
man  who  was  deputy  head  of  the  S.M.A.  He  was  really  nothing  but
an  errand-boy,  and  only  by  accident  knew  what  was  happening
'above'.

An  American  officer  stepped  into  Major  Kuznetsov's  room.  He
thrust  his  cap  in  the  hip-pocket  of  his  trousers,  then  swung  his
hand  up  to  his  uncovered  head  in  salute.  After  which  he  introduced
himself  in  the  purest  of  Russian:  "John  Yablokov,  captain  of  the
American  Army."

Kuznetsov  was  a very  intelligent  man,  but  he  was  also  a humorist
and  a bit  of  a wag.  He  replied  to  the  American  with:  "Greetings,

Ivan  Ivanovich  ! How  do  you  do  !"

The  American  Ivan  Ivanovich  seemed  to  be  no  greenhorn,  and
he  did  not  allow  the  major's  sneering  smile  to  put  him  out.  In  fact,
it  transpired  later  that  John  Yablokov  was  one  of  those  men  who
are  the  life  and  soul  of  the  party.  Either  to  please  us  or  to  show
that,  although  American,  he  was  a progressive,  he  rejoiced  our  ears
with  a flood  of  Russian  oaths  that  would  have  brought  down  the
Empire  State  Building.  But  that  was  later.  At  the  moment  Captain
Yablokov  had  arrived  on  an  official  visit  to  invite  General  Shabalin
to  the  first  organizational  conference  of  the  Control  Commission
Economic  Directorate.  The  general  twisted  the  invitation  and  the
agenda  paper  (both  were  in  English)  between  his  fingers.  Trying
not  to  reveal  that  English  was  all  Greek  to  him,  he  asked:  "Well,
what's  the  news  your  way?"

A second  American  officer  who  had  accompanied  Captain  Yablokov
answered  also  in  Russian:  "Our  chief,  General  Draper,  has  the  honour
to  invite  you  to  a.  . ."  He  did  not  seem  very  well  acquainted  with
the  terminology  of  Red  conferences,  and  was  forced  to  fall  back  on
the  wording  of  the  invitation:  ".  . . to  a meeting,  General."  Now
the  general  was  seated  comfortably  in  the  saddle.  He  did  not  know
English,  but  he  knew  the  Stalinist  terminology  thoroughly.  He  gave
the  American  the  sort  of  look  he  had  given  subordinate  Party
officers  in  his  capacity  as  secretary  of  the  Sverdlovsk  District
Party  Committee,  and  explained  in  a hortatory  tone:

"We  have  to  work,  not  attend  meetings."

That  was  a standing  Stalinist  phrase,  which  all  party  officials
used  as  a lash.  But  at  this  juncture  it  sounded  rather  rude.  However,
the  general  held  to  the  principle  that  too  much  butter  can't  spoil
any  bread,  and  that  Stalin's  words  can  never  be  repeated  enough.


135


I sat  in  a comer  and  enjoyed  myself  immensely.  The  general  would
be  starting  to  give  the  Americans  a lecture  on  party  training  next.

As  was  his  habit  in  intercourse  with  foreigners,  he  observed  the
unwritten  law  never  to  trust  one  interpreter  and  always  to  apply
the  method  of  cross-examination,  especially  when  the  interpreter
belonged  to  the  other  camp.  While  the  Americans  did  their  best  to
explain  what  they  meant  by  a 'meeting',  1 , too,  attempted  to  help.
The  general  never  liked  being  prompted,  but  he  always  snorted
afterwards:  "Why  didn't  you  say  so  before?"  So  I tactfully  observed:

"It's  not  really  important,  Comrade  General.  Let  them  hold  their
meeting  and  we'll  work."

After  we  had  settled  a number  of  minor  questions  the  Americans
went  back  to  their  Chevrolet  and  drove  home.  Major  Kuznetsov
remarked:  "But  they  could  talk  excellent  Russian.  The  one  with
the  little  moustache  looked  like  Douglas  Fairbanks."  The  general
pulled  him  up:  "You  can  see  at  once  what  sort  of  birds  they  are.

That  fellow  strikes  me  as  Chinese.  They're  spies."

The  general  appeared  to  fathom  the  true  nature  of  his  future
colleagues  extraordinarily  well!  A fe*  days  later,  during  a talk,
Captain  Yablokov  informed  me  quite  frankly  that  he  had  formerly
worked  in  the  American  secret  service  in  China.  He  did  not  appear
to  think  he  was  in  any  way  betraying  service  secrets.  If  a Soviet
officer  had  mentioned  such  a fact  he  would  have  been  committing
a serious  breach  of  his  duty.

Some  days  later  we  drove  to  the  first  meeting  of  the  Control
Commission;  we  went  with  the  firm  intention  of  working  and  not
holding  meetings.  The  Allied  Control  Commission  had  taken  over
the  former  Palace  of  Justice  in  Elsholzstrasse.  The  conference  hall
was  almost  empty,  the  delegations  were  only  just  beginning  to
assemble.  I felt  genuinely  afraid  that  I would  be  exposed  to  ridicule:
we  had  no  interpreter  with  us,  and  I didn't  know  English  too  well.

When  I mentioned  this  to  the  general  he  told  me  curtly:  "You
should  know  !"  Another  Party  slogan,  but  it  didn't  make  things  any
easier  for  me.  Until  the  meeting  was  officially  opened  we  relied  on
German,  for  all  the  Allies  without  exception  could  speak  German
more  or  less  well.

When  the  general  noticed  that  I was  talking  to  French  and
English  colleagues  he  barked  at  me  as  he  passed:  "You  wait,  Major,
I'll  cure  you  of  your  mock  modesty!  You  and  your  'don't  know
English'l  Now  you're  talking  away,  even  to  the  French,  nineteen


136


to  the  dozen,  but  you  never  told  me  you  knew  French."  It  was
hopeless  to  think  of  explaining.  And  the  general  would  probably
stick  me  in  a corner  to  exercise  control  over  the  French  interpreters
too,  as  he  had  done  with  the  Americans.

That,  too,  was  due  to  the  general's  Party  experience.  It  is  a common
thing  in  the  Soviet  Union  for  specialists  and  experts  to  dodge
responsible  posts.  Gifted  engineers,  or  former  directors  of  large  trusts
and  combines,  get  appointments  as  'technical  managers'  to  some  small
factory  or  a co-operative  of  war-wounded,  which  employs  only  five
or  six  workmen.  In  such  positions  they  are  less  exposed  to  the  risk
of  being  flung  behind  the  bars  as  'saboteurs',  and  so  they  keep  quiet
about  their  abilities  and  their  diplomas.  The  Party  officials  are
aware  of  this  trick,  and  do  their  utmost  to  round  up  the  'pretenders'.

And  so  even  if  you  try  to  escape  responsibility  you're  in  the  wrong:
you're  a 'passive  saboteur'.

I breathed  a sigh  of  relief  when  I discovered  that  the  American
and  British  delegations  had  first-class  Russian  interpreters.

Another  difficult  problem  for  me  was  my  uniform.  I looked  as
though  I had  covered  all  the  journey  from  Stalingrad  to  Berlin
crawling  on  my  belly.  My  uniform  had  been  washed  in  all  the  rivers
of  Russia  and  Eastern  Europe,  the  colour  had  faded  from  it
completely;  in  addition,  I was  wearing  ordinary  military  boots.  Before
we  drove  to  the  conference  General  Shabalin  gave  me  a critical
look  up  and  down  and  snarled:  "Haven't  you  got  any  shabbier
clothes  you  can  wear?"  He  knew  quite  well  that  I had  left  my  good
uniforms  in  Moscow  as  an  iron  reserve.  Many  of  us  took  the  view
that,  after  all,  the  army  wasn't  a puppet-show,  and  in  any  case
children  -were  running  about  naked  at  home.  Onemanhadalittle  sister,
another  a young  nephew.  Warm  clothes  or  breeches  could  be  made  for
them  out  of  a uniform,  and  the  kids  would  be  hugely  delighted:

"Uncle  Gregory  has  fought  in  this  uniform,"  the  child  would  say,
pointing  proudly  to  the  holes  left  by  the  pins  of  orders.  1 , too,  had
left  several  complete  outfits  in  Moscow.  In  any  case  I would  be  getting
the  so-called'  Foreign  Equipment'  when  I reached  Berlin.  Only  I had
overlooked  the  possibility  that  I would  have  to  take  part  in
meetings  of  the  Control  Commission  before  the  new  equipment  arrived.

As  our  Administration  for  Economy  developed  its  organization
and  activities,  more  and  more  men  arrived  from  Moscow  to  work
with  us.  Usually,  deputies  of  the  People's  Commissars  for  the
corresponding  Moscow  commissariats  were  appointed  heads  of
the  S.M.A.  departments,  which  in  practice  were  functioning  as  the
ministries  of  the  Soviet  zone.  One  and  all,  these  men  were  old


137


Party  officials,  specialists  in  the  running  of  Soviet  economic  affairs.

When  they  took  over  their  new  posts  one  could  hardly  avoid
laughing:  they  were  pure  crusaders  of  communism.

In  due  course  we  were  rejoiced  at  the  sight  of  the  newly  appointed
head  of  the  Industrial  Department,  Alexandrov,  and  his  deputy,

Smirnov.  They  both  wore  squeaking,  highlegged  boots  of  Stalin
pattern,  which  its  creator  had  himself  long  since  discarded.  Above  the
boots  they  had  riding-breeches  of  heavy  overcoating  material,
and  to  crown  this  rigout  they  had  dark  blue  military  tunics  dating
from  the  period  of  revolutionary  communism.  At  one  time  such
attire  was  very  fashionable  among  Party  officials,  from  the  local
chairmen  of  Machinery-Tractor  Stations  right  up  to  People's
Commissars,  for  it  was  symbolical  not  only  of  outward,  but  of  inward
devotion  to  the  leader.  For  a long  time  now  the  People's  Commissars
had  been  wearing  ordinary  European  clothes,  and  one  came
across  antiquated  garb  chiefly  in  remote  collective  farms.  I can
imagine  what  sort  of  impression  these  scarecrows  made  on  the
Germans;  they  were  exact  copies  of  the  Hitlerite  caricatures  of
bolsheviks.

It  was  not  long  before  these  over-zealous  Party  crusaders  them
selves  felt  -that  their  historical  costumes  were  hardly  suited  to  the
changed  conditions,  and  gradually  began  to  adapt  themselves  to
their  surroundings.  Later  still,  all  the  civilian  personnel  of  the  S.M.A.
were  dressed  in  accordance  with  the  latest  European  fashions,  and
even  with  a touch  of  elegance.  All  the  leading  officials,  especially
those  occupied  in  the  Control  Commission,  received  coupons  en
titling  them  to  'foreign  equipment'  corresponding  with  their
position.

I stood  at  a window,  talking  to  the  head  of  the  French  delegation,

General  Sergeant.  Our  conversation  was  on  quite  unimportant
subjects,  and  I prudently  tried  to  keep  it  concentrated  on  the  weather.
Prudence  was  always  advisable;  this  Frenchman  might  be  a
communist  at  heart,  or  in  all  innocence  he  might  repeat  our  conversation
to  someone,  and  in  the  end  it  would  find  its  way  ...  I knew  too  well

from  my  own  experience  how  thoroughly  our  secret  service  was
informed  of  all  that  went  on  among  the  Allies.

When  we  Soviet  officers  working  in  the  Control  Commission
discussed  our  impressions  some  time  later  I realized  why  we  were  all
cautioned  against  talking  with  foreigners.  A captain  remarked:

"All  these  stories  about  spies  are  only  in  order  to  make  us  keep  our
mouths  shut.  It's  to  prevent  our  giving  away  other  secrets."  He  said


138


no  more;  we  didn't  talk  about  those  secrets  even  to  each  other.

The  Control  Commission  session  began  punctually  at  ten  o'clock.
After  settling  the  details  of  the  agenda  relating  to  the  work  of
the  Economic  Directorate,  the  times  of  meeting,  and  the  rotation
of  chairmanship,  we  turned  to  drawing  up  the  agenda  for  the  next
meeting.  The  head  of  the  American  delegation,  who  was  chairman
at  this  first  meeting,  proposed  that  the  first  item  on  the  agenda
should  be:  'Working  out  of  basic  policy  for  the  economic
demilitarization  of  Germany.'

The  Potsdam  Conference  had  ended  the  previous  week;  at  the
conference  it  had  been  decided  to  demilitarize  Germany
economically,  so  that  restoration  of  German  military  power  would  be
impossible,  and  to  draw  up  a peacetime  economic  potential  for  the
country.  The  decision  was  remitted  to  the  Allied  Control  Commission
to  be  put  into  effect.

The  interpreters  now  translated  the  chairman's  phrase  into
Russian  as:  '.Working  out  the  policy  of  economic  demobilization.'
Another  of  those  borderline  cases  in  linguistics!  The  English  formula
had  used  the  word  'policy'.  The  interpreters  translated  this  literally
into  the  Russian  word  'politik',  although  the  English  word  had  a
much  wider  meaning,  and  the  Russian  phrase  for  'guiding  principles'
would  have  been  a more  satisfactory  translation.

At  the  word  'politik'  General  Shabalin  sprang  up  as  though  stung.

"What  'politik'?  All  the  political  questions  were  settled  at  the
Potsdam  Conference!"

The  American  chairman,  General  Draper,  agreed:  "Quite  correct,
they  were.  Our  task  is  simply  to  translate  the  decision  into  action,
and  so  we  have  to  lay  down  the  guiding  policy  . . ."

The  interpreters,  both  American  and  English,  again  translated
with  one  accord:  ".  . . 'politik'."

General  Shabalin  stuck  to  his  guns:  "There  must  be  nothing  about
politics.  That's  all  settled.  Please  don't  try  to  exert  pressure  on
me.

"But  it's  got  nothing  to  do  with  politics,"  the  interpreters  tried
to  reassure  him.  "The  word  is  'policy'."

"I  see  no  difference,"  the  general  objected.  "I  have  no  intention  of
revising  the  Potsdam  Conference.  We're  here  to  work,  not  to  hold
meetings."

That  was  the  beginning  of  the  first  hour-long  battle  round  the


139


oval  table.  Solely  and  simply  over  the  awkward  word  'policy',
which  General  Shabalin  was  not  prepared  to  see  in  the  agenda  or  in
the  minutes  of  the  meeting.

It  was  often  said  in  the  economic  spheres  of  the  S.M.A.  head
quarters  that  the  Kremlin  regarded  the  decisions  of  the  Potsdam
Conference  as  a great  victory  for  Soviet  diplomacy.  The  Moscow
instructions  emphasized  this  aspect  at  every  opportunity.  At  the
Potsdam  Conference  the  Soviet  diplomats  won  concessions  from
the  Western  Allies  to  an  extent  that  the  diplomats  themselves  had
not  expected.  Perhaps  this  was  due  to  the  intoxication  of  victory
and  an  honourable  desire  to  recompense  Russia  for  her  heroic
exertions  and  incredible  sacrifices.  And  perhaps  it  was  due  to  the
circumstance  that  two  new  Allied  representatives  took  part  in  the
conference,  and.  that  President  Truman  and  Mr.  Attlee  had  not  yet
got  to  the  bottom  of  the  methods  of  Soviet  diplomacy.

The  Potsdam  Agreement  practically  gave  the  Soviet  Union  the
right  of  disposal  of  Germany.  Its  terms  were  expressed  in  very  subtle
language,  and  they  were  open  to  various  constructions  later  on,
whenever  it  seemed  desirable.  The  task  of  the  S.M.A.  now  was  to
extract  full  value  from  the  advantages  won  by  Soviet  diplomacy.

"Nothing  of  politik  ! " General  Shabahn  defended  himself  like  a bear
threatened  with  a javelin.  And  in  all  probability  he  was  thinking:

'Do  you  want  to  send  me  to  Siberia?'  Once  more  the  old  reaction
of  even  the  highest  of  Soviet  officials,  not  to  do  anything  on  their  own
responsibility  and  risk.  One  reason  why  all  decisions  are  made  from
above.

Subsequently  I myself  saw  that  the  American  or  the  British
delegation  could  change  its  decisions  in  the  actual  course  of
negotiations.  But  the  Soviet  delegation  always  came  and  went  with
previously  formulated  decisions,  or  else  with  red  question  marks  on  the
appropriate  document,  which  the  general  kept  in  a red  document
case  always  under  his  hand.  At  the  Control  Council  he  acted  more  like
a messenger  than  an  active  partner.  A question  that  arose  in  the
course  of  discussion  was  never  decided  the  same  day,  it  was  only

discussed.  Then  the  general  would  return  to  his  office  and  make
direct  telephonic  contact  that  night  with  Moscow.  Usually  Mikoyan,
a member  of  the  Politbureau  and  plenipotentiary  extraordinary  for
Germany  under  the  Ministerial  Council  of  the  U.S.S.R.,  was  at  the
Moscow  end  of  the  line.  He  was  in  effect  the  Kremlin's  viceroy  for
Germany.  And  during  those  telephone  conversations  the  decisions
were  taken,  or  rather  the  orders  were  issued,  on  which  the  Allied


140


delegations  later  broke  their  teeth.

Even  at  that  first  meeting  with  the  Allies  one  could  not  help
noticing  a great  difference  between  them  and  us.  They  welcomed  us  as
joint  victors  and  sincere  allies  in  war  and  peace.  Each  of  their
delegations  approached  questions  from  the  national  aspect.  And  they
considered  that  there  could  be  no  conflict  of  national  interests  or
antagonisms  among  us  victor  powers,  neither  then  nor  in  the
immediate  future,  They  assumed  that  this  was  a simple  fact  that
must  be  as  clear  to  us  as  it  was  to  them.

We,  on  the  other  hand,  regarded  the  'Allies'  as  the  opposing  party,
as  enemies  with  whom  we  had  to  sit  at  the  one  table  only  for  tactical
reasons.  We  decided  questions  from  the  ideological  aspect.  The  Allies
believed  that  Marx  and  Lenin  were  dead.  But  now  the  shades  of  these
two  men  stood  behind  us  in  the  Control  Commission  conference  hall.
The  Allies  could  not  understand  that?  So  much  the  worse  for  them!
Generally  speaking,  the  members  of  the  delegations  not  only
represented  their  state  interests,  but  were  also  unusually  typical
representatives  of  their  respective  nations.  Of  course  this  doesn't
mean  that  Dimitry  Shabalin  smoked  the  coarse  Russian  Mahorka
tobacco  or  that  William  Draper  chewed  gum.  Not,  at  any  rate,
during  the  sessions.

The  American  delegation  was  headed  by  the  American  director
in  the  Economic  Directorate,  General  William  Draper:  a thin,
athletic  figure,  with  angular,  swarthy  features-a  lively  and
energetic  man.  When  he  laughed,  he  revealed  the  spotless  white  of
strong,  wolfish  teeth  beneath  his  black  moustache.  Better  not  put
your  finger  between  those  teeth!  He  set  the  tone  at  the  sessions,  even
when  he  was  not  in  the  chair.  He  had  an  abundance  of  the  healthy
energy  peculiar  to  young,  self-confident  nations.  I don't  know  how
many  millions  General  Draper  really  had  in  his  pocket,  I know  only
that  General  Shabalin  remarked  more  than  once:  "Ahl  A millionaire!

A shark!"  It  would  have  been  interesting  to  know  what  he  based  his
remark  on:  his  communist  beliefs  or  the  reports  of  our  secret  service.

The  head  of  the  British  delegation  and  the  British  director  of  the
Economic  Directorate  was  Sir  Percy  Mills.  A typical  Briton.  He  gave
off  the  smell  of  fog  and  Trafalgar  Square.  He  wore  a military  uniform
of  thick  cloth,  with  no  insignia  of  rank.  From  the  way  everybody
deferred  to  his  opinion  it  was  obvious  that  he  was  a recognized
authority  in  the  economic  field.  According  to  General  Shabalin
he  was  a director  of  the  large  British  firm  of  Metro-Vickers.  He  was
painfully  cleanshaven;  if  he  ever  thought  it  necessary  to  smile,  only
the  folds  around  his  mouth  came  into  action,  while  his  eyes  remained


141


fixed  on  his  documents  and  his  ears  listened  closely  to  his  numerous
advisers.

In  the  person  of  Sir  Percy  Mills,  Great  Britain  worked  hard,  but
always  paid  attention  to  the  voice  of  its  young  ally  and  victorious
rival,  America.

At  the  conference  table  of  the  Control  Commission  the  historical
changes  that  had  occurred  in  the  world  influence  of  the  various
great  powers  were  very  perceptible.  Great  Britain  had  played
out  her  role,  and  now,  with  a pride  born  of  self-confidence,  was
surrendering  her  place  to  the  younger  and  stronger.  As  befitted  a
gentleman  !

France  was  the  reflection  of  all  the  greatness  to  be  found  in
European  culture.  But  only  the  reflection.  Her  representatives  were
the  successors  to  Bonaparte  and  Voltaire,  the  contemporaries  of
Pierre  Petain  and  Jean-Paul  Sartre.  Existentialism.  How  to
keep  one's  head  above  water.  The  French  director  of  the  Economic
Directorate,  General  Sergent,  had  nothing  better  to  do  than  to
maneuver  as  tactfully  as  possible,  and  not  agree  too  completely
with  the  West,  nor  be  too  much  in  opposition  to  the  East.

The  great  Eastern  Ally  was  represented  by  General  Shabalin,
a man  who  had  a mortal  terror  of  the  word  'politik',  and  by  Major
Klimov,  who  simultaneously  performed  the  duties  of  secretary,
interpreter,  and  general  adviser.  The  Soviet  side  could  have  been
represented  just  as  successfully  by  one  man  to  act  as  a postman.

However,  in  those  days  I still  naively  believed  that  something  was
really  being  decided  in  those  meetings.  And,  although  we  were  armed
to  the  teeth  with  communist  theory,  I felt  really  uncomfortable  when
I noted  the  large  size  of  the  other  delegations  and  the  sort  of  men
who  composed  them.

'Nothing  new  in  the  West.'  The  Allies,  as  one  man,  clung  to  the
word  'policy',  while  for  three  hours  General  Shabalin  repeated:

149

"Nothing  of  politik  ...  At  the  Potsdam  Conference  " In

confirmation  of  his  views  he  took  a newspaper  from  his  document-case  and

pointed  to  a passage  underlined  in  red.  Then  his  fellow-members  in

the  commission  also  brought  out  newspapers  and  began  to  compare

the  texts.  Truly,  it  was  very  interesting  to  take  part  in  one  session  of

the  Control  Commission;  it  was  more  interesting  than  the  operetta.

But  to  take  part  in  them  week  after  week  was  dangerous:  one  might
easily  have  a nervous  breakdown.  Half  a day  spent  in  fighting  over
one  word  in  the  agenda  for  the  next  meeting!


142


The  members  of  the  other  delegations  looked  more  and  more
frequently  at  their  watches.  The  Western  European  stomach  is  used
to  punctuality.  At  last  even  General  Shabalin  lost  his  patience  and
he  officially  demanded:  "What  is  it  you  really  want  to  do  to  me:
violate  me?  Yes?"  The  interpreters  wondered  whether  they  had  heard
aright,  and  asked  irresolutely,  not  knowing  whether  to  regard  his
remark  as  a joke:  "Are  we  to  translate  that  literally?"

"Of  course,  literally,"  the  general  obstinately  replied.

Sir  Percy  Mills  tried  to  indicate  that  he  found  it  highly  amusing,
and  twisted  his  lips  into  a smile.  The  chairman  for  the  session,

General  Draper,  rose  and  said:  "I  propose  that  we  adjourn  the
meeting.  Let's  go  and  have  some  eats."  It  was  difficult  to  tell
whether  h~  really  was  hungry  or  whether  he  was  fed  up  with  Soviet
diplomacy.  Everybody  breathed  more  easily,  and  the  sitting  ended.

We  departed  as  victors.  We  had  won  a whole  week.  The  same
night  General  Shabalin  would  be  able  to  ask  Comrade  Mikoyan
whether  the  word  'politik  could  be  included  on  the  agenda  or  not.

While  we  were  holding  our  meeting,  the  Special  Committee  for
Dismantling,  and  the  Reparations  Department,  with  General  Zorin
at  its  head,  were  hard  at  work.  The  Allies  would  be  faced  with  an
accomplished  fact.  Okay!  In  the  last  resort  each  defends  his  own
interests.

The  Control  Commission  gave  in,  my  first  opportunity  to  get  to

know  our  Western  Allies  personally.  During  the  war  I had  come

across,  or  rather  seen,  many  Americans  and  British  in  Gorky,  and

later  in  Moscow.  But  I had  then  had  no  official  excuse  for  personal

contact  with  them,  and  without  the  special  permission  of  the

Commissariat  for  Internal  Affairs  even  the  most  harmless  acquaintance,

even  a conversation  with  a foreigner,  is  sheer  lunacy  in  the  Soviet

Union.  True,  there  is  no  open  interdiction,  but  every  Soviet

citizens  knows  exactly  what  unfortunate  consequences  are  entailed  by  such

thoughtless  behavior.  Give  a foreigner  a light  for  his  cigarette  in

the  street  and  you  are  hauled  immediately  before  the  Ministry  for

internal  Affairs  and  subjected  to  strict  interrogation.

best.  At  the  worst,  one  disappears  into  a Minvnudel  camp,  for

'spying',  and  thus  one  helps  to  fill  out  the  labour  reserve.

To  stop  all  contact  between  Soviet  people  and  foreigners,  the
Kremlin  spreads  the  story  that  all  foreigners  are  spies.  So  anybody
who  has  a contact  with  a foreigner  is  also  a spy.  It's  as  simple  as
that.


143


One  of  the  Soviet  government's  greatest  achievements  has
been  to  raise  lawlessness  to  a law,  with  all  the  paralyzing  fear  of
'authority'  that  follows  from  it.  Every  individual  lives  in  a state  of
anxiety.  The  Kremlin  exploits  this  mood  as  a highly  effective  means
of  training  and  guiding  the  masses.  Not  even  the  members  of  the
Politbureau  are  free  from  it.

Once,  after  one  of  the  usual  fruitless  debates  in  the  Control
Commission,  Sir  Percy  Mills  proposed  that  we  adjourn,  and  then
invited  the  members  of  the  other  delegations  to  lunch  with  him.
General  Shabalin  went  and  rode  with  his  British  colleague.  I had
received  no  instructions  whatever,  so  I got  into  the  general's  seat  in
our  car  and  ordered  Misha  to  drive  immediately  behind  the  one  in
which  our  chief  was  travelling.  I entered  Sir  Percy's  house  with
decidedly  mixed  feelings.  All  the  guests  left  their  hats  and  document
cases  on  a small  table  or  on  the  hallstand.  The  maid-servant  took  my
cap  from  me,  and  held  out  her  hand  to  take  my  document-case.  I
was  at  a loss  to  know  what  to  do;  it  was  the  general's  red  case  that

I was  carrying.  It  had  nothing  of  importance  in  it:  just  the  minutes
of  the  last  sitting,  which  on  this  occasion  had  been  sent  to  us  by
the  British.  I couldn't  leave  the  case  in  the  car,  but  to  leave  it  on
the  hall  table  with  the  others  would  have  been  a crime  against  the
State.  Yet  to  take  it  with  me  looked  rather  silly,
awkward  situation

General  Shabalin  himself,  rescused  me  from  my  awkward  situation.
He  came  across  to  me  and  said  quietly:

' What  are  you  doing  here,  Major?  Go  and  wait  for  me  in  the  car."

I felt  relieved,  went  out,  got  into  our  car,  and  lit  a cigarette.

A few  minutes  later  a British  captain,  Sir  Percy  Mills'  adjutant,  came
to  the  door  and  invited  me  in  again.  I tried  to  get  out  of  it  by  saying
I wasn't  hungry,  but  he  stared  at  me  in  such  bewilderment  that
there  was  nothing  to  be  done  but  follow  him.  As  I entered  the  hall
where  the  guests  were  waiting  the  general  gave  me  a sidelong  look,
but  said  nothing.  Later  it  transpired  that  our  host  had  asked  his
permission  to  send  the  adjutant  for  me.  The  British  are  justly  famous
as  the  most  tactful  people  in  the  world.

I gave  the  document-case  to  the  general.  Of  all  the  idiotic
possibilities  that  seemed  the  most  harmless.  Let  him  feel  a fool  !

I stood  at  a great  Venetian  window  looking  out  on  to  the  garden,
and  talked  to  Brigadier  Bader.  The  brigadier  was  a real  colonial
wolf.  Sandy,  sunbleached  hair  and  eyebrows,  grey,  lively  eyes.


144


behind  bleached  eyelashes,  a complexion  dry  with  the  tropical  sun.
According  to  General  Shabalin's  amiable  description  he  was  nothing
less  than  one  of  the  cleverest  of  international  spies.  And  now  I had
the  honour  of  chatting  with  this  distinguished  person.  We  talked  in
a mixture  of  English  and  German.

"How  do  you  like  being  in  Germany?"  he  asked.

"Oh,  not  bad!"  I answered.

"Everything's  kaput,"  lie  went  on.

"Oh  yes,  ganz  kaput,"  I agreed.

After  disposing  of  German  problems  we  turned  to  others.  The
summer  of  1945  was  unusually  hot,  and  I asked:

"After  the  English  climate,  don't  you  find  it  very  hot  here?"

"Oh  no,  I'm  used  to  the  heat,"  he  smiled.  "I've  spent  many  years
in  the  colonies,  in  Africa  and  India."

I carefully  avoided  addressing  my  companion  directly.  What
form  of  address  was  I to  use?  'Herr'?  That  was  rather  awkward.  To
our  ears  'mister'  sounds  contemptuous.  'Comrade'?  No,  for  the  time
being  I kept  off  that  word.

Just  then  I noticed  General  Shabalin's  eyes  fixed  on  me.  In  all
probability  my  chief  was  afraid  the  brigadier  was  already  enrolling
me  as  his  agent.  At  that  very  moment  a maid  came  up  to  us  with  a
tray.  Bader  took  one  of  the  small  glasses  of  colourless  fluid,  raised
it  to  eye-level,  and  invited  me  to  help  myself.  I put  the  glass  to  my
lips,  then  set  it  down  on  the  window-sill.  While  the  brigadier  had
his  eyes  turned  away  for  a second  I threw  the  whiskey  out  of  the
window.  Stupid,  I know,  but  it  was  the  only  thing  to  be  done.  And  the
worst  of  it  was  that  the  general  would  never  believe  I had  performed
such  a patriotic  act.  Whether  flung  down  my  throat  or  out  of  the
window,  that  whiskey  would  be  put  to  the  debit  side  of  my  personal
account.

An  air  of  open  cordiality  and  hospitality  reigned  in  the  room  where
we  were  waiting  for  Sir  Percy  Mills  to  take  us  to  lunch.  This  inter
national  assembly  felt  no  constraint  in  face  of  that  variety  of
uniforms  and  babel  of  tongues.  Only  the  Soviet  delegate  Kurmashev,
head  of  the  S.M.A.  Fuel  and  Power  Department,  sat  alone  in  his
easy  chair,  one  leg  crossed  over  the  other,  and  apparently  suffering
torments.  He  felt  more  uncomfortable  than  a missionary  among


145


cannibals;  he  wiped  the  sweat  from  his  forehead  and  looked  again
and  again  at  the  clock.  When  we  were  invited  to  the  dining  room  he
clearly  heaved  a sigh  of  relief.  I am  sure  he  would  have  been  only
too  glad  to  talk  to  his  neighbor,  even  if  he  had  had  to  resort  to  sign
language;  he  would  have  been  delighted  to  laugh  and  toss  off  a
couple  of  whiskies.  But  he  was  not  a man  like  other  men.  He  was
the  representative,  and  the  slave,  of  communist  philosophy.

At  table  General  Shabalin  sat  on  the  right  hand  of  his  host,  who
conversed  with  him  through  an  interpreter.  His  uniform  gave  him
confidence  and  certainly  more  sureness  than  was  possessed  by
Kurmashev,  who  was  a civilian.  But  in  his  civilian  clothes  Kurmashev
tried  to  show  that  he  was  completely  indifferent  to  all  that  went  on
around  him,  and  tackled  his  food  with  the  utmost  ferocity.  It  was
no  easy  task  to  fill  your  mouth  so  full  that  you  couldn't  talk  with
your  neighbors.

My  chief  smiled  formally  and  forced  out  a laugh  at  Sir  Percy's
jokes.  But  for  his  part  he  made  no  attempt  to  keep  the  conversation
going.  No  wonder  the  British  think  it  difficult  to  talk  to  Russians
not  only  at  the  conference,  but  even  at  the  dining  table.  At  one
time  we  contemptuously  called  the  English  narrow-minded;  now  the
boot  is  on  the  other  foot.

I was  sitting  at  the  far  end  of  the  table,  between  Brigadier  Bader
and  the  British  adjutant.  As  I chanced  to  look  up  from  my  plate  I
met  General  Shabalin's  eyes  gazing  at  me  keenly.  The  longer  the
lunch  continued  the  more  the  general  eased  his  bolshevik  armour
plate,  and  finally  he  went  so  far  as  to  propose  a toast  to  our  host.

But  meanwhile  he  gave  me  frequent  interrogative  glances.

Of  course  I knew  the  general  was  in  duty  bound  to  keep  an  eye  on
me.  But  I noticed  that  he  was  not  so  much  watching  me  as  attempt
ing  to  decide  whether  I was  watching  him.  He  was  firmly  convinced
that  I had  been  set  to  watch  over  him.  Kurmashev  was  afraid  of
the  general,  the  general  was  on  his  guard  against  me,  I distrusted
myself.  The  higher  one  climbs  in  the  Soviet  hierarchy,  the  more  one
is  gripped  by  this  constant  fear  and  distrust.  And  the  one  who
suffers  most  of  all  from  this  remarkable  system  is  its  creator.  When
one  observed  how  Soviet  higher  officials  suffered  from  fear  and
distrust  one  lost  all  desire  to  make  a Soviet  career.  General  Shabalin
had  been  unquestionably  a much  happier  man  when  he  was  minding
sheep  or  tilling  the  soil.

After  lunch  we  all  gathered  again  in  the  hall.  Brigadier  Bader
offered  me  a thick  cigar  with  a gold  band,  and  wrapped  in  cellophane.


146


I turned  it  over  curiously  in  my  fingers.  A real  Havanal  Hitherto  I
had  known  them  only  from  caricatures,  in  which  millionaires  always
had  them  stuck  between  their  teeth.  With  the  air  of  an  experienced~d
cigar-smoker  I tried  to  bite  off  the  tip,  but  that  damned  cigar  was
tough.  I got  a mouthful  of  bitter  leaf,  and  to  make  matters  worse  I
couldn't  spit  it  out.

"How  did  you  like  the  food?"  the  brigadier  asked  genially.

"Oh,  very  good!"  I answered  as  genially,  carefully  blowing  the
bluish  smoke  through  my  nose.

At  that  moment  General  Shabalin  beckoned  to  me.  I asked  the
brigadier's  pardon,  prudently  stuck  the  cigar  in  a flower-pot,  and
followed  my  chief.  We  went  out  into  the  garden,  as  though  we  wanted
a breath  of  fresh  air.

"What  have  you  been  talking  about  with  that...  ?"  the  general
muttered,  avoiding  mention  of  any  name.

"About  the  weather,  Comrade  General."

"Hm  ...  hm.  . . ."  Shabalin  rubbed  his  nose  with  the  knuckle  of
his  forefinger,  a trick  of  his  during  conversations  of  a semi-official
nature.  Then  he  unexpectedly  changed  his  tone:

"I  think  there's  nothing  more  for  you  to  do  here.  Take  a day  off.

Have  my  car  and  go  for  a drive  through  Berlin.  Take  a look  at  the
girls

He  made  a very  frivolous  remark,  and  smiled  forcedly.  I listened
closely  as  I walked  with  him  about  the  garden.  What  did  all  this
condescension  and  thought  for  me  mean?

"Call  up  Kuznetsov  this  evening  and  tell  him  I shall  go  straight
home,"  was  the  general's  final  word  as  he  went  up  the  verandah
steps.

So  he  had  no  intention  of  returning  to  the  office  today.  There  an
the  ordinary  routine  was  waiting  for  him,  to  keep  him  as  a rule  tin
three  in  the  morning.  That  was  not  compulsory,  it  was  his  duty  as  a
bolshevik.  He  must  be  around  in  case  the  'master'  called  him  up  in

the  middle  of  the  night.  But  now,  after  a very  good  lunch  and  a
few  glasses  of  wine,  he  felt  the  need  to  be  a man  like  other  men  for
a few  hours  at  least.  The  comfort  of  the  villa  and  the  open  cordiality
of  the  company  had  had  its  effect  even  on  the  old  Party  wolf  Just


147


for  once  he  felt  impelled  to  throw  off  the  mask  of  an  iron  bolshevik,
to  laugh  aloud  and  smack  his  colleagues  on  the  shoulders,  to  be  a
man,  not  a Party  ticket.  And  he  thought  of  me  as  the  eye  and  ear
of  the  Party.  So  he  was  dismissing  me  on  the  pretext  of  being  kind
to  me.

I returned  to  the  house,  picked  up  my  cap  as  unobtrusively  as
possible,  and  went  out.  Misha  was  dozing  at  the  wheel.

"Ah,  Comrade  Major!"  He  gave  a deep  sigh  as  I opened  the  door.
"After  a lunch  like  that,  what  man  wouldn't  like  to  stretch  himself
out  on  the  grass  and  sleep  for  an  hour  or  two  !"

"Why,  have  you  had  some  lunch  too?"  I asked  in  surprise.

"What  do  you  think?  I've  eaten  like  a prince."

"Where?"

"Why,  here.  A special  table  was  laid  for  us.  Like  in  the  fairy  story.

And  do  you  know  what,  Comrade  Major?"  He  looked  sidelong  at
me,  with  all  the  air  of  a conspirator.  "Even  our  general  doesn't
have  such  good  grub  as  I've  had  today."

After  seeing  Sir  Percy  Mills'  house,  I could  not  help  comparing
it  with  General  Shabalin's  flat.  In  the  Control  Commission  the  habit
developed  for  the  directors  to  take  turns  in  inviting  their  colleagues
home.  The  first  time  it  was  Shabalin's  turn  to  issue  the  invitations
he  ignored  the  habit,  as  though  he  had  forgotten  it.  The  real
reason  was  that  he  had  no  place  to  which  he  could  invite  the
foreigners.

Of  course  he  could  have  requisitioned  and  furnished  a house  in
conformity  with  his  rank.  But  he  could  not  bring  himself  to  do  this
on  his  own  responsibility,  while  the  head  of  the  Administrative
Department,  General  Devidov,  simply  would  not  do  it  for  him,
since  under  the  army  regulations  such  luxury  was  incompatible  with
the  position  of  Soviet  generals.  The  authorities  had  got  to  the  point
of  providing  special  'foreign  equipment',  but  nobody  had  yet  thought
of  suitable  residences.  Shabalin  had  exchanged  his  small  house  for
a five-roomed  apartment  in  the  house  where  most  of  the  workers  in
the  Administration  for  Economy  were  accommodated.  Nikolai,  his
orderly,  and  Misha,  the  chauffeur,  had  collected  furniture  and  all
sorts  of  lumber  from  all  over  the  district  for  the  apartment,  but  it


148


looked  more  like  a thieves'  kitchen  than  a general's  home.  It  was
impossible  to  receive  foreign  guests  there:  even  Shabalin  was
conscious  of  that.

Once  more,  the  contradiction  between  bolshevik  theory  and
bolshevik  practice.  The  Kremlin  aristocracy  had  long  since
discarded  the  proletarian  morals  they  still  preached,  and  lived  in  a
luxury  that  not  every  capitalist  could  afford.  They  could  do  so
without  embarrassment  because  their  personal  lives  were  secured
from  the  people's  eyes  by  several  walls.  The  smaller  leaders  tended
to  follow  the  same  course.  The  Party  aristocracy,  men  like  Shabalin,
lived  a double  life;  in  words  they  were  ideal  bolsheviks,  but  in
reality  they  trampled  on  the  ideals  they  themselves  preached.  It  was
not  easy  to  reconcile  these  two  things.  It  all  had  to  be  done  secretly,
prudently,  one  had  continually  to  be  on  guard.  Here  in  Germany
there  was  no  Kremlin  and  no  area  forbidden  to  the  public,  here
everything  was  comparatively  open.  And  supposing  the  lords  of
the  Kremlin  started  to  shout!

At  first  General  Shabalin  had  taken  his  meals  in  the  canteen  of
the  Soviet  Military  Council-in  other  words,  in  the  generals'
casino.  But  now  Dusia,  his  illegal  maidservant,  was  taking  the  car
to  the  canteen  three  times  a day  and  bringing  the  food  home.  Yet
even  in  such  circumstances  the  general  could  not  invite  any  guests
to  his  apartment,  and  visitors,  especially  foreigners,  were  not  allowed
in  the  canteen.

Even  here,  in  occupied  Germany,  where  we  were  not  restricted
by  problems  of  living  space  or  rationing,  and  where  we  could  literally
pick  up  everything  we  liked,  even  here  we  kept  to  our  Soviet  way
of  life.

A little  later  the  S.M.A.  staff  accommodated  itself  to
circumstances  and  solved  the  problem  in  the  old  Potiomkin  fashion.'  A
special  club  was  set  up,  in  which  the  leading  officials  of  the  S.M.A.
could  hold  receptions  for  their  western  colleagues.  In  each  separate
case  an  exact  list  of  the  proposed  guests  had  to  be  sent  in  advance  to
the  S.M.A.  liaison  service,  to  be  carefully  checked  by  the  Narcom
vnudel,  and  to  be  countersigned  by  the  S.M.A.  chief  of  staff.  Of  course
such  a simple  form  of  invitation  as  that  of  Sir  Percy  Mills-"come
and  have  lunch  with  me,  gentlemen",  and  including  even  the
chauffeurs-was  quite  impossible  in  such  circumstances.

1 1 Prince  Gregory  Potiomkin,  favorite  of  Empress  Catharine,  who  organized
show-places  and  even  'model  villages'  to  impress  the  Empress.-Tr.

During  those  early  meetings  with  the  Western  Allies  I was


149


seriously  afraid  that  I would  be  asked  too  many  questions  that  I
could  not,  or  rather  that  I dared  not,  answer.  But  the  longer  I
worked  in  the  Control  Commission  the  less  was  I able  to  understand
their  behavior.  The  representatives  of  the  democratic  world  not  only
made  no  attempt  to  ask  us  political  questions,  as  I had  thought  was
simply  bound  to  happen  when  representatives  of  completely  opposed
state  systems  came  together,  but  they  displayed  a perfectly  in
comprehensible  indifference  to  the  subject.

At  first  I thought  this  was  out  of  tactfulness.  But  then  I felt  sure
it  must  be  due  to  something  else.  The  average  western  man  was  far
less  interested  in  politics  and  all  that  goes  with  it  than  the  average
Soviet  man.  The  men  of  the  West  were  much  more  interested  in  the
number  of  -bottles  of  champagne  that  had  been  drunk  at  a diplomatic
reception  in  the  Kremlin,  and  in  the  evening  gown  Madame  Molotov
had  worn  on  the  occasion.  This  was  in  the  best  case,  but  usually
they  confined  their  interests  to  sport  and  the  beautiful  girls  on  the
covers  of  magazines.  To  any  man  living  in  normal  conditions  this
seemed  perfectly  natural.  If  the  Soviet  men  could  have  chosen  they
would  have  done  the  same.

At  that  stage  the  West  had  no  idea  of  the  extraordinary  dichotomy
of  Soviet  existence.  In  thirty  years  we  have  changed  fundamentally,
to  a certain  extent  we  are  Sovietized.  But  while  becoming  Sovietized
we  have  simultaneously  become  immunized  against  communism.

The  West  has  no  suspicion  of  this.  It  is  with  good  reason  that  the
Politbureau  has  begun  to  underpin  the  Soviet  edifice  with  the  old
national  foundations,  which  proved  themselves  so  well  during  the
war.  After  the  war  the  process  of  giving  the  rotting  state  organism  a
blood  transfusion  was  continued.  The  method  will  doubtless  meet
with  success  for  a time;  it  will  confuse  some  and  arouse  illusory
hopes  in  others.  But  the  Kremlin's  plans  will  not  be  modified  to  any
extent.

A small  but  characteristic  example:  in  occupied  Germany  all  the
Russian  soldiers  and  officers  suddenly  began  to  use  the  word
'Rossiia'-'Russia'.  The  movement  was  quite  spontaneous.  Some-
times out  of  habit  one  would  let  'U.S.S.R.'  slip  out;  but  it  was
corrected  to  'Rossiia'  at  once.  We  ourselves  were  surprised  at  this

fact,  but  it  was  so.  Yet  for  twenty-five  years  anyone  who  used  the
word  'Rossiia'  was  liable  to  be  accused  of  chauvinism,  and  quite
possibly  to  be  charged  under  the  corresponding  article  of  the  Nar
comvnudel  code.  One  could  not  help  noticing  this  seemingly  small
detail  when  one  found  the  word  'Rossiia'  coming  to  every  soldier's


150


lips.  Unconsciously  he  was  emphasizing  the  difference  between  the
concepts  'Soviet'  and  'Russian'.  As  though  in  spite,  the  foreign  press
confused  these  concepts.  What  we  ourselves  couldn't  stand  they
called  'Russian';  all  that  was  dear  and  precious  to  us  they  described
as  'Soviet'.  The  Soviet  people  neither  wish  to  nor  do  they  need  to
teach  foreigners  their  political  ABC.  Why  risk  one's  head  simply  to
satisfy  a stranger's. idle  curiosity

How  constrained  Soviet  people  feel  in  intercourse  with  'foreigners'
is  shown  by  the  following  incident.

One  day,  during  an  interval  in  the  sittings  of  the  Control  Com
mission,  several  members  of  various  delegations  were  discussing
what  they  would  like  to  do  on  the  following  Sunday.  Kozlov,  the
chairman  of  the  Soviet  delegation  in  the  Industrial  Committee,
let  slip  the  unwise  admission  that  he  was  going  hunting  with  a
group  of  colleagues.  Kozlov's  foreign  colleagues  were  enthusiastic
at  the  idea  of  spending  a Sunday  all  together,  and  said  they  would
gladly  join  the  party.  Kozlov  had  to  behave  as  though  he  were
delighted  beyond  measure.

On  the  Sunday  the  hunters  set  out  in  several  cars.  During  the
journey  the  Soviet  members  of  the  party  racked  their  brains  over
the  problem  of  how  to  give  their  Allies  the  slip.  But  the  need  to
show  some  courtesy,  plus  the  excellence  of  the  western  cars,  gave
Kozlov  no  chance  of  getting  away  from  his  unwanted  friends.  At  the
rendezvous  the  Allies  got  out  and  lay  about  on  the  grass,  with  the
idea  of  having  a little  snack  and  a little  chat.  To  avoid  this,  Kozlov
and  the  other  Russians  slipped  off  through  the  bushes,  and  wandered
about  the  forest  all  day,  cursing  Fate  for  pushing  such  politically
unreliable  companions  on  to  them.

In  order  to  secure  himself  against  the  possibility  of  being
reprimanded,  Kozlov  spent  all  the  following  week  cursing  and
swearing  to  other  members  of  the  Administration  for  Economy
about  his  bad  luck,  and  carefully  emphasizing  his  own  'vigilant'
conduct.

We  could  not  enter  freely  into  intercourse  with  the  West.  But
what  was  the  West  doing  to  obtain  information  on  Soviet  problems?

I had  several  opportunities  of  observing  how  the  West  obtained
knowledge  of  Soviet  Russia  from  'reliable  and  competent'  sources.

Those  sources  were  usually  journalists.  The  Americans  and  British
journalists  went  to  great  trouble  to  get  together  with  their  Soviet


151


colleagues,  for  they  were  convinced  that  these  colleagues  could
and  would  answer  their  questions  exhaustively  and  truthfully.

Naive  fellows  ! One  can  no  more  expect  truth  from  a Soviet  journalist
than  chastity  from  a prostitute.  The  American  journalists  in  Berlin
tried  hard  to  get  together  with  their  Soviet  brothers,  free  of
constraint.  But  the  Soviet  journalists  did  their  best  to  avoid  any  such
meeting.  Finally  it  had  to  be  arranged:  they  had  to  invite  the
foreigners  to  their  Press  Club.  It  was  at  least  a step  forward  that  the
Americans  took  the  opportunity  to  ask  questions  which  even  the
very  adroit  Soviet  journalists  could  not  easily  answer.  All  they  could
do  was  keep  their  mouths  shut.  It  was  also  very  good  that  the
Americans  gradually  realized  the  true  meaning  of  'Narcomvjaudel';  they
thought  their  Soviet  colleagues  were  victims  of  the  Na-rcomvnudel
and  were  ringed  about  with  spies,  and  that  a dictaphone  was  built
into  every  desk.  Of  course  it  would  have  been  even  more  sound
to  assume  that  their  hosts  were  themselves  Narcornvnudel  agents.  My
experiences  in  the  college  had  taught  me  that  all  the  Soviet  Union's
foreign  correspondents  were  co-worker, 4 of  that  organization.

The  Americans  took  their  Soviet  colleagues'  silent  reserve  as
indicating  their  anxiety.  This  was  pretty  near,  but  not  quite,  the
truth.  Once  the  Americans  even  raised  the  subject  of  the  'Soul  of
the  Soviet  Man',  but  they  made  the  mistake  of  discussing  the  soul
as  such.  The  Soviet  soul  is  a function  of  the  Soviet  reality,  it  cannot
be  analysed  in  isolation  from  its  milieu.

Our  work  in  the  Control  Commission  was  very  instructive.  From
the  very  first  sittings  I realized  that  the  widely  held  view  that  a
diplomat's  life  is  easy  and  carefree  was  false.  In  reality  it  is  a
devilishly  hard,  or  rather  a tedious,  occupation.  One  needs  to  have
the  hide  of  a hippopotamus,  the  sensitiveness  of  an  antelope,
nerves  of  manila  rope  and  the  endurance  of  a hunter.  An  English
saying  has  it  that  it  is  the  highest  achievement  of  good  manners  to
be  bored  to  death  without  showing  it.  Now  General  Shabalin  gave  his
colleagues  extensive  opportunities  to  demonstrate  the  truth  of  this
remark.  It  was  astonishing  to  see  how  earnestly  earnest  people
could  struggle  for  hours  and  days  on  end  with  an  insoluble  problem
before  they  would  admit  that  it  was  insoluble  !

In  selecting  their  diplomats  the  British  act  on  the  principle  that
the  least  suitable  of  all  candidates  is  one  who  is  energetic  and  stupid;
one  who  is  energetic  and  clever  is  not  very  suitable,  and  the  most
suitable  of  all  is  a man  who  is  clever  and  passive.  The  British  prefer
to  be  slow  in  drawing  the  right  conclusion,  and  they  fear  nothing
more  than  precipitate,  unsound  decisions.

This  same  rule  applies  to  Soviet  diplomats,  only  in  reverse.  The


152


ideal  Soviet  diplomat  must  be  exceptionally  energetic  and  exception
ally  stupid.  He  needs  no  intelligence,  as  he  may  not  take  any
independent  decisions  in  any  case.  On  the  other  hand,  energy  is  a quality
needed  by  every  commercial  traveler,  whether  it  is  razor  blades  he
is  trying  to  sell,  or  his  master's  policy.  General  Shabalin  was  an  out
standing  example  of  this  type  of  Soviet  diplomat.  For  that  matter,
all  Soviet  diplomats  are  distinguished  by  their  enormous  activity.

The  Kremlin  can  be  charged  with  anything  rather  than  passivity.

Our  first  encounters  in  the  Control  Commission  were  quite

educative.  Despite  my  sceptical  attitude  to  the  policy  of  the

western  powers,  I could  not  help  reaching  the  conviction  that  they

were  genuinely  anxious  to  work  together  with  us  for  the  solution  of

post-war  problems.  The  creation  of  the  United  Nations  Organization

testified  to  the  western  democracies'  desire  to  secure  peace  to  the

world.  Outwardly,  we,  too,  gave  out  that  we  were  interested  in

the  same  thing  and  wanted  to  take  the  same  road.  But  the  very  first

practical  measures  proposed  indicated  that  the  opposite  was  the

truth.  Our  readiness  for  collaboration  on  the  problem  of  world

peace  was  nothing  but  a tactical  maneuver  with  the  object  of

maintaining  the  democratic  mask,  winning  time  for  the

reorganization  of  our  forces,  and  exploiting  the  democratic  platforms  in  order

to  sabotage  world  public  opinion.  The  very  first  sittings  of  the

Control  Commission  opened  my  eyes  to  all  this.

I recalled  Anna  Petrovna's  remark  which  had  so  astounded  me
when  I was  in  Moscow.  From  her  words  I could  only  deduce  that
the  Kremlin  was  thinking  of  active  operations  for  the  Soviet  fighting
forces  in  the  post-war  period.  Yet  it  seemed  absurd  to  think
of  any  kind  of  war  plans  when  we  had  only  just  ended  terrible
battles,  and  all  the  world  wished  for  nothing  more  urgently  and
passionately  than  peace.  Now,  after  those  first  sittings  of  the  Control
Commission  it  was  clear,  to  me  at  least,  who  was  neither  diplomat
nor  politician,  that  the  Kremlin  had  not  the  slightest  desire  to
collaborate  with  the  democratic  West.

The  representatives  of  the  western  democracies  racked  their
brains  to  find  an  explanation  for  their  eastern  ally's  extraordinary
conduct.  They  sought  persistently  for  a modus  vivendi  with  the
Kremlin.  They  sought  a key  to  the  enigma  of  the  soul  of  the  East,
they  turned  over  the  pages  of  the  historical  tomes;  but  it  never
occurred  to  them  to  study  the  million-copy  editions  of  Lenin's  and
Stalin's  works.  They  attached  too  much  importance  to  the
dissolution  of  the  Comintern.  They  are  not  acquainted  with  the  winged
words  by  which  the  Soviet  leaders  justify  their  every  deviation  from
the  Party  general  line:  "A  temporary  deviation  is  completely


153


justified  if  it  is  necessary  for  reorganization  and  the  accumulation  of
new  strength  for  the  next  advance."  The  inflexible  general  line  can
wind  like  an  adder.


154


CHAPTER  EIGHT
The  Fruits  of  Victory

The  B.M.W.  car  works  in  Eisenach  was  one  of  the  first  large
industrial  plants  in  the  Soviet  zone  to  receive  the  S.M.A.'s  per
mission  to  start  up  production  again.  It  at  once  began  to  work
at  high  pressure,  turning  out  cars  for  reparations  deliveries  and
for  the  internal  needs  of  the  S.M.A.  The  new  car  park  at  Karls
horst  consisted  exclusively  of  B.M.W.  machines.  In  addition,
heavy  motor-cycles  were  supplied  for  the  Soviet  occupation
forces.

The  Potsdam  Conference  had  made  a number  of  decisions
concerning  the  demilitarization  of  Germany,  and,  with  the  active
participation  of  General  Shabalin,  the  Allied  Control  Commission
drew  up  regulations  strictly  forbidding  German  industry  to  produce
any  kind  of  military  or  para-military  material.  Meanwhile,  the  same
General  Shabalin  placed  definite  orders  with  the  B.M.W.  works  for
the  delivery  of  military  motor-cycles.  But  of  course  motor-cycles
are  only  small  items.

The  representatives  of  B.M.W.  Eisenach  managed  to  get  their
agreement  with  the  S.M.A.  at  Karlshorst  settled  unusually  quickly;
other  firms  offering  their  products  against  the  reparations  account
hung  about  the  place  for  days  and  weeks  on  end  before  they  got
any  satisfactory  answer.  But  the  B.M.W.  board  were  more  than
usually  resourceful  in  their  methods.

A few  days  after  Shabalin  had  signed  the  licence  for  the  Eisenach
firm  to  start  up,  I was  looking  through  his  morning  post.  Among
other  items  I noticed  a B.M.W.  account  for  some  7,400  marks,
debited  to  Shabalin,  and  relating  to  payment  for  a car  'which  you
have  received  through  our  representative'.  The  account  was
stamped  'paid  in  full'.  I threw  Kuznetsov  an  interrogative  glance,
but  he  pretended  to  know  nothing  about  the  matter.

Next  day,  as  I was  crossing  the  yard  of  the  house  where  Shabalin
had  his  apartment,  I saw  Misha  at  the  door  of  the  garage.  He  was
polishing  a brand-new  car,  so  new  that  it  was  not  yet  registered,
shining  in  splendor  in  the  dark  garage.

"Whose  car  is  that?"  I asked  in  amazement,  knowing  that  the
general  had  no  car  like  it.

"Ah,  you'll  see!"  Misha  answered  evasively,  quite  unlike  his  usual
garrulous  sell


155


When  I noticed  the  checkered  marque  of  the  B.M.W.  firm  on  the
radiator  I realized  what  had  happened.  The  board  had  made  the
general  a little  'present'.  The  7,400  Reichsmarks  were  a fictitious
purchase  price.  And  the  general  had  ordered  his  adjutant  and
chauffeur  to  keep  their  mouths  shut,  just  in  case.

Already  during  the  advance  into  Germany  General  Shabalin
had  'organized'  two  cars,  and  with  Iffisha's  help  had  sent  them  back
home,  together  with  three  lorries  loaded  with  'trophies'.  In  Berlin
he  made  use  only  of  the  two  service  cars  at  his  disposal,  and  did  not
make  a single  journey  with  his  new  B.M.W.  Shortly  afterwards  Misha
dispatched  the  B.M.W.  also  to  Russia,  together  with  two  more
lorries.  Naturally,  not  against  reconstruction  or  reparations
accounts,  but  strictly  privately,  to  the  general's  home  address.  So
now  he  had  three  private  and  two  service  cars.  He  exploited  the
service  machines,  and  spared  his  own,  shamefacedly  keeping  them
quiet.  In  this  respect  the  general  was  as  thrifty  as  a usurer.

At  first  it  did  not  occur  to  me  to  provide  myself  with  a car.  But
later,  when  I saw  how  others  were  adapting  themselves  to  local
conditions,  I thought  it  wouldn't  be  a bad  idea.  It  was  easy  enough
to  buy  one,  but  it  was  much  more  difficult  to  get  'permission  to
possess  a private  car'.  Such  permission  was  issued  by  the  head  of
the  S.M.A.  Administrative  Department,  General  Demidov.  General
Demidov  was  subordinate  in  rank  to  General  Shabalin,  so  I decided
to  sound  Shabalin  first.  If  he  agreed,  all  he  had  to  do  was  to  phone
up  Demidov  and  the  matter  would  be  settled.  I wrote  out  the
requisite  application  and  laid  it  before  the  general  at  the  close  of  my
usual  service  report,

"Hm!  What  do  you  want  a private  car  for?"  the  economic
dictator  of  Germany  asked,  rubbing  his  nose  with  his  finger  knuckle,
as  was  his  habit.

The  Soviet  leaders  take  good  care  to  see  that  the  privileges  they
themselves  enjoy  should  not  be  too  easily  acquired  by  others.

Even  if  an  American,  even  if  General  Draper  himself,  applied
personally  to  Shabalin,  he  would  decide  that  the  applicant  had
'No  need  whatever  of  a car'.

"Wait  a little  longer.  At  the  moment  I haven't  time  to  deal  with
it,"  he  said  as  he  handed  back  the  application.

I knew  it  would  get  more  and  more  difficult  to  obtain  the  requisite
permission.  But  I also  knew  that  no  situation  is  insoluble;  at  the
worst  it  was  simply  that  one  did  not  find  the  solution.  'You  must
howl  with  the  wolves'is  one  of  the  chief  commandments  of  Soviet  life.


156


I had  a strong  suspicion  that  the  general's  refusal  was  due  only  to  his
caution.  He  did  not  wish  to  run  the  risk  of  being  charged  with  lack
of  bolshevik  vigilance  in  allowing  his  subordinates  to  grow
accustomed  to  'capitalist  toys'.  He  may  have  had  that  same  feeling  when
he  'organized'  his  own  trophies,  but  the  un-communist  vestiges  of
desire  for  personal  gain  had  overcome  his  fear.  I decided  to  approach
the  question  from  a different  angle.

"Do  you  give  me  permission  to  apply  to  General  Demidov,

Comrade  General?"  I asked  in  a casual  manner.

"Why  not?  Of  course  you  can,"  he  readily  answered.

So  my  assumption  was  confirmed.  The  general  was  not  prepared
to  give  his  signature,  but  he  had  no  objection  to  someone  else
taking  the  responsibility.

General  Demidov  knew  quite  well  that  I was  one  of  General
Shabalin's  personal  staff.  In  approaching  him  I could  exploit
the  element  of  surprise.  The  next  day,  with  a self-confident  air  I
laid  my  application  on  the  desk  of  the  head  of  the  Administrative
Department.  "By  General  Shabalin's  permission,"  I said  as  I
saluted.

Demidov  read  the  application,  assuming  that  it  had  already  been
sanctioned  by  Shabalin.  In  such  circumstances  a refusal  would
seem  like  opposition  to  a superior  officer's  order.

"But  aren't  four  cylinders  enough  for  you?"  He  knitted  his  brow
as  he  looked  through  the  car  documents.  "Six  cylinders  are  for
bidden  to  private  individuals."

Demidov  was  well  known  as  capable  of  haggling-  all  day  with  the
utmost  fervour  over  ten  litres  of  petrol,  though  he  had  thousands  of
tons  of  it  in  store.  In  order  to  get  the  illegal  extra  two  cylinders
I invited  him  cheerfully:. "Then  ring  up  General  Shabalin,  Comrade

General."  I knew  Demidov  would  never  do  anything  so  stupid.  And,
in  any  case,  Shabalin  had  gone  out,  and  was  unobtainable.

"Oh  well"  Demidov  sighed  as  though  he  were  committing  a crime.

"As  Shabalin's  agreed  . . ."  He  countersigned  my  application,
stamped  it,  and  handed  it  back  to  me  with  the  words:  "But  don't
break  your  neck."

This  was  a great  achievement.  Later  on  many  officers  spent  months
trying  to  get  permission  to  own  a private  car,  but  had  to  go  on
being  content  with  the  trams.


157


Quite  early  on  I was  warned  always  to  go  on  foot  in  Karlshorst,
and  to  look  in  every  direction  before  crossing  a street.  In  fact,
there  were  more  traffic  accidents  in  Karlshorst  than  in  all  the  rest
of  Berlin.  Normal  traffic  regulations  were  modified  to  quite  an  extent
by  the  drivers  themselves,  or  rather,  by  the  men  at  the  wheel.

Lorries  always  had  priority,  because  of  their  tonnage.  The  logic  was
unusually  simple,  and  dictated  by  life  itself:  the  one  likely  to  suffer
most  damage  in  a collision  should  always  give  way.  Not  for  nothing
was  Karlshorst  called  the  'Berlin  Kremlin'.  The  rules  of  the  game
were  the  same.

However,  generals'  cars  introduced  a controversial  note  into
this  'traffic  regulation',  and  frequently  the  conflict  between  tonnage
and  prestige  ended  in  crushed  radiators.  Then  the  glass  of  smashed
headlamps  scrunched  underfoot  at  the  street  crossings,  and  the
more  inquisitive  studied  the  nearest  trees  and  fences  in  an  attempt
to  reconstruct  the  details  of  the  accident  from  the  torn  bark  and
twisted  railings.  The  safest  way  of  traveling  through  Karlshorst  was
in  a tank.

The  drivers  generally,  ordinary  soldiers  most  of  them,  were
genuinely  annoyed  at  the  fact  that  generals'  cars  bore  no  distinguishing
marks.  How  were  they  to  know  who  was  sitting  in  the  car:  some
snotty-nosed  lieutenant  or  a high  and  mighty  general?  You  see,
there  was  an  unwritten  law,. strictly  observed,  that  nobody  had  the
right  to  overtake  a general's  car.

I remember  an  incident  that  occurred  once  when  I was  driving
with  General  Shabalin  from  Dresden  to  Berlin.  We  were  traveling
along  a narrow  country  road  lined  with  apple-trees  when  a speedy
little  D.K.W.  flitted  past  right  under  the  nose  of  our  weighty
Admiral.  The  officer  driving  it  did  not  deign  even  to  glance  at  us.

Misha  looked  interrogatively  at  Shabalin,  sitting  beside  him.  Without
turning  his  head  the  general  curtly  ordered:  "After  him  and  stop
him!"

As  a rule  Misha  was  not  allowed  to  drive  fast  Jbecause  the  general
suffered  from  gastric  trouble;  now  he  did  not  need  to  be  told  twice.  In
anticipation  of  the  pleasure  that  he  could  experience  so  seldom  he
stepped  so  violently  on  the  gas  that  the  general  pulled  a face.

Not  in  the  least  suspecting  the  fate  that  threatened  him,  the
unfortunate  driver  of  the  D.K.W.  took  up  the  challenge:  he  stepped  on
it  too.  After  some  minutes  spent  in  furious  pursuit  the  Admiral  drew
ahead  and  began  to  block  its  rival's  path.  To  give  the  maneuver  an
impressive  touch  the  general  stuck  his  head  with  his  gold-braided
cap  out  of  the  window,  and  shook  his  fist.  The  effect  was  terrific:  the


158


D.K.W.  stopped  with  a jerk  some  thirty  yards  behind  us,  and
remained  at  a standstill  in  expectation  of  the  thunders  and  lightnings
about  to  be  let  loose.

"Major,  go  and  give  that  blockhead  a good  punch  in  the  mug,"
the  general  ordered  me.

I got  out  to  execute  the  order.  A lieutenant  was  standing  beside  the
D.K.W. , fidgeting  nervously.  In  a state  of  consternation,  he  tried  to
make  excuses  for  his  behavior.  I took  a cautious  glance  back  and
saw  the  general  watching  me  from  our  car,  so  I let  fly  a volley  of
curses  at  the  unlucky  officer.  But  I was  astonished  to  observe  that
he  was  far  more  frightened  than  the  incident  justified.  So,  as  I was
running  a keen  eye  over  his  papers,  I glanced  inside  his  car.  From
the  depths  of  it  a German  girl  stared  back  at  me,  her  eyes  filled  with
tears.  That  explained  the  officer's  fright:  this  might  cost  him  his
tabs,  for  acquaintance  with  German  girls  was  strictly  forbidden.

I gave  him  a searching  look.  He  stood  like  a lamb  awaiting  the
slaughter.  I placed  myself  with  my  back  to  our  car  and  said  in  a very
different  tone:  "Hop  it  as  quick  as  you  can!"

When  I returned  to  our  car  the  general  greeted  my  cheerful  face
with  an  irritable  look  and  muttered:  "Why  didn't  you  knock  out
his  teeth  for  him?  And  you're  a front-fighter!"  To  appease  his
injured  dignity  I replied:  "It  really  wasn't  worth  it,  General.  You'd
already  given  him  such  a fright  that  he'd  got  his  breeches  full."

"You've  got  a long  tongue,  Major.  You're  always  finding  excuses
for  getting  round  my  orders,"  he  grumbled,  and  nodded  to  Misha.

"Drive  on.  But  not  so  fast!"

Accustomed  as  I was  to  traffic  conditions  in  Karlshorst,  and
especially  after  I had  repeatedly  had  to  drive  on  to  the  sidewalk  to
avoid  a pursuing  lorry,  I found  driving  through  other  parts  of  Berlin
a queer  experience.  I was  out  of  my  element.  Even  along  the  main
street  you  drove  at  a reasonable  speed,  and  you  stepped  politely  on
the  brake  when  a huge  American  truck  shoved  its  nose  out  of  a side
street.  A truck  that  size  driven  by  a Russian  would  never  have  given
way  even  to  the  marshal  himself.  But  the  stupid  American  shoved  on
his  pneumatic  brakes  that  groaned  like  an  elephant,  and  waved  his
hand  from  his  superior  height:  "Drive  on."  Wasting  his  gas  like  that!

He  didn't  understand  the  simplest  of  traffic  and  other  rules:  'If
you're  the  stronger  you  have  priority'.

The  numbers  of  victims  of  car  accidents  rose  threateningly.  Marshal
Zhukov  was  forced  to  resort  to  draconian  measures.  When  a Mercedes
in  which  General  Kurassov,  the  first  chief  of  staff  of  the  S.M.A.,  was
driving  was  smashed  up  at  a Karlshorst  crossing  there  was  a furious


159


development  of  car  inspections.  Next  day  all  the  street  crossings
were  decorated  with  red  'prohibited'  signs,  traffic  lights,  German
traffic  police  and  motor-patrols  from  the  Soviet  Military-Auto
mobile  Inspection.  It  was  more  confusing  to  drive  through  Karl
shorst  than  through  a virgin  forest.

The  problem  of  guarding  the  Soviet  citizens  against  the  corrupting
influence  of  the  capitalist  West  caused  the  Soviet  authorities  in
Germany  many  a headache.  Take  cars  again,  as  an  example.  According
to  Soviet  dogma  a private  car  is  a bourgeois  luxury.  As  a rule  there
were  to  be  only  service  cars,  put  at  the  disposal  of  those  whom  the
State  deemed  worthy  of  them  because  of  rank  and  position.  Exceptions
were  few  and  of  no  importance,  being  made  chiefly  for  propaganda
purposes.  But  the  time  of  vulgar  equality  and  brotherhood
was  long  past.  Now  we  had  scientific  socialism.  He  who  learned  his
lesson  well  had  had  a service  car  for  a long  time  already.

But  then  a struggle  set  in  between  the  'capitalist  vestiges  in  the
communist  consciousness'  and  the  Soviet  dogma.  Despite  thirty
years  of  're-education',  those  'capitalist  vestiges'  proved  to  be
extraordinarily  tenacious  and,  when  transferred  to  other  conditions,
flourished  again  in  all  their  beauty.

In  1945  every  Soviet  officer  in  Germany  could  buy  a car  at  the
price  of  a month's  pay.  In  this  case  the  policy  of  'control  through  the
rouble'  was  ineffective.  So  the  authorities  had  to  resort  to  other
methods.  Patrols  of  the  Military-Automobile  Inspection,  armed  to
the  teeth,  combed  out  all  the  yards  in  Karlshorst,  and  searched  the
garages  and  cellars  for  cars  whose  possession  was  not  'licensed'.
Documents  showing  that  they  had  been  acquired  quite  legally  made  no
difference  whatever.  Anyone  could  buy  a car,  but  who  would  drive  it

was  another  matter.  By  such  radical  methods  officers  were  deprived
of  cars  that  they  had  purchased  officially  and  quite  regularly,  but  for
which  they  had  failed  to  obtain  a licence.  They  had  to  deliver  their
cars  to  the  State,  or  have  them  confiscated.  Expropriation  as  a
method  of  socialist  education!

In  1945  any  officer  holding  the  rank  of  major  or  higher  could
venture  to  apply  for  permission  to  own  a private  car.  From  May  1946
onward  only  officers  of  colonel's  or  higher  rank  were  allowed
to  apply,  and  this  practically  amounted  to  a ban  on  all  officers.  The
Germans  could  come  to  Xarlshorst  in  their  cars  and  call  on  you.

But  the  Soviet  officers  often  had  to  use  streetcars  when  visiting
Germans.  "I've  left  my  bus  round  the  corner"  was  the  usual  formula
in  such  cases.


160


The  golden  days  of  1945,  when  the  Soviet  western  frontier  was
practically  non-existent,  were  now  part  of  the  legendary  past.  The
majority  of  the  champions  of  private  property,  who  had  nursed
the  hope  of  showing  off  in  their  'private'  cars  in  their  home  towns,
and  of  traveling  on  their  own  horse-power  all  the  way  from  Berlin,
through  Poland,  to  the  Soviet  Union,  had  their  secret  wish-dreams
shattered:  on  reaching  the  Soviet  frontier  they  had  to  leave  their
cars  behind,  and  to  drag  their  heavy  cases  to  the  train.  The  import
tax  on  a car  greatly  exceeded  its  purchase  price.  It  might  have  cost
5,000  Reichsmarks,  the  equivalent  of  2,500  roubles;  but  the  customs
authorities  fixed  the  tax  according  to  the  purchase  price  of  the
corresponding  Soviet  machine,  i.e.,  between  10,000  and  12,000  roubles,
and  then  imposed  a tax  of  100  to  120  per  cent  of  this  hypothetical
purchase  price.  Of  course  nobody  had  such  a large  sum  in  his  pocket.
His  fellow-travellers  in  the  train  consoled  the  sinner  thus  being
brought  back  to  the  Soviet  fold:  "Don't  worry,  Vania.  It's  better  so.

It  only  saves  you  further  trouble.  You  think  it  out.  Supposing  you
arrive  in  Moscow.  Before  you  can  dare  to  register  the  car  you've  got
to  have  a garage  built  of  brick  or  stone,  and  you  yourself  will  have
to  live  in  a timber  house  with  accommodation  of  nine  square  yards
per  soul.  And  you'd  never  get  a licence  for  purchasing  petrol,  and
buying  it  on  the  side  means  either  bankruptcy  or  the  clink."

An  obviously  highly  experienced  individual  poked  his  head  down
from  the  upper  berth  of  the  sleeper,  and  rubbed  balm  into  the  la  ' te
car-owner's  soul:  "You  thank  your  lucky  stars  you've  got  out  of  it
so  easily.  There  was  a demobilized  captain  in  my  town-he  brought
back  a wonderful  Mercedes  with  him.  And  what  happened?  He's
likely  to  be  a nervous  wreck  for  the  rest  of  his  life.  He  was  just  an
ordinary  sort  like  you  or  me,  not  a district  Soviet  chairman,  and
not  an  active  worker.  And  suddenly  this  quite  ordinary  sort  of  in
dividual  goes  driving  around  in  an  elegant  automobile.  All  the  local
leaders  were  peeved.  And  they  put  their  heads  together  to  think  up
a way  of  swindling  the  Mere6d6s  out  of  him.  And  then  he  had  had  it
Somewhere  in  the  district  a cow  was  run  over  by  a train,  and  he  was
summoned  before  the  public  prosecutor:  'Why  did  you  kill  that
cow?'  Somewhere  a bridge  collapsed  with  old  age;  he  was  called  to
the  court  again:  'What  did  you  smash  that  bridge  for?'  Whenever
some  misfortune  happened  in  the  district  he  was  charged  with  it:

'You  did  it  with  your  auto!'

"At  last  this  comedy  began  to  get  him  down,  so  he  decided  to
sell  his  car.  But  that  wasn't  so  easy:  nobody  would  buy  it.  After
much  worry  and  trouble  he  arranged  with  the  head  of  the  local


161


Machilie-Tractor  Station  to  exchange  the  car  against  a calf  and  a
few  sacks  of  corn  from  the  next  harvest.  But  then  the  Party  Central
Committee  issued  a regulation  'Concerning  the  Squandering  of  the
Property  of  Collective  Farms  and  Machine-Tractor  Stations'.  The
head  of  the  Tractor  Station  was  arrested  for  his  past  sins,  and  the
captain  didn't  dare  say  a word  about  the  calf  and  com  he  was  owed.
So  you  see  how  that  sort  of  game  ends?  Of  course  you'd  have  been
wiser  to  sell  your  car  and  get  drunk  on  the  proceeds.  But  you  can't
foresee  everything."

After  this  story  the  car-owner  felt  greatly  relieved,  and  began  to
think  he'd  been  rather  clever  to  leave  it  at  the  frontier.  He  even
started  to  argue  that  under  socialist  conditions  the  non-existence  of
a car  was  an  advantage.  "Yes,  you're  right,"  he  remarked.  "It's  only
unnecessary  trouble.  In  Germany,  if  your  car  goes  wrong  even  on  a
country  road,  you've  only  got  to  whistle  and  a German  jumps  out  of
the  nearest  bush  and  puts  it  right  for  you.  But  in  Russia  you  could
have  a breakdown  in  the  middle  of  a town  and  you'd  be  as  badly  off
as  Robinson  Crusoe."

When  he  arrived  home  that  man  felt  he  had  been  fortunate  in
ridding  himself  of  the  burden  and  becoming  again  a full  member  of
Soviet  society.

"The  best  thing  to  do  with  this  tobacco  is  stuff  a mattress  with  it."

The  captain  with  a bleached  greatcoat  and  his  cap  pushed  back  on

his  nape  flung  his  half-smoked  German  ersatz  Mixture  Six  furiously
on  the  ground  and  contemptuously  crushed  it  into  the  loose  sand.  A
group  of  officers  was  sitting  at  the  foot  of  the  five-yard  high  obelisk,
hurriedly  knocked  up  from  strips  of  veneer  and  painted  all  over  with
red  paint,  that  stood  outside  the  S.M.A.  building.  The  socle  of  the
obelisk  was  in  the  shape  of  a five-pointed  star,  and  was  made  of  red
painted  boards,  the  center  being  filled  with  sand.  The  officers  were
warming  themselves  in  the  slanting  rays  of  the  autumn  sun.  In
Germany  the  sun  is  genial,  and  apparently  it  is  accustomed  to  order.
It  never  forces  you  to  seek  shade,  it  only  warms  you,  pleasantly  and
affably.

The  officers  had  made  themselves  comfortable  on  the  veneer  star
while  waiting  to  be  summoned  into  the  staff.  The  years  of  life  at  the
front  had  taught  them  never  to  be  in  any  unnecessary  hurry,  and  to
shorten  the  time  of  waiting  with  cigarettes  and  philosophical  chats.
"Thank  goodness  the  war's  over,  at  any  rate,"  said  a young
artillery  lieutenant  dreamily.  "You  didn't  think  much  in  those
days:  today  you  were  alive,  tomorrow  you  were  for  the  Land  Depart
ment  or  the  Health  Department-who  cared?  Only  when  you  had


162


a letter  from  your  mother  did  it  occur  to  you  to  take  care  of  yourself.
So  as  not  to,  worry  the  old  people.

"Yesterday  I was  sitting  in  the  little  square  opposite  the
'Capitol',"  he  went  on.  "There's  a marble  woman  stands  there  with
a small  mound  at  her  feet,  and  on  it  is  a little  stick  with  a tricoloured
flag.  I asked  some  passing  Germans:  'What's  all  that?'  and  they  told
me  a Frenchman  was  buried  there.  Just  where  he  fell,  poor  devil,
there  they  buried  him  in  the  middle  of  the  street.  A rotten  spot;

I'd  far  rather  be  buried  in  a field,  where  there's  grass  growing  and
the  wind  blowing.  But  that  Frenchman  isn't  allowed  a moment's
rest.  On  7 November  our  Pioneers  had  a firework  display  on  that
very  spot  in  honour  of  the  revolution.  They  buried  six-inch  shell
cases  in  the  earth  and  began  such  a firing  that  half  Berlin  was  stood
on  its  head.  The  Germans  thought  war  had  broken  out  again  and
Karlshorst  was  being  bombed."

The  lieutenant  enjoyed  talking,  and  he  went  on:

"Yes,  you  can  say  what  you  like.  It's  better  on  top  than  under
the  earth.  I'm  sorry  for  those  who  have  to  lie  underneath.  They  say
there  used  to  be  a memorial  to  the  Unknown  Soldier  somewhere  in
Berlin.  Fire  burned  everlastingly  in  front  of  it,  and  in  the  roof  above
was  a round  hole  and  you  could  see  the  blue  sky  th:rough  it.  And
when  you  went  inside  you  felt  as  though  you  were  midway  between
this  world  and  the  next.  That's  where  the  Germans  soothed  their
consciences  over  those  who  had  fallen  in  the  fields  and  forests.  And
any  mother  who  went  there  could  think  the  fire  was  burning  for  her
son.  They  say  they've  got  a similar  idea  in  Paris.  So  they  haven't
forgotten  the  little  Frenchman  lying  opposite  the  'Capitol'."

An  older  captain,  who  had  been  only  half  listening,  was  interested
in  this  theme  and  commented:  "There  are  lots  of  strange  things
in  this  country.  You'll  find  a memorial  to  fallen  soldiers  even  in
the  smallest  of  villages.  And  none  of  your  veneer  rubbish,  but  a real
memorial;  as  you  look  at  it  you  feel  you've  got  to  take  off  your  cap.
Made  of  granite  or  unhewn  stone,  the  soldiers'  names  carved  in  it,
all  overgrown  with  moss,  and  a spring  with  water  gurgling  just  by
it.  Great  people,  these  Germans  ! They  even  make  the  dead
comfortable.

"There  was  a memorial  in  the  little  town  where  I worked  in  the
commandatura,"  he  continued.  "It  was  in  the  shape  of  a large
stone  ball,  probably  to  represent  the  earth,  with  a dying  soldier
spread  out  over  it,  with  his  face  turned  to  the  ball,  his  arms  out
stretched,  his  hands  clawing  into  the  ground  as  though  he  were
trying  to  embrace  all  the  world.  Our  political  commissar  wanted


163


the  commandant  to  have  it  blown  up,  he  said  it  was  military
propaganda.  The  commandant  looked  at  him  and  said:  'Listen,
commissar!  You  devote  your  attention  to  the  living,  and  leave  the
dead  in  peace.  Understand?"'

The  lieutenant  agreed:  "Yes,  the  Germans  know  how  to  respect
their  dead.  One  day  I happened  to  drive  on  my  motor-bike  into  a
cemetery,  and  I felt  ashamed.  It  was  so  tidy,  it  suggested  everlasting
peace.  But  in  Russia  the  only  time  I visited  the  cemetery  was  to
strip  zinc  from  the  coffins.  All  the  graves  were  opened,  and  the  dead
lay  arse  upward.  And  there  were  scoundrels  fleecing  the  dead,
because  you  could  get  more  off  the  dead  than  the  living,  I had  to  go
there  to  get  hold  of  zinc  for  accumulators,"  he  explained  in  self
justification.

A third  officer,  who  had  a strong  pair  of  spectacles  with  thick
lenses  on  his  nose,  and  a shock  of  curly  hair  on  his  head,  joined  in
the  conversation.  You'll  always  find  someone  who  must  take  the
opposite  side  of  a question.  He  smiled:  "That's  all  bosh  ! In  my  home
town  of  Gorky  the  dead  are  cared  for  as  well  as  anyone.  Why,  they've
even  made  a dance  floor."

"Whom  for?"  the  lieutenant  asked.

"For  everybody,  living  and  dead."

The  others  looked  at  him  dubiously  and  expectantly.  He  explained:

"There  was  a cemetery  in  the  center  of  the  town.  The  Town
Soviet  ordered  that  it  was  to  be  turned  into  a park.  And  so  it  was
done,  in  accordance  with  all  the  rules  of  science  and  technique.  The
cemetery  was  ploughed  up  and  a Park  of  Culture  and  Recreation
named  after  Sverdlov  was  made  of  the  site,  with  a dance-floor  and
other  amusements.  And  the  whole  town  called  the  park  'The  Club
of  the  Living  and  the  bead.'  The  daughters  dance  a fox-trot  on  their
fathers'  bones.  But  the  old  women  cross  themselves  as  they  go  by:

'0,  Jesu  ! Jesu!"'

"A  similar  sort  of  thing  happened  in  Rostov,  where  I come  from,"
said  the  lieutenant.  "They  built  a new  theatre  there,  the  Maxim
Gorky.  The  plans  provided  for  the  front  of  the  building  to  be  faced
with  white  marble.  They  looked  around  to  see  where  they  could  get
the  marble  from,  and  decided  to  put  a tax  on  the  dead.  All  over  the
district  of  Rostov  they  took  down  the  white  marble  monuments
and  lined  the  theatre  front  with  marble  plates."


164


"Yes,  it's  a fine  theatre,  but  its  acoustics  are  rotten.  I was  in  it
once,"  said  the  officer  with  the  shock  of  hair.

"When  it  was  finished  everybody  concerned  with  the  building  of
it  was  arrested,"  the  lieutenant  explained.  "It  was  an  extraordinary
thing,  but  you  could  hear  better  in  the  gallery  than  in  the  front  row
of  the  stalls.  Of  course  they  blamed  the  builders:  sabotage.  But  the
people  whispered  among  themselves  that  it  was  the  dead  playing  a
trick."

The  captain  spat  into  the  sand.  The  lieutenant  thrust  his  next  lot
of  Mixture  Six  into  the  sand,  rose,  stretched  himself  luxuriously,
and  tidied  his  tunic.  The  officers,  thoughtfully,  did  not  throw  their
cigarette  ends  and  litter  on  the  green  grass,  but  thrust  them  into
the  sand  of  the  star  socle.

They  would  have  been  not  a little  shocked  if  the  earth  had
opened  in  front  of  them  and  the  indignant  spirit  of  their  former
supreme  commander,  the  hero  of  the  drive  into  Berlin  and  the
city's  first  Soviet  commandant,  Guards'  Colonel-General  Bersarin,
had  risen  from  his  grave  beneath  the  littered  sand  and  the  peeling
veneer.  Neither  the  Soviet  officers,  nor  the  German  workers  who
hung  hopelessly  around  the  staff  headquarters,  suspected  that  the
nameless  red  construction  which  disfigured  the  yard,  offending  the
eye  with  its  lack  of  taste,  was  a memorial  raised  over  a grave,  that
it  was  intended  to  honour  the  memory  of  the  Soviet  hero  who
played  a part  only  second  to  Marshal  Zhukov  in  the  battle  for  Berlin.
There  was  an  absurd  turn  of  Fate  for  you!  To  go  unscathed  right
through  the  war  on  the  most  dangerous  sections  of  the  front  and  at
the  head  of  an  army  breaking  through  all  resistance,  to  survive  to
see  the  victorious  end,  to  enter  the  conquered  metropolis  as  a
conqueror  crowned  with  fame,  and  then  literally  the  next  day  to  be
the  victim  of  a stupid  traffic  accident !

General  Bersarin  had  the  habit  of  going  for  a motor-cycle  ride
every  morning.  In  a sports  shirt  with  short  sleeves,  coatless  and
hatless,  he  drove  a powerful  German  motor-cycle  out  of  a side  street
into  the  main  Treptow-Allee,  which  runs  to  Karlshorst.  A heavily
loaded  column  of  military  Studebakers  was  driving  along  the
Treptow-Allee  at  full  speed.  No  one  ever  knew  whether  the  general
was  affected  by  that  sporting  daring  which  possesses  most  motor
cyclists,  or  whether  it  was  just  an  accident.  In  any  case,  he  tried  to
dash  between  two  of  the  speeding  lorries.  The  driver  who  went  over
him  swore  at  first  at  the  fool  who  had  torn  right  under  his  wheels;
then,  when  he  saw  the  general's  insignia,  he  drew  his  pistol  and  shot
himself.  It  is  not  known  where  the  driver  is  buried,  but  probably


165


he  is  resting  more  peacefully  than  General  Bersarin.

During  the  early  days  after  the  victory  we  were  reminded  at
every  step  of  those  who  had  won  that  victory.  Once  Major  Dubov
and  I were  taking  a walk  through  side  streets  not  far  from  the
Kurfiirstendam  in  the  British  sector.  It  was  Sunday;  the  streets
were  deserted.  We  just  felt  like  wandering  around  and  plunging  for
a few  moments  into  the  real  Germany  as  we  had  imagined  it  before
the  war:  quiet,  clean,  and  orderly.

The  broad  streets  were  lined  with  trees.  Like  archaeologists,  we
attempted  to  discover  and  reconstruct  the  pre-war  Berlin  in  the
ruins  all  about  us.  Not  the  'dens  of  the  fascist  monsters',  as  it  had
been  presented  to  us  and  thought  of  by  us  during  the  past  few  years.

We  wanted  to  see  the  city  and  the  people  who  for  many  of  us  were
a genuine  symbol  of  culture  before  they  began  to  be  dominated  by
megalomania.

We  came  to  a little  shady  island  at  the  intersection  of  three
streets.  Under  the  spreading  boughs  of  chestnut  trees  two  mounds
had  found  shelter  in  a fraternal  community  in  the  middle  of  this

chaotic  ocean  of  the  enormous  city.  Struck  by  the  uncommon  sight,
we  went  closer.  At  the  heads  were  two  plaited  crosses  of  birch  bark.

On  one  of  them  was  a German  steel  helmet,  on  the  other  a Soviet
helmet.  A Soviet  helmet ! All  around  the  unbridled  passions  of  the
world  were  raging;  but  here  ....  The  living  should  follow  the
example  of  the  dead.

Apparently,  when  the  street-fighting  ended  the  people  of  the
neighboring  houses  found  the  two  bodies  at  the  corner  and  buried
them  as  best  they  could,  in  the  shade  of  the  chestnut  trees.  Respect
for  the  dead  was  stronger  than  earthly  hate.

Suddenly  I noticed  something  which  caused  an  inexplicable,
almost  painful  feeling  to  rise  in  my  breast.  The  major  had  noticed
it  too.  Fresh  flowers  ! On  both  mounds  lay  fresh  flowers,  put  there
by  a kindly  hand.  As  though  at  a word  of  command  we  took  off  our
caps,  then  we  exchanged  glances.  The  major's  eyes  went  moist,
heavy  puckers  gathered  round  his  mouth.  He  took  out  his
handkerchief  and  wiped  his  brow,  which  was  suddenly  damp  with  sweat.

"Our  first  thought  was  to  raze  all  the  German  cemeteries  to  the
ground,"  he  said  in  a thick  voice.  "Damn  this  war  and  whoever
invented  it !"  he  added  quietly,  after  a moment.

An  old  woman  walking  with  a child  not  far  from  us  stopped  to
stare  inquisitively  at  the  Russian  officers,  rare  visitors  to  this  part  of


166


the  city.


"Who  put  those  flowers  on  the  graves?"  The  major  turned  to

her.  His  voice  was  sharp  and  cold,  as  though  he  were  giving  a battle

order.

She  pointed  to  a house;  we  went  up  its  half-ruined  steps.  The
elderly  German  woman  who  opened  the  door  to  us  started  back  in
alarm  when  she  saw  the  crimson  bands  on  our  caps.  A twilight  corridor,
a neglected  home,  with  none  of  the  usual  comfort  to  be  seen,  and
obviously  lacking  several  of  its  former  inhabitants.

The  major  waved  his  hand  to  reassure  her.  "We  saw  the  flowers
on  the  graves.  Did  you  put  them  there?"

The  woman  had  not  recovered  from  her  fright  and  she  had  no
idea  what  the  question  was  leading  up  to.  She  answered  irresolutely:

"Yes  I thought  She  nervously  gripped  her  hands  together
under  her  apron.

The  major  took  out  his  letter-case  and  laid  all  the  money  it
contained.  Several  thousand  marks  - on  the  table  without  counting

"Go  on  laying  flowers  there,"  he  said.  Then  he  added:  "On  both
graves."

He  spread  a sheet  of  notepaper  with  the  Soviet  crest  and  the
S.M.A.  address  on  the  table  and  wrote:  'In  the  name  of  the  Red
Army  I order  all  soldiers  and  officers  to  give  Frau  ...every  help
and  support.'  He  signed  it  and  gave  it  to  the  astonished
have  anything  to  do  with  Russians,  this  paper  will  help  you,"  he
said.  Then  he  looked  round  the  empty  room  and  asked,  as  though
he  had  just  thought  of  something  else:  "Tell  me,  have  you  a husband
or  a son?"

"My  husband  and  one  son  fell  at  the  front.  My  second  son  is  a
prisoner  of  war,"  she  answered.

"Where?"  he  asked  curtly.

She  hesitated  a moment,  then  whispered:  "In  Russia."

He  looked  at  the  standard  prisoner-of-war  postcard  which  she  held
out  to  him,  and  noted  down  the  name  and  the  field-post  number
of  the  prisoner-of-war  camp.

"I  shall  write  to  the  camp  commandant  and  the  higher  authorities.

I'll  intercede  for  his  earlier  release,"  he  turned  and  said  to  me.


167


I had  come  to  know  Major  Dubov  while  still  at  the  front.  He  had
been  head  of  the  Reconnaissance  Department  of  the  divisional  staff,
and  he  had  had  to  screen  the  prisoners.  If  he  saw  the  S.S.  death's
head  emblem  on  a prisoner's  cap,  he  knew  that  the  man  had  dozens
of  men's  lives  on  his  conscience,  and  did  not  hesitate  to  send  him  as
one  of  a special  group  to  the  rear,  though  he  knew  their  lives  would
end  beyond  the  next  turn  in  the  road.

In  the  street,  pigeons  were  strutting  about  the  pavement;  they
politely  made  way  for  us,  like  equals  with  equals.  The  full  September
sun  streamed  down  on  the  lindens  and  chestnuts  of  Berlin,  the  leaves
rustled  quietly.  Life  went  on.  Life  is  stronger  than  death.  And  life
is  particularly  good  when  there  is  no  hate  in  the  heart,  when  a man
feels  minded  to  do  some  good  to  other  men,  whether  living  or  dead.

During  the  first  few  months  of  my  work  in  Karlshorst  I was  not
greatly  interested  in  the  surrounding  world.  I had  to  work  hard,  and
left  Karlshorst  only  on  duty.  I forgot  the  very  existence  of  the
calendar  on  my  desk,  and  when  I did  remember-it  I turned  over  a
whole  week  at  a time.

One  Sunday  I awoke  at  the  sound  of  the  alarm  clock  and  sprang
out  of  bed  as  usual.  The  flowers  and  trees  of  the  garden  were
brilliant  through  the  wide-open  window,  purple  plums  showed
ripely  between  green  leaves.  The  morning  sun  streamed  down,
playing  merrily  on  the  walls  of  my  bedroom.  The  quiet,  inviolable
peace  of  the  Sunday  morning  filled  all  my  small  house.  The  clang
of  the  neighboring  church  bell  rolled  through  the  air.  The  clear
morning  air  poured  into  my  room,  and  cooled  my  hot  skin  and
refreshed  my  body.  I felt  like  doing  something.  I wandered
aimlessly  from  room  to  room.  Today  I had  got  entirely  to  myself
What  should  I do  with  it?

Suddenly  I was  overcome  by  a strange  feeling:  where  was  I in
such  a hurry  to  get  to?  A man  goes  on  treading  the  treadmill  all
his  life  without  stopping  to  think  about  it.  But  if  he  does  stop  to
think,  then  he  wonders  why  one  is  always  in  a hurry.  Most  men  only
recognize  that  when  it  is  too  late.

Recently  I had  got  hold  of  a German  propaganda  pamphlet,

'In  God's  own  Country',  in  which  they  poked  fun  at  America  and
the  Americans.  They  were  particularly  sarcastic  about  the  rate  at
which  the  Americans  lived,  and  their  everlasting  pursuit  of  the
dollar,  of  success.  'Your  luck's  just  round  the  corner.'  The  American
tore  at  full  pelt  to  the  corner  in  the  hope  of  finding  his  luck.  But  he
found  only  a vacuum.  On  the  other  hand,  there  were  plenty  of  other


168


corners.  And  so  on  all  through  life.

On  this  count  I'm  with  the  Germans.  But  how  can  one  learn  the
art  of  enjoying  life?

I took  a cigarette  from  my  bronze  casket,  lay  down  on  my  couch
and  stared  at  the  ceiling.  There  wasn't  a single  fly  on  that  ceiling.

What  a queer  country  ! You  never  saw  any  flies.

I got  up  and  fidgeted  with  the  electric  coffee  pot,  then  went  out  on
to  the  balcony,  stretched  myself  in  a deck-chair  and  lit  another
cigarette.  But  after  a few  minutes  I was  seized  with  a deadly
boredom.  In  the  end  I seated  myself  at  my  desk  and  prepared  to  write
letters.  I thought  with  longing  of  Moscow,  and  imagined  what  the
people  there  were  doing  at  that  particular  moment.

Just  then  I heard  noisy  footsteps  in  the  next  room,  behind  my
back.  Without  turning  round  I called:

"Who's  there?"

"Ha-ha-hal"  There  was  a roar  of  laughter  behind  me.  "Just  look
at  the  way  they  live  here  !"

I turned  round.  Mikhail  Belyavsky  was  standing  at  the  double
doors,  and  Valia  Grinchuk's  fair  head  appeared  over  his  shoulder.
They  were  both  roaring  with  laughter  at  the  sight  of  me:  I was  sitting
in  nothing  but  a pair  of  trunks,  with  shoes  on  my  sockless  feet.

I hurried  to  my  bedroom,  returning  fully  dressed  a minute  or  two
later.  "How  did  you  get  here,  Misha?"  I asked,  still  astonished  at
this  unexpected  visit.

"We  arrived  yesterday.  A whole  group  of  us  from  the  college.

We've  been  sent  here  to  help  you  out."

"Ho*  are  things  in  Moscow,  and  what's  the  latest  news?"  I asked.

"What  news  would  you  expect?  Now  Germany  is  all  the  rage.
Everybody  in  the  college  dreams  of  being  sent  to  Germany  to  work."
He  looked  about  the  room.  "Yes,  you  can  live  here  ! You've  already
got  used  to  it,  so  you  no  longer  notice  the  difference."

"Do  tell  me  something  about  Moscow,!'  I pleaded.

"Oh,  you  read  the  papers  !"  he  replied  evasively.  "I'm  glad  I've
got  away  from  it.  I'd  rather  you  told  us  how  things  are  here."

"You'll  soon  see  for  yourselves.  How  would  you  like  to  go  in  to
Berlin  today.  We'll  plunge  into  the  thick  of  its  life."


169


"That's  just  what  Valia  and  I were  wanting  to  do.  That's  why
we  came  to  ha~l  you  out  of  it."

"Well,  then,  let's  go  !"  I exclaimed.

We  left  Karlshorst  just  before  midday  and  took  the  street-car  for
the  city  centre.

The  Reichstag.  At  one  time  we  Russians  regarded  this  massive
building  rising  against  the  background  of  the  Brandenburg  Gate  as
the  symbol  of  Hitler's  Reich.  'To  the  German  people'  was  inscribed
in  gold  letters  above  the  entrance  to  this  enormous  grey  mass.  Today
those  words  could  only  seem  like  a malicious  sneer  to  the  Germans.

The  windows  were  walled  up  with  bricks,  with  loopholes  in  between;
the  smoky  traces  of  fire  played  over  the  walls.  Inside,  great  heaps  of
scorched  brick,  puddles  of  stinking  green  water;  the  blue  sky  showed
through  the  shattered  dome.  The  wind  blew  about  scraps  of  paper
with  black  eagles  printed  on  them.  Half-used  machine-gun  belts,
cartridge  cases,  gas-masks.

On  the  walls,'  innumerable  inscriptions:  'Ivan  Sidorchuk,  of
Kuchevka;  14.5.1945.'  'Simon  Vaillant,  Paris;  5.7.1945.'  'John  D.

Willis,  Chicago;  23.7.1945.'  Frequently  one  could  not  think  how  the
writer  had  reached  the  inaccessible  point  on  which  he  had  written
his  name  in  order  to  leave  his  everlasting  mark  in  history.  The

inscriptions  were  written  with  coal,  ash,  pencil,  chalk.  One
inscription,  scratched  with  a bayonet  point  by  one  of  the  Reichstag
defenders,  read  like  the  last  cry  of  a drowning  man:  'Heil  Hitler !"

On  the  opposite  wall,  carefully  painted  with  oil  paint,  were  the
words:  'Here  did  Sergeant  Kostya  of  Odessa  shit.'

Truly,  the  atmosphere  of  the  place  reminded  one  of  certain  well
known  lines  in  Heine's  poem:  'Germany'.  Evidently  the  Reichstag
was  being  used  by  quite  a number  of  people  as  a public  lavatory
these  days.  Certainly  an  instructive  historical  memorial

Between  the  Reichstag  and  the  Brandenburg  Gate,  among  the
ruins  of  past  glories,  a new  life  was  seething.  Here  was  the  inter
national  black  market.  Looking  about  them  anxiously,
surreptitiously,  Germans  were  selling  umbrellas,  shoes,  old  clothes.  The
Russians  were  interested  mainly  in  watches,  and  offered  cigarettes,
bread,  and  occupation  notes  in  exchange.  An  American  jeep  pulled
up  not  far  from  us.  Without  getting  out,  the  negro  soldiers  in  it
began  a lively  trade:  in  chocolates,  cigarettes,  soap.  They  emptied
their  packs,  laughing  all  over  their  faces,  and  looked  about  them.

One  of  them  noticed  us,  and  whispered  something  to  his  companion.


170


Then  he  turned  to  us  with  a lively  gesture,  apparently  inviting  me
to  buy  something.

"What?"  I asked.

He  took  an  enormous  army  Colt  from  under  his  seat  and  raised
two  fingers:  two  thousand.  I shook  my  head.  So  he  pointed  to  the
pistol  hanging  at  my  belt  and  asked  the  price.  To  the  Allies'  obvious
surprise  I explained  that  it  was  not  for  sale.

"What  are  you  selling,  then?"  the  negro  asked  in  businesslike
tones.

"Nothing,"  I replied.

"Then  what  are  you  buying?  Would  you  like  a jeep?"  He  slapped
his  hand  on  the  seat  of  his  car.  I only  laughed.  .

A Soviet  military  patrol  came  along:  two  soldiers  with  red  arm
bands,  carrying  automatics.  Not  far  away  a feeble  old  man  was
selling  newspapers.  He  had  enormous  shoes  on  his  feet,  and  he  had
difficulty  in  moving,  either  because  he  was  weak  or  because  of  those
awkward  shoes.  As  the  patrol  approached  him  he  held  out  his  hand
to  beg,  and  smacked  his  shriveled  lips:  "Comrade,  papyros"
(cigarette).  One  of  the  soldiers,  who  evidently  thought  he  was
beginning  to  be  a nuisance,  took  the  old  man  deliberately  by  the
collar  and  pushed  him  aside.  But  he  had  overestimated  the  man's
powers  of  resistance.  The  beggar  went  sprawling  like  a sack  into  the
road,  leaving  his  enormous  shoes  behind  him,  while  his  newspapers
scattered  fanwise  on  the  stones.

Before  Belyavsky  could  open  his  mouth  to  reprimand  the  soldier
the  man  again  seized  the  old  fellow  by  the  collar  and  hauled  him  up,
to  set  him  on  his  feet.  He  was  rough,  but  there  was  no  malice  in  his
manner;  rather  was  it  a mixture  of  disgust  and  chagrin.  He  had  not
expected  his  push  to  have  such  an  effect.  The  old  man  hung  in  his
arms  like  a sack,  lacking  the  strength  to  keep  his  feet.

"Let  him  be!  Come  along!"  the  second  patrol  said.

"Wait ! You  bloody  Fritz!"  the  man  scolded  roughly,  to  cover  his
own  embarrassment.  "You,  Fritz,  hungry?"  The  old  man  had  sunk
to  the  pavement  again,  and  the  patrol  nudged  him  with  his  foot.

But  the  beggar  made  no  answer.  "He'll  die  anyway,"  the  soldier
grumbled,  and  looked  around  as  though  seeking  something.

A Russian  girl  in  sergeant's  uniform  happened  to  come  along,


171


carrying  a satchel.  It  contained  several  dozen  packets  of  cigarettes
wrapped  in  cloth.  Under  her  arm  was  a loaf  of  bread,  also  destined
for  exchange.

The  patrol  reached  for  the  loaf,  snarling:  "Don't  you  know  it's
forbidden  to  trade  here?"

The  girl  vanished  in  terror  into  the  crowd,  leaving  the  loaf  in  the
soldier's  hand.  He  turned  back  to  the  old  man,  who  was  still  sitting
on  the  sidewalk.  People  standing  round  had  gathered  up  his  papers
and  put  them  in  a pile  beside  him.

"Here,  Fritz!"  The  soldier  held  out  the  loaf  to  him.  But  the  man
only  blinked,  as  though  blind.  The  patrol  swore  at  him  again,  stuck
the  loaf  in  the  newspaper  bag  which  was  tied  to  the  old  fellow's
waist,  and  went  off.

We  were  amazed  at  the  crowds  of  old  men  and  women  in  the  street
cars  and  on  the  streets.  They  were  neatly  dressed,  the  passers-by
treated  them  with  respect,  gave  up  their  seats  to  them  in  the  cars,
helped  them  across  the  road.

"Ah,  those  godly  women!"  Belyavsky  sighed  as  he  noticed  two
old  women  in  neat  black  dresses  with  white  collars  get  out  of  a
street-car.  "In  Russia  they've  given  up  all  their  souls  to  God  long
since.  By  way  of  natural  selection."

What  we  were  seeing  was  not  any  novelty  to  us.  We  knew  a man
should  show  respect  for  the  aged.  Not  only  did  we  know  it,  but  we
ourselves  felt  the  need  to  behave  like  that.  And  yet  we  could  not  but

admit  that  we  had  grown  rough,  we  had  forgotten  how  to  be
courteous  and  obliging  in  our  relations  with  others.  Existence  forms  the
consciousness,  so  dialectical  materialism  proclaims.  Soviet  existence
has  changed  old  people  into  a burden  and  has  made  the
corresponding  dialectical  adjustments  in  our  consciousness.

Later,  as  we  came  to  know  conditions  in  Germany  more  intimately,
we  realized  that  though  the  German  social  insurance  seemed  so  small,
it  always  assured  a living  minimum  in  the  form  of  pensions  and  pay,
it  enabled  the  old  people  to  live  out  their  days  in  human  conditions.

In  the  Soviet  Union  old-age  pensions  are  a completely  fictitious
concept.  In  practice  a man  can  live  only  if  he  works,  or  if  his  children
support  him.  And  who  can  expect  support  from  his  children  when
they  themselves  have  nothing?

We  saw  many  convalescent  Soviet  soldiers  from  Berlin  hospitals
roving  around.  Many  of  them  were  engaged  in  speculative


172


activities,  some  of  them  did  not  stop  at  robbery  in  broad  daylight.

One  man  snatched  something  and  fled  into  the  ruins,  while  his
companions  used  their  crutches  and  sticks  to  cover  his  retreat.

The  war-wounded  were  embittered  and  rancorous,  many  of  them  were
tipsy  and  ready  for  a fight.  The  Germans  feared  them  like  the
plague,  and  even  Russians  kept  out  of  their  way  if  possible.

What  I have  just  said  about  old-age  pensions  in  Russia  is  also
true  of  war  pensions.  They  are  too  much  for  death,  too  little  for  life.

And  yet  in  return  we  must  show  our  gratitude.  'Our  happiness  is  so
boundless  that  one  cannot  describe  it',  as  one  of  our  songs  puts  it.

In  conquered  Germany  the  war-wounded  of  a lost  war  get ' higher
pensions  than  those  of  the  victor  country.  Paradoxical,  but  true.

There  are  many  children  to  be  seen  in  the  streets  of  Berlin.  Even
in  the  first  world  war,  but  still  more  in  the  second,  the  Germans
attached  great  importance  to  the  birth  statistics.  Ludendorff  and
Hitler  did  all  they  could  to  avoid  any  fall  in  the  birth-rate  during
the  wars,  and  that,  and  not  humanity,  is  the  main  reason  why  the
German  soldiers  were  given  regular  home  leave.  The  results  strike
the  eye.

The  sight  seemed  strange  to  us,  for  during  the  war  years  infants
were  an  uncommon  occurrence  in  the  Soviet  Union.  The  Red
Army  men  never  had  leave  during  the  war.  In  due  course  the  Soviet
leaders  will  be  faced  with  a serious  problem,  for  in  the  years  1941
to  1945  the  birth  statistics  dropped  almost  to  zero.  That  will  have  its
effect  when  those  years  are  called  up  for  military  service.

Berlin  lay  in  ruins.  But  out  of  the  ruins  new  life  was  reaching
up  to  the  light.  That  new  life  is  particularly  striking  when  seen
against  that  background  of  dead  ruing.  Man's  will  to  live  is  stronger
than  the  forces  of  destruction.  We  were  astonished  by  the  numerous
florists'  shops  in  the  dead  streets.  The  burnt-out  carcass  of  a building
rises  to  the  sky,  surrounded  by  a dead  sea  of  ruin.  And  in  the  midst
of  this  joyless  world,  the  brilliant  colours  of  innocent  flowers  smile
at  us  from  the  ground-floor  windows.

We  returned  to  Karlshorst  late  in  the  evening;  we  were  tired  and
dusty.  During  the  following  days  I frequently  met  Belyavsky  and
Valia.  He  had  been  appointed  to  a post  in  the  Air  Force  Directorate
of  the  Control  Commission,  while  she  worked  in  the  private  office  of
Marshal  Zhukov,  the  commander-in  chief  of  the  S.M.A.  They  were
both  very  glad  they  had  been  able  to  remain  in  the  capital  and  had
not  been  posted  to  the  provinces.


173


In  Moscow  I had  known  Valia  only  as  a fellow  student.  But  here,
far  from  one's  intimate  circle  of  friends,  she  suddenly  became  dear
and  precious  to  me  as  a part  of  that  for  which  I was  yearning,  as  a
part  of  Moscow  and  all  it  signified.  In  Valia  I found  an  unusual
quality  which  made  me  value  her  friendship  highly:  she  was  a true
child  of  nature,  untouched  by  the  filth  of  life.  She  said  what  she
thought,  and  she  acted  on  what  she  said.

A Sunday  or  two  later  Belyavsky  and  Valia  again  called  on  me.

As  I looked  at  him  I was  not  a little  astonished.  I saw  a very  elegant
young  man  in  irreproachable  light  coffee-coloured  civilian  dress.

A dazzling  tie  and  a brilliant  felt  hat  completed  the  transformation.
Hitherto  I had  seen  him  only  in  uniform.

"What  are  you  all  togged  up  for?"  I whistled  and  examined  him
from  all  sides.

"I  want  to  go  to  the  Opera,  but  Valia  doesn't.  So  I've  decided  to
entrust  her  to  your  care."

"Really,  Misha,  the  more  I get  to  know  you  the  more  convinced  I
am  that  you're  a fine  fellow!  You've  brought  Valia  along  to  me  and
now  you're  going  to  vanish.  Have  you  ever  known  such  a
disinterested  friend,  Valia?"

I tried  to  persuade  him  to  drive  with  us  through  the  city,  but  he
was  as  immovable  as  a rock.  "My  legs  are  still  aching  after  last
Sunday,"  he  declared.

The  day  was  unusually  sunny  and  warm.  We  put  Belyavsky
down  in  Friedrichstrasse  and  decided  to  go  for  a drive  out  of  the

city.  To  right  and  left  of  us  historical  relies  of  the  past  went  by
like  museum  pieces:  Unter  den  Linden,  a great  name,  now  lined  with
ruins,  and  not  a trace  of  green.  The  trees  of  the  Tiergarten,  shattered
with  shells  and  bombs,  littered  with  the  wrecked  and  rusting
carcasses  of  aeroplanes.  The  Siegessaule,  with  the  faded  gold  of  its
angel,  the  symbol  of  the  victories  and  glories  of  It371 . Before  us
stretched  the  broad  and  straight  East-West  Axis.

Berlin  had  its  own  aspect.  The  aspect  of  the  capital  of  the  Reich.

The  stones  of  Berlin  are  trodden  with  history.  Germany  gave  the
world  dozens  of  men  whose  names  are  precious  to  every  civilized
being.  The  street  name-plates  testify  to  that:  Mozartstrasse,
Humboldtstrasse,  Kantstrasse.

Before  us  rose  the  Griinewald.  Valia  looked  about  her,  then  she
leaned  her  head  against  the  leather  back  of  the  seat  and  looked  up


174


into  the  sky,  which  hung  over  us  like  a blue  dome,  and  remarked:
"D'you  know  what,  Grisha?"

"Yes?"

"Somehow  the  sun  shines  differently  here.

"How  d'you  mean?"

"I  can't  explain  it  myself.  I feel  strangely  different  here.  Tell  me,
don't  you  feel  it?"

"It's  the  feeling  of  the  conqueror,  Valia.  That's  why  the  sun  seems
different  too.  "

"It's  beautiful  here,"  she  said  dreamily.  "I  have  such  a longing
for  a peaceful  life.  I often  feel  I could  throw  off  this  uniform  and
simply  live  for  the  sake  of  living.  . .

"What's  preventing  you?"

"I  sometimes  feel  sorry  I'm  in.  uniform.  It  had  to  be  during  the
war;  but  now  ...  I want  to  be  free  ....  How  can  I explain  it  to
you?t$

"Explain  it  to  someone  else  !"  I smiled.  "And  let  me  give  you  some
good  advice:  don't  forget  that  here  is  the  S-M-A,.  That  forest  is
darker  and  more  dangerous  than  your  partisan  forests.  Otherwise
you'll  feed  the  grey  wolves  yet.  Get  that?"

She  looked  at  me  fixedly,  was  silent  for  a while,  then  said  in  a
quiet,  earnest  tone:

"You  see,  Grisha,  often  I feel  so  lonely;  I've  got  nobody  I can  talk
to.  I love  everything  that's  good,  and  there's  so  little  of  it  in  our
world."

Before  us  the  grey  arrow  of  the  river  Avus  cut  through  the  autumn
glory  of  the  Grilnewald.  I took  my  foot  off  the  accelerator,  the  car
rolled  slowly  to  a halt.  The  golden  autumn  extended  all  around  us
in  a sluggish  languor.  The  distance  danced  hazily  in  the  sunlight,
it  slowly  came  to  meet  us.

"Tell  me,  what  are  you  thinking  of?"  she  whispered.

"I'm  thinking  which  way  to  take,  left  or  right.  The  Wannsee
must  be  somewhere  around  here."

The  Wannsee  is  one  of  the  largest  lakes  in  the  vicinity  of  Berlin.


175


Its  banks  are  lined  with  fine,  large  villas,  the  former  residences  of
the  most  wealthy  inhabitants  of  the  capital.  And  here,  too,  was  the
largest  and  most  modern  of  Berlin's  bathing  beaches.

We  drove  round  the  lake.  It  was  quiet,  almost  deserted.  The
stones  of  the  road  were  all  but  hidden  under  a thickly  strewn
carpet  of  leaves.  To  right  and  left,  fences  overgrown  with  green,
gates  standing  wide  open,  empty  villas,  abandoned  by  their  owners.
Some  had  fled  to  the  West  before  the  Red  Army's  advance,  others
had  been  transferred  to  other  dwellings  in  the  neighborhood,
former  wooden  barracks  for  foreign  workers.  I turned  the  car  in
through  the  open  gate  of  a particularly  fine  villa.  Antlers  that  once
had  adorned  the  master's  room  lay  on  the  gravelled  drive;  on  the
steps  of  the  main  entrance  the  wind  was  turning  over  papers
bleached  with  rain.

Below,  by  the  waterside,  was  a small  platform  paved  with  square
tiles,  bridges  from  which  to  fish,  and  moorings  for  boats.  Close  by  was
the  rusting  shell  of  a boat-house.

We  got  out  and  wandered  through  the  garden.  High  above  us
century-old  trees  were  murmuring.  In  between  were  trenches  with
caving  wars,  entangled  rolls  of  barbed  wire,  cartridge  cases.  Higher
up  was  a villa  with  a red-tiled  roof,  and  draped  with  the  colorful
autumn  attire  of  a wild  vine.

"Let's  have  a look  at  the  house,"  I suggested.

The  wind  was  blowing  through  the  rooms.  The  boards  creaked
underfoot.  Gas-masks,  remnants  of  furniture,  cans  of  conserves
were  littered  about.  Upstairs  we  found  the  former  master's  study.
Faded  heaps  of  photographs  were  lying  on  the  floor,  among  them
the  features  of  bewhiskered  men  in  high,  stiff  collars.  These  people
could  never  have  suspected  that  some  day  Russian  officers'  boots
would  tread  on  their  portraits.

"Let's  get  out,  Grishal"  Valia  tugged  at  my  arm.  "It  isn't  good  to
walk  in  a strange  house."

After  the  twilight  indoors  the  sun  streaming  on  to  the  balcony
dazzled  more  than  usual.  Below  us  extended  the  lightly  crinkled
surface  of  the  great  lake.  Stirred  by  a gentle  breeze,  the  reeds  swayed
and  nodded  down  to  the  water.  The  wind  sighed  through  the  crowns
of  the  trees.  A dead  picture  of  the  collapse  of  human  hopes  behind
us  and  everlasting,  inextinguishable  life  at  our  feet.

Valia  and  I stood  silent  on  the  balcony.  After  the  stony  chaos  of
Berlin  the  peace  and  stillness  of  the  Grilnewald  made  a deep


176


inpression  on  her.  Her  face  was  overcast,  as  though  she  had  a headache.
Her  breast  rose  and  fell  spasmodically,  as  though  she  lacked  air.  .

"Tell  me,  Grisha,  what  is  happiness?"  she  asked  without  turning
to  me.

"Happiness?  Happiness  is  man's  ability  to  be  content  with  what
he  has."

"But  when  he  has  nothing  at  all?"

She  turned  her  face  to  me.  Her  eyes  were  serious,  they  looked  at
me  searchingly,  they  demanded  an  answer.  A furrow  clove  her
forehead  between  her  eyebrows.

I was  silent;  I didn't  know  what  to  answer.

A man  who  is  released  after  a long  spell  of  prison  cannot  get  used
to  freedom  at  first,  he  has  a fear  of  space.  There  is  even  a special
term  for  this:  acrophobia.  We,  too,  had  that  same  sort  of  feeling
during  the  early  days  of  our  stay  in  occupied  Germany.

In  1945  we  had  unrestricted  freedom,  we  could  openly  visit  the
sectors  held  by  our  Western  Allies.  Twelve  months  later  we
had  only  the  memory  of  those  days.  But  meanwhile  all  the  allied
soldiers'  and  officers'  clubs  in  the  western  sectors  were  open  to  us,
we  were  always  treated  as  welcome  guests.  To  our  shame  it  must  be
admitted  that  the  guests  often  behaved  in  such  a way  that  the
hosts  were  forced  to  be  more  prudent.

The  following  story  was  often  told  in  Karlshorst.  One  day,  a
Soviet  soldier  traveling  through  Berlin  got  lost,  and  wandered  by
mistake  into  an  American  barracks.  The  Americans  were  delighted
at  this  rare  visit  and  made  the  mortally  terrified  Ivan  welcome,
relieving  him  of  his  pack.  What  else  can  a Soviet  soldier  have  in
his  pack  but  a loaf  of  black  bread  and  a couple  of  leg-rags?  So  the
Americans  made  Ivan  sit  down  at  the  table,  and  gave  him  such  a
quantity  of  good  things  to  eat  and  drink  as  he  could  never  even  have
dreamed  about,  and  persuaded  him  to  spend  the  night  in  the
barracks.  Some  versions  add  that  they  even  provided  him  with  a
sleeping  partner.  Next  morning  they  stuffed  his  pack  full  with  all
kinds  of  overseas  delicacies  and  saw  him  to  the  barrack  gates.

Many  of  the  narrators  say  that  he  applied  to  be  taken  into  the
American  army.  They  all  swear  by  God  and  all  the  saints  that  they
personally  met  this  Ivan  right  outside  the  gate  of  the  American
barracks.


177


We  were  all  struck  by  the  fact  that  the  Allies  were  far  better
equipped  than  the  Soviet  soldiers,  and  enjoyed  much  more  personal
freedom.  Our  officers  who  worked  in  the  Control  Commission  used
to  remark  with  a smile  that  the  American  soldiers  smoked  the  same
cigarettes  as  their  generals.  In  the  Red  Army,  soldiers,
non-commissioned  officers,  officers  and  generals  are  allotted  various  kinds
of  tobacco  or  cigarettes  according  to  their  rank.  This  is  in  token  of
their  general  equality  and  brotherhood.

At  first  we  lived  as  though  on  a forgotten  island.  As  we  were  all
'living  abroad',  we  were  not  subject  to  any  form  of  Soviet  taxation,
not  once  were  we  bothered  with  the  voluntary  state  loans  that  one
cannot  avoid  subscribing  to  in  the  Soviet  Union.  And-something
that  was  completely  incomprehensible-we  were  even  freed  from
political  instruction  and  study  of  the  great  and  wise  book  which
feeds  up  every  Soviet  human  being,  the  Short  Course  of  History  of
the  Communist  Party  of  the  Soviet  Union  (Bolsheviks).  Stalin
committed  the  greatest  of  errors  when  he  allowed  Soviet  citizens  to  see
Europe,  and  on  the  other  hand  showed  Europe  Soviet  conditions.

The  Soviet  personnel  began  to  take  a much  more  critical  view  of
what  was  going  on  behind  them  in  the  Soviet  Union.  And  as  the
West  came  to  recognize  the  true  features  of  Stalinist  Communism,
it  lost  a large  part  of  its  illusions  and  was  cured  of  certain  rosy
intentions.

The  first  few  months  of  the  occupation  were  of  great  significance.

In  the  midst  of  the  chaos  of  shattered  Germany,  in  the  midst  of
ruined  Berlin,  in  the  life  of  the  people  who  yesterday  had  been  our
enemies,  we  saw  things  that  at  first  only  amazed  us.  But  then  we
gradually  began  to  understand  them  aright  and  our  views  of  things
were  modified  in  accordance.

We  had  to  overcome  the  enmity  we  felt  for  everything  connected
with  the  name  of  Germany.  We  had  to  seek  new  standards  of

measurement.  But  meanwhile,  out  of  the  dust  and  rubble  left  from
the  long  years  of  the  Hitler  regime,  the  total  war  and  the  un
conditional  capitulation,  we  were  able  to  reconstruct  the  normal
life  of  the  Germans,  and  of  Europe  generally,  only  with  difficulty.

The  Soviet  personnel  were  amazed  at  the  astonishingly  high  living
standards  of  the  average  western  man.  The  words  uttered  by  a
Soviet  soldier  when  he  saw  the  home  of  a European  worker:  "Are
you  a capitalist?",  became  proverbial  among  us.  During  the  years  of
the  occupation  the  Soviet  soldier  began  to  give  these  words  an  inverse
application  to  his  own  life.  Every  Soviet  citizen  who  has


178


seen  Europe  is  lost  to  the  Soviet  regime.  He  continues,  like  a wound-up
piece  of  clockwork,  to  perform  his  functions,  but  the  poison  of  his
recognition  of  the  truth  has  not  left  him  unscathed.

As  the  years  pass  the  impressions  of  those  early  days  will  be
erased.  Everything  will  seem  more  ordinary,  the  contradictions  will
lose  their  sharpness,  men  will  grow  accustomed  to  them.  The  front
line  soldiers  and  officers  who  formed  the  backbone  of  the  occupation
forces  will  be  replaced  by  others.  And  when  they  return  to  their
homeland  it  will  be  difficult  for  them  to  share  their  impressions  of
Germany  with  others.  Who  wants  ten  years  for  'anti-soviet
agitation'?

Our  first  meeting  with  our  conquered  enemy  opened  our  eyes  to
many  things;  we  began  to  recognize  our  place  in  the  world.  We  felt
our  strength  and  our  weakness.  In  the  light  of  subsequent
experiences  the  impressions  of  the  first  post-war  months  are  seen  as  a
distinct  phase  in  the  life  of  the  Soviet  occupation  troops.  It  was  a
kind  of  transient  period  of  post-war  democracy.  Nobody  else  in  the
Soviet  Union  was  as  conscious  of  the  victory  as  we,  the  men  of  the
occupation  forces.  We  looked  victory  in  the  face,  we  sunned  our
selves  in  its  light.

Simultaneously  the  victory  and  our  encounter  with  the  West
aroused  old  doubts  and  engendered  new  ones.  In  their  turn  these
doubts  strengthened  our  desire,  our  longing  and  hope  for  something
different,  for  something  that  differed  from  what  we  had  known
before  the  war.  In  the  ra3,s  of  victory  we  lived  in  hope  of  a better
future.

That  short  period  of  post-war  democracy  allowed  us  to  have  this
hope.  That  can  be  understood  only  in  retrospect.


179


CHAPTER  NINE
The  Soviet  Supreme  Staff

After  a few  months  in  Karlshorst  I had  a very  good  knowledge
of  the  structure  and  the  functions  of  the  Supreme  Staff  of  the  Soviet
Military  Administration.  My  work  in  close  association  with  the
highest  officers  of  the  S.M.A.  enabled  me  to  see  behind. the  scenes  of
the  Supreme  Staff  machinery.

The  head  of  the  S.M.A.,  Marshal  Zhukov,  was  also  the  supreme
commander  of  the  Soviet  occupation  forces.  As  such,  at  Potsdam
he  had  a second  staff  headquarters,  the  Supreme  Staff  of  those
forces.

Marshal  Zhukov  rightly  enjoyed  great  authority,  and  his  appoint
ment  to  the  post  of  military  governor  in  the  Soviet  zone  was  due  to
his  great  services  as  a brilliant  field-commander  who  had  played  a
decisive  role  during  the  war.  Moreover,  he  was  highly  popular,  as  is
shown  by  the  many  stories  about  him  and  his  relations  with  his  men.

Here  is  one:

On  one  occasion  during  the  advance  the  marshal  decided  to
investigate  the  state  of  affairs  along  the  roads  leading  to  the  front.

He  put  an  old  military  greatcoat  over  his  marshal's  uniform,  an  old
earflapped  cap  on  his  head,  threw  a ragged  pack  across  his  back
and  went  to  a road  leading  directly  to  the  front  line.  He  posted  him
self  at  the  roadside,  alone,  leaning  on  a stick,  posing  as  a wounded
soldier.  Whenever  a car  occupied  by  officers  drove  past  he  tried  to
stop  it,  but  his  requests  for  help  were  ignored,  none  of  the  cars
stopped.  But  they  found  themselves  held  up  at  the  next  control
point.  They  cursed  at  the  unexpected  delay,  but  could  not  discover
who  had  issued  the  order.  A little  later  Zhukov  himself  arrived  in
his  old  greatcoat.

"What  idiot  gave  the  order  to  stop  us  at  this  control  point.?"  he
found  the  officers  storming  at  the  inflexible  guard.

'41  did,"  the  marshal  answered  calmly.

"Then  who  are  you?"  They  turned  on  him  roughly.

"Who  am  I?  I'm  a Russian  soldier,"  Zhukov  explained  with  the
same  threatening  calm,  and  casually  undid  the  froggings  of  his
coat.  "Relieve  them  of  their  documents  and  remit  the  cases  to  a


180


field  court-martial,"  he  ordered  his  adjutant,  who  had  just  arrived.

In  his  memoirs,  General  Eisenhower  frequently  expresses  his

astonishment  at  Marshal  Zhukov's  disconcerting  lack  of

independence;  while  they  were  working  together  Zhukov  never  dared  to  make

a decision  for  himself.  According  to  American  ideas  such  a man

would  be  forced  to  resign  on  the  ground  that  he  was  not  equal,

to  his  responsible  tasks.  But  according  to  Soviet  conceptions  Marshal

Zhukov  was  too  independent,  and  this  was  one  of  the  reasons  for

his  early  recall  from  the  post  of  S.M.A.  supreme  commander.

As  a matter  of  fact,  Marshal  Zliukov  never  took  any  decision
without  a preliminary  understanding  with  Moscow.  His  real  fault
was  that  even  when  he  carried  out  the  Kremlin's  instructions
exactly  he  had  the  audacity  to  express  his  own  opinion.  Quite  often
he  tried  to  get  his  instructions  revised  when  he  considered  them
premature  or  inexpedient.  In  the  Kremlin's  eyes  that  was  reason
enough  to  suspect  him  of  rebellious  tendencies.

His  recall  to  Moscow  in  March  1946  and  appointment  as
commander  of  a military  district  in  the  Russian  provinces  was  a further
instance  of  the  Kremlin's  dictatorial  methods.  Zhukov  enjoyed  too
great  authority  and  popularity  in  the  post-war  Soviet  Union,  and
that  in  itself  would  have  been  sufficient  reason  for  depriving  the
war-hero  of  his  important  post.  The  Kremlin  was  afraid  of  such  a
great  concentration  of  power  in  the  hands  of  a man  who  was  not  one
of  its  group.

Marshal  Zhukov's  successor,  General  Sokolovsky,  who  soon  after
his  appointment  was  raised  to  the  rank  of  marshal,  was  not  quite
so  disturbing  to  the  Kremlin's  peace  of  mind.  He  was  a gifted
administrator,  but  had  never  been  more  than  the  executive  of
others'  decisions.  The  Kremlin  considered  such  a commander  more
fitted  to  deal  with  the  changed  conditions  of  the  post-war  period
when,  after  getting  through  a critical  period,  the  Politbureau  again
took  the  reins  firmly  into  its  hands. Side  by  side  with  the
supreme  commander's  organization  there  is  the  office
of  the  Political  Adviser,  who  is  the  real  representative
of  Soviet  Party  policy  in  Germany;  his  role  far  exceeds  that  of  a
normal  counselor.  He  is  responsible  for  seeing  that  the  Kremlin's
political  line  is  followed,  and  as  unofficial  political  commissar  he
simultaneously  has  oversight  of  all  the  supreme  commander's
decisions.  When  Molotov  arrived  in  Berlin  on  his  way  to  the  London
Conference  or  for  the  subsequent  Foreign  Ministers'  Conferences  in
that  city,  he.  always  saw  the  Political  Adviser  before  the  supreme
commander.  While  the  commander  was  the  representative  of  the
Soviet  Government,  the  Political  Adviser  was  the  representative


181


of  the  Party.  Their  mutual  relations  corresponded:  the  first  executed
the  second's  will.


The  Political  Administration  of  the  S.M.A.  Staff  has  the  same  name
as  that  of  the  Political  Adviser,  but  it  is  an  independent  organization.
The  Political  Adviser's  Administration  forms  the  link  between  the
S.M.A.  and  Moscow,  whereas  the  S.M.A.  Political  Administration
is  the  link  with  below;  in  other  words,  it  controls  political  activities
inside  the  S.M.A.  offices  throughout  the  Soviet  zone  and  directs  all
the  political  life  of  that  zone.  It  issues  instructions  to  and  receives
reports  from  the  Party  organizers  who  act  as  political  commissars
to  the  head  of  each  office,  department,  and  branch  of  the  S.M.A.
Although  the  position  of  political  commissar  has  been  officially
abolished  more  than  once,  it  still  continues  unofficially  in  the  army
under  the  designation:  'Deputy  of  the  Commander  in  Political
Affairs',  and  in  civilian  offices  as  the  'Party  Organizer'.

The  Political  Administration  supervises  the  activities  of  the
political  parties  in  the  Soviet  zone.  It  is  from  this  department  that
the  German  communist  leaders,  Pieck,  Grotewohl,  and  Ulbricht,
receive  their  instructions.  Among  other  tasks  of  the  Administration
is  the  propagation  and  spreading  of  Soviet  ideology.  One  department
is  concerned  with  the  instruction  of  and  political  work  among  the
German  youth.  All  the  educational  plans  and  primers  for  the  German
schools  are  drawn  up  in  conformity  with  the  directives  of  the  S.M.A.
Department  for  Education,  but  they  have  first  to  be  examined  and
confirmed  by  the  Political  Administration.

Without  the  Administration's  approval  nobody  can  play  any
part  in  the  public  life  of  the  Soviet  zone.  Even  where  the  simulacrum
of  democracy  is  maintained-in  the  elections  of  representatives  of
German  parties  and  trade  unions,  for  instance-the  Political
Administration  predetermines  the  outcome  of  those  elections.

The  purely  military  branches  of  the  S.M.A.,  divided  into  army
air  force,  and  naval  departments,  are  occupied  with  studying  a ~
appraising  the  military  experience  of  the  German  Wehrmacht  and
especially  the  German  war  technique.  A large  number  of  military
scientific  research  institutes  and  experimental  stations  taken  OVCI
from  the  former  Wehrmacht  are  used  for  this  purpose.

In  addition  there  are  Departments  for  health  and  traffic,
education,  and  a number  of  minor  offices.  The  Administration  for
Economy  has  already  been  discussed.

There  are  provincial  departments  of  the  S.M.A.  in  all  the  chief
cities  of  the  five  provinces  in  the  Soviet  zone,  and  their  structure  and
organization  correspond  exactly  with  those  of  the  Supreme  Staff.


182


Together  with  the  local  commandaturas  which  exist  in  all  the  large
towns,  they  form  the  link  with  the  periphery.

The  Soviet  sector  of  Berlin  is  a separate  administrative  unit,
and  officially  ranks  as  a sixth  Province.  The  duties  of  the  S.M.A.
provincial  administration  of  Berlin  are  largely  performed  by  the
Soviet  central  commandatura  in  Luisenstrasse.

Almost  all  the  administrations  and  departments  of  the  S.M.A.

Supreme  Staff  have  committees  for  working  with  the  Control
Commission,  which  function  as  the  Soviet  representatives  in  the
corresponding  directorate  of  the  Allied  Control  Commission.

The  Group  of  Soviet  Occupation  Forces  in  Germany-G.S.O.V.
is  a completely  independent  unit,  having  its  headquarters  in  Pots
dam;  its  only  link  with  the  S.M.A.  is  that  the  S.M.A.  supreme
commander  is  also  in  supreme  command  of  the  G.S.O.V.  The  G.S.O.V.
keeps  its  own  account  of  special  deliveries  from  German  industry,
the  deliveries  being  supervised  by  its  own  control  officers  in  the
respective  works.

Conditions  in  the  S.M.A.  and  the  G.S.O.V.  differ  in  many  respects.

The  S.M.A.  officers  enjoy  greater  freedom  and  privileges,  and  are
better  cared  for  in  respect  of  food  and  clothing.  Assignment  to  a
post  in  the  S.M.A.  ranks  as  an  assignment  abroad,  so  the  S.M.A.
officers  receive  double  pay,  one  in  'currency'  and  the  other  in
roubles,  special  foreign  equipment  of  particularly  good  quality  as  well
as  the  ordinary  army  equipment,  higher  rations,  and  other  con
cessions.  The  officers  in  the  occupation  forces  complain  to  their
S.M.A.  comrades  about  their  incomparably  harder  conditions  both
of  service  and  of  private  life.

The  local  Soviet  commandaturas  play  an  intermediary  part
between  the  S.M.A.  and  the  G.S.O.V.  They  are  small,  armed  units,
necessary  for  the  maintenance  of  the  order  guaranteed  by  the  occupy
ing  power;  but  they  also  include  economic  departments  and  fulfil
subsidiary  administrative  functions.  Because  of  its  wide  variety  of
tasks  and  the  special  conditions  arising  from  the  division  of  the
city  into  sectors,  the  Berlin  Soviet  commandatura  occupies  a special
position.

Such,  in  broad  outline,  is  the  organizational  structure  of  the  Berlin
Kremlin.

In  December  1945  General  Shabalin  suddenly  fell  ill.  It  was

explained  that  he  had  been  overworking  and  must  spend  a time  in

bed.  Meanwhile,  there  were  persistent  rumours  that  the

Administration  for  Economy  was  to  be  reorganized.  A little  later  I saw  a code


183


order  from  Moscow  instructing  General  Shabalin  to  hand  over  his
duties  and  work  immediately,  and  to  return  to  Moscow  to  place
himself  at  the  disposition  of  the  Party  Central  Committee  Personnel
Department.  No  reason  was  given  for  this  recall.

When  I visited  the  general  in  his  apartment  he  looked  not  so
much  ill  as  harassed  and  depressed.  His  mysterious  recall  to  Moscow
provided  an  adequate  explanation  of  his  illness.  Contrary  to
practice  in  the  democratic  countries,  where  highly  placed  officials
are  honorably  pensioned  off  when  they  prove  unequal  to  their
jobs,  the  Soviet  leaders  either  climb  steadily  higher  or  vanish  with
out  trace.  So  the  general  had  every  reason  to  feel  agitated  about  his
recall.

A few  days  later  he  was  on  his  way  back  to  Moscow,  with  Kuznet
sov  accompanying  him,  At  our  last  meeting  the  former  economic
dictator  of  Germany  made  a wretched  impression:  he  seemed  more
like  a man  awaiting  severe  and  punitive  sentence  than  a highly
placed  general  honorably  quitting  a post  in  which  he  had  served
meritoriously.  He  was  gripped  by  the  feeling  of  impotence,  of  com
plete  dependence  on  the  will  of  his  masters  and  anxiety  for  his  future
fate,  which  is  common  to  all  the  new  'class'  of  Soviet  leaders.

On  his  return  to  Moscow  he  doffed  his  uniform  and  was  appointed
to  quite  a high  post  in  the  Party  leadership,  as  secretary  of  a Party
Regional  Committee  somewhere  on  the  Volga.  So  his  fears  were
unjustified.  Although  his  services  in  the  S.M.A.  were  not  greatly
valued,  and  some  of  his  colleagues  even  considered  him  stupid,  no

direct  censure  could  ever  be  made  of  him.  He  was  very  hardworking
and  devoted  to  the  Party,  which  was  the  main  thing.

After  the  abolition  of  the  Administration  for  Economy  all  its
departments  became  separate  administrations,  subordinated  to
the  supreme  commander's  deputy.  Comrade  Koval  was  sent  from
Moscow  to  take  up  this  post;  previously  he  had  been  a member  of
the  Council  of  People's  Commissars.

Some  of  the  officers  on  General  Shabalin's  personal  staff  were
taken  over  by  Koval's  office,  others  took  the  excellent  opportunity
afforded  by  the  reorganization  to  look  for  new  jobs  in  other
departments.  Those  former  officers  of  the  Administration  who  had  had
no  special  training  and  possessed  no  expert  knowledge  or  capacity
for  economic  affairs  were  attracted  to  Koval's  personal  staff,  in
which  the  work  was  mainly  on  paper  and  where  the  Party  ticket
replaced  diplomas  and  knowledge.  Vinogradov  took  the  lead  in  this
post-hunting.  He  became  head  of  Koval's  private  chancellery
acquired  a service  car,  and  an  office  of  his  own.  Nobody  visiting  hi-
now  would  have  believed  that  only  a few  months  previously  he  had


184


been  hunting  night  after  night  for  trophies  in  the  dust  and  muck  of
Karlshorst's  empty  houses.

The  second  group  consisted  of  specialists  who  were  depressed
by  the  thought  of  conditions  in  the  'apparatus'.  These  took  ad
vantage  of  any  opportunity  to  join  the  administration  in  which
their  professional  knowledge  would  be  of  most  service.  After  his
return  from  Moscow,  where  he  was  raised  to  the  rank  of  lieutenant
colonel,  Major  Kuznetsov  was  transferred  to  the  S.M.A.  Saxony
and  was  given  the  post  of  head  of  the  Mines  Department  in  Dresden.
I,  too,  had  to  face  a change  of  office.  I could  have  waited  passively
for  the  Personnel  Department  to  post  me  to  a new  job  if  I had  not
been  afraid  that,  after  checking  my  documents,  Colonel  Utkin  might
again  offer  me  work  in  the  Administration  for  State  Security  or
some  other,  purely  military  administration.  It  would  have  been  too
risky  to  turn  down  such  a flattering  proposal  a second  time.

I recalled  what  General  Biyasi  had  said  to  me  before  I left  the
college:  "Wherever  you  may  find  yourself,  you  will  always  belong
to  the  General  Staff."  Now,  faced  by  the  forthcoming  change  of  post,

I was  disturbed  by  these  words.  Only  recently  I had  been  proud  of
the  military-diplomatic  career  which  was  opening  before  me.  But
now  I was  more  and  more  understanding  the  meaning  of  Valia
Grinchuk's  artless  remark:  simply  live  for  the  sake  of  living."
obviously  the  road  we  were  traveling  was  not  entirely  in  harmony
with  true  living  if  we,  two  young  pupils  of  Stalin,  were  both  troubled
by  the  same  feeling.

The  thoughts  slipped  vaguely  through  my  mind:  after  all,  I had
collie  to  Germany  to  free  myself  of  my  pestering  doubts  and
hesitations.  After  all,  I had  quite  deliberately  chosen  to  go  to  the  most
exposed  part  of  the  post-war  front  in  order  to  return  to  Moscow  a
convinced  and  thorough-going  communist.  Instead,  after  six  months,

I was  now  trying  to  make  up  my  mind  to  turn  off  that  path.  Nc)-w
that  I stood  at  the  crossroads,  one  way  taking  the  road  of  a military
career,  the  other  turning  back  to  my  profession  as  engineer,  I felt . . .
To  avoid  difficulties  with  Colonel  Utkin,  I decided  not  to  wait  to
be  called  to  the  Personnel  Department,  but  to  talk  to  Alexandrov,
head  of  the  Administration  for  Industry.  Alexandrov  had  come  to
know  me  quite  well  during  my  service  with  Shabalin.  After  he  had
gone  through  my  papers  he  said  he  was  willing  to  apply  for  my
transfer  to  his  department.

All  went  well.  In  those  days  there  was  a greater  need  of  industrial
specialists  than  of  military  men.  A few  days  later  I was  officially
appointed  directing  engineer  in  the  Administration  for  Industry
This  meant  that  I was  entrusted  with  the  task  -of  directing,  i.e.


185


controlling,  a definite  branch  of  German  industry.  So  I had  taken
another  step  off  the  main  road.  But  where  was  I going?

In  essence  the  S.M.A.  Administration  for  Industry  performed
the  functions  of  a ministry  for  industry  in  the  Soviet  zone.  Its  most
important  tasks  were,  first  and  foremost,  to  ensure  reparations
deliveries,  which  involved  close  co-operation  with  the  S.M.A.
Administration  for  Reparations  and  Deliveries;  secondly,  to  en-
sure deliveries  for  the  Soviet  Occupation  Force  in  Germany;  and,
thirdly,  to  ensure  production  for  the  needs  of  the  German  population.
This  last  function  was  customarily  exercised  only  on  paper,  especially
when  it  could  be  exploited  for  starting  a new  undertaking.  As  soon
as  the  works  had  begun  production,  that  production  went  to
reparations  deliveries.

Shortly  after  the  capitulation  the  S.M.A.  set  up  a number  of
German  central  administrations  to  correspond  with  its  own:  a German
Administration  for  Agriculture,  one  for  Industry,  etc.  All  these

administrations  were  accommodated  in  G6ring's  former  Air  Ministry
building  and  were  obedient  instruments  in  the  hands  of  the  S.M.Ai
Later,  again  on  orders  from  Karlshorst,  the  German  Economic
Commission,  D.W.K.,  was  set  up,  on  the  basis  of  these  German
administrations,  its  task  being  to  direct  German  economy  in
accordance  with  S.M.A.  principles,  but  through  German  instruments.

The  relations  between  the  S.M.A.  and  the  German  central
administrations  can  be  shown  by  considering  the  interconnections
between  the  S.M.A.  Administration  for  Industry  and  the  German
Central  Administration  for  Industry,  since  each  was  a highly
important  organ  in  its  respective  sphere.  The  duties  of  the  two  bodies
can  be  stated  in  very  simple  terms:  the  first  ordered  and  directed,
the  second  obeyed  implicitly  and  suffered  the  curses.

Alexandrov,  the  head  of  the  S.M.A.  Administration  for  Industry,
had  a very  deceptive  outward  appearance.  Of  medium  size,  with
a bloated,  inscrutable  visage,  he  always  spoke  in  a - monotonous
and  dispassionate  tone.  But  he  had  had  great  experience  in  the
industrial  field,  and  enjoyed  the  respect  of  his  assistants.  Until  his
appointment  to  Germany  he  had  been  deputy  minister  for  the
medium  machinery  industry  in  the  U.S.S.R.  It  was  very  wearying  to  take
part  in  conferences  in  Alexandrov's  room,  for  one  of  his  eyes  stared
continually  out  of  the  window,  and  the  other  at  the  ceiling.  When  he
spoke  it  was  impossible  to  tell  which  way  he  was  looking  and  whom
he  was  addressing.

Smirnov,  the  deputy  head  of  the  Administration,  was  a man  with
a pale,  haggard  face,  thin,  colourless  lips  and  piercing  eyes.  He
rather  reminded  one  of  the  typical  M.V.D.  examining  officer,  and


186


that  resemblance  was  not  altogether  deceptive,  since  he  held  his  post
in  a somewhat  similar  capacity.  Although  he  had  not  done  anybody
any  harm  in  the  Administration,  the  majority  of  the  officers
preferred  to  have  contact  with  Alexandrov.

The  Administration  included  an  Industry  Committee  which  had

the  task  of  co-ordinating  the  work  of  the  S.M.A.  Administration

for  Industry  with  the  Industrial  Directorate  of  the  Control

Commission.  Its  head  was  a gloomy  and  extremely  unsociable  man  named

Kozlov.

In  the  Administration  for  Industry  there  was  a very  different
atmosphere  from  that  which  prevailed  in  the  office  of  the  Political  Adviser,
the  Political  Administration,  or  the  purely  military  administrations.

Although  the  majority  of  the  staff  wore  uniform,  they  felt  that  they
were  really  engineers  or  other  technical  experts,  that  they  were  all
civilians.  Here  the  first  requirement  was  that  a man  should  be  a
specialist;  in  the  other  administrations  the  Party  ticket  was  the  most
important  thing.

Ninety-five  per  cent  of  the  engineers  in  the  Administration  were
Party  members.  But  that  did  not  prevent  their  taking  a more  or  less
critical  and  independent  attitude  to  their  milieu.  Though  they  did
not  always  express  their  thoughts  aloud,  they  thought  and  felt
differently  from  the  'Party-men  of  the  purest  water'.  Here  the
difference  between  the  two  concepts-Soviet  intelligentsia  and
Party  intelligentsia-was  clearly  revealed.  The  first  group  was  just
as  much  a product  of  the  Stalin  epoch  as  the  second,  but  it  was  not
by  any  means  always  sincerely  sympathetic  to  the  Party  line.  To
a large  extent  it  consisted  of  enforced  camp-followers.  It  is  very
dangerous  to  be  an  engineer  and  not  to  belong  to  the  Party,  and

In  practice  it  is  impossible  to  continue  so  for  any  length  of  time.

The  second  group,  the  so-called  'Party  intelligentsia',  whose  only
backing  is  the  Party  ticket,  had  undergone  only  a narrowly
specialized  Party  training.  So,  willy-nilly,  they  had  to  be  faithful  to  the
Party,  to  which  they  owed  their  position.

One  of  my  first  jobs  in  the  Administration  for  Industry  was  to
help  in  fixing  the  peace  potential  for  the  industry  of  the  Soviet  zone.

To  get  a real  understanding  of  what  this  meant  one  must  bear
in  mind  the  state  of  post-war  industry  in  that  zone.  In  brief  outline
it  was  as  follows:

Immediately  the  war  was  over  a number  of  dismantling  forces
swept  over  the  country.  In  the  Soviet  zone  they  worked  feverishly
for  several  months  under  the  stimulus  of  the  slogan:  'Everything
on  to  wheels.'  They  were  governed  by  the  one  principle  of  dispatching


187


as  much  tonnage  as  possible  to  the  Soviet  Union,  irrespective  of
whether  it  would  be  useful  there  or  not.  There  were  no  plans,  and  no
limitations.  The  only  difficulty  which  the  dismantlers  came  up
against,  and  truly  it  was  a very  small  one,  was  the  sequestration  of
certain  works  by  the  occupation  forces.  If  a factory  was  producing
something  the  army  needed,  it  was  sequestrated:  a military  unit
commanded  by  an  officer  went  to  the  works  and  refused  the
dismantlers  access,  with  a show  of  armed  force  if  necessary.  But  in
general  this  sequestration  was  of  little  importance,  since  it  chiefly
affected  branches  of  light  industry.  After  their  attack  on  Soviet  zone
industry  the  remnants  of  the  dismantling  parties  were  placed  at  the

disposition  of  the  S.M.A.  The  first  step  of  the  S.M.A.  was  to  form  a
Committee  for  Liquidation  of  the  War  Potential,  which  very  quick?
dealt  with  its  task:  that  of  blowing  up  the  war  industry  with
dynamite.  The  works  which  had  already  been  stripped  of  their  machinery
were  now  razed  to  the  ground  by  sappers.  As  the  German  industry
had  been  adapted  to  war  requirements  long  before  its  outbreak,
frequently  it  was  not  easy  to  draw  an  exact  line  between  peace  and
war  industry-in  the  chemicals  industry,  for  instance.  And  so  in
this  'liquidation  of  war  potential'  a part  of  basic  industry,  if  not  of
peace  industry,  had  to  suffer.  The  effect  was  rather  like  cutting  the
roots  of  a tree.

Part  of  the  dismantling  process  had  been  treated  as  a state  secret,
and  so  the  details  had  no  been  revealed  even  to  the  S.M.A.
Administration  for  Industry.  As  for  the  rest,  no  systematized
records  of  operations  were  kept  in  any  case,  so  Alexandrov  and  the
directing  engineers  of  the  various  branches  of  industry  could  not
get  any  detailed  picture  of  the  state  of  industry  in  the  Soviet
zone.  In  addition,  the  M.V.D.  had  laid  its  hands  on  a large  number
of  items,  and  these  did  not  appear  in  any  books  at  all.  This  related
to  firms  in  which  Moscow  was  particularly  interested,  and  which  it
disposed  of  without  reference  to  the  S.M.A.  These  included,  for
instance,  the  experimental  stations  and  testing  bases  for  the  V2  at
Peenemunde.

After  the  first  wave  of  dismantling  and  destruction  of  the  war
industry  had  come  to  an  end,  the  S.M.A.  attacked  its  chief  task
be  the  economic  front:  the  extraction  of  reparations.  But  it  must
not  be  overlooked  that  in  various  forms  the  dismantling  process
continued.  Moscow  set  literally  dozens  of  dates  for  the  final
completion  of  the  process,  only  to  suspend  the  date  each  time.

As  the  S.M.A.  has  a special  Administration  for  Reparations,
with  the  largest  staff  of  any  department,  it  may  seem  strange  that
the  Administration  for  Industry  is  in  practice  occupied  with  the


188


same  task,  namely,  extraction  of  reparations.  One  may  describe  its
role  as  that  of  'gunlayer'.

At  this  stage  one  comes  up  against  the  idea  of  reparations  out
of  current  production.  This  formula  was  a stumbling-block-even
if  only  formally  perhaps-in  all  the  negotiations  of  the  various
Foreign  Ministers'  Conferences  held  by  the  victor  powers.

Reparations  out  of  current  production  are  straightforward,  naked  repair
tions  which  can  be  supervised,  and  so  taken  into  account.  The  works
directors  in  the  Soviet  zone  are  familiar  with  the  special  forms  issued
for  reparations  orders.  The  S.M.A.  keeps  the  original,  one  copy  goes  to
the  works  instructed  to  execute  the  order,  and  the  second  copy  goes
to  the  local  burgomaster,  who  has  to  pay.

As  we  S.M.A.  engineers  were  constantly  concerned  with  reparations
deliveries,  we  often  wondered  whether  the  value  of  the  installations
dismantled  and  sent  to  the  Soviet  Union  was  to  be  deducted  from  the
ten  milliard  dollars  which  we  claimed  in  reparations.  The  question
interested  us  purely  academically,  but  the  Germans  must  have  a much
more  practical  interest  in  it.

The  question  of  German  property  in  Austria  is  just  as  academic.

The  Soviet  authorities  in  Austria  have  confiscated  a large  part  of
the  industry  on  the  ground  that  it  is  German  property.  Assuming  that
it  really  is  German-owned,  the  question  necessarily  arises:  to  which
account  is  it  to  be  entered?  At  one  conference  one  of  the  leading
officers  in  the  Administration  for  Reparations  asked  the  commander
in-chief's  deputy  for  economic  questions,  Koval,  a question  on  this
point.  Koval  only  smiled  and  answered:  "At  the  moment  I have  no
knowledge  that  this  property  is  to  be  credited  to  the  German
reparations  account."  Koval's  words  are  authoritative  enough.

The  Potsdam  Conference  gave  the  Allied  Control  Commission
the  task  of  fixing  the  limits  of  German  industry's  peace  potential,
so  as  on  the  one  hand  to  exclude  any  possibility  of  a revival  of
militarism,  and  on  the  other  to  ensure  the  German  people  a Central
European  living  standard.  At  the  Foreign  Ministers'  Conference  to
be  held  in  Paris  in  the  early  summer  of  1946  the  German  problem  was
to  be  the  first  item  on  the  agenda,  and  so  the  Control  Commission
and  the  military  administrations  of  the  four  Allied  powers  attacked
the  problem  of  the  peace  potential.  To  this  end  the  directing  engineers
of  the  various  branches  of  industry  were  called  to  a conference  with
the  head  of  the  Administration  for  Industry.

Alexandrov  opened  the  conference  with  the  words:  "In  the  immediate


189


future  the  Control  Commission  will  be  fixing  the  definite  limits  of
German  industry's  peace  potential,  on  the  basis  of  drafts  supplied
by  all  the  four  parties.  The  supreme  commander  has  in  instructed  us
to  present  him  with  our  views  and  a draft  for  a peace  potential  in
the  Soviet  zone  for  his  confirmation,  when  it  will  be  submitted  as
the  Soviet  contribution  to  the  solution  of  this  problem.

The  supreme  commander  draws  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  this
draft  will  also  be  presented  directly  to  Comrade  Molotov."

He  made  a significant  pause.  Then  he  murmured  something

concerning  the  wisdom  of  the  leaders,  and  the  great  confidence  they
had  shown  in  us  by  entrusting  us  with  such  a responsible  task.

Indeed,  one  might  well  have  believed  that  the  fate  of  Germany  had
been  placed  in  our  hands,  in  the  hands  of  a small  group  of  Soviet
engineers  assembled  in  Alexandrov's  private  room.

At  first  glance  the  task  seemed  interesting  and  important.  By
fixing  the  industrial  potential  we  would  be  practically  establishing
the  Germans'  living  conditions.  In  their  case  the  industrial  potential
was  the  equivalent  of  their  standard  of  existence;  it  meant  the
amount  of  bread  on  the  plate  of  every  German  in  the  country.

"What  are  our  directives  in  regard  to  the  method  of  working
out  the  potential?"  one  of  us  asked.

"We  must  take  as  basis  the  average  living  conditions  before  1988,"
Alexandrov  answered.  "We  must  calculate  the  average  internal
consumption  per  head  of  the  population  at  that  time,  or  equivalent
units.  With  these  data  and  the  present  population  figures  for  the
Soviet  zone  we  shall  arrive  at  the  peace  potential  of  the  Soviet  zone
industry."

He  had  mentioned  only  the  internal  consumption.  But  every  one
of  us  knew  quite  well  that  in  the  German  economic  budget  exports
played  a far  more  important  part  than  the  internal  demand.  If  we
left  exports  out  of  consideration  when  making  our  calculations,  it
would  artificially  reduce  the  volume  of  industrial  production
enormously  by  comparison  with  the  'thirties.  "What  about  the  industrial
production  that  was  formerly  exported?"  One
raised  the  question  which  was  interesting  us  all.

"Exports  play  no  part  in  our  calculations,"  Alexandrov  answered
in  a monotonous  tone.  "During  the  occupation  period  the  export
quota  will  be  replaced  by  reparations.  If  the  occupation  regime  should
be  changed,  something  else  will  take  the  place  of  direct  reparations."


190


He  chose  his  words  very  carefully.  He  did  not  say:  "The  end  of  the
occupation,"  but:  "If  the  occupation  regime  should  be  changed."

The  first  steps  on  the  road  to  'something  else'  in  place  of  direct
reparations  were  taken,  in  fact,  much  sooner  than  the  change  of  the
occupation  regime  itself,  those  steps  consisted  in  the  founding  of
Soviet  joint-stock  companies,  which  occurred  six  months  later.

"What  will  happen  to  those  industrial  works  which  are  still
producing  beyond  the  limit  today?"  another  officer  asked.  But
then  apparently  he  recalled  the  dismantling  operations  and
quickly  corrected  himself.  "Anyway,  after  dismantling  operations
engineer  at  last

are  completed  such  a case  is  hardly  likely  to  arise.  But  what  happens
in  the  opposite  case;  namely,  if  present  production  doesn't  reach  the
limits  of  the  future  peace  potential?"

"Such  a case  is  purely  hypothetical,  so  far  as  we're  concerned.  So
far  as  it  is  necessary  from  the  reparations  aspect,  we  shall  increase
production,"  Alexandrov  answered.  "But  generally  speaking  our
job  is  simply  to  establish  the  limit  figures.  We're  interested  in  the
procedure  only  in  so  far  as  we  need  the  figures  for  the  Control
Commission."

He  had  mastered  his  phlegm  sufficiently  to  put  emphasis  on  the
word  'figures'.  So  far  as  we  were  concerned,  the  only  guiding  factor
in  regard  to  industrial  production  in  the  Soviet  zone  was  simply  and
solely  that  we  were  to  secure  reparations  deliveries.  The  establishing
of  any  hypothetical  peace  potential  for  the  future  Germany  was
simply  a courteous  act  of  compliance  with  the  Potsdam  Agreement.

The  task  of  drawing  up  a draft  for  Germany's  peace  potential  was

a simple  matter,  carried  out  almost  literally  to  Alexandrov's

instructions.  The  internal  consumption  for  all  Germany  in  1980  was  taken

as  the  basis.  The  German  population  within  the  1980  frontiers  was

taken  as  seventy  millions.  The  population  of  the  Soviet  zone  was

some  twenty  millions,  so  it  was  easy  to  determine  the  peace

potential  by  resort  to  the  simplest  of  comparative  calculations.  So  it  seemed

in  theory.  In  practice  it  was,  of  course,  much  more  complicated,

especially,  because  Germany  was  divided  into  zones.  For  instance,

a large  part  of  the  electro-technical  industry  was  in  the  Soviet  zone.

In  this  sphere  the  actual  industrial  capacity  was  frequently  higher
than  the  proposed  potential.  On  the  other  hand,  there  were  several
branches  of  the  metallurgical  industry  which  presented  exactly  the
contrary  picture.  From  the  beginning  one  thing  was  quite  clear
to  all  of  us  directing  engineers:  nobody  was  going  to  intensify


191


or  stifle  the  industrial  production  of  the  Soviet  zone  to  accord  with
the  hypothetical  figures  of  the  peace,  potential.  Other,  far  more
weighty  factors  were  decisive.  The  only  normal  solution  would
be  to  treat  Germany  as  a unity.  But  Molotov  did  not  ask  our  advice
on  that  point.  The  draft  of  the  peace  potential  was  drawn  up  and
sent  to  the  Control  Commission.  We  engineers  who  had  participated
in  giving  it  shape  were  probably  the  first  to  realize  in  advance  that
it  was  unrealistic  and  unrealizable.

The  draft  was  subjected  to  much  discussion  and  revised  again
and  again  in  the  conferences  of  the  Control  Commission.  Of,  course

the  first  prerequisite  of  the  establishment  of  a peace  potential

was  German  unity.  The  concession  of  a free  and  unrestricted

commodity  exchange  between  the  zones  could  have  served  as  a temporary

solution  if  necessary.  But  a free  exchange  of  commodities  could

hardly  be  reconciled  with  the  provision  of  reparations  out  of

current  production  because  of  the  danger  that  part  of  the

reparations  might  flow  away  into  other  channels.

During  his  stay  in  Berlin  in  April  1946,  on  his  way  to  the  Foreign
Ministers'  Conference  at  Paris,  the  Soviet  foreign  minister.  Molotov,
checked  the  draft  of  the  peace  potential  and  took  it  with  him,  as  a
Proof  of  the  Soviet  Union's  desire  to  establish  a normal  regime  in
Germany.  At  Paris  he  insisted  just  as  vehemently  on  the  necessity
for  establishing  a peace  potential  as  he  did  on  the  necessity  -for
reparations  out  of  current  production.  It  is  not  easy  for  the  non-
expert to  get  the  hang  of  these  theoretical  questions  and  to  grasp
that  the  two  points  are  mutually  exclusive.  Molotov's  escapades  at
the  Paris  conference  were  nothing  but  propaganda  maneuvers.

While  the  S.M.A.  seemed  to  be  concentrating  on  abstract
discussions  of  the  German  peace  potential,  it  was  also  occupied  with
much  more  vital  issues,  with  measures  that  pursued  far-reaching
ends:  the  socialization  of  industry,  and  the  formation  of  the  Socialist
Unity  Party,  the  S.E.D.

In  the  Administration  for  Industry  I often  had  work  arising  out  of
Marshal  Zhukov's  Order  No.  124.  1 had  had  experience  of  this  order
even  earlier,  while  working  with  General  Shabalin.  At  that  time,  day
after  day  the  marshal's  private  chancellery  had  sent  us  packets  of
letters  and  petitions  in  which  he  was  asked  to  cancel  the
confiscations  of  German  property  which  the  S.M.A.  was  carrying  out.  Order
No.  124,  which  was  issued  shortly  after  the  German  capitulation,
contained  the  guiding  principles  governing  the  confiscation  of  real
estate  belonging  to  former  members  of  the  National-Socialist  Party
and  speculators  who  had  grown  rich  during  the  Hitler  regime  and  the
war,  and  its  transference  to  local  German  authorities.  As  a rule  the


192


Administrator  for  Economy  endorsed  these  petitions,  with  the  note:

'In  accordance  with  Order  No.  124  the  issue  is  to  be  examined  on  the
spot',  without  investigating  them,  and  simply  passed  them  to  the
local  commandaturas  of  the  districts  in  which  the  contested  property
was  situated.  In  reality,  the  endorsement  'In  accordance  with  Order
No.  1 24  the  issue  is  to  be  examined'  meant  that  it  was  to  be  turned
down.  At  that  time  I did  not  go  into  the  question  in  any  detail,  and
the  confiscation  of  former  Nazi  property  seemed  absolutely
justifiable.

Now,  however,  my  work  in  the  Administration  for  Industry
brought  me  into  very  close  contact  with  the  undertakings  that
had  been  confiscated  on  the  basis  of  Order  No.  124.  The  order
related  chiefly  to  works  in  which  the  S.M.A.  was  not  directly
interested,  i.e.  works  that  were  not  likely  to  be  dismantled  nor
could  provide  reparations  deliveries:  small  factories,  mills,  repair
shops,  public  utilities,  and  co-operatives.

From  the  S.M.A.  aspect,  industry  in  the  Soviet  zone  can  be
divided  into  two  categories:  useful  and  useless.  To  the  first  category
belong  the  basic  industries,  which  the  S.M.A.  controls  with  the  aid
of  special  plenipotentiaries  attached  to  all  the  larger  works.  These
plenipotentiaries  are  cloaked  under  all  kinds  of  titles:  'sequestration
officers',  'dismantling  plenipotentiaries'  (who,  however,  after  the
dismantling  is  completed,  remain  as  the  S.M.A. 's  agents  of  control),
preparations  plenipotentiaries',  'Soviet  construction  or  scientific
research  offices',  etc.  No  matter  what  they  are  called,  their  task  is
always  the  same,  namely,  to  ensure  that  the  particular  works
function  in  accordance  with  S.M.A.  plans.  In  these  cases  the  S.M.A.  was
quite  unconcerned  about  the  complexity  of  the  legal  rights  bound
up  with  the  property,  but  in  any  event  all  the  legal  aspect  of  the
problem  was  solved,  very  simply  a little  later,  when  the  Soviet  Joint
stock  Companies  were  organized.

The  second  category  of  German  industry  was  of  no  direct  interest
to  the  S.M.A.,  so  in  practice  it  was  left  to  its  own  devices  for  the
time  being.  It  was  pointless  to  place  an  S.M.A.  representative  in
every  small  works,  yet  it  was  contrary  to  Soviet  tradition  and
custom  to  leave  even  unimportant  works  without  supervision.  So  it
was  decided  to  extend  Order  No.  124,  which  originally  applied  only
to  the  property  of  former  Nazis,  to  all  the  group  of  'useless'
industries,  in  order  to  extract  the  most  effective  value  from  them.  For
this  purpose  the  works  were  expropriated  out  of  hand,  provided  with
the  label  'district-owned  works'  (Landeseigener  Betrieb)  and  handed
over  to  the  local  German  authorities.


193


Practically  speaking,  this  was  nothing  more  nor  less  than  the
socialization  of  small  industry.  In  this  step  the  S.M.A.  was  governed
by  two  considerations.  In  the  first  place,  it  was  necessary  to  deprive
the  second  independent  stratum  of  the  German  community,  namely,
the  entrepreneurs  and  industrialists,  of  their  economic  basis.  This

operation  had  already  been  carried  through  in  agriculture,  with  the
aid  of  the  land  reform.  Secondly,  it  lent  itself  to  the  presence
that  the  new  regime  was  progressive,  and  thus,  if  only  transiently,
it  made  political  capital  for  the  Soviets  and  their  puppets.

The  S.M.A.  lost  nothing  by  this  development.  Under  the  new
conditions  of  planned  economy  the  whole  group  of  'useless  industries
was  condemned  to  extinction  in  any  case,  as  it  could  not  carry  on
without  credits  and  subsidies.  So  it  was  fully  expedient  to  hand  over
the  unprofitable  concern  into  'the  hands  of  the  German  people'.

In  due  course  these  'district-owned  works'  loyally  and  wholly
fulfilled  the  orders  of  the  firms  engaged  in  making  reparations
deliveries.  And  so,  although  the  'district-owned  works  , received  no
reparations  orders  themselves,  they  worked  none  the  less  to  the
reparations  account.  Q.E.D.

The  socialization  thus  begun  was  extended  more  and  more  into
other  spheres  of  the  'private  capitalist'  sector.  For  its  part,  the
S.N.A.  brought  the  German  'local  authorities'  more  and  more  into
subjection,  while  on  the  other  hand  the  hitherto  comparatively
independent  sectors  of  'social  and  economic  life  in  the  Soviet  zone
were  brought  more  and  more  under  the  control  of  these  same
'local  authorities'.  The  total  remained  the  same,  but  the  various
entries  were  rearranged.

One  of  the  most  subtle  moves  of  the  S.M.A.  Political

Administration  in  the  struggle  for  political  domination  in  Germany  was  the

formation  of  the  Socialist  Unity  Party.

In  the  early  days  after  the  capitulation  the  S.M.A.  took  various  steps
to  strengthen  the  position  of  the  German  Communist  Party  (K.P.D.)
and  to  establish  its  authority  among  the  German  people.  It  resorted
to  methods  well  tried  in  practice:  on  the  one  hand  extending  every
conceivable  kind  of  privilege  to  the  Party  members,  and  on  the
other  exercising  increasing  pressure  on  persons  who  were  reluctant
to  become  Party  members.  These  methods  were  successful  for  a time,
but  then  there  was  a decline  in  the  influx  of  new  members,  and
finally  it  stopped  altogether.  And  the  German  people's  respect  for
the  K.P.D.  declined  even  more.  Everybody  saw  that  it  existed  only
by  virtue  of  the  bayonets  of  the  occupying  power.  Even  people  who
previously  had  sympathized  with  Marxism  realized  that  they  had


194


taken  a wrong  road  when  they  came  to  know  Stalinism  in  practice.

Consequently  the  quite  natural  leftward  trend  of  the  German
people  after  the  collapse  of  the  totalitarian  dictatorship  led  to  a
growth  not  of  the  Communist  but  of  the  Social-Democratic  Party.

And,  despite  their  'left-wing'  attitude,  the  S.D.P.D.  were  not  very
sociable,  and  treated  the  S.M.A.'s  persistent  advances  with  a cool
reserve.

The  special  conditions  of  the  transition  stage,  together  with  the
very  unceremonious  economic  measures  being  applied,  rendered  it
necessary  to  observe  certain  democratic  rules  of  the  game  at  least
formally.  One  of  the  first  'formalities'  of  this  kind  was  the  election
of  the  German  municipal  authorities.  The  Western  Allies  repeatedly
proposed  that  the  question  of  general  elections  in  Berlin  should  go  on
the  agenda  of  the  Allied  Commandatura  meeting,  but  the  S.M.A.
managed  to  postpone  the  question  again  and  again--simply  because
Karlshorst  was  far  from  convinced  that  the  K.P.D.  would  get  the
desired  majority  in  such  elections.

The  S.M.A.  Political  Administration  held  many  conferences  with
the  leaders  of  the  K.P.D.  headed  by  Wilhelm  Pieck.  The
Administration  insisted  that  the  Party  influence  must  be  increased  by  every
possible  means.  Pieck  could  only  shrug  his  shoulders  helplessly.  Then,
after  discussions  with  the  S.M.A.  Political  Adviser,  the  possibility  of
a fusion  of  the  K.P.D.  and  S.D.P.D.  was  raised.  At  one  stroke  that
would  give  the  K.P.D.  a gigantic  increase  in  membership,  and  there
fore  in  votes.  The  S.M.A.  regarded  the  S.D.P.D.  as  a numerically
very  strong  but  politically  helpless  organization  without  a backbone.

If  the  K.P.D.,  numerically  very  weak  but  energetic,  unscrupulous
in  its  methods,  and  supported,  moreover,  by  the,  bayonets  of  the
occupying  power,  could  swallow  and  digest  the  S.D.P.D.,  success
was  assured,  at  least  superficially.  It  was  decided  to  provide  the
future  coalition  party  with  the  temporary  accommodation  address
of  the  'Socialist  Unity  Party  of  Germany'  (S.E.D.).

No  sooner  said  than  done.  A violent  campaign  was  initiated  for  the
unification  of  the  two  parties.  But  the  harmony  of  the  concert  was
disturbed  at  the  very  beginning  by  the  resolute  voice  of  the  S.D.P.D.
leadership  and  headquarters,  which  were  beyond  the  reach  of  the
S.M.A.  They  flatly  refused  to  enter  the  coalition  or  recognize  the
fusion,  or  rather  the  inclusion,  of  their  members  with  the  K.P.D.  in
forming  the  S.E.D.,  of  which  the  S.M.A.  was  the  godfather.

So  within  the  area  under  its  control  the  S.M.A.  produced  a few
renegades  who  were  ready,  in  the  name  of  the  eastern  zone  S.D.P.D.,


195


to  enter  into  a socialist  coalition  with  the  K.P.D.  The  result  was  the
formal  split  of  the  S.D.P.D.  into  two  parts:  east  and  west.  A little
205

later  the  inhabitants  of  the  eastern  zone  saw  brightly  colour
placards  put  up  on  their  walls  and  fences,  representing  the  KPD
and  the  S.D.P.D.  as  fraternally  shaking  hands.  The  Soviet  officers
sneered:  "We  hold  out  our  hand  to  you:  you'll  hold  out  your  foot
yourself."

How  completely  Karishorst  had  misjudged  the  Germans'  political
maturity  was  shown  by  the  elections  held  in  Berlin  in  October  1946
The  newly  born  political  bastard  on  which  the  S.M.A.  had  set  such
great  hopes  came  bottom  but  one  of  the  four  parties  that  took  part
But  although  the  S.E.D  ' suffered  a shameful  defeat  in  Berlin
where  the  Germans  could  give  free  expression  to  their  opinion
it  came  to  power  in  the  provinces  of  the  Soviet  zone,  where  al
methods  could  be  used.  The  occupation  authorities  had  enough
means  of  influencing  the  masses  there.

The  building  in  which  the  Administration  for  Industry  was  housed
was  outside  the  Karishorst  military  zone,  and  so  the  pernicious
influence  of  the  surrounding  world  had  obvious  effects.  Opposite  the
building  was  a German  newspaper  kiosk  where  many  of  the  Soviet
officers  on  their  way  to  work  bought  German  papers  and  periodicals,
on  the  simple  pretext  of  getting  'practice  in  German'.

Compulsory  courses  in  German  were  held  in  the  Administration
three  times  a week.  Now  the  courses  were  stopped  on  some  pretext
or  other,  so  an  unexpected  'gap'  occurred.

I was  sitting  in  my  room,  looking  through  some  documents.

The  door  to  the  next  room  happened  to  be  open,  and  I saw  Captain
Bagdassarian  enter,  throw  a wad  of  newspapers  on  to  his  desk,  and
remark:  "Now  we'll  see  what  new  sensations  there  are  today!"

His  remark  referred  to  the  Courier  and  the  Telegraf,  newpapers
published  in  the  western  sectors  of  Berlin.  He  sat  down  at  his  desk,
leaned  forward  and  bent  his  head  down.  A casual  observer  would  have
thought  he  was  studying  official  documents  calling  for  particular
concentration.  His  first  step  was  to  open  the  lllustrierte  Rundschau,
the  weekly  illustrated  supplement  to  the  Tagliche  Rundschau,  the
official  S.M.A.  organ  in  the  German  language,  which  had  Colonel
Kirsanov  as  its  editor-in-chief.

"So  the  Germans  plough  with  tractors!  Excellent!  Let  them
plough;  we'll  eat  the  fruits."  He  turned  over  a page.  "Ah,  so  we're
ploughing  too."  He  bent  down  over  the  paper  in  an  attempt  to  pick


196


out  the  details.  "Apparently  the  tractor  driver's  been  touched  up,
but  he  looks  pretty  sick,  all  the  same.  A black  mark  for  Colonel
Kirsanov!

"Ah,  so  now  we  have  fancy  cakes!  Lovely,  tasty,  sweet,  delicious
cakes!  This  time  it's  President  Roosevelt's  son  who  is  being  regaled
on  our  pastries.  He  had  a fine  father,  but  too  much  of  an  idealist.
Pastries  straight  off  a conveyor  belt:  open  your  mouth  wide  and  let
them  drop  in  !"

He  was  looking  at  a photograph  taken  in  a Moscow  confectionery
factory  during  a visit  by  one  of  President  Roosevelt's  sons  in  January
1946.  We  all  knew  that  the  products  of  that  factory  were  intended
primarily  for  export  and  secondarily  only  for  the  'Luxus'  shops.'

"And  anyone  who's  tired  of  chocolate  can  have  some  bread  for  a
change,"  Bagdassarian  continued  to  philosophize  as  he  turned  over
another  page.  "What  a lot  of  bread!  They're  jumping  right  out  of  the
picture."  He  leaned  back  and  contemplated  the  picture  with
admiring  eyes.  But  suddenly  he  sat  up  and  exclaimed:  "But  they've  all
collapsed!  Any  German  who's  been  a prisoner  of  war  under  us  will
recognize  those  loaves  at  once.  How  could  they  print  such  a picture
for  the  Germans  to  see?"

I got  up,  went  into  the  next  room,  and  quietly  advised  him  to  talk
to  himself  rather  more  quietly.  Then  I bent  over  and  studied  the
picture,  which  had  been  taken  in  a Kiev  bakery.  In  the  foreground
was  a whole  mountain  of  freshly  baked  bread.  He  was  right,  they
presented  a familiar  sight:  all  their  sides  had  collapsed,  which  meant
that  their ' insides  must  consist  of  raw,  sticky  dough.  When  our  men
at  the  front  were  issued  with  dry  tack  made  from  this  bread  they
couldn't  break  them  up  even  with  their  rifle  butts.  If  anyone  can  be
taken  in  by  our  export-propaganda,  it  isn't  the  Soviet  citizen.  We
have  a sixth  sense  in  regard  to  the  Stalinist  propaganda  cookery.

"But  here  are  some  good  autos,"  the  captain  continued.  He  read  the
caption  under  the  picture:  " 'comfortable  ZIS  limousines,  being  run
off  in  serial  production  in  the  Moscow  "Stalin"  works'.  "Immediately
I get  home  I simply  must  buy  myself  a ZIS.  I'll  have  to  go  on  saving
a little  longer,  though.  How  much  shall  I need?  I 'Luxus'  shops:
state  shops  where  anything  can  be  bought  at  extremely  high  prices
beyond  the  reach  of  the  Soviet  people.  In  1945-7  a tablet  of
chocolate  in  a Luxus  shop  cost  100  roubles,  roughly  equal  to  a
week's  pay  for  a Soviet  worker.

The  old  ZIS  model  cost  29,000  roubles.  The  new  one  costs  50,000,
they  say.  If  my  wife  and  I both  work  and  save,  we  can  put  aside  100


197


roubles  every  month.  That's  1,200  a year,  12,000  in  ten  years.  So  we
shall  only  need  forty  years  or  so."

The  door  opened,  and  one  of  our  drivers,  Vassily  Ivanovich,  stuck
in  his  head.  When  he  saw  that  the  atmosphere  was  peaceable  he
stepped  fearlessly  over  the  threshold.

"Good  morning,"  he  greeted  us  in  German.  Then  he  shook  hands
with  each  of  us,  faithfully  observing  the  precedence  of  rank.  "Your
health,  Comrade  Major.  Your  health,  Comrade  Captain.  Your  health,
Comrade  Lieutenant."  He  turned  to  Lieutenant  Kompaniyez,  who
was  sitting  at  another  desk.  "My  boss  hasn't  turned  up  yet  so  I
thought  I'd  warm  up  a bit  in  your  room.  Do  you  mind  if  i wait
here?"

Until  recently  Vassily  had  been  a soldier.  Now  he  was  demobilized,
and  worked  for  the  S.M.A.  as  a chauffeur.  He  had  a due  appreciation
of  his  civilian  status  and  took  every  opportunity  to  greet  officers  with
handshakes,  to  sit  down  modestly  in  a corner,  and  occasionally
to  join  respectfully  in  the  conversation.  After  five  years  of  life  in
uniform,  during  which  all  his  communications  with  officers  had  been
confined  to  salutes  and  the  brief.  'Very  good,  Comrade  Lieutenant',
it  gave  him  profound  pleasure  to  be  able  to  have  simple  human
relations  with  them.  He  sat  down  gingerly  on  the  edge  of  a chair  by
the  door.

Captain  Bagdassarian  continued  to  look  through  his  papers.

The  presence  of  an  outsider  prevented  him  pursuing  his  favorite
occupation  of  pulling  Colonel  Kirsanov's  work  to  pieces.  For  us
Soviet  officers  in  Germany  the  lllustrierte  Rundschau  was  a highly
diverting  comic  journal.  And  one  not  only  got  a laugh  out  of  it,
but  could  read  a great  deal  between  the  lines  about  things  not  referred
to  in  Soviet  papers.

"Why,  they've  even  remembered  Trotsky!"  The  captain  turned
to  the  lieutenant.  "What  does  that  smack  of,  d'you  think,
permanent  revolution?"

"It  must  be  tactical  differences  of  opinion,"  the  lieutenant
answered  reluctantly.  He  buried  himself  in  his  German  primer,
and  tried  to  ignore  the  surrounding  world.

"Why,  yes,  it's  tactical  differences  of  opinion,"  Vassily  Ivanovich
butted  in.  "The  one  says,  Let's  break  in  from  the  front;  the  other
-says,  No,  from  the  back.  The  one  says,  Let's  do  it  today;  the  other
says,  No,  tomorrow.  You'll  find  that  even  in  the  'Short  Course',
comrade  Captain."  He  appealed  to  the  Party  textbook  in  order  to
give  his  words  greater  authority.


198


"I  don't  remember  anything  on  those  lines  in  it,"  the  captain
cautiously  observed.

"There's  something  about  the  scissors,  too.  Do  you  know  what
that  is?  It's  connected  with  the  peasant  question."

"I  don't  remember."

"Trotsky  had  a difference  of  opinion  once  with  Comrade  Stalin."
Vassily  performed  a scissor-like  motion  with  two  fingers.  "The  one
said  the  peasants  must  be  sheared,  the  other  said  it  didn't  call  for
scissors,  the  peasants  could  be  shaved.  And  so  they  argued  whether
to  shear  or  shave.  Only  I don't  rightly  know  who  wanted  to  shear  and
who  wanted  to  shave  them."

( 'Scissors:  a term  applied  to  the  disproportion  in  prices  of
agricultural  and  industrial  goods,  circa  1 923-4. -Tr.  )

The  captain  pretended  not  to  hear  what  Vassily  had  said.

"Yes,  it's  obviously  tactical  differences  of  opinion,"  the  driver
muttered  on.  "After  Nicholas,  the  throne  was  left  empty,  and  every
body  wants  to  sit  in  it.  They  say  that  when  Comrade  Lenin  died  he
left  a testament  behind.  Have  you  heard  anything  about  it,  Comrade
Captain?"

"No.'

"They  say  there  are  some  funny  things  in  it.  It  seems  Comrade
Lenin  said  more  or  less  . . ."

Captain  Bagdassarian  was  already  fidgeting  uneasily  on  his  chair
and  he  decided  to  stop  this  dangerous  talk.  In  the  Soviet  Union
the  story  went  that  in  his  political  testament  Lenin  hit  off  his  two
possible  successors  in  the  following  words:  'Trotsky  is  a clever
scoundrel,  Stalin  a scoundrelly  fool.'  It  was  whispered  that  Lenin
gave  his  testament  to  his  wife,  Krupskaya,  on  his  deathbed,  and
that  Stalin  took  it  from  her  by  force.  Later  the  'true  friend  and  pupil'
sent  Krupskaya  herself  after  his  'teacher'.  According  to  the  story,
the  testament  rests  to  this  day  in  Stalin's  private  safe.  It  was  quite
understandable  that  the  captain  would  wish  to  turn  such  talk  into
another  channel.

"Look,  Semion  Borisovich  - he  again  tried  to  drag  his  colleague  away
from  the  study  of  German  declensions-"what  a fuss  the  foreign  papers
have  made  over  Zoshchenkot  He's  written  some  story  called  The
Adventures  of  an  Ape.  Have  you  read  about  it?"

The  lieutenant  did  not  raise  his  eyes  from  his  book.  But  Vassily


199


Ivanovich  spoke  up  again  for  him.

"Don't  you  know  anything  about  it,  Captain?"  he  asked  with
assumed  astonishment.

"Why,  have  you  read  it?"  the  captain  asked,  surprised  to  find  that
an  ordinary  chauffeur  knew  of  the  latest  thing  in  literature.

"Oh  no,  I haven't  read  it.  Only  heard  about  it.  You  know,

Comrade  Captain,  we  drivers  know  everything.  We  have  to  drive
around  all  sorts  of  clever  people,  even  Sokolovsky  and  Viacheslav
ALkhailovich  (Molotov)  himself

'Well,  and  what  has  Sokolovsky  told  you  about  the  ape?"  the
captain  sceptically  inquired.

Upset  at  the  doubts  cast  on  the  quality  of  his  information,

Vassily  cleared  his  throat  and  began:

"Hm  ...  well,  there  was  once  a monkey.  Somewhere  in  Leningrad,  it
was.  I expect  war  had  already  started."  He  took  out  his  tobacco  pouch
and  calmly  began  to  roll  himself  a cigarette.  "Allow  me  to  tear  off
a bit  of  your  paper,  Captain.  It  has  a better  taste  in  newspaper.

"This  ape  suddenly  got  a notion  that  he'd  like  to  live  among  human
beings.  He  wanted  to  enjoy  a little  bit  of  culture.  No  sooner  said  than
done:  the  ape  got  out  of  his  cage  and  into  6,  street-car.  When  he  got
into  the  street-car  he  was  a genuine  ape,  but  when  he  got  out  he  was
neither  ape  nor  human  being-goodness  knows  what  he  was.  Then
he  went  to  the  Russian  baths.  You  know  yourselves  what  goes  on
in  the  Russian  baths.  Nothing  came  of  his  wash,  but  he  picked  up  a
regiment  of  fleas.  Then  he  felt  hungry.  He  went  to  a shop.  He  gaped
and  gaped,  and  walked  out  again  as  hungry  as  he  went  in."

He  took  a long,  pleasurable  pull  at  the  cigarette  he  had  made  from
the  Tagliche  Rundschau.

"Where  else  he  went  to,  I don't  know.  But  it  ended  up  by  his  going
back  to  his  cage,  slamming  the  door  behind  him  and  huddling  into
a corner,  shivering  like  an  aspen.  It's  said  he  suffered  a long  time
with  a nervous,  breakdown.  How  the  cage  has  been  arranged  for
Zoshchenko,  I don't  know.  I expect  he's  been  put  on  the  waiting
list,"  he  concluded  with  a profound  observation.  "Well,  now  I must
go  and  see  whether  my  chief  has  come  in."  He  put  on  his  cap,  pressed
it  down  on  his  head  with  one  hand,  and  went  out,  closing  the  door
quietly  behind  him.

"Do  you  know  him  well?"  Lieutenant  Kompaniyez  asked,  nodding
at  the  door.


200


"Yes.  He's  a good  lad,  only  he  talks  too  much."

"What  are  you  to  make  of  him?  Do  you  think  he  talks  like  that
deliberately?"

"Oh  no.  It's  simply  that  they've  got  a bit  out  of  hand  here  in
Germany."

"I  don't  know,  I should  keep  on  my  guard.  An  ordinary  soldier,
talking  about  politics  !"

"It's  best  to  pretend  you  haven't  heard.  Otherwise  you'd  have  to
report  it  all  to  the  Special  Department."

"I  don't  think  it  was  so  common  before  the  war.  Do  you  think  the
conditions  here  have  had  any  influence?"

"I  should  say  Now  the  war's  over,  every  soldier  feels  more  sure
of  himself.  After  all,  they're  heroes  and  victors  too.  Don't  you  feel
that  yourself?"

"Yes,  that's  true,"  the  lieutenant  assented.  He  contemplated  one
of  the  newspapers.  "But  the  way  Kirsanov's  attacking  America  !"  he
remarked.  "I'm  amazed  that  they  put  up  with  it.  We  take  every
possible  opportunity  to  sneer  at  them,  and  they  just  don't  answer."

"Criticism  of  the  Allies  is  strictly  forbidden  by  the  Control
Commission,"  the  captain  observed.

"Have  you  been  in  western  Germany?"  the  lieutenant  asked.

"No.  Why?"

"I  was  in  charge  of  the  dispatch  of  dismantled  equipment  from
Bremen,  and  I was  absolutely  amazed.  Communist  papers  hanging
everywhere  on  the  fences,  with  great  banner  headlines  shrieking:
'Down  with  America!'  And  the  Americans  walking  past  as  though  it
were  all  nothing.  But  let  someone  try  to  put  up  a bill:  'Down  with  the
U.S.S.R.'  anywhere  in  our  zone  !"

"Well,  but  does  anybody  read  those  papers?"

"I  seemed  to  be  the  only  one.  One  or  two  people  looked  at  them
out  of  curiosity.  The  communists  always  stick  their  papers  up  at  the
street-car  stops,  and  a man  reads  them  out  of  sheer  boredom  with


201


waiting.


"Maybe  it's  just  an  American  trick.  They  can't  really  allow  them
selves  to  be  baited  like  that."

"But  when  you  come  to  consider  it,  it's  not  so  dangerous  after  all.

Those  papers  do  us  more  harm  than  good."

"How  d'you  get  that?"

"Any  intelligent  man  of  the  West  who  reads  a communist  paper
can't  help  spitting  with  disgust.  You  can  see  at  once  whose  money

is  behind  it.  The  capitalists  are  to  blame  if  it's  cold,  the  capitalists
are  to  blame  if  it's  hot,  and  everything  in  the  U.S.S.R.  is  super...
lative  ...  ly  good  !"

"And  yet  the  press  is  very  important.  Take  these  two  papers."

The  captain  slapped  his  hand  down  on  a pile  of  newspapers.  "Here's
the  Rundschau  and  here's  the  Courier.  We  know  well  enough  how
it's  done,  and  what's  at  the  back  of  it,  don't  we?  If  you  read  the
Courier  there's  nothing  in  it,  it's  dead.  A strike  is  going  on
somewhere,  someone's  been  murdered,  an  actress  has  performed  some
where.  And  as  you  read  you  really  do  feel  that  the  world's  pretty
rotten.  The  life's  all  right,  but  nothing  ever  happens."

"That's  only  because  you're  not  used  to  it,"  the  lieutenant
commented.  "Do  you  remember  1988?  People  were  dropping  dead  with
hunger  in  the  streets,  but  the  papers  contained  nothing  but  bliss
and  benedictions.  In  the  West  it's  just  the  reverse:  they  live  quite
well  and  are  satisfied,  but  the  papers  are  full  of  panic."

"Yes,  maybe  you're  right,"  the  captain  said  slowly.  "And  yet..  .
take  the  Rundechau.  One  long  exhortation  Today  you  can't  say  the
Germans  have  got  any  life  at  all.  And  at  a moment  like  this  they  may
answer  the  call.  Hungry  people  go  where  they're  promised  the  most."

"What  would  you  expect?  That's  clever  policy,  first  to  strip  a man
of  all  he's  got  and  then  win  him  over  with  cake.  A man  with  a full
belly  wouldn't  take  any  notice."

"The  appeal  is  a great  force,"  the  captain  mused.  "But  there's  no
trace  of  that  left  in  our  country  today  ....  We're  already  in  the  second
round."


202


There  was  a knock  at  the  door,  and  a thin-faced  man  in  a green
waterproof,  carrying  his  hat  in  one  hand,  opened  and  looked  in.

"Good  morning,  Herr  Captain!"  he  said  in  a wheedling  tone,  and
bowed  deeply.

"One  moment !"  The  captain  waved  him  out  negligently.  The  man
drew  back  and  vanished.

Captain  Bagdassarian  hurriedly  gathered  the  newspapers
together  and  thrust  them  into  a drawer,  then  took  out  some  files  of
documents.  "This  swine  says  he's  a communist.  I must  put  the  papers
away,  just  in  case,"  he  murmured  half  to  himself.  Then  he  called:

"Herr  Meyer ! Come  in  !"


203


CHAPTER  TEN

A Major  in  the  State  Security  Service

One  day  I picked  up  my  telephone  to  answer  a call,  and  heard
an  unknown  voice:

"Is  that  the  staff  of  the  Soviet  Military  Administration?"

"Yes."

"Major  Klimov?"

"Speaking."

"Good  day,  Klimov."  Then,  after  a brief  pause:  "This  is  the
Central  Administration  of  the  M.V.D.  in  Potsdam."

"Oh  yes.  Whom  do  you  want?"

You.

"What  about?"

"A  major  in  the  State  Security  wishes  to  speak  to  you."

"By  all  means.  What  about?"

"A  highly  personal  matter,"  the  voice  said  with  a hint  of  irony,
to  go  on  with  exaggerated  courtesy:  "When  can  I talk  to  you?"

"At  any  time."

"We'd  like  to  pay  you  a visit  after  office  hours.  Be  at  home  this
evening.  What's  your  address?  But  it  doesn't  matter,  we've  got  it
here.  Till  this  evening,  so  long."


"So  long."

Frankly,  I thought  it  was  only  an  acquaintance  of  mine  playing
a stupid  joke.  A silly  trick,  especially  on  the  telephone.  When  I got
home  that  evening  I lay  on  the  sofa  reading  the  papers,  completely
forgetting  the  promised  visit.  I didn't  remember  it  even  when  the
bell  rang.  I went  and  opened  the  door.  In  the  hall  an  officer  was
standing.  The  hall  light  shone  on  a blue  cap  with  a raspberry  band,


204


and  on  blue-edged  tabs.  No  doubt  of  it:  an  M.V.D.  uniform.  It  was
the  first  time  I had  seen  that  raspberry  band  since  the  end  of  the  war
for  the  M.V.D.  officers  in  Germany  usually  wore  normal  military
uniform  or  civilian  dress.  But  now  they  were  calling  on  me  in  my  own
apartment!  I felt  an  unpleasant  emptiness  in  the  pit  of  my  stomach.

Then  the  thought  flashed  through  my  mind:  'But  he's  alone.  So  it
can't  be  so  bad;  it's  not  usual  to  send  only  one  when  an  arrest  is  to  be
made.'

"May  I come  in?"  The  visitor  walked  past  me  with  a confident,
step.

I did  not  took  at  his  face.  Startled  by  the  unexpected  visit,  I tried
to  think  what  it  meant.  Without  waiting  for  my  invitation  the
officer  took  off  his  coat  and  cap,  turned  to  me,  and  said:

"Well,  old  fellow!  If  we'd  met  on  the  street  I wouldn't  have
recognized  you  either.  But  now  make  your  guest  really  welcome."

I stared  dumbfounded  at  the  officer's  face.  He  was  obviously
delighted  at  the  impression  he  had  made.  I recognized  him  as  my  old
school  colleague  and  student  friend,  Andrei  Kovtun,  whom  I had
long  believed  to  be  dead.

One  hot  day  in  July  1941  Andrei  and  I were  standing  in  the
street,  watching  a column  of  infantry  march  past.  Yesterday  they
had  still  been  peaceful  citizens.  Today  they  had  been  led  into  the
Russian  bath,  their  heads  had  been  close-cropped,  they  had  been
put  in  uniform,  and  now  the  ragged,  silent  column  was  on  its  way  to
the  unknown.  They  sang  no  songs,  their  faces  expressed  only
resignation  to  fate.  They  were  wearing  old,  completely  faded  uniforms,  the
heritage  of  previous  generations  of  soldiers.

"What  do  you  think,  how  will  it  all  end?"  Andrei  asked  me.

"We'll  pull  through,"  I answered,  for  the  sake  of  saying  some
thing.

"I  think  the  Germans  will  get  here  quite  quickly,"  he  said  in  an
enigmatic  tone,  giving  me  a searching  look.

Andrei  was  an  amusing  fellow,  outwardly  as  well  as  inwardly
not  good-looking,  but  sturdily  built,  tall,  rather  bandy,  with  arms
too  long  for  his  body.  His  head  seemed  to  go  flat  at  the  sides,  and
was  stuck  on  an  absurdly  long  neck.  He  was  terribly  proud  of  his
thick,  bristly  hair,  and  had  even  let  it  grow  into  a shock  that  made


205


him  look  like  a tsarist  cossack.  He  was  all  out  of  proportion,  and
had  a savage  appearance.  His  eyes  were  too  black,  his  skin  far  too
swarthy,  and  much  too  freckled  for  a grown  man.  I often  used  to
say  to  him  jokingly:  "Andrei,  if  scientists  should  happen  to  dig  up
your  skeleton  some  day  in  the  distant  future,  they'll  be  delighted:
they'll  think  they've  discovered  a specimen  of  a cave-man."  In  those
days  he  bubbled  with  youthful  energy  and  seemed  to  exude  the
scent  of  black  earth  and  steppe  winds.

His  chief  characteristic  was  an  inordinate  self-esteem.  When  we
were  at  school  together  we  often  went  out  to  the  lakes  about  fourteen
miles  from  the  city.  Andrei  took  a rod  and  nets,  and  I an  old  sporting
gun.  On  the  way  we  always  had  a race  to  see  who  could  walk  the
faster.  He  laid  down  the  conditions  right  to  the  last  detail,  and  set
off  at  a great  pace,  looking  back  again  and  again  to  see  whether  I
was  keeping  up,  or  possibly  felt  like  giving  up.  After  an  hour  or  more
of  this  he  would  stop,  quite  out  of  breath,  and  say  condescendingly:

"Yes,  you've  got  some  idea  of  how  to  walk.  We'll  call  a halt,
otherwise  I'm  afraid  you'll  have  a stroke."  He  lay  down  on  the
grass  at  the  roadside  and  gasped:  "Of  course,  your  gun's  lighter  than
my  rod  ....  Otherwise  I'd  have  beaten  you.  Now  we'll  swop  over."

Later,  when  he  became  a student,  he  found  another  outlet  for  his
self-esteem:  he  ardently  studied  the  lives  of  the  great.  He  did  this
by  simply  rummaging  through  the  library  catalogs  for  books  which
had  titles  beginning  with  the  word  'great'.  He  was  never  put  off,  even
by  some  three-volume  work  like  Great  Courtesans  in  World  History.

Whenever  he  visited  me  at  home  he  always  sat  astride  his  chair
and  drummed  his  fingers  on  the  table  without  saying  a word.  Then
he  would  turn  his  flat  face  to  me  and  ask  in  the  tone  of  an
inquisitor:  "I  expect  you've  heard  of  Cleopatra.  But  can  you  tell
me  who  Messalina  was?  Well?"  When  I couldn't  answer  the  question
he  was  absurdly  delighted.  As  a rule  I didn't  fall  into  the,  trap,  but
resorted  to  counter-questions.  If  he  asked  what  stone  Nero  used  for
his  spectacles  I would  say  contemptuously:  "That's  just  stupid!  But
you  tell  me  the  difference  between  a cohort  and  a phalanx.  That's  a
man's  question,  that  is!"

It  has  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  in  the  Soviet  Union  history

teaching  begins  with  the  Paris  Commune.  According  to  Soviet  pedagogues

all  that  happened  before  that  event  is  to  be  related  to  the  Darwin

theory;  namely,  evolution  from  ape  to  man.  Man  really  made  his

first  appearance  only  in  1871.  By  the  law  of  action  and  reaction  we

felt  an  invincible  antipathy  to  the  'barrel-organs',  as  we  called  the

history  teachers,  and  preferred  to  go  and  play  football.  The  result


206


was  that  it  was  unusual  for  a student  to  have  any  knowledge  of
antiquity  and  the  middle  ages.  To  acquire  such  knowledge  one  had
to  study  such  things  for  oneself,  and  it  was  very  difficult  to  get  hold
of  the  necessary  books.  I first  read  textbooks  on  the  history  of
antiquity  when  I was  a university  student,  as  a change  from  boring
differential  calculi  and  integrals.  I don't  know  why  Andrei  came  to
take  an  interest  in  the  ashes  of  Alexander  the  Great:  probably  it  was
just  his  self-esteem.  He  assumed  that  he  was  the  only  student  who
could  ever  think  of  such  an  idea,  and  he  was  highly  astonished  when
he  found  I could  answer  his  importunate  questions.

Another  outstanding  feature  of  his  character  was  his  deep
instinctive  hate  of  the  Soviet  regime.  He  hated  it  as  a dog  hates  a
cat.  I found  his  attitude  incomprehensible  and  often  rather  un
pleasant-l  was  more  liberal  in  my  views.  Andrei's  father  was  an
independent  shoemaker,  so,  according  to  Soviet  ideas,  he  belonged  to
the  propertied  class  which  was  condemned  to  be  liquidated  though  all
the  property  he  owned  was  a pair  of  calloused  hands  and  a back  bowed
with  much  labour.  I expect  Andrei  heard  quite  a few  bitter  curses  at
Stalin  and  the  whole  'communist  band  of  robbers,  even  in  his  cradle.

I could  find  no  other  explanation  for  his  conduct  when  he  took  me
aside  at  school  and  whispered  anti-Soviet  verses  into  my  ears:  the
sort  of  thing  one  finds  on  the  walls  of  lavatories.  Usually  I
refused  to  be  drawn  into  any  argument.  We  were  both  sixteen,  but  I
remembered  that  in  a local  school  three  scholars  had  recently  been
sent  to  prison  for  'anti-Soviet  activity'.

During  our  student  days  he  often  came  round  to  my  place.  We
were  not  exactly  inseparable  friends:  my  impression  is  that  he  had
no  intimate  friends  whatever.  His  friendship  was  based  mainly  on
one-sided  contests  on  every  possible  issue.  He  felt  a constant  desire,
to  excel  me  in  examinations,  and  in  general  knowledge  of  the
humanities.  I was  amused  at  his  extraordinary  ways,  tried  to  haul
him  down  from  the  clouds  to  earth  and  make  him  realize  that  even
he  had  still  a long  way  to  go  to  perfection.  My  feeling  for  him  was
not  so  much  one  of  friendship  as  of  interest,  because  he  was  a very
unusual  fellow.  Although  he  had  never  done  me  any  wrong,  I always
kept  him  at  a certain  distance.  But  he  honored  me  in  a condescend
ing  sort  of  way  with  his  friendship,  or  rather  his  rivalry,  explaining
that  I did  have  some  understanding  at  least  of  'higher  things'.

He  regarded  himself  as  insuperable,  unique.  Among  us  students
that  gave  rise  to  continual  joking  and  banter.  One  thing  in  his
favor  was  that,  despite  his  self-esteem,  he  never  took  offense.  He
simply  kept  away  for  a time,  and  when  he  had  got  over  it  he  turned
up  again  as  if  nothing  had  happened.


207


On  one  occasion,  while  we  were  studying  at  the  Institute  for
Industry,  at  the  beginning  of  the  school  year  he  came  round  to
my  place  and  seated  himself,  as  usual,  astride  a chair.  I was  bent  over
the  table,  occupied  with  a plan,  and  took  no  notice  of  him.  But  this
time  he  had  specially  important  news.  At  first  he  preserved  a
mysterious  silence  in  order  to  provoke  my  curiosity.  I saw  that  he
was  bursting  to  surprise  me  with  his  news,  but  I pretended  that  I
hadn't  noticed.

"Haven't  you  heard  yet?"  At  last  he  could  hold  out  no  longer.

I calmly  went  on  with  my  drawing.

"Of  course  you  haven't!"  He  dropped  his  voice  almost  to  a
whisper.  "There  are  some  simply  marvelous  girls  in  the  first  course
this  year.  I was  in  the  students'  hostel  of  the  Faculty  of  Chemistry
yesterday.  They're  stunning  ! One  of  them  I saw  is  a real  princess.

I've  managed  to  find  out  her  name-it's  Halina.  And  I've  thought
out  a plan  and  I want  to  talk  it  over  with  you.  Oh,  drop  your  stupid
drawing  ! I've  arranged  things  with  devilish  cleverness.  First  I found
out  what  room  Halina  occupies.  Then  I discovered  whom  she  has  in
with  her-there  are  four  altogether.  Next  I sought  out  the  ugliest  of
the  lot  and  enchanted  her  all  the  evening  like  Mephistopheles.  Now
the  toad  thinks  I'm  head  over  heels  in  love  with  her,  and  she's  even
invited  me  to  go  and  see  her.  Get  that?  And  in  her  room  I shall
find  ....  Halina  !"  He  capered  about  joyfully,  and  made  some
indefinite  grunts  and  groans  of  rapture  at  his  own  cleverness.  "So  it's
already  half  achieved.  Only  I can't  go  along  by  myself.  I need  a
companion.  You're  going  with  mel

"Anyway,  you're  not  dangerous  as  a rival,"  he  added,  fully
conscious  of  his  own  superiority.

I was  highly  astonished.  We  all  regarded  him  as  a woman-hater.

His  appearance  was  so  unprepossessing  that  he  never  achieved  any
success  with  the  girl  students.  He  was  in  the  habit  of  saying:

"Women  haven't  any  understanding.  They  see  only  the  outer  shell,
they're  not  interested  in  the  soul."  Then  he  would  mutter:  "Besides,
all  the  greatest  men  were  lifelong  bachelors."  So  something  unusual
must  have  happened  to  make  him  suddenly  wax  enthusiastic  about
feminine  charms.

A little  later  I did  meet  the  princess  he  was  out  to  capture.  It

need  only  be  added  that  our  friendship  and  rivalry  were  extended  to
include  Halina.


208


We  both  received  diplomas  as  engineers,  passing  the

State  Examination  Commission  in  the  spring  of  1941.  Now  the  world  lay  open

before  us.  Despite  all  its  attractions,  student  life  had  not  been

easy.  Over  half  the  graduates  of  our  course  had  had  to  pay  for  their

studies  at  a high  price:  tuberculosis,  gastric  troubles,  neurasthenia

But  we  had  been  fighting  for  our  future,  and  now  it  lay  before  us  for  their

all  its  allurement.  We  had  a definite  profession,  which  promised

improvement  in  our  material  conditions  and  the  possibility  of  putting

long-nursed  plans  into  execution.

Then  came  21  June  1941.

There  are  very  many  who  will  never  forget  that  date.  The  war
came  like  a bolt  out  of  the  blue.  It  shattered  all  our  plans  at  one
blow.  We  had  to  renounce  all  our  personal  and  private  life  for  several
years.  Yet  we  accepted  the  war  with  great  calmness.  Germany  stood
for  us  as  a symbol  of  Europe,  but  for  the  majority  of  the  young
thinking  people  of  Russia,  Europe  was  a forbidden  paradise.  The
complete  ban  on  contacts  with  the  outer  world  had  its  negative
aspects:  many  of  the  young  Soviet  people  greatly  exaggerated  the
reality,  and  thought  of  Europe  as  the  incarnation  of  all  that  they  were
striving  for  in  intellectual  and  material  respects.  During  the  early
days  many  of  us  accepted  that  the  war  was  the  signal  for  the  world
communist  revolution,  that  it  was  a logical  maneuver  engineered  by
the  Comintern,  staged  by  Stalin,  and  those  who  thought  so  were
alarmed.  But  when  the  first  reports  began  to  come  in  of  the  Germans'
incredible  successes  and  the  Red  Army's  catastrophic  defeats,  they
were  reassured.  Many  people  genuinely  welcomed  the  war.

Particularly  such  a war!  Secretly  they  thought  of  it  as  a European  crusade
against  Bolshevism.  That  is  a paradox,  and  very  few  people  in
Europe  suspected  its  existence.  Russian  people  now  prefer  not  to  be
reminded  of  it:  the  later  disillusionment  was  too  bitter.

Hitler  played  his  greatest  trump,  the  people's  trust,  into  Stalin's
hands.  Before  the  war  the  majority  of  the  young  Soviet  thinking
people  had  had  no  faith  whatever  in  Soviet  propaganda,  or  at  least
treated  it  with  great  scepticism.  The  war  taught  them  a bloody
lesson  that  they  will  never  forget.

In  those  days,  if  Andrei  caught  me,  anywhere,  it  didn't  matter
where,  he  excitedly  drew  me  aside  and  told  me  the  latest  reports  from
the  front.  The  German  reports,  of  course.  He  swore  that  Kiev  had
fallen  long  before  the  German  troops  had  got  anywhere  near  it.  He
greeted  every  Soviet  defeat  not  only  exultantly,  but  with  a really
bestial  malignity.  He  already  had  visions  of  himself  leading  a terrorist


209


band,  and  was  mentally  counting  the  communists  he  would  hang  with
his  own  hand.


The  war  drove  Andrei  and  me  in  different  directions.  I had  my
first  letter  from  him  at  the  end  of  1941 . It  was  written  on  a dirty
scrap  of  paper,  and  every  line  expressed  a hopeless  depression.  It  was
Jot  a letter,  it  was  the  cry  of  a hound  howling  to  the  moon.  He  was
with  a training  unit  somewhere  in  the  rear.  To  make  things  worse,  it
was  a unit  for  special  training:  when  the  course  was  finished  they
were  to  be  dropped  as  partisans  in  the  German  rear.  He  had  been  a
construction  engineer;  now  he  was  an  officer  in  the  pioneer  corps.

That  determined  his  future  work:  the  organization  of  diversionary
activities  in  the  enemy  rear.

After  reading  the  letter  I felt  convinced  that  the  day  he  was
dropped  he  would  go  over  to  the  Germans.

I received  a second  letter  from  him  much  later,  after  some  twelve
months.  The  paper  was  headed  with  a German  staff  heading,  which
Andrei  himself  had  crossed  out.  As  I read  it  I was  not  a little  amazed
at  the  amount  of  hypocrisy  a man  can  achieve.  It  was  written  in  an
exalted  style  and  consisted  solely  of  a hymn, of  praise  of  the  father
land,  the  Party,  and  the  government.  He  wrote:

'Only  here,  in  the  enemy  rear,  have  I come  to  realize  what  "home
land"  means.  It  is  no  longer  an  abstract  conception,  but  a living
essence,  a dear  being,  the  fatherland.  I have  found  what  I previously
sought  in  vain:  the  meaning  of  life.  To  triumph  gloriously  or  go  under.

But  if  I survive,  to  have  a chest  loaded  with  decorations.  I am  now
a member  of  the  Party,  I have  three  orders  and  have  been
recommended  for  promotion'  I am  in  command  of  a partisan  force  which
corresponds  roughly  to  a regiment  in  numerical  strength,  but  our
fighting  power  is  even  greater.  I was  a fool  when  I decided  to  be  an
engineer.  Now  for  the  first  time  I know  what  I have  to  do:  when  we
have  won  the  war  I shall  work  in  the  N.K.V.D.  and  change  my  name
to  Orlov.'

Little  Nero  no  longer  had  any  doubt  of  the  outcome  of  the  war..

He  wanted  to  join  the  N.K.V.D.  because  he  regarded  that  institution
as  the  quintessence  of  the  Soviet  regime.  His  letter  went  on  to  detail
how  many  bridges  his  unit  had  blown  up,  how  many  trains  it  had
derailed,  and  how  many  of  the  enemy  it  had  wiped  out.

I had  no  faith  in  this  regeneration.  I simply  assumed  that  when
writing  the  letter  he  had  had  one  eye  on  the  military  censor.  The
authorities  form  their  moral  and  political  opinion  of  an  officer


210


largely  on  the  content  of  hi.  letters,  and  his  Promotion  therefore
depends  on  them  to  a large  extent.  I assumed  that  his  self-esteem  and
desire  for  a brilliant  career  had  swamped  all  other  feelings  in  him.

I felt  thoroughly  angry,  and  replied:

'I'm  afraid  you  and  I may  find  ourselves  on  opposite  sides
of  the  table,  Citizen  Orlov':  a clear  hint  at  his  future  career  as  an
N.K.V.D.  officer.

The  last  letter  I had  from  Andrei  reached  me  a year  later.  It
revealed  the  well-considered,  mature  thought  of  someone  who  had
come  to  manhood.  He  reported  that  he  now  commanded  a group  of
regular  partisan  units,  amounting  in  strength  to  approximately  an
army  division.  His  units  were  active  in  a district  corresponding  in
area  to  a Central  European  state.  The  official  army  communiques
made  references  to  their  military  achievements.  He  no  longer  listed
the  orders  he  had  received,  and  only  mentioned  casually  that  he  had
been  awarded  the  title  Of  'Hero  of  the  Soviet  Union'.

So  my  friend  and  rival  had  really  carved  himself  out  a career.

Andrei  was  fond  of  boasting,  but  he  was  not  a liar.  During  these
years  great  changes  had  occurred  in  the  souls  of  the  Russians,  and
I was  genuinely  proud  of  his  success.  In  conclusion,  he  wrote  that'
he  was  moving  westward  with  the  advancing  front  into  the  Baltic
States,  that  the  work  there  would  be  difficult  and  there  might  be  an
interruption  in  our  correspondence.  That  was  the  last  I had  heard  of
him.  I thought  with  regret  that  his  career  was  closed  and  mentally
put  R.I.P.  after  his  name.

Now  he  Was  standing  in  front  of  me  alive  and  unscathed,  risen
from  the  dead,  a man  in  the  prime  of  life.  On  his  chest  a gold  five,
pointed  star,  the  highest  Soviet  distinction  for  military  prowess,
glittered  above  several  rows  of  ribbons.  All  his  being  radiated  the
calm  assurance  of  a man  who  is  accustomed  to  command;  his
features  had  lost  their  angularity  and  had  acquired  a distinctive,
masculine,  handsome  quality.  Only  his  character  hadn't  changed:
he  had  planned  to  give  me  a surprise  that  would  make  my  heart  sink
into  my  boots!

"It's  a long  time  since  we  last  met,  brother.  Prepare  a fitting
reception  for  your  guest,"  he  said.  His  voice  was  different,  strange;
it  had  a note  of  patronage,  as  though  he  were  used  to  ordering  people
about.

"You  certainly  are  a stranger,"  I said.  "But  why  didn't  you  warn
me?  Now  I haven't  the  least  idea  how  to  celebrate  your  return  from


211


the  dead.  Why  didn't  you  write?


"You  know  what  the  words  ' 'special  task'  mean?  For  two  whole
years  I couldn't  even  write  to  my  mother.  But  how  are  you?  Are  you
married,  or  are  you  still  ploughing  a lonely  furrow?  Tell  me  all  that's
happened  to  you,  from  beginning  to  end.  How  did  you  get  on  in  the
war?"

"Like  everybody  else,"  I answered.  I was  not  yet  recovered  from
the  surprise,  and  felt  a little  awkward.  He  had  changed  so  completely:
would  we  find  any  common  language?

"There  were  various  ways  of  fighting  during  the  war,"  he
commented.  "You  know,  the  wise  got  the  rewards  while  the  stupid
fought.  But  that's  all  past  now.  What  are  your  plans?"

"About  ten  in  the  morning  I shall  go  to  my  office,"  I answered.

"Very  praiseworthy.  So  you're  still  a realist?"

Our  conversation  was  formal  and  artificial,  as  though  time  had
washed  away  the  intimacy  of  our  youthful  years.

"Ah,  those  were  wonderful  times,  our  student  days.  It  might  be  a
thousand  years  ago,"  he  said  thoughtfully,  as  though  he  had  guessed
my  thoughts.  "Tell  me,  how  did  things  go  between  you  and  Halina?

I felt  sure  you'd  marry  her."

So  he  had  not  forgotten  the  princess  of  our  student  days.  I,  too
willingly  turned  our  thoughts  back  to  those  years.  I offered  him  a
cigarette,  but  he  refused  it.  "So  you  still  don't  smoke?"  I asked.

"I  tried  it  in  the  forests,  out  of  sheer  boredom.  But  I just  didn't
take  to  it,"  he  replied.

I knew  that  in  the  old  days  he  could  not  stand  spirits.  I set  a
flask  on  the  table  before  him,  and  he  studied  it  as  though  it  were
medicine.

"That's  my  biggest  defect:  I can't  drink,"  he  said.  "At  home,  I've
got  some  of  the  choicest  wines  from  G6ring's  private  cellar,  but  I
"ever  touch  them.  That  isn't  always  easy  for  me.  Others  can  empty  a
bottle  and  find  oblivion;  I can't."

"Are  you  beginning  to  be  troubled  by  conscience?"  I asked.

"If  I remember  aright,  you  had  a tremendous  desire  to  be  a Robes
Pierre  at  one  time.  Oh,  and  by  the  way,  is  your  name  Orlov  now?"


212


"No,  I was  just  intoxicated  then.  A kind  of  drunkenness"  he
replied.  I caught  a note  of  uncertainty  in  his  voice.

"Tell  me,  Andrei,  what  made  you  write  such  idiotic  rot  in  your
letters?  Were  you  writing  with  one  eye  on  the  censorship?"

"You  may  not  believe  it,  but  I wrote  exactly  as  I felt  at  that  time,
he  answered.  "Today  it  seems  idiotic  to  me  too.  To  tell  the  truth
the  war  years  were  the  happiest  time  of  my  life,  and  will  always
remain  so.  In  the  war  I found  myself.  I waded  in  blood,  but  I will
absolutely  convinced  that  I was  right,  I was  doing  a great  an  and
necessary  work.  It  all  seemed  as  clear  and  clean  to  me  as  a field  of
virgin  snow.  I felt  that  I was  lord  of  our  Russian  earth,  and  was
prepared  to  die  for  it."  He  spoke  slowly,  with  an  almost  imperceptible
falter  in  his  voice.  The  self-confidence  was  gone.

"Then  what  do  you  really  feel  now?"  I asked.

"These  days  I often  lose  that  absolute  conviction,"  he  went  on  as,
though  he  hadn't  heard  my  question.  He  stared  into  vacancy,  i've
killed  lots  and  lots  of  Germans!  Look  !"  He  thrust  out  his  sinewy
swarthy  hands  towards  me.  "With  these  hands  I've  put  out  I don't
how  many  Germans.  Just  wiped  them  out:  we  partisans  didn't  take
prisoners.  I killed,  and  I felt  happy  in  killing.  For  I was  convinced
that  I was  doing  right.

"But  do  you  know  what  I'm  doing  now?"  His  face  twitched
nervously;  there  was  a note  of  suppressed  resentment  in  his, voice,
a peculiar  resentment,  as  though  he  were  furious  with  himself  "Now
I'm  killing  the  German  soul  and  German  brains.  Goebbels  once  said:
'If  you  wish  to  subject  a people,  you  must  rob  it  of  its  brains.'  That  is
my  job  now.  The  snag  is  that  in  this  procedure  your  own  brain
threatens  to  go.  We  are  interested  in  Germany  only  in  so  far  as  it
is  necessary  to  secure  our  own  interests!  Very  sound!  But  things  are
going  too  far.  However,  that's  not  really  the  crux  of  the  matter.  How
can  I put  it ...  ?"

He  was  silent  for  a time;  then  he  went  on  slowly,  carefully
choosing  his  words:  "I'm  tormented  with  accursed  doubts.  It
seems  to  me  ...  that  what  we're  trying  to  kill  here  ...  is  better
than  what  we  have  at  home.  I don't  feel  any  pity  for  the  Germans,
but  I feel  pity  for  myself,  and  for  ourselves.  That's  the  crux  of  the
matter.  We're  destroying  a well-developed  cultural  system,
reorganizing  it  to  match  our  own  pattern,  and  that  pattern  ...  to  hell
with  it!  Do  you  remember  what  our  life  was  like?"


213


"Tell  me,  Major  of  the  State  Security  Force,  what  is  the  job  you're
doing  at  the  moment?"  I asked. " And  another  thing:  talk  a little
more  quietly.  German  houses  have  thin  walls."

"What  am  I doing  at  present?"  he  repeated  my  words.  Then,
evasively:  "Various  things.  Besides  the  tasks  usually  assigned  to
the  M.V.D.  we  have  many  others  of  which  nobody  outside  has  any
suspicion.  For  instance,  we  have  an  exact  copy  of  your  S.M.A.
organization,  only  in  miniature.  We  control  all  your  work,  and  we
give  a hand  when  radical  intervention  is  called  for,  swift  and  without
fuss.  Moscow  has  less  trust  in  Sokolovsky's  reports  than  in  ours.

"I  expect  you  know  from  experience  than  an  M.V.D.  lieutenant
can  issue  orders  to  your  army  colonels,  and  an  M.V.D.  major's  word
is  binding  on  your  army  generals.  Yet  it  is  only  an  unwritten  law
that  that  is  so:  a general  takes  for  granted  that  it  is  a law,  and  that
if  he  disregards  or  fails  to  comply  with  it  the  consequences  can  be
very  unpleasant.

"You  know  the  Political  Adviser  Semionov,  and  Colonel  Tulpanov?"  he  asked,  but
added  without  waiting  for  my  answer:  "We

have  contact  with  them  very  rarely,  but  they're  always  conscious  of
our  fatherly  care.  Right  down  to  such  details  as  would  ensure  a full
hall  and  a sound  moral  tone  in  our  Soviet  House  of  Culture  here  ....

And  we  often  invite  Wilhelm  Pieck  and  other  leaders  to  visit  us  for
friendly  conversations"-he  ironically  stressed  the  words  'leaders'
and  'friendly  conversations'.  "We  never  even  shake  hands  with
them,  so  that  they  shouldn't  get  any  Voltairian  ideas  into  their
heads.  We  don't  bother  with  velvet  gloves,  not  like  your  Tulpanov.

"Only  a man  who  has  worked  in  our  organization  can  know  all
the  depths  of  human  turpitude.  All  our  guests  slink  in  on  tiptoe.

If  they  no  longer  please  us,  it  isn't  far  to  Buchenwald.  Pieck  and  his
fellows  know  that  well  enough.  A number  of  their  colleagues  are
already  stewing  in  their  own  juice  there.

"The  democratization  of  Germany  ...  Hm!  ...  All  the  bakers
and  sausage-makers  are  to  be  sent  to  Siberia!  The  property-owners
are  to  be  liquidated  as  a class!  We  turn  their  places  into  Red  Corners
and  call  them  after  Pieck  or  some  other  dog.  Do  you  know  how  we
purged  Berlin  after  the  capitulation?  It  took  us  just  one  night.

Thirty  thousand  people  were  taken  from  their  beds  and  sent  straight
to  Siberia.  We  already  had  the  lists  prepared  while  our  troops  were
still  the  other  side  of  the  Oder.  We  got  all  we  needed  from  the  local
communists."


214


He  was  silent  for  a moment,  crossed  his  legs  and  studied  his  knee.

"We  can  hardly  shake  off  the  servile  scum.  You  know,  after  the
capitulation  there  were  literally  queues  of  voluntary  denouncers  a
informers  waiting  to  be  interviewed  by  us.  Once  I gave  orders  for  a
whole  mob  of  these  human  abominations  to  be  driven  out  of  my
waiting  room  with  rifle  butts.  I simply  couldn't  stand  any  more.  "

His  words  reminded  me  of  the  typical  attitude  taken  by  Soviet
soldiers  to  the  German  'political  comrades'.  Shortly  before  the
Soviet  and  American  forces  made  contact  a group  of  Russian
soldiers  fell  in  with  a single  German.  He  had  a rucksack  on  his  back
and  was  wheeling  a cycle  loaded  with  all  he  possessed.  He  was  going
eastward.  When  he  saw  the  Soviet  soldiers  he  shouted  enthusiastically
'Stalin  good  ...  I'm  communist ...  Comrade  . . .'  He  tried
to  explain  that  he  was  on  his  way  to  the  Soviet  Union,  and  intended
to  build  communism  together  with  them.  The  soldiers  looked  at  one
another  without  a word,  turned  him  round  to  face  the  west,  and  gave
him  a good-natured  push.  When  he  resisted,  and  tried  again  a and
again  to  go  east,  the  soldiers  got  wild  and  took  away  his  rucksack
and  cycle.  After  they  had  given  him  a communist  baptism  he  could
hardly  move  a limb.  As  he  pulled  himself  together  and  turned  to  go
back  the  soldiers  called  after  him:  "Now  comrade  is  a real  communist

Yours  is  mine.  Stalin-good!"  They  were  perfectly  convinced  they
had  done  him  a good  turn,  they  had  saved  his  life.

The  officials  of  the  K.P.D.-S.E.D.  decorated  their  car  radiators
with  red  flags  and  felt  that  they  were  lords  of  creation  as  they  drove
like  the  fire-brigade  about  Berlin,  with  no  regard  to  the  speed  limit
Whenever  a Soviet  soldier  or  officer  driving  a car  met  such  a man
he  regarded  it  as  a matter  of  honor  to  undertake  the  crazy
'comrade's'  ideological  re-education.  The  higher  the  'comrade'

Party  rank,  the  greater  the  honor  of  smashing  in  his  radiator  and
his  mug.  "So  that  he  won't  be  in  such  a hurry  to  get  to  communism
in  future,"  was  the  usual  comment  in  such  cases.

The  Karlshorst  commandant,  Colonel  Maximov,  only  laughed

when  such  incidents  were  reported  to  him.  They  were  not  simply

acts  of  crude  barbarism.  After  the  Soviet  soldiers  had  lived  a while

in  Germany  they  spoke  with  respect  and  even  with  envy  of  the

Germans.  But  they  called  the  German  communists  rogues  and  venal

riffraff.  Any  Soviet  citizen  who  has  seen  Europe  is  quite  convinced

that  only  degenerates  in  the  pay  of  Moscow  can  be  communists

"Oh,  and  by  the  way,  what  were  you  doing  in  Petersburgerstrasse  recently?"

Andrei  asked  the  direct  question.


215


I stared  at  him  in  amazement.  It  was  true  that  I had  been  in
Petersburgerstrasse  a week  before.  A Moscow  girl  acquaintance
named  Irena  had  invited  me  to  call  on  her.  She  had  graduated  from
the  Institute  for  Foreign  Languages  in  Moscow  and  was  now
working  in  Berlin  as  a teacher  of  German.  The  house  I had  visited
differed  very  little  from  the  others  in  the  street;  it  had  no  name-plate
or  red  flag  to  indicate  that  it  was  used  by  the  occupation  authorities.
But  hardly  had  I opened  the  door  when  a man  in  the  uniform  of  the
M.V.D.  frontier  guards  barred  my  way.  My  officer's  uniform  and  my
identity  papers  were  not  of  much  use.  Before  I could  enter  the
house  Irena  herself  had  to  come  down  and  identify  me.

The  house  was  used  as  the  school  for  the  M.V.D.  censors,  and  they
lived  as  though  in  barracks.  The  conditions  were  very  strict,  as  they
are  in  all  M.V.D.  establishments.  Although  Irena  was  not  on  the
AI.V.D.  strength,  but  was  simply  an  outside  employee,  she  had  to
obtain  her  employer's  permission  to  go  out,  even  on  Sundays.  When
she  went  out  she  had  to  enter  the  time  she  left  and  the  object  of  her
going  in  a record  book;  on  her  return  she  had  to  enter  the  time  and
sign  her  name  again.  As  she  herself  admitted,  they  all  lived  like
semi-prisoners.

"How  do  you  know  I was  in  Petersburgerstrasse?"  I asked  Andrei.
"That's  simple:  I took  a preliminary  look  at  your  personal  file,
only  not  the  personal  file  you  have  in  your  Personnel  Department
here.  If  I'm  not  mistaken,  not  long  ago  you  saw  'Eugene  Onegin'  at
the  Admiralspalast,  and  you've  seen  the  'Petrushka'  ballet  too,
haven't  you?  I can  even  tell  you  whom  you  went  with."

He  looked  at  me  sidelong,  to  see  what  impression  he  had  made.
Evidently  he  was  just  as  fond  as  ever  of  cheap  effects.

"But  that's  not  a crime  at  the  moment:  the  Admiralspalast  is  in
the  Soviet  Sector.  But  I advise  you  not  to  visit  theaters  in  the  other
sectors,  for  that  will  be  placed  to  your  debit.  Understand?  We  keep
our  own  books  on  every  S.M.A.  officer,  right  up  to  Marshal  Sokolov
sky.  At  present  your  personal  record  is  perfectly  in  order,  and  I
congratulate  you.

"Oh,  and  while  we're  talking  about  the  Petersburgerstrasse,
we've  got  one  or  two  other  interesting  institutions  there:  a special
school  for  German  instructors,  for  instance.  They're  the  framework
of  the  future  German  M.V.D.  There  are  certain  things  that  it's
more  convenient  to  leave  to  the  Germans.  I'm  only  surprised  at  the
enormous  amount  of  trouble  they  give  themselves.  There  are  times

when  I can't  help  thinking  that  some  of  them  really  believe  they're


216


helping  to  build  a finer  Germany.  And  these  petty  hacks  never  even
get  supplementary  rations,  like  the  Special-Troika  does.  You  know
what  the  Special-Troika  is,  I expect.  The  Germans  call  the
triumvirate  Grotewohl,  Pieck  and  Ulbricht  simply  and  briefly  the  G.P.U.
And  for  simplicity's  sake  we  ourselves  have  christened  them  the
'Special-Troika'."

( A reference  to  the  days  of  the  revolutionary  Extraordinary
Tribunal  which  usually  had  three  members-Tr )

He  went  on  to  tell  of  the  slogans  with  which  the  walls  of  German
toilets  are  embellished.  "Do  you  know  what  S.E.D.  stands  for?'
he  asked.  "The  Germans  say:  'So  ends  Germany.'  (So  endet
Deutschland.)  Maybe  they  themselves  don't  suspect  how  right  they  are.
That  will  be  clear  to  them  when  Germany  is  renamed  the  German  S.S.R
and  the  present  S.E.D.  is  known  as  the  German  Communist  Party
Of  course  it's  not  the  name  but  the  thing  behind  it  that's,  important.'

For  the  sake  of  both  of  us  I felt  that  I had  to  comment:

"You're  saying  some  very  remarkable  things.  If  it  were  anybody
else,  I'd  report  it  to  the  proper  authorities  without  hesitation.

But  as  they're  being  said  by  a major  in  the  State  Security  Service  I
must  take  them  as  deliberate  provocation.  So  I think  it  unnecessary  t
to  do  anything  about  it.  Go  on  until  you  get  bored."

He  looked  at  me  and  laughed.  "But  you're  a prudent  fellow!

Reinsurance  can't  do  any  harm.  To  reassure  you,  you  can  take  every
word  I have  said  as  provocation.  In  those  circumstances  I can  speak
even  more  frankly."

He  got  up  from  his  chair  and  strode  about  the  room.  Finally  he
halted  before  my  bookcase  and  studied  the  books.  With  his  back  to
me  he  continued:

"It's  really  amusing  to  see  how  readily  whole  nations  put  their
necks  into  this  yoke.  Take  Germany.  If  Stalin  had  all  Germany  in
his  hands  the  Germans  would  dance  to  his  pipe  as  one  man.  You
know  how  they  think:  'Orders  are  orders!'  Of  course  one  would  have
to  create  the  prerequisites  first:  the  form  of  an  independent  German
state,  with  a premier  and  other  puppets.  You  have  to  play  up  the
German  national  pride.  And  when  the  right  men  are  in  charge  the
Germans  will  vote  unanimously  for  a German  S.S.R.

"Form  and  content !"  he  continued  thoughtfully.  "Take  socialism
and  communism,  for  instance.  According  to  Marx,  socialism  is  the
first  step  to  communism.  There  are  very  strong  socialist  tendencies


217


in  the  world  today.  Of  course  as  modern  society  progresses  it  requires
new  forms.  The  Social-Democratic  Parties,  socialization  under  Hitler,
the  present  socialistic  trend  in  England.  You  can  see  it  at  every  step.

Well  then,  do  all  roads  really  lead  to  communism?

"Now  look  at  what  we've  got  in  Russia.  It's  called  socialism.

By  its  form  it  really  does  seem  to  be  socialism,  for  everything
belongs  to  society  in  the  shape  of  the  State.  But  the  content?

The  content  is  state  capitalism  or  socialistic  slave-ownership.  The
people  pour  out  their  blood  and  sweat  to  bring  about  the  future
communist  paradise.  It's  all  strongly  reminiscent  of  the  ass  with  the
bundle  of  hay  hung  out  in  front  of  its  nose.  The  ass  puts  out  all  its
strength,  but  the  hay  always  remains  the  same  distance  off.  And  the
naive  idealists  of  the  West  treat  the  concepts  of  socialism  and
communism  as  interchangeable,  and  voluntarily  put  their  necks  in
the  same  yoke.

"Strange  as  it  may  seem,  there  is  only  one  historical  parallel  to
communist  teaching,  and  that's  Christian  teaching.  Only  the
Christian  teaching  was  as  orthodox  as  communist  teaching  is  to
day,  and  that  is  precisely  why  it  spread  all  over  the  world.  The
Christian  teaching  said  to  the  soul  of  man:  'Share  with  your
neighbour'.  But  history  has  advanced  to  the  materialistic  phase.

The  common  law  of  communism  is:  'Take  from  your  neighbor'."

He  sank  into  his  chair,  stretched  out  his  legs,  and  leaned  his  head
against  the  back.  "After  the  capitulation  I took  for  granted  that  we
would  be  taking  all  the  best  Europe  had  got-after  all,  we  were  the
victors-and  then  we  would  impose  order  in  our  own  house.  Instead,
we've  forced  our  own  muck  down  these  people's  throats  while  we're
(training  our  own  people  of  their  last  drop  of  blood.  Permanent
revolution!  Here  I'm  building  communism  on  an  all-German  scale.

In  that  job  Wilhelm  Pieck  is  my  errand-boy,  and  meanwhile  what  is
happening  in  our  own  country?"

An  evil  light  gleamed  in  his  eyes.  He  jumped  up  and  took  long
strides  about  the  room.  His  voice  choked  with  fury:  "Is  that  what  I
fought  for?"


"Listen,  Andrei,"  I said.  "Assuming  for  the  moment  that  your
remarks  are  not  intended  as  provocation,  but  that  you  really  do  feel
and  think  as  you  say,  how  can  you  reconcile  it  with  your  work  in  the
M.V.D.?-

He  looked  into  my  eyes  for  one  moment,  then  shifted  his  gaze  to
some  invisible  point  in  the  twilit  room.

"You  mean,  why  do  I wear  this  raspberry-banded  cap?"  he  asked
"Just  for  fun.  Simply  to  enjoy  the  sight  of  others  starting  away  from
me.  That's  the  only  thing  I get  any  pleasure  out  of  now  in  my  work,
When  one  has  a vacuum  inside,  one  inevitably  seeks  some  substitute
in  the  outside  world."

"You  had  that  streak  even  in  the  old  days,  A la  Nero!"  I retorted

"But  a man  doesn't  get  far  with  that."

"You're  quite  right.  Do  you  know  what  are  the  occupational
diseases  of  M.V.D.  officers?"  He  laughed  maliciously.  "Alcoholism  is
the  least  of  them.  The  majority  of  the  men  are  drug-addicts;
morphine,  cocaine.  It's  been  statistically  proved  that  three  years'
work  in  the  operational  organs  is  enough  to  turn  a man  into  A,
chronic  neurasthenic.  In  the  Crimea  there's  a special  M.V.D
sanatorium  for  treatment  of  the  drug-addicts  and  impotents.  But  it'
doesn't  do  much  good.  A shattered  nervous  system  isn't  easily
restored  to  health.  Normal  men  can't  stick  the  work.  And
intelligence-that's  the  most  dangerous  thing  of  all  in  our  profession

If  you  want  to  make  a career  in  the  M.V.D.  you  must  be  a scoundrel
by  vocation.  The  idealists  have  long  since  lost  their  heads,  the  old
guard  has  become  part  of  the  history  of  the  C.P.S.U.  What  are
left  can  be  divided  into  two  main  categories:  those  who  do  everything
they're  called  on  to  to  do  without  offering  any  resistance,  since
they  don't  mind  how  they  earn  their  bread,  and  those  who're  ready
to  betray  even  their  own  mother  for  the  sake  of  their  career.  You
know  the  Soviet  commandment:  outwardly  be  your  superior's  slave,
but  inwardly  dig  his  grave,  so  that  you  can  take  his  place.  The  same
holds  true  of  the  M.V.D.,  only  much  more  so.  No  wonder  they  turn
to  cocaine  and  morphine.

"You  know,  when  I get  sick  to  death  of  it  all  I go  out  in  the
e o the  night,  get  into  my  car  and  drive  like  a madman
through  Berlin.  At  full  speed  along  the  East-West  Axis.  The  British
Military  Police  try  to  stop  me,  but  what  can  they  do?  I've  got  an
eight-cylinder  Tatra.  And  then  I drive  through  the  Brandenburg


219


Gate.  A hair's  breadth  to  right  or  left,  and  I'd  be  smashed  to  pulp,

I'm  even  tempted  to,  sometimes  ....  It's  so  simple  ....  Only  a hair'
breadth  ....  You're  all  right,  you're  an  engineer.  That  smells  of  oil
and  smoke.  But  everything  around  me  reeks  of  blood.

"At  the  university  I thought  of  engineering  as  a solid  sort  of
profession.  But  when  I got  down  to  practice  and  saw  what  a lot
engineers  were  I stayed  on  in  the  faculty  only  by  sheer  inertia.  All  the
time  I wanted  something  different,  but  now  I don't  know  what  I
want.  I know  only  one  thing:  my  life  will  be  ended  with  a bullet
my  own  or  another's."

I felt  sorry  for  Andrei  now.  The  man  who  had  entered  my  room
was  in  the  prime  of  life,  with  a confident  step  and  outlook,  a man
who  seemed  to  have  achieved  his  aim  in  life.  But  now  I could  tell
from  his  own  words  that  he  was  damned.  And  the  calmness  with
which  he  spoke  only  accentuated  my  feeling.

"But  you're  still  an  engineer  too,"  I said.  "And  you're  a Party
member  and  a war  hero.  You  can  go  back  to  your  old  profession."

"That's  right  out  of  the  question,"  he  answered.  "There's  no
escape  from  the  M.V.D.  Have  you  ever  met  anyone  who  has?  In  the
old  days,  work  in  the  Cheka  provided  a way  to  a further,  a different
career.  But  now  we've  advanced  in  that  respect  too.  Now  you're
asked:  'Why  did  you  leave  the  M.V.D.?'  Now  such  a step  is  a crime,
it's  desertion  from  the  most  responsible  sector  of  the  communist
front.  They'd  never  release  me,  except  to  put  me  behind  bars.

"And  besides,  anyone  who  has  had  some  power  over  other  men  finds
it  difficult  to  start  catching  butterflies-  and  growing  geraniums  in  a
flower-box  on. the  window-sill,"  lie  said  with  an  unpleasant  smile.

"Power  is  a tasty  dish.  And  you  can't  tear  yourself  away  from  it,
you're  only  torn  away."

His  words  reminded  me  of  a man  I had  met  in  a front-line  hospital
during  the  war.  He  was  a private  in  a punitive  company.  Before  the
war  he  had  been  an  aviation  engineer.  He  was  a Party  member,
and  when  he  was  called  up  he  was  assigned  to  work  in  the  N.K.V.D.
They  sent  him  to  the  Secret  Department  of  the  Central  Institute  for
Aerodynamics  in  Moscow,  where  he  was  put  on  secret  work  in  the
field  of  constructing  special  high-flying  machines  driven  by  turbo
compression  engines.


220


Nobody  in  Moscow  suspected  that  almost  all  through  the  war  a
solo  German  Henschel  circled  over  Moscow  day  after  day.  It  flew
at  such  a height  that  it  was  invisible  to  the  naked  eye.  Only  the
experts  knew  the  secret  of  the  white  smoke-clouds  that  formed  and
then  slowly  dissipated  in  the  sky.  The  machine  never  dropped  bombs,
it  only  took  photographs  with  the  aid  of  infra-red  films.  The
Germans  attached  great  importance  to  the  regular  photographing  of  the
Moscow  railway  junctions,  through  which  the  main  flood  of  military
material  passed  to  the  West.  German  machines  flew  over  Moscow
day  and  night,  and  they  gradually  began  to  get  on  the  Kremlin's

nerves.  When  the  Soviet  fighters  attempted  to  go  above  their
80,000  feet  limit  the  Henschel  calmly  climbed  still  higher,  then
swooped  down  and  shot  up  the  Yaks  and  the  MIGS.  However,  it
did  not  often  show  the  Soviet  fighters  such  honor,  and  only  made
fun  of  them.

The  Defence  Council  gave  the  Institute  for  Aerodynamics  the
urgent  task  of  inventing  means  of  combating  these  German
reconnaissance  planes,  and  the  former  aviation  engineer,  the  newly
commissioned  N.K.V.D.  officer,  was  given  the  task  of  controlling
the  work.  Under  the  'plan'  drawn  up  by  the  N.K.V.D.  higher
authorities  he  was  instructed  to  send  them  each  month  the  names  of  a
fixed  percentage  of  spies,  diversionists  and  wreckers.  The  'plan'  was
strict:  every  month  a certain  percentage  of  spies,  a percentage
of  diversionists,  and  similar  'people's  enemies'.  Often,  in  addition
they  sent  him  an  urgent  demand  for  ten  'spies'  from  the  milling
machinists,  or  five  'wreckers'  from  the  laboratory  or  metallurgical
workers,  the  demand  being  made  to  meet  the  N.K.V.D.'s  special
needs  for  some  urgent  construction  project  of  its  own.

After  some  months  the  lieutenant  had  a nervous  breakdown.  He
was  not  very  well  acquainted  with  the  ways  of  the  N.K.V.D.,  and
he  put  in  a report  with  the  request  to  be  assigned  to  other  work.  A
day  later  he  was  reduced  to  the  ranks  and  sent  to  a punitive  company

In  the  hospital  where  I came  to  know  him  he  had  had  both  legs
amputated.

Andrei  was  right,  there  would  be  no  way  out  of  the  M.V.D.  for
him.

"Where  is  Halina  now?"  he  suddenly  asked  bluntly.

"Somewhere  in  Moscow."


221


"I  have  only  one  hope  left  now,"  he  said  dreamily.  "Perhaps  if
could  see  her  again.  .

There  was  a ring  at  the  door.  I went  out,  and  came  back  with
an  acquaintance  named  Mikhail  Sykov,  who  lived  not  far  from  me
He  excused  his  invasion  with  the  usual  remark:  "I  happened  to  be
passing,  and  saw  your  light  was  on,  so  I thought . . ."  He  broke  off
as  he  caught  sight  of  Andrei.  Andrei's  face  was  not  recognizable
in  the  dusk;  my  desk  lamp  lit  up  only  his  blue  and  gold  epaulettes
and  the  numerous  decorations  on  his  chest.  Sykov  greeted  Andrei
who  only  nodded  without  rising  from  his  chair.  The  newcomer
obviously  felt  that  he  had  called  at  an  awkward  moment.  It  isn't
so  easy  to  make  conversation  with  an  M.V.D.  officer  as  with  ordinary
mortals.  Besides,  who  knew  what  the  officer  was  here  for?  On  official
business,  quite  possibly.  In  such  cases  it's  much  the  best  to  make
yourself  scarce.  Anyway,  the  taciturn  major  showed  no  inclination  to
talk.  So  Sykov  declined  the  chair  I offered  him,  with  the  remark:

"I'll  drop  in  some  other  time.  I think  I'll  go  and  see  who's  around
in  the  club."

He  vanished  as  suddenly  as  he  had  arrived.  Next  morning  he
probably  told  everybody  in  his  office  that  I was  on  friendly  terms
with  the  M.V.D. , embellishing  his  story,  of  course.  Among  official
S.M.A.  circles  my  stock  would  rise:  intimate  relations  with  the
M.V.D.  were  not  without  significance.

Andrei  sat  a little  longer  without  speaking,  then  rose  and
remarked:  "I  think  it's  about  time  I was  going,  too.  Drop  in  and  see
me  whenever  you're  in  Potsdam."


222


CHAPTER  ELEVEN
KING  ATOM


Siemens  in  Arnstadt:  that's  under  control  isn't  it  ?

"Yes.

"Read  this."

The  head  of  the  Administration  for  Industry  handed  me  a code
telegram  struck  across  diagonally  in  red  to  indicate  that  it  was
secret.  It  read:  'Electronic  measuring  instruments  discovered.

Object  of  use  unknown.  Suspect  atom  research.  Awaiting  instructions.
Vassiliev.'

Colonel  Vassiliev  was  the  S.M.A.  plenipotentiary  at  the  Siemens
works  in  Arnstadt,  as  well  as  the  director  of  the  scientific  research
institute  for  television  which  was  attached  to  the  works.  He  was  an
experienced  and  reliable  man:  if  he  mentioned  'atom  research'  he
had  reason  for  doing  so.  I held  the  telegram  in  my  hand,  waiting
for  Alexandrov  to  say  more.

"We  must  send  someone  there.  As  the  works  is  under  your
direction  it  would  be  best  if  you  went  yourself,"  he  said.

"It  would  be  as  well  to  take  someone  from  the  Department  for
Science  and  Technique  with  me,"  I observed.

Half  an  hour  later  the  deputy  head  of  the  Department  for  Science
and  Technique,  Major  Popov,  and  I left  Karlshorst  for  Thuringia,
reached  Arnstadt  just  before  midnight,  and  went  straight  to  Colonel
Vassiliev's  house,  right  opposite  the  works.  He  had  been  phoned
that  we  were  coming,  and  he  and  his  assistant  were  waiting  for  us,

"What  have  you  discovered,  Comrade  Colonel?"  Major  Popov
asked.

"Let's  go  to  the  works  at  once  and  you'll  see  for  yourself,"  Vassiliev
said.

Accompanied  by  the  commander  of  the  works  guard  we  made  our
way  through  the  darkness  to  the  far  end  of  the  yard,  to  the  warehouse
for  raw  materials  and  finished  production.  A guard  challenged  us
outside;  and  inside,  before  a sealed  door,  we  found  a second  armed


223


guard.  When  the  seal  was  removed  we  passed  into  a great  warehouse
packed  with  half-assembled  electrical  equipment:  unfinished  war
production-a  scene  common  to  all  the  German  factories
immediately  after  the  war.

Vassiliev  halted  beside  several  large,  long  woodencases.  They
contained  enormous  glass  utensils  with  spherical  swellings  in  their
middle;  they  were  packed  with  great  care,  and  held  by  special
clamps.  The  equipment  was  similar  to  the  ordinary  cathode  tubes  used
in  oscillographs,  but  was  much  bigger.  It  was  an  easy  deduction  that
it  was  connected  with  electrical  measurement,  and  the  type  of
insulation  used  showed  that  it  was  intended  for  hightension  current
of  enormous  voltage,  such  as  is  employed  in  cyclotrons  for
experiments  in  atom-splitting.  One  of  the  pieces  had  a special
attachment  for  taking  photograms  of  the  process.  Judging  by  its
construction  it  was  not  intended  for  measuring  continuous  charge,
but  a single,  sudden,  enormous  application  of  current.

The  cases  were  marked:  'With  great  care,  glass',  but  we  vainl  y
looked  for  any  indication  of  where  they  had  come  from  or  whom  they
were  consigned  to.  They  bore  only  indecipherable  rows  of  numbers
and  letters.

"How  did  they  get  here?"  I asked  Vassiliev.  "They  couldn't  have
been  produced  in  this  works."

He  only  shrugged  his  shoulders.

Next  morning  we  opened  an  official  inquiry.  All  the  people  who
might  be  expected  to  have  some  knowledge  of  the  mysterious  cases
were  summoned  one  by  one  to  Vassiliev's  office.  The  warehouse  men
knew  nothing,  for  the  cases  had  not  been  opened  on  delivery  to  the
warehouse,  and  had  lain  until  Vassiliev  had  discovered  them.  The
technical  staff  said  the  instruments  had  not  been  produced  in
Arnstadt,  but  had  probably  come  with  other  material  from  the
Telefunken  and  Siemens  chief  works  in  Berlin.

We  felt  convinced  that  they  did  not  even  know  precisely  what
instruments  they  were  being  asked  about.

We  decided  to  send  a wire  direct  to  Karlshorst,  asking  for  the  help

of  experts  from  the  Special  Group.  The  Special  Group  is  the  highest

Soviet  organization  for  scientific  research  in  Germany  and  is

attached  to  the  M.V.D.  Department  for  Science  and  Technique  in  Potsdam.

They  have  full  powers  to  make  direct  contact  at  once,  if  necessary

with  all  the  scientific  research  organizations  in  the  Soviet  Union.


224


It  did  not  surprise  us  to  find  the  mysterious  apparatus  in  the
Siemens  warehouse  at  Arnstadt.  During  the  later  years  of  the  war
all  the  large  German  works  shifted  their  industrial  plant  and
established  branches  and  depots  in  areas  less  subject  to  air  attack

Moreover,  immediately  before  the  capitulation  the  more  valuable
installations  and  stores  of  raw  material  were  removed  and  secretly
deposited  in  various  remote  parts.  We  often  came  across  most
interesting  material  in  the  least  expected  places.

It  was  of  great  importance  to  find  out  who  had  ordered  this
apparatus  to  be  made,  and  whom  it  was  intended  for.  To  discover
this,  we  must  first  ascertain  where  it  had  been  produced.  Only  a very
few  German  works  could  have  made  it,  the  most  important  of  these
being  at  Siemensstadt,  in  the  British  sector  of  Berlin.  That  was
beyond  the  scope  of  our  authority-at  least,  officially.  On  the  other
hand,  the  Telefunken  works  were  at  Erfurt,  and  they  were
concerned  with  producing  huge  transmitter  valves  for  broadcasting
stations.  Telefunken-Erfurt  was  perfectly  able  to  handle  such  a
contract.  Moreover,  the  technical  directors  at  Erfurt  were  in  constant
business  contact  with  Siemensstadt,  and  lad  a pretty  good  idea  of
all  that  went  on  in  other  Telefunken  works.  There  we  should  find  the
threads  linking  up  with  the  mysterious  apparatus  at  Arnstadt,

We  decided  that  Colonel  Vassiliev  should  await  the  arrival
of  the  Special  Group  experts,  while  Major  Popov  and  I visited  the
Telefunken  works  at  Erfurt.

We  notified  the  S.M.A.  control  officers,  Lieutenant-Colonel
Yevtikov  and  Lieutenant  Novikov,  that  we  were  coming  to  Erfurt,
and  found  them  waiting  for  us  in  the  former  directors'  office.

When  we  explained  the  reason  for  our  visit  they  breathed  a sigh
of  relief;  they  had  obviously  been  expecting  one  of  the  regular
inquiries  into  their  failure  to  comply  with  production  plans  and
reparations  deliveries.  We  questioned  all  the  engineers  working  in
the  department  for  transmitter  valve  production,  and  came  upon
several  essential  clues.  Shortly  before  the  capitulation  they  had
executed  some  special  orders  for  gigantic  electrodes  and  other  parts
for  some  quite  unknown  and  completely  new  type  of  construction.

The  construction  plans  had  come  from  Berlin,  and  the  parts,  when
manufactured,  were  to  be  sent  there,  presumably  for  assembly.  The
work  was  strictly  secret.  When  we  persisted  in  asking  the  origin  of
the  commission  and  the  construction  plans,  the  technical  head  of


225


the  transmitter  valve  department  said  uncertainly:  "Berlin-Dahlem
...  I think  . . ."

That  was  good  enough.  During  the  war  Berlin-Dahlem  had  been
the  headquarters  of  the  secret  laboratories  for  atomic  physics
engaged  in  atom-splitting  experiments.

At  this  stage  Colonel  Vassiliev  telephoned  from  Arnstadt  to
report  that  the  Special  Group  experts  had  arrived.  I knew  that
Lieutenant-Colonel  Yevtikov  was  a sluggish  sort  of  individual,  so

I asked  Lieutenant  Novikov  to  get  reliable  men  to  start  a thorough
search  immediately  for  anything  that  could  have  any  connection  with
the  mysterious  order,  and  to  place  anything  found  under  lock  and  key
and  post  a military  guard  over  it.  Lieutenant  Novikov  was-  an
energetic  and  able  man,  an  engineer  by  profession,  who  later,  when  the
Telefunken-Erfurt  was  transformed  into  a Soviet  A.G.  company,
was  appointed  chief  engineer  to  the  works.  While  he  set  to  work  on
the  inquiries,  Major  Popov  and  I drove  back  to  Arnstadt.

In  Vassiliev's  office  we  found  a group  of  men  who  were  obviously
scientists  and  thoroughly  at  home  in  laboratories  and  research  in
situations.  Together  with  them  there  were  several  taciturn  men  in
eivilian  dress,  who  took  no  part  in  the  discussion  of  technical  points
and  kept  mainly  in  the  background.  But  one  could  see  that  they
were  the  real  bosses:  they  were  the  M.V.D.  shadows.

The  experts  had  already  examined  the  mysterious  apparatus,
and  without  asking  them  any  questions  we  felt  that  they  confirmed
our  suppositions.  - Major  Popov  reported  on  our  visit  to  Telefunken
Erfurt.  Now  we  had  the  unpleasant  feeling  that  our  report  was
acquiring  the  features  of  a judicial  interrogation;  it  was  as  though  the
M.V.D  shadows  suspected  that  we  might  be  concealing  something.
Even  in  dealings  with  Soviet  officers  that  institution  applies  its  quite
distinctive  methods.

A searching  examination  of  the  technical  employees  at  Arnstadt
continued  all  that  day.  Each  individual  had  to  pledge  himself  in
writing  to  the  strictest  secrecy.  Towards  evening  the  apparatus
was  all  taken  to  Berlin,  under  reinforced  escort  and  with  the  greatest
Of  precautions.

Accompanied  by  Major  Popov  and  myself,  the  Special  Group
experts  went  on  to  Erfurt.  Yevtikov  had  already  been  ordered  not
to  let  anybody  leave  the  works  who  was  likely  to  be  required  for
questioning.


226


The  inquiry  went  on  all  night:  the  taciturn  men  with  the  pale
faces  seemed  to  make  no  difference  between  night  and  day.  The
inquiry  was  held  in  Yevtikov's  office,  but  he,  Major  Popov,  and  I
spent  the  night  in  an  adjacent  room,  whence  one  or  another  of  us
was  summoned  to  establish  some  fact  or  to  give  information,  as  we
were  well  acquainted  with  the  activities  of  the  Telefunken  works.  The
Special  Group  acquired  not  only  a mass  of  fresh  material,  but  also
a list  of  the  German  scientists  and  engineers  who  had  been  directly
concerned  with  carrying  out  the  secret  commission.  Once  more  the
threads  linked  up  with  the  Kaiser-Wilhelm  Institute  and  the  secretly
laboratories  for  atomic  physics  in  Berlin-Dahlem.

One  of  the  leading  German  atomic  physicists  was  Dr  Otto  Hahn
a pupil  of  Max  Planck.  A number  of  the  German  scientists  who  had
been  working  in  his  laboratory  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Soviet
authorities  after  the  capitulation  and  were  taken  to  the  Soviet  Union
where  they  were  afforded  every  possibility  of  continuing  their
research.  Such  famous  German  scientists  as  Professor  Herz  and  Dr
Arden  are  now  working  in  Soviet  Research  Institutes  connected  with
atomic  research  under  the  general  direction  of  Professor  Kapitza
who  is  also  head  of  the  Supreme  Administration  for  the  scientific
research  organizations  attached  to  the  Ministry  for  Special  Weapons.

By  the  last  few  months  of  the  war  the  Germans  had  cyclotrons
for  atom-splitting  at  their  disposition.  But  the  catastrophic  situation
at  the  fronts--  and  the  destruction  of  the  German  heavy-water  plant
in  Norway  by  the  R.A.F.  forced  them  to  suspend  attempts  to  solve  the
secret  of  the  atom.  Before  the  final  capitulation  they  scattered  all  the
atom  laboratory  equipment  in  spots  which  seemed  safe  from  discovery.
The  Soviet  authorities  set  up  Special  Units  to  search  exclusively  for
the  secret  weapons  on  which  Hitler  had  set  such  great  hopes.

During  the  month  following  our  finds  at  Arnstadt  all  who  had  had
anything  to  do  with  it  were  once  more  summoned  to  Potsdam-Babelsberg,
to  the  headquarters  of  the  Special  Group.  Somehow  or  other
it  had  got  hold  of  some  valuable  clues,  both  from  German  scientists
working  in  the  Soviet  Union  and  from  many  others  living  in  the
German  western  zones.  At  times  one  cannot  but  feel  admiration
at  the  precision  and  speed  with  which  the  M.V.D.  works.  It  is  with  good
reason  that  this  highly  responsible  field  of  research  has  been
entrusted  to  it.

While  the  Special  Group  was  solving  the  problem  of  the  Arnstadt
equipment  the  S.M.A.  made  a further  important  discovery.  From
Suslov,  the  Scientific  and  Technical  Department's  representative


227


for  Thuringia,  the  head  of  the  department,  Colonel  Kondakov,
received  a telegram  announcing  that  'The  Levkovich  Group  has  come
upon  a secret  store  of  equipment  whose  purpose  is  unknown'.  Colonel
Levkovich  was  the  head  of  the  Dismantling  Group  operating  in
Thuringia.  Such  discoveries  were  by  no  means  rare;  dismantling
teams  had  more  than  once  come  across  double  walls,  with  special
installations  or  machinery  concealed  between  them.  Because  of  this
a circular  had  been  issued,  instructing  that  all  the  walls  of
dismantled  works  were  to  be  sounded.  The  dismantlers  also  searched
systematically  for  plant  removed  from  factories  and  works
immediately  before  the  capitulation.

Kondakov  sent  two  of  his  officers  to  Thuringia  immediately.

In  the  abandoned  galleries  of  an  unfinished  underground  factory,
packed  apparatus

which  in  connection  with  very

situated  in  a forest,  they  saw  carefully

apparently  had  been  intended  for  use

high-tension  transformers  or  dischargers  such  as  are  required  in
laboratories  researching  into  the  problems  of  high-tension  current.

They  were  especially  struck  by  the  remarkable  scale  of  this
apparatus,  and  especially  the  insulation.  Although  the  experts  from
Karlshorst  had  never  had  anything  to  do  with  cyclotrons,  they
thought  at  once  of  atomic  research,  and  cabled  for  experts  from  the
Special  Group.

A few  hours  later  the  experts  arrived  from  Babelsberg;  their
car  was  escorted  by  a second  containing  a force  of  soldiers  in
green  caps:  M.V.D.  special  troops.  One  glance  at  the  plant
convinced  the  experts  of  the  significance  of  the  find.  A cypher  cable  was
sent  to  General  Pashchin,  in  the  Ministry  for  Special  Weapons  at
Moscow,  and  the  following  day  a group  of  M.V.D.  experts  left
Moscow  to  take  over  the  plant.  As  soon  as  they  arrived  the  area,  with
a circumference  of  several  miles,  was  sealed  off  with  M.V.D.  guards.
From  that  moment  neither  the  men  from  Karlshorst  nor  those  of  the
Special  Group  from  Babelsberg  were  allowed  to  visit  the  area  until
the  entire  equipment  had  been  removed  to  the  Soviet  Union.

Later,  Colonel  Kondakov  explained  that  we  had  not  discovered
anything  new  in  the  sphere  of  atomic  research  in  Germany.  Similar
equipment  was  being  made  in  the  U.S.S.R.  before  the  war,  under
the  Supervision  of  Professor  Kapitza.  Owing  to  war-time  difficulties,
Germany  had  been  unable  to  conduct  the  research  on  any  large  scale.


228


The  Purely  scientific  and  theoretical  aspects  of  problems  associated

with  the  atom  have  been  known  to  the  scientists  of  many  countries
for  many  years  past,  and  Germany  failed  to  find  the  solution  to  the
problem  of  splitting  the  atom  chiefly  because  of  technical  difficulties
-above  all,  that  of  constructing  the  necessary  plant  and  providing
the  energy  for  splitting  the  atom.

One  must  remark  on  the  striking  difference  between  the  Soviet
and  the  foreign  press  in  its  handling  of  atomic  questions.  We  officers
from  Soviet  Russia,  who  stood  on  the  bounds  between  two  worlds
saw  the  difference  more  clearly  than  anybody  else.  While  in  general
the  Soviet  press  maintained  an  excessive  silence,  the  foreign  press
was  vociferous,  and  reminded  one  of  a woman  going  into  hysterics  at
the  sight  of  a mouse.  The  fuss  made  over  the  atom  bomb  is  indicative
of  fear  and  shows  a lack  of  sense  of  reality.  In  the  last  resort
the  atom  bomb  alone  cannot  decide  the  destiny  of  the  world.  Man
has  already  produced  the  atom  bomb,  and  he  will  always  be  mightier
than  the  atom.

"It's  amazing  how  much  fuss  is  being  made  over  the  atom  bomb"
Colonel  Kondakov  remarked  one  day.

"Yes,  and  the  reports  always  come  from  'reliable  sources'  his
assistant,  Major  Popov,  smirked.  "Sometimes  from  circles  close  to
Karlshorst,  sometimes  'direct  from  Moscow'."

"To  tell  the  truth,  the  foreign  press  knows  more  than  we  ourselves
do,"  the  colonel  sighed.  "Their  continual  quest  for  the  sensational..."

His  remark  was  typical  of  the  attitude  of  responsible  Soviet
officials.  Each  of  us  knew  exactly  so  much  as  he  had  to  know  in
order  to  perform  his  duties.  And  the  majority  of  us  went  to  great
trouble  to  know  as  little  as  possible.  While  the  world  was  shivering
with  atom  fever  our  life  pursued  its  normal  course.  I am  reminded
of  a comparatively  unimportant  yet  significant  incident  that  occurred
in  my  everyday  life  about  that  time.

Shortly  after  my  return  from  Thuringia  the  Administration
for  Reparations  sent  me  a file  containing  construction  plans
accompanied  by  a note:  'We  send  you  the  prototype  plans  for  a
standard  house- — cottage-intended  for  workers'  colonies  in  the
Soviet  Union,  in  accordance  with  reparations  Order  No  ....  We
request  you  to  check  the  electrical  installations  for  the  proposed  project
and  confirm  them.  We  also  request  you  to  prepare  an  overall
plan  of  electrical  installations  for  a total  of  120,000  houses,  and  to
notify  us  which  works  are  in  a position  to  execute  such  an  order


229


Petrov:  Head  of  the  Electro- Industry  Department  of  the  Administration  for
Reparations.'

The  plans  included  construction  diagrams  for  an  ordinary
German  one-family  house,  consisting  of  three  rooms,  kitchen,  bath
room,  and  toilet.  In  the  basement  there  were  a coal  cellar  and  wash
house.

I and  several  other  engineers  studied  the  plans  with  much  interest.

When  we  go  back  to  Russia  we'll  get  a little  house  like  that,"  one
of  us  remarked.  The  electrical  installations  were  checked,  the  plans
approved,  and  the  Administration  for  Reparations  sent  them  on  to
Moscow  for  final  approval.

A little  later  I found  the  file  again  on  my  desk,  with  an
accompanying  note:  'On  the  instruction  of  the  U.S.S.R.  Ministry  for
the  Building  Industry  I request  you  to  make  certain  requisite
modifications  in  the  project.  Petrov.'

Curious  to  see  what  improvements  Moscow  had  ordered,  I unfolded  the
plans.  To  begin  with,  the  wash-house  had  been  abolished;  the
Ministry  considered  that  the  washing  could  be  done  just  as  well  in
the  kitchen.  Second,  the  veranda  was  eliminated.  Quite
understandable:  the  tenants  weren't  to  loll  around  on  verandas.

After  the  modifications  had  been  made  accordingly,  the  project
was  returned  to  Moscow  for  approval.  A few  weeks  later  I found
it  on  my  desk  yet  again,  this  time  accompanied  by  the  laconic
remark:  'Please  make  the  necessary  alterations.  Petrov.'

This  time  the  changes  were  pretty  drastic.  Without  a word  of
explanation  the  bathroom  and  the  toilet  had  been  abolished.  Every
workers'  colony  has  public  baths,  so  why  a bathroom  to  each
house?  But  the  toilet?  Apparently  the  Moscow  authorities  were  of
the  opinion  that  such  things  were  unnecessary  so  long  as  there  were
bushes  around.

The  plans  for  electrical  installations  had  been  provided  with  a
Plentiful  crop  of  thick  red  question-marks.  For  instance,  in  the
bedroom  there  were  question-marks  against  the  wall  plug,  the
bedside  lamp  to  be  attached  to  it,  and  the  cord  to  enable  it  to  be
worked  from  the  bed.  The  120,000  workers'  dwellings  had  been
refashioned  to  meet  the  Soviet  requirements.  The  cottages  had  been
turned  into  ordinary  huts.  As  finally  'modernized',  the  project  was
the  subject  of  bitter  jest  among  the  engineers  of  our  department,

'lid  none  of  them  expressed  any  desire  to  live  in  such  a house.


230


From  one-fourth  to  one-third  of  the  budget  for  the  current
five-year  plan  for  the  're-establishment  of  Soviet  Economy',  i.e.
some  60  milliard  roubles,  goes  directly  or  indirectly  into  atom  re
search  and  development.  But  if  a man,  the  lord  of  creation  and  the
creator  of  the  atom  bomb,  needs  to  perform  his  natural  functions
let  him  run  to  the  nearest  bush.  So  the  State  interest  requires!

In  the  high  summer  of  1946  a number  of  commissions  from  various
Soviet  ministries  arrived  in  Karlshorst  to  inquire  into  the  possibilities
of  allocating  reparations  orders  and  of  exploiting  the  finished
production  lying  in  the  warehouses  of  German  industrial  works.  Two
representatives  from  the  Soviet  Ministry  for  Shipbuilding  invited
me  to  travel  with  them  through  the  Soviet  zone  to  study  the
situation  on  the  spot.  Colonel  Bykov,  Captain  Fedorov,  and  I set  out  from
Karlshorst  to  go  to  Weimar.  On  the  road  I got  to  know  my  companions
quite  well.  They  were  both  extremely  pleasant  fellows,  and
ignored  military  regulations  so  far  as  to  use  the  familiar  Christian
name  and  patronymic,  rather  than  the  prescribed  rank  and  surname

They  were  not  professional  officers  but  engineers.  And  besides,  they
were  in  the  navy;  anybody  who  has  had  anything  to  do  with  seamen
knows  the  difference  between  the  navy  and  the  army.

On  our  arrival  at  Erfurt  we  put  up  at  the  Haus  Kossenhaschen
which  had  been  turned  into  the  staff  headquarters  of  the  dismantling
teams  working  in  Thuringia.  We  sat  in  the  old-fashioned,  oak
paneled  hall,  talking  while  we  waited  to  be  called  to  lunch.  I had
been  here  often  before,  so  the  scene  was  familiar  to  me.  But  my
companions  had  left  Moscow  only  a few  days  previously,  and  they
were  keenly  interested  in  all  that  was  happening.

"Tell  me,  Gregory  Petrovich,  what's  going  on  around  here  ?

Are  they  preparing  for  an  expedition  to  the  North  Pole?"  Colonel
Bykov  asked  me  in  an  undertone.  The  strange  inquiry  was  due  to
the  fact  that  all  the  dismantling  officers  bustling  to  and  fro  were
wearing  enormous  boots  of  reindeer  hide,  although  it  was  a very
warm  summer  day.  And  these  men  in  fur  boots  carried  sporting  guns
with  them  wherever  they  went,  even  taking  them  into  the  dining  hall

"No,"  I answered.  "It's  only  that  the  dismantlers  have  found  a
store  of  German  airmen's  arctic  equipment  somewhere  or  other,  and
now  they're  enjoying  the  pleasure  of  trying  it  out.  And  they've  got
their  guns  with  them  because  they're  going  off  to  hunt  immediately
they've  had  their  dinner."


231


"An  amusing  lot !"  The  colonel  shook  his  head.  "Haven't  they
really  got  anything  else  to  do?"

"The  position's  rather  complicated,"  I explained.  "The  main
work  of  dismantling  was  finished  some  time  ago  now,  and  the
majority  of  them  haven't  anything  to  do.  But  they  aren't  having  a
bad  time  here,  so  their  chief  activity  in  life  at  present  is  to  drag  out
whatever  they're  doing.  As  they're  directly  under  Moscow  control,
the  S.M.A.  can't  do  anything  about  it."

"In  Berlin  we  were  told  that  many  of  them  have  accumulated
enough  to  retire  for  the  rest  of  their  lives,"  Fedorov  remarked.

"Recently  the  S.M.A.  Department  for  Precision  Tools  did  take  up
one  case,"  I said.  "It  involved  the  director  of  the  State  Watch  and
Clock  Works  No.  2.  He  had  been  sent  to  Germany  to  dismantle  the
watch  and  clock  industry.  Soon  after  his  return  to  Moscow  the  S.M.A.
discovered  that  while  here  he  had  acquired  many  thousand  gold
watches  and  several  dozen  kilograms  of  gold  illegally."

"That  certainly  should  provide  for  the  rest  of  his  life,  " Fedorov
remarked  with  conviction  in  his  tone.  "If  only  for  a lifelong  free
lodging."

"I  doubt  whether  he'll  get  that,"  I commented.

"Why  do  you?"  The  captain  was  astonished.

"Well,  the  circumstances  were  reported  to  the  higher  authorities,
and  they  hushed  it  all  up."

"But  why?"  Fedorov  still  failed  to  understand.

"Don't  ask  mel"  I replied.  "Apparently  they  prefer  not  to  bring
such  people  into  disrepute.  'Don't  wash  dirty  linen  in  public',  says
the  old  saying.  His  wasn't  the  first  case  of  its  kind."

"And  he's  a Soviet  director!"  the  colonel  exclaimed  indignantly.

I could  not  help  smiling  bitterly.  Nodding  towards  the  dis
mantling  officers  bustling  about,  I said:  "In  the  Soviet  Union  all
these  people  are  either  high  ministerial  officials  or  factory  directors.

And  hardly  any  of  them  are  very  different  from  that  director  I've
just  told  you  of.  You  can  take  my  word  for  it.  We  in  the  S.M.A.  are
getting  more  and  more  of  that  sort  of  case  brought  to  our  notice."


232


There  was  an  awkward  silence,  broken  only  when  the  head  waiter
summoned  us  to  the  dining  hall.

We  spent  two  days  visiting  factories  and  works  in  the  Erfurt
district.  My  companions  were  especially  concerned  with  orders  for

special  electrical  installations  in  warships,  and  in  particular  in
U-boats.  I was  struck  by  the  interest  they  showed  in  the  life  going
on  around  us-l  had  been  more  than  a year  in  Germany  now,  and  I
was  not  so  impressed  by  the  contrasts  as  I had  been  at  first.

Among  the  works  we  visited  was  the  Telefunken  factory;  my
companions  wanted  to  find  out  whether  it  could  undertake
reparations  orders  for  naval  receiving  and  transmitting  apparatus.  As  we
drove  along  the  drive  to  the  offices  the  colonel  exclaimed:  "Look  at
that,  Victor  Stepanovich  ! Tennis  courts  !"

Captain  Fedorov  also  stared  through  the  window  at  several  courts
surrounded  with  a high  wire-mesh  wall.  Around  the  courts  there
were  flowerbeds,  and  a little  square  where  one  could  rest.  The  captain
gazed  with  intense  curiosity  at  the  tennis  courts,  the  garden,  and  the
nearby  factory  buildings,  as  though  the  very  fact  that  they  were  all  to
be  found  together  within  the  factory  walls  was  noteworthy  in  itself.

In  the  Soviet  Union  it  is  continually  being  proclaimed  that  the
workers  need  to  have  opportunities  for  rest  and  recreation  within
the  factory  area.  But  as  a rule  the  idea  never  gets  beyond  the
proclamation  stage,  and  such  facilities  are  to  be  found  only  in  a few
works  which  serve  as  showplaces.  But  now,  in  Germany,  the  two
Soviet  officers  were  seeing  things  which  they  had  been  told  at  home
were  the  achievement  exclusively  of  the  Soviet  system.

Not  far  from  the  office  building  there  were  several  rows  of  cycle
stands,  all  of  them  empty.

"But  where  are  the  cycles,  Gregory  Petrovich?"  the  captain-
asked  me.

Now  that's  really  too  simple!"  I retorted.  "In  Russia,  of  course."

"Oh,  of  course!"  he  smiled.  "But  there  must  have  been  a lot-
here  at  one  time.  Almost  one  per  worker."

After  we  had  discussed  our  business  with  the  Soviet  control
officers  and  the  Telefunken  directorate's  representatives,  Colonel
Bykov  turned  to  me  with  an  unexpected  request:  "Couldn't
you  arrange  for  us  to  go  over  the  works?  So  that  we  can  get  to  know


233


the  labor  processes  and  organization?"

The  technical  director  was  quite  willing  to  take  us  round.  We
went  right  through  the  production  departments,  from  beginning
to  end  of  the  process.  In  a great  hall  where  electrodes  were  being
wound  and  assembled  for  wireless  valves  several  hundred  women
and  girls  were  sitting  at  tables.  The  director  explained  the  details#
but  Colonel  Bykov  did  not  listen  to  him.  The  colonel  had  fallen  a
little  way  behind,  and  was  unobtrusively  surveying  the  hall.  His
eyes  passed  slowly  over  the  huge  windows,  over  the  high  walls,  the
ceiling,  and  rested  for  a moment  on  the  glass  partitions  that
separated  one  sector  from  another.  As  a high  ministerial  official  and
head  of  one  of  the  main  departments  in  the  Mnistry  for  Shipbuilding
he  was  well  acquainted  with  working  conditions  in  the  Soviet
Union,  and  it  was  obvious  that  he  was  quietly  comparing  them  with
conditions  in  this  German  works.

As  we  were  leaving  the  hall  Captain  Fedorov  drew  me  back.
"Gregory  Petrovich,"  he  said,  "how  do  you  like  this  seat?"  He
perched  himself  on  one  of  the  seats,  all  of  the  same  pattern,  used  by
the  women  workers.  It  was  fitted  with  a padded  backrest,  and  its
height  was  adjustable.

"What  do  you  find  interesting  about  that  seat,  Victor
Stepanovich?"  I asked  him.

"To  start  with,  it's  comfortable.  For  a worker  it's  absolutely
luxurious.  But  quite  apart  from  that,  did  you  notice  the  seats  they
had  in  the  factory  office?"

"No,  I didn't."

"They're  exactly  the  same,"  he  said  with  a faint  smile.  "Directors
and  workers,  they  all  sit  on  the  same  seats.  And  they're  really
comfortable,  too."

As  we  went  on,  the  technical  director  began  to  complain  of  the
difficulties  they  met  with  in  regard  to  labour  power;  workers  tended
to  come  and  go  as  they  liked,  and  this  had  a detrimental  effect  on
output.  "It  takes  four  weeks  to  train  a new  worker,"  he  said.  "But
many  of  them  don't  stay  longer  than  a fortnight.  And  absenteeism
is  very  common."

"But  haven't  you  any  means  of  stopping  it?"  the  colonel  asked
in  astonishment.


234


The  director  shrugged  his  shoulders.  "A  worker  can  be  away  three
days  without  good  reason,"  he  explained.  "If  he's  away  any  longer
he  must  obtain  a doctor's  certificate."

"Then  how  do  you  stop  slacking  and  shifting  from  one  works  to
another?"  the  colonel  asked.

"If  the  worker  comes  within  the  categories  I have  just  referred
to  we  have  no  powers  of  dismissal.  On  the  other  hand,  if  he  wishes
to  throw  up  his  job  we  can't  make  him  work,"  the  director  replied.

"I'm  not  thinking  of  dismissal,  I'm  thinking  of  the  necessity  to
make  a man  work,"  the  colonel  persisted.

The  director  stared  at  him  blankly.  "I  beg  your  pardon?"  he  said.

The  colonel  repeated  his  remark.

"We  have  no  legal  means  of  compelling  a worker  to  work.  We
can  only  dismiss  a worker  who  violates  the  labor  code,"  the
German  answered.

There  was  an  awkward  pause.  The  worst  punishment  a German
worker  could  suffer  was  dismissal.  In  the  Soviet  Union  dismissal  was
frequently  a worker's  one,  unachievable,  dream.  A Soviet  director
can  deal  with  a worker  entirely  as  he  wishes.  He  can  put  a man  on
a poor  and  badly  paid  job,  and  he  can,  or  rather  must,  hand  a man
over  to  the  law  for  arriving  late,  even  if  it  be  only  a few  minutes.  But
the  worker  has  no  right  whatever  to  change  his  place  of  work  without
the  director's  agreement.  Arbitrary  absenteeism  is  liable  to  lead  to
imprisonment.  We  Soviet  officers  were  used  to  such  discipline,  and
so  we  could  not  understand  the  German  director's  impotence.  And  he
for  his  part  was  highly  astonished  at  what  he  evidently  regarded  as
our  absurd  questions.  Two  worlds:  two  systems.

"You  were  speaking  of  the  labour  code,  just  now,"  the  colonel  went
on.  "What  labour  legislation  governing  relations  between  employer
and  employee  is  in  force  today?  Laws  dating  from  the  Hitler  regime?"

"The  German  labour  code  dates  mainly  from  the  time  of  Bismarck,"
the  German  answered.  "It  has  suffered  only  insignificant
modifications  since  then."

"The  time  of  Bismarck?"  Bykov  sounded  incredulous.  "But
that's  something  like  seventy  years  ago


235


"Yes,"  the  director  answered,  and  for  the  first  time  a look  of
pride  showed  in  his  face.  "Germany's  social  legislation  is  one  of  the
most  progressive  in  the  world  ...  I mean  in  Western  Europe,"  he
hurriedly  corrected  himself  as  he  remembered  that  he  was  talking
to  Soviet  officers.

The  colonel  looked  at  the  captain.  The  captain,  for  his  part,
looked  at  me.  I was  used  to  this  kind  of  mute  dialogue;  it  was  the
normal  reaction  of  Soviet  people  to  things  that  made  them  think,
but  which  could  not  be  discussed.

I took  advantage  of  the  fact  that  none  of  our  control  officers  was
near  to  ask  the  director  why  there  had  been  a sudden  fall  in  radio
valve  production  during  the  last  few  months.  When  one  inspects  a
factory  it  is  best  to  talk  with  both  sides  separately.

"The  main  reason  is  the  shortage  of  wolfram  and  molybdenum
wire,"  lie  answered.

"But  you  were  recently  allocated  a supply  securing  the
production  plan  for  six  months,"  I retorted.  "Haven't  you  received  it
from  Berlin  yet?"

"Yes,  Herr  Major,  but  don't  you  know  . he  muttered  in  his
embarrassment.  "Hasn't  Herr  Novikov  reported  to  you  ...  ?"

"He's  reported  nothing.  What's  happened?"

The  director  hesitated  before  answering:

"We  needed  the  wire  so  urgently  that  we  sent  a lorry  to  Berlin
to  fetch  it."

"On  the  way  back  the  lorry  wa~s  stopped  ....

"What  happened  to  the  wire?"

"Herr  Major,  our  men  couldn't  do  anything
"But  where's  the  wire?"

"As  our  lorry  was  approaching  Leipzig  at  night  another  lorry
blocked  its  way.  Armed  men  with  machine-pistols  forced  our  driver
and  the  dispatching  clerk  to  get  out,  and  they  took  over  the  lorry
and  drove  off.  The  wire  . . ."

"Who  were  the  bandits?"


236


"They  were  wearing  Soviet  uniforms,"  he  answered  reluctantly.

As  we  got  into  our  car  after  leaving  the  director,  Captain  Fedorov
asked:

"But  who  could  have  been  interested  in  that  lorry  and  its  wire?

D'you  think  it  was  some  diversionists  trying  to  sabotage  reparations
deliveries?"

"We're  well  aware  of  that  kind  of  diversionary  activity,"  I told
him.  "The  lorry  will  be  found  abandoned  in  a forest  in  a day  or
two,  with  the  wire  still  on  it,  but  stripped  of  its  tires  and  battery.  I
expect  that's  what  Novikov  is  hoping  for,  too.  That's  why  he  hasn't
reported  the  matter  yet."

"But  who  goes  in  for  that  sort  of  thing?"  the  captain  asked.

"You  live  here  for  any  length  of  time  and  you'll  find  out."  I
avoided  a direct  answer.

From  the  Telefunken  works  we  drove  to  a Thiel  works  for  precision
instruments  and  clocks.  It  was  situated  in  a small  village  which
we  had  difficulty  in  finding  on  a map.  There  were  several  other  quite
large  industrial  works  engaged  in  armature  production  in  the  same
village.  It  lay  in  a narrow  valley  between  wooded  hills,  along  the
sides  of  which  the  Thuringian  houses,  brightly  painted,  clung  in  rows.
It  was  difficult  to  believe  that  this  place  was  a workers'  settlement.

"It  looks  more  like  a sanatorium,"  Fedorov  remarked,  and  his
voice  expressed  envy,  or  regret.  "In  this  country  workers  live  as  if,
they  were  staying  at  a health  resort."

We  called  on  the  S.M.A.  control  officers,  who  had  taken  up  their
residence  in  the  villa  of  one  of  the  factory  owners.  As  we  came  away
the  colonel  laughed  and  said:  "Victor  Stepanovich,  what  do  you
think  these  brothers  of  ours  are  most  afraid  of?"

"I&st  they  should  be  transferred  somewhere  else,"  the  captain
replied  without  stopping  to  think.  And  we  all  understood  what  he
meant  by  'somewhere  else'.

People  living  in  the  West  would  never  guess  what  it  is  that  most
astonishes  Soviet  people,  especially  engineers,  on  their  first  visit  to
a German  factory.  It  might  be  thought  that  the  Soviet  officers  would
gaze  open-mouthed  at  the  enormous  buildings,  the  innumerable
modern  machines  and  other  technical  achievements.  But  such
things  have  long  since  lost  any  power  to  surprise  us.  It  is  rather  the


237


western  peoples  who  would  be  astonished  at  the  size  of  Soviet
factories  and  the  scope  of  their  technical  achievement.  It  is  not
western  technique,  not  western  machinery,  that  are  new  to  us,  but
the  place  which  man  occupies  in  society  and  the  State.  We  have  to
recognize  the  fact  that  men  in  the  western  system  of  free
development  of  social  relations  enjoy  far  greater  rights  and  liberties,  that,
to  put  it  simply,,  they  get  much  more  out  of  life  than  do  the  Soviet
people  of  the  corresponding  social  stratum.

As  we  were  traveling  on  to  our  next  point  of  call  that  evening,
not  far  from  Jena  a fault  developed  in  our  car's  dynamo,  and  it
stopped  charging.  To  avoid  running  down  the  battery  completely
we  switched  off  our  headlamps  and  drove  slowly  through  the  night.

On  one  side  of  the  narrow  road  a steep  cliff  overgrown  with  trees
towered  above  us,  on  the  other  side  the  cliff  fell  away  into  bottomless
darkness.  In  the  most  God-forsaken  spot  of  all,  in  the  middle  of  a
gorge,  our  auto  petered  out  completely.  We  got  out  to  stretch  our  legs
while  the  driver  examined  the  engine  by  torchlight.

A dark  form  pushing  a cycle  loomed  out  of  the  darkness.

"Can  you  tell  us  where  we  are?"  I asked  the  German.

"You're  at  Goethe's  castle,"  he  answered.  "It's  right  above
your  heads."

"But  is  there  a village  anywhere  near?"

"Yes.  You'll  come  to  a bridge  a little  way  along  the  road,  and
there's  a village  on  the  other  side  of  it."

"I  can't  do  anything  to  it,  Comrade  Colonel,"  our  driver  reported
a moment  or  so  later.  "It'll  have  to  go  to  a garage."

"Now  what  shall  we  do?  Spend  the  night  in  the  car?"  my  companions  fumed.

"Of  course  not !"  I said.  "There's  a village  not  far  off,  We'll  go
there  for  the  night."

"God  forbid,  Gregory  Petrovich  !"  the  two  sailors  exclaimed  in
horror.  "We  shan't  find  a commandatura  or  an  hotel  for  Soviet
officers  there."

"And  very  good,  too!"  I answered.


238


"Cut  it  out !"  they  objected.  "We're  not  tired  of  life  yet."

"Why  did  you  say  that?"  It  was  my  turn  to  be  astonished.

"Have  you  forgotten  where  we  are?  Not  a day  passes  without
a murder  being  committed.  It's  been  drummed  into  our  heads  that
we've  got  to  take  the  utmost  care.  We've  been  told  not  to  let  our
driver  spend  a night  in  a car  alone,  for  he's  sure  to  be  murdered  if
we  do.  You  know  for  yourself  what  things  are  like."

"And  where  were  you  told  all  this?"

"In  Moscow."

I couldn't  help  laughing.  "Well,  if  that's  what  you  were  told  in
Moscow,  it  must  be  so.  But  you  get  a different  view  of  it  when  you're
close  up  to  it.  We  shall  sleep  better  in  the  village  than  in  any
commandatura  hotel:  I guarantee  you  that.  After  all,  we've  all  got
pistols  in  any  case."

After  long  argument  they  agreed  to  take  the  risk  of  spending  the
night  in  a wild  and  strange  village.  They  told  the  driver  he  was  to
remain  in  the  car,  and  we  set  out  to  walk,

"But  where  shall  we  sleep  there?"  The  captain  was  still  dubious.

"You  can't  wake  people  up  in  the  middle  of  the  night  and  force
your  way  into  their  house."

"Don't  worry,  Victor  Stepanovich.  The  very  first  house  we  come
to  will  be  an  hotel.  Would  you  care  to  bet  on  it?"

"But  how  can  you  be  so  sure  that  it  will  be  an  hotel?"  Captain
Fedorov  asked.  "Anyway,  if  you're  right,  we'll  open  a bottle  of
cognac."

"It's  quite  simple.  We're  traveling  along  a country  road,  and  in
Germany  the  hotels  are  always  found  in  the  main  street,  at  the
beginning  and  end  of  the  village.  That's  an  easy  way  to  win
cognac!"

"All  the  same,  I don't  like  it."  The  captain  sighed  mournfully.

Some  ten  minutes  later  a bridge  loomed  up  ahead  of  us.  Immediately  beyond  it

we  saw  light  streaming  through  the  chinks  of

window-shutters.


239


"And  now  we'll  see  who's  right,  Victor  Stepanovich,"  I said,  as  I
shone  my  torch  on  to  a signboard,  depicting  a foaming  tankard,
fixed  above  the  main  door.  "Here's  the  hotel."

A few  minutes  later  we  were  sitting  at  a table  in  the  bar-parlour.

My  companions  cast  suspicious  glances  around  the  room,  as  though
they  expected  to  be  attacked  at  any  moment.  The  room  was  decorated
in  the  Thuringian  manner,  and  had  heavily  carved  dark  oak  furniture,
and  antlers  on  all  the  walls.  The  ceiling-  and  wall-lights  were
fashioned  from  antlers,  too.  At  the  back  gleamed  the  chromium,
plated  taps  of  the  bar,  and  two  girls  in  white  aprons  stood  smiling
behind  the  counter.

After  we  had  arranged  rooms  for  the  night,  we  ordered  hot  coffee.

From  our  cases  we  took  bread,  sausage,  and  a bottle  of  cognac  which
the  captain  had  brought  with  him  as  a 'remedy  against  the  flu'!

"AN,  Gregory  Petrovich,  it's  all  right  to  drink,  but  we'll  be
slaughtered  like  quails  later  on,"  the  captain  sighed  as  he  drew  the
cork.  "You'll  have  to  answer  for  it  all  to  St.  Peter."

"Would  you  like  me  to  betray  my  little  secret  to  you?"  I said.

"Then  you'll  sleep  more  quietly.  I have  to  do  a lot  of  traveling  about
on  official  business,  and  I've  driven  through  Thuringia  and  Saxony
again  and  again  with  a fully  loaded  lorry.  In  such  cases  there  is
a certain  amount  of  danger,  and  you  have  to  be  on  your  guard.

And  when  evening  comes  on  and  I have  to  look  for  quarters  for
the  night ...  do  you  know  what  I do?"

"You  make  for  a town  where  there's  a commandatura  hotel,  of
course,"  the  captain  answered  with  the  utmost  conviction.

"I  did  that  once;  but  only  once.  After  that  first  experience  I've
always  tried  to  avoid  towns  where  there's  a Soviet  commandatura
and  garrison.  I deliberately  pull  up  in  the  first  village  I come  to  and
spend  the  night  in  an  hotel."

"But  why?"  Colonel  Bykov  asked.

"Because  it's  safer  that  way.  During  my  twelve  months  in  Germany  I've  had  to

draw  and  fire  my  pistol  three  times  ...  and  in

every  case  I had  to  fire  at  men  in  Soviet  uniform  ...  out  to  commit


240


a robbery,"  I explained  after  a pause.

"Interestingly"  the  captain  said  through  his  teeth.

"I  spent  one  night  in  an  officers'  hotel  at  Glachau,"  I went  on,

"To  be  on  the  safe  side  I drove  the  lorry  right  under  my  bedroom
window.  Hardly  had  I gone  to  bed  when  I heard  it  being  dismantled."

"Amusing  !"  the  colonel  commented.

"It  wasn't  at  all  amusing  to  have  to  chase  through  the  streets  in
my  underclothes  and  waving  a pistol,"  I retorted.  "I  rounded
up  two  Soviet  lieutenants  and  a sergeant,  called  out  the
commandatura  patrol,  and  had  them  arrested.  Next  morning  the
commandant  told  me:  'I  quite  believe  you,  Comrade  Major,  but  all  the
same  I shall  have  to  let  the  prisoners  go.  I haven't  time  for  such
petty  matters.  Let  me  give  you  some  good  advice  for  future
occasions.  Next  time,  wait  till  they've  robbed  your  car,  and  then  you'll
have  evidence  to  show.  Then  shoot  them  out  of  hand  and  call  us  in
when  you've  done  it.  We  shall  draw  up  a statement  on  the  affair
and  be  very  grateful  to  you.  It's  a pity  you  were  in  such  a hurry  this
time.'"

At  that  moment  a fashionably  dressed  young  woman  and  a man
entered  the  bar-parlour.  They  sat  down  at  a table  opposite  us  and
lit  cigarettes.

"All  very  well"  the  captain  said.  "But  there's  one  thing  about
this  place  I don't  like:  the  people  are  too  well  dressed.  Look  at  that
fellow  sitting  opposite  us  with  that  dame.  I wouldn't  be  surprised
if  they're  former  Nazis,  who've  hidden  themselves  away  in  this
lonely  spot.  And  now  we've  come  and  stirred  them  up.  And  did  you
notice  that  group  of  youngsters  a little  earlier?  They  came  in,  stood
whispering  to  one  another,  then  slipped  out  again  ! It  strikes  me  as
highly  suspicious."

"Well,  I think  the  best  thing  to  do  is  to  go  to  bed,"  I proposed.

"Bed,  maybe  ! But  sleep?"  the  colonel  retorted.  "I  think  our  first
job  is  to  see  which  side  our  window  looks  out  on."

As  soon  as  we  went  to  our  bedrooms  upstairs,  the  colonel  and  the
captain  made  a security  check.  They  opened  and  closed  the  windows
and  tested  the  shutters.  "We  were  told  they  throw  hand-grenades
through  the  window,"  the  captain  explained.  He  went  into  the


241


corridor  and  tried  to  discover  whether  the  adjacent  rooms  were
occupied  by  members  of  the  Werewolf  organization.'

( The  organization  planned  by  Nazis  to  carry  on  guerrilla  resistance
and  terrorism  after  the  war.  -TR  )

Finally  he  tested  the  door  lock.  My  companions  occupied  one  room,
and  I had  the  one  next  to  it.  Now,  for  the  first  time  since  I had
arrived  in  Germany,  I felt  a little  dubious.  I bolted  the  door,
thought  for  a moment,  then


took  out  my  pistol  and  slipped  it  under  my  pillow.  After  undressing  I
put  out  the  light  and  plunged  beneath  the  enormous  feather  bed

The  following  morning  I knocked  at  my  companions'  door  to
awaken  them.  I heard  sleepy  voices,  then  the  bolt  was  shot  back
They  were  weary  and  worn  out.  I gathered  that  they  had  sat  up
till  long  past  midnight,  discussing  whether  they  should  get  into
bed  dressed  or  undressed.  Now,  in  the  morning  sunlight,  all  their
fears  and  anxieties  were  dispelled,  and  they  began  to  pull  each  other's
leg.

"Tell  us  how  you  went  to  the  toilet  in  the  middle  of  the  night  with
your  pistol  at  the  ready,  Victor  Stepanovich!"  the  colonel  said
winking  at  me.

"Do  you  know  who  that  well-dressed  couple  were  yesterday
evening?"  I asked  him.  "The  village  shoemaker  and  his  wife.  And  he's
an  old  communist,  too.  I asked  the  landlord.  And  you  took  them  for
Nazi  leaders!"

We  had  asked  the  landlord  the  previous  evening  to  arrange  for
a mechanic  to  help  our  driver  first  thing  in  the  morning.  When  we
returned  to  the  car  we  found  them  both  hard  at  work.  To  pass  the
time,  we  climbed  the  steep  path  up  to  Goethe's  castle,  and  were
shown  over  the  place  by  the  caretaker-guide.  When  we  returned  the
car  was  in  order,  and  before  long  we  were  on  our  way  again.

We  journeyed  through  the  length  and  breadth  of  Thutrin
and  Saxony  for  several  days,  controlling,  sequestrating,  requisitioning
current  production,  and  allocating  orders  on  behalf  of  the
Administration  for  Reparations.  It  was  during  this  trip  that  I first
began  to  experience  an  unusual  feeling.  It  made  me  realize  that  th
year  I had  spent  outside  the  Soviet  Union  had  not  passed  without


242


leaving  its  effect  on  me.  Somehow,  a change  had  taken  place  with
in  me.  I was  conscious  of  that  as  I worked  and  lived  together  with  my
two  naval  companions.  They  provided  a kind  of  standard  measure
against  which  I could  check  the  process  that  was  going  on  inside  me

As  I talked  with  them  I was  disturbed  to  realize  that  my  thoughts
and  my  outlook  had  been  modified  by  comparison  with  those  of  Soviet
people.  What  I felt  was  not  a simple  renunciation  of  what  i had
believed  in  favor  of  something  else.  It  was  an  enlargement  of  all  my
horizon.


243


CHAPTER  12


PRISONERS  OF  THE  SYSTEM

"Let  me  introduce  you,"  Colonel  Kondakov  said.  "Lieutenant
Colonel  Dinashvili."

I shook  hands  with  a man  in  grey  civilian  clothes.  His  white  shirt
was  open  at  the  collar  and  he  was  not  wearing  a tie:  an  exaggerated
negligence  in  civil  attire,  characteristic  of  the  professional  officer.

A puffy  face,  whitish  complexion,  obviously  long  unacquainted  with
sunlight.  A weary  indifference  in  the  black,  staring  eyes.  A flabby
handgrip.

At  the  request  of  the  M.V.D.'s  Central  Operational  Group,  Colonel
Kondakov  and  I had  gone  to  their  headquarters.  There  were  certain
matters  in  their  hands  which  overlapped  analogous  material  in
Colonel  Kondakov's  department,  and  so  the  M.V.D.,  had  invited  the
S.M.A.  into  consultation  and  assistance.  Kondakov  studied  the
reports  of  previous  examinations  of  certain  prisoners,  and  other
material  relating  to  them.  The  first  case  was  that  of  a former
scientific  worker  in  the  laboratory  at  Peenemunde,  the  headquarters
of  German  research  into  rocket-missiles.

"A  slight  delay  !"  the  lieutenant-colonel  said  with  a glance  at  the
door.  "I've  given  orders  for  him  to  be  made  rather  more  presentable
first."

"Have  you  had  him  long?"  Kondakov  asked.

"Some  seven  months,"  Dinashvili  answered  in  a drowsy  tone,  as
though  he  had  not  slept  a wink  since  the  day  of  his  birth.  "We
received  certain  information  from  agents,  and  decided  to  take  a
closer  look  at  him."

"But  why  ...  in  such  circumstances?"  the  colonel  asked.

"He  was  living  in  the  western  zone,  but  his  mother  is  in  Leipzig.

We  ordered  her  to  write  to  him  and  ask  him  to  visit  her.  And  now
we've  got  to  keep  him  under  lock  and  key  until  the  question's
cleared  up.

"But  how  did  his  mother  come  to  agree?"

"We  threatened  to  expropriate  her  green  grocer's  shop  - if  she
didn't.  We  told  her  we  only  wanted  to  have  a friendly  talk  with  her
son,"  Dinashvili  explained  with  a yawn.


244


A little  later  a sergeant  brought  in  the  prisoner.  The  chalky
whiteness  of  the  man's  face  and  his  feverish,  deeply  sunken  eyes
were  more  eloquent  than  all  the  M.V.D.  endeavors  to  make  him
more  presentable.

"Well,  you  get  to  work  on  him,  and  I'll  take  a rest."  Dinashvili

yawned  again  and  stretched  himself  out  on  a sofa.  The  prisoner,  an

engineer  and  expert  on  artillery  weapons,  was  of  particular  interest

to  us,  for  according  to  agents9  reports  he  had  worked  in  the  'third

stage',  as  it  was  called,  at  Peenemunde.  The  'first  stage'  was  concerned

with  weapons  already  tested  in  practice  and  being  produced  serially;  the  'second

stage'  dealt  with  weapons  that  had  not  gone  beyond

the  phase  of  tests  inside  the  works;  the  'third  stage'  was  concerned

with  weapons  that  had  not  got  farther  than  the  planning  phase.

knew  all  about  the  results  of  the  work  of  the  first  two  stages, but  the

'third  stage'  represented  a gap  in  our  knowledge,  for  almost  all  the

designs  and  formulae,  etc.,  had  been  destroyed  at  the  time  of  the

capitulation.  No  factual  material  whatever  had  fallen  into  our

hands;  our  only  source  of  information  was  the  oral  testimony  of  a

number  of  persons.

Judging  by  the  reports  of  the  interrogations  sofar  made,  the  prisoner
held  for  examination  had  worked  among  a group  of  scientists  whose,
task  was  to  produce  guided  rockets  for  anti-aircraft  defense.  The
German  decision  to  explore  this  line  of  activity  had  been  due  to  the
fact  that  the  Allies'  air-offensive  powers  had  greatly  outstripped
Germany's  air-defense  resources.  The  rockets  were  planned  to  be
shot  from  special  mountings,  without  precise  ranging  on  the  target.

At  a certain  distance  from  the  target  plane,  highly  sensitive
instruments  built  into  the  rocket  head  automatically  directed  the  missiles
and  exploded  them  in  the  target's  immediate  vicinity.  The  Germans
had  already  effectively  exploited  the  same  principle  in  magnetic
mines  and  torpedoes,  so  causing  the  Allied  fleets  serious  losses
in  the  early  days  of  the  war.  In  the  case  of  a rocket  the  problem  was
complicated  by  the  much  greater  velocity  both  of  the  missile  and
of  its  target,  by  the  smaller  dimensions  of  the  target,  and  by  the  fact
that  an  aeroplane  is  constructed  mainly  of  non-magnetic  metal.

Nonetheless,  we  had  indications  that  the  Germans  had  actually
found  the  solution  to  these  problems.  But  there  were  many
contradictory  opinions  as  to  how  they  had  done  so,  whether, by  radar,  photo
electric  cells,  or  in  some  other  manner.

The  reports  of  the  interrogations  showed  that  the  prisoner  had


245


been  ordered  to  reconstruct  all  the  formulae  and  construction  plans
of  the  V-N  rocket  out  of  his  own  head.  Colonel  Kondakov  turned  the
inquiry  in  a very  different  direction.  After  comparing  the  available
data  he  tried  to  determine  the  position  the  prisoner  had  occupied  in
the  complicated  system  of  the  Peenemunde  scientific  staff.  He  clearly
saw  that  one  individual  could  not  possibly  know  every  aspect  of  the
work  on  the  project,  as  the  M.V.D.  demanded.

"Would  you  be  prepared  to  continue  your  work  in  a Soviet
research  institute?"  he  asked  the  prisoner.

"I've  already  asked  again  and  again  for  an  opportunity  to  prove
the  accuracy  of  my  statements,"  the  prisoner  replied.  "Here  I can
prove  very  little.  You  understand."

The  grey  form  lying  with  his  back  to  us  on  the  sofa  came  abruptly
to  life.  The  lieutenant-colonel  sprang  to  his  feet.  "You  want  your
freedom?  Then  why  did  you  flee  to  the  West?"  He  stormed  and  raged
at  the  prisoner,  who  shrugged  his  shoulders  helplessly.

"I  propose  to  place  him  at  the  disposition  of  General.

Kondakov  turned  to  Dinashvili,  mentioning  the  name  of  the  general
who  was  in  charge  of  the  Soviet  research  station  at  Peenemunde.
"There  we'll  get  out  of  him  all  he  knows."

"But  supposing  he  escapes?"  The  lieutenant-colonel  gave  the
prisoner  a distrustful  glance.

"Comrade  Lieutenant-Colonel,"  Kondakov  smiled  stiffly,  "for
us  the  decisive  question  is  how  we  can  extract  the  greatest  possible
advantage  from  each  individual  case.  I shall  apply  to  higher  authority
to  have  the  man  transferred  to  Peenemunde."

We  turned  to  the  next  case,  which  was  connected  with  an  idea  for  a
really  fantastic  invention.  Plans  had  not  gone  beyond  the  stage  of  the
inventor's  own  calculations  and  sketches,  and  had  never  been
tested  by  any  official  German  organization.  The  man  had  been  living
in  the  French  zone,  and  had  offered  his  project  to  the  French
authorities  for  their  consideration.  The  interested  Soviet  quarters
had  learned  of  his  plans  through  the  intermediary  of  the  French

Communist  Party,  and  they  had  put  the  case  in  the  hands  of  the
M.V.D.  How  the  German  inventor  had  been  brought  to  the  Soviet
zone  was  not  mentioned  in  the  reports;  one  learned  merely  that  he
had  been  ten  months  in  the  cellars  of  the  Potsdam  Operational
Group,  and  had  been  encouraged  to  continue  work  on  his  invention
with  all  the  numerous  means  it  possessed  of  'bringing  influence  to
bear'.

We  were  confronted  with  a fairly  young  man,  by  profession  an


246


electrical  engineer  who  had  specialized  on  low-tension  current

problems.  During  the  war  he  had  worked  in  the  research  laboratories

of  several  important  electro-technical  firms  concerned  with  telemechanics

and  television.  He  had  been  working  on  his  invention

for  a number  of  years,  but  the  plans  had  only  begun  to  take  practical

shape  towards  the  end  of  the  war,  by  which  time  the  German

military  authorities  were  no  longer  interested  in  such  things.

He  began  to  explain  his  invention,  referring  to  the  works
leading  German  scientists  in  the  field  of  optics  for  support.  It  was
to  consist  of  two  instruments,  a transmitter  and  a receiver.  The
transmitter,  a comparatively  small  instrument,  was  intended  to  be
dropped  some  miles  behind  the  enemy  lines;  and  when  in  operation
the  receiver,  situated  on  the  other  side  of  the  front,  would  show
on  a screen  everything  that  was  happening  between  the  two  instruments;
in  other  words,  all  the  enemy's  dispositions  and  technical
resources.  The  use  of  a series  of  transmitters  and  receivers  would
provide  a survey  of  any  desired  sector  of  the  front.

There  was  no  indication  in  the  reports  of  the  reason  why  the  M.V.D
had  held  the  prisoner  for  ten  months.  With  their  characteristic  distrust,
its  officers  assumed  that  he  was  attempting  to  conceal  details
from  them,  and  tried  every  means  of  forcing  him  to  say  more  than  he
actually  knew.

In  this  case  Colonel  Kondakov  tried  a different  tack  from  the  one
he  had  taken  with  the  rocket  specialist:  he  attempted  to  find  out
how  far  the  inventor  had  realized  his  ideas  in  practice.  He  was
interested  not  only  in  the  theory  but  in  the  feasibility  of  its
application.  He  plied  the  man  with  expert  questions  in  the  field  of  wireless
telegraphy  and  television.  The  man  passed  the  test  with  honor.  But,
with  an  obstinacy  rarely  met  with  behind  the  walls  of  the  M.V.D.,  he
hesitated  to  give  up  the  key  details  of  his  invention.  Possibly  he
was  afraid  the  M.V.D.  would  liquidate  him  as  an  unnecessary
and  inconvenient  witness  when  he  had  told  them.

"Would  you  be  prepared  to  demonstrate  that  your  plan  is
technically  feasible  within  the  walls  of  a Soviet  research  institute?"
Kondakov  asked  him.

"Herr  Colonel,  that's  the  one  thing  I wish  for,  the  one  thing  I've
asked  for  again  and  again,"  the  man  answered  in  a quivering  voice.

"He's  lying,  the  swine  !"  a voice  shouted  from  the  sofa.  Dinashvili
sprang  to  his  feet  again.  "He's  only  looking  for  an  opportunity  to
escape.  Why  did  he  offer  his  invention  to  the  French?"


247


"I  propose  to  place  this  man  at  the  disposition  of  Colonel  Vassiliev
in  Amstadt,"  Kondakov  told  the  M.V.D.  officer.  "If  Vassiliev  takes
a negative  view  of  his  proposals,  you  can  have  him  back  and  settle
the  matter  as  you  wish."

"The  way  you're  going  on  you'll  let  all  my  prisoners  escape,"

Dinashvili  fumed.

We  devoted  the  rest  of  the  day  to  examining  various  documents,
chiefly  agents'  reports  on  German  scientists  and  technicians  in
the  western  zones.  We  had  to  decide  how  far  these  people  could  be
of  practical  use  to  the  Soviet  Union.  If  we  thought  they  could  be,  the
M.V.D.  took  further  steps  to  'realize  the  opportunity'.

We  were  finished  late  in  the  afternoon.  Glancing  at  the  clock,  I
decided  to  phone  Andrei  Kovtun.  When  I told  him  I was  in  Potsdam
he  invited  me  to  call  on  him  in  his  office.

Several  months  had  passed  since  our  first  meeting  in  Karlshorst.
Meanwhile,  he  had  been  visiting  me  almost  every  week.  Sometimes
he  arrived  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  sometimes  towards  dawn.  If

I offered  him  some  supper  or  breakfast,  he  only  waved  his  hand
wearily  and  said:  "I  merely  wanted  to  drop  in  for  a little  while.  I'll
have  a nap  on  your  couch."

At  first  I was  astonished  by  these  irregular,  purposeless  visits;
he  seemed  to  find  a morbid  pleasure  in  talking  about  our  school
and  student  days.  He  went  over  the  tiniest  detail  of  our  youthful
experiences  again  and  again,  always  ending  with  the  exclamation:
"Ah,  they  were  great  days!"  It  sometimes  seemed  to  me  that  he  came
and  talked  to  me  simply  to  escape  from  his  present  circumstances.

I asked  Colonel  Kondakov  to  drop  me  outside  the  building  of
the  M.V.D.  central  administration,  where  Andrei  worked.  A pass
was  already  waiting  for  me  at  the  inquiry  office.  In  the  dusk  of  the
summer  evening  I walked  through  the  garden  and  up  to  the  second
storey,  where  Andrei  had  his  room.

"Well,  pack  up  !"  I said  as  I entered.  "We're  going  to  Berlin."

"Hmm!  you're  finished  for  the  day,  but  I'm  only  just  beginning"
he  snarled.

"What  the  devil  did  you  ask  me  to  come  here  for  then?"  I said
angrily.  After  spending  the  day  in  Lieutenant-Colonel  Dinashvili's
company  I felt  an  urgent  desire  to  have  some  fresh  air  as  soon  as
possible.


248


"Don't  get  worked  up,  Grisha!  I've  often  been  to  your  place,  and
you've  never  been  here  before."

I've  already  spent  all  day  in  a similar  hole,"  I retorted

making  no  attempt  to  conceal  my  annoyance.  "I've  no  wish  to  stick  here

If  you  like,  we'll  go  to  Berlin  and  see  a show.  If  not.  . . ."

"You'd  like  to  see  a show?"  he  interrupted.  "Well,  you  can  see  a
good  show  here  too.  Things  you'd  never  see  in  a theatre."

"I  don't  feel  like  it  today,"  I insisted.

"Now  listen,  Grisha  !"  He  changed  his  tone,  and  his  voice  recalled
the  days  when  he  had  sat  astride  my  chair.  "For  a long  time  now  I've
been  interested  in  a certain  question.  To  make  you  understand,'
shall  have  to  go  rather  a long  way  back.  You  and  I have  nothing  to
conceal  from  each  other.  Nobody  in  the  world  knows  me  better  than
you  do."

He  was  silent  for  a moment  or  two,  then  he  added:  "But  to  this
very  day  I don't  know  you

"What  is  it  you  want  to  know  then?"  I asked.

He  went  to  the  door  and  turned  the  key.  Then  from  sockets  in  the
wall  he  pulled  several  plugs  attached  to  cords  running  to  his  desk

"Do  you  remember  our  childhood?"  he  said  as  he  leaned  back  in
his  chair.  "You  were  a boor  just  like  me.  And  you  must  have  had
the  same  sort  of  sensitive  reaction  as  I had.  But  you  never  said  a
word.  In  those  days  it  used  to  make  me  mad  with  you.  But  now  i
must  regard  it  as  something  praiseworthy.  Do  you  know  why?"

I made  no  comment.  After  a moment  he  went  on,  staring  under
his  desk:

"It's  an  old  story.  I was  fourteen  years  old  when  it  happened.

On  the  very  eve  of  the  October  celebrations  I was  summoned  to  the
school  director's  room.  He  had  another  man  with  him.  Briefly  and
simply,  this  man  took  me  to  the  G.P.U.  There  I was  accused  of
having  stuck  cigarette  butts  on  Stalin's  portrait,  and  other
counterrevolutionary  crimes.  Of  course  it  was  all  sheer  lies.  Then  they  told
me  that  as  I was  so  young  they  were  prepared  to  forgive  me  if  I was
prepared  to  work  with  them.  What  could  I do?  I was  forced  to  sign
a document  condemning  me  to  collaboration  and  silence.  And  so  I
became  an  N.K.V.D.  spy.  I hated  Stalin  with  all  my  heart,  I


249


decorated  the  toilet  walls  with  anti-Soviet  slogans,  and  yet  I was  an
S.K.V.D.  spy.  Don't  get  anxious!  I never  denounced  anybody.  When
they  pestered  me  too  much  I wrote  in  charges  against  similar  spies.

As  I was  in  touch  with  the  G.P.U.  I knew  their  people.  It  didn't  do
them  any  harm."

He  fidgeted  in  his  seat  and  said  without  raising  his  eyes:

"I  was  mad  with  you  in  those  days  because  you  didn't  share
your  thoughts  frankly  with  me,  I was  convinced  that  you  thought  as
I did.  When  we  were  students  ...  do  you  remember  Volodia?"  He
mentioned  the  name  of  a mutual  friend  who  had  graduated  from  the
Naval  Academy  shortly  before  the  war  broke  out.  "He  used  to  talk
to  me  openly.  But  you  were  always  silent.  And  all  the  time  it  went
on  like  that.  I joined  the  Young  Communists.  You  didn't.  Now  I'm
in  the  Party.  You're  not.  I'm  a major  in  the  State  Security  Service,
and  at  the  same  time  I'm  a bigger  enemy  of  the  system  than  all  my
prisoners  put  together.  But  are  you  still  a convinced  Soviet  citizen?

Why  are  you  so  silent,  damn  you?"

"What  is  it  you  want  from  me?"  I asked  with  a strange  indifference.
"An  avowal  of  counter-revolutionary  sentiments,  or  assurances  of
devotion  to  Stalin?"

"Ah!  You  don't  need  to  tell  me  that !"  He  shook  his  head  wrath
fully.  "I  simply  regard  you  as  my  best  friend,  and  so  I'd  like  to
know  what  you  really  are."

"Then  what  am  I to  say  to  you?"

"Why  don't  you  join  the  Party?"  He  gave  me  the  vigilant  look
of  an  interrogating  officer.

"It  isn't  difficult  for  me  to  answer  that  question,"  I said.  "It's
more  difficult  for  you  to  answer  the  question:  'Why  did  you  join
the  Party?’"

"Wriggling  against"  he  cried  in  a blind  fury,  and  let  slip  a foul
curse.  "Forgive  me,  it  fell  out!"  he  said  apologetically.

"It's  all  because  your  life  flatly  contradicts  your  convictions,

Andrei,"  I said.  "But  I do  only  just  so  much  ....

"Aha!  So  that's  why  you  don't  join  the  Party  !"  he  exclaimed  with


250


unconcealed  malevolence.


"Not  entirely,"  I protested.  "When  I flew  from  Moscow  here  I
had  every  intention  of  joining  the  Party  on  my  return."

"You  had?"  He  stressed  the  word  derisively.

"There's  no  point  in  arguing  over  grammatical  tenses,  Comrade
Interrogating  Officer."  I tried  to  turn  the  talk  into  a joke.  I had  the
singular  thought  that  the  major  of  the  State  Security  Service  sitting!
opposite  me  suspected  me  of  sympathizing  with  communism  and
was  trying  to  convict  me  of  this  sympathy.

"Grisha,  putting  all  jokes  on  one  side,"  he  said,  staring  straight
into  my  eyes,  "tell  me,  are  you  a blackguard  or  aren't  you?"

"And  you?"  I retorted.

"Me?  ...  I'm  a victim...."  He  let  his  eyes  drop.  "I  have  no  choice
But  you're  free."

There  was  a dead  silence.  Then  that  hysterical,  toneless  cry  came
again:  "Tell  me,  are  you  a blackguard  or  aren't  you?"

"I  do  all  I can  to  become  a good  communist,"  I answered  thought
fully.  I tried  to  speak  honestly,  but  my  words  sounded  false  and
hypocritical.

He  sat  for  a time  without  speaking,  as  though  seeking  a hidden
meaning  in  my  words.  Then  he  said  calmly  and  coldly:  "I  think
you're  speaking  the  truth,  and  I believe  I can  help  you  ....you
want  to  learn  to  love  the  Soviet  regime.  Isn't  that  so?"

As  he  received  no  answer,  he  continued:  "I  had  an  acquaintance

Today  he's  a big  shot  in  Moscow.  He  did  it  like  this:  He  arrested
man  and  accused  him  of  making  or  planning  to  make  an  arrested  a
Stalin's  life,  a blow  against  the  Kremlin,  of  poisoning  the  Moscow
water  supply,  and  similar  crimes.  Then  he  handed  him  a statement
already  drawn  up  and  said:  'If  you  love  Stalin  sign  this!"'  Andrei
smiled  forcibly  and  added:  "And  I can  help  you  to  love  Stalin
Agreed?  I'll  arrange  a little  experiment  for  you.  I'm  sure  it  will
help  you  in  your  endeavour  to  be  a good  communist."

"What  am  I to  do?"  I asked,  feeling  thoroughly  annoyed.  This
conversation  was  getting  on  my  nerves,  especially  as  it  was  taking
place  in  the  M.V.D.  headquarters.  "I  have  no  intention  of  signing
any  statement.  And  I certainly  shan't  come  here  to  see  you  again,


251


"One  visit  will  be  enough."  He  smiled  sardonically  and  ]looked  at
his  watch.  "The  show  will  be  starting  in  a moment.  But  now,  not
another  word."  He  replaced  the  plugs  of  the  telephone  cords  in  their
sockets.  He  opened  a drawer  and  took  out  various  documents,  and
after  checking  them  reached  for  the  telephone.  From  the
conversation  that  ensued  I gathered  that  the  investigating  officers
subordinate  to  Andrei  were  at  the  other  end  of  the  line.  Finally  he
nodded  with  satisfaction  and  replaced  the  receiver.

"Act  one,  scene  one.  You  can  think  of  your  own  title  later,"  he
said  quietly,  and  switched  on  a dictaphone  in  front  of  him  on  the
desk.  Two  voices  sounded  in  the  stillness  of  that  large  room:  a
pleasant,  feminine  voice  in  pure  German,  and  a man's  voice  speaking
German  with  a pronounced  Russian  accent.

"If  you  don't  mind,  Herr  Lieutenant,  I'd  like  to  ask  about  my
husband,"  the  woman  said.

"The  only  definite  thing  I can  say  is  that  his  fate  depends  wholly
and  entirely  on  your  work  for  us."

"Herr  Lieutenant,  it's  exactly  a year  since  you  promised  me  that
if  I fulfilled  certain  conditions  my  husband  would  be  released  in  a
few  days,"  the  woman  said.

"The  material  you've  brought  in  to  us  recently  has  been  un
satisfactory.  It  would  be  very  unpleasant  for  me  if  we  were  forced
to  take  certain  measures.  You  might  happen  to  meet  your  husband
in  a place  where  you  wouldn't  wish  to."

The  woman  gave  a suppressed  moan.  Andrei  switched  off  the
dictaphone,  took  a sheet  of  paper  out  of  a file  and  handed  it  to  me.
it  was  a decision  of  an  M.V.D.  military  tribunal,  condemning  a
man  to  twenty-five  years'  forced  labor  'for  terrorist  activities
directed  against  the  Soviet  army's  occupation  forces'.

"He'd  been  a communist  since  1928,"  Andrei  explained.  "Spent
eight  years  in  a Nazi  concentration  camp.  One  month  after  the
beginning  of  the  occupation  he  resigned  from  the  Communist  Party.

He  talked  too  much.  You  see  the  result.  His  wife  works  as  a
translator  for  the  British.  She  enjoys  their  trust  because  she's  the  wife
of  a man  who  has  been  persecuted  by  the  Hitler  regime.  Since  we
imprisoned  her  husband  they  trust  her  even  more.  Until  recently  she
was  an  extremely  valuable  agent  of  ours."


252


He  nodded  to  me  to  be  silent,  and  switched  on  the  dictaphone
again.  This  time  two  men  were  talking,  also  in  German.

"You've  come  well  out  of  the  test  recently.  Now  we  want  to
give  you  a more  responsible  commission,"  said  a voice  speaking
with  a Russian  accent.  "At  one  time  you  were  an  active  member  of
the  National  Socialist  Party.  We've  given  you  the  chance  to  join  the
S.E.D.  Now  we  expect  you  to  justify  the  trust  we've  placed  in  you.  19

"Herr  Captain,  even  when  I was  a member  of  the  N.S.D.A.P.
and  I was  only  a member  because  of  circumstances  -I  always
sympathized  with  the  ideals  of  communism  and  looked  hopefully  to
the  East,"  a voice  said  in  pure  German.

"Today  the  S.E.D.  has  a large  number  of  members  who  formerly
sympathized  with  the  ideas  of  national  socialism,"  the  first  Voice
replied.  "We're  particularly  interested  in  these  nationalistic
tendencies  among  the  S.E.D.  members.  Such  people  are  really  working  for
the  restoration  of  fascism,  and  they're  the  most  bitter  enemies  of  the
new,  democratic  Germany.  And  as  a former  national-socialist  you'll  be
trusted  by  such  people  more  than  anyone  else.  In  future  your  task
be  not  only  to  register  any  such  expression  of  opinion,  but  even  to
sound  your  comrades  moods  and  tendencies.  You  must  pay  particular
attention  to  the  following  people."  He  read  out  a list  of  names.

Andrei  cut  off  the  dictaphone  and  looked  at  a document:

"A  Gestapo  spy  since  1984.  Has  worked  for  us  since  May  19  1945
So  far,  on  the  basis  of  his  reports  129  arrests  have  been  made.  He's
been  accepted  in  the  S.E.D.  on  our  recommendation.

"AN,  here's  a case  of  love  in  the  service  of  the  State,"  he  remarked
as  he  opened  another  file.  "Baroness  von  ...  Since  1928  has  been
running  a matrimonial  agency  for  higher  society  and  has
simultaneously  owned  brothels.  A Gestapo  agent  since  1936.  Registered  with
us  since  July  1 .945.  Has  two  sons  prisoners  of  war  in  the  USSR

The  head  of  the  prisoner  of  war  camp  has  been  ordered  not  to  release
them  without  the  special  instructions  of  the  M.V.D.  Are  you
interested  in  pretty  girls?  Look!"

He  handed  a portfolio  and  a card  index  across  the  desk.  On  the
portfolio  cover  was  a series  of  numbers  and  pseudonyms;  they
corresponded  with  similar  references  in  the  card  index,  which  contained
personal  details.  At  the  top  of  the  portfolio  was  the  photographs
of  a grey-haired,  well-set-up  woman  in  a white  lace  collar.


253


I opened  the  portfolio:  it  contained  a number  of  sheets  to  which
the  photographs  of  young,  beautiful  girls  were  attached  * These  were
the  baroness's  protegees,  and  with  their  unusual  beauty  the  were  a
credit  to  her  philanthropic  institutions.  In  addition  to  the  normal
personal  details  each  sheet  bore  an  entry:  'compromising  details

Beneath  the  picture  of  a happy,  smiling,  fairhaired  girl  this  entry
commented:  'Fiance  served  in  the  Waffen-S.S.  In  Soviet  hands  since
1944.  1946,  syphilis.'

The  next  photograph  was  of  a girl  with  the  eyes

of  a young  doe;  it  had  the  note:  'Father  a member  of  the  N.S.D.A.

Interned  in  U.S.S.R.  1944,  illegitimate  child. 'Next  came  a brunette
and  the  comment:  'Registered  with  the  police  on  account  of  prostitution.
1946:  illegitimate  child  by  a negro.'  All  the  comments  provided
exact  dates  and  factual  material.

"The  baroness's  house  is  in  the  American  zone,"  Andrei  explained,
and  her  sphere  of  activities  corresponds."  He  took  the  photo  of  the
girl  with  doe's  eyes  from  me,  noted  the  code  number,  took  a file
bearing  the  same  number  from  his  desk  and  said:  "Look!"

It  contained  the  girl's  reports  as  an  agent.  Photos  of  American
soldiers.  Numbers;  dates;  love  letters,  for  attestation  of  the
signatures;  details  of  places  of  service,  personal  manner  of  living,  political
attitude,  American  home  addresses.

"What  are  the  American  addresses  for?"  I asked.

"If  we  need  to  we  can  always  make  contact  with  the  individual
concerned.  It's  even  easier  for  us  to  do  so  there  than  here,"  Andrei  replied.
He  pointed  to  a special  folder  in  the  file:  it  contained  photographs
of  the  girl  in  an  American  lieutenant's  company.  First  came  Leica
amateur  snaps,  reflecting  all  the  stages  of  the  progressive  intimacy.

Then,  on  a special  sheet,  numbered  and  dated,  were  photographs  of  a
different  kind:  The  technical  finish  revealed  the  work  of  an  automatic
micro-film  camera.  Unequivocal  pornographic  pictures,  perpetuating
love  not  only  in  its  nakedness,  but  in  its  perverted  forms.  On  every
photo  the  American  lieutenant  was  clearly  recognizable.

"That  young  man's  also  working  for  us  now,"  Andrei  grinned.  "In
America  he  had  a young  and  wealthy  fiance.  When  he  was  faced
with  the  choice  either  of  compromise  in  her  eyes,  with  all  that  it
entailed,  or  quietly  helping  us,  he  preferred  to  help.  Now  he's  sending
us  quite  valuable  material.

"That's  only  just  a sample  of  the  baroness's  work,"  he  continued.

"We  have  others  of  her  kind,  all  engaged  in  exploiting  the  prostitutes


254


in  all  the  four  zones  of  Germany.  Quite  an  extensive  enterprise,  as
you  see."


"But  does  it  pay?"  I queried.

"More  than  you'd  think.  Prostitution  and  espionage  have  always
gone  hand  in  hand.  We've  merely  given  these  activities  a new,
ideological  basis.  We  approach  every  single  case  individually.

And  in  addition  almost  every  one  of  these  women  has  a relative  in
our  hands.  Our  system  is  the  cheapest  in  the  world."

"You  must  have  seen  men  condemned  to  death,"  I remarked.

"Tell  me,  have  you  often  met  men  who  died  believing  in  the  truth  of
what  they  were  dying  for?"

"At  the  beginning  of  the  war  I often  saw  S.S.  men  about  to  be
shot,"  he  said  thoughtfully,  rubbing  his  brow.  "They  used  to  shout:
'Heil  Hitler !'  When  I was  with  the  partisans  I sometimes  had  to

stand  by  and  watch  while  Germans  hanged  Russians.  And  as  they
stood  with  the  rope  round  their  necks  they  cursed  the  Germans  and
shouted:  'Long  live  Stalin!'  I knew  some  of  them  personally,  and

I knew  they  had  never  said  words  like  that  before.  Yet  as  they  stood
waiting  for  death  they  shouted  'Long  live  Stalin  !'  I don't  think  it  was
because  they  believed  them,  I think  it  was  a matter  of  personal
courage.  They  simply  wanted  to  give  expression  to  their  contempt
for  death  and  the  enemy."

"And  now  you're  engaged  in  destroying  the  enemies  of  the  State,"

I continued.  "According  to  the  History  of  the  C.P.S.U.  the  capitalists
and  landowners  have  long  since  been  exterminated.  So  those  you
have  to  fight  against  today  are  children  of  our  new  society.  If  they're
enemies,  how  are  they  to  be  classified?  Are  they  ideological  enemies
or  are  they  simply  people  who  by  force  of  circumstances  have  done
something  punishable  under  the  M.V.D.  code?"

"Why  do  you  ask  that?"  He7  looked  at  me  distrustfully.

"The  question's  interested  me  for  some  time  now,  and  who  could
answer  it  better  than  a major  in  the  M.V.D.?"

"Damn  you,  Grisha  !"  He  sighed  unexpectedly.  "I  thought  I'd

put  you  through  it  and  so  relieve  my  own  feelings.  But  there  you  sit

like  a post,  and  now  you're  starting  to  grub  around  in  my  soul.  You've


255


raised  a question  that's  been  troubling  me  for  a long  time."  He  spoke
more  slowly.  "If  it's  a question  of  ideological  enemies,  then  today  all
the  nation  is  our  ideological  enemy.  Those  who  fall  into  the  hands  of
the  M.V.D.  are  only  victims  of  a lottery.  Out  of  every  hundred
charges  brought  by  the  M.V.D.,  ninety-nine  are  pure  inventions,  we
act  on  the  principle  that  every  man  is  our  enemy.  To  catch  an  enemy
red-handed  you  have  to  give  him  the  opportunity  to  commit
hostile  act.  if  we  wait,  it  may  be  too  late.  For  their  name  is:  million
So  we  seize  the  first  to  hand  and  accuse  him  of  what  you  will.  Thus
we  liquidate  a certain  proportion  of  the  potential  enemy  and
simultaneously  paralyze  the  will  of  the  others.  That's  our  prophylactic
method.  History  itself  has  forced  us  to  resort  to  it.  But  such  a system
has  certain  positive  aspects  too  . . ."

"You  still  haven't  answered  my  question,"  I said.  "Have  you  ever
met  a real  enemy?  A man  who  gazed  straight  into  your  face  and
declared:  'Yes,  I am  against  you!'?"

The  major  looked  up  at  me  from  under  his  brows.  "Why  don't
you  yourself  come  and  work  for  the  M.V.D.?  You'd  make  a remarkably
good  examining  officer,"  he  muttered.  "I've  deliberately  been
dodging  the  question;  you  see,  I have  a living  answer  to  it ...  Only,

I didn't  intend  to  bring  him  to  your  notice.  I'm  afraid  it  might  have
an  unhappy  effect  on  our  friendship."

He  looked  at  me  expectantly,  and  hesitated.  As  I raised  my  head

I saw  the  clock.  It  was  long  past  midnight,  but  the  building  was
living  its  own  life.  From  the  corridor  came  sounds  comprehensible
only  to  people  intimate  with  the  work  of  the  M.V.D.  From  time  to
time  there  was  a cautious  knock  at  the  door,  and  Andrei  went  out  of
his  room,  locking  the  door  behind  him.  Again  and  again  our
conversation  was  interrupted  by  telephone  calls.

"Good  !"  he  said  at  last ' as  I did  not  reply.  "But  I ask  you  not  to
draw  any  conclusion  about  me  from  what  you  sec."  He  picked  up  a
telephone:  "Comrade  Captain,  what  news  of  51-W?  Still  the  same?

Good!  Have  him  brought  up  for  examination.  I shall  come  along  with
another  officer."

We  went  down  to  the  next  floor.  Here  there  was  no  carpeting  in
the  corridor;  the  walls  were  painted  with  grey  oil-paint.  We  entered
a room.  At  the  desk  opposite  the  door  sat  a captain  of  infantry.

Andrei  answered  his  greeting  with  a nod,  went  to  a sofa  by  the  wall,
and  buried  himself  in  examination  reports.  I sat  down  at  the  other


256


end  of  the  sofa.


A knock  at  the  door;  a sergeant  in  a green  cap  reported:  "Prisoner
No.  51 -W,  at  your  disposition,  Captain."  He  was  followed  by  a dark
figure  with  hands  crossed  behind  him.  A second  guard  closed  the
door.

"Well,  how  are  things,  Kaliuzhny?"  the  captain  asked  in  a friendly
tone.

"Is  it  such  a long  time  since  you  saw  me  last,  you  hound?"  The
words  burst  from  the  prisoner  in  a cry  of  boundless  hate  and  con
tempt,  suppressed  pain  and  mortal  yearning.  He  staggered  right  up
to  the  desk  and  stood  there,  his  legs  straddled.  I saw  that  his  wrists
were  handcuffed.  The  M.V.D.  handcuffs  only  prisoners  who  are
candidates  for  death,  or  are  particularly  dangerous.

"Well,  what's  the  position?  Have  you  remembered  anything  yet?"
the  captain  asked,  without  raising  his  head  from  his  scrutiny  of  the
papers  on  his  desk.  The  answer  came  in  a rushing,  largely  in
comprehensible  stream  of  curses  directed  against  the  captain,  the
M.V.D. , the  Soviet  government,  and,  finally,  the  man  whose  portrait
hung  on  the  wall  behind  the  desk.  The  prisoner  leaned  forward,  and  it
was  impossible  to  tell  whether  he  was  on  the  point  of  dropping  with

exhaustion  or  making  ready  to  strike  his  tormenter.  His  guards  , one
on  either  side,  seized  him  by  the  shoulders  and  thrust  him  down  on  a
seat.

"Now  let's  talk  to  each  other  quietly,"  the  captain  said.  "Would
you  like  a smoke?"  He  beckoned  to  the  guards,  and  they  removed  the
handcuffs.  There  was  a long  silence,  while  the  man  took  a greedy  draw
at  the  cigarette.  A gurgling  sound  came  from  his  chest,  he  coughed
painfully  and  spat  into  his  hand.

"Here,  enjoy  this,  Captain  !"  He  stretched  his  hand  across  the  desk
revealing  black  clots  of  blood  in  the  bright  light  of  the  desk  lamp

"They've  damaged  my  lungs,  the  hounds  !"  he  croaked,  as  he  wiped
the  blood  on  the  edge  of  the  desk.

"Listen,  Kaliuzhny,"  the  captain  said  in  a pleasant  tone.  "I'
terribly  sorry  you're  so  pigheaded.  You  were  a model  citizen  of  the
Soviet  Union,  the  son  of  a worker,  a worker  yourself.  A hero  of  the
patriotic  war.  Then  you  go  and  make  one  mistake


257


"That  was  no  mistake!"  The  words  came  hoarsely  from  the  other
side  of  the  desk.

"We  know  how  to  value  your  past  services,"  the  captain  continued

( Torture  by  being  kept  constantly  in  a standing  position.  )

"Atone  for  your  guilt,  and  your  country  will  forgive  you.  I only
want  to  make  your  lot  easier.  Tell  us  who  the  others  were.  Then
give  you  my  word  as  a communist.  . . "

"Your  word  as  a communist !"  The  bloody  rattle  conveyed
inexpressible  hate.  "You  viper,  how  many  have  you  already  caught
with  your  word  of  honor?"

"My  word  is  the  word  of  the  Party.  Confess,  and  you  will  be  given
your  freedom!"  The  captain  had  difficulty  in  controlling  himself.

"Freedom?"  came  from  the  bloody  mask  that  had  been  a face.  I
know  your  freedom  ! I shall  find  your  freedom  in  heaven  . . ."

"Sign  this  document !"  the  captain  held  out  a sheet  of  paper.

"You  wrote  it,  you  sign  it !"  was  the  answer.

"Sign  !"  the  officer  ordered  in  a threatening  tone.  Forgetting  the
presence  of  the  two  men  sitting  silently  on  the  sofa,  he  swore
violently  and  snatched  up  a pistol  lying  on  his  desk.

"Give  it  here,  I'll  sign  !"  the  prisoner  croaked.  He  took  the  sheet
of  paper  and  spat  on  it,  leaving  clots  of  blood  clinging  to  it.  "Here  you
are  ...  With  a genuine  communist  seal!"  His  voice  rose  in  malignant
triumph.  He  slowly  raised  himself  out  of  his  chair  and  slowly  bent
over  the  desk  to  face  the  pistol  barrel.  "Well,  now  shoot ! Shoot,
hangman,  shoot!  Give  me  freedom!"

In  impotent  fury  the  captain  let  the  weapon  sink,  and  beckoned
to  the  guards.  One  of  them  sent  the  prisoner  to  the  floor  with  his
pistol  butt.  The  steel  handcuffs  clicked.

"You  don't  get  away  so  easily  as  that!"  the  captain  hissed.  "You'll
call  for  death  as  if  you  were  calling  for  your  mother  before  we're
finished  !"  The  guards  hoisted  up  the  prisoner  and  stood  him  on  his
feet.  "Put  him  to  the  'stoika',"  the  captain  ordered.'

With  an  unexpected,  desperate  writhe  the  man  wrested  himself
free.  With  a vehement  kick  he  sent  the  desk  over.  The  captain


258


sprang  away,  then,  howling  with  rage,  flung  himself  on  the  prisoner.


He  brought  his  pistol  butt  down  heavily  on  the  man's  head;  a fresh
purple  patch  appeared  above  the  crust  of  congealed  blood.

"Comrade  Captain  !"  Andrei  Kovtun's  voice  sounded  sharply.

As  the  man  was  dragged  out  of  the  room  the  captain  gasped  out:
"Comrade  Major,  I ask  permission  to  close  the  examination
procedure  and  transfer  the  case  to  the  tribunal."

"Keep  to  the  instructions  I've  given  you,"  Andrei  replied  coldly,
and  went  to  the  door.

We  walked  silently  along  the  corridor.

"You  wanted  to  see  for  yourself,"  Andrei  said  moodily  as  he
closed  the  door  of  his  room  behind  us.  He  spoke  hurriedly,  as  though
anxious  to  justify  himself,  to  forestall  what  he  felt  I was  bound  to
say.

"Why  was  he  arrested?"  I asked.

"For  the  very  question  you  were  so  interested  in,"  Andrei
answered  as  he  dropped  wearily  into  a chair.  "He  was  a man  who
openly  declared:  'Yes,  I'm  against  you  !'  All  through  the  war  he  was
with  us,  from  the  very  first  to  the  very  last  day.  He  was  wounded
several  times,  decorated  several  times.  He  was  to  be  demobilized
after  the  war,  but  he  voluntarily  signed  on  for  longer  service.  And
then,  a month  ago,  he  was  arrested  for  anti-Soviet  propaganda  in
the  army.  His  arrest  was  the  last  straw.  He  tore  his  shirt  at  his
breast  and  shouted:  'Yes,  I'm  against  you!"'

"How  do  you  explain  his  change?"

"Not  long  before  he  had  had  leave  in  Russia.  He  went  home-and
found  the  place  deserted.  His  old  mother  had  been  sent  to  Siberia
for  collaboration  with  the  Germans.  To  avoid  starving,  during  the
war  she  had  washed  crockery  for  them.  And  in  1942  they  sent
his  young  brother  to  work  in  Germany;  after  the  lad's  repatriation


he  was  condemned  to  ten  years  in  the  mines.  And  apart  from  that
our  prisoner  saw  what  was  happening  at  home.  When  he  returned
to  duty  he  began  to  tell  others  what  he  had  seen  and  heard.  The
rest  you  know  for  yourself."


259


"What  did  the  captain  mean  by  his  reference  to  'the  others'?'
I asked.


"Oh,  the  usual  story."  Andrei  shrugged  his  shoulders.  "Out  of  one
man  we've  got  to  unmask  a whole  counter-revolutionary  movement,

There  you  have  the  clear  evidence  that  every  man  is  an  enemy  " he
continued  in  a monotonous  tone.  "Outwardly  he  was  an,  exemplary
Soviet  man.  One  of  the  sort  that  during  the  war  died  with  the
shout  'Long  live  Stalin  !'  on  their  lips.  But  when  you  go  deeper.  . .

"So  you  regard  him  as  an  ideological  enemy?"  I asked.

"He  hasn't  any  idea  yet,"  Major  Kovtun  answered.  "But  he's
already  come  to  the  point  of  saying  'no'  to  the  existing  regime.  He  is
dangerous  chiefly  because  he  is  one  of  millions.  Throw  a lighted  idea
into  that  powder  barrel  and  the  whole  lot  would  go  up!"

I was  silent.  As  though  he  had  divined  my  thoughts,  Andrea
whispered  helplessly:  "But  what  can  I do?"  Then,  with  sudden
vehemence,  he  cried:  "What  did  you  want  to  see  it  for?  I'd  already
told  you.  . . "

In  the  dusk  of  the  room  his  face  changed,  it  expressed  his  weariness.
His  eyes  were  dull  and  expressionless.  He  fidgeted  with  restless,
nervous  fingers  among  the  papers  on  his  desk.

"Andrei  !"  I cried,  and  turned  the  lampshade  so  that  the  light
fell  full  on  his  face.  He  huddled  himself  together,  raised  his  head
and  stared  at  me  blankly.  I glanced  into  his  eyes:  they  were  fixed
and  dilated;  the  pupils  showed  no  reaction  to  the  strong  light.

"You  know  what  light-reaction  is,  don't  you?"  I asked  as  gently
as  I could.

"I  do,"  he  answered  quietly.  His  head  sank  on  to  his  chest.

"It  means  you've  reached  the  end  of  your  tether,"  I said.  "In  a
year  or  two  there'll  be  nothing  left  of  you  but  a living  corpse."

"I  know  that  too,"  he  muttered  still  more  quietly.

"Can't  you  find  any  other  way  out  than  morphine?"  I asked,
putting  my  hand  on  his  shoulder.


260


"I  can't  find  any  way  at  all,  Grisha  ...  I can't,"  his  lips  whispered.

"You  know,  I'm  often  pursued  by  delusions,"  he  said  in  a perfectly
expressionless  tone.  "Always  and  everywhere  I'm  followed  by  the
scent  of  blood.  Not  just  blood,  but  fresh  blood.  That's  why  I come

to  you  sometimes  so  unexpectedly.  I'm  trying  to  get  away  from  that
smell."

Pull  yourself  together,  Andrei  !"  I rose  from  my  chair,  took  my
cap  down  from  the  hook,  and  glanced  at  the  clock.  "It's  six  already.

Let's  go  for  a drive."

He  opened  a cupboard  and  took  out  a civilian  suit.  "Every  one  of
us  has  to  own  a suit  of  civilian  clothes,"  he  explained  as  I gave  him
a questioning  look.  "Nowadays  I use  it  to  get  away  from  the
accursed  stench."

Before  we  finally  left  the  room,  he  took  a book  out  of  his  desk
drawer  and  handed  it  to  me,  saying:  "Take  an4  read  it.  I've  seldom
read  anything  to  compare  with  it."

I read  the  name  of  the  book:  Abandon  Hope,  and  of  the
author:  Irene  Kordes.

"I  don't  get  much  time  for  reading,"  I answered,  as  a rapid  glance
at  its  pages  showed  that  the  book  was  about  the  Soviet  Union.

"And  I've  read  enough  of  this  stupid  kind  of  literature.  And  look  at
its  date  of  publication:  1942!"

"That's  just  why  I want  you  to  read  it,"  he  answered.  "It's  the
only  German  book  about  the  Soviet  Union  that  every  German  ought
to  read.  I personally  find  it  particularly  interesting  because  she  spent
four  years  in  prison;  she  was  held  for  interrogation  by  the  M.V.D."

Later  I did  read  the  book.  The  writer,  Irene  Kordes,  was  living  with
her  husband  in  Moscow  before  the  war.  During  the  Yezhovshchina
period'  they  were  both  arrested  simply  because  they  were  talking
German  in  the  street.

( The  period  of  the  great  purges  of  1986-8  to  which  most  of  the
political  emigr,s  living  in  the  Soviet  Union  fell  victims.  Yezhov
was  head  of  the  N.K.V.D.  at  the  time;  in  1989  he  himself  was
dismissed  and  shot.  )


261


That  was  sufficient  for  the  M.V.D.  to  charge  them  both  with
espionage.  There  followed  four  years  of  misery  and  torment,  four
years  of  examination  in  the  cellars  of  the  notorious  Lubianka  and
other  Soviet  prisons.  After  the  Soviet  Union  signed  the  pact  of
friendship  with  Hitlerite  Germany  in  1989  she  was  set  free  and  sent
back  to  her  own  country.  Her  husband  disappeared  within  the  N.K.V.D.
walls.

It  is  a striking  circumstance  that  the  book  was  published  in  1942.

This  German  woman  displayed  a true  grandeur  of  spirit.  After
living  for  four  years  in  conditions  that  would  have  led  anybody  else
to  curse  the  regime  and  the  country,  and  even  the  people,  who
willingly  or  unwillingly  bore  the  responsibility  and  guilt  for  the

Soviet  system,  Irene  Kordes  had  not  one  word  of  reproach  or
accusation  to  say  against  the  Russian  people.  She  spent  four  years
in  hell,  together  with  hundreds  of  thousands  of  Russian  people  who
shared  her  fate;  and  during  that  time  she  came  to  know  the  Russians
as  few  foreigners  have  done.

The  first  rays  of  the  rising  sun  were  gilding  the  crowns  of  the
trees  as  Andrei  and  I left  the  building.  He  drove  our  car  along  the
autobahn.  He  sat  silent,  his  features  seemed  waxen  and  sunken  in
the  grey  light.  His  driving  was  spasmodic  and  restless.  As  we  drew
near  to  the  Wannsee  he  took  his  foot  off  the  accelerator  and  looked
at  the  clock.  "You  haven't  got  to  be  in  the  office  till  ten,"  he  said
"Let's  drive  to  the  lake  and  lie  for  an  hour  on  the  sand."

"Good  !"

Gentle  waves  were  curling  over  the  surface  of  the  lake.  Mews
were  flying  overhead,  or  gliding  low  to  send  up  spray  from  the
crests  with  their  wings.  The  fresh  morning  breeze  drove  away  the
leaden  weariness  of  my  sleepless  night.  We  undressed  and  plunged
into  the  water.  The  farther  we  swam  from  the  bank  the  more
strongly  was  I conscious  of  the  freedom  and  expanse,  of  an
inexplicable  desire  to  swim  on  and  on.  I felt  a rare  inward  relief,
though  the  waves  would  wash  us  clean  of  the  blood  of  the  past
night.

After  bathing  we  lay  on  the  sand.  Andrei  watched  the  few  early
bathers.  I gazed  at  the  sky,  at  the  white,  fleecy  clouds.

"Well,  have  I helped  you  in  your  endeavors  to  become  a true
communist?"  he  asked  in  a wooden  tone,  and  tried  to  smile.


262


"You've  shown  me  nothing  new,"  I answered.  "Many  things
in  this  world  look  unpleasant  when  seen  close  up."

"So  you  excuse  all  these  things?"

"One  must  attempt  to  comprehend  not  merely  a part,  but  the
whole.  Not  the  means,  but  the  end."

"So  the  end  justifies  the  means?"  he  said  bitterly.  "You'll  make
a better  bolshevik  than  I."

"I  am  a child  of  the  Stalin  epoch,"  I replied.

"So  in  your  view  everything  is  for  the  best!"

4'1'd  like  to  believe  that

"Then  what  stops  you  now?"

"I'm  afraid  I lack  the  wider  vision,"  I said  slowly.  "When  I've
solved  the  problem  of  the  expediency  or  inexpediency  of  the  final
goal  it  will  be  easy  ....  In  either  case  it  will  be  easy  ....  That  is
my  final  answer,  Andrei.  Until  then  we'd  better  drop  further  talk
on  the  subject.  Meanwhile,  I think  you  should  take  some  leave  and
have  a thorough  rest."

"That  won't  help,"  he  sighed.  "I  need  something  else."

"You  must  either  find  a faith  that  justifies  your  present  activities,
or  - - I did  not  know  how  to  go  on.

"It's  rather  late  for  me  to  seek,  Grish!"  He  shook  his  head  and
stared  at  the  sand.  "I've  burnt  my  wings.  Now  I must  creep."

Little  Lisa  was  a charming  child.  When  she  went  for  walks  with
her  old  governess  along  the  Gogolevsky  boulevard  in  Moscow  the
people  sitting  on  the  benches  used  to  say  reprovingly  to  their
children:  "Just  look  at  that  pretty  little  girl.  See  how  well  she
behaves!"

On  hearing  such  remarks,  Lisa  would  pull  haughtily  at  her  velvet
dress,  and  deliberately  speak  in  a louder  tone  to  her  German
governess.  The  people  whispered  in  surprise:  "They  must  be
foreigners.  "

Lisa's  father  was  one  of  those  men  who  have  the  gift  of  adjusting
themselves  to  life.  He  bad  joined  the  Party  at  the  right  time,  he
knew  when  to  say  the  right  word,  and  even  better  when  to  keep  a
still  tongue  in  his  head.  Thus  he  rose  to  the  directorship  of  a large


263


commercial  trust  in  Moscow.  High  enough  to  exploit  to  the  full  all
the  material  advantages  of  his  official  position,  yet  not  high  enough
to  be  forced  to  take  the  risk  of  responsibility  for  the  undertaking.

He  had  prudently  brought  up  his  sons  in  the  spirit  which  had
ensured  himself  a successful  career.  But  he  had  intended  to  marry
his  daughters  to  men  who  could  guarantee  them  not  only  material
well  being,  but  brilliant  society  life.  Lisa  was  the  younger, daughter,
and  her  father's  favorite.  From  earliest  childhood  she  was  the
subject  of  rapturous  admiration  on  the  part  of  her  relations  and
family  acquaintances,  and  the  naive  envy  of  her  child  companions.

The  years  passed,  she  grew  up,  and  graduated  from  school.  When  the
time  came  to  decide  on  what  she  should  do  next,  after  consultations
with  her  father  she  resolved  to  enter  the  Moscow  Institute  for
Foreign  Languages.  There  she  could  be  sure  of  comparatively
easy  studies  and  the  prospect  of  an  equally  easy  position  when  she
left;  the  Institute  was  known  to  be  a starting  point  for  careers  in  the

Commissariat  for  Foreign  Affairs,  the  Commissariat,  for  Foreign
Trade,  and  other  governmental  bodies.  The  young  girls  of  Moscow
retailed  many  strange  rumors  of  the  massive  yellow  building  in
Metrostroyevskaya  Street;  Lisa  thought  of  its  doors  as  opening  on
to  a terra  incognita.

Thanks  to  her  excellent  knowledge  of  German,  and  her  father's
connections,  she  had  no  difficulty  in  entering  the  Institute.  In
her  very  first  year  she  won  the  professors'  notice  by  her  keen
intelligence  and  her  success  as  a student.  She  considered  it  a matter
of  honor  to  be  outstanding  in  her  subjects.  She  had  always  been
used  to  admiration,  and  as  the  years  passed  she  had  developed  a
morbid  craving  for  it.  Now  she  attempted  to  win  the  admiration
and  envy  of  those  around  her.  She  went  to  great  trouble  to  excel  the
other  students  in  every  possible  respect:  in  study,  in  behavior,  and
in  dress.  The  professors  began  to  hold  her  up  as  an  example  to  the
others,  while  her  colleagues  looked  down  their  noses  at  her  eccentric
behavior.  The  young  men  turned  to  stare  after  her  slender  figure
and  were  astonished  at  her  provocative  conduct  and  her  dress.

One  morning  in  the  autumn,  during  her  second  year  at  the  the
Institute,  on  reaching  the  door  of  the  lecture  hall  she  was  called  aside
by  a senior  girl,  who  whispered:  "Lisa,  you're  wanted  in  the  Special
Department.  You're  to  report  there  at  once."

The  Special  Department  was  situated  next  door  to  the  rector's
office.  None  of  the  students  knew  exactly  what  functions  the
department  performed:  they  could  only  surmise.  Lisa  knocked
shyly  at  the  door, 'and  went  in.  Behind  a desk  sat  a woman  with  the
exaggeratedly  self-confident  air  of  women  who  occupy  men's


264


positions.  Now  this  woman  took  a file  from  a steel  cupboard  behind
her,  and  glanced  first  at  the  file,  then  at  Lisa.  The  minutes  seemed
endless.  Lisa  stared  with  longing  through  the,  window  at  the
houseroofs  opposite  and  thought:  'It's  either  arrest  or  expulsion  from  the
Institute.'

The  woman  held  out  a sealed  envelope  to  her,  and  said:

"At  nine  this  evening  you're  to  call  at  the  address  on  this  letter
Hand  in  your  name  at  the  inquiry  office.  They'll  be  expecting  you."

Lisa  glanced  at  the  address:  the  letters  began  to  dance  before  her
eyes.  They  read:  'Lubianskaya  Square,  entrance  8,  room  207.'

That  day  she  was  unusually  abstracted.  She  heard  very  little
of  what  the  professors  said,  but  in  her  head  the  words  drummed
incessantly:  'Lubianskaya  Square,  nine  o'clock.'  Punctually  at  five
to  nine  she  passed  through  the  gates  of  the  N.K.V.D.  central  offices
in  Lubianskaya  Square.  The  lieutenant  on  duty  phoned  to  someone,
then  handed  her  a pass.  She  went  to  the  room  given  on  the  letter
and  knocked  almost  inaudibly  with  her  knuckles.

"You're  punctual;  that's  a good  sign."  The  young  man  in  civilian
dress  who  opened  the  door  smiled  as  he  spoke.  "Please  come  in!"

He  pointed  affably  to  a comfortable  chair  by  the  desk.  She  dropped
into  it,  and  planted  her  feet  firmly  on  the  floor.

The  young  man  smiled  again,  pleasantly.  "May  I offer  you  a
cigarette?"  He  pushed  a box  of  expensive  cigarettes  across  the
desk.  Her  fingers  trembled,  she  had  difficulty  in  opening  the  box  and
taking  out  a cigarette.  She  did  not  know  what  to  make  of  this  warm
reception.

"Would  you  like  some  tea?  Or  coffee?"  the  obliging  young  man
asked.  Without  waiting  for  her  answer  he  pressed  a button  on  his
desk,  and  a few  moments  later  a tray  of  coffee,  cakes,  and  a tablet
of  chocolate  arrived.  To  cover  up  her  uncertainty  and  shyness  she
took  a cake.  But  somehow  she  had  difficulty  in  getting  it  down.

"Have  you  any  idea  why  I've  invited  you  to  come  and  see  me?"
he  asked,  lighting  a cigarette  and  studying  Lisa  from  one  side.

"No  ...  I haven't,"  she  answered  in  a trembling  voice.

"We've  been  interested  in  you  for  a long  time  now,"  he  began,
leaning  back  more  comfortably  in  his  chair.  "You're  a cultivated
and  an  attractive  girl.  I might  go  so  fax  as  to  say  very  attractive.

And  you're  from  a good  Soviet  family.  Your  father's  an  old  Party


265


member.  You  yourself  have  been  active  as  a Young  Communist
in  the  Institute.  We've  received  very  favorable  reports  about  you."

He  paused  and  glanced  at  her,  to  study  the  effect  of  his  words.

The  expression  of  anxiety  and  excitement  gradually  faded  from  her
face,  to  be  replaced  by  one  of  tense  expectation.

"We  not  only  punish  enemies  of  the  Soviet  regime,"  he  continued.

"We're  even  more  concerned  to  see  that  the  numbers  of  genuine
Soviet  people  should  increase.  As  we've  had  such  good  reports  about
you  we  consider  it  our  duty  to  take  some  interest  in  your  future
career."  He  paused  again.  "Tell  me,  we're  right,  aren't  we,  in
regarding  you  as  a true  Soviet  citizen  and  in  wishing  to  help  you  in
your  career?"

"I'm  still  too  young,"  she  said  in  some  embarrassment.  "So  far
I've  not  had  the  opportunity.  . . "

"Oh,  I quite  understand,"  he  interrupted.  "You've  always  wanted

to  prove  your  devotion  to  the  Party,  but  so  far  you  haven't  had  the
opportunity:  that's  it,  isn't  it?"

"I  ...  I've  always  tried.  . . " she  stammered.

"I  know.  I've  taken  some  trouble  to  find  out  about  you  before
asking  you  to  come  and  see  me.  And  now  we  think  we  can  test  you
in  action.  You're  studying  in  the  Institute  for  Foreign  Languages,

You  know  that  after  graduating  many  of  the  students  will  be  given
the  opportunity  to  work  together  with  foreigners,  or  even  abroad.
That's  a great  honor.  I'm  sure  you'd  like  to  belong  to  that  select
few,  wouldn't  you?"

"Of  course,  Comrade,"  she  readily  answered;  but  then
prudently  added:  "If  it's  in  the  interests  of  the  Party  and  the
government."  She  now  realized  that  this  evening  visit  to  the  '

N.K.V.D.  by  no  means  held  out  the  unpleasant  prospects  it  had-. a
suggested  to  her.  And  she  resolved  to  exploit  all  her  powers  to  grasp
the  attractive  possibility  that  seemed  to  be  looming  up  on  the
horizon.

"Call  me  Constantine  Alexievich,"  the  man  said  in  a friendly
manner,  as  he  pushed  the  tablet  of  chocolate  across  to  her.  "I  see
you're  a clever  girl.  Work  with  foreigners,  or  even  abroad:  you  know
what  that  means!  It  means  Lyons  silks,  Parisian  perfumes,  and  the


266


best  restaurants  in  the  world.  It  means  special  privileges,  high-
society.  An  easy  and  fine  life  filled  with  pleasure.  Men  at  your  feet...'


He  took  a breath  and  gave  her  a swift  glance.  She  was  sitting
motionless  as  though  entranced,  her  eyes  were  shining  with
excitement.  The  chocolate  began  to  melt  in  her  fingers.

"But  all  that  is, possible  only  on  one  condition,"  he  said  with
a hint  of  regret.  "That  is,  that  you  have  our  complete  trust.  Not
everybody  has  that.  It  has  to  be  won."

His  last  words  seemed  cold  and  hard.  For  a second  she  again  felt
helpless  and  afraid.  But  in  a moment  her  longing  for  a brilliant
existence  and  admiring  glances  shattered  all  her  doubts  and  fears.

What  have  I got  to  do?"  she  asked  practically.

'Oh,  we'll  give  you  various  commissions  that  will  provide  you
with  opportunities  to  show  your  devotion  to  the  party,"  he  explained
in  a careless  tone.  Then,  as  though  she  had  already  indicated  her
assent,  he  added  in  a businesslike  tone:  "You  will  be  given  additional
schooling.  And  instructions  will  be  issued  to  you  for  each  separate
commissariat ...  as  well  as  the  requisite  means  to  achieve  the  task."

"But  perhaps  I shan't  be  equal  to  your  demands,"  she  feebly
objected,  for  she  hadn't  expected  matters  to  develop  so  quickly,
and  instinctively  she  tried  to  secure  a way  of  retreat.

"We  shall  help  you.  Besides,  from  the  personal  knowledge  we
already  have  of  you  we  know  very  well  what  you  can  do.  Now  may  I
ask  you  to  sign  this  document?"  He  pushed  a form  across  the  desk
and  showed  her  where  to  sign.  She  glanced  rapidly  through  it:
it  was  a formal  promise  to  collaborate  and  not  to  talk;  in  the  event  of
breaking  this  promise  she  was  threatened  with  'all  necessary
measures  to  defend  the  State  security  of  the  Soviet  Union'.  Her  radiant
vision  of  a brilliant  future  seemed  to  turn  a little  dim.  He  handed
her  a pen.  She  signed.

Thus  she  achieved  her  desire  for  a brilliant  life.  And  thus  the  N.K.

V.D.  added  one  more  to  its  list  of  agents.  Before  long,  without
interrupting  her  studies  at  the  Institute,  Lisa  was  transformed  into
a model  siren.

During  the  war  there  were  no  Germans  in  the  true  sense  of  the
words  living  in  Moscow.  So  she  was  introduced  into  the  small  circle
of  German  anti-fascists  who  had  arrived  as  political  emigres,  in  the


267


Soviet  Union  and  had  managed  to  survive  the  continual  purges.  But
soon  this  work  proved  to  be  without  point,  as  the  only  German
communists  left  in  freedom  were  themselves  secret  agents  of  the  N.K.
V.D.,  and  that  organization  had  introduced  her  to  them  only  in  order
to  provide  yet  one  more  cross-check  on  the  reliability  of  their  spies.

But  the  Germans  had  grown  cunning  through  experience,  they

glorified  Stalin  and  repeated  the  fashionable  slogan:  'Smash  the  Germans.'

She  was  disgusted  with  this  way  of  showing  devotion  and  grew  angry
at  the  lack  of  opportunity  to  prove  what  she  could  do.

Constantine  Alexievich,  who  was  her  immediate  superior,  quickly
became  convinced  of  her  keen  intelligence  and  unusually  wide  cultural
horizon.  She  was  capable  of  starting  and  carrying  on  a conversation
on  any  subject.  Now  she  was  entrusted  with  the  task  of  spying  on
higher  Party  officials,  and  had  the  opportunity  to  visit  the  exclusive
clubs  of  the  various  People's  Commissariats  and  even  the  very
special  club  attached  to  the  People's  Commissariat  for  Foreign
Affairs.  The  results  of  her  work  were  stored  away  in  the  N.K.V.D.
files  and  prisons.  The  fact  that  she  was  kept  at  work  on  the  'internal
front'  for  a long  time  is  testimony  to  her  success.  In  the  N.K.V.D.
view,  work  among  foreigners  is  comparatively  unimportant.  Where
foreigners  are  concerned  the  N.K.V.D.  is  interested  in  external
details  and  factual  material.  But  spies  working  among  the  'beavers',

i.e.  the  important  Soviet  Party  men,  are  expected  to  discover  their
secret  thoughts  and  moods:  a complex  task,  and  calling  for  real  art
on  the  part  of  those  engaged  in  it.

In  the  spring  of  1945  Lisa  graduated  from  the  Institute  as  one  of
its  best  students.  At  this  period  many  of  the  graduates  were  sent  to
work  in  the  S.M.A.  in  Berlin,  and  Lisa  went  with  them.  Once  more  she
was  given  special  commissions.  She  was  appointed  translator
member  of  the  Special  Dismantling  Committee  under  the  Council  of
People's  Commissars,  simultaneously  acting  as  his  N.K.V.D.  control.

When  this  general  was  recalled  to  Moscow  on  the  completion  of  his
task  she  was  appointed  to  the  personnel  department  of  the  S.M.A
Her  personal  file  contained  the  remark:  'Employment  to  be  given
in  agreement  with  the  Administration  for  State  Security.'  A few  days
later  she  became  personal  interpreter  to  General  Shabalin,  the
economic  dictator  of  the  Soviet  zone.

That  was  when  I first  met  her.  Soon  afterward  Major  Kuznetsov
gave  me  his  secret  warning  concerning  her.  Did  the  general  himself
know  what  sort  of  people  he  had  around  him?  After  a time  I came,
to  the  conclusion  that  he  had  good  reason  not  to  trust  anybody.


268


His  orderly,  Nikolai,  had  served  in  the  N.K.V.D.  forces  at  one
time.  As  is  the  custom  in  the  Soviet  Union,  anyone  who  has  ever  had
any  kind  of  relations  with  the  N.K.V.D.-not  only  their  former
workers,  but  even  their  former  prisoners-always  remains  in  touch
with  them.  Of  course  the  general  knew  that  quite  well.  Nikolai  was  his
master's  orderly,  and  simultaneously  his  control.

Shabalin's  maid,  Dusia,  was  a pleasant,  quiet  girl.  At  the  end  of

1945  all  the  Russian  women  who  had  been  brought  to  Germany  during

the  war  and  had  later  been  employed  by  the  Soviet  authorities  to  fill

subordinate  positions  were  sent  back  home.  To  everybody's  astonishment

Dusia  remained  behind.  People  assumed  that  she  owe~d"  1 1

to  the  general's  protection.  But  when  the  general  returned  to  Moscow

while  Dusia  still  remained  in  Karlshorst  it  was  assumed  that  s

must  have  some  other  highly  placed  protector.  Only  a few  suspected

the  truth.

She  was  a very  pleasant  girl,  but  I always  felt  that  she  suffered
from  some  personal  sorrow  and  vague  depression.  She  knew  what
had  happened  to  her  friends  who  had  been  sent  back  to  Russia,  and
she  knew  that  in  the  end  she  would  share  their  fate.  Yet  she  had  to
work  as  an  instrument  in  the  hands  of  those  same  men  who  sooner  or
later  would  become  her  jailers.


Thus  the  general's  orderly,  his  maid,  and  his  personal  interpreter
were  all  N.K.V.D.  agents.  I don't  think  the  general  was  so  stupid
as  not  to  realize  it.  Even  if  he  hadn't  noticed  it,  he  must  have  known
from  experience  that  it  must  be  so.  And  so,  to  simplify  matters,  he
regarded  all  those  who  worked  in  close  touch  with  him  as  informers
for  the  N.K.V.1 ).  Including  me.

After  Kuznetsov's  warning  I was  more  on  my  guard  with  Lisa,

I found  out  more  about  her  from  former  friends  of  hers  who  had
studied  with  her  in  the  Institute,  and  who  were  working  as
translators  in  the  Supreme  Staff.  She  was  not  only  inordinately
ambitious,  but  inordinately  talkative;  and  in  such  circumstances  the  M.V.D.
trust  could  not  remain  a secret  for  long.  I gleaned  other  details  of
her  from  various  sources.

One  evening  shortly  after  General  Shabalin's  recall  to  Moscow,
while  she  was  waiting  to  be  given  a new  appointment,  she  dropped
in  on  me  on  some  pretext.  In  Karlshorst  we  all  had  a habit  of  calling
casually  on  one  another,  without  waiting  for  special  invitations.

After  looking  round  my  apartment  she  made  herself  comfortable


269


on  the  couch  and  declared:  "You're  a poor  sort  of  lady's  man,

Gregory  Petrovich.  And  to  make  matters  worse,  you're  a skinflint."

As  she  tucked  her  feet  up  on  the  couch  she  added:  "Bring  a bottle
of  wine  out  of  your  cupboard  and  let's  feel  at  home."

"I  already  feel  at  home,"  I answered.

"Don't  be  so  detestable  !"  She  purred  like  a cat.  "I'm  going  away
soon.  Though  I simply  can't  endure  you,  I'd  like  to  celebrate  our
parting."

"The  feeling  is  mutual,"  I retorted.  "And  yet  I'm  sorry  you're
going.

"So  you  really  are  sorry  to  part  from  me?"  She  gazed  at  me  with
her  dark  brown  eyes.  "You  admit  it !"

So  far  as  her  feminine  charms  were  concerned,  what  I found  most
attractive  in  her  was  the  polish  acquired  from  residence  in  a great
city,  her  culture  and  knowledge,  in  combination  with  a superlative
vulgarity.  Such  a combination  involuntarily  attracts  by  its  very
novelty.

"I  find  you  as  interesting  as  the  beautiful  skin  of  a snake,"  I
confessed.

"But  why  do  you  avoid  me,  Gregory  Petrovich?"  she  asked.

"By  all  the  signs  you  and  I ought  to  understand  each  other  better
than  anybody  else."

"That's  just  the  very  reason,  Lisa,"  I said.  "Don't  be  annoyed
with  me.  Shall  I tell  you  your  fortune?  You'll  marry  an  elderly
general.  That's  the  only  way  in  which  you'll  be  able  to  satisfy  your
demands  on  life.  You  regard  life  soberly  enough  to  know  that  I'm
telling  the  truth."

She  was  rather  disconcerted,  uncertain  how  to  take  my  words,
in  joke  or  earnest.  Then  she  began  to  talk  sincerely  and  passionately,
as  though  she  wanted  to  justify  herself:

"Good  ! One  confidence  deserves  another!  Yes,  I shall  marry  a
man  in  the  highest  possible  position.  I don't  suppose  he'll  be  young.

What  is  so-called  'pure  love'  in  comparison  with  what  a -man  in  a
high  position  can  offer  me?  I can  pick  up  handsome  young  men  in
any  street,  and  they'll  do  as  I tell  them!  Let  other  women  run  about
without  stockings  and  act  'pure  love'.  One,  must  have  power:  money,


270


or  a high  position.  Then,  and  only  then,  can  one  understand  how
cheap  love  is  . .

"It's  a matter  of  taste."  I shrugged  my  shoulders.

"Not  of  taste,  but  intelligence,"  she  retorted.  "You're  old  enough
to  understand  that  life  is  a struggle.  That  there  are  strong  and
weak.  If  you  want  to  live,  you  must  be  strong.  If  you're  weak,  you
must  serve  the  strong.  Equality,  brotherhood?  Beautiful  fairy
stories  for  fools!"

"You  take  a very  critical  attitude  to  life  !"  I observed.

"Yes.  I want  to  be  on  top,  not  underneath,"  she  continued
in  a dreamy  tone.  "You  can  only  comprehend  life  when  you  see
it  from  above.  And  to  do  that  you  need  wings..."

"I  like  you  today,  Lisa,"  I said  almost  sincerely.  "Life  is  often
far  from  easy.  Often  one  looks  for  a fine  fairy-story.  As  you  say,
fairy-stories  are  for  fools.  But ...  do  you  remember  the  story  of
Icarus?  That's  a story  for  the  wise.  He,  too,  wished  to  have  wings
...Do  you  know  how  the  story  ended?"

She  looked  up  at  me  blankly.  "What  are  you  getting  at,  Gregory
Petrovich?"  she  asked  uncertainly.

"Oh,  nothing  ! It's  just  a mental  association,"  I replied.

At  the  beginning  of  1940  Lisa  was  appointed  a translator  to  the
Soviet  delegation  at  the  Nuremburg  trials.  She  remained  in  that
position  for  a year.  Of  course  she  had  other  tasks,  her  real  tasks,
to  perform  there  too.  But  she  is  of  interest  because  she  is  a shining
example  of  a new  type  of  Soviet  personality,  someone  who. is
the  educational  product  of  the  Stalin  epoch,  and  exploits  all  the
prerequisites  for  a successful  life  under  Soviet  conditions.  They  have
grown  up  in  a milieu  which  excludes  mental  freedom,  freedom  of
thought,  and  their  consciousness  is  automatically  focused  on  the
material  aspect  of  existence.  Their  driving  impulse  is  the  desire  to
climb  as  high  as  possible  up  the  social  ladder.  The  means?  People
of  Lisa's  type  are  trained  not  to  think  about  the  moral  aspect  of
their  activities.  Soviet  morality  justifies  everything  that  serves  the
Party  interests.

One  cannot  help  drawing  a comparison  between  Andrei  Kovtun
and  Lisa  Stenina.  They  both  serve  one  and  the  same  institution.

He  carries  out  his  task  with  all  his  inner  being  protesting,  but  with  no


271


possibility  of  changing  his  position  in  any  way.  Lisa,  on  the  other
hand,  does  her  job  quite  willingly  and  deliberately.  Andrei  has  al
ready  learnt  only  too  well  that  he  is  the  helpless  slave  of  the  system.
Lisa  is  striving  to  get  higher.  And  yet  possibly  she,  too,  will  be
pursued  by  the  stench  of  blood  before  long.


272


CHAPTER  THIRTEEN
BETWEEN  TWO  WORLDS

Before  the  war  I came  across  a book  by  Paul  de  Cruis:  Is  Life

Worth  Living?  The  book  was  a real  find  for  the  Soviet  State

Publishing  Company;  it  was  in  complete  accord  with  the  Politbureau  course

of  that  time,  with  its  attack  on  the  'rotten  democracies'.  And  so  the

book  was  translated  and  published  in  huge  editions.  The  Russian

edition  had  a foreword  by  the  author;  it  was  so  amazing  that  I read

it  aloud  to  a friend:  '"I  cannot  pass  myself  off  as  a proletarian;

rather  am  I a bourgeois  of  the  bourgeois,  enervated  and  corrupted

by  the  blessings  of  my  social  state.  With  a partridge  wing  in  one

hand  and  a glass  of  Burgundy  in  the  other,  I find  it  difficult  to  reflect

on  the  social  ulcers  and  painful  problems  of  modem  society.

Nonetheless  l.am  enthusiastic  for  the  great  Soviet  experiment,  I raise  my
right  fist'-holding  the  partridge  wing  or  the  Burgundy?-'and  cry:

"Red  Front !"

At  this  point  my  friend  had  had  enough,  and,  swearing  violently,
he  flung  the  book  away.  Both  of  us  bitterly  regretted  that  we  hadn't
got  the  simple-minded  Frenchman  in  the  room  with  us.  It  may  be  i~  I
there  are  people  who  get  pleasure  out  of  watching  a dissected  rabbit,
but  the  rabbit  itself  hardly  shares  the  pleasure.

Paul  de  Cruis  truthfully  and  honestly  analyzed  the  defects  of
modem  American  society;  he  was  indignant  at  the  fact  that
American  unemployed  workers  were  living  in  extremely  wretched
conditions,  and  that  their  food  consisted  chiefly  of  fried  potatoes  and
horribly  salted  pork.  And  their  children  received  only  a litre  of
ordinary  milk  a day,  as  an  act  of  charity.  And  he  exclaimed:  "Is
their  life  worth  living?"  Naturally,  standards  of  good  and  bad  are
always  relative.  And  possibly  he  was  justified  in  concluding  that  in
comparison  with  American  living  conditions  generally  such  a state
of  affairs  was  very  bad.

But  a Soviet  reader  reading  those  words  might  well  ask:  "And
what  is  the  state  of  the  Soviet  workers,  who  work  themselves  to
death  to  earn  a wage-not  unemployment  pay-which  only  very
rarely  assures  them  such  a treat  as  pork,  whether  salted  or  unsalted?

And  what  of  their  children,  who  even  in  the  best  years  received  less
milk  than  an  American  unemployed  worker's  child?  What  answer
could  be  given  to  the  question:  'Was  it  worth  while  for  these  children
to  be  born?’"


273


After  the  war  I recalled  Paul  de  Cruis'  book,  and  especially  his
question:  'Is  life  worth  living?'  For  now  some  of  us  have  hid  an
opportunity  to  see  the  children  of  the  democratic  world,  and  that  in
conquered  Germany,  in  conditions  that  were,  generally  speaking,
worse  than  those  applying  in  other  democratic  countries.  Now  we
have  had  a chance  to  draw  comparisons.

In  Germany  the  difference  between  the  children  of  the  two  systems
was  painfully  obvious.  At  first  we  noticed  only  the  superficial
differences;  but  when  we  had  lived  in  Berlin  for  some  time  we  saw
another,  much  more  profound  difference.  Soviet  children  seem  like
little  soulless  automata,  with  all  their  childish  joy  and  lack  of
restraint  suppressed.  That  is  the  result  of  many  years  of  replacing
the  family  by  the  State.  Soviet  children  grow  up  in  an  atmosphere
of  mistrust,  suspicion,  and  segregation.  We  in  Berlin  found  it  much
more  difficult  to  strike  up  a conversation  with  the  child  of  a Soviet
officer  who  was  quite  well  known  to  us  than  with  any  German  street
urchin  in  the  Berlin  streets.

The  German  children  born  in  the  Hitler  epoch,  and  those  who  have
grown  up  in  the  years  following  the  capitulation,  could  hardly  be
exemplary  in  their  characters.  So  we  found  it  all  the  more  depressing
to  note  these  vast  internal  and  external  differences  between  the
children  of  the  two  systems.

Here  is  a significant  detail.  The  Germans  are  not  in  the  habit
of  having  their  mother-in-law  in  the  young  married  couple's  home;
it  is  regarded  as  a family  disaster.  The  German  mothers-in-law
themselves  take  the  attitude  that  when  they  have  disposed  of  their
daughters  they  can  'enjoy  life';  they  ride  cycles,  visit  the  pictures,
and  live  their  own  lives.  In  a Soviet  family  the  exact  opposite  is  the
case.  It  is  a bit  of  luck  for  the  wife,  and  even  more  for  the  children,
if  her  mother-in-law  is  living  with  them.  Soviet  children  usually

grow  up  in  their  grandmother's  care.  Whereas  the  German  woman
of  forty  or  more  often  begins  a 'second  youth'  when  her  daughter
gets  married,  the  Russian  woman  of  over  forty  no  longer  has  any
personal  life,  she  devotes  herself  wholly  and  entirely  to  her  'second
family',  to  her  grandchildren.  Only  then  is  there  any  surety  that  the
children  will  be  brought  up  in  a normal  manner.

Generalizing  on  this  difference,  one  can  say  that  the  German
woman  belongs  to  the  family,  the  Soviet  woman  to  the  State.  A
Soviet  woman  can  become  an  engine-driver,  a miner,  or  a stone
mason.  In  addition,  she  has  the  honorable  right  of  voting  for
Stalin,  and  of  being  her  husband's  hostage  if  the  M.V.D.  is  interested
in  him.  Only  one  small  right  is  denied  her:  the  right  to  be  a happy


274


mother.


For  a long  time  there  were  two  conflicting  theories  as  to  the
formation  of  the  child  character,  and  Soviet  pedagogues  were
divided  into  two  camps.  The  heredity  theory  maintained  that  the
chief  part  in  the  development  of  human  characteristics  was  played
by  the  inherited  genes;  this  theory  came  to  be  widely  accepted  by
pedagogues  after  the  emergence  of  a separate  science  of  genetics.  The
second,  environment,  theory  declared  that  the  infant  mind  was  a
tabula  rasa,  on  which  environment  wrote  the  laws  of  human
development.  This  made  the  child's  characteristics  exclusively  dependent
on  the  influences  of  its  milieu.  In  due  course  the  Politbureau  issued
a specific  instruction  that  the  environmental  theory  was  to  be
accepted  as  the  basis  of  Soviet  pedagogy.  The  totalitarian  State
fights  wholeheartedly  for  the  souls  as  well  as  the  bodies  of  its  citizens
it  cannot  stand  any  rivals  in  the  formation  of  the  citizen-, not  even
genes.  Soviet  pedagogy  now  declares  in  so  many  words  that  the
Soviet  child  is  a hundred-per-cent  product  of  its  communist  environment.

During  the  period  before  this  approach  was  finally  established
the  Politbureau  based  its  system  of  Soviet  education  on  a
tendentious  curriculum  and  the  political  organization  of  the  youth  in  the
Pioneers  and  the  Young  Communist  League;  in  these  organizations
the  children  began  when  quite  young  to  render  their  services  to  the
State.  The  years  passed,  and  after  much  experimentation  , the
authorities  went  over  from  the  'method  of  conviction'  to  the
method  of  compulsion'.  In  1940  a 'Committee  for  the  Problem  of
Labour  Reserves'  was  set  up  as  a subsidiary  of  the  Council  of
People's  Commissars,  and  trades  and  technical  schools  attached
to  the  factories  and  works  were  organized.  The  pupils  for  these
educational  institutions  were  compulsively  recruited  at  the  age  of
fourteen,  under  the  pretext  of  mobilizing  labour  reserves.

In  1948  a State  decree  established  the  Suvorov  and  Nakhimov
Cadet  Schools.  The  task  of  these  schools-there  are  some  forty  of
them-is  to  prepare  children  of  eight  years  and  upward  for  a military
career  by  a barrack  style  of  education  and  training.

I once  had  the  opportunity  to  visit  the  Suvorov  Cadet  School  at
Kalinin.  It  was  not  far  from  Moscow,  and  consequently  was  the
most  privileged  of  all  these  schools,  there  being  no  Suvorov  school  in
Moscow  itself.  At  Kalinin  I met  a number  of  lads  who  were  the
grandsons  of  Politbureau  members.  Petka  Ordjonokidze,  the  grand
son  of  Sergo  Ordjonokidze,  at  one  time  People's  Commissar  for
Heavy  Industry,  was  sitting  in  his  underwear  on  his  bed,  for  his
uniform  trousers  were  being  repaired,  and  service  regulations


275


prescribed  only  one  pair  per  child.  In  this  respect,  to  have  a highly
influential  and  famous  grandfather  was  of  no  advantage  whatever.

The  teacher,  a captain,  complained  of  his  delicate  position  in  regard
to  Mikoyan's  youngest  scion,  who  kept  the  whole  establishment
supplied  with  cigarettes  which  he  smuggled  into  the  school.  He  could
hardly  be  punished  with  the  cells,  for  his  grandfather  was  still  alive
and  had  a very  good  seat  in  the  Politbureau.  Some  of  these  lads  of
twelve  or  thirteen  years  old  were  wearing  service  decorations,  which
they  had  won  as  partisans.  Seen  close  up,  all  this  doesn't  look  too
bad:  the  Suvorov  schools  are  privileged  institutions  in  which  the
children  are  clothed,  fed,  and  educated  at  the  State  expense.  There
are  candidates  and  to  spare  for  all  vacancies,  so  it  isn't  easy  for  the
ordinary  child  to  get  to  these  schools.  In  that  at  Kalinin  about  half
the  pupils  consisted  of  relations  of  generals  and  other  members  of
the  Soviet  aristocracy.

On  leaving  these  schools  the  pupils  may  not  enter  any  other
than  an  officers'  training  college.  Their  fate,  their  future  career,  are
decided  when  they  are  eight  years  old.  The  classless  society  divides
its  children  at  an  early  age  into  strictly  delimited  castes:  the
privileged  caste  of  the  military  and  the  caste  of  the  proletarians,
whose  job  is  -to  do  productive  work,  to  multiply  up  to  the  approved
limits,  and  to  die  for  the  glory  of  the  leader.

In  1940  an  urgent  conference  was  called  by  the  head  of  the  S.M.A.
Political  Administration  to  discuss  the  question  of  improving
educational  work  in  the  Russian  school  at  Karlshorst.  Certain


unhealthy  trends  had  been  noted  among  the  scholars  in  the  higher
forms.  A month  or  so  before,  a scholar  in  the  ninth  form  had  shot'
his  father  and  his  father's  young  mistress.  The  father  was  a Party
member,  a lieutenant-general,  an  official  in  the  S.M.A.  legal
department.  Apparently  he  had  taken  a fancy  to  war-time  habits,  and  had
been  untroubled  by  the  circumstance  that  he  had  been  living  with
his  paramour  under  the  very  eyes  of  his  grown-up  son  and  daughter,
whose  mother  had  remained  in  Russia.

After  fruitless  talks,  pleadings,  and  quarrels  with  his  father,  the
son,  a seventeen-year-old  member  of  the  Young  Communist  League,
had  decided  to  appeal  to  the  advice  and  assistance  of  the  Party
organization.  He  had  put  in  an  official  report  to  the  head  of  the
Political  Department.  When  a Party  man  is  accused  of  moral  or
criminal  misconduct  the  Party  organs  usually  act  on  the  principle
of  not  washing  dirty  linen  in  public.  So  the  Political  Department


276


tried  to  hush  up  the  affair,  and  only  passed  on  the  report  to  the  father
The  result  could  have  been  anticipated.  The  father  was  furious,  and
took  active  steps  against  his  son.  It  ended  by  the  son  snatching  up
his  father's  pistol  and  shooting  him.

Hardly  had  the  commotion  died  down  after  this  tragic  incident
when  the  Karlshorst  commandant,  Colonel  Maximov,  had  to  entrust
a rather  unusual  task  to  a company  of  the  commandatura  guard.

A mysterious  band  of  robbers  was  operating  in  the  wooded
sanddunes  and  wilderness  around  Karlshorst,  and  filling  all  the  district
with  alarm  and  terror.  The  company  sent  to  deal  with  it  was  strictly
enjoined  not  to  shoot  without  special  orders  from  the  officer  in
command,  but  to  take  the  robbers  alive.  For  they  were  scholarly
from  higher  forms  of  the  Karlshorst  school,  and  were  led  by  the
son  of  one  of  the  S.M.A.  generals.  They  were  very  well  armed,  with
their  father's  pistols,  and  some  of  them  even  with  machine-pistols.

The  district  was  combed  thoroughly,  the  robbers'  headquarters
were  found  in  the  cellar  of  a ruined  house,  and  it  was  formally
besieged.  Only  after  long  negotiations  conducted  through  emissaries  did
the  head  of  the  band  declare  himself  ready  to  capitulate.  It  is  striking
that  the  first  of  his  conditions  for  surrender  was  that  they  were  not
to  be  sent  back  to  the  Soviet  Union  as  a punishment.  The  officer  in
command  of  the  company  had  to  send  a courier  to  the  S.M.A.  staff
to  obtain  the  necessary  agreement  to  the  condition.  The  stipulation
greatly  disturbed  the  S.M.A.  Political  Department.lt  was  discovered  that  the
results  achieved  in  the  higher  forms

of  the  Karlshorst  school  were  not  up  to  the  standard  of  correspond
ing  forms  in  the  U.S.S.R.,  and  on  the  other  hand  there  was  a
considerable  increase  in  truancy..  The  only  improvement  shown
was  in  regard  to  German  conversation,  and  this  did  not  please  the
school  authorities  at  all,  as  it  showed  that  the  pupils  were  in  contact
with  the  German  world  around  them.  That  might  have  unpleasant
consequences  for  the  school  staff.

The  commandatura  patrols  regularly  hauled  scholars  out  of  the
darkness  of  the  Berlin  cinemas  in  school  hours.  A search  of  the  desks
of  older  scholars  led  to  the  discovery  of  hand-written  copies  of
banned  Yesenin  poems  and  amoral  couplets  by  Konstantin  Semionov,
which  soldiers  had  passed  from  hand  to  hand  during  the  war.  Worst
of  all,  the  S.M.A.  hospital  notified  the  chief  of  staff  that  several  cases
of  venereal  disease  had  occurred  among  the  senior  scholars.  A
sixteen-year-old  girl  was  brought  to  the  hospital  suffering  from  a
serious  hemorrhage  as  the  result  of  a clumsy  attempt  at  abortion.

Another  girl  lay  between  life  and  death  for  several  months  after


277


she  had  made  an  attempt  to  gas  herself  because  of  an  unhappy  love
affair.


All  these  things  had  led  to  the  Political  Department  calling  an
urgent  conference,  which  decided  that  radical  measures  must  be
taken  to  improve  the  communist  education  of  the  Soviet  children
and  youths  in  Germany.  It  was  agreed  that  the  most  effective  step
towards  effecting  such  an  improvement  was  the  approved  panacea
for  all  diseases:  additional  lessons  on  the  'Short  Course  of  History
of  the  C.P.S.U.'  and  on  the  childhood  and  youth  of  the  leaders  of  the
world  proletariat,  Lenin  and  his  true  friend,  collaborator  and
pupil,  Joseph  Stalin.  It  was  also  decided  incidentally  to  send  the
incorrigible  sinners  home  to  the  Soviet  Union,  a punishment  which
hitherto  had  been  applied  only  to  the  adult  members  of  the  Karls
horst  Soviet  colony.

"Well,  did  you  like  it?"

"Oh  yes.  An  outstanding  piece  of  work."

"Unquestionably.  A real  chef-d'oeuvre."

The  solid  stream  of  human  beings  carried  us  in  the  darkness  out
of  the  cinema  of  the  officers'  club  in  Karlshorst.  The  crowd  expressed
their  opinions  about  the  film  as  they  poured  out.

That  morning  Nadia,  the  secretary  to  the  Party  Organizer  in  the
Administration  for  Industry,  had  rather  startled  us  by  her  obliging

conduct.  She  had  gone  from  room  to  room,  handing  each  of  us  it  a
cinema  ticket,  and  even  asking  affably  how  many  we  would  like
Normally  it  wasn't  so  easy  to  get  hold  of  tickets;  if  you  wanted  to,
go  you  had  to  apply  to  Nadia  very  early.

"Ah,  Nadia  my  dear!  And  what  is  showing  today?"  I asked,  rather
touched  by  her  amiability.

"A  very  good  one,  Gregory  Petrovich.  The  Vow.  How  many
tickets  would  you  like?"

"Ah!  The  Vow,"  I murmured  respectfully.  "In  that  case  let  me
have  two."

The  Soviet  press  had  devoted  a great  deal  of  space  to  this  film
extolling  it  to  the  skies  as  a new  masterpiece  of  cinematic
art.  Although,  generally  speaking,  I am  sceptical  of  proclaimed


278


masterpieces,  I decided  to  go.  It  was  so  remarkably  publicized  that  it  would
have  been  quite  dangerous  not  to.

Within  five  minutes  of  its  beginning  Captain  Bagdassarian  and
I were  watching  the  clock  rather  than  the  screen.  It  would  have  been,
an  act  of  madness  to  leave,  and  yet  to  sit  and  watch  the  film  ...

'Let's  act  as  though  we  were  going  to  the  toilet,  and  then  slip  out,
Bagdassarian  whispered.

"You'd  better  sit  still  and  see  it,  out  of  scientific  interest!"  I
advised  him.

Even  in  the  pre-war  Soviet  films  Stalin  had  begun  to  acquire  a
stature  equal  to  Lenin's.  But  in  The  Vow  Lenin  served  only  as  a
decorative  motif.  When  they  heard  that  Lenin  was  seriously  ill  the,
peasants  from  all  the  neighbouring  district  went  on  pilgrimage  to
the  village  of  Gorky,  where  Lenin  was  living.  But  now  it  appeared
that  they  had  gone  to  Gorky  only  to  plead,  with  tears  in  their  eyes
for  Stalin  to  be  their  leader.  They  swore  their  troth  and  fidelity
to  him  for  thousands  of  feet.

I swore  too.  I swore  that  never  in  all  my  life,  not  even  in  pre-war
days,  had  I seen  such  stupid,  coarse,  and  unashamed  botching.

No  wonder  that  our  officers'  club  had  stopped  showing  foreign  films
for  some  months  past.

"Show  a film  like  that  abroad,"  Bagdassarian  said  as  we  went
home,  "and  they'll  believe  that  all  Russians  are  a lot  of  fools."

"They've  got  plenty  of  rotten  films  of  their  own."  I tried  to
appease  him.

The  few  foreign  films  which  had  been  shown  from  time  to  time

in  the  Soviet  Union  were  real  masterpieces  of  the  international

cinema.  Of  course  such  films  were  shown  only  when  they

corresponded  with  higher  interests  and  in  conformity  with  the  sinuosities  of

Soviet  foreign  policy.  The  result  was  that  Soviet  citizens  came  to

have  an  exaggeratedly  enthusiastic  opinion  of  foreign  cinema  art.

In  Berlin  we  had  extensive  opportunities  to  see  the  achievements  of
various  countries  in  this  sphere.  We  often  laughed  till  we  cried  at  some
heartrending  American  picture,  with  more  shooting  than  dialogue,
with  blood  streaming  off  the  screen  right  into  the  hall,  and  it  was
quite  impossible  to  tell  who  was  killing  whom,  and  why.  It  is  a
striking  fact  that,  if  one  may  dogmatize  on  the  tastes  of  the  'common
people'  at  all,  the  ordinary  Russian  soldiers  never  got  any  enjoyment
out  of  such  films.


279


It  may  seem  strange,  but  we  liked  German  films  most  of  all.

Whether  in  music,  literature,  or  cinematic  art-all  of  them  spiritual
revelations  of  national  life-the  German  soul  is  more  intelligible  than
any  other  to  the  Russians.  It  has  the  same  sentimentality,  the  same
touch  of  sadness,  the  same  quest  for  the  fundamental  bases  of
phenomena.  It  is  significant  that  Dostoyevsky  has  enjoyed  even  greater
popularity  among  the  Germans  than  among  Russians  themselves,
and  that  Faust  is  the  crowning  achievement  of  the  Russian  theatre.

We  Russians  often  had  interesting  discussions  about  German  films
and  plays.  The  Soviet  viewer  is  struck  by  the  unusual  attention  given
to  details,  to  facts,  and  to  the  actors  themselves.  These  films  provided
plenty  of  matter  for  argument.  The  Vow  provided  no  matter  for
argument.

"Their  art  is  passive,  ours  is  active.  Their  art  exhibits,  ours
commands,"  Bagdassarian  remarked.  "Have  you  seen  Judgement  of  the
Nation?"

"Yes.  It's  a powerful  piece  of  work."

"I  saw  it  recently  in  the  American  sector.  They've  given  it  quite
different  montage  treatment,  and  call  it  Nuremberg.  It's  the  same
theme,  yet  it  makes  no  impact  whatever."

We  arrived  at  Bagdassarian's  apartment.  Still  under  the  influence
of  the  film  we  had  just  seen,  we  sat  discussing  the  possibilities  of
propaganda  through  art.

"It'll  take  the  Americans  another  hundred  years  to  learn  how  to
make  black  white,"  he  said  as  he  took  off  his  greatcoat.

"If  they  have  to,  they'll  soon  learn,"  I answered.

It  can't  be  done  in  a day.  The  masses  have  to  be  educated  over
many  years."

"Why  are  you  so  anxious  about  the  Americans?"  I asked.

"Only  from  the  aspect  of  absolute  justice."

"Who's  interested  in  justice?  Might  is  right.  Justice  is  a fairytale
for  the  simple-minded."

"I  award  you  full  marks  in  Dialectical  Materialism,"  the

captain  sarcastically  observed.  "But,  you  know,  during  the  war  things

were  grand  !"  He  sighed.  "D'you  remember  the  films  the  Americans  sent


280


US?"

"Yes,  they  were  pretty  good.  Only  it  was  rather  amusing  to  see
how  little  they  know  about  our  life.  In  Polar  Star  the  collective
farmers  had  more  and  better  food  than  Sokolovsky  gets."

"Yes,  and  they  danced  round  dances  in  the  meadows,  just  like
in  the  good  old  days."  He  laughed  aloud.

In  1943  and  later,  American  films  on  Russian  subjects  were  showing
in  the  Soviet  Union.  We  particularly  remembered  Polar  Star
Although  it  was  very  naive,  and  showed  complete  ignorance  of  the
Soviet  reality,  it  revealed  genuine  sympathy  for  the  Russians
After  a performance  one  often  heard  the  Russian  audience  remark
"Fine  fellows,  the  Americans";  although  the  film  represented  only
Russian  characters.  The  Russians  took  this  kindly  presentation
of  themselves  as  evidence  of  the  American  people's  sympathy  for
them.

That  film  had  a number  of  expert  advisers  with  Russian  names"

I said.  "I  don't  suppose  they'd  seen  Russia  for  thirty  years  or  more
The  American  technique  is  good,  but  they  haven't  any  ideology
Probably  they  don't  even  know  what  it  is."

"Stalin's  making  hell  hot  for  them,  but  all  they  do  is  gape,"
Bagdassarian  meditated.  "They  don't  know  what  to  do.  Now  they're
beginning  to  sneer  at  Russian  Ivan:  he's  pockmarked,  he  squints,  and
his  teeth  are  crooked.  The  fools!  The  last  thirty  years  of  Russian
history  are  still  a white  patch  to  them,  yet  it's  an  inexhaustible  well.
They've  only  got  to  strip  Stalin  naked  and  all  the  world  would  spit
in  disgust.  And  we  Soviet  people  wouldn't  object.  But  when  they
start  to  sneer  at  Russian  Ivan  . . ."

He  sniffed,  annoyed  to  think  that  the  Americans  couldn't  tumble
to  anything  so  simple.

We  were  often  amazed  to  see  how  little  the  outside  world  knew
of  the  true  position  in  Soviet  Russia.  The  thirty  years'  activity  of  the
State  lie-factory,  and  the  hermetical  closure  of  Russia  to  free
information,  had  done  their  work.  The  world  is  told,  as  though  it  were  a
little  child,  that  the  capitalist  system  is  doomed  to  go  under.  But
on  that  question  Soviet  people  have  no  hard-and-fast  standpoint.

History  is  continually  developing,  and  requiring  new  forms  in  its
development.  But  even  so,  for  us  the  historical  inevitability  of
communism,  the  thesis  that  'all  roads  lead  to  communism',  is  the  one
constant  factor  in  an  equation  which  has  many  unknown  and


281


negative  factors.  For  us  Soviet  people  this  equation  has  already
acquired  an  irrational  quality.

We  are  united  not  by  the  intrinsic  unity  of  a State  conception,  but
by  the  extrinsic  forms  of  material  dependence,  personal  interests,  or
a career.  And  all  these  are  dominated  by  fear.  For  some  this  fear  is
direct,  physical,  perceptible;  for  others  it  is  an  unavoidable
consequence  if  they  behave  or  even  think  otherwise  than  as  that  the
machine  demands.

Later,  in  the  West,  I had  an  opportunity  to  see  the  American
film  The  Iron  Curtain,  which  dealt  with  the  break-up  of  Soviet
atomic  espionage  in  Canada.  I had  already  read  various  criticisms
of  this  film,  as  well  as  the  angry  outbursts  of  the  communist  press,
and  I was  interested  to  see  how  the  Americans  had  handled  this
pregnant  theme.  It  left  two  impressions.  On  the  one  hand,  a feeling
of  satisfaction:  the  types  were  well  chosen;  the  life  of  the  official
Soviet  representatives  abroad  and  the  role  of  the  local  Communist
Party  were  presented  quite  accurately.  Once  more  I lived  through
my  years  in  the  Berlin  Kremlin.  No  Russian  would  have  any  criticism
to  make  of  this  presentation.  It  was  not  surprising  that  the  foreign
communist  parties  were  furious  with  the  film,  for  in  this  game  they
play  the  dirtiest  role.  Something  which  for  the  staff  of  the  military
attache's  department  is  a service  duty,  is  treachery  to  their  country
when  performed  by  the  communist  hirelings.

On  the  other  hand,  the  film  left  me  with  a vague  feeling  of
annoyance.  The  Americans  hadn't  exploited  all  the  possibilities.  The  Soviet
peoples  are  accustomed  to  films  with  the  focus  on  politics,  in  which
the  audience  is  led  to  draw  the  requisite  conclusions.  In  this  respect

The  Iron  Curtain  scenario  was  obviously  weak.

In  Berlin  we  Soviet  officers  were  able  to  compare  two  worlds.

It  was  interesting  to  set  the  impression  made  by  real  life  against
the  fictions  that  the  Soviet  State  creates  and  maintains.  The  direct

creators  of  this  fiction  are  the  toilers  with  the  pen,  the  'engineers
of  human  souls',  as  they  been  have  called  in  the  Soviet  Union.

Of  course  we  were  chiefly  interested  in  the  writers  who  dealt
with  the  problem  of  Soviet  Russia.  They  can  be  divided  into  three
main  categories:  the  Soviet  writers,  who  are  slaves  of  the  social
command';  the  foreign  writers  who  have  turned  their  backs  on
Stalinism;  and,  finally,  those  problematic  foreigners  who  even  today
are  still  anxious  to  find  pearls  in  the  dungheap.

Let  us  consider  them  as  a Soviet  man  sees  them.


282


One  day  I found  a French  novel  on  Belyavsky's  desk.  I picked  it
up  to  read  the  name  of  the  author,  and  was  astonished:  it  was,

Ilia  Ehrenburg.

"But  haven't  you  read  it  in  Russian  already?"  I asked  him
"It  hasn't  been  published  in  Russian."

"What  do  you  mean?"

"It's  quite  simple."

He  was  right.  Soviet  experts  on  literature  maintain  that  the  finest
journalists  of  the  time  are  Egon  Erwin  Kisch,  Mikhail  Koltsov,  and
Ilia  Ehrenburg.  There  is  no  disputing  that  they  are  all  brilliant
writers.  Koltsov's  literary  career  came  to  an  abrupt  end  in  1987
through  the  intervention  of  the  N.K.V.D.  It  is  said  that  he  is  now
writing  his  memoirs  in  a Siberian  concentration  camp.  For  many
years  Ehrenburg  was  classified  as  a 'fellow-traveler'.  With  a Soviet
passport  in  his  pocket,  he  wisely  preferred  to  live  abroad,  at  a
respectable  distance  from  the  Kremlin.  This  assured  him  some
independence.  His  books  were  published  in  big  editions  in  Soviet
Russia,  after  they  had  been  thoroughly  edited.  It  was  not  surprising
that  I had  found  a book  by  him  which  was  in  French,  and  unknown
in  the  U.S.S.R.  Only  the  Hitlerite  invasion  of  France  drove  him  back
to  his  native  land.

First  and  foremost  Ehrenburg  is  a cosmopolitan.  Many  people
think  of  him  as  a communist.  True,  he  subtly  and  intelligently
criticized  the  defects  of  Europe  and  the  democratic  world.  But  one
doesn't  need  to  be  a communist  to  do  that-many  non-communist
writers  do  the  same.  After  he  had  rid  his  system  of  his  rabid,  gutter
snipe  denunciations  of  the  Nazi  invaders  he  began  to  compose
mellifluous  articles  about  beautiful,  violated  France,  the  steadfast
British  lion,  and  democratic  America.  During  the  war  we  were  glad
to  read  these  articles;  but  it  seemed  like  a bad  joke  when  we  saw  his
signature  beneath  them.  Today,  obedient  to  his  masters,  he  is
thundering  away  at  the  American  'imperialists'.  Ehrenburg,  who
once  enjoyed  some  independence,  has  been  completely  caught  in  the
Kremlin  toils.

His  career  and  fate  are  very  typical  of  Soviet  writers  generally.

They  have  only  two  alternatives:  either  to  write  what  the  Polit
bureau  prescribes,  or  to  be  condemned  to  literary  extinction,
if  Leo  Tolstoy,  Alexander  Pushkin  or  Lermontov  had  lived  in  the


283


age  of  Stalin,  their  names  would  never  have  been  added  to  the
Pantheon  of  human  culture.  When  I was  a student  books  such  as
Kazakov's  Nine  Points,  Lebedenko's  Iron  Division,  and  Soboliev's
General  Overhaul  were  passed  from  hand  to  hand.  These  names  are
not  well  known  to  the  public  generally,  the  books  were  printed  in
very  small  editions  and  it  was  difficult  to  get  hold  of  copies.  It  is
characteristic  that  they  all  dealt  with  the  1917-21  period,  when  the
masses  were  still  inspired  with  enthusiasm  and  hope.  Their  consciences
did  not  allow  these  writers  to  write  about  later  times;  faced  with  the
alternative  of  lying  or  being  silent,  they  preferred  silence.

One  cannot  condemn  the  Soviet  writers.  Man  is  flesh  and  blood,
and  flesh  and  blood  are  weaker  than  lead  and  barbed  wire.  In  addition
there  is  the  great  temptation  not  only  to  avoid  creative  and  physical
death,  but  to  enjoy  all  the  advantages  of  a privileged  position.  Some
people  may  think  it  strange  that  there  are  millionaires  in  the  land
of  communism.  Genuine  millionaires  with  an  account  in  the  State
bank  and  owning  property  valued  at  more  than  a million  roubles.

Alexei  Tolstoy,  the  author  of  Peter  I and  scenarios  for  Ivan  the
Terrible,  was  an  example  of  the  Soviet  millionaire.  Who  can  throw
the  first  stone  at  a man  faced  with  such  alternatives?

As  for  the  foreign  writers,  they  are  simply  not  to  be  trusted!  Not
even  the  dead.  At  one  time  John  Reed  was  in  charge  of  the  American
section  of  the  Comintern.  True,  he  lived  in  Moscow,  but  that  was  in
the  order  of  things.  He  conscientiously  wrote  a solid  book  on  the
Russian  revolution:  Ten  Days  that  Shook  the  World.  Lunacharsky,
the  then  People's  Commissar  for  Education,  and  Lenin's  wife,
Krupskaya,  wrote  introductions  to  the  book  in  which  they  con
firmed  that  it  was  a perfectly  truthful  description  of  the  October
Revolution.  John  Reed  departed  from  this  life  not  very  long  after
lie  had  written  the  book,  and  his  mortal  remains  were  interred  in
the  Kremlin  wall:  the  highest  distinction  for  outstanding  communists.
Then  there  was  trouble!  Reed  had  not  foreseen  that  in  Stalinist
Russia  history  would  be  stood  on  its  head.  In  all  his  story  of  the
289

revolution  lie  had  devoted  only  two  lines  to  Stalin,  and  those  only
in  passing,  whereas  he  had  extolled  to  the  skies  Trotsky  and  the
other  creators  of  the  revolution,  all  those  who  after  Lenin's  death
began  to  pass  out  with  colds  in  the  head  and  similar  ailments.

So  John  Reed's  remains  had  to  be  removed  from  the  Kremlin  wall.

One  can  think  of  dozens  of  world-famous  writers  who  in  their
quest  for  new  ways  for  man  waxed  enthusiastic  over  communism,

As  soon  as  they  came  to  know  the  Soviet  reality  they  were
permanently  cured  of  their  enthusiasm.  I need  mention  only  one  of


284


the  latest  of  these.  Theodor  Plievier,  author  of  the  book  Stalingrad,  a
German  writer  and  communist  who  had  spent  many  years  in  Moscow,  fled
from  the  Soviet  zone  into  western  Germany.  In  an  interview  given
to  the  press  he  explained  that  there  was  not  a trace  of  communism
left  in  Stalinist  Russia,  that  all  communistic  ideas  were  strangled
and  all  the  socialistic  institutions  had  been  turned  into  instruments  of
the  Kremlin's  totalitarian  regime.  He  discovered  this  quite  soon  after
his  arrival  in  Moscow,  but  he  had  to  keep  quiet  and  reconcile  himself
to  the  situation,  since  he  was  to  all  intents  and  purposes  a prisoner,

It  is  difficult  to  convict  the  Kremlin  propagandists  of  pure  lying

There  is  a refined  art  of  lying,  consisting  in  the  one-sided  ventilation
of  a question.  In  this  field  the  Kremlin  jugglers  and  commercial
travellers  have  achieved  a very  high  level  of  artistry:  they  pass  over
one  side  in  complete  silence,  or  even  furiously  revile  it,  while  exalting
the  other  side  to  the  skies.

In  Berlin  we  often  got  hold  of  amusing  little  books  written  by
foreign  authors  and  published  by  foreign  publishers,  extolling  Stalin
and  his  regime.  It  is  noteworthy  that  these  books  are  either  not
translated  into  Russian  at  all,  or  they  are  published  only  in  very
small  editions,  and  it  is  virtually  impossible  to  buy  copies.  They  are
intended  purely  for  external  consumption.  The  Kremlin  prefers  that
the  Russians  should  not  see  such  books:  the  lies  are  too  obvious.

Not  far  from  the  Brandenburg  Gate  there  is  a bookshop,  'Das
Internationale  Buch'.  It  is  a Soviet  shop  selling  literature  in  foreign
languages  and  intended  for  foreign  readers.  We  often  visited  it

Of  course  we  didn't  buy  Lenin's  works  but  ordinary  gramophone
records.  Things  that  can't  be  bought  at  any  price  in  Moscow  are
offered  in  abundance  to  foreigners.

Propaganda:  only  a Soviet  man  has  any  idea  what  that  is!  It  is
said  of  a famous  drink  that  two  parts  of  the  price  are  for  the
mixture  and  three  for  the  advertising,  and  many  consumers
convinced  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  world  more  tasty,  healthy,
and  costly.  Such  is  the  power  of  advertising.

Among  the  Soviet  people  communism  is  in  a somewhat  similar
case.  They  are  continually  being  told  that  communism  is  the  finest
of  all  systems,  an  achievement  that  is  unsurpassable.  The  mixture
is  rather  more  complicated  than  that  of  any  drink.  It  is  injected  into
the  Soviet  man  day  in  day  out,  from  the  moment  of  his  birth.  What
advertising  does  in  the  Western  World,  propaganda  takes  care  of  in  the
U.S.S.R.  The  people  are  hungry,  naked,  thrust  down  to  the  level  of
speechless  robots,  and  meanwhile  they  are  assured  that  the  complete


285


opposite  is  the  case.  Most  astonishing  of  all,  they  believe  it,  or  try  to.
That  makes  life  easier.

The  Kremlin  knows  what  enormous  power  propaganda  has  over
human  souls,  it  knows  the  danger  that  threatens  it  if  the  mirage  is
dispelled.  Under  the  Nazis  during  the  war  the  Germans  were  for
bidden  to  listen  to  enemy  broadcasts,  but  they  were  not  deprived
of  their  receiving  sets.  But  the  Kremlin  did  otherwise:  in  the
U.S.S.R.  all  receiving  sets  were  confiscated  on  the  very  first  day  of
the  war.  The  Kremlin  knew  its  weak  spot  only  too  well.  If  its
thirty  years  of  propaganda;ire  undermined,  the  ephemeral  spiritual
unity  of  the  Kremlin  and  the  people  will  vanish  like  mist.

"The  Press  is  our  Party's  strongest  weapon,"  Stalin  has  said.  In
other  words,  the  Kremlin's  strongest  weapon  is  propaganda.
Propaganda  welds  the  internal  forces  and  disintegrates  the  external
ones.  So  much  the  better  for  Stalin  that  his  opponents  haven't  any
real  idea  of  the  accuracy  and  significance  of  his  words.


286


CHAPTER  FOURTEEN
The  Dialectical  Cycle

In  the  steaming  heat  of  the  late  summer  of  1946  Karlshorst  lived  its
normal  life.  In  all  the  S.M.A.  administrations  and  departments  there
was  feverish  activity.  In  the  rush  of  work  the  officers  with  golf
epaulettes  forgot  that  Karlshorst  was  only  a remote  island
surrounded  with  a foreign  and  hostile  element.  But  when  the  time  came
for  them  to  go  on  leave  and  return  to  the  homeland  they  grew  more
conscious  of  the  fact  that  far  away  to  the  east  was  an  enormous
country  whose  interests  they  were  called  on  to  defend  outside  its
frontiers.

Letters  from  the  Soviet  Union  reported  an  unusual  drought  all
over  European  Russia.  Fears  were  being  openly  expressed  for  the
harvest.  The  small  allotments  and  market  gardens  which  provided
produce  for  the  great  masses  of  the  people  were  withering  in  the
sun.  People  stared  anxiously  into  the  sky  and  feared  that  they  were
in  for  a famine  still  worse  than  that  experienced  during  the  war
Letters  from  home  sounded  desperate,  hopeless.

A year  had  passed  since  my  arrival  in  Berlin  to  work  in  the  Soviet
Military  Administration.  I was  due  for  leave  at  the  end  of  the
summer.  I could  shake  the  dust  of  Berlin  from  my  feet  and  relax  at
home  for  six  weeks.

Andrei  Kovtun  took  his  leave  at  the  same  time  as  I,  and  we
agreed  to  travel  together.  We  decided  to  stop  in  Moscow  for  a time
then  to  visit  our  home  town  in  the  south,  and  to  finish  our  holiday
somewhere  on  the  Black  Sea  coast.  Andrei  insisted  on  organizing  our
leave  so  as  to  spend  it  largely  surrounded  by  memories  of  our  youth

At  the  Berlin  Schlesische  station  Andrei,  relying  on  his  M.V.D
uniform,  went  to  see  the  military  commandant,  and  quickly  came
back  with  two  second-class  tickets.  His  foresight  was  amply  justified.

All  the  carriages  were  packed.  The  majority  of  the  travellers  were
taking  a mass  of  baggage  with  them,  and  refused  to  be  parted
from  it;  they  did  not  trust  the  baggage  cars.  Andrei  and  I each
had  two  trunks  filled  mainly  with  presents  for  relations  and
acquaintances.

Our  train  arrived  at  Brest  without  adventure,  though  the  Soviet
military  trains  running  between  Berlin  and  Moscow  often  came


287


underfire  and  even  attack  from  Polish  nationalists  hiding  in  the
forests.  The  first  check  of  documents  and  baggage  took  place  at
the  Soviet  frontier  post  in  Brest,  where  we  transferred  to  another
train.  The  M.V.D.  frontier  guards  made  a special  point  of  thoroughly
searching  the  baggage  of  demobilized  military  men,  looking  for
weapons  which  officers  and  men  might  be  taking  home  as  trophies.

Just  in  front  of  us  a frontier-guard  lieutenant  checked  the
documents  of  a captain  going  on  leave.  "Why  didn't  you  leave  your
service  weapon  behind,  Comrade  Captain?"  lie  asked.

"I  received  no  instructions  to  do  so,"  the  captain  answered  with
a shrug  of  annoyance.

"On  arrival  at  your  destination  you  must  hand  over  your  pistol
to  the  local  commandatura  when  you  register,"  the  lieutenant  said
as  he  returned  the  documents.

"That's  peacetime  conditions  for  you!"  the  captain  muttered  as
we  left  the  control-point  office.  "Everybody's  afraid  of  something  or
other."

While  waiting  for  the  Moscow  train  Andrei  and  I sat  in  the
waiting-room.  Here  there  were  many  officers  in  Polish  uniform,
including  the  Polish  square  military  caps.  They  were  all  talking  in
Russian,  resorting  to  Polish  only  -for  swearing.  They  were  officers  of
Marshal  Rokossovsky's  Soviet  forces  stationed  in  Poland  and
dressed  in  Polish  uniforms.  Some  of  the  Russian  officers  returning
from  Berlin  fell  into  conversation  with  them.

"Well,  how  are  things  with  you  in  Germany?"  an  officer  with  an
unmistakable  Siberian  accent  and  with  a Polish  eagle  in  his  cap
asked  a lieutenant  who  had  come  from  Dresden.  "D'you  find  the
Germans  a handful?"

"Not  in  the  least,"  the  lieutenant  answered  casually.  "They're  a
disciplined  people.  Tell  them  they  mustn't,  and  they  don't.  At  first
We  thought  we'd  have  to  deal  with  unrest  and  even  attempts  on  our
lives.  Nothing  of  the  sort !"

"You  don't  say!"  The  fellow  from  Siberia  shook  his  head,  obviously  astonished.
"But  our  'gentlemen'  give  us  more  than  we

bargain  for.  Not  a night  passes  without  someone  being  knocked  off
or  shot.  And  this  chicken  is  of  no  help  whatever"-he  pointed  to
the  eagle  in  his  cap.

"You  don't  know  how  to  treat  them!"  the  lieutenant  said  with  a


288


hint  of  superiority.

"It  isn't  so  simple  as  that!"  another  Soviet  officer  in  Polish
uniform  intervened.  "During  the  war  years  Rokossovsky  had  sixteen
expressions  of  Stalin's  thanks  in  orders  of  the  day,  but  during  his
one  year  in  Poland  he  has  had  twenty  censures  ! All  because  of  the
Poles.  They  shoot  at  you  round  corners,  and  you  aren't  allowed  to
raise  a finger  against  them,  otherwise  you've  had  it!  Court-martial
for  you.  That's  politics!"  He  gave  a deep  sigh.

Shortly  after  the  train  for  Moscow  had  started  our  documents
were  checked  again,  this  time  in  the  carriage.  We  had  traveled  only
a few  hours  when  the  procedure  was  repeated  a second  time.

Andrei  sat  silent  in  a corner  seat,  taking  no  notice  of  what  went
on  around  him,  sunk  deep  in  thought.  A passenger  glanced  in,
noticed  the  M.V.D.  officer's  uniform,  pretended  he  had  made  a
mistake,  and  went  to  look  for  a seat  elsewhere.  Even  in  the  second
class,  where  every  traveler  had  a Party  ticket,  people  preferred  to
keep  a respectable  distance  between  them  and  the  M.V.D.  Towards
evening  Andrei  livened  up  a little-he  had  not  uttered  a word  for
a long  time.  We  began  to  talk  about  the  past.  Gradually  his
reminiscences  turned  to  Halina.  I sat  listening  in  astonishment.  Evidently
he  had  been  thinking  of  her  all  the  time,  but  only  now  did  he  openly
talk  about  her.  Time  and  distance  had  blunted  his  feelings  a little,
but  now  his  heart  was  burning  once  more  with  that  same  former  fire.

The  story  of  Andrei's  pre-war  relations  with  Halina  was  somewhat
unusual.  She  was  an  extraordinarily  beautiful  girl,  with  a pure  and
exalted  quality  in  her  beauty.  Above  all,  her  character  was  in
perfect  harmony  with  her  appearance.  Andrei  worshiped  her.

But  for  a long  time  she  was  indifferent  to  his  attentions  and  did
not  notice  his  slavish  devotion.  Then  a strong  friendship  developed
between  them.  Possibly  his  sacrifice  and  devotion  won  her,  or
perhaps  she  felt  that  his  love  was  different  from  other  young  men's
fiattering  attentions.

Their  acquaintances  all  thought  this  friendship  queer;  the  contrast
between  his  angular  figure  and  her  spiritual  beauty  was  too  obvious

Nobody  could  imagine  what  bound  them  to  each  other.  Again  and
again  her  girl  friends  reduced  her  to  tears,  for  they  took  every
opportunity  of  pointing  out  Andrei's  defects.  His  comrades  openly
congratulated  him  on  his  'undeserved  good  fortune'.  More  than
once  this  sort  of  thing  led  to  their  separating  for  a time.  And  then


289


Andrei  had  no  rest.  He  wandered  like  a shade  behind  her,  not  daring
to  go  up  to  her,  yet  lacking  the  strength  to  turn  away.  Thus  they
went  on,  all  but  inseparable,  down  to  the  outbreak  of  war.  The  war
flung  him  into  the  partisans  and  directed  his  unbridled  emotions  in
another  direction.  The  town  in  which  she  was  living  was  soon
overrun  by  German  troops,  and  they  completely  lost  contact  with
each  other.

"We're  continually  striving  towards  something,"  he  now  said
abruptly.  "We  strive  for  power,  for  fame,  for  distinction.  But  that
is  all  outside  us.  And  when  you  come  to  a certain  point  you  realize
that  all  the  time  you've  only  been  giving  out  from  yourself.  And
you  ask  yourself:  what  have  you  gained  for  it  all?

"I've  got  a strange  feeling.  Putting  aside  everything  else  and
thinking  only  of  myself,  I get  the  impression  that  all  I've  done  in
my  struggle  to  climb  higher  has  been  for  Halina's  sake.  Now  I shall
lay  this  uniform  and  these  orders  at  her  feet."

He  ran  his  eyes  over  his  perfectly  fitting  uniform,  brushed  a speck
of  dust  from  the  blue  riding  breeches,  and  said  dreamily:

"Now  Halina  has  graduated  as  an  engineer;  she's  living  in  Moscow,
she  has  work  worthy  of  her,  and  a comfortable  home,  And  what
more  can  any  woman  achieve  today?  And  now,  to  complete  it  all,
a major  in  the  State  Security  Service  will  turn  up  as  a guard  and
defender  of  her  well  being.  Don't  you  think  that's  quite  a logical
conclusion?  And  now,  old  friend,  I'm  hoping  that  life  will  repay  me
with  interest  for  everything."  He  clapped  his  hand  down  on  my
knee,  then  rose  and  stared  through  the  window  into  the  darkness
ahead,  as  though  he  hoped  to  discern  what  fate  had  in  store  for  him.

I had  noticed  before  that  he  had  rather  queer  ideas  of  his  position
with  regard  to  Halina.  He  had  put  all  his  ardor  into  his  ambitions
and  had  received  no  satisfaction  from  life  in  return;  on  the  contrary,
he  was  tortured  by  his  situation,  in  which  he  was  compelled  to  act
against  his  own  convictions.  And  so  he  had  subconsciously  begun  to
seek  for  some  compromise  with  life,  he  had  begun  to  convince
himself  that  his  old  love  and  the  happiness  of  married  life  would  fill
the  void  in  his  soul.  To  meet  Halina  again  had  become  an  obsession


with  him;  he  thought  of  it  as  the  miracle  which  would  bring  him
salvation.

"D'you  know  what?"  He  turned  round  sharply.  "I  simply  must


290


get  hold  of  a bottle  of  vodka."

"But  you  don't  drink."

"It's  for  you,"  he  replied  abruptly.  "I  want  everybody  round  me
to  be  jolly.  Damn  it  all,  I'm  not  going  to  a funeral,  I'm  going  to
wedding!"

I tried  to  dissuade  him.  "So  you  want  to  insult  me?  Is  that  it?"  li
demanded.  I could  only  hope  that  he  was  unlikely  to  find  vodka  at
that  time  of  night.

At  the  very  next  station  lie  went  out;  a few  minutes  later  he
returned  with  a bulging  pocket.  "Obtained  in  perfect  agreement  with
regulations!"  he  grinned.  "The  station  commandant  had
confiscated  it  from  someone,  and  I confiscated  it  from  him.  The
raspberry  capband  has  its  uses!"

He  filled  the  glass  so  full  that  the  vodka  overflowed.  "I'm  all  on  fire
inside,  and  there's  something  lacking,"  he  said.  "You  drink  for  me

You  know,  there  are  times  when  I feel  an  emptiness  inside  me  almost
physically."  He  sat  with  his  feet  planted  widely  apart,  his  hands  on
his  his  knees.  "Sometimes  I think  about  God,  and  I envy  those  who
believe  in  Him.  It's  better  to  believe  in  a non-existent  but  infallible
God  than  in  the  scoundrel  pretenders  of  this  earth."

"When  did  you  go  to  church  last?"  I asked.

"Some  twenty  years  ago.  My  father  took  me.  When  I was  a
boy  I knew  all  the  prayers  by  heart.

"Yes,  the  soul  of  a man  is  not  a piece  of  litmus  paper,"  lie  sighed.

"You've  got  no  means  of  deciding  straight  off  whether  it  will  be
red  or  blue.  In  my  damned  job  one  often  has  to  think  about  a human
soul.  I've  developed  quite  a psychosis:  I'm  looking  for  people  who
believe  in  something."

All  around  us  there  was  silence.  Our  native  land  sped  towards
us.

The  train  arrived  in  Moscow  next  day.  We  went  into  the  sunlit
square  outside  the  station  and  stopped  to  look  about  us.  The  trams
clattered  past,  cars  drove  by  silently,  people  were  hurrying  about
their  affairs.  All  the  feverish  life  of  the  capital  city  was  opened  before
us.  It  was  all  so  everyday,  so  simple.  We  felt  as  though  we  had  never


291


left  Moscow.


Thanks  to  his  M.V.D.  uniform  and  the  gold  star  of  a 'Hero  of  the
Soviet  Union'  Andrei  easily  obtained  a room  for  two  in  the  Staraya
Moskovskaya  Hotel  on  the  farther  side  of  the  river  Moskva,  right
opposite  the  Kremlin.  Our  window  looked  out  on  to  the  river,  and
beyond  we  could  see  the  new  Stone  Bridge,  the  rows  of  trees
beginning  to  turn  yellow  along  the  Kremlin  Embankment,  the
pointed  towers  and  gold  cupolas  behind  the  Kremlin  walls,  and
a long  white  building  staring  with  innumerable  windows.  That
building  housed  the  brain  of  our  country,  the  laboratory  for  the
creation  of  a new  world.

We  spent  our  first  day  aimlessly  wandering  about  the  city.  We
were  both  impatient  to  see  Moscow  life  with  our  own  eyes.  Only
a year  had  passed  since  I had  last  seen  Moscow,  but  that  year  had
been  so  filled  with  experiences  that  I felt  now  as  though  I were
getting  to  know  my  own  capital  for  the  first  time.  Somewhere  in
the  depths  of  my  being  I felt  mingled  feelings  of  expectation,
distrust,  and  anxiety;  as  though,  despite  everything,  I was  trying
to  find  something  here  that  would  make  me  change  my  mind,  would
lead  me  to  revoke  a firmly  made  decision.

That  summer  evening  Andrei  and  I wandered  into  Mayakovsky
Square.  Before  us  the  black  cube  of  the  Marx-Engels-Lenin  Institute
loomed  up  in  the  dusk.  In  that  stone  chest  the  brain  of  Lenin,  the
ideologist  and  founder  of  the  Soviet  State,  is  preserved  in  spirit  as
a very  sacred  object.  To  the  left  of  the  square  rose  the  editorial
offices  of  Pravda.  At  roof  level  an  illuminated  sign  was  announcing
the  latest  news.  Nobody  in  the  square  paid  any  attention  to  it.  But
we  craned  our  necks  and  began  to  read:  'The  farmers  report ...  the
accomplishment  of  the  plan  for  handing  in  the  harvest.  . . 'Andrei
and  I looked  at  each  other.  Evening  after  evening,  year  after  year,
similar  reports  had  been  flashed  along  the  roof  of  Pravda  before  the
war.  And  it  was  still  the  same  today.  Hadn't  there  been  any  war  and
all  that  the  war  connoted?

"What  does  it  say  up  there,  little  son?"  An  old,. feeble,  quavering
voice  sounded  behind  us.

Beside  Andrei  a decrepit  old  man  was  standing.  He  was  wearing
a homespun  coat  of  uncertain  colour,  and  a tangled,  reddish  beard
framed  his  face  and  brightly  twinkling  eyes.  His  long  hair  hung
down  from  beneath  his  old  peaked  cap.

"My  eyes  are  weak,  little  son,  and  besides,  I'm  not  good  at  read


292


ing,"  he  murmured.  "Tell  me  what  it  says."  He  addressed  Andrei


in  the  tone  that  simple  folk  use  to  their  superiors:  with  respect  and
wheedling  sincerity.

"Why  haven't  you  learned  to  read  and  write,  daddy?"  Andrei
asked  with  a warm  smile,  touched  by  the  old  fellow's  request.

"What  do  we  simple  people  need  to  know  them  for?  That's  what
learned  men  are  for,  to. understand  everything."

"Where  are  you  from,  daddy?"  Andrei  asked.

"My  village  is  a little  way  outside  Moscow,"  the  old  man  answered.

"Nearly  forty  miles  from  here."

"Are  you  in  town  to  visit  your  son?"  Andrei  asked  again.

"No,  little  son;  I'm  here  to  look  for  bread."

"Why,  haven't  you  any  in  your  village?"

"No,  little  son.  We've  handed  over  all  our  corn.  Now  all  we  can
do  is  sell  our  potatoes  in  the  Moscow  market  in  order  to  buy  bread.".

"What's  the  price  of  bread  in  the  market  now?"  Andrei  inquired.

"Seventy  roubles  a kilo,  little  son."

"And  how  much  did  you  sell  your  grain  to  the  State  for?"

The  old  fellow  fidgeted  from  foot  to  foot,  sighed  and  said
reluctantly:

"Seven  kopeks  a kilo  . . .

There  was  an  awkward  silence.  We  behaved  as  though  we  had
forgotten  his  request  that  we  should  read  the  news  to  him,  and
walked  on.  In  the  middle  of  the  square  we  came  to  a halt  before  a
granite  cibelisk;  it  had  a bronze  plaque  fastened  to  each  of  its  sides.,
Andrei  and  I went  closer  to  read  the  inscriptions  on  the  plaques.
"Little  son,  perhaps  you'll  tell  me  what  it  says  on  those  boards."

We  again  heard  that  feeble,  aged  voice  behind  us.  The  old  man
stood  there  like  a shade,  shifting  from  foot  to  foot.

A smile  slipped  over  Andrei's  face,  and  he  turned  his  eyes  back  0


293


the  obelisk,  intending  this  time  to  satisfy  the  old  man.  Slowly  he  read
the  first  few  words  aloud,  but  then  he  broke  off  and  read  the  further
lines  in  silence.


"What's  the  matter,  little  son?"  the  old  man  asked  with  some
concern.  "Isn't  it  written  in  Russian?"

Andrei  was  silent,  he  avoided  the  old  man's  eyes.  In  the  dusk  1,
too  read  the  words.  The  plaques  carried  extracts  from  the  Soviet
Constitution,  dealing  with  the  rights  and  liberties  of  Soviet  citizens,
Hungry  and  ragged  Moscow,  this  old  peasant  arrived  in  search  of
bread,  and  the  bronze  promises  of  an  earthly  paradise!  I realized
why  Andrei  was  silent.

The  next  day  was  a Saturday;  we  decided  to  find  out  where  Halina
lived  and  call  on  her.  Through  letters  from  mutual  acquaintances  I
had  learnt  that  she  was  working  as  an  engineer  in  one  of  the  Moscow
factories.  But  when  Andrei  phoned  the  works  administration  they
told  him  she  was  no  longer  working  there,  and  refused  to  give  any
further  information.  On  making  inquiries  at  the  Bureau  for  Ad
dresses  we  were  amazed  to  be  given  an  address  in  one  of  the  out
lying  suburbs,  an  hour's  journey  by  electric  train.

The  sun  was  sinking  behind  the  crowds  of  the  pine  forest  when
Andrei  and  I knocked  at  the  door  of  a small  timber-built  house  in  a
summer  settlement  not  far  from  the  railway.  A negligently  dressed,
elderly  woman  opened  the  door  to  us,  gave  us  an  unfriendly  look,
listened  to  us  in  silence,  and  silently  pointed  up  a rickety  staircase
to  the  first  floor.  Andrei  let  me  go  in  front,  and  I could  not  see  his
face;  but  by  the  sound  of  his  footsteps  and  the  way  he  leaned  heavily
on  the  shaking  banister  rail  I could  tell  how  much  this  meeting
meant  to  him.

On  the  landing  damp  underwear  was  hung  out  to  dry.  Dirty  pails
and  old  rags  littered  the  window-sill.  A board  door,  hanging  by
rusty  hinges,  had  tufts  of  wool  blocking  the  chinks  between  the
planks.  I irresolutely  took  hold  of  the  handle,  and  knocked.

We  heard  shuffling  footsteps.  The  door  shook  on  its  hinges  and
scraped  over  the  floor  as  it  was  slowly  opened,  to  reveal  a woman
simply  dressed,  with  old  shoes  on  her  stockingless  feet.  She  gazed
interrogatively  into  the  dimly  lit  landing.  Then  she  distinguished
men  in  military  uniform,  and  the  astonishment  in  her  eyes  was
changed  to  fear.

"Halina!"  Andrei  called  quietly.

The  young  woman's  face  flushed  crimson.  She  fell  back.  "Andrei!"
a half-suppressed  cry  broke  from  her  lips.  She  stood  breathing


294


rapidly  and  heavily,  as  though  short  of  breath.

Andrei  avoided  looking  about  him.  He  tried  not  to  see  the
wretched  furnishing  of  the  half-empty  room;  he  tried  to  ignore  her
old  clothes  and  worn  shoes.  He  saw  only  the  familiar  features  of  the
woman  he  loved.  All  the  world  was  lost  in  oblivion,  sunk  beneath
the  burning  depths  of  her  eyes  fixed  on  him.

How  often  during  all  the  long  years  had  he  dreamed  of  her  eyes!

And  now  those  eyes  slowly  took  him  in,  from  head  to  foot.  They
rested  on  the  gold  epaulettes  with  the  blue  facings,  on  the  star
indicating  his  major's  rank,  on  the  brilliant  raspberry  band  of  his


service  cap.  Her  eyes  turned  to  the  M.V.D.  insignia  on  his  sleeve,
then  stared  into  his  eyes.

"Halina  !"  he  repeated  again  as  though  in  a dream;  he  stretched
out  both  his  hands  to  her.

"Gregory,  shut  the  door,  please!"  she  said  to  me,  as  though  she
had  not  noticed  Andrei  or  heard  his  voice.  Her  tone  was  cold,  her
eyes  faded,  her  features  set.  She  avoided  Andrei's  eyes  and,  not
saying  a word,  went  to  the  open  window  at  the  far  end  of  the  room,

"Halina,  what's  the  matter?"  he  asked  anxiously.  "How  is  it
you're  living  here  ...  in  such  conditions?"

"Perhaps  you'd  better  tell  your  story  first,"  she  answered.  She
seemed  to  be  finding  our  visit  a torture.

"Halina  ! What's  the  matter  with  you?"  A growing  alarm  sounded
in  his  voice.

There  was  a long  silence.  Then  she  turned  her  back  on  us  and  said
in  a voice  that  was  almost  inaudible  as  she  gazed  out  of  the  window:

"I've  been  dismissed  ...  and  exiled  from  Moscow."

Why?

1 am  an  enemy  of  the  people,"  she  said  quietly,

"But  what  for?"

Another  silence.  Then,  like  a rustle  of  wind  outside  the  window'.
"Because  I loved  my  baby.  .


295


"Are  you  married?"  His  voice  broke  with  the  despair  of  a in  a
who  has  just  heard  his  death,  sentence.

"No."  The  word  came  softly.

"Then  . . . then  it's  not  so  bad,  Halina."  The  fear  in  his  voice
turned  to  a note  of  relief

There  was  another  silence,  disturbed  only  by  his  panting  breath:

"Look  at  that !"  She  nodded  at  a small  photograph  standing  on
the  table.  Andrei  followed  her  glance.  From  the  simple  wooden
photograph  frame  a man  in  German  officer's  uniform  smiled  at  the
major  of  the  Soviet  State  Security  Service.  "He  was  the  father  of
my  child,"  she  said  from  the  window.

"Halina  ...  I don't  understand  ....  Tell  me  what  happened.'

He  dropped  helplessly  into  a chair;  all  his  body  was  trembling.

"I  fell  in  love  with  him  when  our  town  was  under  German
occupation,"  she  answered,  after  turning  away  from  us  again.  "When
the  Germans  retreated  I hid  the  child.  Someone  informed  on  me.

And  of  course  you  know  the  rest

"But  where  is  the  child?"  Andrei  asked.

"It  was  taken  from  me."  Her  voice  choked.  Her  shoulders  shook
with  dry  sobbing.

"Who  took  it  from  you?"  There  was  a threat  in  his  tone.

"Who?"  she  echoed  him.  "Men  in  the  same  uniform  as  you're
wearing."

She  turned  her  face  to  us.  It  had  nothing  in  common  with  the
face  of  the  gentle  and  friendly  girl  we  had  known  in  past  days.

Before  us  stood  a woman  in  all  the  nakedness  of  her  womanly  pain.

"And  now  I must  ask  you  to  leave  my  house."  She  stared  fixedly
at  Andrei's  motionless  figure.  He  sat  with  shoulders  bowed  as
though  under  the  blows  of  a knout,  staring  at  the  floorboards:  his
back  huddled,  his  eyes  expressionless,  his  body  lifeless.

The  sun  was  glowing  orange  beyond  the  window.  The  branches
of  the  dusty  pines  swayed  silently.  The  sun  lighted  up  the  fluffy  hair
of  the  woman  standing  at  the  window,  caressed  her  proudly  carried
head,  the  gentle  outlines  of  her  neck,  the  frail  shoulders  under  the


296


old  dress.  The  light  left  in  shadow  all  the  wretched  furniture  of  the
half-empty  room  and  all  the  signs  and  tokens  of  human  need.


At  the  window  stood  a woman  now  farther  off  than  ever,  but  now
more  desired  than  ever.  On  a chair  in  the  middle  of  the  room  slumped
a living  corpse.

"Halina  ...  I'll  try.  . . " he  said  thickly.  He  himself,  had  no  idea
what  he  could  hope  to  do,  and  he  was  silent  again.

"We  have  nothing  more  to  talk  about,"  she  answered  quietly  and
firmly.

He  rose  heavily  to  his  feet,  looked  helplessly  about  - him.  He
muttered  something,  held  out  his  hand  as  though  asking  for  some
thing,  or  maybe  in  farewell.  She  looked  away,  taking  no  notice
of  his  hand.  There  was  another  long  silence.

I crept  out  of  the  room  as  though  from  the  presence  of  the  dead.
Andrei  followed  me.  As  he  went  downstairs  he  clung  to  the  wall  like,
a blind  man.  His  face  was  ashen,  words  came  incoherently  from  his
lips.  Our  steps  sounded  hollowly  on  the  creaking  stairs.

In  the  train  he  stared  with  glassy  eyes  out  of  the  window  and
was  obdurately  silent.  I tried  to  distract  his  thoughts  with  talk.  He
did  not  hear  my  voice,  he  took  no  notice  of  me  whatever.

As  we  made  our  way  to  the  Moscow  Underground  station  lie
broke  the  silence  by  asking:  "Which  way  are  you  going?"  I guessed
he  wanted  to  get  rid  of  me,  but  I also  felt  that  on  no  account  could
I dare  to  leave  him  to  himself.

We  returned  to  our  hotel.  All  the  rest  of  the  evening  I followed
him  like  a shadow.  When  he  left  the  room  for  a moment  I unloaded
our  pistols,  which  were  lying  in  the  table  drawer.  He  would  not  have
any  supper,  and  went  to  bed  unusually  early.  But  he  tossed  and
turned  and  could  not  sleep.  He  wished  to  escape  from  this  life  at
least  in  his  sleep,  to  find  release  from  his  torment;  but  he  could  not.

"Andrei,  the  best  thing  would  be  for  you  to  go  home  tomorrow,"

I said.

"I  have  no  home,"  came  from  his  bed  after  a long  silence.

"Then  go  to  your  family,"  I persisted.

"I  have  no  family,"  he  said  thickly.


297


'Your  father.  . .


"My  father  has  disowned  me."

Andrei's  father  was  a man  of  the  old  school,  hard  as  oak  and  as
obstinate  as  a mule.  When  the  years  of  collectivization  arrived  the
old  cossack  had  preferred  to  leave  his  native  soil  to  live  in  a town
rather  than  join  a collective  farm.  In  the  town  he  had  become  an
artisan.  No  repressive  measures,  no  amount  of  taxation  could  drive
him  into  an  artisans'  co-operative.  "I  was  borne  free,  I shall  die  free!
was  his  one  answer.  He  had  given  all  his  strength  to  bring  up  his  son
in  the  hope  that  the  lad  would  be  a comfort  to  his  old  age.  But  who
he  heard  that  his  Andrei  had  gone  over  to  the  enemy  he  disowned
him.

All  night  Andrei  tossed  and  turned  in  his  bed.  All  night  I lay  in
the  darkness,  not  closing  my  eyes,  fighting  to  keep  from  failing
asleep.  The  hours  passed.  The  ruby  stars  of  the  Kremlin  towers  shone
in  through  the  open  window.  As  the  sky  turned  pale  and  the  first
feeble  light  stole  into  the  room,  I saw  that  Andrei  was  still  awake

He  had  buried  his  face  in  the  pillow,  and  his  arms  hung  helplessly
down,  one  on  either  side  of  the  bed.  In  the  silence  I caught  words
that  came  strangely  from  his  lips,  words  that  I remembered  from
times  long  past,  the  time  of  my  childhood.  They  came  in  a passionate
whisper:  "Lord,  incline  Thy  ear  and  hear  my  prayer,  for  I am
miserable  and  weak."

For  the  first  time  that  night  I closed  my  eyes.  I would  not ' hinder
a man  who  stood  on  the  confines  of  this  world.  And  again  in  the  early
morning  stillness  I heard  a whisper  that  had  nothing  earthly  in  it
the  words  of  a long  forgotten  prayer:  "lord,  forgive  thy  sinful
slave  . . ."

On  the  farther  side  of  the  river  the  Kremlin  clock  chimed  in  answer

While  in  Berlin  I had  exchanged  very  little  correspondence  with
Genia.  She  was  too  sensitive  to  the  least  hint  of  insincerity  and
mental  reservations;  moreover,  there  was  still  a military  censor
ship,  and  that  had  to  be  taken  into  account.  A frank  description  of
my  present  life  and  of  our  impressions  of  the  real  world  around  us
would  have  been  unforgivable  lunacy.  And  we  had  no  private  life
in  Karlshorst  that  I could  write  about.  Both  she  and  I were  too  young
and  too  fond  of  life  to  write  each  other  insane  letters  out  of  sheer
amiability.


298


So  I preferred  to  use  the  nights  when  I had  a twenty-four-hour  turn
of  duty  in  the  staff  headquarters,  and  was  alone  in  the  commander
in-chief's  private  office,  for  getting  direct  telephonic  contact  with
Moscow  and  talking  to  Genia.  On  such  occasions  we  had  long
conversations  that  had  no  connection  with  the  marshal's  office,  or
policy.  The  people  tapping  the  telephone  could  go  on  reading  their
novels  unperturbed.

On  returning  to  Moscow  I looked  forward  impatiently  to  seeing
Genia  again.  And  in  preparing  for  my  first  visit  I spent  a long  time
pondering  what  to  wear:  my  military  uniform,  or  civilian  clothes.  I
finally  decided  in  favor  of  the  civvies.

I found  only  Anna  Petrovna  at  home.  She  was  feeling  bored,
and  she  took  the  opportunity  to  ply  me  with  questions
concerning  Berlin,  and  simultaneously  to  retail  the  latest  Moscow
news.

Now  the  family  was  reunited.  Genia's  father,  Nikolai  Sergeivich,
had  returned  home  after  the  conclusion  of  operations  against  Japan.

But  even  now,  when  he  was  stationed  in  Moscow,  his  wife  knew  as
little  as  ever  about  his  duties  and  activities,  and  she  lived  in  constant
dread  of  his  being  sent  off  again  in  some  unknown  direction  and  for
an  indefinite  period.

After  lunch  Genia  decided  that  she  and  I would  go  off  into  the
country  for  the  rest  of  the  day.  I was  very  grateful  to  her  for  taking
me  to  her  parents'  country  house,  for  the  small  summer  villa  outside
the  city  had  been  the  scene  of  my  first  meeting  with  her,  in  the  early
days  of  the  war.  She  herself  drove  her  sports-model  Captain.  When
we  reached  the  villa  she  began  to  question  me  at  great  length  and  in
unusual  detail  about  life  in  Germany.  All  my  explanations  and


descriptions  failed  to  satisfy  her.  Suddenly,  quite  unexpectedly,  she
gazed  into  my  eyes  and  asked:

"But  why  are  you  so  thin?"

"I'm  feeling  fine!"  I replied.  "It  may  be  just  overwork."

"No,  it  isn't  that."  She  shook, her  head.  "You  look  really  bad.

You're  keeping  something  from  me."  She  gazed  at  me  closely,  as
though  trying  to  read  my  thoughts.


299


"Maybe  there  is  something,"  I assented,  touched  by  her  anxious
tone.  "But  if  there  is  I haven't  noticed  it."

"But  I do,"  she  whispered.  "At  first  I thought  it  must  be

something  coming  between  us  . . . Now  I see  it's  something  else.  Forget

it!"


And  I did  forget  it.  I was  boundlessly  happy  to  see  the  familiar
walls  around  me,  and  to  hear  only  Genia,  to  think  only  of  Genia.

As  the  evening  twilight  settled  over  the  forest  and  shadows  began
to  steal  through  the  room  she  decided  to  celebrate  my  arrival  with
a supper.

"Today  you're  mine."  She  flashed  her  eyes  at  me.  "Let  father  be
annoyed  because  we've  gone  off  I Let  him  know  how  mother  worries
when  he's  not  at  home!  I'll  show  him!"

We  had  hardly  sat  down  to  eat  when  we  heard  the  sound  of  a car
approaching.  Genia  raised  her  eyebrows  anxiously.  The  car  stopped
outside,  and  a moment  later  Anna  Petrovna  entered.  She  was
followed  by  Nikolai  Sergeivich  and  a colleague  of  his,  Colonel-General
Klykov.  They  were  all  in  a very  cheerful  mood,  and  the  house  was
filled  with  their  laughter  and  talk.

"Now  isn't  this  wonderful!  We've  only  just  arrived,  and  the
table's  already  laid!"  Klykov  laughed  and  rubbed  his  hands.

"Nikolai  Sergeivich,  your  daughter's  a treasure  !"

"D'you  think  she's  prepared  all  this  for  us?"  Nikolai  Sergeivich
answered.  "You  must  excuse  us  for  interrupting,  Yevgenia
Nikolaevna,"  he  said  very  formally,  turning  to  his  daughter.  "Would  you
permit  us  to  join  your  company?"

"And  you're  a fine  one!"  he  added,  turning  to  me.  "Get  into
civilian  clothes  and  you  immediately  forget  your  army  regulations!

You  know  your  first  duty  is  to  present  yourself  to  your  superiors  !

Ah,  you  youngsters

"But  we  were  just  getting  ready  to  go  home,"  Genia  began.

"Then  why  have  you  laid  the  table?  For  us?"  Her  father  roared
with  laughter.  "So  we  drive  here,  and  you  go  back  there!  You  think


300


you're  clever,  my  girl.  But  I'm  no  fool  either.  Just  to  punish  you
we'll  spend  all  the  evening  with  you."


Anna  Petrovna  set  to  work  to  prepare  supper.  They  had  brought
cans  and  bottles  of  a striking  diversity  of  labels  with  them.  All  the
lands  of  eastern  Europe  were  represented:  Bulgaria,  Rumania,
Hungary.  These  commodities  were  not  spoils  of  war,  but  normal
peacetime  production.  There  were  American  conserves  too,  obviously
the  remnants  of  lend-lease  deliveries.  None  of  these  things  could  be
bought  in  the  Moscow  shops,  but  they  were  available  in  abundance
in  the  special  distribution  centres  to  which  generals  had  access.

"Well,  Gregory,  now  tell,  us  all  about  it  from  the  beginning."

Nikolai  Sergeivich  turned  to  me  when  the  dessert  arrived.  "What
is  life  in  Germany  like?"

"Not  too  bad,"  I answered  vaguely,  waiting  for  him  to  be  more
definite  in  his  questions.

"In  any  case  he  has  a better  apartment  there  than  we  have,"

Genia  intervened.

The  general  ignored  her,  and  asked:  "What's  Sokolovsky  doing?"

"What  Moscow  orders,"  I replied,  involuntarily  smiling.  "You
people  here  should  know  best  what  he's  doing."

Obviously  I had  given  Nikolai  Sergeivich  the  opening  he  was
fishing  for.  He  sat  turning  over  his  thoughts.  Genia  looked  about  her
with  a bored  air.

"Germany's  a tough  nut."  General  Klykov  broke  the  silence.

"It'll  be  a long  time  before  we  crack  it.  The  Allies  won't  clear  out  of
western  Germany  without  giving  trouble,  and  there  isn't  much  to  be
expected  simply  from  eastern  Germany.  Not  like  the  Slavonic
countries:  no  sooner  said  than  done!  I think  our  first  task  is  to  create
a strong  bloc  of  Slavonic  states.  If  we  form  a Slavonic  bloc  we  shall
have  a good  cordon  sanitaire  around  our  frontiers.  And  our  positions
in  Europe  will  be  strong  enough  to  prevent  any  repetition  of  1941 ."

"My  friend,  you're  always  looking  backward,  but  we've  got  to
look  forward."  Nikolai  Sergeivich  shook  his  head  reproachfully.

"What  do  we  want  a Slavonic  bloc  for?  The  old  dreams  of  a pan
Slav  empire!  Today  we're  in  the  epoch  of  the  communist  advance
along  the  whole  front.  Eastern  Europe  and  the  western  Slavonic


301


states  are  of  interest  to  us  now  chiefly  as  providing  a favorable
base  for  penetration  and  further  action."

"So  far  the  masters  are  pursuing  a quite  clear  pan-Slavonic
policy,"  the  colonel-general  retorted.  Like  all  the  upper  circles  of

Moscow  he  resorted  to  the  vague  term  'masters'  to  denote  the
Kremlin  and  the  Politburo.

"That's  what  policy's  for,  to  conceal  the  ultimate  aims,"  Nikolai
Sergeivich  said.  "It  would  be  a crying  shame  not  to  exploit  our
possibilities  today.  One  half  of  Europe  belongs  to  us,  and  the
other  half  is  inviting  us  to  take  it  over  and  give  it  order."

It  was  now  quite  dark  outside.  Moths  fluttered  through  the  open
window  and  beat  against  the  lamp  glass,  burning  their  wings.

A drowsy  fly  crawled  over  the  table,  moving  its  legs  painfully.  The
fly  had  no  aim,  it  simply  crawled.

"There's  Europe!"  the  general  said  with  a contemptuous  smile,
and  he  unhurriedly  picked  up  the  fly  between  two  fingers.  "You
don't  even  have  to  catch  it,  you  simply  take  it."

"But  tell  us  frankly,  Nikolai  Sergeivich,  what  do  you  need  that
dead  fly  for?  What  good  will  it  be  to  you?"  the  colonel-general
asked.

"Of  course  we're  not  greatly  interested  in  western  Europe  as
such,"  the  general  answered  after  a moment's  thought.  "It'll
probably  be  more  difficult  to  plant  communism  in  the  Europeans
than  in  any  other  peoples.  They're  too  spoiled  economically  and
culturally."

"There  you  are!  You  yourself  admit  it's  very  difficult  to  make
Europe  communist,"  Klykov  expressed  his  thoughts  aloud.  "It
we  intend  to  build  communism  seriously  there  we'll  have  to  send
half  the  population  to  Siberia  and  feed  the  other  half  at  our  expense
And  what's  the  sense  of  that?"

"We  need  Europe  so  as  to  deprive  America  of  her  European
markets,  and  then  she'll  go  under  economically.  But  in  any  case.  . .
The  general  was  silent,  thoughtfully  rolling  the  unfortunate  fly
between  his  thumb  and  fingers.  Then,  as  though  he  had  come  to  a
definite  decision,  he  flung  the  fly  away  and  repeated:  "But  in  any
case  ...  neither  you  nor  I know  what  the  masters  are  thinking.

And  it's  just  as  well  that  we  don't,"  he  went  on  after  another  pause,


His  tone  suggested  that  he  knew  more  than  he  proposed  to  say.

"Communist  theory  lays  it  down  that  the  revolution  should  develop
where  there  are  the  best  prerequisites  for  it:  in  the  weakest  link  of
the  capitalist  system.  And  at  the  moment  that  isn't  in  Europe.

Today  Asia  is  ripe  for  revolution.  There  we  can  gain  the  greatest
possible  successes  with  the  least  risk  and  the  least  expenditure.  Asia
is  waking  up  nationally,  and  we  must  use  this  movement  in  order  to
further  our  objectives.  The  Asians  are  not  so  cultured  and  spoiled
as  the  Europeans."

He  paused  again,  then  went  on:  "It's  more  important  to  have
Asia  in  our  hands  than  Europe.  AR  the  more  so  as  Japan  has
dropped  out  of  the  running.  Today  China  is  the  key  to  Asia.  Nowhere
else  in  the  world  are  the  prerequisites  for  revolution  so  favorable
as  in  China."

"All  right,  I give  you  China,"  the  colonel-general  said  in  a joking
tone.  "And  what  will  you  do  with  it?"

"China  is  an  enormous  reservoir  of  vital  forces,"  Nikolai
Sergeivich  replied.  "It  would  be  a tremendous  thing  to  have  such  a reserve
at  our  disposal,  for  the  army  and  for  industry.  And,  above  all,  that's
the  way  we  shall  force  America  to  her  knees."

"So  America's  giving  you  trouble  again?"  Klykov  laughed.

"Sooner  or  later  our  roads  will  cross,"  Nikolai  Sergeivich  answered.  "Either  we
must  renounce  our  historical  mission  or  follow
it  through  to  the  end."

"All  the  same,  I assume  that  our  post-war  policy  is  directed
towards  ensuring  the  security  of  our  frontiers,  both  in  the  West  and
in  the  East."  The  colonel-general  held  to  his  views.  But  he  prudently
made  his  remarks  sound  more  like  a commentary  on  Kremlin  policy
than  an  expression  of  his  own  attitude.

The  general  put  on  a smile  of  superiority.  "Don't  forget,  my
friend,  that  one  can  build  socialism  in  one  country,  but  communism
only  in  all  the  world."

"What's  the  world  to  do  with  you,  when  you're  a Russian?"

"We're  communists  first,  and  Russians  only  second

"So  you  need  the  whole  world."  The  colonel-general  drummed  his


303


fingers  ironically  on  the  table.

"That  is  the  general  line  of  the  Party,"  the  general  answered  coldly.

"Our  policy  during  the  war.  . . " Klykov  put  up  a feeble  opposition.

"Policy  can  change  with  circumstances,  but  the  general  line
remains  the  general  line;"  the  general  would  not  let  him  finish.

"It  has  to  be  so,"  he  went  on  slowly.  "It's  a historical  necessity.

We've  already  exhausted  all  the  possibilities  of  internal  development.
Internal  stagnation  is  equivalent  to  death  of  old  age.  Either
we  finally  retreat  on  the  internal  front,  or  we  go  forward  on  the
external  front.  That  is  the  law  of  dialectical  development  that
applies  to  every  state  system."

"You're  going  too  far,  Nikolai  Sergeivich.  You're  placing  the
interests  of  the  state  system  above  those  of  your  people  and  your
country."

"That's  why  you  and  I are  communists,"  Genia's  father  said
slowly  and  firmly,  raising  his  glass  as  though  to  confirm  his  words,
Klykov  pretended  not  to  notice  this  invitation,  and  felt  for  his
cigarettes.  Anna  Petrovna  and  Genia  sat  listening  to  the
conversation  with  bored  expressions  on  their  faces.

"What  you've  just  said,  Nikolai  Sergeivich,  is  one  thing  in  words
but  in  reality  it  means  war,"  Klykov  said  after  a long  silence.  "You
underestimate  - the  external  factors-America,  for  instance,  "

"And  what  is  America?"  Nikolai  Sergeivich  asked.  "An
aglomeration  of  people  who  represent  no  nation  and  possess  no
ideals,  and  whose  basis  of  unity  is  the  dollar.  At  a certain  stage  her
living  standards  will  fall  inevitably,  the  class  antagonisms  will
grow  sharper,  and  then  favorable  conditions  will  arise  for  the
development  of  the  class  struggle.  The  war  will  be  shifted  from  the
front  to  the  rear  of  the  enemy.."

"And  that's  what  you  and  I are  generals  for:  to  wage  war,"  he
added.

"A  general  should  be  a citizen  of  his  country  first  and  foremost.'
Klykov  drew  at  his  cigarette  and  sent  the  smoke  curling  up  to  the
ceiling.  "A  general  without  a native  country  is.."  He  did  not
finish  the  sentence.


304


During  the  war  Colonel-General  Klykov  had  successfully
commanded  large  Soviet  forces  in  the  field.  Shortly  before  the  war
ended  he  had  been  recalled  from  the  front  and  given  a comparatively
subordinate  post  in  the  Commissariat  for  Defense.  Generals  on
active  service  were  not  subjected  to  such  changes  without  reason.

Before  leaving  Moscow  to  join  the  S.M.A.  I had  met  Klykov  more
than  once  at  the  home  of  Genia's  parents.  Whenever  the  talk  turned
to  politics  he  had  always  been  very  moderate,  taking  the  attitude
that  the  war  was  one  of  defence  of  the  national  fatherland.  At  that
time,  just  about  the  close  of  hostilities,  there  was  a good  deal  of
rather  independent  discussion,  or  rather  surmise,  as  to  the  USSR's
future  policy.  It  is  hardly  to  be  doubted  that  Klykov  had  been
rather  too  frank  in  expressing  his  opinions,  which  did  not  entirely
coincide  with  the  Politbureau's  secret  plans,  and  that  this  had  been
the  reason  for  his  recall  to  the  rear,  closer  to  the  Kremlin's  ever
watchful  eye.

"But  we  won't  argue  about  that,  Nikolai  Sergeivich,"  he  said  in  a
conciliatory  tone,  after  a long  pause.  "In  the  Kremlin  there  are
wiser  heads  than  yours  or  mine.  Let  them  decide."

They  fell  into  a long  silence.  Anna  Petrovna  sat  turning  over  the
pages  of  a periodical.  Genia  looked  at  the  clock,  then  at  the  moon
rising  through  the  trees.  At  last  she  could  stand  no  more,  and  she
jumped  up.

"Well,  you  can  go  on  dividing  up  the  world,  but  we're  going  home."

"Why,  is  the  moon  making  you  restless?"  her  father  laughed.

"Off  you  go,  then,  only  don't  get  lost  on  the-  way.  If  anything
happens,  Gregory,  I shall  hold  you  responsible."  He  jokingly
wagged  his  finger  at  me.

A minute  or  two  later  we  drove  off.  In  the  moonlight,  the  shadows
of  the  trees  fell  spectrally  across  the  ground.  Here  and  there  the
window-panes  of  summer  villas  gleamed  through  the  trees.  The  car
bumped  over  the  hummocky  forest  road.  I sat  at  the  wheel,  not
speaking.

"What  were  you  so  dumb  for  this  evening?"  Genia  asked.

"What  could  I talk  about?"  I asked.

"What  others  talk  about."


305


"I  can't  repeat  the  sort  of  thing  your  father  says.  And  I mustn't
support  Klykov."

"Why  not?"

"Because  I don't  happen  to  be  Klykov.  Your  father  would  never
stand  from  me  what  he  takes  from  Klykov.  Klykov  gives  expression
to  very  imprudent  views."

"Let's  forget  politics  !"  she  whispered.  She  put  her  hand  to  the
dashboard  and  switched  'off  the  headlamps.  The  night,  the
marvellous  moonlit  night,  caressed  us  with  its  silence.  I gazed  into  her
face,  into  her  eyes,  veiled  in  the  half-light.  My  foot  slowly  released
the  accelerator.

"If  you  don't  close  your  eyes  again.  . ."  she  murmured.

"Genia,  I've  got  to  steer  the  car."

Instead  of  an  answer,  a neat  little  foot  was  set  on  the  brake
pedal.  The  car  slowly  pulled  sideways  and  came  to  a stop.

I spent  the  next  few  days  visiting  my  numerous  Moscow  friends
and  acquaintances.  Everywhere  I was  bombarded  with  questions
about  life  in  Germany.  Although  occupied  Germany  was  no  longer
'foreign'  in  the  full  meaning  of  the  word,  and  many  Russians  had


already  seen  the  country  with  their  own  eyes,  there  was  no  falling
off  in  the  morbid  interest  the  Russian  people  showed  in  the  world  on
the  farther  side  of  the  frontier.  This  interest  and  the  exaggeratedly
rosy  ideas  of  life  abroad  were  a reaction  from  Soviet  Russia's
complete  isolation.  Moreover,  the  Russians  have  one  trait  which  is'
seldom  found  in  other  nations:  they  are  constantly  seeking  to  find
the  good  sides  of  their  neighbors  in  the  world.  The  Germans  used  to
regard  this  as  evidence  of  the  primitive  ways  of  thought  in  the  East.

After  I had  satisfied  my  friends'  curiosity  as  far  as  possible  I
turned  to  questioning  them  about  life  in  Moscow.  But  while  they
were  very  ready  to  listen  to  my  guarded  accounts  of  life  in  Germany,
they  were  very  unwilling  to  answer  my  questions  about  life  in  Moscow

The  general  mood  was  joyless.  Everybody  had  hoped  that
living  conditions  would  improve  after  the  war.  But  now  there  were
signs  of  famine.  And  in  addition,  the  papers  were  again  talking
hysterically  of  a new  war  danger.


306


When  my  friends  learned  that  we  in  Berlin  were  in  the  habit
of  meeting  Americans,  talking  to  them  and  even  shaking  their
hands,  they  stared  at  me  as  if  I were  a ghost,  and  did  not  know  what
comment  to  make.  Although  there  had  been  a considerable  cooling
off  in  relations  between  the  Allies  during  the  first  twelve  months
after  the  war,  the  very  fact  that  we  lived  in  the  same  city  did  to
some  extent  mitigate  the  growing  tension  in  official  relations.  But  ~l
in  Moscow  the  one-sided  and  continual  abuse  in  vhich  all  the  press
and  propaganda  weapons  were  indulging  was  leading  the  people,
despite  their  own  personal  convictions,  to  think  of  the  Americans  as
cannibals.  The  propaganda  poison  was  having  its  effect.

One  evening  I went  as  usual  to  see  Genia,  and  found  all  the
family  making  ready  for  a journey.  Anna  Petrovna  explained  that
they  were  going  next  morning  to  see  Nikolai  Sergeivich's  parents
who  lived  in  a village  between  Moscow  and  Yaroslavl,  and  she
invited  me  in  her  husband's  name  to  go  with  them.  I knew  already
that  his  parents  were  simple  peasants,  and  that,  despite  their  son's
attempts  to  persuade  them,  they  had  refused  to  move  to  Moscow,
preferring  to  remain  on  their  land  and  continue  as  peasants.

I readily  accepted  the  invitation,  though  Genia  turned  up  her
nose  a little  and  made  no  comment.  I had  observed  already  that  she
was  not  fond  of  visiting  her  grandparents,  and  did  so  only  because
her  father  wished  her  to.  She  had  grown  up  in  the  Moscow  milieu,
and  was  completely  alien  to  her  peasant  origins.

Early  next  morning  Nikolai  Sergeivich,  Anna  Petrovna,  Genia
and  I drove  in  the  general's  limousine  out  of  Moscow.  We  passed
through  the  suburbs  with  its  factories  and  small  houses,  and
plunged  into  the  forests  surrounding  the  city.  Towards  midday,
after  a long  journey  over  by-roads,  we  drew  near  to  our  destination.

Bumping  over  the  pot-holes,  the  car  crawled  into  a village  street.  It
was  enveloped  in  a deathly  silence,  there  was  not  a sign  of  life  any
where.  No  domestic  animals,  no  chickens,  not  even  a dog  to  be
heard.  It  seemed  to  have  been  deserted  by  its  inhabitants.

Our  car  stopped  at  one  of  the  houses  on  the  outskirts.  With  a
groan  the  general  climbed  out  and  stretched  his  legs  after  the  long
drive.  Anna  Petrovna  gathered  her  things  together.  Genia  and  I
waited  for  them  to  lead  the  way.  There  was  no  sign  of  life  in  the  hut.

Nobody  came  out  to  welcome  us.  Finally,  the  general  went  up  the
steps  of  the  porch  and  opened  the  unfastened  door.  We  went  through


307


a dark  entry  smelling  of  dung,  genera  opened  the  living-room
door  without  knocking.  In  the  middle  of  the  room  a girl  about  eight
years  old,  bare-foot  and  straight-haired,  was  sitting  on  the  floor,
swinging  a cradle  hanging  from  the  ceiling.  She  was  singing  under
her  breath.  When  she  saw  us  she  stopped,  and  stared  half  in  wonder,
half  in  alarm,  without  rising.

"Good  morning,  my  child,"  the  general  said  to  her.  "Have  you
lost  your  tongue?"

In  her  confusion  she  only  stuck  her  finger  into  her  mouth.

"Where  is  everybody?"  Nikolai  Sergeivich  asked  again.

"They've  gone  to  work,"  the  child  answered.

At  that  moment  we  heard  a noise  behind  us,  and  a pair  of  legs  shod
in  worm  feltboots  began  to  stir  on  the  enormous  Russian  stove  that
filled  half  the  room.  A muffled  coughing  and  groaning  came  from  the
shelf  for  a few  moments,  then  a shaggy,  grey  head  was  stuck  out
from  behind  a cloth  curtain.

"Ah....  So  it's  you,  Nikolail"  an  aged,  rather  hoarse  voice  said.

"So  you've  come  again!"  It  was  the  general's  father.  The  old  man's
face  showed  no  sign  of  pleasure  at  the  sight  of  his  son.

"Who  else  should  it  be?"  the  general  thundered  with  forced
gaiety  as  the  old  man  climbed  down  from  the  stove.  "I've  brought
something  for  you,  Sergei  Vassilievich.  Something  for  the  pain  in
your  legs.  You  won't  refuse  a bottle  of  vodka,  I'm  sure!"

"Bread  would  have  been  more  acceptable  than  vodka!"  the  old
man  grumbled.

"Marusia,  run  to  the  chairman  of  the  collective  farm"-the
general  turned  to  the  child-"and  ask  him  to  release  all  our  people
from  work  today.  Tell  him  the  general's  arrived."

"The  general  ...  the  general.  . . ."  the  old  man  mumbled  in  his
beard.  He  laid  his  hand  affectionately  on  Genia's  head.  "You're
looking  well,  dragon-fly.  So  you  haven't  forgotten  your  old  grand,
dad  in  that  Moscow  of  yours?"

I went  to  the  car  and  brought  in  the  packets  and  bundles  of
presents  we  had  brought  with  us.  One  after  another  the  rest  of  the


308


family  arrived,  all  the  general's  numerous  kindred  and  their  grown
up  children.  They  all  seemed  rather  awkward,  and  showed  no  sign
of  pleasure  at  the  arrival  of  guests.  The  last  to  enter  was  a man,
who  had  been  wounded  in  the  war,  and  now  walked  with  the  aid  of
a stick.  He  was  the  general's  cousin,  and  the  collective  farm  store
keeper.

As  usual  in  the  country,  the  oldest  man  of  the  family  issued  the
orders.  The  grandfather  waved  to  one  of  the  women:

"Lay  the  table,  Serafima.  We'll  have  dinner  now  we've  got
guests."  Turning  to  his  son,  he  remarked:  "I  don't  suppose  you've
eaten  potatoes  for  a long  time,  Nikolai?  Well,  you  can  have  some
now.  We  haven't  any  bread,  so  we're  eating  potatoes  instead."
"What's  happened  to  your  corn  then?"  Nikolai  asked.  "Haven't
you  received  anything  yet  from  the  collective  farm?"

"Received  anything.  . ."  the  old  man  muttered.  "The  collective
farm  handed  over  everything  down  to  the  last  grain  to  the  State
and  that  still  left  it  in  debt.  We  haven't  met  our  delivery  plan.

We're  managing  with  potatoes  at  present,  but  when  winter  comes  ...
we  haven't  any  idea  what  we'll  eat."

"Well,  don't  worry!"  the  general  reassured  him.  "We've  brought
bread  with  us."

"AN,  Nikolai,  Nikolai!  If  you  -veren't  my  son  I'd  show  you  the
door!  Brought  your  bread  to  make  a mock  of  us  country-people
have  you?  You  know  our  custom:  the  host  provides  for  the  guest
You'll  eat  what  we  eat.  And  no  arguments!  Don't  turn  up  your  nose
at  our  food."

With  a sweeping  gesture  he  invited  everybody  to  sit  down  at  the
table,  op  which  Serafima  had  set  a huge  iron  pot  of  steaming  beet
root  soup.  Next  to  ii  she  placed  a pot  of  potatoes  boiled  in  their
jackets.  Then  she  arranged  earthenware  plates  and  wooden  spoon
round  the  table.  The  general  was  the  first  to  sit  down.  He  was't
most  talkative  of  all  the  company,  and  tried  hard  to  show  that  the
was  perfectly  at  home  in  the  house  where  he  had  been  born.  He
joked  as  he  peeled  his  potatoes,  readily  held  out  his  plate  for
Serafima  to  fill  with  the  'beetroot  soup',  which  apparently  had  been
made  without  meat  or  fat.  For  some  time  only  the  clatter  of  the
wooden  spoons  was  to  be  heard.

"What's  a dinner  without  vodka?"  the  general  exclaimed  at  last,
and  he  rose  and  went  across  to  his  packages.  "We'll  throw  back  a
glass  all  round,  and  then  we'll  feel  more  cheerful."


309


All  the  men  in  the  house  readily  accepted  his  invitation,  and  the
bottle  was  swiftly  emptied.  A second  followed,  it.  The  plain  peasant
food  was  quickly  disposed  oL  The  ge~neral  again  resorted  fo  his
packages,  and  littered  the  table  with  cans  of  preserves  labelled  in
all  the  languages  of  Europe.  His  old  father  watched  him  glumly,  and
tried  to  protest;  but  then  he  held  his  peace  and,  staring  at  the  strange
labels,  confined  himself  to  the  brief  remark:  "You've  done  some
looting

The  plentiful  supply  of  vodka  had  its  effect;  they  all  found
their  tongues.

"Well,  Nikolai,  tell  us.  They  say  there's  a smell  of  war  around
again,"  the  old  man  asked,  a little  more  amiable  after  several
glasses  of  vodka.

"We're  a long  way  off  war  at  the  moment,  but  we  must  always
be  ready  for  surprises,"  the  general  replied.  "We've  won  the  war,
now  we  must  win  the  peace,"  he  added  self-importai.itly.

"What  sort  of  world?"'  his  father  asked,  screwing  up  his  eyes
cunningly.  "That  old  story  again  'proletarians  of  all  countries
unite.  . . '?" ,

( 'The  Russian  word  Imirl  has  two  meanings:  'peace',  and'world';  the
old  man  deliberately  twists  his  son's  remark.  )

"Why  of  course,  we  mustn't  forget  the  proletarians  of  other
countries,"  the  general  said  sluggishly,  conscious  of  the  ineptitude  of
his  remark.  "Proletarian  solidarity,"  he  added,  avoiding  his  father's
eyes.

"Of  course,  of  course  ....  My  belly  tells  me  every  day  that  we're
proletaris.  But  as  for  the  solidarity!  D'you  mean  that  others  are  to
go  hungry  with  us?  Is  that  it?"

"Let's  have  another  drink,  Sergei  Vassilievich,"  his  son  proposed,
realizing  that  there  was  no  point  in  arguing  with  him.  He  filled  his
glass  again.

"But  tell  me  just  one  thing,  Nikolai."  His  father  went  over  to  the
offensive.  "I  don't  say  anything  about  our  having  shed  our  blood
and  gone  hungry  in  this  war.  God  be  thanked  that  it  ended  as  it  did.
But  tell  me  one  thing:  did  the  soldiers  want  to  fight  at  the  beginning,
or  didn't  they?  You  should  know  the  answer,  you're  a general."

The  general  stared  silently  at  his  plate.


310


"Nothing  to  say?"  the  old  fellow  crowed.  "The  soldiers  didn't
want  to  fight.  And  you  know  very  well  why.  Because  they'd  had
enough  of  that  song  long  before.  You  can't  Ml  your  belly  with
songs.

"But  all  the  same  we  won  the  war,"  the  general  said  in  his  own
defence.

"Nikolail  I'm  your  father,  and  you  needn't  tell  me  lies.  Have
you  forgotten  what  was  promised  us  during  the  war?  Why  were  the
churches  opened  again?  Why  have  you  been  given  Russian
epaulettes?  Why  have  you  got  tsarist  ribbons  on  your  chest?  You  hid
behind  the  backs  of  the  Russian  peoplel  We  were  promised  land  and
freedom.  That's  what  we  fought  fori  And  where  is  it  all?"  He  banged
his  fist  down  on  the  table,  making  the  glasses  jingle.  "Where  is  it
all?"  he  shouted  again,  furiously  pointing  a skinny  finger  at  the
potato-skins  littered  about  the  table.

"You  can't  have  everything  at  once,"  the  general  feebly  protested

"What  do  you  mean  by  that?  You  can't  have  everything  at  once!

The  old  man  exploded  like  a gunpowder  barrel.  "D'you  mean  it's
going  to  be  still  worse?"

"Oh  no  ....  But  when  everything's  been  destroyed  it  can't  all
be  restored  at  once;"  the  general  made  his  retreat.

"Ah,  now  that's  a different  storyl  But  you  began  at  first  with
the  old  song:  Solidarity!  Proletaril  We  know  it  all  by  heart.  We
even  know  it  backward!"

The  general  said  no  more,  but  apathetically  chewed  a
breadcrust.  The  old  man  could  not  get  over  his  excitement.  With  a
trembling  hand  he  helped  himself  to  a glass  of  vodka  and  tossed  it
off.  He  wiped  his  mouth  with  the  back  of  his  hand,  then  looked
about  him  to  see  if  anyone  was  daring  to  oppose  him.  But  they
all  sat  staring  indifferently  into  their  empty  plates.

"Don't  tell  me  any  of  your  fairy-stories,  Nikolail"  the  old  fellow
said  decisively,  with  a challenging  stare  across  the  table.  "I  know
all  that  you've  been  up  tol  D'you  think  I don't  know  how  for  the
last  twenty  years  you've  been  going  about  the  world  with  a
flamitoreli?  D'you  think  I don't  know  where  you  got  all  those  gewgaws
from?"  He  pointed  to  the  orders  on  his  son's  chest.  "When  you  were
lying  in  that  cradle,"  he  nodded  to  the  cradle  hanging  from  the


311


ceiling,"  we  didn't  only  have  bread  in  the  house,  we  had  everything
in  plenty.  Now  you've  become  a general,  but  the  child  in  that  cradle
is  crying  with  hunger.  What's  happened  to  your  conscience?

Answer  me!  Have  you  exchanged  your  conscience  for  those  gew
gaws?"

"Grand-dad,  where  could  I find  a basket?"  Genia,  who  had  been
sitting  silent  next  to  her  father,  asked  the  old  man.  She  rose  from
the  table  to  go  out.

"What,  dragon-fly,  had  enough?"  Her  grandfather  gazed  after
her.  "Go  and  pick  some  mushrooms  in  the  forest,  then  we'll  have
mushrooms  as  well  as  potatoes  for  supper."

Genia  stood  at  the  door  with  a basket  on  her  arm,  and  nodded
to  me  to  go  with  her.  As  I left  the  room  I heard  the  old  man  say:

"I  tell  you,  Nikolai,  I don't  want  to  hear  any  more  about  the
proletari  in  my  house.  If  there's  anybody  who's  the  last,  the  very
bottom-most  proletari,  it's  us,  and  not  anybody  else.  If  anybody's
got  to  be  set  free,  it's  us!  Get  that?  Put  that  in  your  pipe  and  smoke
it!"


Genia  and  I walked  out  of  the  village.  The  forest  began  almost  at
the  last  house.  The  sky  was  overcast  with  grey.  The  air  was  autumn
ally  clear,  and  pervaded  with  the  scent  of  rotting  leaves  and
dampness.  Genia  had  flung  a kerchief  over  her  head,  knotting  it  beneath
her  chin.  She  took  off  her  high-heeled  shoes  and  dropped  them  into
her  basket,  and  went  on  in  front  without  saying  a word,  cautiously
stepping  with  her  bare  feet  through  the  grass.  I followed  her,  my
eyes  delighting  in  her  supple  figure.  We  went  deeper  and  deeper  into
the  forest,  and  at  last  came  to  a clearing  littered  with  the  great,
mossy  trunks  of  felled  trees;  all  around  them  was  a wilderness  of
wild  berries,  mushrooms,  and  grasses.

"But  what  does  father  come  here  for  at  all?"  Genia  broke  the
silence.  She  walked  aimlessly  along  with  bent  head,  gazing  at  the
ground.  "Grand-dad  always  entertains  him  with  this  sort  of  per
formance,  and  father  seems  to  like  it."

"Perhaps  he  likes  to  see  the  difference  between  what  he  was  and
what  he  is  now,"  I suggested.

"I've  had  enough  of  this  comedy,  long  since!"  she  went  on.  "And
this  time  it's  all  the  more  unpleasant  because  you've  seen  it."

"Genial"  I called  quietly.


312


She  turned  round  so  swiftly  and  so  readily  that  she  might  have
been  waiting  for  the  call.  Her  chestnut  eyes  were  fixed  on  me  with
a look  of  expectation.

"Genia,  what  comedy  are  you  referring  to?"  I asked,  feeling  an
unpleasant  suspicion  rising  in  my  mind.  She  stood  embarrassed
disturbed  by  the  tone  of  my  voice.  I took  her  by  the  hands  and
set  her  against  a large,  mossy  stump  rising  as  high  as  her  head.  She
humbly  stood  as  I had  placed  her.  I

"Don't  you  see  it  for  yourself?"  She  attempted  to  avoid  my
question.

"But  it  isn't  the  comedy  itself  you  mind?"  I gazed  into  her  eyes
and  saw  that  she  was  expecting,  yet  fearing,  my  question.  "Which
one  do  you  think  is  the  comedian?"

"I  ...  I don't  know,  Grisha

"Genia,  which  one  do  you  regard  as  the  comedian?"  I repeated
harshly.

"I'm  sorry  for  grand-dad,"  she  whispered,  lowering  her  eyes,
could  see  that  this  talk  was  torturing  her.  "But  it's  all  so  silly.  . .
she  added,  as  though  excusing  herself.

"So  you  think  your  grandfather  is  a comedian?"  I insisted.

"No;  he's  quite  right.  But.  . ."  Tears  came  into  her  eyes.

I had  a feeling  of  relief,  mingled  with  a warm  tenderness.  I took
her  head  between  my  hands  and  kissed  her  on  the  lips.  I had  no  wish
to  go  on  tormenting  her,  by  forcing  her  to  disavow  her  own  father
There  was  no  need  for  me  to  say  more.

"D'you  know  what,  Genia?"  I said,  as  I played  with  a strand  of
her  hair.  "I'm  very  grateful  to  you  at  this  moment."

"Why?"  she  whispered  in  surprise.


"I  was  afraid  for  you.  I was  afraid  you'd  say  something  else.  . .

"I  felt  really  upset  for  the  old  man,"  I added  thoughtfully

"Before  the  war  came,  each  of  us  lived  in  his  own  nest,  and  each
built  his  life  to  the  best  of  his  ability.  During  the  war  everything


313


was  changed,  everybody  was  threatened  and  everybody  was  equal
in  the  presence  of  death.  In  those  days  of  blood  and  evil  I
experienced  so  much  good  from  people  I didn't  know  at  all,  from
simple  people  like  your  grandfather.  The  war  brought  us  together  in
a brotherhood  of  blood.  Now  I feel  sick  at  heart  for  these  people."

A grey  pall  crept  across  the  sky.  The  scent  of  rawness  rose  from  the
earth.  A bird  fluttered  about  for  a moment,  then  flew  off.

"You  and  I are  on  top,"  I went  on  quietly.  "We  must  never
forget  that.  Our  being  on  top  and  remaining  there  only  makes  sense
if  we  don't  forget  it.  I think  your  father  has.  And  I was  afraid  you
had  too  ....

The  rustles  of  the  autumnal  forest  stirred  through  the  glade.

I looked  at  Genia's  bare  feet,  at  her  peasant's  kerchief,  at  the  basket
standing  beside  her.  In  her  hands  she  held  a sprig  of  ash  berries  which
she  had  broken  off  as  she  walked  along.

"I'd  be  tremendously  happy  if  you, were  only  your  grandfather's
grand-daughter  and  lived  in  that  hut,"  I said.,

She  pressed  closer  to  me,  as  if  she  were  cold.

"For  then  I'd  know  you  belong  to  me,"  I whispered  into  her  ear.

"You  know,  I often  think  of  the  first  days  we  met.  When  you  were
simply  Genia,  a delightful  girl  who  was  a soldier's  friend.  D'you
remember  how  I knocked  at  your  door,  straight  back  from  the
front,  in  a soldier'r.  dirty  greatcoat?  I was  always  so  proud  of  you  ...

A soldier's  little  wife  . . ."

"Grisha,  tell  me  quite  frankly."  As  she  learned  against  the  mossy
stump  she  bore  little  resemblance  to  the  saticy  and  carefree  girl

I had  once  known.  She  spoke  quietly,  seriously.  "You've  come  back
from  Berlin  completely  changed  ....  And  you  talk  so  little  ...  I
feel  that  something's  getting  you  down.  What  is  it?"

"Genia,  it's  because  I'm  sorry  that  our  friendship  will  never  be
anything  more  than  that .

"What's  preventing  it?"

"When  I first  met  your  father  I was  proud  of  him.  I thought
of  him  in  those  days  as  an  example  to  be  followed... "

"And  now?"  She  looked  into  my  eyes  with  a strange  look.

I did  not  answer  at  once.  I could  not  yet  put  what  I felt  into  words.


314


"That  you  should  leave  the  life  you're  living  now  and  belong  only
to  me  ...  I can't  insist  that  you  should  do  that,"  I said  quietly.  "But
if  you  were  to  include  me  in  your  life,  it  would  be  the  end  for  all  of
us."

"So  my  father  stands  in  the  way?"  she  said  with  a strange  calm.

The  words  came  as  an  answer  to  my  own  thoughts.  I remained  silent,
gently  stroking  her  shoulders.  The  leaves  of  the  birches  rustled
quietly.  The  cloudy  sky  was  silent.  Ants  crawled  aimlessly  over  the
stump.

"Don't  be  afraid,  Grisha.  I'd  come  to  the  same  conclusion  my
self."  Her  voice  betrayed  her  weariness.  "There's  just  one  thing  I

want  to  say:  it  isn't  my  father  that  stands  between  us.  What  has
come  between  us  is  something  that  long  since  came  between  me
and  my  father.  I am  only  a woman  and  a daughter.  But  I feel
differently  about  that."  She  was  silent  for  a moment,  then  she  went
on:  "I've  told  you  once  already  I'm  an  orphan..."

She  raised  the  sprig  of  mountain  ash  to  her  face  and  brushed  her
cheeks  with  the  cluster  of  berries.  The  air  was  fresh  with  the  autumn

We  stood  silent  in  the  forest  glade,  forgetting  what  we  had  come
there  for.

"And  so  you've  quite  made  up  your  mind?"  she  asked  at  last.

I only  shrugged  my  shoulders  impotently.

"But  supposing  I throw  up  everything  and  come  to  you  in
Berlin?"

"My  position  there  is  too  insecure.  I can't  risk  your  future  . .

She  played  thoughtfully  with  the  cluster  of  orange  berries.  Her
eyes  gazed  over  my  shoulder  into  the  distance.

"I  shall  never  forget  you,  my  dear,"  I began,  and  was  not  at  all
sure  whom  I was  trying  to  comfort,  her  or  myself.  My  heart  quivered
once  more  with  all  the  pang  of  a soldier's  parting,  with  sadness
and  tenderness,  as  in  times  past.  But  now  the  girl's  body  did  not
quiver  and  caress  me  as  it  had  done  in  the  past.  It  was  lifeless  and
cold.

"Don't  be  angry  with  me,"  I pleaded.  "It's  very  difficult  for  me
too.  Very.  . .

She  raised  her  head.  The  emptiness  in  her  eyes  slowly  gave  place  to


315


the  irresistible  call  of  life.  "If  it  has  to  be  so,  " she  whispered
soldier's  little  wife  won't  cry."  She  smiled  through  her  tears.  Then
she  set  both  her  hands  on  my  shoulders  and  threw  her  head  back
though  she  were  looking  at  me  for  the  first  time.  A burning  kiss
scalded  our  lips.

After  a fortnight  in  Moscow  I suddenly  felt  a griping  void  and
restlessness.  I hurried  to  put  my  affairs  in  order,  feeling  rather
like  a man  afraid  of  being  late  for  a train.

Andrei  Kovtun  had  already  left  Moscow.  After  his  meeting  with
Halina  he  had  wandered  about  for  several  days  as  though  in  a trance
dead  to  everything  around  him.  I had  great  difficulty  in  persuading
him  to  take  the  train  to  Sochi  on  the  Black  Sea,  to  spend  the  rest
of  his  leave  in  a sanatorium.  Even  when  I saw  him  off  at  the  station
he  did  not  smile,  and  as  he  shook  my  hand  he  gazed  aside.

When  I left  Berlin  to  return  to  Russia  I had  not  felt  any  need  of  a
rest.  But  now,  after  a fortnight  in  Moscow,  I felt  desperately  tired
and  in  need  of  a break.

One  morning  towards  the  end  of  the  third  week  I hurriedly
packed  my  few  belongings  and  took  a trolley-bus  for  the  Central
Aerodrome.  I had  already  phoned  and  found  out  that  there  were
always  free  places  in  the  S.M.A.  planes,  flying  from  Moscow  to  Berlin.
And  now,  just  as  I had  done  more  than  a year  before,  I stood  in  the
airport  office,  entering  my  name  in  the  passenger  list.

With  a pain  in  my  heart  I went  to  a telephone  kiosk  and  called
up  Genia.  When  I heard  her  familiar  voice  I said:

"Genia,  I'm  phoning  from  the  airport.  I've  been  urgently  called
back  to  Berlin."

"Don't  tell  lies,"  I heard  her  say.  "But  I'm  not  angry  with  you.

Only  it's  a pity  you  didn't  give  me  a parting  kiss.  . . "

I was  about  to  say  something,  but  she  had  already  rung  off.

Half  an  hour  later  our  plane  was  airborne.  This  time  the  pilot
did  not  make  a farewell  circle  above  Moscow.  This  time  I did  not  gaze
out  of  the  window.  And  I did  not  look  forward  with  any  feeling  of
pleasure  to  what  lay  ahead  of  me.  I tried  to  avoid  thinking  of  what
I had  left  behind  me.


316


CHAPTER  FIFTEEN
The  Marshal's  Emissaries

So  I fled  from  Moscow  back  to  Berlin.

I closed  the  door  of  my  Karlshorst  apartment  behind  me,  went
to  my  desk,  sat  down  and  stared  miserably  at  the  calendar.  I had
two  more  weeks  of  leave:  what  was  I to  do  with  them?  Report  for
duty  before  my  time  was  up?  Some  would  think  me  mad,  others
would  call  me  a careerist.  Visit  my  friends?  I would  be  asked  too
many  questions  which  I had  not  the  least  desire  to  answer.  I had
been  in  a great  hurry  to  get  away  from  Moscow;  but  what  I had
hurried  for,  where  I was  hurrying  to,  I had  no  idea.

In  the  end  I decided  to  take  a rest,  and  spent  the  next  few  days
visiting  bathing  resorts,  deliberately  making  for  the  most
frequented

spots,  lying  on  the  sand  and  watching  the  alien,  carefree  world  all
around  me.  At  first  I got  a tremendous  kick  out  of  this  occupation

But  after  a time  I began  to  experience  a mortal  boredom  with  seeing
the  same  packets  of  sandwiches  and  the  same  childish  antics  of
grown-up  people  day  after  day.

Ten  days  before  my  leave  expired  I reported  to  the  head  of  the
Administration  for  Industry,  and  expressed  my  desire  to  resume
my  duties.  Alexandrov  looked  pleasantly  surprised.  "Well,  did  you
have  a good  rest  in  Moscow?"  he  asked.

"Very  good!"

"You  couldn't  have  turned  up  at  a more  opportune  moment"

He  got  down  to  business.  "Over  half  of  our  staff  are  on  leave,  a
at  this  very  moment  the  supreme  commander  has  given  us  an  urgent
and  responsible  commission.  We've  got  to  collect  material  against
the  dismantling  organizations  to  send  to  Moscow."

He  spent  the  next  half-hour  discussing  the  tension  that  had
arisen  between  the  S.M.A.  Department  for  Reparations  and  the'
Special  Committee  for  Dismantling  set  up  by  the  U.S.S.R.  Council
of  Ministers.  In  order  to  justify  the  S.M.A.’s  attitude  we  had  to
collect  as  much  incriminating  material  as  possible  about  the
Special  Committee's  activities.  The  Administration  for  Industry
had  been  ordered  to  put  at  the  supreme  commander's  disposition  a
Special  Commission  consisting  of  several  engineers.  Officially  their


317


task  was  to  co-ordinate  the  work  of  the  S.M.A.  and  the  Special
Committee,  but  unofficially  they  would  be  charged  to  collect  in
formation  exposing  the  dismantlers.  The  commission  was  to  make
visits  to  all  the  most  important  industrial  works  in  the  Soviet
zone.

"If  you  agree,  I'll  nominate  you  as  a member  of  the  commission,"
Alexandrov  said  in  conclusion.  "Especially  as  you  know  German,  for
it  will  be  necessary  to  make  close  contacts  with  German  works
directors."

Continual  traveling  and  visits  to  factories.  For  the  next  few
weeks,  possibly  even  for  months,  I would  be  free  of  Moscow,  and
Karlshorst  too!  I could  not  hope  for  anything  better  at  that  moment,
and  I readily  agreed  to  Alexandrov's  suggestion.  Next  day  I was
appointed  to  the  Co-ordination  Commission,  which  was  responsible
directly  to  the  Supreme  Commander.

So  here  was  a Soviet  citizen  who  had  fled  from  Moscow,  a Soviet
officer  who  could  find  no  peace  in  Karlshorst,  who  at  the  same  time
was  an  emissary  of  the  S.M.A.  Supreme  Commander,  working  for
Moscow.  A fortuitous  coincidence?  No!  Rather  a law  of  progression.
The  grey  automobile  sped  through  the  chilly  autumn  air.  The
road  drummed  monotonously  under  the  tires.  A covey  of  partridges
flew  over  the  bare  field  beside  the  road.

"Let's  take  a pot-shot,"  Major  Dubov  proposed,  reaching  for  his
double-barreled  gun,  which  was  stuck  behind  the  seat.

"Why  bother?"  I answered.  "In  any  case  we'd  have  to  hand  our
bag  over  to  someone  else."

"All  the  better !"  the  major  laughed.  "It  might  be  a way  of  getting
someone  to  talk.  Vassily  Ivanovich,  to  arms!"

Our  driver,  Vassily,  was  an  elderly  man,  a former  soldier.  He
lowered  one  of  the  car  windows,  then  turned  off  the  road.  The


partridge's  thinking  apparatus  is  rather  restricted:  it  won't  let  a
man  come  anywhere  near  it,  but  you  can  almost  drive  over  it  in  a car.
Karlshorst  lay  behind  us.  In  our  pocket  we  had  a plenipotentiary
document  signed  by  Marshal  Sokolovsky,  valid  for  the  district  of
Thuringia,  and  empowering  us  to  carry  out  a special  commission  for
the  S.M.A.  Supreme  Commander  in  Germany.  That  would  be  sufficient
to  open  all  doors  in  Thuringia.  But  if  that  failed  to  achieve  its
purpose,  we  had  a second  document  ready,  giving  us  'full  powers
to  check  up  on  the  fulfillment  of  the  S.M.A.  order  No....  and  the
decree  of  the  U.S.S.R.  Council  of  Ministers  dated.  . . '


318


These  resounding  documents  were  chiefly  intended  for  General
Dobrovolsky,  who  was  plenipotentiary  of  the  Special  Committee
for  Dismantling  and  also  Soviet  director  of  the  Zeiss  works  at  Jena.

Although  he  was  a hundred-per-cent  civilian,  and  formerly  had  been
director  of  a Soviet  optical  works,  and  in  addition  was  a member  of
the  ambiguous  tribe  of  'dismantlers',  he  enjoyed  some  authority,
since  he  held  strongly  entrenched  positions  in  Moscow.

Although  Marshal  Sokolovsky  had  issued  the  strict  order  that  all
members  of  dismantling  organizations  were  to  wear  civilian  dress,
Dobrovolsky  was  behaving  as  though  he  had  never  heard  of  the
order.  Whenever  Sokolovsky  met  Dobrovolsky,  the  marshal  always
addressed  the  general  in  an  ironically  friendly  tone,  using  the
civilian  form  of  address,  ignoring  the  military  regulation  that
military  men  were  always  to  be  addressed  by  their  rank.

Apart  from  his  childish  attachment  to  the  insignia  of  his  rank,
Dobrovolsky  was  also  notorious  for  his  rudeness.  He  had  been  known
to  throw  officers  down  the  steps  when  they  arrived  to  check  up  on
his  activities,  or  had  refused  to  allow  them  into  the  works  at  all,
politely  telling  them:  "If  you  don't  like  it,  complain  to  Moscow."

But  in  order  to  make  a complaint  it  was  necessary  to  have  evidence,
and  that  could  not  be  obtained  from  the  Zeiss  works  except  through
Dobrovolsky.

So  far  as  the  Soviet  Military  Administration  had  internal  enemies
and  antagonists  at  all  in  Germany,  they  were  to  be  found  mainly
among  the  people  collectively  known  as  dismantlers.  General  Zorin,
head  of  the  Administration  for  Reparations  and  Deliveries,  had
made  a number  of  futile  attempts  to  work  with  the  dismantlers,  but
at  last  he  had  given  up  all  hope.  Now  all  his  communications  with
these  bodies,  who  frequently  were  only  five  minutes  away  from
Karlshorst,  were  made  through  Moscow,  in  the  form  of  complaints,
demands,  and  reports  on  failures  to  accomplish  the  reparations
plan  because  of  the  dismantlers'  activities.  But  they  only  laughed
and  continued  to  search  through  the  Soviet  zone  for  anything  that
the  S.M.A.  had  not  so  far  succeeded  in  sequestrating.  But  even
sequestration  was  not  of  much  value,  for  the  dismantlers  quickly
made  contact  with  Moscow,  with  the  result,  as  a rule,  that  an  order
came  through  to  the  S.M.A.  to  hand  over  the  object  in  question  to
the  dismantlers.

Among  the  chief  duties  of  the  S.M.A.  Economy  Department  were


319


the  securing  of  deliveries  on  reparations  account  and  ensuring  that
German  industry  worked  within  the  limits  of  the  peace  potential
fixed  under  the  Potsdam  Agreement.  The  very  task  of  reconciling
these  two  functions  was  a difficult  one,  to  put  it  mildly,  as  one  can  see
especially  when  the  scope  of  the  reparations  plan  is  borne  in  mind.  But
then  a third  power  intervened,  and  so  far  as  we  were  concerned  it  was
an  uncontrollable  fiction,  for  this  third  power-the  dismantlers
was  responsible  directly  to  Moscow.

The  work  of  the  dismantling  organizations  was  directed  by  the
Special  Committee  for  Dismantling  set  up  under  the  Soviet  Council
of  Ministers,  and  therefore  by  the  Council  of  Ministers  itself,  together
with  the  ministries  directly  interested.  The  result  was  a kind  of
socialist  competition:  two  milkmaids  assiduously  milking  the  one
cowl  One  of  the  milkmaids  behaved  like  a poacher,  got  as  much  as
she  could  and  went  her  way.  That  was  the  dismantlers.  From  the
other  the  masters  first  demanded  milk,  then  hung  the  half-dead  cow
round  her  n6ek  with  the  demand  to  go  on  milking  and  milking.  That
was  the  S.M.A.  No  matter  what  happened  to  the  cow  and  the  two
milkmaids,  the  masters  got  their  milk  down  to  the  last  drop.

As  soon  as  the  Red  Army  crossed  the  German  frontier  special
army  trophy  brigades  were  entrusted  with  the  task  of  collecting  and
valuing  the  spoils  of  war,  even  to  the  extent  of  dismantling
industrial  plant.  When  it  was  found  that  these  brigades  could  not  cope
with  their  task  special  dismantling  organizations  came  more  or  less
arbitrarily  into  being,  and  these  were  later  co-ordinated  under  the
Special  Committee  for  Dismantling.  Every  People's  Commissariat,
the  chief  administrations  of  commissariats,  and  even  single  Soviet
works  and  factories  sent  their  own  dismantling  brigades  to  Germany.

Dismantling  became  all  the  rage.  Things  went  so  far  that  even  the
State  Lenin  Library  in  Moscow  sent  its  own  specialists  to  dismantle
Goethe  and  Schiller,  while  the  Moscow  'Dynamo'  sports  stadium


hurriedly  sent  its  football  team  to  Germany  in  search  of  a swimming
pool  suitable  for  dismantling.

The  dismantlers  were  given  military  rank  on  the  following  basis
a technician  became  a lieutenant,  an  engineer  a major,  a director
came  a colonel,  and  a higher  ministerial  official  a general.  The
authorities  who  had  created  the  dismantlers  did  not  worry
themselves  unduly  over  this  problem.  But  it  gave  the  S.M.A.  all  the
more  headaches  when  it  came  to  have  dealings  with  these  home-made
officers.  As  time  passed  they  grew  more  and  more  fond  of  their
getup,  and  the  S.M.A.  had  no  little  trouble  in  dismantling  them


320


again.


Major  Dubov  had  been  sent  with  me  on  this  trip  because  he  was
an  expert  on  optics  and  precision  machines.  In  addition,  there  was
the  positive  advantage  that  he  and  Dobrovolsky  had  been  fellow
students.  While  he  was  drawing  the  general  into  reminiscences
former  days  I would  be  free  to  prepare  the  downfall  of  our  eneny
and  rival  No.  1 .

In  the  case  of  the  Zeiss  works  the  conflict  of  interests  between  the
S.M.A.  and  the  Special  Committee  was  particularly  glaring.  After
the  first  spasm  of  dismantling  in  Germany,  which  the  S.M.A.  had
neither  the  time  nor  the  desire  to  prevent,  economic  consideration
began  to  be  thought  of.  From  the  very  beginning  the  Special
Committee  had  insisted  that  the  Zeiss  works  was  to  be  completely
dismantled  and  transferred  to  the  Soviet  Union.  From  the  aspect
military  strategy  that  was  sound.  But  there  were  difficulties  in
the  way.  The  crux  of  the  matter  was  that  the  industrial  plant  of  the
Zeiss  works  was  of  comparatively  little  value;  in  fact  it  included
no

machinery  that  did  not  exist  in  the  U.S.S.R.  already.  The  value  of
the  Zeiss  works  inhered  in  its  experts,  starting  with  the  ordinary
workmen  polishers,  who  had  worked  there  all  their  lives  and  who
passed  on  their  experience  from  generation  to  generation,  and  ending
with  the  engineers,  who  had  laid  down  the  classic  formulae  for
optical

mechanics.  Without  these  men  the  whole  of  the  Zeiss  works  would  not
have  been  worth  a brass  farthing  in  the  Soviet  Union.  But  to
transfer  the  works  complete  with  the  staff  would  have  been  too
difficult  and  too  risky  an  undertaking.

An  attempt  was  made  to  find  a compromise  by  proposing  that
Soviet  workers  and  technical  staffs  should  be  sent  to  Jena  to  make
special  studies.  After  their  return  to  the  Soviet  Union  they  were  to
take  over  the  dismantled  plant  and  apply  the  technical  experience
of  the  Zeiss  works.  This  plan  was  put  into  operation  to  some  extent,
but  inadequately.  The  Kremlin  was  very  reluctant  to  let  its  children
travel  to  foreign  parts,  even  to  occupied  Germany,  for  they  i-night
learn  other  things  besides  the  technical  experience  of  the  Zeiss  works.

The  first  round  of  dismantling  proved  unprofitable.  The  Zeiss
equipment  dismantled  and  sent  to  the  Soviet  Union  made  very  little
practical  contribution  to  the  country's  economy.  Meanwhile  the
main  works,  which  had  thus  been  amputated,  excelled  all
expectations,  for  it  continued  to  turn  out  genuine  Zeiss  products  to  the
astonishment  even  of  General  Dobrovolsky,  who,  after  the
dismantling  was  completed,  had  remained  in  Jena  as  Soviet  director  of  the


321


works.  He  was  relatively  little  interested  in  this  production,  since
it  went  to  the  S.M.A.  Administration  for  Reparations  and  all  the
laurels  fell  to  his  sworn  enemy,  General  Zorin.

On  the  other  hand,  the  S.M.A.  was  deeply  interested  in  the  works,
for  its  production  was  beginning  to  play  an  important  part  in  the
reparations  account.  If  a second  round  of  dismantling  were  to
occur-and  Dobrovolsky  was  persistently  pressing  for  it-the  S.M.A.
would  lose  a considerable  contribution  on  that  account.  As  the
Council  of  Ministers  would  never  reduce  the  figure  set  for  reparations,
new  sources  would  have  to  be  found  for  reparations  deliveries,  and
as  time  passed  this  presented  increasing  difficulties.  And  now  a duel
began  between  the  S.M.A.  and  the  Special  Committee.  Dobrovolsky
solemnly  assured  Moscow:  "If  I finally  dismantle  Zeiss,  and  it  is  set
up  in  the  Soviet  Union,  within  twelve  months  it  will  be  achieving  a
production  worth  a hundred  million  roubles."

The  S.M.A.  parried  with  the  counter-blow:  'The  first  dismantled
section  of  the  Zeiss  works  already  set  up  in  the  Soviet  Union  has  so
far  achieved  a deficit  of  fifty  million  roubles,  and  requires  continual
subsidies,  whereas  the  half-dead  Zeiss  works  in  Jena  is  bringing  us
yearly  reparations  deliveries  to  the  value  of  twenty  million  marks.'

The  conflict  took  an  unexpected  turn  for  both  sides.  After  studying
the  reports  of  both  parties  Moscow  ordered:  'A  corresponding
number  of  highly  skilled  German  experts  is  to  be  drawn  from  the
staff  of  the  Zeiss  works  at  Jena  and  its  subsidiary  undertakings  for
work  in  the  optical  industry  of  the  Soviet  Union,  chiefly  in  the
dismantled  Zeiss  undertakings;  they  are  to  be  recruited  on  the  basis  of
individual  contracts  and  transferred  to  their  new  assignments.  The
selection  of  these  experts  and  the  execution  of  this  order  are
entrusted  to  the  director  of  the  Zeiss  works  at  Jena,  Comrade
Dobrovolsky.  Simultaneously  it  is  decreed  that  the  restoration  of  the


main  undertaking  Zeiss-Jena  is  to  be  forced  in  accordance  with
previous  decrees.  Signed:  Minister  for  Precision  Industry,  by
plenipotentiary  powers  from  the  Council  of  Ministers  of  the  U.S.S.R.'

So  Dobrovolsky  had  achieved  a partial  success.  It  had  been
decided  that  the  first  step  was  to  dismantle  the  Zeiss  experts.  But
what  was  one  to  make  of  the  fact  that  one  and  the  same  decree
demanded

the  destruction  and  also  the  'forced  restoration'  of  one  and  the
same  undertaking?


322


Some  days  previously,  in  the  Tagliche  Rundtchau  I had  read  a
nauseating  letter  written  by  one  of  the  German  specialists  who
had  been  sent  to  the  Soviet  Union  on  the  basis  of  an  'individuals
contract',  which  really  meant  compulsion.  The  happy  expert
hastened  to  inform  the  world  that  he  was  doing  very  well  and
was  earning  10,000  roubles  a month.  At  this  same  period  Marshal
Sokolovsky  was  receiving  5,000  roubles  a month.  The  average
Soviet  engineer  receives  800  to  1 ,200  roubles  a month.

The  deed  was  done:  a considerable  proportion  of  the  workers  and
technical  staff  at  Jena  was  sent  to  the  East  'on  the  basis  of
individual  contracts'.  The  Zeiss  output  fell.  Dobrovolsky  celebrated
his  victory,  and  sought  to  convince  everybody  of  the  soundness  of
his  theory  that  the  Zeiss  works  must  be  dismantled  completely.

But  now  Major  Dubov  and  I were  traveling  to  Jena  as  spies  venturing
into  the  enemy  camp.

"Why,  old  colleague,  how's  things?"  Major  Dubov  shook
Dobrovolsky's  hand  effusively.

"What  wind  has  blown  you  here?"  The  general  welcomed  his  old
comrade  in  a somewhat  unfriendly  manner.  He  behaved  like  a
dictator  in  the  works,  and  simultaneously  like  the  commander  of  a
besieged  fortress.  Especially  when  his  visitors  smelt  of  the  S.M.A,

I stepped  aside  and  turned  to  study  examples  of  Zeiss  products
which  were  attached  to  the  wall,  to  give  the  impression  that  I was
not  in  the  least  interested  in  business  matters.  But  when  Major
Dubov  had  drawn  Dobrovolsky  into  his  private  office  I set  to  work
to  turn  the  general's  flank

Through  a communicating  door  I passed  from  Dobrovolsky's
waiting  room  into  the  waiting  room  of  the  German  director.  I
showed  the  woman  secretary  my  documents  with  Marshal  Sokolovsky'
signature,  and  expressed  a wish  to  see  the  director.  He  was
very  glad  to  see  me,  and  hurriedly  got  rid  of  the  visitors  who  were
with  him.  He  was  a fairly  young  man,  a member  of  the  Socialist
Unity  Party.  Only  recently  he  had  been  a worker  in  the  packing
department  of  the  works.  Now  he  was  the  director.  Just  the  sort  of
man  I wanted  to  get  hold  of.  Not  intelligent,  but  an  energetic
executive.

"Well,  Herr  Director,  tell  me  how  things  are  going!"  I said.

I knew  quite  well  that  two  feelings  were  struggling  for  mastery
within  him:  his  fear  of  Dobrovolsky  and  a feeling  of  professional  or
national  duty,  if  such  conceptions  exist  at  all  for  members  of  the
Socialist  Unity  Party.  He  must  realize  that  the  S.M.A.  stood  for  the


interests  of  the  works,  so  far  as  its  continued  existence  was
concerned.  I had  no  need  to  explain  the  situation  to  him,  he  knew  it
very  well.  He  only  wished  to  be  assured  that  Dobrovolsky  would  not
learn  anything  of  our  conversation.

Despite  his  apparently  quite  genuine  desire  to  spike  Dobrovolsky's
guns,  my  talk  with  him  did  not  get  me  very  far.  I thanked  him  for
his  exceptionally  useless  information  and  asked  his  permission  to
talk  to  the  higher  technical  staff,  'just  to  elucidate  certain  details'.

He  was  so  forthcoming  as  to  put  his  office  at  my  disposition.  A few
minutes  later  a gaunt  man  in  horn  spectacles  and  a white  overall
came  in.  He  was  a being  of  a different  cut.  I stared  at  him  silently,
and  smiled,  as  though  he  were  an  old  acquaintance.  I had  already
gathered  information  concerning  the  technical  managers  of  the
works.  After  a few  preliminary  remarks  concerning  Zeiss  and  its
production  we  understood  each  other.

I told  him  frankly  that,  although  I was  not  moved  by  any
philanthropic  impulses,  my  object  nonetheless  was  to  free  the  works
from  Dobrovolsky's  terror  regime.  In  this  particular  instance  we
were  involuntary  allies.  I assured  him  that  our  conversation  would
be  kept  a dead  secret.  He  declared  himself  ready  to  place  his
knowledge  and  experience  at  the  disposition  of  the  S.M.A.

"What  in  your  view  are  the  bottlenecks  in  the  work  of  the
undertaking,  Herr  Doctor?"  I tried  to  minimize  the  catastrophic
situation  by  using  the  euphemistic  word  'bottlenecks'.

"It  would  be  simpler  to  specify  the  bottles!"  he  replied  with
a mournful  smile.  "There's  a shortage  of  everything.  But  the  chief
thing  is  that  we've  been  deprived  of  our  brains,  our  specialists.  And
that  damage  cannot  be  made  good  for  decades."

He  went  on  to  paint  a pitiful  picture.  Unlike  Soviet  industry,

German  industry  depends  to  a particularly  high  extent  on  the  co
operation  of  related  enterprises.  In  the  Soviet  Union  economic  con

siderations  were  sacrificed  in  order  to  achieve  autonomy  in  industry
whether  large  or  small,  both  on  a national  scale  and  in  regard  to
individual  and  factories.  This  issue  was  decided  not  so  much  by
economic  as  by  military  strategic  factors.

The  basis  of  capitalist  economy  is  that  production  should  at  least
pay  its  way.  The  structure  of  any  enterprise  and  its  viability  are
governed  by  strictly  economic  calculation  and  an  active  balance.
Western  economists  would  consider  it  absurd  that  in  the  Soviet
Union  the  majority  of  the  chief  and  basic  industrial  undertakings


324


work  at  a loss  and  are  dependent  on  a State  subsidy,  which  the
State  through  its  plan  pumps  out  of  light  industry  by  over  pricing
means  of  consumption,  and  from  collectivized  agriculture.

At  the  moment  we  are  still  working  with  old  stocks  and  semi
manufactures.  We  are  not  getting  any  new  deliveries.  When  these
stocks  are  exhausted  . . ."  the  technical  director  threw  out  his
hand  in  despair.  "Our  former  suppliers  in  the  Soviet  zone  have
largely  ceased  to  exist.  The  promised  raw  materials  from  the  Soviet
haven't  started  to  come  in  yet.  It  is  practically  impossible  to
obtain  anything  from  the  western  zone.  We've  already  tried  sending
lorries  over  the  frontier  illegally,  at  our  own  risk,  in  order  to
renew  commercial  contacts  and  thus  get  hold  of  something.  But  that
is  no  solution."

We  Soviet  engineers  were  frequently  amazed  at  the  vitality
German  industry,  despite  all  the  difficulties  of  total  warfare,  the
capitulation,  and  the  dismantling  process.  At  the  capitulation
stocks  of  raw  materials  in  many  German  works  were  often  larger  than
those  held  by  Soviet  works  in  peacetime.

In  May  and  June  1945,  immediately  after  the  fall  of  Berlin,  Soviet
dismantlers  hurriedly  dismantled  the  industrial  plants  at  Siemens
stadt,  the  heart  of  the  German  electro-technical  industry.  Even
then,  before  the  Potsdam  Conference,  it  was  known  that  the  capital
of  Germany  was  to  be  occupied  by  all  the  four  allies.  Officially
this  decision  was  taken  on  5 June  1945,  by  inter-allied  agreement.

But  the  Western  Allies'  entry  into  Berlin  was  artificially  delayed
for  another  month.  The  reason?  Dismantling.  The  Soviet  dismantling
brigades  worked  feverishly  day  and  night  in  the  sectors  of  Berlin  to
be  handed  over.  And  they  dismantled  in  earnest:  right  down  to  the
pipes  of  water  closets.

A year  later  I visited  Siemensstadt  in  the  company  of  Colonel
Vassiliev,  who  had  been  in  charge  of  the  dismantling  operation
in  these  works.  He  shook  his  head  in  astonishment.  "Where  on  earth
have  they  got  all  this  new  plant  from?  Why,  we  even  removed  the
cables  from  the  conduitsl"  The  German  directors  greeted  the  colonel
genially  as  an  old  acquaintance.  "Ah,  Colonel,  how  are  things  with
you?  Have  you  any  orders  for  us?"  And  that  without  a hint  of  irony,
simply  with  an  eye  to  business.

The  Zeiss  technical  director  continued:

"We're  trying  to  meet  and  we  are  meeting  demands  so  far  as
we  can.  But  it  is  being  achieved  only  against  an  ultimate  exhaustion


325


of  production.  This  is  an  internal  process  which  so  far  is  barely
perceptible;  but  one  day  it  will  lead  to  a complete  standstill."

I asked  him  to  draw  up  a report,  together  with  an  economic
analysis  of  the  state  of  the  undertaking.  I would  collect  these
documents  on  my  way  back  to  Berlin.  I once  more  assured  him  that
his  name  would  not  appear  in  my  report  to  Marshal  Sokolovsky.

I took  the  same  line  with  two  other  technical  managers.  I had  to  get
a general  picture  of  the  situation,  though  in  fact  there  was  little
difference  between  their  stories.

During  a visit  to  the  head  of  the  Economic  Department  of  the
Jena  commandatura  I learned  more  details  of  Dobrovolsky's  activ
ities.  In  regard  to  the  Zeiss  works  the  commandatura  was  working
for  both  sides.  It  readily  helped  Dobrovolsky  to  draw  up  'individual
labour  contracts'  for  the  Zeiss  specialists  to  be  sent  to  the  Soviet
Union,  and  just  as  readily  it  communicated  all  the  details  of  this
special  measure  to  the  S.M.A.  representative.

We  obtained  no  new  information  from  the  head  of  the  S.M,A.

Economic  Department  in  Thuringia,  but  he  was  loud  in  his  complaints
about  Dobrovolsky:  "He's  sabotaging  the  S.M.A.  work  shamelessly.

He  doesn't  care  what  happens  to  reparations,  so  long  as  he  enjoys
Moscow's  favour.  'So  many  units  of  installations  sent  to  the  address
of  the  Ministry  for  Precision  Tool  Industry.'  But  he  doesn't  care  a
damn  what  benefit  is  derived  from  them.  And  now  in  the  Soviet  Union
men  are  being  put  in  prison  because  they  can't  make  use  of  the  plant."

That  was  quite  true.  For  instance,  in  one  German  works  a serial
installation  of  a hundred  specialized  machine-tools  for  the  mass
manufacture  of  a certain  article  was  dismantled  and  sent  to  Russia.

But  on  the  way  one  of  the  special  machines  attracted  the  interest  of
another  dismantler,  and  without  more  ado  it  was  readdressed  to  a
new  consignee.  When  it  arrived  at  its  destination  it  was  discovered
that  a little  mistake  had  been  mide;  it  was  a special  machine  that


could  not  be  used  in  that  works  at  all.  So  without  unnecessary
fuss  it  was  scrapped.  But  when  the  rest  of  the  series  arrived  at  the
rightful  destination  and  they  set  to  work  to  install  them,  it  was  found
that  one  machine  was  missing.  Yet  without  it  the  entire  series  was
useless.  There  was  no  hope  of  finding  a substitute  for  the  missing
item,  so  the  whole  lot  was  scrapped.  The  total  cost  was  charged  to


326


capital  investments',  and  several  men  were  brought  to  trial  for
sabotage.

Our  car  sped  through  the  frosty  winter  air  of  Thuringia;  Karlshorst's
emissaries  drew  up  the  balance-sheet  of  their  work.  Sokolov
sky  would  have  material  for  another  report  to  Moscow  and  for  further
charges  against  Dobrovolsky.  But  there  would  be  no  change  in  the
situation.  The  Kremlin  knows  what  it  needs.

Major  Dubov  was  more  interested  in  the  purely  technical  aspect
of  the  affair.  One  day  he  unexpectedly  asked  me:  "Do  you  know  the
story  of  Zeiss  at  all?"  Without  waiting  for  my  reply  he  went  on:

"It's  a very  interesting  and  striking  story.  While  they  were  still
alive  old  Zeiss  and  the  scientific  founder  of  the  works,  Professor
Ernst  Abbe,  transformed  the  enterprise  into  a foundation.  A
foundation  statute  strictly  bound  the  administration;  the  supreme
management  was  vested  in  representatives  of  the  town's  municipal
council  and  representatives  of  the  works.  The  district  of  Thuringia
appointed  the  foundation  president.  So  you  had  a kind  of  voluntary
socialization  of  the  works  without  the  disadvantages  of  a , state
capitalistic  enterprise.  The  revenues  have  contributed  greatly  to  the
material  and  cultural  prosperity  of  the  city  of  Jena.  And  that  is
precisely  what  we  in  Russia  came  to  later,  only  in  a different  form.

"And  in  addition  . . . ."  Major  Dubov  gazed  out  of  the  window

and  said,  apparently  incidentally:  "In  addition,  under  the  founder's,

will  all  the  workers  and  employees  in  the  works  directly

participation  in  the  profits.  Which  is  exactly  what  should  happen  in

the  ideal  socialistic  society,  according  to  our  theories.  But  that  has  existed

in  the  Zeiss  works  for  decades,  and  still  exists  today."

Our  driver,  Vassily  Ivanovich,  whose  presence  we  tended  to  over
look,  pushed  his  cap  on  to  the  back  of  his  head  and  added:

"Not  exists,  but  existed  . . . until  we  arrived."


327


CHAPTER  SIXTEEN
Stalin's  Party

The  days  passed  into  weeks,  the  weeks  into  months.  An  incessant
lapse  of  time  in  which  there  was  no  purpose,  in  which  one  only
looked  back  and  felt  a great  emptiness  in  the  soul.

Winter  had  come.  The  new  year  1947  was  approaching.  In  us  Soviet
men,  who  stood  on  the  bound  between  two  worlds,  this  aroused
few  cheerful  memories  and  still  fewer  cheerful  expectations.  We
had  recently  witnessed  two  noteworthy  events:  in  the  October  there
had  been  the  first  post-war  elections  to  the  Berlin  municipal
council,  and  in  November  the  regular  election  of  candidates  to  the
Supreme  Soviet  of  the  U.S.S.R.

The  German  elections  aroused  far  greater  interest  among  the
Soviet  residents  in  Berlin  than  one  would  have  expected.  Perhaps
it  was  because  they  differed  fundamentally  from  those  to  which  we
were  accustomed.  It  was  strange  to  see  the  pre-election  slogans  of  the
various  parties.  We  were  struck  by  the  powerful  and  intelligent
propaganda  of  the  Socialist  Unity  Party.  Here  one  sensed  the  long
experience  of  Soviet  propaganda;  it  was  self-confident  and  shame
less.  We,  who  were  the  masters  of  the  S.E.D.  and  knew  what  was
behind  it  all,  were  particularly  struck  by  this  latter  aspect.

I well  remember  one  incident  that  occurred  during  the  Berlin
elections.  One  Sunday  morning  I and  two  other  officers  decided  to
take  advantage  of  the  fine  weather  to  go  for  a motor-cycle  ride.  We
borrowed  three  heavy  military  motor-cycles  from  the  Auto  Battalion
and  tore  out  of  Karlshorst  along  the  Frankfurter-Allee.

On  our  way  to  the  Alexanderplatz  we  overtook  a slowly  marching
column  of  men  with  crimson  banners  and  flags  in  their  hands.  The
demonstrators  made  an  exceptionally  depressing  and  joyless
impression.  Men  in  Thaelmann  caps  and  red  armbands  were  bustling

backward  and  forward  along  its  sides.  We  accelerated  to  drive  past.

It  had  been  organized  by  the  trade  unions  of  the  Soviet  sector  to
express  the  wishes  and  desires  of  the  German  people.  Attendance
was  compulsory.  Any  man  who  didn't  turn  up  was  in  danger  of  losing
his  job.  It  was  pitiful  and  absurd  to  see  this  flock  of  sheep  moving
along  under  the  supervision  of  the  herdsmen  in  Thaelmann  caps.

I don't  know  how  it  came  about,  but  all  the  three  of  us  Soviet
officers  began  to  ride  our  powerful  military  motor-cycles  round  and
round  that  column.  The  demonstrators  looked  at  one  another


328


anxiously,  assuming  that  we  were  a military  patrol  sent  to  ensure
that  the  procession  didn't  melt  away.  The  herdsmen  stared  at  us
in  astonishment,  and  as  we  drove  close  to  the  edge  of  the  column
they  had  to  jump  aside  to  avoid  being  knocked  down.  For  our  part,
we  were  sickened  at  the  sight  of  this  shameful  comedy,  and  on  the
other  hand  we  enjoyed  not  having  to  take  part  in  it  ourselves  for  once.

On  that  same  day  a Soviet  patrol  shot  an  American  who  was
attempting  to  photograph  a similar  demonstration  in  the  Soviet
sector  of  Berlin.  Evidently  someone  was  of  the  opinion  that  such
photographs  might  have  the  same  effect  on  the  close  observer  that
that  procession  had  made  on  us.

The  elections  were  held  on  21  October.  I have  never  known  people
in  the  Soviet  Union  to  take  any  interest  in  the  results  of  elections
to  the  Soviet  elected  authorities.  But  on  that  election  day  in  Berlin,

I doubt  whether  there  was  one  man  in  Karlshorst  who  was  not
interested  in  the  results.  Most  interesting  of  all  was  the  fact  that  the
S.E.D.  came  last  but  one  of  the  parties.  Not  much  was  said  about  this
eloquent  circumstance.

In  the  S.M.A.  Administration  for  Industry  the  Berlin  elections,
led  to  the  following  conversation  between  Captain  Bagdassarian
and  Major  Zhdanov:

"You  know,"  Captain  Bagdassarian  said,  as  he  pointed  to  the
results  printed  in  one  of  the  newspapers,  "when  I think  of  these
elections  I get  a queer  thought.  All  the  parties  are  voting.  Supposing
the  Communist  Party  gets  a majority.  Does  it  mean  that  the  other-
will  let  it  take  over  the  power?"

"Yes,  it  looks  like  it,"  Major  Zhdanov  answered  uncertainly.

"That's  funny!  If  the  Communist  Party  comes  to  power,  its  first,
step  will  be  to  wring  the  necks  of  all  the  other  parties.  Yet  these
other

parties  are  ready  to  give  the  power  into  the  Communist  Party'
hands  without  making  any  resistance.  That  doesn't  make  sense  !"


"You  can't  make  sense  of  this  democracy  business  all  at  once!"
the  major  sighed.

"It's  utter  idiocy  !"  the  captain  agreed,


329


"Perhaps  it  isn't  so  stupid  after  all."  The  major  knitted  his  brows
in  the  attempt  to  get  to  the  bottom  of  it  all.  "Democracy  as  a
political  form, is  the  will  of  the  majority.  If  the  majority  votes  for
communism,  there  will  be  communism.  True,  very  few  are  voting
for  it  at  the  moment!"  he  ended  on  a different  note.

"All  the  same,  it's  queer."  Captain  Bagdassarian  ran  his  fingers
through  his  curly  hair.  "They  all  sling  abuse  at  one  another,  but
nobody  puts  anybody  else  into  prison.  But  we  do  just  the  reverse:
one  says  nothing  and  is  put  in  prison.  A man  doesn't  even  think,  and
still  he's  put  in  prison

In  December  1946  the  Officers'  Club  in  Karlshorst  was  the  scene
of  electoral  meetings  at  which  candidates  were  nominated  for  the
U.S.S.R.  Supreme  Soviet.  On  the  day  set  apart  for  the  Administration
for  Industry  all  the  workers  in  the  Administration  had  to  be
present  in  the  Club,  which  had  been  decorated  for  the  occasion  with
additional  portraits  of  the  leaders,  and  red  bunting.

We  sat  for  some  time  in  the  hall,  utterly  bored.  At  last  the  chair
man  called  on  a speaker,  who  had  been  previously  arranged.  With
a paper  in  his  hand  the  speaker  went  to  the  platform  and,  speaking
in  a monotonous  tone,  began  to  explain  how  happy  we  all  were
that  we  ourselves  could  elect  the  representatives  to  our  country's
supreme  governmental  authority.  Then  a further  speaker  went  to
the  platform  to  propose  our  candidate  from  the  Special  Electoral
District  formed  by  the  Soviet  Occupation  Zone.  Then  the  candidate
himself  came  out  from  the  wings  and  told  us  his  life  story.  He  was  a
general,  but  I doubt  whether  he  had  ever  spoken  in  such  a humble
and  lackadaisical  manner  in  all  his  previous  military  career.  The
second  candidate  was  someone  quite  unknown  to  all  of  us.  We  knew
such  a person  existed  only  when  he  went  to  the  platform  not  from
the  wings,  but  from  the  body  of  the  hall.  He  was  chosen  to  play  the
role  of  candidate  'from  the  very  heart  of  the  people'.  Both  candidates
had  been  put  forward  in  advance  by  the  S.M.A.  Political
Administration  and  had  been  approved  by  Moscow.

We  all  waited  impatiently  for  this  boring  procedure  to  finish,
especially  as  it  was  to  be  followed  by  a film  show.  When  the  chair
man  announced  that  he  proposed  to  take  the  vote  the  hall  sighed
with  relief,  and  everybody  hurriedly  raised  their  hands  without


waiting  to  be  invited.  Armed  with  pencils  and  paper,  the  tellers
hurried  through  the  hall.  The  audience  began  to  murmur  with
impatience.  At  last  the  votes  were  counted,  and  the  chairman  asked  in


330


a drowsy  tone:  "Those  against?"

There  was  a dead  silence.  Nobody  stirred.

The  chairman  waited  for  a moment  or  two,  then  looked  round  the
hall.  Then,  to  intensify  the  effect  of  the  unanimous  decision,  he
asked  in  a tone  of  assumed  surprise:

"Nobody  against?"

And  thus  we  elected  two  men  'chosen  of  the  *people'  to  the
U.S.S.R.  Supreme  Soviet.

The  turn  of  the  year  brought  several  innovations  that  made  one
take  yet  another  glance  back  over  the  eighteen  months  that  had
passed  since  the  capitulation  of  Germany.

In  the  early  autumn  of  1946  the  United  States  Secretary  of  State,
Byrnes,  had  made  a speech  in  Stuttgart,  soberly  surveying  events
since  the  end  of  the  war  and  indicating  the  main  features  of  American
foreign  policy.  Only  now,  after  eighteen  months,  were  the  Americans
beginning  to  suspect  that  it  was  hard  to  sup  out  of  the  same  bowl  as
good  old  Uncle  Joe.  Byrnes'  speech  was  not  to  the  Kremlin's  liking,
and  it  was  given  a sharp  answer  in  Molotov's  speech  on  the  occasion
of  the  revolutionary  celebrations  on  7 November.  So  much
importance  was  attached  to  this  speech  that  it  was  made  the  subject
of  compulsory  study  in  all  the  political  study  circles  throughout  the
S.M.A.  There  was  no  attempt  to  conceal  the  connection  between  the
Byrnes  and  Molotov  speeches  from  the  senior  officials  of  the  S.M.A.;
the  two  speeches  were  studied  simultaneously,  and  those  taking  part
in  the  discussion  had  to  unmask  the  American's  imperialist  intrigues
and  to  stress  Molotov's  peace-loving  policy.  But  Byrnes'  speech  was
regarded  as  too  dangerous  for  the  less  politically  educated  workers,'
and  they  were  allowed  to  discuss  only  their  own  leader's  speech.

These  two  political  speeches  can  be  regarded  as  marking  the
beginning  of  the  cold  war.  In  the  Control  Commission  Allied  relations
cooled  off  still  more  and  went  no  further  than  diplomatic  courtesy
required.  Decisions  affecting  the  future  of  Germany  were  more  and
more  removed  from  the  Control  Commission  meetings  to  the  private
offices  of  the  Kremlin  and  the  White  House.

This  situation  also  served  as  a signal  for  a final  tightening  of  the
screw  on  the  Soviet  post-war  front.  The  S.M.A.  Political  Administration
issued  an  instruction  accusing  minor  Party  authorities  of  having
lost  contact  with  the  masses  and  neglecting  political  educational
work.  This  was  the  crack  of  the  whip.  One  could  guess  what  would
follow.  In  fact  the  first  consequence  was  a change  of  Party  organizers
in  all  the  S.M.A.  departments.  This  was  followed  by  measures  to


331


tighten  things  up  all  through  the  Soviet  machinery.

Hitherto  the  Soviet  residents  of  Karlshorst  had  lived  and  worked
without  -engaging  in  political  study.  Anybody  who  knows  anything
about  Soviet  life  will  know  what  that  meant.  The  higher  authorities
were  secretly  astonished,  the  smaller  fry  quietly  rejoiced;  but  one
and  all  held  their  tongues,  on  the  principle  of  not  mentioning  the
devil  in  case  he  appeared.  But  now  political  studies  were  started,
including  study  of  the  Short  Hi8tory  of  the  C.P.S.U.  And  it  had  to
be  carried  through  in  shock  tempo  at  that.  Evidently  to  make  up  for
lost  time.

The  next  step  was  a campaign  to  raise  labor  discipline.  It  was
decided  to  remind  Soviet  citizens  abroad  that  there  was  such  a
thing  as  the  Soviet  labor  code.  Brand-new  boards  with  hooks  and
numbers  were  hung'  up  in  all  the  departments,  and  every  worker  in
each  department  had  to  take  off  and  rehang  his  own  allotted  number
four  times  a day.  In  the  Soviet  Union  these  boards  are  the  object  of
fear,  but  their  effect  on  us  was  rather  to  get  our  backs  up.  The  head
of  the  Administration  for  Industry,  Alexandrov,  entrusted  his
number  to  his  chauffeur,  who  very  quickly  lost  it.  We  officers
regarded  the  boards  as  an  insult  and  took  it  in  turn  to  remove  several
numbers  at  a time.  But  once  more  Soviet  law  with  all  its
consequences  hung  as  a threat  over  the  head  of  every  one  of  us.

Then  an  hysterical  'vigilance'  campaign  was  inaugurated.

Personnel  Departments  were  instituted  in  all  the  S.M.A.  offices  with
the  obvious  job  of  keeping  closer  watch  on  the  workers.  Once  more
extensive  questionnaires  were  drawn  up  'for  Soviet  citizens
abroad'.  These  with  their  endless  list  of  questions  had  to  be  filled
afresh  every  three  months.  Many  of  us  kept  a copy  of  the  questionnaire
and  our  answers,  and  next  time  simply  copied  the  old  answers
on  to  the  new  form.

A demobilized  lieutenant  of  the  N.K.V.D.  forces  was  appointed
head  of  the  Personnel  Department  in  the  Administration  for
industry.  From  the  very  beginning  he  behaved  with  such  rudeness  and
insolence  that  many  of  the  officers,  who  were  of  higher  rank,  were
infuriated.  His  room  was  in  the  basement,  and  he  would  ring  some
one  up:  "Comrade  Colonel,  come  down  to  me  and  fill  in  your


questionnaire."  But  as  often  as  not  he  got  the  answer:  "If  you
need  it  filled  in,  bring  it  up  to  me.  At  the  moment  I'm  still  a
colonel,  I believe."

An  order  issued  by  General  Dratvin,  chief  of  staff  of  the  S.M.A.,


332


was  circulated  for  the  information  of  all  members  of  the  S.M.A.

In  it,  without  actually  mentioning  names,  he  stated  that  the  wives
of  quite  a number  of  highly  placed  Soviet  officials  were  going  to  the
Berlin  western  sector  while  their  husbands  were  at  work,  and  were
forming  impermissible  acquaintances  among  officers  of  the  western
powers.  The  order  spoke  in  very  sharp  terms;  it  referred  to  fashion
able  restaurants,  expensive  furs,  and,  to  crown  all,  agents  of
foreign  intelligence  services.  All  the  accused  women  were  returned
to  the  Soviet  Union  at  twenty-four  hours'  notice,  and  the  husbands
were  sternly  reprimanded  for  their  lack  of  Bolshevik  vigilance.

The  secret  purpose  of  this  unusually  frank  order  was  revealed  in
its  second  paragraph,  in  which  all  members  of  the  S.M.A.  were
strictly  forbidden  to  visit  the  western  sector,  and  were  reminded
of  the  necessity  to  be  particularly  vigilant  in  the  circumstances  of
residence  abroad.  The  women  were  chastised  in  order  to  serve  as  A,
warning  to  others.

In  conclusion,  General  Dratvin  threatened  the  application  of,
sterner  measures  to  all  who  violated  the  order ...  down  to  and,
including  return  to  the  Soviet  Union.  In  saying  so  much,  the  general
went  too  far.  For  thus  officially,  in  the  words  of  the  S.M.A.  chief
of  staff,  return  to  one's  native  land  was  recognized  as  serious
punishment  for  Soviet  citizens,  abroad.

None  of  this  was  anything  new  to  us.  We  had  experienced  it
before,  at  home.  But  coming  after  we  had  won  the  war,  after  we  had
looked  forward  hopefully  to  changes  in  the  Soviet  system,  and  above
all  after  our  comparatively  free  life  in  occupied  Germany,  this
abrupt  return  to  former  practices  gave  us  furiously  to  think.  Or
rather,  to  avoid  thinking  if  possible.  That  was  the  only  hope.

I bad  made  Major  Dubov's  acquaintance  during  the  war.  Even
a brief  comradeship  at  the  front  binds  men  together  more  strongly
than  many  years  of  acquaintance  in  normal  conditions.  That  m
have  been  the  reason  why  we  greeted  each  other  as  old  acquaintances
when  we  met  again  as  fellow  workers  in  the  S.M.A.

He  was  over  forty.  Outwardly  stern  and  incommunicative,  he
had  few  friends,  and  avoided  society.  At  first  I regarded  his  reserve
simply  as  a trait  of  his  character.  But  after  a time  I noticed  that  he
had  a morbid  antipathy  to  anybody  who  began  to  talk  politics  in
his  hearing.  I assumed  that  he  had  good  reasons  for  his  attitude,
and  never  bothered  him  with  unnecessary  questions.

It  so  happened  that  I was  the  only  person  Dubov  introduced  to  his


333


family.  He  had  a charming,  well  educated  wife,  and  two  children.
When  I came  to  know  his  family,  I realized  that  he  was  not  only
a good  husband  and  father,  but  a rarely  decent  fellow  morally.

His  one  great  passion  was  hunting.  That  brought  us  still  closer
together.  We  often  drove  out  of  Berlin  on  a Saturday  and  spent  all
day  and  all  night  hunting,  cut  off  from  Karlshorst  and  all  the  world.

On  one  occasion,  tired  out  after  hours  of  wandering  through
the  dense  growth  of  thickets  and  innumerable  little  lakes,  we  flung
ourselves  down  to  have  a rest.  The  conversation  happened  to  turn
to  discussion  of  an  officer  we  both  knew,  and  I casually  remarked:

"He's  still  young  and  stupid  . . ."

The  major  gave  me  a close  look  and  asked  with  a queer  smile:

"And  are  you  so  old  and  wise?"

"Well,  not  quite,"  I answered.  "But  I've  learned  to  keep  a still
tongue  in  my  head."

He  again  looked  at  me  fixedly.  "Tell  me,  has  anything  ever
happened  to  you  ...  of ...  you  know  what?"

"Absolutely  nothing,"  I replied,  realizing  what  he  was  hinting  at.

"Then  why  aren't  you  in  the  Party?"  he  asked  almost  roughly.

"I've  simply  not  had  the  time,"  I answered  shortly,  for  I had  no
wish  to  go  further  into  details.

'Now  listen,  Gregory  Petrovich,  it's  not  a joking  matter,"  he
said  slowly,  and  I caught  an  almost  fatherly  note  in  his  voice.

"For  a man  in  your  position  it  smacks  almost  of  a deliberate
demonstration.  It  might  even  have  serious  consequences  for  you."

"I'm  doing  my  job  as  well  as  any  Party  man!"  I retorted.

He  smiled,  rather  sadly.  "That's  how  I argued  once,"  he  said  with
bitter  irony.

Then,  without  my  prompting  him,  in  an  objective  sort  of  tone  he  told
me  his  story:  how  he  had  come  to  join  the  Party,  and  why  he  avoided
people  who  talked  politics.  In  1988  Dubov  was  an  engineer  working  in
a Leningrad  factory  producing  precision  instruments.  He  was  a
capable  engineer,  and  held


334


a responsible  post  connected  with  the  construction  of  instruments
for  the  air  force  and  the  navy.  He  liked  his  job,  devoted  all  his
free  time  to  research,  and  bothered  little  about  politics.  Despite  his
responsible  post  he  remained  a non-Party  man.

One  day  he  was  summoned  to  the  director's  room.  From  that
moment  he  was  not  seen  in  the  works  again.  Nor  did  he  return  home.
His  wife  found  out  what  had  happened  to  him  when  the  N.K.V.D.
men  turned  up  at  their  apartment  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  made
a thorough  search,  and  confiscated  all  her  husband's  personal
property.  Next  day  she  went  to  the  N.K.V.D.  to  ask  for  news  of  him.
She  was  told  they  knew  nothing  about  him,  and  was  advised  not  to
worry,  nor  to  worry  others.  If  there  was  any  need,  she  would  be
informed.

Dubov  spent  more  than  a year  in  the  investigation  cells  of  the
N.K.V.D.  He  was  charged  with  sabotage  and  counter-revolutionary
activity.  The  sentence  was  the  standard  one:  ten  years'  imprison
ment,  to  be  spent  in  one  of  the  camps  in  Central  Siberia,  where  new
war  factories  were  being  built.  There  he  continued  to  work  as  an
engineer.

He  discovered  the  real  reason  for  his  arrest  only  two  years  later.
Among  a fresh  batch  of  prisoners  he  recognized  the  former  chief
engineer  at  the  Leningrad  factory  for  precision  instruments.  Dubov
was  delighted  to  see  him,  but  the  man  seemed  restrained  and  avoided
Dubov  as  much  as  possible.  But  as  the  months  passed  the  two
engineers  struck  up  a friendship  based  on  their  common  memories  of
freedom.  One  day  the  conversation  turned  to  the  reasons  why  they
had  been  sent  to  the  camp.

"Someone  denounced  me,"  Dubov  said.

The,  chief  engineer  looked  away,  then  sighed,  and  laughed
bitterly.  "Would  you  like  to  know  who  it  was?"  he  asked.

Dubov  stared  at  him  distrustfully.

"I  did  it,"  the  other  man  said,  and  hurried  on  without  giving
Dubov  a chance  to  comment:  "We  regularly  received  orders  from  the
N.K.V.D.  to  provide  them  with  so  many  persons  possessing  such  and
such  qualifications.  The  lists  had  to  be  drawn  up  by  the  Party
organizer  and  confirmed  by  the  chief  engineer  and  the  director.  What
could  I do?  I too  had  a wife  and  children

"But  why  was  I put  on  the  list?"  Dubov  asked.


335


"Because  you  were  not  a Party  member,"  the  former  chief
engineer  said.  "The  Party  organizer  put  you  down."

Dubov  said  nothing  for  some  time,  then  he  looked  wearily  at  the
other  man  and  asked:

"But  how  did  you  get  here?"

The  engineer  only  shrugged  his  shoulders  helplessly.

Dubov  spent  four  years  in  the  camp.  But  during  all  those  years
he  did  not  suffer  as  much  as  his  wife  and  children.  Under  Soviet
law  a political  prisoner's  guilt  extends  to  include  his  family.  His  wife
was  morally  and  physically  shattered.  Their  children  grew  up  in  the
knowledge  that  their  father  was  'an  enemy  of  the  people',  and  felt
always  that  they  were  not  like  other  children.

In  1948  he  was  released  before  the  expiry  of  his  term.  With  no
explanation  given,  he  was  completely  rehabilitated  and  the
conviction  quashed.  He  was  called  up  straight  from  the  camp  into
the  army.  That  was  the  real  reason  for  his  premature  discharge.
Without  seeing  his  family  he  went  as  an  officer  directly  to  the  front.

At  the  front  he  was  an  exemplary  officer,  just  as  he  had  been  an
exemplary  engineer  in  Leningrad  and  an  exemplary  prisoner  in
the  Siberian  camp.  He  was  just  to  his  men  and  ruthless  to  the  enemy.
And  he  was  devoted  to  his  native  land,  with  all  its  Party  organizers
and  prison  camps.

Shortly  before  the  end  of  the  war  he  received  another  battle
decoration,  and  in  addition  was  singled  out  for  the  honour  of  being
invited  to  join  the  Communist  Party.  This  time  he  did  not  hesitate.
Without  a word  he  filled  in  the  questionnaires.  And  without  a word
he  accepted  the  Party  ticket  which  the  corps  commander's  political
deputy  presented  to  him.

In  the  S.M.A.  Major  Dubov  was  regarded  as  one  of  their  most
reliable  and  knowledgeable  engineers.  He  was  given  the  responsible
task  of  transferring  the  German  industry  in  the  Soviet  zone  to  new
lines,  but  his  rank  and  position  remained  unchanged.  Why?  Because,
although  he  had  been  completely  rehabilitated  and  the  conviction
had  been  quashed,  in  his  personal  file  was  a curt  note:  'Conviction
under  article  58.'  That  was  enough  to  cast  a shadow  over  all  his
future  life.

During  my  stay  in  Karlshorst  I formed  a close  friendship  with
Captain  Belyavsky.  Little  by  little  I came  to  know  his  story  too,
though  he  talked  about  himself  very  reluctantly,  and  only  dropped
hints.


336


In  1986  Belyavsky  was  in  Spain,  where  he  was  a lieutenant  in  the
staff  of  the  Republican  forces.  This  was  about  the  time  that  the
Yezhov  terror  was  at  its  height  in  the  Soviet  Union,  and  one  night
his  father  was  arrested,  to  vanish  without  trace.  Belyavsky  was
immediately  recalled  from  Spain  and  demobilized.  Until  1941  he
shared  the  fate  of  other  relatives  of  'enemies  of  the  people';  in  other
words,  he  was  outside  the  pale.  All  those  spheres  of  Soviet  life  in
which  the  first  requirement  is  a completed  questionnaire  were  closed
to  him.  Only  a Soviet  citizen  can  understand  all  the  significance  of
such  a situation.

When  war  broke  out  in  1941  he  was  not  called  up  for  the  army,
since  he  was  'politically  unreliable'.  But  when  the  German  forces
began  to  lay  siege  to  his  native  city,  Leningrad,  he  went  to  the
military  commander  and  volunteered  for  service.  His  request  was
granted,  and  that  same  day,  as  an  ordinary  private,  he  was  flung  into
the  fight-in  a punitive  battalion.  In  other  words,  straight  to  his
death.  But  fate  was  more  merciful  to  him  than  the  Soviet  regime,
and  he  escaped  with  a wound.

He  spent  the  next  three  years  as  an  ordinary  soldier,  going  right
through  the  siege  of  Leningrad.  His  service  was  exemplary,  and  he
was  recommended  again  and  again  for  officer's  rank,  but  each  time
the  questionnaire  put  an  end  to  the  story.  In  1944,  when  the  Soviet
armies  were  suffering  from  a very  serious  shortage  of  officers,  he  was
summoned  to  the  staff  once  more.

The  colonel  who  interviewed  him  pointed  to  the  entry:  'article  58'
on  his  questionnaire  and  asked:  "Why  do  you  always  mention  that?"
Belyavsky  did  not  reply.

"Is  it  that  you  don't  want  to  fight?"  the  colonel  asked  sharply;
he  avoided  looking  at  the  decorations  on  Belyavsky's  chest.  Belyav
sky  only  shrugged  his  shoulders.  The  decorations  rattled  a little,  as
though  answering  the  colonel's  question.

"If  you  continue  to  make  such  entries,  I must  regard  it  as  an
attempt  to  avoid  military  service,"  the  colonel  said.  "Take  a new
form  and  fill  it  in  properly.  Leave  a space  for  your  service  rank."
Private  Mikhail  Belyavsky  did  not  return  to  his  company.

But  next  day  First-Lieutenant  BelyaVsky  was  on  his  way  to
Moscow.  In  his  pocket  he  had  an  order  to  proceed  to  the  Military
Diplomatic  College  of  the  Red  Army  General  Staff.  Men  were
needed  in  wartime,  and  there  was  no  bothering  about  a thorough


337


examination  of  questionnaires.  There  would  be  plenty  of  opportunity
for  that  after  the  war.  And  so  Mikhail  Belyavsky  entered  one  of  the
most  privileged  military  colleges  in  the  Soviet  Union.

He  was  discharged  from  the  college  in  the  autumn  of  1945  with  the
rank  of  captain,  and  was  sent  to  work  in  the  Soviet  Military
Administration.  That  was  nothing  extraordinary.  Many  of  the  students  were
freed  from  further  study  even  in  the  middle  of  their  second-year
course,  in  order  to  take  up  a post.

Captain  Belyavsky's  personal  file,  which  was  kept  in  the  S.M.A.

Personnel  Department,  was  in  spotless  order.  All  through  his
documents  the  phrase  occurred  again  and  again:  'Devoted  to  the  Lenin
Stalin  Party'.  That  was  a stereotyped  remark  and  was  to  be  found
in  almost  every  officer's  personal  file,  but  it  was  truer  of  him  than  of
the  majority.

Certain  days  were  set  apart  for  political  instruction,  and  on  one
of  these  days  Belyavsky  went  to  his  office  two  hours  earlier,  as  was
his  custom,  and  unfolded  his  papers.  The  educational  circle  to  which
he  belonged  was  of  a rather  higher  level,  for  it  consisted  exclusively
of  men  with  advanced  education.  With  earnest  faces  they  pored  over
the  pages  of  the  Short  Course,  though  they  must  have  known  that
the  book  was  full  of  lies  and  falsifications.

The  leader  of  the  circle,  who  normally  was  one  of  themselves,  began
proceedings  by  asking:

"Well,  who's  prepared  to  open  on  the  third  chapter?  Any
volunteers?"

They  all  bowed  their  heads  even  lower  over  their  books.  Some  of
them  began  to  turn  over  their  papers  hurriedly,  others  fixed  their
eyes  on  the  table  as  though  collecting  their  thoughts  with  a view
to  speaking  later.  There  was  no  volunteer.

"All  right,  then  we'll  follow  the  list,"  the  leader  proposed.  There
was  a sigh  of  relief.

The  majority  of  the  circle  leaders  kept  alphabetical  lists  of  their
circle  members.  Each  member  knew  whom  he  followed.  And  so  the
question  was  settled  quite  simply.  The  first  on  the  list  began  to
deliver  a summary  of  the  chapter,  while  the  one  who  was  to  follow
him  read  farther,  underlining  passages  with  red  pencil.  In  this  way
the  majority  of  circles  got  through  their  course  without  difficulty.

All  the  members  of  Belyavsky's  circle  had  worked  through  the
Short  Course  several  times  already.  They  were  all  bored  to  tears.

When  each  had  done  his  duty  he  sat  gazing  out  of  the  window,


338


smoking,  or  sharpening  his  pencil.


Everything  went  off  as  usual.  The  speakers  droned  away  monotonously.
The  leader  sat  with  his  eyes  on  his  notebook,  not  even  listen  ing.

It  was  a hot  day,  and  everybody  felt  sleepy.  And  in  that  drowsy
kingdom  something  happened  to  Captain  Belyavsky  that  he  himself
would  have  had  difficulty  in  explaining.

When  his  turn  was  reached  he  had  to  expatiate  on  the  passage
which  deals  with  the  Entente's  three  anti-Soviet  campaigns.  The
theme  had  an  heroic  quality  and  there  were  parallels  to  the
experiences  of  the  war  just  ended.  As  soon  as  Belyavsky  began  to  speak
the  leader  raised  his  sleepy  eyes  and  stared  at  him  in  astonishment.

And  one  by  one  all  the  others  began  to  gaze  at  him  in  bewilderment.

For  he  spoke  as  though  addressing  a meeting.  His  voice  had
a note  of  unusual  conviction.  It  sounded  a note  of  faith,  of  challenge.

He  depicted  the  three  foreign  interventions  in  Soviet  Russia  after
the  1917  revolution,  and  cleverly  linked  them  up  with  the  invasion
and  destruction  of  the  Nazi  armies  in  1941-5.  He  did  not  summarize
the  Short  Course,  he  spoke  extemporaneously,  from  a heart  burning
with  conviction.  The  bewildered  looks  of  his  fellows  expressed  the
mute  question:'Has  he  gone  mad?  Why  all  this  unnecessary  bother?'

It  happened  that  the  circle  that  day  included  the  Instructor
from  the  S.M.A.  Political  Administration,  who  was  there  as  observer.
Belyavsky's  speech  attracted  his  notice;  obviously  he  had  not
often  heard  anyone  speak  with  conviction 'm  these  circles  for
political  education.  He  made  a note  of  the  name.  Next  day  Belyav
sky  was  summoned  to  the  Political  Administration.

"Listen,  Comrade  Captain,"  the  instructor  said  to  him.  "I'm
amazed  at  you.  I've  been  looking  through  your  personal  Me.  An
exemplary  officer,  the  finest  of  testimonials,  and  yet  you're  not  a
Party  member.  That  simply  won't  do.  The  Party  must  interest
itself  in  men  like  you  ...

"No,  no,  no  . . ."  he  raised  his  hand,  as  though  afraid  Belyavsky
might  make  some  objection.  "You  made  a very  remarkable  speech
in  the  political  circle  yesterday  . . . And  yet  you've  never  been
drawn  into  Party  work.  We  shall  assign  you  to  the  task  of  giving
political  instruction  to  the  officers'  wives.  That  to  begin  with.

And  secondly,  you  must  put  in  your  application  for  Party  member
ship  at  once.  No  objections!  Get  that?"

Belyavsky  had  no  thought  of  objecting.  Membership  of  the  Party


339


connoted  a full  and  valid  position  in  Soviet  society.  His  heart  was
filled  with  joy,  he  shook  the  instructor's  hand  with  genuine  gratitude.

The  November  revolutionary  celebrations  were  drawing  near.

In  addition  to  having  charge  of  a political  education  circle,  Belyav
sky  was  entrusted  with  the  preparations  for  the  festival.  He  plunged
headlong  into  social  and  political  activity,  and  devoted  all  his  free
time  to  it.  Spiritually  he  was  born  again.  But  above  all  he  rejoiced
because  the  Party  had  forgotten  his  past,  because  he  was  no  longer
a lone  wolf  Only  now  did  he  fully  realize  how  bitterly  he  had  felt  his
alienation  from  society.

Just  about  then  an  insignificant  incident  occurred  which  had
unexpected  consequences.

Belyavsky  was  a keen  motor-cyclist.  While  working  in  the  S.M.A.
he  had  had  innumerable  specimens  of  motor-cycles  pass  through  his
hands,  and  in  the  end  he  had  picked  on  a very  fine  BMW  sports
model  for  himself.  All  Karlshorst  knew  that  machine,  and  many  a
young  officer  stood  to  admire  it  as  it  flashed  by.

One  evening,  as  he  was  riding  past  the  house  where  Valia  Grinchuk
lived,  he  saw  a light  in  her  rooms,  and  decided  to  drop  in  and  see  her.
He  leaned  the  motor-cycle  against  the  railings,  but  did  not  lock  it
UP,  as  was  his  habit,  for  he  did  not  intend  to  stay  long.

Valia  had  guests,  the  company  was  a merry  one,  and  he  stayed
longer  than  he  thought.  He  left  about  ten  o'clock.  When  he  got
outside  his  motor-cycle  had  disappeared.  He  looked  about  him,
thinking  someone  must  be  playing  a practical  joke.  But  there  was
no  sign  of  it  anywhere.

He  broke  into  a string  of  curses.  Obviously  someone  had  stolen
the  machine.  But  what  infuriated  him  most  was  the  knowledge  that
the  thief  must  be  one  of  his  own,  Soviet,  people.  No  Berlin  thief
would  ever  have  dared  to  take  anything  from  Karlshorst,  least  of  all
a motor-cycle.

The  Karlshorst  commandatura  was  only  a few  paces  away.  He
went  and  reported  the  theft  to  the  officer  on  duty.  The  lieutenant
sympathized  with  him  and  promised  to  find  out  whether  the  theft
had  been  committed  by  one  of  the  commandatura  guards.  He  knew
well  enough  who  were  responsible  for  the  majority  of  the  thefts  that
took  place  in  Karlshorst.

Belyavsky  had  no  great  faith  in  the  commandatura,  and  he
decided  to  go  straight  to  a German  police  station  situated  just  outside


340


the  sealed-off  Soviet  area.  He  returned  accompanied  by  a German
policeman  and  a police-dog.  At  the  spot  where  the  motor-cycle  had
been  left  the  policeman  put  the  dog  on  the  scent.  It  made  directly


for  the  next  wicket  gate  and  began  to  paw  at  it.  Belyavsky  knew
that  the  Party  organizer  for  the  Administration  of  Justice,  Major
Yeroma,  and  his  deputy,  Major  Nikolayev,  lived  there,  and  he
thought  the  dog  was  completely  on  the  wrong  trail.  But  each  time
they  tried  out  the  animal  it  persistently  led  them  to  that  wicket  gate.
In  the  end  Belyavsky  shrugged  his  shoulders  hopelessly  and  let  the
German  policeman  go.

Next  day  he  happened  to  be  passing  the  gate  at  which  the  dog
had  pawed,  and  he  decided  to  go  in  and  make  inquiries.  He  found
four  young  women  sitting  in  the  sitting  room.  One  of  them  was  the
wife  of  Major  Nikolayev,  another  was  the  wife  of  the  head  of  the
S.M.A.  Political  Administration,  General  Makarov.

All  the  women  were  rather  problematic  wives,  wives  only  within
the  bounds  of  Karlshorst.  Almost  all  the  high  S.M.A.  officials  had
exceptionally  young  wives.  Marshal  Sokolovsky's  wife  was  several
years  younger  than  his  daughter.  Such  things  were  the  result  of  the
war.

Belyavsky  apologized  for  troubling  them,  explained  why  he  had
called,  and  inquired  whether  they  had  noticed  anything  suspicious
the  previous  evening.  They  exchanged  embarrassed  glances  and
expressed  their  indignation  at  the  theft.  They  seemed  bored,  and
they  invited  him  to  stay  &while.  Quite  an  animated  conversation
followed,  a conversation  which  played  a large  part  in  the  further
developments,  chiefly  because  he  made  a very  good  impression  on
those  young  women.

After  searching  fruitlessly  for  a week  he  had  resigned  himself  to
the  loss  of  his  favourite  machine,  when  one  evening  he  was  called
to  the  telephone.  He  was  astonished  to  hear  a woman's  voice:

"Is  that  Comrade  Captain  Belyavsky?"  the  unknown  asked,  and
went  on  hurriedly:  "You  mustn't  mind  my  not  mentioning  my  name.
I'm  one  of  the  ladies  who  ...  you  remember,  you  called  to  inquire
about  the  motor-cycle  ....  I phoned  up  to  let  you  know  that  your
machine  is  in  the  cellar  of  the  house  you  called  at.  Go  at  once  and
you'll  fina  it.  You  can  guess  who  took  it ....  Please  don't  tell  any
body  how  you  found  out.  I wouldn't  like.  . ."

He  hurriedly  thanked  her  and  put  down  the  receiver.  He  sat  for  a
moment  considering  what  lie  should  do  next.  For  the  thief  could  be


341


no  other  than  the  S.M.A.  Party  organizer  for  the  Administration  of
Justice,  Yeroma  himself.  Finally  he  decided  to  ask  a Lieutenant
Colonel  Potapov  and  Major  Berko  to  go  with  him  as  witnesses.  On
their  way  to  Major  Yeroma's  house  they  picked  up  the  officer  on
duty  at  the  commandatura.

Major  Yeroma  was  not  at  home.  At  the  commandatura  officer's
request  the  cellar  was  opened.  There  they  found  the  missing  motor
cycle.  The  commandatura  officer  drew  up  an  official  report  on  the
theft  and  discovery  of  the  machine.  In  his  simplicity  he  wrote:  'The
thief  is  Major  Yeroma,  of  the  Administration  of  Justice,  and  Party
organizer  to  the  Administration  of  Justice.'  The  report  was  signed
by  all  the  witnesses,  including  Major  Yeroma's  wife.

As  the  four  officers  struggled  to  haul  the  heavy  machine  iip  the
stairs,  between  their  groans  and  pants  the  officer  could  not  help
remarking:  "One  man  couldn't  have  got  it  down  there  by  hirnself.

He  must  have  had  at  least  two  others  to  help  him."

It  transpired  that  the  day  the  machine  was  stolen  Major  Yeroma
was  returning  late  in  the  evening  from  the  Political  Administration,
accompanied  by  two  other  officers  of  the  Administration  of  Justice.

As  he  approached  his  house  the  Major  noticed  the  machine  and,
without  stopping  to  think,  persuaded  the  other  two  officers  to  help
him  put  it  in  his  cellar.  Probably  it  would  not  have  been  found  if
Belyavsky  hadn't  chanced  to  call  on  the  young  women.  They  knew
that  Major  Yeroma  had  got  hold  of  a motor-cycle  the  previous
evening,  but  they  had  no  idea  where  he  had  obtained  it.  When  Bel
yavsky  told  his  story  they  put  two  and  two  together,  but  they  did
not  tell  him  what  they  were  thinking,  for  obvious  reasons.  After
he  had  gone  they  quarrelled  among  themselves.  The  young  wife
of  the  head  of  the  Political  Administration  took  Belyavsky's  side
and  declared  that  the  machine  must  be  returned  to  him.

In  his  indignation  he  decided  to  take  steps  to  bring  the  culprits  to
justice.  He  wrote  reports  of  the  affair  to  General  Dratvin,  the  S.M.A.
chief  of  staff,  to  the  Political  Administration,  and  the  S.M.A.

Military  Prosecutor.  If  justice  were  done,  Major  Yeroma  should  be
expelled  from  the  Party,  stripped  of  his  officer's  rank  and  sentenced  to
imprisonment  for  theft.  So  the  law  prescribed.

When  Major  Berko  heard  what  Belyavsky  intended  to  do  he  advised
him  not  to  be  in  any  hurry.  A charge  against  Yeroma  involved
much  else  besides  him,  and  in  such  cases  it  was  advisable  to  be
prudent.  He  suggested  that  Belyavsky  should  first  go  and  see  Yeroma
personally,  and  they  decided  to  call  oil  him  during  lunch-time.


342


They  found  him  at  home.  He  was  sitting  at  the  table,  with  his
tunic  unbuttoned  and  unbeited.  Before  him  was  an  aluminium  dish


of  steaming  beetroot  soup.  He  did  not  even  look  up  when  the  visitors
were  shown  in,  but  went  on  spooning  up  his  soup.

"Well,  Yeroma,"  Belyavsky  said,  "how  did  my  motor-cycle  get
into  your  cellar?"

"I  found  it,"  the  major  answered  with  his  mouth  full  of  food,  and
not  batting  an  eyelid.

"I  shall  send  a report  to  the  Political  Administration."  Belyavsky
was  so  taken  aback  by  the  Party  organizer's  impudence  that  he
didn't  know  what  else  to  say.

Yeroma  went  on  eating,  or  rather  guzzling  his  soup;  the  sweat
rolled  down  his  face.  When  he  had  finished  the  dish  he  picked  it  up
and  poured  the  last  few  drops  into  his  spoon.  Then  he  licked  the
spoon  and  smacked  his  lips.

"You'll  never  make  any  impression  on  him  with  a report,"  Berko
said  in  a rage.  "Spit  in  his  plate  and  let's  go!"

They  went,  slamming  the  door  behind  them.

The  same  evening  Belyavsky  went  to  the  office  of  the  head  of  the
Political  Administration  and  handed  the  adjutant  on  duty  his
report.  While  the  adjutant  was  reading  it  with  some  'interest
General  Makarov  himself  came  out  of  his  room.

"Another  case  relating  to  Yeroma,  Comrade  General,"  the
adjutant  reported  with  a smile.

"Ah  ! that's  good  !"  the  general  observed.  "He's  already  on  our
list  for  bigamy.  . ."

The  adjutant  afterwards  explained  to  Belyavsky  that,  following
his  superiors'  example,  Yeroma  had  taken  a new  wife  to  himself . But
in  doing  so  he  had  made  one  tactical  error:  unlike  others,  he  had
registered  his  marriage  at  the  Soviet  register  office  in  Karlshorst.

But  he  had  not  taken  the  trouble  to  obtain  a divorce  from  his  first
wife,  who  was  in  Russia.

Belyavsky  then  went  to  the  S.M.A.  military  prosecutor,  Lieu
tenant-Colonel  Orlov.  Orlov  knew  Belyavsky  personally,  and  he
told  him  frankly:

"We  can't  take  him  to  court.  In  this  case  it  all  depends  on  the


343


Political  Administration.  You  know  yourself  it's  a Party  matter."

If  Belyavsky  had  had  more  experience  in  Party  matters,  he
would  probably  have  avoided  measuring  his  strength  against  the
Party.  Meanwhile,  the  Political  Administration  had  received  a
resolution  from  a local  Party  group  recommending  Captain  Belyavsky's
acceptance  as  a Party  member.  His  application  was  accompanied
by  brilliant  testimonials  to  his  conduct  during  the  war.  But  now  the
affair  of  the  stolen  motor-cycle  was  beginning  to  be  talked  about
all  over  Karlshorst.  In  order  to  smother  the  scandal  the  Political
Administration  decided  that  it  must  close  the  mouth  of  one  of  the
two  antagonists,  and  the  choice  fell  on  Belyavsky.

Quite  unexpectedly  he  received  the  order  that  he  was  to  be
demobilized  and  returned  to  the  Soviet  Union.  He  knew  at  once  what  was
behind  that  order.  What  he  did  not  know  was  that  on  his  return  he
was  to  be  brought  to  trial.  The  explanation  was  quite  simple.  Not
long  before  the  motor-cycle  incident  he  had  filled  up  one  of  the  regular
questionnaires.  This  time,  in  accordance  with  new,  strict  instructions,
it  was  sent  to  the  local  M.V.D.  departments  in  all  his  previous  places
of  residence,  to  be  checked.  It  was  returned  from  Leningrad  with  the
comment:  'father  sentenced  under  article  58.'  So  he  was
demobilized  and  sent  back  to  the  U.S.S.R.,  where  he  was  tried  for  making
a false  statement  which  he  had  been  forced  into  making  under  threat
of  court-martial.

Belyavsky's  collision  with  the  Party  in  the  person  of  Major  Yeroma
was  not  a decisive  factor  in  his  recall  to  the  Soviet  Union.  He
belonged  to  a category  of  people  whose  fate  was  predetermined.

That  was  shown  by  the  fact  that  almost  at  the  same  time  Major
Dubov  also  was  demobilized  and  recalled.  Only  the  S.M.A.  Personnel
Department  and  Major  Dubov  himself  knew  what  was  behind  that
order.  He,  too,  had  to  take  his  postwar  place  in  life.

Two  men  in  my  close  circle  of  acquaintances  had  been  cut  out
of  life  and  thrown  overboard.  I respected  them  as  men  and  liked
them  as  colleagues.  Others,  too,  thought  of  them  as  fine  exemplars  of
the  new  Soviet  society.  Neither  of  them  had  anything  in  common
with  the  old  classes,  which,  according  to  Marxism,  were  destined  to
be  eliminated.  They  had  both  been  created  by  the  Soviet  world  and
were,  in  the  best  sense  of  the  words,  true  citizens  of  Soviet  society.

Yet  they  were  condemned,  irrevocably  condemned  to  death.  To
spiritual  death  at  the  least.  And  there  are  millions  of  similar  cases.

That  can  easily  be  proved.  During  the  thirty  years  of  the  Soviet
regime  at  least  thirty  million  people  have  been  subjected  to
repressive  measures  on  political  grounds.  As  the  families  of  all  such


344


people  are  automatically  classified  as  politically  unreliable,  if  we


assume  that  each  of  them  had  only  two  relatives  at  least  sixty  million
people  must  be  on  the  black  list.  If  ten  million  out  of  the  thirty
million  died  in  prison  camps,  and  at  least  another  ten  million  are
still  in  the  camps,  while  ten  million  have  served  their  time  and
been  released,  we  get  a figure  of  eighty  million  people  whom  the
Soviet  State  has  turned  into  its  enemies,  or,  at  least,  regards  as  its
enemies.  That  explains  why  in  every  section  of  the  Soviet  state
apparatus  there  are  personnel  departments  charged  with  the
scrutiny  and  check  of  questionnaires.  Today  it  is  indubitable  that
the  main  class  of  the  new  Soviet  society  consists  of  millions  of
automatic  enemies  of  the  Soviet  State.

This  invisible  class  of  enemies  who  are  also  slaves  permeates  all
society  from  top  to  bottom.  Is  it  necessary  to  cite  examples?  One
could  mention  the  names  of  many  marshals  of  the  Soviet  Union,  as
well  as  Stalin  prize-winners,  who  have  been  in  N.K.V.D.  prisons;
and  these  would  be  names  known  all  over  the  world.  Of  the  millions
of  petty  collisions  between  State  and  individual  who  can  speak?
State  and  individual  Involuntarily  I think  of  Valia  Grinchuk,  an
undersized  girl,  a partisan  fighter  who  in  the  fight  for  her  freedom
took  up  arms.  She  fought  bravely.  She  not  only  defended  her
freedom  against  the  foreign  enemy,  she  climbed  the  ladder  of  Soviet
society.  She  raised  herself  out  of  the  grey  mass  and  became  an
individual.  And  hardly  had  she  achieved  this  when  she  felt  the  heavy
hand  of  the  State.

Her  duties  often  took  her  to  the  Allied  Control  Commission.

There  she  came  to  know  a young  Allied  officer.  There  could  be  no
outward  objection  to  this  acquaintance,  as  she  visited  the  Control
Commission  in  the  course  of  her  work.  After  some  time  the
acquaintance  developed  into  a personal  friendship.

One  day  she  was  summoned  to  the  Party  organization.  She  was
given  to  understand  quite  amiably  that  the  Party  knew  of  her
acquaintance  with  an  Allied  officer.  To  her  astonishment,  that  was
all  that  was  said,  and  it  seemed  that  the  Party  leaders  were  quite
sympathetic  in  regard  to  the  friendship.  Some  time  later  this  incident
was  repeated,  and  she  had  the  impression  that  they  were  even
encouraging  the  acquaintance.

Time  passed,  and  this  friendship  between  a Soviet  girl  and  an  Allied
officer  developed  into  a genuine  attachment.  But  now  she  was  once
more  summoned  to  the  Party  organization,  and,  as  a Party  member,


345


was  confronted  with  the  demand  to  harness  her  love  to  State  interests.

Next  day  she  was  taken  to  hospital.  The  doctors  found  she  had
a very  high  temperature  and  blood  pressure,  but  could  find  no  visible
reason  for  her  condition.  Weeks  passed  without  any  change  for  the
better.

One  day  an  elderly,  experienced  neuro-pathologist  came  to  her
ward,  studied  her  case  history,  and  shook  his  head  as  he  asked
her:  "Have  you  met  with  any  great  unpleasantness  ...  in  your
personal  life?"

"No!"  she  curtly  replied.

She  spent  more  than  two  months  in  hospital.  When  she  was

discharged  she  applied  on  health  grounds  to  be  transferred  to

work  which  did  not  bring  her  into  contact  with  the  Control

Commission.  Through  acquaintances  she  informed  her  lover  that  she  had  been

recalled  to  Russia.  Valia  had  the  heart  of  a soldier.

Only  very  few  people  knew  the  connection  between  these
incidents.  Everybody  continued  to  regard  her  as  a fine  officer  who  was
assiduously  doing  her  duty  in  Soviet  society.  And  only  a few
noticed  that  she  began  to  leave  off  wearing  her  officer's  tunic  with
its  decorations,  and  took  to  ordinary  feminine  clothes.,

All  these  things  happened  to  people  who  were  close  acquaintances
of  mine.  They  affected  me  personally  because  sooner  or  later  I,  too,
would  have  to  join  the  Party.  There  was  no  other  choice,  except
to  face  up  to  a future  which  for  Major  Dubov  and  Captain  Belyavsky
had  become  the  present.

Today  there  is  no  Communist  Party  in  the  Soviet  Union.  There
is  only  Stalin's  Party  with  its  obsolete  facade.  The  aim  and  end  of
that  Party  is  power,  indivisible  power.  The  ideal  Party  member
should  not  have  any  independent  thought,  he  must  be  only  a dumb
executive  of  the  higher  will.  A striking  example  is  provided  by
Party  organizer  Major  Yeroma,  a bestial  brute  and  an  ideal
Bolshevik  of  the  Stalin  school.

I was  wearing  Soviet  officer's  uniform  and  I was  a child  of  the
October  Revolution.  If  I had  been  born  twenty  years  earlier,  I
would  perhaps  have  been  a convinced  Marxist  and  revolutionary,
active  in  the  October  Revolution.  Today,  despite  everything,  I was
still  not  a member  of  the  Communist  Party.  If  I had  not  been  faced
with  the  necessity,  the  indubitable  necessity,  it  would  never  even


346


have  entered  my  head  to  join  the  Party  which  was  called  the
Communist  Party  of  the  Soviet  Union.


347


CHAPTER  SEVENTEEN
A Member  of  the  Politburo

Before  me  lies  a yellowing  sheet  of  coarse  paper,  which  looks  as
though  it  has  been  tom  out  of  one  of  my  old  school  exercise  books.
Large  writing,  like  a child's,  written  in  faint  ink,  which  has  been
watered  again  and  again.  I have  difficulty  in  reading  the  carefully
formed  letters  written  with  a rusty  nib:

"My  dear  grandson  ...  I am  sitting  by  the  light  of  a paraffin
wick,  just  like  it  was  in  1 921 , to  write  to  you.  The  electricity  is
switched  on  for  only  two  hours  a day,  and  that  not  every  day.  I
have  pushed  the  table  over  close  to  the  oven,  where  it  is  a little
warmer.  There's  a terrible  drought  coming  from  the  window,  though'
I've  stopped  up  all  the  cracks  with  wool

No  electricity  No  coal  for  the  stove!  And  this  two  years  after  the
victorious  close  of  the  war.  And  in  the  heart  of  the  Donietz  Basin,
the  richest  coalfield  in  Europe.

Yet  it  is  not  surprising.  Before  the  war  the  students  at  our  Institute
attended  lectures  all  the  winter  in  fur  coats  and  fur  caps.  Our
fingers  froze,  but  we  couldn't  put  our  hands  in  our  pockets  because
we  had  to  take  notes.  The  boiler  for  the  central  heating  of  the
Novocherkass  Industrial  Institute  was  intended  to  bum  Donietz
anthracite,  but  now  it  was  fueled  with  useless  shale.  We  were
amazed  when  we  saw  that  the  German  periodical,  Der  Bergbau,
which  was  in  the  Institute  library,  contained  advertisements  offering
Donietz  anthracite  for  export  at  cheap  rates.

A friend  of  mine,  Vassily  Shulgin,  once  achieved  a temporary
fame  in  the  Faculty  for  Energetics.  Somehow  or  other  he  go:)t  hold
of  an  electrically  heated  airman's  suit,  such  as  is  used  by  arctic
flyers.  From  the  laboratory  for  electro-technics  he  obtained  a
transformer,  which  he  placed  under  his  desk,  and  it  was  easy  enough
to  get  hold  of  a long  piece  of  cable.  At  one  touch  of  a switch  he
became  a celebrity.  The  first  day  he  tried  it  out  we  were  more
interested  in  seeing  whether  he  would  go  up  in  smoke  and  flames
than  in  listening  to  our  professor.  To  be  on  the  safe  side,  one  of  his
close  friends  brought  in  a fire-extinguisher  from  the  corridor  and
put  it  close  to  hand.

Vassily's  triumph  was  a nine-days'wonder.  Sometimes  he  proudly
switched  off  the  heat,  and  then  the  freezing  students  realized  that
he  was  too  hot.  We  were  all  as  proud  of  that  baggy  figure  on  the
back  bench  as  if  we  had  shared  in  his  ingenuity.


348


To  the  general  consternation,  one  frosty  morning  in  January  he
turned  up  in  his  old  overcoat.  When  we  insisted  on  knowing  the
reason  why  he  curtly  replied  that  the  works  had  gone  wrong.  He
confided  the  bitter  truth  to  only  a few  intimate  friends.  He  had  been
summoned  to  the  Special  Department,  the  N.K.V.D.  representative
in  the  Institute,  where  he  was  ordered  to  stop  his  'anti-Soviet
demonstration',  otherwise  his  case  would  be  passed  to  the  '
requisite  organs'.  To  tell  the  truth,  the  Special  Department  showed
him  a great  favor  in,  this  instance.  Here  were  all  the  students
freezing  and  suffering  in  silence,  and  one  of  them  tried  to  get  warm:
counter-revolutionary  agitation  and  undermining  socialist  economy.
That  sort  of  thing  continued  all  through  the  years  before  the  war.

That  was  the  system.  The  people  simply  got  used  to  it  and  didn't
even  notice  it.

Now,  after  the  war,  the  Germans  were  freezing  in  their  unheated
homes.  Naturally  they  cursed  the  Soviet  officers,  who  had  no  need
to  count  every  briquette.  But  it  did  not  occur  to  them  that  in
Russia  these  same  officers'  families  were  freezing  even  more  than  the
Germans.

".  . . But  I keep  going.  I'm  on  my  feet  all  day,  I manage  all  the
housework.  It's  a pity  I haven't  got  much  strength,  and  my  old
bones  ache.  I can  have  only  sweet  tea,  with  a biscuit  sometimes
dipped  in  it.  I only  have  two  teeth  left  and  I can't  chew  anything.

"Your  mother  goes  off  to  work  every  morning  at  seven.  In  the
evening  she  can  hardly  crawl  home  with  the  aid  of  a stick;  she  helps
herself  along  by  the  fences.  It  isn't  so  much  that  she's  tired  with  work
as  her  nerves.  Everybody's  so  irritable,  they  swear  at  the  least  thing
and  won't  listen  to  you.  She's  afraid  to  go  to  the  post  now  to  get
your  parcels.  Robbers  are  on  the  look-out  for  people  receiving


parcels  from  Germany,  and  they  break  into  their  homes  at  night
and  kill  the  people.  And  in  the  daytime  young  boys-  craftsmen'  -
hang  around  the  post  office  and  snatch  the  parcels  in  broad  day.
light."

Mention  of  the  'craftsmen'  recalled  to  my  mind  the  Molotov
automobile  works  in  the  town  of  Gorky.  I worked  there  at  the
beginning  of  the  war,  and  I saw  these  so-called  'craftsmen',  the
young  recruits  to  the  Soviet  proletariat.  Soviet  industry  began  to
experience  difficulty  in  getting  new  hands,  because  the  Soviet  youth
were  not  prepared  to  become  ordinary  workers,  so  the  President
of  the  Supreme  Soviet  issued  a decree:  'On  the  mobilization  for
factory-works  and  crafts  schools'.  In  these  schools  millions  of


349


adolescents  between  the  ages  of  fourteen  and  seventeen  were
enrolled.


At  Gorky  these  'craftsmen'  attending  the  trade  school  attache4
to  the  works  ate  in  the  canteen.  Their  food  was  poor  enough,  but  it
was  better  than*that  issued  to  the  older  workers;  after  all,
adolescents  are  not  so  class-conscious  as  adults  and  you  can't  feed
them  only  on  slogans.  In  addition,  many  of  the  'craftsmen'  were  sent
food

from  the  villages  where  most  of  them  had  been  recruited.  So
sometimes  they  left  their  rations,  and  even,  boylike,  littered  the
inedible  food  about  the  tables.

As  soon  as  the  'craftsmen'  had  left  the  dining  hall  the  workmen
rushed  in  for  their  meal.  Some  of  them  hurried  to  the  queue  for
food;  others  sat  down  at  the  table,  for  otherwise  they  would  not
have  got  a place  until  the  more  energetic  proletarians  had  eaten
others  went  to  the  tables  and  surreptitiously  ate  the  remains  which
the  youngsters  had  left.

On  one  side  of  the  hall  was  a small  room  from  which  came  the
smell  of  eggs  and  bacon.  That  room  was  the  canteen  for  the  factory
management:  the  director,  the  Party  organizer,  and  other  leaders.
The  workers  were  not  particularly  envious  of  the  leaders.

bosses  changed  so  often  that  the  workers  hardly  had  time
remember  their  names.  And  they  were  just  as  little  interested  in
their  further  activities  after  they  had  gone.  The  workers  knew  that
the  stork  brought  them  and  the  crow,  the  black  N.K.V.D.  prison
van,  took  them  away.

During  those  war  years  a group  of  British  sergeants  and  techncians
worked  at  the  Gorky  Automobile  Works,  supervising  the  assembly  of
tanks  sent  to  the  U.S.S.R.  under  lend-lease.  Of  course
they  got  a very  favorable  impression  of  the  works.

Yesterday  your  mother  bought  two  glasses  of  Indian  corn
in  the  market.  I crushed  them  in  a mortar  and  we've  been  having
maize  porridge.  It  would  have  been  very  tasty  if  we  could  have  got
some  butter  to  go  with  it.  But  it  is  cold  now  and  the  peasants  aren't
bringing  much  to  market.  Potatoes,  peas  and  milk  are  dear,  and  we
mustn't  even  think  of  meat  or  butter."  Here  followed  several  lines
blacked  out  by  the  censor.

Two  glasses  of  maize  ....

In  the  early  spring  of  1945  1 graduated  from  the  Military  College,


350


and  as  I had  exemption  in  certain  subjects,  I got  through  my  state
examination  quickly  and  managed  to  obtain  a week's  leave.  I spent
this  at  home,  on  the  pretext  that  I was  carrying  out  official  duties
in  my  home  district.  I went  to  the  Kazan  railway  station  in  Moscow
and,  with  a ruck-sack  on  my  back,  wandered  about  trying  to  find  a
way  of  getting  a seat  in  a~  train.  That  was  pretty  hopeless,  for  some
times  people  tried  for  weeks,  and  even  then  had  to  give  it  up.  I began
to  study  the  lay-out  of  the  station,  to  see  whether  I could  get  a seat
by  a trick.  My  only  advantages  were  that  I had  no  heavy  luggage,
but  plenty  of  youthful  energy  and  all  a Soviet  citizen's  experience
in  such  matters.

"Brother,  if  I'm  not  mistaken  you've  got  a T-T."  I heard  a
hoarse  deep  voice  behind  me,  and  a powerful  hand  clapped  me  on  the
shoulder.  I looked  round  and  saw  a brawny  sailor  in  the  usual  black
blouse,  his  cap  thrust  to  the  back  of  his  head.  Despite  the  cold,  his
shirt  was  wide  open  at  the  chest,  and  his  breast  was  gay  with  all  the
decorations  of  a sailor's  life;  he  was  tattooed  right  up  to  his  chin.

One  of  those  who  'don't  care  a damn  for  anybody'  and  always  fall  on
their  feet.  He  smiled  at  me  as  if  we  were  old  acquaintances  and
pointed  to  my  pistol  holster.

"Yes,  it's  a T-T.  What  about  it?"  I asked.

"What  train  are  you  going  by?  The  1 1 .20?"  he  inquired.  When  I
said  yes,  he  gave  me  an  even  broader  grin.  "Well,  then,  everything's
okay!  Let's  go!"

"Go  where?"

"When  I say  'let's  go',  we  go!  You  keep  in  my  wake.  Have  you
just  dropped  out  of  the  moon,  brother?"  my  new  relation  demanded.

To  sailors  all  men  are  brothers.

We  went  out  of  the  station,  crawled  in  the  darkness  over  a roof
or  two,  and  through  some  fences.  At  last  we  reached  the  farther  side
of  the  station  and  the  tracks.  Guards  were  patrolling  the  platforms.


Like  diversionists  we  stole  up  to  a train  standing  on  the  lines.  All
the  carriages  were  locked.

"Now  let  me  have  your  T-T,  brother,"  the  sailor  ordered.

"You're  not  going  to  shoot?"


351


"Of  course  not ! You  hold  the  magazine.  And  now  look:  here's  your
railway  ticket  to  all  the  world."

He  drew  back  the  pistol  hammer,  and  fixed  it  by  the  safety  catch.
Then  he  thrust  the  barrel  into  the  carriage  door  lock.  One  turn,  and
we  were  inside.

"I've  used  this  ticket  more  than  any  other,"  my  'brother'  proudly
explained,  as  he  handed  the  pistol  back  to  me.  After  that  I,  too,  had
more  than  one  occasion  to  exploit  this  unusual  means  of  unlocking
carriage  doors.

On  the  threshold  of  my  home  I halted  and  looked  about  me.  All
the  walls  were  sinking  and  slanting;  the  fences  had  gone;  they  had  all
been  used  for  fuel.  One  could  walk  right  through  the  town  from
house-yard  to  house-yard  unhindered.  As  I opened  the  rickety  door
with  its  rusty  hinges  and  ingenious  latch,  I had  very  mixed  feelings.

In  my  heavy  boots  I stepped  prudently  over  the  creaking  floorboards
in  the  kitchen.  Everything  was  rickety,  neglected,  rotting,  like  the-
old  cottage  in  the  fairy-story.  I had  to  stoop  to  avoid  knocking  my, I
head  against  the  lintel  as  I passed  into  the  next  room.

In  one  corner  of  the  room,  a little,  hunched  old  woman  in  an
apron  was  sitting  by  the  stove.  At  one  time  she  had  carried  me  iii
her  arms;  now  I could  have  picked  her  up  with  ease.  Her  grey  hair
was  neatly  arranged  under  her  white  kerchief,  she  had  the  same  old
shawl  round  her  shoulders.  At  the  sound  of  the  door  being  opened,
she  turned.

"Grisha!"  That  one  brief  word  conveyed  all  the  experiences  of

the  long  war  years:  her  hopes,  her  fears,  her  expectations  and  joys.

"Grannie!"

I put  my  arms  round  her  shoulders;  I was  afraid  she  would  fall.

We  remained  standing  a long  time,  with  her  head  pressed  against
my  chest;  she  wept  like  a little  child,  but  they  were  tears  of  joy.

I gently  stroked  her  back  under  her  old  flannel  blouse.  I felt  he-
fragile  bones,  and  was  afraid  my  rough  hands  would  hurt  her.
"Where's  mother?"  I asked.

'She's  at  work.  She  gets  home  at  six."

'I'll  send  a boy  to  tell  her  I'm  home,"  I suggested  as  I took  off  m
greatcoat.


352


"No,  don't,  Grisha!  For  God's  sake!"  my  old  grandmother
murmured  fearfully.  "She'll  be  so  glad  she'll  leave  her  work  and  come
home,  and  then  they  may  take  her  to  court."

I felt  my  collar  suddenly  grow  tight  as  the  blood  rushed  to
my  head  and  roared  in  my  ears.  So  that  was  how  a Soviet
mother  was  allowed  to  welcome  her  soldier  son  after  four  years  of
separation!

My  mother  came  home  from  work  late  in  the  evening.  Grannie  had
prepared  a festive  table  in  honour  of  my  homecoming.  She  proudly
brought  out  a tiny  tin  of  honey  and  set  it  on  the  table,  then  a tiny
medicine  bottle  of  home-made  cherry  wine.  When  I went  to  my  ruck
sack  and  began  to  hand  out  all  kinds  of  cans  of  American  preserves
my  mother's  eyes  lit  up  with  joy  and  relief.  They  were  both  hungry,
but  that  was  not  so  bad  as  the  realization  that  they  had  nothing
to  make  a feast  for  their  son  who  had  come  safely  home  after  a long
absence.  Now  they  had  American  cans  of  conserves  on  the  table!

Whenever  Russian  people  hear  mention  of  the  words  'lend-lease'
they  think  of  cans  piled  up  like  mountains.  Those  cans  were  to
be  found  in  the  wildest  and  loneliest  parts  of  the  famous  Bryansk
forests,  in  the  marshes  of  Leningrad,  wherever  the  Soviet  army  passed.
Russia  is  undoubtedly  a very  rich  agricultural  country,  with
inexhaustible  natural  resources.  Yet  from  1942  to  1945  that  country
lived  and  fought  exclusively  on  American  products.  We  officers
were  all  profoundly  convinced  that  we  could  have  held  out  without
American  tanks  and  planes,  but  we  would  have  died  of  starvation
without  the  American  food.  Ninety  percent  of  the  meat,  fats,  and
sugar  consumed  in  the  Soviet  army  was  of  American  origin,  and  al
most  the  same  can  be  said  of  life  in  the  rear.  Even  the  beans  and  the
white  flour  were  American.  The  one  article  of  Soviet  origin  was  the
black  bread-apart,  of  course,  from  water.

A word  or  two  on  water.  People  in  Moscow  seriously  believed  that
the  American  embassy  received  even  water  in  cans  from  America.

Probably  this  was  due  to  the  amount  of  grapefruit  and  other  fruit
juices  the  Americans  drank  from  cans.  After  the  war  it  was  said  that
the  Kremlin  had  provided  itself  with  American  foodstuffs  for  many
five-year  plans  ahead.

There  was  one  time  at  the  beginning  of  1943  when  all  the  shops
in  all  the  large  Soviet  cities  were  stocked  to  the  ceiling  with  sacks
of  coffee  beans.  Before  the  war  coffee  in  the  bean  had  been  a luxury
article  in  the  Soviet  Union.  But  now  all  the  empty  shelves  of  the


353


shops  were  stocked  with  sacks  bearing  foreign  inscriptions  in  red
paint.  Coffee  to  be  bought  off  the  ration,  at  500  roubles  a kilo.  At  that
time  bread  cost  150  roubles  a kilo  on  the  free  market.

The  people  began  to  buy  the  coffee  by  the  sack.  It  wasn't  that  the
Russians  had  acquired  a foreign  taste.  Not  at  all  They  cooked  the
beans,  threw  the  fragrant  liquor  away,  then  dried  the  beans,  pounded
them  in  a mortar  or  a coffee-grinder,  and  made  bread  of  the  flour.
Bread  from  coffee.  Previously  they  had  played  the  same  sort  of
trick  with  mustard  powder!  Bread  from  mustard

During  the  war  all  the  metal  utensils  in  the  U.S.S.R.  were  made
from  American  cans.  It  will  be  many  years  before  the  Russians
forget  those  cans  with  their  labels:  'pork  meat'.

In  an  endeavour  to  diminish  the  effect  of  this  propaganda  by  food
conserves,  the  rumor-mongers  of  the  N.K.V.D.  spread  stories  that
the  Americans  were  canning  the  flesh  of  South  American  monkeys
to  send  to  the  Soviet  Union.

".  . . Dear  Grisha,  perhaps  you  have  a cup  or  something  of  the  sort
where  you  are.  I broke  mine  recently  and  haven't  any  thing  to  drink
my  tea  out  of.  If  you  can  send  me  one  I shall  be  very  glad  and  will
always  think  of  you  when  I drink  my  tea,  my  dear  boy.

"You  always  sew  up  your  parcels  in  very  good  canvas,  and  we
don't  throw  it  away,  we  make  towels  from  it.  Don't  be  annoyed  with'
us  if  we  ask  you  for  anything,  you're  all  we  have,  in  the  world.  I live
only  for  your  letters.  And  I haven't  much  longer  to  live.

"Keep  well,  my  dear  boy.  Look  after  yourself.

Grannie."

I got  hold  of  a sack  in  which  to  pack  a parcel.  I stuffed  it  full  with
ladies'  lace  underwear,  silk  stockings,  lengths  of  material,  until  it
weighed  the  permitted  10  kilograms.  In  the  very  centre  I packed
several  china  cups.  And  what  else  could  I put  in?-The~  needed
absolutely  everything.  They  would  sell  what  I sent  and  buy  meat,  and
would  go  on  wearing  rags.  You  can't  fill  a bottomless  barrel.

That  evening  I had  planned  to  go  out,  but  grannie's  letter  robbed
me  of  all  inclination.  I sat  at  my  desk,  and  scenes  from  my  past  life
arose  before  my  eyes.

1921 . At  that  time  I was  quite  an  infant.  Perhaps  the  only  memory
I haire  is  of  the  jackdaws.  Daws  hopping  about  the  floor,  in  the  light
of  the  paraffin  lamp.  One  of  them  was  dragging  its  wing  awkwardly
leaving  a trail  of  blood.  The  lamp  flickered,  the  dark  corners  were
very  mysterious,  and  wretched  daws  hopped  about  the  floor.


354


In  the  winter  they  flew  about  in  great  black  flocks.  When  they  flew
over  the  roofs  in  the  evening  dusk,  the  people  said  as  they  heard
them  call:  "That's  a sign  of  frost., It'll  be  still  colder  tomorrow."
Raspberry  streaks  left  by  the  sunset  on  the  horizon,  the  lilac,  frosty
mist,  and  the  calling  daws.  They  settled  like  bunches  of  black  berries
on  the  bare  poplars  in  the  orchards,  and  chattered  away  before
retiring  to  rest.

My  uncle  thought  of  very  ingenious  ways  of  getting  close  to  the
daws  with  his  gun.  Normally  they  won't  let  you  come  anywhere  near
them.  But  he  went  hunting  them  to  shoot  them  for  a ragout.  I've
forgotten  what  it  tasted  like.  Older  people  say  it  doesn't  taste  any
worse  than  ragout  made  from  other  wild  birds.  Every  wildfowl  has
its  own  specific  flavor.

In  those  days  children  wrapped  in  rags  sat  in  the  snow  in  the  street
and  silently  held  out  their  hands.  They  no  longer  had  the  strength
to  ask  for  'bread'.  If  you  returned  that  way  a few  hours  later  you
found  they  were  no  longer  holding  out  their  hands:  they  were  frozen
corpses.

People  don't  remember  1921  to  any  extent  nowadays.  It  was
followed  by  many  other  years  which  have  been  fixed  more  definitely
in  the  mind.  1921  was  something  quite  elemental,  the  result  of  war
and  the  post-war  ruin.  So  it  did  not  seem  so  terrible.

1926.  The  later  years  of  the  New  Economic  Policy.  "The  period
of  temporary  retreat  in  order  to  organize  a decisive  advance  along
the  entire  front,"  as  we  can  read  in  the  History  of  the  Communist
Party  of  th~  Soviet  Union.

In  those  days,  when  my  father  gave  me  ten  kopeks  I was  a rich
man  and  could  satisfy  all  my  childish  desires.  The  years  1925  and
1926  were  the  only  time  in  all  the  existence  of  the  Soviet  regime
when  the  people  did  not  think  of  bread.

I don't  remember  tsarist  Russia.  People  of  my  generation  regard
the  NEPI  period  as  the  equivalent  of  a normal  and  affluent  life.  I
heard  various  stories  told  by  older  people,  but  at  this  time  I was  a
Young  Pioneer  and  was  more  interested  in  playing  a drum.  Some
museum-piece  of  an  old  man,  would  throw  his  arms  wide  and  say
rapturously  and  regretfully:  "Under  Nicholas  a dried  fish  that  size

( NEP:  New  Economic  Policy-involved  a partial  return  to  a free
market  exchange  of  commodities. -Tr.  )


355


cost  three  kopeks;  and  now.  . He  swallowed  back  his  spittle  and
waved  his  hand  resignedly.

1980.  I was  attending  school.  The  name  of  the  school  was  changed
every  three  months;  the  curriculum  changed  accordingly.  I was  not
greatly  interested-l  hadn't  time  to  be,  for  I spent  most  of  the  day
queuing  for  bread.  Queues  stood  outside  the  bakers'  shops  day  and
night.  Six  hundred,  seven  hundred  ....  Often  the  number  written
in  indelible  ink  on  my  hand  was  over  the  1 ,000.

We  boys  regarded  it  all  as  a kind  of  game.  When  the  cart  drove
up  to  the  shop  and  the  loaves  were  unloaded  there  was  a bit  of  a
riot.  Women  screamed  as  they  were  half  crushed  to  death,  one  heard
curses,  groans,  and  tears.  Meanwhile  we  boys  tried  to  find  a way  into
the  shops  through  a window  or  some  other  opening.  In  other
countries  the  children  played  'Red  Indians',  but  we  fought  for  our
lives  to  get  bread.  That  was  how  the  youthful  builders  of  socialism
were  reared,  that  was  how  the  steel  was  tempered.

We  went  to  school  in  two  shifts;  it  was  as  cold  inside  the  building
as  outside.  It  was  much  more  pleasant  in  the  street,  where  you  could
run  and  keep  yourself  warm.  What  point  was  there  in  our  teacher
telling  us  stories  of  the  Paris  Commune?  We  stormed  not  the  Bastille
but  the  bakers'  shops.

1982.  General  collectivization.  People  starved  to  death,  their
bodies  lay  about  the  streets.  The  living  had  difficulty  in  dragging
themselves  about,  for  their  legs  were  swollen  with  famine  dropsy.

My  elder  brother,  who  was  in  the  Young  Communists,  was  called
up  to  perform  special  duties.  He  and  his  comrades  were  given
weapons,  and  they  mounted  guard  all  night  over  the  church,  which
was  being  used  as  a transit  camp  for  prisoners.  There  were  not
enough  prisons,  there  were  not  enough  guards.  Of  an  evening,
hundreds  of  ragged  men  and  women  peasants,  arrested  as  kulaks,
were  driven  into  the  church.  Mothers  carried  babes  in  arms.  Many
of  the, prisoners  could  hardly  shift  their  feet.  The  youngsters  who
had  been  issued  arms  went  hungry  to  the  church  to  guard  hungry
people.

Each  morning  the  ragged  class  enemies  were  driven  on  north
ward.  Many  dead  bodies  were  left  lying  on  the  stone  flags  inside  the
church.  So  far  as  they  were  concerned,  the  problem  of  liquidating
the  kulaks  as  a class  was  already  solved.

Winter  passed,  spring  arrived.  The  campaign  for  collecting  the
State  grain  fund  began.  The  peasants  were  baking  bread  made  from
tree  bark,  but  men  armed  with  pistols  demanded  that  they  should
hand  over  corn  for  the  spring  sowing.  During  the  winter  the  peasants


356


had  eaten  tree  bark,  cats,  dogs,  even  horsedung.  Cases  of  cannibalism
were  not  unknown.  Nobody  can  say  how  many  millions  of  people
died  of  hunger  in  1933:  possibly  one-third  or  one-fourth  of  the
agricultural  population  of  southern  Russia.

During  the  summer  the  few  half-savage  dogs  still  left  alive
wandered  through  the  deserted  villages,  devouring  human  flesh.

First  man  ate  dog,  then  dog  ate  man.  Many  fields  were  left  un
cultivated;  there  was  nobody  to  harvest  those  that  were  sown.

Day  after  day  we  scholars  of  the  higher  classes  were  driven  out  to
harvest  these  fields.  The  road  ran  past  the  town  cemetery.  Each
morning  as  we  went  to  work  we  saw  dozens  of  deep,  freshly  dug
pits.  When  we  returned  in  the  evening  they  had  been  filled  and
levelled  with  the  ground.  Some  of  the  more  inquisitive  scholars
tried  digging  up  the  loose  soil  with  their  boots.  They  lost  their
curiosity  when  they  came  upon  human  ' hands  or  feet  beneath  the
shallow  layer  of  earth.  Sometimes  as  we  went  past  the  cemetery
we  saw  swollen  corpses  being  thrown  from  carts  into  the  pits;  they
had  been  brought  from  prisons  and  hospitals.  The  wild  steppe  grass
rapidly  covered  these  graves,  and  nobody  will  ever  know  the  exact
cost  of  that  resounding  word  'collectivization'.

The  artificial  famine  of  1982-3  was  a political  measure  taken  by
the  Politburo,  it  was  not  an  elemental  disaster.  The  people  had
to  be  shown  who  was  the  master.  The  decision  was  taken  in  the
Kremlin;  the  result  was  the  loss  of  millions  of  human  lives.  From  that
time  hunger  became  a new,  full  member  of  the  Politburo.

Yet  at  that  same  period  the  Soviet  government  was  dumping!

They  offered  wheat  at  very  cheap  prices,  much  cheaper  than  the
world  market  price.  The  principle  was  simple:  grain  taken  from  the
collectivized  Soviet  peasant  at  6 kopeks  a kilo  was  sold  to  the
Russian  workers  at  90  kopeks  a kilo.  In  such  circumstances  it  was
easy  enough  to  indulge  in  dumping.

The  Soviet  Union  offered  its  grain  at  knock-down  prices  on  the
world  market.  The  greedy  capitalists  rushed  to  buy  it.  But  the
Canadian  and  Australian  farmers  started  to  burn  their  grain,  while
the  Moscow  radio  howled  in  delight:  "Look  what  is  happening
in  the  unplanned  capitalist  world."  But  after  burning  their  grain
the  Australians  and  Canadians  had  no  money  to  buy  the  British
industrial  goods,  consequently  British  factories  began  to  close


down  and  unemployment  increased.  The  British  workers  had  no
money  to  buy  the  cheap  Russian  grain.

But  over  the  sea,  in  the  marvelous  land  where  communism  was


357


being  built,  there  was  no  unemployment,  and  bread  was  so  cheap
that  it  was  being  sold  abroad  for  next  to  nothing.  And  so  there  was
a wave  of  strikes  and  revolutionary  movements  in  the  West.

"The  revolution  is  continuing,  Comrades,"  they  said  in  the  Kremlin,
rubbing  their  hands.

In  Denmark  the  pigs  were  fe  d on  cheap  Russian  sugar.  In  the
U.S.S.R.,  people  drank  their  tea  with  the  sugar  on  the  table  to  look
at,  or  on  Sundays  and  holidays  they  nibbled  a knob  as  they  sipped
their  tea.  The  Soviet  workers  and  peasants  went  hungry,  but  there
was  money  enough  for  financing  capital  construction,  while  machine
tools  and  machinery  were  imported.  Heavy  industry  increased
proportionately  to  the  rest  of  the  country's  economy.  The  workers
and  peasants  wer~  told  that  heavy  industry  would  make  the
machinery  for  light  industry,  and  this  in  turn  would  make  cloth
and  boots.  But  meanwhile  tanks  and  aeroplanes  were  the  chief
production.  There  was  nothing  to  be  done  about  it:  it  was  all  due
to  the  capitalist  encirclement.

Now  there  was  no  room  for  bourgeois  sentimentality.  Statistics
show  that  fertility  and  population  increase  are  in,  inverse  proportion
to  the  living  conditions.  The  worse  people  live,  the  swifter-  they
multiply.  On  the  one  hand  there  are  India  and  China,  where  thou
sands  did  of  hunger  every  year,  but  where  millions  are  born  in  their
place.  On  the  other,  the  well-fed,  enervated  countries  in  the  decline
of  civilization,  such  as  France  and  Britain,  with  their  falling
fertility  curve,  and  where  the  age-groups  past  the  prime  of  life  play
a predominant  part.  Given  these  circumstances,  Stalin  had  no  need
to  fear  the  consequences  of  the  famine  policy;  whatever  happened,
he  was  assured  of  soldiers  and  labor.  In  every  respect  the  State
would  show  an  active  balance.

September  1989.  Signature  of  the  Hitler-Stalin  Pact  of  Friend
ship.  Trainload  after  trainload  of  Soviet  grain,  Soviet  butter,  Soviet
sugar  steamed  off  to  Germany.  Simultaneously  all  these  articles
disappeared  from  the  Soviet  shops,  which  in  any  case  had  never  had
any  remarkable  stock  of  them.

To  explain  the  change  of  political  course  the  N.K.V.D.  rumor,
mongers  spread  the  story  that  Ribbentrop  had  brought  to  Moscow
the  photo-copy  of  a document  which  had  been  signed  by  fourteen
foreign  powers.  These  powers  had  offered  Hitler  aid  if  he  attacked
the  U.S.S.R.  Hitler  preferred  our  friendship:  we  desire  peace.

But  for  that  we  have  got  to  pay!

1941 . War.  Hunger  passed  into  its  final,  perfected  form.  The
ration-card  system.  No  longer  under-nourishment,  but  out-and-out


358


starvation.  In  the  winter  of  1941-2  a kilo  of  potatoes  cost  60  roubles
on  the  free  market:  the  equivalent  of  a week's  wage.  A kilo  of  butter
cost  700  to  800  roubles:  three  months'  wages.  The  worker  received
sufficient  on  the  ration  card  to  keep  him  on  his  feet  and  capable  of
working.  In  practice  the  main,  indeed  the  only  food  issued  was
bread-600  grams  daily-the  same  bread  that  caused  the  German
prisoners  of  war  to  suffer  from  gastric  ulcers  and  to  die  off  like
flies.

One  day  I had  called  on  the  director  of  the  Lenin  radio  factory,
to  discuss  some  business.  A knock  at  the  door  interrupted  our
conversation.  His  secretary  put  in  her  head  and  reported:  "
Serdiukova  is  here;  is  she  to  come  in  or  wait?"

Serdiukova  came  nervously  into  the  room.  Her  face  was  dirty,
and  it  was  difficult  to  tell  her  age.  She  was  wearing  a black,  greasy
jacket,  and  her  stockings  were  of  sailcloth;  she  had  men's  boots  on
her  feet.  She  stood  at  the  door,  silently  waiting.  Her  expression
seemed  despondent,  yet  indifferent,  stamped  with  the  apathy  of
infinite  weariness.

"Why  didn't  you  come  to  work  yesterday,  Serdiukova?"  the
director  asked.  "To  stay  away's  a serious  crime,  punishable  under
war  legislation.  You  know  what  the  punishment  is  for  it."

"I  was  ill,  Comrade  Director.  I couldn't  get  out  of  bed,"  she
answered  in  a hoarse  voice.  She  shifted  from  foot  to  foot.  A pool  of
water  formed  on  the  parquet;  it  was  dripping  off  her  boots.

Absence  from  work  without  good  reason  involved  the  punishment
of  for-ed  labor  even  in  peacetime.  In  wartime  it  might  bring  ten
years'  imprisonment,  on  a charge  of  sabotaging  war  industry.

"Have  you  got  a doctor's  certificate?"  the  director  asked.

"No.  I hadn't  anyone  to  send  for  the  doctor.  As  soon  as  I could
get  up  I came  to  work." '

Serdiukova  was  one  of  those  typical  Russian  women  who
uncomplainingly  endure  all  the  difficulties  of  life,  who  accept  every
thing  as  inevitable,  as  sent  from  above.  In  this  silent  humility  there
is  a kind  of  religious  quality.  It  is  not  weakness;  it  is  a source  of  the
Russian's  enormous  spiritual  strength.


As  I looked  at  her  I recalled  an  old  soldier  who  was  returning  from
hospital  to  the  front  after  the  latest  of  his  many  wounds.  As  he
carried  a machine-gun  tripod  on  his  back  he  quite  calmly  gave
expression  to  his.  secret  desire:  "Ah,  if  only  I had  lost  an  arm  or  a leg!
Then  I'd  be  going  back  to  my  village."  I was  shocked  not  so  much
by  his  words  as  by  the  composure  with  which  he  said  them,  his  genuine


359


readiness  to  lose  an  arm  or  a leg  in  exchange  for  return  home.  Yet
he  was  an  exemplary  soldier.

"You  must  know  the  law,"  the  director  went  on.  "Absent  without
good  reason.  I'll  have  to  send  your  case  to  court."

She  began  to  mutter  in  a broken  voice:  "But,  Comrade  Director
...  Day  after  day,  fourteen  hours  at  the  bench  ...  I haven't  the
strength  ...  I'm  sick.  . . "

"I  can't  help  it.  It's  the  law.  We're  all  sick  like  that."

Her  face  twisted  with  anger.  "You're  all  sick  like  that?"  she
shouted,  stepping  closer  to  his  desk.  "But  have  you  ever  seen  this?'
Tears  streamed  down  her  face  as,  in  an  uncontrollable  impulse  or
fury,  she  snatched  up  the  edge  of  her  skirt.  She  was  no  longer  a
human  being,  no  longer  a woman,  but  a creature  mastered  by  the
courage  of  despair.  "All  of  you?  All  as  sick  as  this?"

I saw  her  white  body,  all  the  whiter  against  the  grey  background
of  the  office  wall.  She  did  not  have  a woman's  shapely  legs,  but  two
deformed  pillars  with  no  curve  to  the  calves,  with  the  knees  touching
Two  garters  of  red  automobile  inner  tubing  cut  deeply  into  this
swollen  mass  of  her  bluish  flesh.

"Have  you  ever  seen  that,  Comrade  Director?  Have  you  got  legs
like  this?"  she  screamed,  beside  herself  with  indignation  and  shame.

"For  five  months  I've  not  had  a period.  I've  dropped  unconscious
at  the  bench  again  and  again

"Is  there  really  nothing  to  be  done?"  I asked  him  when  she  had
gone.

"What  can  I do?"  he  answered,  and  stared  hopelessly  at  th
papers  on  his  desk.  "Half  the  women  are  like  that.  Pills  are  of  no
use  in  such  cases."

"I  don't  mean  that.  I mean  referring  it  to  the  court.  Can't  you
overlook  it?"

"Concealment  of  absenteeism  is  punished  as  heavily  as  absenteeism
itself.  If  I overlook  this  case  the  N.K.V.D.  will  put  us
inside.  You  can't  hide  anything  from  Luzgin,"  he  answered.

I had  not  made  Lu7, gin's  acquaintance,  but  I had  heard  a great
deal  about  him.  He  was  the  head  of  the  works  Special  Department:
the  eyes  and  ears  of  the  Party.

While  working  in  the  town  of  Gorky  I was  crossing  Sverdlov  Square
one  day  in  March.  There  were  puddles  of  snow  and  mud  lying  in
the  roadways.  Just  in  front  of  me  two  young  girls,  probably  students,


360


with  document-cases  under  their  arms,  were  trudging  through  the
water.  Suddenly  one  of  them  dropped  her  case;  it  fell  into  the  muck
of  the  side-walk  and  flew  open.  Books  and  exercise  books  were
scattered  in  the  mud.  The  girl  took  a few  staggering  steps  towards
the  wall  of  the  nearest  house,  but  then  her  legs  gave  way  under  her,
and  she  slowly  sank  to  the  ground.  Her  blue  kerchief  slipped  off,
the  strands  of  her  chestnut  hair  were  mingled  with  the  melting  snow
and  mud.  She  had  a deathly-  white  face,  with  blue  under  the  eyes.

She  had  fainted.

Her  friend  hurried  to  her  aid.  One  or  two  passers-by  helped  to
pick  her  up  and  carry  her  to  the  gateway  of  the  nearest  house.  The
crowd  excitedly  asked  her  friend  what  had  happened,  but  she
answered  in  some  embarrassment:  "It's  nothing,  only  a faint."  An
elderly  woman  in  huge  boots  asked  her:  "Where've  you  come  from?
From  the  centre?"  Without  waiting  for  the  answer  she  began  to
lament  with  all  the  commiseration  of  a simple  woman:  "Poor  kids!

You're  hungry,  hardly  able  to  stand  on  your  feet,  yet  you're  giving
your  last  drop  of  blood.  You  can't  go  on  like  this.  You'll  be  in  your
grave  before  long."

A large  proportion  of  the  donors  attending  the  blood-transfusion
centres  consisted  of  girl  students  and  mothers  with  little  children.

In  exchange  for  450  cubic  centimeters  of  blood  they  received  125
roubles,  which  would  buy  not  quite  a kilo  of  black  bread.  After  each
transfusion  they  received  an  extra  ration  card  entitling  them  to  200
additional  grammes  of  bread  each  day  for  a month.  They  also
received  one  supplementary  ration  consisting  of  250  grammes  of  fat,
500  grammes  of  meat  and  500  grammes  of  sugar.  These  mothers  and
girls  knew  their  patriotic  duty  well  enough,  they  knew  the  blood
was  for  their  husbands  and  brothers  at  the  front.  But  it  was  chiefly
hunger  that  drove  them  to  the  centres.  The  mothers  tried  to  feed
their  hungry  children  at  the  price  of  their  own  blood;  the  students
preferred  to  sacrifice  their  blood  rather  than  their  bodies.

Special  letter  blanks  were  obtainable  at  the  blood  transfusion
centres,  and  many  of  the  girl  donors  used  these  to  send  letters  to  the
front,  to  the  soldiers  for  whom  they  were  donating  their  blood.

Frequently  these  letters  marked  the  beginning  of  a correspondence  and
friendship.  After  the  war  there  were  quite  a number  of  cases  of  the
writers  meeting  and  marrying:  a marriage  sealed  in  blood.

In  the  centre  of  the  town  of  Gorky  there  is  a square:  'The  Square
of  the  Victims  of  1 905.'  One  side  of  the  square  is  bounded  by  thi
walls  of  an  old  prison,  in  which  the  heroes  of  Gorky's  novel  The
Mother  were  imprisoned.  On  the  opposite  side  is  the  Municipal  Opera
and  Ballet  Theatre.  One  evening  I stood  with  a group  of  comrades


361


in  the  foyer  during  an  interval.  Dancing  was  going  on  in  the  hall,
to

the  music  of  an  orchestra.  A slim,  good-looking  girl  dancing  with  an
officer  attracted  my  notice.  Her  slender  form  was  clothed  in  a grey
dress  of  matt  silk,  her  hair  was  arranged  in  a simple  yet  original
style.  Her  toilet  and  all  her  bearing  indicated  her  good  taste,  and
a sense  of  her  own  value.

"Who  is  that  girl?"  I asked  a comrade  who  was  well  acquainted
with  life  in  the  town.

"A  student;  she's  in  the  last  year  of  the  medical  faculty,"
answered  curtly.

"An  interesting  girl,"  I said.

"I'd  advise  you  not  to  go  running  after  her."

"Why,  what's  wrong?"

"I  just  advise  you  not  to,  that's  alll"  He  would  not  say  more
His  words  aroused  my  curiosity,  and  I asked  another  acquainted
the  same  question.

"The  girl  in  grey?"  he  said,  taking  a glance  at  her.  "If  you're
terested  in  knowing  her  for  a night,  it's  very  simple:  one  can  of
conserves  or  a loaf  of  bread."

I stared  at  him  incredulously.  I was  fond  of  student  lite,  and  still
thought  of  myself  as  belonging  to  it.  His  words  seemed  like  a
personal  insult.  In  pre-war  days  the  students  had  been  the,  morally
cleanest  and  most  spiritual  group  in  society.  Could  one  year  of  war
have  brought  about  such  a change?

"Don't  talk  bosh!"  I retorted.

"It's  not  bosh,  it's  the  mournful  truth.  She  lives  in  a hostel,  in
one  room  with  five  other  friends.  They  have  two  or  three  visitors
every  night.  Chiefly  officers.  Who  has  anything  to  spare  these  days
apart  from  officers?"

Before  the  war  there  was  practically  no  prostitution  in  the  Soviet
Union.  The  average  Soviet  man's  budget  did  not  include  this  item
of  expenditure.  There  was  only  prostitution  for  political  purposes
under  N.K.V.D.  protection,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Intourist
hotels  and  restaurants  and  wherever  foreigners  congregated.  And
some  commerce  in  human  bodies  went  on,  to  a small  extent,  among


362


the  higher  circles  of  the  new  ruling  class,  who  had  the  means  to  buy
such  articles.


But  now,  during  the  war,  hunger  was  driving  women  on  to  the
street.  Not  for  silk  stockings,  Parisian  perfumes,  or  luxury  articles.

Only  for  bread  or  a can  of  preserves.  And  worst  of  all,  the  first
victims  were  the  students,  who  would  form  the  future  Soviet  in
tellectual  and  professional  classes.  They  paid  a high  price  for  their
higher  education.

Two  old,  men,  Nikanor  and  Peter,  were  employed  in  the  construe
tional  department  of  Factory  No.  645.  They  had  both  been  pen
sioned  off  long  before,  but  hunger  had  driven  them  back  to  work,
for  they  found  it  impossible  to  live  on  their  pensions.  At  one  time
Nikanor  had  been  a well-known  engineer  aircraft  constructor.

Before  the  first  world  war  he  had  worked  at  the  B16riot  works  in
France,  where  he  had  helped  to  build  the  first  aeroplanes  in  the
world.  He  had  known  all  the  fathers  of  Russian  aviation  personally:
Zhukovsky,  Sikorsky,  Piontkovsky.  Under  the  Soviet  regime  he  had
worked  hard  in  the  field  of  aviation  and  was  proud  of  his  many  letters
of  congratulation  and  praise,  his  awards,  and  newspaper  cuttings  in
which  his  name  was  mentioned.  Now  he  was  only  a helpless  ruin  of  a
man.  He  had  been  taken  back  into  the  works  mainly  out  of  pity,  for
he  was  really  too  old  to  work.

From  early  morning  Nikanor  and  Peter  would  sit  at  a table  in
a quiet  corner  and  barricade  themselves  off  with  a drawing-board,
while  they  talked  about  all  the  various  kinds  of  food  they  had
had  in  their  long  lifetime.  Every  day  they  told  each  other  of  some
new  dish  which  they  had  recalled  out  of  the  mist  of  the  years.

Thus  they  sat,  hour  after  hour,  day  after  day,  capping  each  other's
stories,  and  sometimes  even  quarrelling  over  the  method  of  pre
paring  some  sauce  or  the  details  of  a recipe  for  mushrooms.  The  other
members  of  their  department  thought  them  a little  funny  in  the  head.
One  day  I happened  to  overhear  Nikanor  complaining  to  Peter:

"This  is  the  third  day  I've  gone  without  porridge.  We've  eaten  all
the  mallows  in  our  street,  and  I shan't  find  any  more  anywhere  else.
Porridge  made  from  mallows  is  very  tasty,  I assure  you,  Peter.  Just
like  sucking  pig  with  chestnut  stuffing.  Now  I shall  have  to  look  up
the  books  again;  they  say  there  are  other  edible  roots  to  be  found."


Two  hours  before  the  midday  break  Nikanor  took  a pocket  watch
on  a heavy  silver  chain,  two  more  tributes  to  past  services,  out  of
his  waistcoat  pocket  and  laid  them  on  the  desk  before  him.  Every  few
minutes  he  looked  expectantly  at  the  slowly  moving  hands.  Fifteen


363


minutes  before  the  break  he  began  to  rummage  through  his  drawers
r

in  search  of  his  spoon  and  fork.  Then  he  made  sure  his  goloshes  were

firmly  over  his  boots.  All  this  was  in  preparation  for  the  start,

for

at  the  age  of  seventy  he  was  not  very  fit  for  the  coming  race.  At  last
he  even  obtained  permission  from  the  factory  management  to  go  to
dinner  five  minutes  before  time.

After  all  these  preparations  he  trotted  across  the  yard  to  the
dining  hall,  with  one  hand  holding  his  pince-nez  on  his  nose.  There
he  would  have  his  dinner:  a first  course  of  boiled  green  tomatoes,
and  a second  course  of  water-gruel  made  from  oatmeal,  and  without
seasoning-a  serving  only  sufficient  for  a cat.  He  scraped  his
aluminium  plate  thoroughly,  licked  his  spoon  carefully,  then  back  to
work  and  after  work  the  search  for  edible  roots.  1944.  The  Soviet
army  struck  like  a battering  ram  at  the  most  important  sectors  of
the-  German  front.  Soviet  territory  was  almost  completely  freed  of
German  troops.  The  tank  wedges  thrust  towards  the  frontiers  of  the
Reich.  The  soldiers  in  the  reserve  regiments  waited  impatiently  to
be  sent  to  the  front-not  out  of  patriotism  but  simply  because  of
hunger.  In  the  reserve  regiments  the  rations  were  so  low  that  many
of  the  men  went  rummaging  in  the  dustbins  in  search  of  cabbage
leaves  or  a frozen  potato.

"The  way  to  the  soldiers'  hearts  lies  through  their  stomachs,"

Napoleon  said.  Stalin  modernized  the  remark  to  meet  his  own  needs.

In  the  Soviet  army  there  were  twelve  ration  standards:  front  ration
No.  1 , front  ration  No.  2;  immediate  rear  ration  No.  1 , immediate
rear  ration  No.  2;  and  so  on,  down  to  the  twelfth,  called  the
sanatorium  ration.  Only  the  first  and  last  of  all  these  ration  scales  could
be  regarded  as  normal;  the  others  simply  connoted  various  stages
of  hunger.

The  difficulties  of  wartime!  Again  and  again  I have  tried  to  find
this  justification  for  all  the  misery  that  was  to  be  seen  at  every  step.

I was  a Soviet  officer,  I should  know  what  I sent  men  into  battle  for.

In  those  days  I often  asked  myself  what  would  happen  after  we  had
driven  the  last  German  off  our  soil.  Everything  as  before?  I had  no
wish  to  recall  the  'heroic  workdays  of  socialist  construction.

In  Soviet  Union  hunger  has  been  elevated  into  a system.  It  has
become  a means  of  influencing  the  masses;  it  is  a full  member  of
the  Politbureau,  a true  and  faithful  ally  of  Stalin.

Leningrad.  It  is  a proud  name.  I was  there  shortly  after  the  city
was  freed  from  the  blockade.  Nobody  knows  the  exact  total  of


364


victims  from  hunger  during  the  siege.  As  the  Germans  advanced,
all  the  inhabitants  of  the  surrounding  countryside  flocked  into  the
city,  swelling  its  population  to  almost  eight  millions.  At  least  three
million  died  of  hunger.

One  day  I and  another  officer  were  walking  along  the  shore  of  a lake
just  outside  Leningrad.  Right  beside  the  water  was  a small  ceme
tery;  young  grass  was  growing  among  the  neglected  graves.  A block  of
red  granite  attracted  my  attention.  'Flight-Lieutenant ...  died  the
death  of  a hero  in  the  battle  for  the  city  of  Lenin.'  I read  the  inscrip
tion  carved  in  the  stone.

"Lucky  blighted"  said  my  companion,  who  had  taken  part  in
the  defence  of  the  city  from  the  very  beginning.  "Those  who  have
survived  the  blockade  are  only  husks  of  men  today."

"I'm  a passive  murderer,"  another  inhabitant  of  the  city  once
told  me.  "I  saw  a man  lying  in  the  snow  in  the  street;  he  had  fallen
and  was  too  weak  to  get  up.  He  asked  me  to  help  him,  otherwise  he'd
freeze  to  death.  But  I couldn't,  I'd  only  have  fallen  myself  and  been
unable  to  get  up  again.  I'd  only  have  frozen  at  his  side.  I staggered
on,  leaving  him  to  freeze  in  the  snow."

I would  give  every  citizen  of  Leningrad  the  highest  decoration
possible.  Since  the  days  of  Troy,  history  knows  no  similar  case  of
mass  civic  heroism.  Was  it  all  a strategic  necessity,  or  simply  a
question  in  which  Stalin's  prestige  was  involved?  'When  one  man
dies,  it  is  a tragedy;  when  millions  die,  it's  only  statistics.'

Especially  when  the  death  of  millions  is  contemplated  from  behind
the  Kremlin  walls.

Shortly  before  the  end  of  the  war  I travelled  back  to  Moscow  from
Leningrad  by  train.'  At  every  station,  every  wayside  halt,  crowds  of
ragged  women  were  standing  with  children  in  their  arms.  The  in
fants'  faces  were  translucent,  bluish  white,  their  eyes  were  glittering
with  hunger,  their  faces  were  aged,  joyless,  serious.  Other  children
stretched  out  their  thin  hands  and  asked  for  'Bread,  breadl'

The  soldiers  undid  their  rucksacks  and  silently  handed  their
rations  of  hard  tack  or  bread  through  the  windows.  Each  of  them
was  oppressed  by  thoughts  of  his  own  wife  and  children.  They  gained
a momentary  feeling  of  relief  as  they  handed  out  their  food,  but  they


were  left  with  a nagging  sense  of  shame  and  bitterness.  Can  you  feed
a whole  starving  land  with  bits  of  bread?

As  the  German  prisoners  return  home  from  Russia  they  will


365


doubtless  tell  of  the  desperately  low  food  rations  in  the  Soviet
prisoner  of  war  camps.  And  as  they  see  it  they  will  be  justified.

By  European  standards  the  prisoner  of  war  conditions  were  murder,
ous,  the  soggy  black  bread  was  simply  poison  to  a European  digestive
system.  I myself  have  been  in  camps  for  German  prisoners  of  war,  and
have  seen  the  conditions.  But  I can  only  ask:  did  the  German
prisoners  notice  that  the  Russian  people  on  the  farther  side  of  the
barbed  wire  were  fed  on  even  lower  standards?  Did  any  of  them  think
that  these  so-called  'Russian'  conditions  were  the  result  of  the
Soviet  system  and  that  in  due  course  they  will  flourish  in  Eastern
Germany?  Moscow.  The  last  days  of  the  war.  A lively  trade  was  going
on  in  the  city  markets.  Pale,  exhausted  women  huddling  in  corners,  a
few  knobs  of  sugar  or  one  or  two  herrings  in  their  extended  hands.
They  e were  selling  their  meagre  ration  in  order  to  get  milk  or
bread  I for  their  children.  Bread,  breadl  In  all  eyes  was  the  same
mute  cry.

The  article  that  sold  best  was  the  Russian  home-grown  tobacco
called  'mahorka'-15  roubles  a glass.  The  markets  swarmed  With
war-wounded,  without  legs,  without  arms,  in  front-line  greatcoats
and  tunics,  with  red  wound  stripes  on  their  chests.  The  militiamen
turned  a blind  eye  to  these  violators  of  the  Sovie  ' t trade  monopoly

If  any  of  them  did  try  to  take  away  one  of  the  war-wounded,  the
air  rang  with  indignant  shouts:  "What  did  he  fight  for?"  "What  did
he  shed  his  blood  for?"  His  comrades  came  hurrying  up,  waving
crutches  and  sticks.

Berlin  capitulated.  A few  days  later  all  Germany  unconditionally
surrendered.  People  thought  that  things  would  be  easier  literally
the

very  next  day.  That  was  the  hope  of  people  who  had  nothing  but
their  hopes.

Now  the  first  post-war  year  had  passed,  the  second  was  drawing  to
its  close,  and  we  members  of  the  Soviet  occupation  forces  in  Germany
were  reading  our  letters  from  home.  As  we  read  they  acted  on  us  like
poison.  Our  bitterness  was  intensified  by  all  that  we  saw  around  us
One  day  Andrei  Kovtun  and  I were  discussing  the  situation  in
Germany.  Little  by  little  the  conversation  turned  to  comparisons
between  'here'  and  'there'.

"The  Berlin  Underground  is  really  rotten,"  Andrei  said.  "When
I compare  it  with  the  Moscow  Underground  I feel  really  good.

These  days  I often  catch  myself  looking  for  things  in  Germany  that


366


tell  in  our  favour.  It's  difficult  to  get  used  to  the  idea  that  all
our  lives  we've  been  chasing  after  shadows."  "Yes,"  I commented;  "
here  people  live  in  the  present,  whereas  we  have  lived  all  our  lives
in  the  future.  Or  rather,  for  the  future.  I quite  understand  how  you
feel.  It's  a violation  of  the  inward  harmony,  as  the  psychiatrist
would  say.  The  only  remedy  is  to  recover  faith  in  the  future."

"Look,  Gregoryl"  Andrei  replied.  "We've  got  splendid  aeroplanes  and
tanks,  a powerful  heavy  industry,  let's  leave  out  of  account  the
price  we've  paid  for  all  these  things,  let's  forget  all  the  blood,
the  sweat,  the  hunger.  You'd  think  that  now  the  time's  come  to
exploit  all  these  achievements  for  our  own  benefit.  After  all,  we
haven't  seen  anything  of  life  yet.  It's  always  been  nothing  but  aims
and  ideals  for  us:  socialism,  communism.  But  when  shall  we  really
start  living?

D'you  remember  what  Professor  :klexandrov  said  at  the  Higher
Party  School  of  the  Party  Central  Committee?  'If  the  proletariat  of
other  countries  cannot  achieve  their  own  emancipation,  we  shall
stretch  out  our  hands  to  help  them.'  We  know  what  that  'helping
hand'  means.  What  if  all  the  promises  of  wartime  are  only  unsecured
bills  of  exchange?  I didn't  know  what  fear  was  during  the  war,  but
I do  now.  Yes,  I'm  afraid  all  right  now."

He  was  expressing  the  same  thoughts  and  fears  that  possess  the
majority  of  the  young  Soviet  intellectuals  and  professional  people.

We  are  proud  of  our  country's  achievements,  we  are  proud  of  our
victory.  We  do  not  regret  all  the  difficulties  and  deprivations  we
have  experienced,  the  price  we  paid  for  the  victory  and  for  our
country's  glory.  But  we  who  were  living  in  the  West  were  beginning
to  feel  keenly  that  all  the  things  which  Soviet  propaganda  claims  as
the  exclusive  achievement  of  the  Soviet  regime  are  colossal  lies.  We
used  to  have  our  doubts,  but  now  the  doubts  have  been  trans  formed
into  certainties,  and  we  cannot  fight  them.

We  have  come  to  the  realization  that  we  haven't  started  to  live
yet,  that  we  have  only  continually  made  sacrifices  for  the  sake  of
the  future.  Now  our  faith  in  that  future  is  shattered.  As  the  post
war  situation  develops  we  are  increasingly  filled  with  alarm.  What
is  it  all  leading  to?

In  those  early  post-war  years  Berlin  was  the  political  centre  of
the  world.  And  we  were  sitting  in  the  front  rows  at  the  chess  tourna
ment  of  international  politics.  More,  we  ourselves  were  pawns  in


367


the  tournament  play.  The  post-war  experience  showed  that  there
was  no  basis  whatever  for  the  hopes  and  expectations  which  Russian
soldiers  and  officers  possessed  in  the  war  years.  And  what  now?

"Politics  is  politics,  but  life  is  life."  Andrei's  voice  sounded  in  my
ears.  "But  what  have  we  got  out  of  life?  The  Germans  are  having  a
thin  time  at  present,  but  they  have  a past  they  can  recall,  and  they
still  have  a hope  of  the  future.  They  can  at  least  hope  that  one  day
we  shall  clear  out  and  they'll  be  able  to  live  again.  But  what  can  we
hope  for ...  we  victors?"

Two  years  had  passed  since  the  end  of  the  war.  Now  our  worst
fears  were  being  confirmed.  Once  more  hunger  was  stalking  our
country,  a still  worse  hunger  than  in  wartime.  Once  more  the  Party
had  decided  to  take  the  people  firmly  in  hand,  had  decided  to  make
the  people  forget  and  turn  from  the  illusory  hopes  which  the  Party
itself  had  cleverly  stimulated  and  encouraged  in  the  critical  period
of  the  war.  The  Party  had  once  more  decided  to  show  the  people  who
was  the  real  master,  and  had  summoned  its  first  servant,  famine,
to  its  help.

In  past  days  famine  had  been  an  elemental  disaster;  today  it  is
an  instrument  deliberately  wielded  by  the  Kremlin.

A clock  struck;  I rose  and  looked  round  my  room,  at  my  feet,
shod  in  leg-boots,  at  my  blue  breeches  with  their  crimson  stripes,

My  gaze  passed  over  the  gilt  buttons  of  my  green  tunic.  I had  gold
epaulettes  on  my  shoulders,  It  was  all  so  close  and  so  well  known
yet  it  was  all  so  alien.

The  walls  of  my  room  dissolved  to  reveal  the  dark,  starry  night

over  Europe.  And  somewhere  beyond,  far  to  the  east,  was  the  frontier  of  my

native  land.  But  there  it  was  dark  and  still,  like  a leaden

tomb.


368


CHAPTER  EIGHTEEN
The  Wings  of  a Slave

At  the  beginning  of  1947,  Mikoyan,  member  of  the  Politbureau
and  plenipotentiary  extraordinary  of  the  Soviet  Council  of  Ministers
for  the  economic  assimilation  of  the  occupied  areas  and  the  satellite
countries,  made  an  exhaustive  inspection  tour  of  the  Soviet  zone.

Afterwards  he  had  a long  conference  with  Marshal  Sokolovsky  and
his  deputy  for  economic  questions,  Comrade  Koval.

This  conference  discussed  the  results  of  the  economic
reorganization  of  the  Soviet  zone.  The  land  reform  which  had  been
accomplished  shortly  after  the  capitulation  had  not  achieved  any  decisive
economic  effect.  This  fact  did  not  disturb  or  even  surprise  either
Mikoyan  or  Marshal  Sokolovsky.  With  its  aid  certain  necessary
tactical  results  had  been  achieved;  in  particular,  a basis  had  been  laid
for  an  offensive  against  the  peasants,  as  well  as  the  prerequisites  for
the  final  collectivization  of  agriculture.

In  the  industrial  sphere,  after  the  mass  dismantling  process  and
the  socialization  of  the  small  enterprises  as  Landeseigener  Beirieb
(district-owned  works),  the  S.M.A.'s  biggest  measure  was  the  practical
unification  of  all  the  Soviet  zone  basic  industry  in  an  enormous
industrial  concern  known  as  'Soviet  Joint  Stock  Companies'.  This
measure,  which  had  been  dictated  by  Moscow,  came  under  special
consideration  at  the  Mikoyan-Sokolovsky  conference.

Late  in  the  summer  of  1946,  Comrade  Koval,  the  commander-in
chief's  deputy  for  economic  questions,  had  returned  from  a visit
to  Moscow,  bringing  with  him  new  secret  instructions.  Shortly  after,
mysterious  documents  began  to  circulate  between  the  Administra
tion  for  Industry,  the  Administration  for  Reparations,  and  Koval's
office.  These  documents  were  referred  to  in  whispers  as  'List  of  216'


or  'List  of  285'.  The  figure  changed  continually;  it  indicated  the  list
of  enterprises  which  it  was  proposed  to  transform  into  Soviet  Joint
Stock  Companies.  The  lists  were  sent  to  Moscow  for  confirmation,  and
they  returned  in  the  form  of  appendices  to  an  official  decree  concerning  the
organization  of  an  'Administration  for  Soviet  Joint  Stock
Companies  in  Germany'.  This  administration,  which  took  over  the
former  Askania  Company's  building  in  Berlin-Weissensee  for  its
headquarters,  controlled  thirteen  Soviet  joint  stock  companies  in  the
more  important  industrial  spheres,  and  these  thirteen  included  some


369


250  of  the  larger  industrial  works  in  the  Soviet  zone.  By  the  statutes  of
the  new  concern  51  per  cent  of  the  shares  of  the  works  thus  included
were  to  be  Soviet-owned.  Thus  practically  the  entire  industry  in  the
Soviet  zone  came  into  Soviet  hands,  not  only  by  right  of  conquest  and
for  the  duration  of  the  occupation,  but  for  all  future  time.

At  the  1945  Potsdam  Conference,  in  which  Stalin  had  taken  an
active  part,  great  attention  had  been  paid  to  the  question  of
decartellizing  German  economy,  and  it  had  been  decided  to  liquidate
the  big  German  industrial  concerns,  which  were  regarded  not  only
as  an  important  economic  factor,  but  also  as  a political  factor
frequently  aggressive  in  its  nature.  As  a result,  one  of  the  first  items
on  the  agenda  of  the  Allied  Control  Commission  was  this  question
of  the  liquidation  of  the  German  concerns,  and  in  his  time  General
Shabalin  was  active  in  pressing  for  the  matter  to  be  tackled.  But
now,  again  on  orders  from  Moscow,  the  largest  industrial  concern
not  only  of  Germany,  but  perhaps  of  the  whole  world  was  founded

Its  economic  and  also  political  importance  surpass  anything  of  the
kind  existing  hitherto  in  Germany  or  in  Europe.  And  this
superconcern  is  no  longer  in  German  but  in  Soviet  hands.  In  the  present
struggle  for  Germany  and  Europe  the  S.A.G.

(Sowjet  Aktiengtsellschaften)  will  be  a strong  weapon  in  Kremlin  hands.

All  the  economic  measures  taken  by  the  S.M.A.  in  Germany,  like
the  Kremlin's  economic  policy  generally,  pursue  far-reaching
political  aims.  The  object  of  this  transformation  of  the  Soviet  zone
is  to  fetter  it  with  powerful  economic  chains.  It  provides  a necessary
economic  basis  for  a further  political  advance.

Mikoyan  was  not  the  only  member  of  the  Politbureau  to  visit
Germany  about  this  time.  Beria,  the  Soviet  Minister  for  Home
Affairs,  made  a similar  tour  of  inspection  through  the  lands  of
eastern  Europe  and  eastern  Germany.  He,  too,  had  a long
conference  with  Sokolovsky  and  the  head  of  the  S.M.A.  Administration
for  Internal  Affairs,  Colonel-General  Serov.  This  conference  dis
cussed  measures  to  strengthen  the  internal  political  front.  The
sequence  of  events  was  logical  enough:  the  master  for  economic
exploitation  was  followed  by  the  master  for  extermination  affairs.

One  of  the  results  of  Beria's  visit  to  Karlshorst  was  a further  purge
of  the  S.M.A.  personnel.  A growing  number  of  the  officers  who  had
been  with  the  S.M.A.  from  the  beginning  were  recalled  to  the  Soviet
Union.  Their  place  was  taken  by  new  men  from  Moscow;  they  were
recognizable  at  first  glance  as  the  purest  of  Party-men.  The  change
of  personnel  in  Karlshorst  was  in  full  accord  with  the  Kremlin's
post-war  policy,  which  was  directed  towards  placing  all  the  key


370


points  in  Party  hands.  Once  more  one  could  not  help  being  struck
by  the  difference  between  'nominal  Party-men'  and  'pure  Party
men'.  Almost  every  Soviet  officer  was  a Party-member,  but  the
Party  was  far  from  regarding  them  all  as  'pure  Party-men'.

More  than  eighteen  months  had  passed  since  Karlshorst  had  been
transformed  into  the  Berlin  Kremlin.  Since  then  both  the  world  and
Karlshorst  had  been  subjected  to  many  changes.  Many  of  these
changes  had  been  the  result  of  Karlshorst's  own  activities  as  an
advanced  post  of  Soviet  foreign  policy.  Parallel  with  this  there  had
been  a change  in  the  international  atmosphere,  and  the  people  in
Karlshorst  had  been  the  first  to  become  conscious  of  it.

We  were  left  with  only  the  memory  of  the  time  when  Russians
had  been  welcomed  everywhere  as  liberators  and  allies.  The
Kremlin's  post-war  policy  had  left  not  a trace  of  the  sympathy  which
Russian  soldiers  had  won  in  the  world.  The  Russian  people's  heroism
and  self-sacrifice  in  the  fight  for  their  native  country  had  assured  the
Soviet  Union  a leading  place  among  the  world  powers,  and  had  led
to  unexpected  results.  The  Kremlin  had  decided  to  exploit  this
situation  for  the  aims  of  their  foreign  policy.  Instead  of  the  breath
ing-space  which  the  Russian  people  had  hoped  for  and  expected,
they  now  had  to  carry  all  the  burdens  involved  in  the  Kremlin's
risky  political  game.  Menacing  clouds  were  again  beginning  to  gather
on  the  horizon.  It  was  the  people  in  the  Karlshorst  outpost  who
saw  those  clouds  most  clearly.  We  were  not  fond  of  talking  about
the  danger  of  a new  war,  but  we  thought  of  it,  and  our  hearts  sank.

As  events  developed,  we  were  more  and  more  forced  to  think
about  this  danger.  It  seemed  stupid  and  unnatural,  but  the  facts
spoke  for  themselves.  Many  people  tried  to  convince  themselves  that
the  Allies'  post-war  dissension  were  simply  in  the  nature  of  disputes


over  the  division  of  the  spoils.  But  that  was  a poor  pretext.  We
Soviet  officers  were  too  well  grounded  in  the  Marxist-Leninist  theory
of  world  revolution  to  believe  it.  We,  the  Soviet  men  who  stood  on
the  bounds  of  the  two  worlds,  and  who  had  lived  through  all  the
development  of  relations  between  the  Allies  since  the  capitulation,
we  who  had  been  personally  convinced  that  the  West  was  genuinely
striving,  and  still  is  striving,  for  peace,  and  who  had  seen  the
sabotage  of  every  attempt  to  achieve  friendly  co-operation  with  the
Soviets-we  knew  a great  deal  that  our  people  at  home  did  not  and
could  not  know.

We  well  remembered  the  first  few  months  after  Germany's
capitulation.  The  Western  Allies  demobilized  their  armies  as  swiftly


371


as  transport  conditions  allowed.  Meanwhile  the  Soviet  command  as
swiftly  brought  up  its  shattered  divisions  to  fighting  strengthening
completing  their  complement  of  men  and  officers,  and  supplying
new  tanks  and  aeroplanes.  We  racked  our  brains  over  the  question:
what  for?  Perhaps  it  was  necessary  to  have  an  armed  fist  when
negotiating  at  the  diplomatic  table?  Subsequent  events  showed
what  it  was  all  for.  The  Kremlin  regarded  the  will  to  peace  as  a mark
of  weakness,  and  democracy's  demobilization  as  providing  all
opportunity  for  further  aggression.  What  else  could  the  democracies
do  but  re-arm?  That  meant  a new  armaments  race  instead  of,
Russia's  peaceful  economic  restoration;  it  meant  all  that  we  had
known  so  well  before  the  war.  And  where  would  it  all  lead  to?

When  political  passions  begin  to  play  on  national  sentiments-
something  the  Kremlin  particularly  desires-when  the  armaments
race  is  at  its  height,  it  will  be  difficult  to  determine  who  began  it  all
and  who  is  to  blame.  And  then,  quite  naturally,  each  side  will  accuse
the  other.

But  this  time,  we  members  of  the  Soviet  occupation  forces  know
one  thing  perfectly:  no  matter  what  comes,  all  the  blame  for  the
consequences  will  lie  solely  and  simply  on  the  shoulders  of  the  men
in  the  Kremlin.  This  time  we  know  who  started  to  play  with  the
gunpowder  barrel.  This  time  we  have  no  doubt  of  the  prime  and
original  cause  of  the  new  war  danger.

The  more  the  atmosphere  darkened,  the  more  monotonous  grew
life  in  Karlshorst.  The  days  dragged  past,  grey  and  boring.  On  one

of  these  grey  days  I went  to  do  my  usual  twenty-four-hour  tour  of
duty  on  the  staff,  which  I had  to  perform  once  a month.

The  officer  on  duty  in  the  S.M.A.  staff  headquarters  had  to  spend  the
daytime  in  the  commander-in-chief's  waiting  room,  and  during  this
time  he  acted  as  assistant  adjutant  to  the  marshal.  During  the  night
he  was  alone  on  duty  in  the  marshal's  office,  and  acted  as  adjutant.

At  six  o'clock  in  the  evening  I took  my  place  as  usual  in  the  wait
ing  room.  Marshal  Sokolovsky  was  in  Potsdam,  so  the  place  was
empty.  The  adjutant  left  at  half-past  seven,  leaving  me  in  charge,
alone.  To  inform  myself  on  current  matters  I glanced  through  the
files  on  the  desk  and  all  the  documents.  The  time  passed
imperceptibly,  my  only  interruption  being  telephone  calls.

At  midnight,  in  accordance  with  regulations,  I took  the  marshal's
seat  at  the  desk  in  his  room,  in  order  to  be  ready  if  direct  calls  came


372


through.  It  was  quite  common  for  the  Kremlin  to  ring  up  in  the
middle  of  the  night,  and  then  the  telephonogram  had  to  be  taken
down  and  passed  on  to  its  destination.

As  I sat  at  the  desk  I began  to  order  the  papers  littered  over  it.

Among  them  was  a duplicated  Information  Bulletin.  This  bulletin
was  intended  only  for  the  higher  staff,  and  was  a top  secret  document,
with  every  copy  numbered.  I began  to  look  through  it.  The  contents
were  very  illuminating:  they  were  a detailed  collection  of  all  the
things  that  the  Soviet  press  carefully  ignores  or  even  flatly  denies.

If  a Soviet  citizen  dared  to  speak  of  such  things  aloud,  he  would
be  accused  of  being  a counter-revolutionary,  with  all  its  con
sequences.  But  this  was  an  official  information  bulletin  for  the  use
of  the  S.M.A.  commander.

It  is  a serious  mistake  to  attempt  to  justify  the  Soviet  leaders'
conduct  by  arguing  that  they  are  not  acquainted  with  a particular
problem,  or  lack  information  on  it.  At  one  time  peasant

representatives  made  a habit  of  traveling  from  remote  villages  on  a pilgrimage
to  the  Kremlin  gates.  They  naively  thought  that  behind  the  Krem
lin  walls  Stalin  did  not  see  what  was  happening  all  around  him,  that
they  had  only  to  tell  him  the  truth  and  everything  would  be  altered.

The  peasants'  representatives  sacrificed  their  lives,  and  everything
continued  as  before.  The  Soviet  leaders  are  fully  informed,  and  are
entirely  responsible  for  anything  that  occurs.

In  the  middle  of  the  night  I resolved  to  ring  up  Genia.  I made
contact  with  the  Moscow  exchange,  and  waited  a long  time  for  an
answer.  At  last  a sleepy  voice  sounded:  "Well?"

"Genia,"  I said,  "this  is  Berlin  speaking.  What's  the  news  in
Moscow?"

"Ah,  so  it's  you  !"  I heard  a distant  sigh.  "I  thought  you'd  dropped
out  completely."

"Oh  no  ...  not  completely.  What's  the  news?"

"Nothing.  Life's  a bore...

"How's  your  father?"

"Gone  off  again. 9~


373


'Where  to  this  time?’


"He  sent  me  a silk  gown  recently.  So  I expect  it's  somewhere
there  ...  But  how  are  things  with  you?"

"I'm  sitting  in  the  marshal's  chair."

"Are  you  intending  to  come  to  Moscow  soon?"

"When  I'm  sent."

"I'm  so  bored  here  alone,"  she  said.  "Do  come  soon!"

We  had  a long  talk,  and  dreamed  of  our  future  meeting,  thought
of  all  we  would  do,  discussed  plans  for  the  future.  It  was  a dream  to
which  we  resorted  in  order  to  avoid  the  present.  At  that  moment
I regretted  that  I was  not  in  Moscow,  and  sincerely  wanted  to  go
back.

The  sleepless  night  passed.  The  day  arrived,  and  with  it  generals
from  the  provinces  fussed  around,  German  representatives  of  the
new  democracy  lurked  timidly  in  corners.  Just  before  six  o'clock
in  the  evening,  when  my  turn  of  duty  ended,  an  engineer  named
Sykov  came  in  to  talk  over  a proposed  hunting  expedition  with  me
We  were  interrupted  by  the  telephone.  I picked  up  the  receiver  and
replied  with  the  usual  formula:  "Officer  on  duty  in  the  staff."  It  was
Koval,  the  commander's  deputy  on  economic  questions,  and  my
immediate  superior.

"Comrade  Klimov?"

'Yes.

"Come  and  see  me  for  a moment."

'He  asked  for  me  personally,'  I thought  as  I went  to  his  room
'What's  the  hurry?'

He  greeted  me  with  the  question:  "I  suppose  you  don't  happen
to  know  what  this  is  all  about?"  He  held  out  a sheet  of  paper  bearing
an  order  from  the  S.M.A.  staff  headquarters.  I took  it  and  read:

'The  directing  engineer,  G.  P.  Klimov,  being  a highly  qualified
specialist  in  Soviet  economy,  is  to  be  demobilized  from  the  Soviet
Army  and  freed  from  duty  in  the  Soviet  Military  Administration  to


374


return  to  the  Soviet  Union  for  further  utilization  in  accordance  with
his  special  qualifications.'


For  a moment  I could  not  grasp  its  import.  It  left  me  with  a
decidedly  unpleasant  feeling.  There  was  something  not  quite  in
order  here.  A certain  formal  courtesy  was  always  observed  towards
responsible  personnel;  in  such  cases  there  was  a preliminary  personal
talk.

"You  haven't  yourself  applied  to  be  transferred  to  Moscow?"

Koval  asked.

"No,"  I answered,  still  rather  preoccupied.

"It's  signed  by  the  chief  of  staff,  and  there  was  no  prior
agreement  with  me."  Koval  shrugged  his  shoulders.

Five  minutes  later  I walked  into  the  office  of  the  head  of  the
Personnel  Department.  I had  had  frequent  opportunities  to  meet
Colonel  Utkin,  so  he  knew  me  personally.  Without  waiting  for  my
question,  he  said:

"Well,  may  I congratulate  you?  You're  going  home.  . .

"Comrade  Colonel,  what's  at  the  back  of  it?"  I asked.

I was  interested  to  discover  what  was  at  the  bottom  of  the  un
expected  order.  Workers  in  Karlshorst  were  not  recalled  to  Moscow
without  good  reason.  As  a rule,  when  members  of  the  S.M.A.  applied
to  be  returned  home  the  staff  turned  down  the  request.

"I'm  disturbed  not  so  much  by  what  the  order  says,  as  by  its
form,"  I continued.  "What  does  it  mean?"

Utkin  was  silent  for  a moment  or  two,  then  he  said  with  some
reluctance:  "The  Political  Administration  is  involved.  Between
ourselves,  I'm  surprised  you've  held  out  here  so  long  as  you're  a
non-Party  man."

I shook  hands  with  him  gratefully.  As  I turned  to  leave  he  advised
me:  "Bear  in  mind  that  after  your  frontier  pass  has  been  issued  you
must  leave  in  three  days.  If  there's  any  necessity,  hang  out  the
transfer  of  your  work."

I left  his  room  with  a feeling  of  relief.  Now  everything  was  clear.

As  I went  along  the  dimly  lighted  corridor  I was  gradually  possessed


375


by  a queer  feeling;  I felt  that  my  body  was  receiving  an  influx  of
strength;  my  soul  was  mastered  by  an  inexplicable  feeling  of
freedom.  I had  had  exactly  that  same  feeling  when  I first  heard  ' of  the
outbreak  of  war.  And  I had  had  it  when  I first  put  on  my  military
uniform.  It  was  the  presentiment  of  great  changes  to  come.  It  was
the  breath  of  the  unknown  in  my  face.


Now,  as  I walked  along  the  corridors  of  the  S.M.A.  headquarters  I
again  felt  the  breath  of  this  unknown.  It  slightly  intoxicated  me.

I went  home  through  the  empty  streets  of  Karlshorst.  Behind
the  fences  the  trees  were  swinging  their  bare  branches.  The  harsh
German  winter  was  in  possession;  darkness  and  stillness.  A passer-by
saluted  me-l  answered  automatically.  I was  in  no  hurry.  My  step
was  slow  and  thoughtful.  It  was  as  though  I were  not  taking  the
well-known  road  home,  but  standing  at  the  beginning  of  a long
road.  I looked  about  me,  I took  in  deep  breaths  of  air,  I felt  the
ground  beneath  my  feet  as  I had  not  felt  it  for  a long  time.  Strange,
inexplicable  feelings  swept  over  me.

Hardly  had  I shut  the  door  of  my  apartment  when  Sykov  came
in.  By  my  face  he  saw  at  once  that  something  had  happened.

"Where  are  you  being  sent  to?"  he  asked.

"Moscow,"  I answered  briefly.

"What  for?"

Without  taking  off  my  greatcoat  I went  to  my  desk  and  silently
drummed  on  it  with  my  fingers.

"But  why?"  he  asked  again.

"I  haven't  provided  myself  with  the  red  book  soon  enough,"  I
answered  reluctantly.

He  stared  at  me  commiserating.  Then  he  put  his  hand  in  a
pocket,  took  out  a long  piece  of  red  cardboard  and  turned  it  over
in  his  fingers,

"What  would  it  have  cost  you?"  he  asked,  gazing  at  his  Party
ticket.  "You  shout  your  'Hail!'  once  a week  at  the  Party  meeting,
and  afterward  you  can  go  to  the  toilet  and  rinse  your  mouth."

His  words  made  an  unpleasant  impression  on  me.  I instinctively
reflected  that  that  piece  of  cardboard  must  still  be  warm  with  the


376


warmth  of  his  body.  As  though  he  had  guessed  my  thoughts,  he
went  on:  "I  myself  remained  at  the  candidate  stage  for  six  years,

Until  I couldn't  keep  it  up  any  longer."

His  presence  and  his  remarks  began  to  irritate  me.  I wanted  to
be  left  to  myself.  He  invited  me  to  go  with  him  to  the  club.  I refused,

"I'm  going  to  have  a game  of  billiards,"  he  remarked  as  he  went
to  the  door.  "A  cannon  off  two  cushions,  and  no  ideology  about
it.

I remained  standing  by  my  desk.  I was  still  wearing  my  greatcoat.
The  coat  round  my  shoulders  strengthened  my  feeling  that  I was  on
my  way.  I tried  sitting  down,  but  jumped  up  again  at  once.  I couldn't
sit  quietly.  Something  was  burning  inside  me.  I wandered  about  the
room  with  my  hands  in  my  pockets.

I switched  on  the  radio.  The  cheerful  music  plucked  at  my  nerves,
and  I switched  it  off.  The  telephone  bell  rang.  I did  not  bother  to
answer  it.  The  German  maid  had  prepared  my  supper;  it  was  waiting
on  the  table  for  me.  I didn't  even  look  at  it,  but  paced  from  corner
to  corner,  my  head  sunk  on  my  chest.

The  order  had  burst  the  dam  which  had  long  been  holding  me
back.  I felt  that  inside  me  everything  was  shattered,  everything
was  in  turmoil.  And  at  the  same  time  something  was  slowly  crawling
towards  me  from  afar.  Something  inexorable  and  joyless.

Today  I must  cast  up  accounts.

Today  only  one  thing  was  clear:  I did  not  believe  in  that  which

I had  at  the  back  of  me.  But  if  I returned  to  Moscow  I must  at  once
join  the  Party,  a Party  in  which  I did  not  believe.  There  was  no
other  way.  I would  have  to  do  it  in  order  to  save  my  life,  to  have
the  right  to  exist.  All  my  life  thenceforth  I would  lie  and  pretend,
simply  for  the  sake  of  the  bare  possibility  of  existence.  Of  that  I
had  no  doubt.  I had  examples  before  my  eyes.  Andrei  Kovtun,  a
a man  in  a blind  alley.  Mikhail  Belyavsky,  a man  beyond  the  pale.
Major  Dubov,  a man  in  a vacuum.  But  wasn't  I a man  in  a vacuum
too?  How  long  could  that  continue?

I would  have  a home,  and  wait  for  the  nocturnal  knock  at  the
door.  I would  get  married,  only  to  distrust  my  own  wife.  I would  have
children,  who  might  at  any  time  betray  me  or  become  orphans
ashamed  of  their  father.


377


At  these  thoughts  the  blood  rushed  to  my  head.  My  collar  choked
me.  A hot  wave  of  fury  rose  in  my  throat.  I felt  so  hot  that  my
greatcoat  seemed  too  heavy  for  me.  At  the  moment  I still  had
my  greatcoat  round  my  shoulders  and  a weapon  in  my  hand.  I
didn't  want  to  part  from  that  coat,  or  from  that  weapon.  Why
not?

If  I returned,  sooner,  or  later  I would  go  under.  Why?  I had  no
belief  in  the  future.  But  what  had  I had  in  the  past?  I tried  to  recall
that  past.  When  I first  saw  the  light  of  this  world  the  flames  of
revolution  were  playing  in  my  eyes.  I grew  up  to  be  a restless  wolf
cub,  and  those  flames  continually  flickered  in  my  eyes.  I was  a wolf
cub  of  the  Stalin  generation;  I fought  with  teeth  and  claws  for  my
life  and  thrust  my  way  forward.  Now  the  Stalin  wolf-cub  was  at  the
height  of  his  powers,  surveying  the  point  he  had  reached.


Today  I had  to  confess  to  myself:  all  my  life  I had  forced  myself
to  believe  in  something  I could  not  believe  in,  even  from  the  day  of  my
birth.  All  my  life  I had  only  sought  a compromise  with  life.  And  if
any  one  of  my  contemporaries  were  to  say  that  he  believed,  I would
call  him  a liar,  a coward.  Did  such  men  as  Sykov  really  believe?

I strode  about  my  room,  my  eyes  on  my  boots.  They  had  trodden
the  earth  from  Moscow  to  Berlin.  I remembered  the  flaming  and
smoking  years  of  the  war,  the  fiery  font  in  which  my  feeling  of
responsibility  to  my  native  land  was  awakened.  Once  more  I saw  the
Red  Square  and  the  walls  of  the  Kremlin  lit  up  with  the  fiery  salutes
of  victory.  Days  of  pride  and  glory,  when  one  cried  aloud  with  excess
of  emotion.  In  my  ears  sounded  once  more  the  words  that  had
throbbed  in  my  breast:  'Among  the  first  of  the  first,  among  the
finest  of  the  finest  you  are  marching  today  across  the  Red  Square.'

Now  I was  marching  from  one  corner  of  my  room  to  the  other,
like  a 'caged  wolf.  Yes,  the  war  had  knocked  us  off  our  balance.
Blinded  by  the  struggle  for  our  native  land,  we  forgot  a great  deal
in  those  days.  At  that  time  it  could  not  be  otherwise,  there  was  no
other  way.

Those  who  took  another  way  ....  With  a bitter  pang  I recalled
the  early  days  of  the  war.  I am  deeply  grateful  to  Fate  that  I was
saved  the  necessity  of  making  a very  difficult  decision.  By  the  time
it  came  to  my  turn  to  put  on  the  soldier's  greatcoat  I knew  clearly
that  the  way  of  the  Russians  was  not  with  the  Germans.  And  I
fought  to  the  end.  I fought  for  something  in  which  I did  not  believe,

I fought,  consoling  myself  with  hopes.


378


Now  I no  longer  had  those  hopes.  Now  I felt  that  we  had  gone
wrong,  we  had  not  accomplished  our  task,  but  had  trusted  to
promises.  That  was  why  I did  not  want  to  take  off  the  greatcoat.  It
wasn't  too  late  yet!

Now  menacing  clouds  were  again  gathering  on  the  horizon.  If  I
returned  to  Moscow,  I would  once  more  be  confronted  with  the  same
bitter  decision  as  in  June  1941 . Once  more  I would  have  to  defend
something  I had  no  wish  to  defend.

Still  more,  now  I was  convinced  that  the  men  in  the  Kremlin
were  leading  my  country  along  a road  to  perdition.  Nobody  was
threatening  us.  On  the  contrary,  we  were  threatening  all  the  world.

That  was  an  unnecessary  and  dangerous  game.  If  we  won,  what  good
would  it  do  us?  If  we  were  defeated,  who  would  bear  the  guilt,  and
who  would  pay  the  Kremlin's  accounts?  Every  one  of  us!

I had  passed  through  days  of  anxiety  for  my  country,  through
battles  and  through  victory.  And  in  addition  I had  seen  with  my
own  eyes  all  the  bitterness  of  defeat.  Germany  in  the  dust  was  a
good  example  of  that.  Germany  was  writhing  in  the  convulsions  of
hunger  and  shame-but  where  were  the  guilty  ones?  Were  only
leaders  guilty,  or  the  entire  nation?

If  the  war  broke  out,  it  would  be  too  late  then.  War  has  its  own
laws.  Those  whom  the  Kremlin  had  turned  into  enemies  would
regard  us  as  enemies.  They  did  not  want  war,  but  if  war  was
inevitable  they  would  wage  it  to  defend  their  own  interests.  So  what  was
left  for  us  to  do:  be  again  a chip  in  the  hands  of  criminal  gamesters?
Hour  after  hour  I walked  about  my  room,  with  my  greatcoat
round  my  shoulders.  It  was  long  past  midnight,  but  I had  no  thought
of  sleep.  There  was  a void  behind  me  and  a void  before  me.  I had
only  one  conscious  and  definite  realization:  I could  not  go  back.  One
thought  hammered  continually  in  my  head:  what  was  I to  do?

Not  until  early  in  the  morning  did  I feel  tired.  Then  I lay  down  on
my  bed  without  undressing.  And  I fell  asleep  with  my  greatcoat
drawn  over  my  head.

During  the  next  few  days  I began  to  hand  over  my  work,  bit  by
bit.  Following  Colonel  Utkin's  advice  I deliberately  dragged  out  the
process.  Without  yet  knowing  why,  I sought  to  gain  time.  And
continually  I was  oppressed  with  the  same  tormenting  thoughts  and
the  one  inexorable  question:  what  was  I to  do?


379


On  one  of  these  days  I stepped  out  of  the  Underground  station  on
Kurfurstendamm,  in  the  British  sector.  I was  wearing  civilian
clothes;  my  boots  squelched  in  the  damp  ooze  of  melting  snow.  The
familiar  streets  seemed  strange  and  unfriendly.  I walked  along
aimlessly,  running  my  eyes  over  the  name-plates  at  the  entrances
to  the  houses.  My  finger  played  with  the  trigger  of  the  pistol  in  my
coat  pocket.

Finally  I made  my  choice  of  name-plate  and  went  into  the  house.

It  had  been  a luxurious  place-it  still  had  a broad  marble  staircase.

Now  the  stairs  were  unlit,  a chilly  wind  blew  through  the  unglazed
windows.  After  some  difficulty  I found  the  door  I was  seeking,  and
rang  the  bell.  A girl  with  a coat  flung  round  her  shoulders  opened  to
me.

"Can  I see  Herr  Diels?"  I asked.


"What  about?"  she  asked  pleasantly.

"A  private  matter,"  I curtly  answered.

She  showed  me  in  and  asked  me  to  wait  a moment.  I sat  in  the
lawyer's  cold,  dark  reception  room,  while  the  girl  disappeared.  A
few  moments  later  she  returned  and  said:  "The  Herr  Doctor  will
see  you."

I entered  an  enormous,  unheated  office.  An  elderly  gentleman  in
gold-rimmed  spectacles  rose  from  his  desk  to  meet  me.  "What  can

I do  for  you?"  he  asked,  offering  me  a seat.  He  rubbed  his  frozen
hands,  probably  expecting  some  ordinary  case  of  divorce.'

"My  request  is  rather  unusual,  Doctor,"  I said.  For  the  first  time
in  my  intercourse  with  Germans  I felt  a little  awkward.

"Oh,  you  needn't  feel  any  constraint  with  me,"  he  said  with  a
professional  smile.

"I  am  a Russian  officer,"  I said  slowly  instinctively  lowering  my  voice.

The  lawyer  smiled  genially,  to  indicate  that  he  felt  highly  honored
by  my  visit.  "Only  the  other  day  another  Soviet  officer  called  on  me
with  a German  girl,"  he  said,  obviously  seeking  to  encourage  me.

I hardly  listened  to  his  explanation  of  why  the  other  Russian
officer  had  visited  him.  I was  thinking  with  chagrin:  'I've  made  a bad


380


start . ]But  it  wa's  too  late  to  retreat,  and  I decided  to  speak
out.

"You  see,  I'm  being  demobilized  and  sent  back  to  Russia.  I shan't
burden  you  with  explanations  as  to  the  why  and  wherefore.  To  put
it  briefly,  I want  to  go  to  Western  Germany."

The  smile  vanished  from  his  face.  For  a moment  or  two  he  did  not
know  what  to  say.  Then  he  prudently  asked:  "Ah  ...  and  what  can  I
do  about  that  ?"

"I  must  get  into  contact  with  the  Allies,"  I said.  "I  wish  to  ask
for  political  asylum.  I can't  do  that  myself.  If  I'm  seen  with  anY
Allied  official,  or  if  I'm  observed  coming  out  of  an  Allied  office  ...
that's  too  great  a risk  for  me  to  run.  So  I'd  like  to  ask  you  to  help
me.

The  silence  lasted  some  minutes.  Then  I noticed  that  Herr  Diels
was  behaving  in  a queer  manner.  He  fidgeted  restlessly  on  his  chair,
searched  for  something  in  his  pocket,  turned  over  the  papers  on  his
desk.

"Yes,  yes  ...  I understand,"  he  murmured.  "I,  too,  am  a victim  of
the  Nazi  regime."

He  took  out  a letter-case  and  hurriedly  ran  through
innumerable  letters.  At  last  he  found  what  he  was  seeking,  and  with  a
trembling  hand  held  out  a paper  to  me.  It  had  been  carefully  reinforced
at  the  folds  and  obviously  was  in  frequent  use.

"You  see,  I've  even  got  a certificate  testifying  to  that  fact,"  he
said.

I glanced  through  the  document.  It  stated  that  the  possessor  was
a victim  of  Nazism,  and  almost  a communist.  I again  had  the  un
pleasant  feeling  that  I had  come  to  the  wrong  address.  I realized
that  the  lawyer  was  afraid  of  something  and  was  trying  to  secure
himself.

"Herr  Doctor,  to  be  frank  I'd  rather  deal  with  the  most  rabid  of
Nazis  at  this  moment,"  I said  as  I handed  back  his  document.

"Who  recommended  you  to  come  to  me?"  he  asked  irresolutely.

"No  one.  I took  a chance.  I have  to  act  in  the  knowledge  that  I
cannot  trust  anybody  in  my  immediate  surroundings.  I hoped  you'd
be  in  a position  to  help  me.  But  if  you  can't  for  any  reason,  at  any


381


rate  there's  no  reason  why  you  should  do  me  any  harm."

Herr  Diels  sat  sunk  in  thought.  Finally  he  appeared  to  come  to
some  decision.  He  turned  to  me  again.  "But  tell  me,  what  surety
can  I have  that  you  . . ."  He  concentratedly  turned  the  pencil
over  and  over  in  his  hand  and  avoided  looking  me  in  the  face.

Then,  as  though  making  up  his  mind,  he  raised  his  eyes  and  said  a
little  hesitantly:

G.P.U?"

The  former  name  of  that  well-known  organization  jarred  in  my
ears.  Apparently  the  Germans  didn't  know  its  present  name  yet.
Despite  the  seriousness  of  my  position,  his  question  made  me  smile.
The  very  thing  I feared  in  others  I was  myself  suspected  of.  I simply
shrugged  my  shoulders  and  said:  "I  haven't  had  an  opportunity  to
think  that  one  out  as  yet,  Herr  Doctor.  All  I'm  concerned  with  at  the
moment  is  with  saving  my  own  head  from  that ...  G.P.U."

He  sat  very  still,  thinking  aloud:  "You  speak  German  well  ...

too  well  ...  And  besides,  this  is  all  so  abnormal.  . ."  He  stared  at  me

fixedly,  as  though  trying  to  read  my  thoughts,  and  said:  "Good!

I'm  an  old  man  and  I have  experience  of  men.  I believe  you're
speaking  the  truth.  Where  do  you  want  to  go?"

"To  the  American  zone."

"But  why  the  American  zone?"  He  raised  his  eyebrows  in
astonishment.

...  that  you're  not  an  agent  of  that ...  of  the


"Herr  Doctor,  when  a man  takes  such  a step  from  political
considerations  it's  natural  for  him  to  seek  refuge  with  the  strongest
enemies  of  the  people  he's  escaping  from."

"Yes,  but  this  is  the  British  sector.  I have  no  contact  with  the
Americans."

I realized  that  this  was  tantamount  to  a refusal,  and  I made  one
last  attempt:

"Perhaps  you  could  recommend  me  to  one  of  your  colleagues  who
has  got  contact  with  the  Americans?"

"Oh  yes,  I can  do  that,"  he  answered,  reaching  for  his  telephone
book.  He  turned  up  a name  in  the  book,  then  rose  heavily  from  his
desk  and  went  to  the  door,  remarking:  "Excuse  me  a moment.

I'll  write  out  the  address  for  you."


382


He  went  into  the  reception  room.  I heard  him  spe~king  to  his
secretary.  Then  he  exchanged  a few  words  with  another  visitor.

The  telephone  bell  rang  more  than  once.  Somebody  came  and  went,
The  minutes  dragged  past.  It  was  very  cold  in  that  unheated  room
and  I began  to  shiver.  I felt  a perfectly  stupid  feeling  of  utter
dependence  on  the  decency  of  someone  who  was  a complete  stranger
I settled  deeper  in  the  armchair,  drew  my  coat  closer  round  me  and
put  my  right  hand  in  my  pocket.  I slipped  back  the  safety  catch  of
my  pistol,  and  turned  the  barrel  to  cover  the  door.  If  a Soviet
military  patrol  came  in  I would  open  fire  without  taking  my  hand  out  of
my  pocket.

At  last  the  lawyer  came  back,  and  held  out  a slip  of  paper  to  me.

On  it  was  an  address,  typewritten.  I could  not  help  wondering:  'Is
that  from  prudence,  or  simply  the  German  habit  of  always  using  the
typewriter?'

Suppressing  a sigh  of  relief,  I left  the  house.  The  street-cars  and
automobiles  were  noisy  in  the  grey  dusk  of  the  winter  evening,

People  were  hurrying  along  on  their  way  home;  each  one  had  some
where  to  go.  I felt  a wretched  feeling  of  loneliness.  I'drew  my  cap
down  over  my  eyes  and  plunged  into  the  Underground.

After  a long  journey  and  long  wandering  through  unknown  streets
at  night  I found  the  address  Herr  Diels  had  given  me:  a villa  on  the
outskirts  of  the  city.  Dr.  von  Scheer  occupied  quite  a high  position,
and  it  was  not  easy  for  me  to  get  a personal  interview  with  him,

When  at  last  I was  alone  with  him  in  his  study  and  explained  the
reason  for  my  visit  he  at  once  got  down  to  business.  He  took  ii
photocopy  of  a document  from  his  desk  drawer,  and  showed  it  to  me,

It  stated  that  he  had  official  relations  with  the  Soviet  central
comandatura.  I was  confronted  with  all  the  familiar  seals  and
signatures.  I pulled  such  a face  that  he  could  not  help  smiling.

"What  surety  have  I that  you're  not  an  agent  of  this  ...  well,
you  know  !"  he  asked.  He  winked  and  gave  me  a friendly  slap  on
the  knee.

I could  only  shrug  my  shoulders.

Dr.  von  Scheer  proved  to  be  a businesslike  man.  After  a brief
talk  he  agreed  to  have  a chat  with  some  Americans  he  knew,  and
asked  me  to  call  again  in  two  days'  time.  I went  home  wondering
whether  he  was  at  that  moment  telephoning  to  the  Soviet
commandatura  to  inform  them  of  my  visit.

Two  days  later  I went  to  keep  the  appointment.  I had  very  mixed
feelings:  hopes  of  success,  and  expectations  of  an  ambush.  He  curtly


383


informed  me  that  his  talks  had  been  fruitless.  The  Americans
didn't  wish  to  have  anything  to  do  with  the  matter.  Evidently  for
the  same  reason:  'What  surety  have  we  ...  ?'

I thanked  the  doctor  for  his  kindness,  groped  my  way  down  the
steps  of  his  house,  and  strode  through  the  darkness  of  Berlin.  I could
not  use  my  automobile  with  its  Soviet  registration  number,  and  I
had  to  go  home  by  street-car.  So  once  more  I stood  on  the  rear
platform,  surrounded  by  bustling  people  on  their  way  home  from  work
At  one  of  the  stops  close  to  the  Control  Commission  a Soviet
officer  got  on,  and  stood  beside  me.  He  was  an  elderly,  benevolent
looking  man,  with  a document-case.  Evidently  he  had  been  detained
in  the  Control  Commission  and  so  had  missed  the  service  omnibuses
At  the  sight  of  the  familiar  uniform  I felt  a touch  of  anxiety.

Suddenly  he  turned  to  me  and  asked  me  some  question  in  German.

I answered  in  German.  As  I did  so  I felt  a clutching  at  my  heart.

Here  was  the  beginning  of  it  all!  I no  longer  trusted  anybody;  I did
not  even  dare  to  admit  that  I was  a Russian.

As  I changed  from  one  street-car  to  another  I noticed  a German
policeman  not  far  off.  With  no  clear  idea  of  what  I had  in  mind  I
went  up  to  him  and  asked  where  I could  find  the  American
consulate.  He  evidently  guessed  I was  not  a German,  and  shone  his
lantern  over  me  from  head  to  foot.

In  post-war  Germany  foreigners  who  were  not  wearing  Allied
uniform  or  did  not  possess  an  allied  passport  were  beyond  the  legal
pale.  I had  often  seen  such  people  wandering  aimlessly  about  Berlin.
The  policeman  evidently  took  me  for  one  of  these,  and  stared  at  me

suspiciously.  He  was  used  to  such  individuals  avoiding  the  police
like  the  plague.  "We  don't  give  such  information,"  he  answered  at
last,  and  shone  the  lantern  at  me  again,  evidently  half  minded  to
ask  me  for  my  documents.  It  was  well  that  he  didn't,  for  I would
have  been  in  an  awkward  predicament:  German  police  were  under
orders  to  salute  Soviet  officers.

The  policeman  walked  away.  I had  a feeling  of  breathlessness  in
my  chest.  This  incident  marked  the  beginning  of  the  road  I had
decided  to  follow.  Where  I was  going  I would  have  neither  a pistol
nor  a valid  document  assuring  me  a place  in  life.

As  I opened  the  door  of  my  Karlshorst  apartment  I heard  the
telephone  ringing.  I did  not  bother  to  answer.  I didn't  want  to  see
or  speak  to  anybody.  I felt  that  I must  have  time  to  think  over  all
that  had  happened,  and  to  consider  the  future.


Once  more  I began  my  restless  wandering  from  corner  to  corner,

So  my  attempts  to  make  contact  with  the  Allies  had  been  futile.

It  wasn't  so  simple  as  I had  thought.  It  had  had  one  result:  now  I
saw  clearly  that  I had  got  to  act  at  my  own  risk.

In  thus  attempting  to  make  contact  with  the  Allies  I had  been
concerned  not  so  much  with  the  formal  aspect  of  the  matter,  as
with  its  principle.  I knew  there  was  a secret  agreement  between  the
American  military  governor  and  the  Soviet  command,  under  which
both  parties  bound  themselves  to  hand  over  deserters.  The  British
had  been  more  far-sighted,  they  hadn't  made  such  an  agreement.

But  this  foresight  was  not  much  of  a guarantee  to  a man  who  was
familiar  with  the  ways  of  the  military  secret  service.  Although  I
had  been  demobilized,  and  so  could  not  be  regarded  as  a deserter,

I had  nothing  to  show  that  I was  a political  emigre.

The  Soviet  military  authorities  had  ways  of  dealing  with  the
situation  in  which  I was  placed.  They  simply  made  serious  criminal
charges  against  any  Soviet  citizen  who  attempted  to  flee,  and
demanded  his  extradition  on  the  ground  that  it  was  international
practice  to  hand  over  criminals.  Close  acquaintance  with  Lieutenant
Colonel  Orlov,  the  S.M.A.  chief  military  prosecutor,  had  enabled
me  to  know  a great  deal  about  such  matters.

This  explains  why  I attempted  to  make  contact  with  the  West
before  going  over.  It  was  a point  that  would  occur  to  anyone,  but
this  was  only  a superficial  aspect  of  the  problem  which  confronted
me.  There  was  another,  deeper  aspect,  which  had  not  occurred  to
me  until  now.

As  I walked  from  corner  to  comer,  reviewing  my  conduct  during
the  past  two  or  three  days,  what  I had  done  began  to  seem  an  un
pardonable  stupidity.  I simply  must  not  lose  all  sense  of  reality.

The  powerful  thought  of  my  break  with  the  past  had  dominated  my
mind  too  much.  I had  cut  myself  loose  from  my  past  life,  and  now  I
was  like  a blind  kitten  in  a new  world.  My  rejection  of  half  the  world
had  engendered  the  erroneous  idea  that  the  other  half  was
immaculate.  I must  look  the  facts  soberly  in  the  face.

I regarded  myself  as  an  engineer,  and  I had  forgotten  that  I
was  an  officer  on  the  Soviet  General  Staff,  one  who  had  been  trained
in  the  highest  of  Kremlin  schools.  Even  at  this  stage  I could  still
make  a triumphal  return  to  Moscow,  and  travel  abroad  a month  or
so  later  to  take  a post  in  a military  attach6's  office,  to  command  a
whole  staff  of  secret  agents,  buying  and  selling  those  with  whom  I
had  just  been  seeking  refuge.  And  1 , who  trusted  nobody,  was


385


demanding  trust  in  myself. Who  would  believe  me,  when  I myself  didn't
know  what  was  going  on  within  me?  I was  conscious  of  only  one
thing:  a spring  had  snapped,  and  the  former  mechanism  was  useless.

Had  I any  right  to  expect  trust?  1 , an  erring  Stalin  wolf-cub?

As  I strode  about  my  room  I heard  the  words:  "An  unforgivable
stupidity,  Comrade  Klimov  !"  I started  as  I realized  that  I was  talking  aloud.

To  think  of  making  contact  with  the  Allies!  It  was  just  as  well
that  nothing  had  come  of  it ! I should  know,  better  than  most,  the
generally  accepted  rules  of  the  secret  war.  The  other  side  welcomed
only  those  ' who  had  gained  its  confidence.  I knew  exactly  how  that
confidence  was  to  be  won.  A man  was  of  interest  to  them  so  long  as
he  brought  some  benefit.  If  he  were  regarded  as  stupid  enough,  he  was
used  for  propaganda  purposes,  and  finally  was  flung  on  the  rubbish
heap.  At  times  refugees  are  exchanged  against  agents  who  have  been
caught.  It  is  all  done  quietly  and  without  fuss.  Was  that  the  road
I wanted  to  take?

"You  haven't  learnt  my  teaching  well,  Comrade  Klimov!"  I heard
General  Biyasi's  voice  in  my  ears.

I knew  that  the  Soviet  intelligence  service  often  sends  agents  to
the  West  in  the  guise  of  refugees.  They  are  covered  so  well  that  they
remain  undiscovered  for  years.  The  West  is  fully  aware  of  this  trick.

It  is  true  that  a Soviet  instruction  had  laid  down  that,  as  a rule,
people  of  Russian  nationality  were  not  recommended  for  such
activities.  On  the  one  hand,  Russians  arouse  suspicion  at  once;  on


the  other  hand,  the  Soviet  regime  trusts  its  own  people  least  of  all.

But  that  was  a detail  the  West  did  not  know.

My  inward  break  with  the  world  of  lies  had  quickened  a terrible
longing  for  the  truth.  I sought  trust.  But  what  did  I need  their  trust
for?  I wanted  only  one  thing:  to  be  left  in  peace.  I had  no  idea  what
I should  do  next.  All  I had  achieved  so  far  was  renunciation  of  the
past.  In  my  soul  there  was  now  a vacuum.  I must  have  a breathing
space  in  which  to  find  new  sense  in  life.  I was  slowly  but  surely
I must  disappear,  must  lose  my  identity  until  I found  a new  identity.

I had  drawn  a line  beneath  the  past.  But  I had  not  thought  of  the
future.  My  first  attempt  to  make  contact  with  the  other  world  had
compelled  me  to  think  of  it.  Now  I tried  to  systematize  all  the
possibilities  open  to  me.


386


As  I was  demobilized,  I was  freed  from  my  oath,  and  by  the  rules
of  international  etiquette  I was  free  to  go  where  I liked.  I wanted
to  renounce  my  Soviet  passport  and  become  a stateless  political
emigre.  Let  me  say  that  I would  never  advise  any  of  my  comrades  to
take  such  a step.  If  you  wish  to  become  a political  emigre,  you  must
renounce  your  Soviet  passport,  but  not  your  country.  That  means
that  you  renounce  all  legal  support  from  a powerful  state.  You  stand
naked  and  disarmed  in  this  imperfect  world,  which  reckons  only
with  him  who  is  strong,  whether  his  strength  consists  in  firearms,  or
money,  or  tanks.  Today  the  Kremlin  has  raised  all  the  world  against
it.  Concealing  their  distrust  and  fear,  the  people  of  the  outside  world
will  smile  hypocritically  and  shake  the  hands  of  those  who  possess
Soviet  passports,  but  will  vent  their  impotent  feelings  on  you,  the
political  emigr,,  because  you  haven't  one.  That  is  one  aspect  of
political  emigration.

Life  in  a strange  land  is  not  easy.  I have  seen  living  examples.

In  Berlin  I frequently  came  across  certain  people  who  deserved  the
utmost  commiseration.  They  spoke  Russian,  but  they  were  afraid
to  talk  to  me.  Sometimes  they  minded  my  car  while  I was  at  the
theatre  and  were  grateful  when  I gave  them  a packet  of  cigarettes,

That  is  another  aspect  of  political  emigration.

Until  long  after  midnight  I wandered  about  my  room.  The  house
was  as  still  as  the  grave;  Karlshorst  was  asleep.  All  around  me  was
the  infinite  sea  of  an  alien  world.  I felt  its  cold,  indifferent  breath.

At  last  I lay  down  on  my  bed  without  undressing,  thrust  my  pistol
under  the  pillow,  and  fell  asleep.

Several  more  days  passed.  All  this  time  I was  living  a double  life.

I spent  the  first  part  of  the  day  in  Karlshorst,  handing  over  my  work,
putting  my  papers  in  order  ready  for  the  return  to  Moscow,  receiving
the  congratulations  and  good  wishes  of  my  acquaintances.  I had  to
give  the  impression  that  I was  glad  to  be  going  home.  I exchanged
addresses,  I promised  to  write  from  Moscow.  During  the  second  part
of  the  day  I wandered  about  wintry  Berlin,  visiting  my  German
friends  and  cautiously  sounding  the  ground.  I must  find  out  the
road  by  which  people  went  to  the  West.

Day  after  day  went  by  without  result.  The  normal  period  of
preparation  for  departure  to  Moscow  was  three  days.  I had  already
taken  two  weeks.

As  time  passed  it  became  increasingly  difficult  for  me  to  play  this
double  game. With  every  day  my  stay  in  Karlshorst  grew  more  dangerous.
I must  reckon  with  the  possibility  of  a showdown,  and  take  pre


387


cautionary  measures.  Like  many  of  the  Soviet  officers  in  Germany,

I had  quite  a collection  of  trophy  weapons.  Now  I thought  of  them,
and  took  out  a German  automatic  pistol  from  behind  the  cupboard.

After  loading  it  I hung  it  on  the  hatrack  at  the  door,  and  covered  it

with  my  greatcoat.  Then  I put  several  spare  clips  and  a box  of

cartridges  close  at  hand.  This,  in  case  there  was  an  attempt  to  arrest

me  in  my  rooms.  Next  I loaded  my  large-caliber  parabellum,  my  officer's  pistol,

which  I had  kept  from  the  front-line  days.

Next  day  I drove  out  of  Berlin,  stopped  my  car  in  a dense  wood,
and  began  to  test  my  weapons  methodically,  as  though  engaging
in  firing  practice.  The  brief  bursts  of  the  automatic  shattered  the
frosty  silence  of  the  winter  evening.  The  heavy  bullets  of  the
parabellum  tore  into  the  young  pines.  There  must  be  no  let-down  !

Anything  you  like,  except  being  left  helpless.  I did  not  think  much
- 1 feared  only  one  thing:  a let-down.

Each  night,  after  my  long  and  fruitless  wanderings  about  Berlin,

I would  return  home  tired  and  depressed.  I was  sunk  in  apathy.

Evidently  there  was  nothing  else  for  it  but  to  go  off  on  my  own  to  the
West,  and  hope  to  be  lost  in  the  flood  of  German  refugees.

I sat  down  at  my  desk.  I had  no  desire  for  food  or  drink.  But  I
terribly  longed  to  have  some  living  creature  with  whom  I could
share  my  thoughts.  I felt  utterly  weary  and  exhausted.  Suddenly
I remembered  that  I had  not  cleaned  my  weapons  after  my  drive
to  the  woods.  To  escape  from  my  thoughts  I began  to  oil  the  pistol.

That  gave  me  some  measure  of  relief.

The  night  peered  in  at  the  window.  My  room  was  half  in  darkness.

My  only  light  was  the  desk-lamp,  burning  brightly  beneath  its  shade.

In  the  yellow  light  the  oily  pistol  gleamed  coldly.  I stared  without
thinking  at  the  lifeless  metal.  That  gleam  drew  me,  held  my  eyes.

I tried  to  tear  my  gaze  away,  and  looked  about  me.  I caught  sight
of  a dark,  hunched  figure  standing  on  one  corner  of  my  desk.  Just
where  light  and  darkness  met  a black  monkey  was  crouching.

Crouching  and  gazing  at  me.

This  large  bronze  statuette  had  been  given  me  by  one  of  my
acquaintances.  On  a square  pedestal  of  black  marble  were  scattered
rolls  of  parchment,  books,  retorts,  the  material  symbols  of  human
intellect.  Over  them  crouched  a repulsive  black  ape,  squatting  with
an  important  air.  It  held  a human  skull  in  its  hairy  paws,  and  was


388


staring  at  it  with  doltish  curiosity.  The  sculptor  had  conveyed  in
bronze  all  the  vanity  of  human  wishes.  I set  the  statuette  on  my
desk,,  and  took  little  notice  of  it  as  a rule.

But  now  as  I looked  at  the  figure  it  seemed  to  stir.  I felt  mad  with
myself:  was  I beginning  to  suffer  from  hallucinations?  I tried  to  think
of  other  things,  of  the  past.  Once  more  I recalled  the  years  of  war,
the  Red  Square,  the  Kremlin.  Once  more  the  intoxicated  cry  of
inflamed  emotion  roared  in  my  ears:  "First  of  the  first,  among  the"
finest  of  the  finest."

"Tomorrow  you  will  be  last  among  the  last,  defeated  among  the
defeated,"  I heard  a voice.

Now  I tried  to  think  of  the  future.  But  before  me  opened  a grey
void.  I saw  that  I had  to  renounce  all  my  past  life;  I must  lose  my
identity  and  vanish  into  the  nothingness.

Into  the  nothingness  ....  Perhaps  there  was  an  even  simpler  way
of  doing  that.  I looked  at  the  shining  barrel  of  my  pistol,  reached
for  it,  and  played  automatically  with  the  safety  catch  ....  It  was  so
simple  ....

The  emptiness  of  these  days  I was  passing  through  pressed  me
down.  All  my  life  I had  done  my  duty,  even  when  I had  doubted
that  it  was  my  duty.  I had  regarded  duty  as  being  the  result  of  faith
in  the  infallibility  of  the  fundamental  principle,  and  had  searched
obstinately  for  that  central  core  of  rational  existence.  Today  I was
convinced  that  the  principle  was  false.  So  what?

Yet  again  my  thoughts  turned  back  to  the  past:  I thought  of
the  impatience  with  which  I had  looked  to  the  end  of  the  war,  of
the  passion  with  which  I had  dreamed  of  peaceful  life.  And  now,  just
when  I could  return  to  that  peaceful  life,  just  when  my  dreams  would
come  true,  I was  throwing  it  all  behind  me  and  going  off  in  the
opposite  direction.  Why?  I felt  instinctively  that  the  reason  sprang  out
of  the  danger  of  a new  war.  I felt  that  otherwise  I would  have
returned  home  despite  everything  and  would  have  continued  to
share  my  joys  and  sorrows  with  my  country.  The  possibility  of  a
new  war  aroused  deep  and  conflicting  feelings  in  me.  But  where  was
the  connection?

There  are  feelings  buried  so  deep  in  the  heart  that  one  cannot
trust  oneself  to  speak  them  out.  I had  the  fate  of  Germany  before
my  eyes.  Now  I felt  convinced  that  a similar  fate  awaited  my  own
country.  I knew  the  criminals  who  were  leading  my  country  to
perdition,  and  I did  not  wish  to  share  in  their  crime.  I was  going  out
today  in  order  to  fight  them  tomorrow.  I didn't  want  to  admit  to


389


these  thoughts:  they  seemed  like  treachery.  And  yet  to  betray  a
traitor  is  to  be  faithful  to  the  fundamental  principle.  To  kill  a killer
is  a praiseworthy  deed.

I lit  another  cigarette  from  the  dying  butt  and  flung  myself  back
in  my  chair.  I felt  an  unpleasant,  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth.  In  the
chilly  silence  the  words  beat  through  my  head  monotonously:

'It  is  not  enough  to  love  your  country  and  freedom,  you  have
to  fight  for  them.  Now  you  see  no  other  possibility  of  fighting  than
to  go  over  to  the  other  camp  and  fight  from  there.  That  is  your  way
back  to  your  fatherland.'

On  the  seventeenth  day  I was  issued  my  frontier  pass.  It  was  valid
for  three  days,  and  before  the  end  of  the  third  day  I must  cross  the
Soviet  frontier  at  Brest-Litovsk.  Whatever  happened,  I could  not
remain  more  than  another  three  days  in  Karlshorst.

The  dusk  was  settling  in  Berlin  when,  after  another  day  of  fruit
less  wandering,  I decided  to  call  on  a German  acquaintance,  the
director  of  a factory  which  I had  visited  from  time  to  time  on
official  business.  During  these  visits  I had  had  many  quite  frank
political  conversations  with  him.  That  evening,  too,  we  quickly
turned  to  discussion  of  the  future  of  Germany.  I gave  expression
to  my  view  that  the  Germans  were  too  optimistic  about  it.


"You  underestimate  the  internal  danger,"  I said.  "You're  blindly
waiting  for  the  end  of  the  Occupation.  ]But  even  if  the  Soviet  forces
are  withdrawn  from  Germany,  there  will  be  very  little  change  in  the
situation.  Before  that  time  comes  Germany  will  have  been  bound
hand  and  foot,  she  will  have  been  sold  wholesale  and  on  a long-term
lease  !"

"By  whom?"  the  director  asked.

"That's  what  the  Socialist  Unity  Party  (S.E.D.)  and  the
People  Police  are  for."

I knew  he  had  recently  joined  the  S.E.D.,  and  so  my  words  could
not  be  very  pleasant  for  him  to  hear.  He  looked  at  me  sidelong  was
silent  for  a moment,  then  said  slowly:  ".  Many  of  the  members  of
the  S.E.D.  and  the  People's  Police  have  different  thoughts  from
what  the  occupation  authorities  would  desire."  ,

"So  much  the  worse,  if  they  think  one  thing  and  do  another."


390


"At  present  we  have  no  other  way  out  But  when  the  decisive
moment  comes,  believe  me'  the  S.E.D.  and  the  People's  Police  will
not  do  as  Moscow  hopes."

"I  wish  you  success!"  I smiled.

After  a momentary  silence  the  director  turned  the  conversation
into  another  channel:

"Well,  and  how  are  things  going  with  you?"

Weary  and  cold,  I only  waved  my  hand  hopelessly  and  sighed:

"I'm  going  back  to  Moscow

He  evidently  caught  the  disillusionment  in  my  tone,  and  stared
at  me  in  astonishment.  "Aren't  you  glad  to  be  going  back  home?  I

In  your  place  1 .

"I'm  quite  prepared  to  change  places  with  you,"  I retorted.

He  threw  me  another  swift  glance  and  interpreted  my  words  to
his  own  satisfaction.  "So  you  like  Germany  more  than  Russia?"  he
asked.

"I  could  do,  if  I were  not  a Soviet  officer,"  I replied  evasively,

"The  victors  are  envious  of  the  vanquished"  He  shook  his  head
thoughtfully.  He  rose  and  began  to  walk  about  the  room.

Suddenly  he  halted  in  front  of  me  and  asked:

"Then  why  don't  you  remain  here?"

"Where's  here?"  I asked  indifferently.

"Why,  go  to  one  of  the  other  zones!"  he  exclaimed.  He  made

vague  gesture,  surprised  that  I had  not  myself  thought  of  such  A
simple  idea.

"But  is  that  so  simple?"  I asked,  pricking  up  my  mental  ears,  but
remaining  outwardly  unconcerned.

For  some  time  he  said  nothing.  Then,  apparently  coming  to  a
decision,  he  turned  and  said  in  a rather  lower  voice:  "If  you  wish
to  remain  in  Germany  there's  nothing  simpler  than  to  get  across
the  green  frontier."'


391


('Green  frontier'-a  common  phrase  for  crossing  frontiers
illegally.  -Tr.)

I listened  still  more  closely,  and  asked:

"Maybe,  but  what  is  the  American  attitude  to  you  if  you  do?"

He  made  a contemptuous  gesture.  "Oh,  spit  on  the  swines!  They're
no  better  than  He  bit  his  lip.

I smiled  involuntarily.  I had  the  impression  that  this  director,
this  member  of  the  Socialist  Unity  Party,  was  prepared  to  go  to
any  lengths  to  reduce  the  Soviet  Army  by  just  one  fighting  unit!

I knew  him  well;  I had  no  reason  to  suspect  that  he  was  acting  as  a
provocateur.  I sat  silent.  If  he  was  so  anxious  to  win  me,  let  him  talk
a little  more!

"I  have  many  acquaintances  in  Thuringia,"  he  went  on.  "If

you  like,  I can  give  you  letters  of  recommendation  to  people  of  trust.

They'll  willingly  help  you  to  get  to  the  other  side."

"But  how  about  documents?"

He  shrugged  his  shoulders:  "Today  every  third  man  in  Germany
has  false  papers."

"Where  can  you  get  hold  of  them?"

"I  know  a man  who'll  be  very  glad  to  help  you  in  that  direction."

He  smiled  a little  smile,  and  added:  "And  by  the  way,  he's  an  officer
in  the  People's  Police."

Now  I decided  to  show  my  hand.  I changed  my  tone;  my  words
sounded  strong,  almost  harsh.  "Herr  Director,  you  must  pardon
my  reserve.  The  question  we're  discussing  has  been  decided  long
since.  If  I hadn't  met  you  I'd  have  had  no  other  choice  but  to  make
my  own  way  to  the  West."

He  was  silent  for  a moment;  then  he  said:

"Even  when  I had  only  business  relations  with  you  I noticed
that  you  were  different  from  the  others.  They  have  only  one  word:
'Hand  over!  Hand  over!"'  (He  used  the  Russian  word:  'Davai  !

Davai!


392


We  got  down  to  discussion  of  the  details.  He  promised  to  provide
me  with  documents  in  case  I found  it  necessary  to  remain  in  Berlin
and  against  the  possibility  of  my  being  stopped  on  the  road.  After


we  had  arranged  to  meet  next  day,  I left  his  house  and  went  into
the  street.  It  was  still  as  dark  and  as  bitterly  cold  as  two  hours
before.  But  now  I did  not  feel  the  cold;  the  air  seemed  to  have  a
vital  freshness  to  it.

Next  day  I met  him  again.  With  true  German  reliability  he  set  a
German  identity  card  on  the  desk  in  front  of  me.  At  the  window  a
young,  fair-haired  German  with  a military  carriage  was  standing

The  director  introduced  us  to  each  other.  Two  men  in  civilian  dress
shook  each  other's  hands,  and  clicked  their  heels  from  sheer  habit

We  filled  in  the  identity  card.  A bitter  smile  crossed  my  face  as  I
read  my  new  name:  my  German  sheepdog  had  had  the  same  name.

For  the  first  time  in  my  life  I had  my  fingerprints  taken.  A German
police  seal  was  stamped  over  my  photograph.  I had  a feeling  that
after  stamping  it  the  German  looked  at  me  with  different  eyes.

The  officer  of  the  People's  Police  went  so  far  in  his  kindness  as  to
say  he  would  himself  accompany  me  to  the  frontier.  He  had  already
obtained  a few  days'  leave,  and  would  take  the  opportunity  to  visit
relations  in  Thuringia.

To  provide  against  all  contingencies  I decided  to  take  with  me  one
of  my  old  official  authorizations  for  a visit  to  Thuringia,  stating  that

I was  traveling  on  a special  commission  for  Marshal  Sokolovsky,  If
the  German  police  checked  my  papers  on  the  road  they  would  see
Soviet  documents,  and  these  had  the  same  effect  on  them  as  a snake
on  a rabbit.  If  a Soviet  patrol  made  a check,  in  the  car  would  be  a
man  who  had  lost  his  identity.

We  arranged  that  the  police  officer  was  to  drive  to  a street  just
outside  Karlshorst  at  one  o'clock  the  next  afternoon,  and  then
would  ring  me  up.

As  I was  saying  goodbye  to  the  director,  he  asked  me:

"But  tell  me,  in  reality,  why  have  you,  a Soviet  officer,  decided


393


to  turn  your  back  on  the  Soviet  Union?"

"On  the  same  ground  that  you,  a member  of  the  S.E.D.,  have
decided  to  help  this  Soviet  officer,"  I replied,  warmly  shaking  his
hand.

Next  day  I sprang  out  of  bed  before  daylight  had  fully  come.

I felt  an  unusual  influx  of  strength  and  energy.  Today,  whatever
happened,  I had  got  to  leave  Karlshorst.  Twenty  days  had  passed
since  I had  been  given  the  fateful  order.  My  frontier  pass  expired
today,  and  before  its  close  I must  be  in  Brest-Litovsk.  If  I were  found
in  Karlshorst,  I would  have  great  difficulty  in  explaining  my  presence.

Every  unnecessary  minute  that  I remained  here  increased  the  danger.

I had  ordered  a ticket  and  reserved  a seat  in  the  Moscow  train.  Be
fore  I left  Berlin  I would  call  on  the  military  commandant  at  the
Schlesische  station  and  register  my  departure.  Now  I must  leave  my
apartment  in  a state  indicating  that  I had  gone  back  to  Moscow.  I
made  my  final  preparations.  Lighting  the  stove,  I destroyed  the  con
tents  of  my  desk.  I was  possessed  by  an  inexplicable  feeling  of
freedom.  Packets  of  documents,  authorizations  bearing  the  S.M.A.  seal,
flew  into  the  stove.  Photographs  of  myself  were  melted  in  flame:
myself  against  the  ruined  Reichstag,  among  the  marble  statues  of
the  Siegesallee,  in  the  Tiergarten,  with  Marshal  Zhukov  and  General
Eisenhower  on  the  Tempelhof  airfield.  Letters  from  dear  and  loved
friends  were, consumed  to  ash.  My  last  spiritual  bonds  with  the  past
went  up  in  smoke.  I was  seized  with  a passion  for  destruction.  The
feeling  that  I was  cutting  myself  off  from  all  my  past  life,  together
with  the  absolute  emptiness  of  the  future,  left  only  one  gnawing
desire  alive  within  me:  to  destroy  everything  with  my  own  hands.

It  did  not  even  occur  to  me  that  these  documents  and  papers  might
be  of  use  to  me  some  time  or  other,  that  it  might  be  better  to  put
them  somewhere  in  safe  keeping.  I was  quite  indifferent  to  what
might  happen  to  me  in  the  future.  Today  I was  a man  who  had  lost
his  identity,  a man  without  a past,  without  a name,  without  a
native  land.

I sat  down  at  my  desk  and  wrote  letters,  which  I intended  to  post
in  the  Karlshorst  post-box.  In  all  probability  I would  never  have
another  opportunity  of  writing  to  these  people.  Every  letter  consisted
of  only  one  brief  sentence:  'Today  I am  traveling  to  Moscow',
together  with  a last  greeting,  and  my  signature.  In  all  my  personal
letters  my  signature  always  clearly  revealed  the  mood  in  which  I
had  written.  Today  the  signature  was  clear,  firm,  and  sure,  like  a.
judicial  sentence.  It  would  tell  the  recipients  everything.


394


My  mind  went  over  all  the  possibilities  of  a failure  in  my  plans,
and  all  that  must  be  done  in  each  instance.  I had  enough  weapons  and
cartridges.  The  one  thing  I knew  for  certain  was  that  I would  not
be  taken  alive.

I shaved  and  dressed  with  unusual  care;  I even  scented  my  hand
kerchief.  At  that  moment  I realized  why  sailors  have  the  custom
of  putting  on  their  best  underwear  and  uniform  when  going  into


battle.  The  long  days  of  inner  conflict,  of  tormenting  search  for  a way
out,  the  consciousness  of  continual  danger,  had  left  their  traces,

Now  I felt  that  my  nerves  were  strained  to  breaking  point.  I knew
that  sooner  or  later  there  would  come  a reaction,  a discharge  of
tension.  I must  get  to  the  frontier  and  across,  and  then  I could  lie
down  and  close  my  eyes.  There  I would  be  indifferent  to  all  the  world
One  way  or  another,  at  that  point  I would  be  only  a corpse,  living  or
dead.

I looked  at  the  clock,  and  suddenly  had  the  alarming  thought
supposing  my  guide  should  change  his  mind,  or  was  afraid  to  drive
right  up  to  the  Berlin  Kremlin?  Then  there  would  be  nothing  for  it
but  to  go  out,  thrust  my  hands  in  my  pockets,  and  make  my  way
westward  with  the  aid  of  a map.  But  again  I thought  that  it  would
all  be  settled  today,  and  that  comforted  me.

With  my  greatcoat  flung  round  my  shoulders  I began  to  wander
once  more  from  corner  to  corner.  The  room  was  cold  and  empty
My  footfalls  sounded  very  loud  on  the  bare  floor.  The  clock  struck
twelve.  Still  another  hour.  I was  emptied  of  all  thought.  I only
waited  for  that  ring.

There  was  a sharp  ring  at  the  doorbell;  the  sound  cut  through  the
tense  silence.  I stood  listening.  For  days  I had  not  answered  any
telephone  calls  and  had  not  opened  the  door  to  callers.  The  bell  ratio
again:  long,  insistently.  I put  my  right  hand  in  my  coat  pocket
and  listened.  The  bell  rang  still  more  imperatively.  With  a deliberately
unhurried  step,  my  hand  still  in  my  pocket,  I went  to  open  it.

I opened  it  with  my  left  hand.

In  the  grey  twilight  of  the  wintry  day  I saw  a man  in  M.V.D
uniform.  I stared  at  him  with  unseeing  eyes,  and  felt  my  pistol  barrel
slowly  lifting  the  lining  of  my  pocket.  The  man  stood  silent  and
motionless.  I made  an  effort  and  looked  into  his  face.  Then  I realized
that  he  was  Andrei  Kovtun.  He  did,  not  enter  as  was  his  usual
habit,  but  stood  stockstill,  as  though  he  could  not  make  up  his


395


mind.


"May  I come  in?"  he  said  at  last.

I did  not  answer.  How  had  he  known  that  I was  still  here?  What
had  he  come  for?  I did  not  want  anybody  to  see  my  apartment  at  this
moment;  there  was  much  in  it  that  contradicted  the  impression  of
a man  about  to  leave  for  Moscow.  I looked  at  him  again.  All  his  face
expressed  an  unusual,  mute  question.

"Come  in! " I said  curtly.

I placed  myself  so  that  lie  could  go  only  to  my  study.  He  went
ahead  of  me  and  tried  not  to  look  about  him.  His  step  was  listless
and  irresolute.  I glanced  out  at  the  staircase,  then  closed  the  door.

My  heavy  pistol  knocked  against  my  thigh,  so  I shifted  it  to  my  tunic
pocket.

He  dropped  heavily  into  his  usual  chair.  I had  no  idea  what  to  say
to  him,  and  switched  on  the  electric  fire,  simply  for  the  sake  of
doing  something.  As  I did  so  I glanced  through  the  window,  and
noticed  that  his  car  was  empty.

"So  you're  off?"  he  said  in  a peculiar  tone.

"Yes."

"When?"

"Today."

"And  so  you  didn't  want  to  say  goodbye  to  me?"

There  was  a painful  silence.  He  did  not  expect  any  answer.  He
leaned  his  head  against  the  back  of  his  chair,  stared  up  at  the
ceiling,  then  closed  his  eyes.  He  sat  in  his  greatcoat  and  cap,  not  even
drawing  off  his  gloves.  Only  now  did  it  occur  to  me  that  we  hadn't
shaken  hands.

I glanced  at  the  clock,  at  the  telephone,  then  again  at  Andrei.  I
had  not  seen  him  often  since  our  journey  to  Moscow.  I had  the
impression  that  he  was  avoiding  me.  Now  I realized  how  much  he
had  changed  since  that  time.  His  face  was  haggard,  aged;  the  shining
skin  was  drawn  tightly  across  his  forehead.  His  features  were  set  in
the  expression  common  to  people  incurably  ill.  All  his  bearing
expressed  hopeless  weariness.


396


The  minutes  passed.  He  sat  without  stirring,  his  eyes  closed.  I
stared  through  the  window  into  the  street,,  and  aimlessly  tapped
my  foot  on  the  floor.


"Am  I in  your  way?"  he  asked  quietly.  For  the  first  time  I caught
a tone  of  uncertainty,  almost  helplessness,  in  his  voice.  I felt  a wave
of  pity  for  him.  He  was  only  the  empty  husk  of  a man.  But  I did
not  trust  him,  his  M.V.D.  uniform  forbade  that.  I glanced  out  into
the  street  again.  If  they  were  to  come  for  me  now,  Andrei  would  get
my  first  bullet.

At  that  moment  the  doorbell  sounded  again.  A short,  uncertain
ring.  Only  a stranger  would  ring  like  that.  I went  out  and  opened
the  door.  Two  small,  mute  figures  were  standing  outside.  I saw  their
white,  childish  faces,  their  hands  blue  with  the  cold.  Refugee
children.


"Khlepal  "-the  Russian  word  for  bread  sounded  queerly  distorted
in  the  mouths  of  these  German  children.  "Khlepal"  The  word  Was
quietly  repeated.  In  their  eyes  was  neither  entreaty  nor  expectation
only  childish  helplessness.  I felt  a lump  in  my  throat.  These  wretched
figures  seemed  like  a spectral  premonition  of  that  which  awaited  me.

Without  speaking  I beckoned  to  them  to  enter,  found  my  01
military  kitbag  in  the  kitchen,  and  filled  it  with  everything  I could
They  had  difficulty  in  dragging  it  to  the  door.  I saw  them  out.

As  I closed  the  door  I heard  a vague  muttering  behind  me:  "That
wasn't  just  chance  "That's  a sign..."  I stared  at  Andrei '
amazement.  He  drooped  his  head,  avoiding  my  gaze,  and  whispered
"God  sent  them."

He  dropped  back  into  his  chair.  The  clock  said  half-past  twelve

I realized  that  I had  not  had  anything  to  eat  all  the  morning.  I
must  have  strength  for  whatever  lay  ahead.  I cut  some  bread  and
butter,  and  forced  myself  to  eat.  I put  a second  plate  in  front  of
Andrei.  As  I leaned  over  the  table  I saw  that  his  eyes  were  fixed  on
my  coat.  The  greatcoat  had  swung  open,  and  the  butt  of  my  pistol
was  poking  out  from  my  tunic  pocket.  I felt  my  mouth  go  dry.

Before  returning  to  the  U.S.S.R.  Soviet  officers  had  to  hand  over  all
their  weapons.  Any  attempt  to  smuggle  a weapon  across  the  frontier
was  sternly  punished.  A major  in  the  State  Security  Service  would
know  that  best  of  all.  I drew  my  greatcoat  round  me  as  casually  as


397


possible  and  gave  him  a sidelong  look.  There  was  no  astonishment  in
his  eyes,  his  face  was  quite  tranquil.  The  hands  of  the  clock  crept
nearer  to  the  appointed  hour.

"In  all  probability  we  shall  never  see  each  other  again."  Andrei
broke  the  oppressive  silence.  His  words  were  not  said  in  a questioning
tone,  but  rather  as  an  answer  to  his  own  thought  and  you  didn't
want  to  say  goodbye,"  he  added  sorrowfully.

I was  silent;  I pretended  I had  not  heard  his  remark.

"All  my  life  I've  never  trusted  you."  His  words  came  slowly  and
quietly.  "When  I did  begin  to  believe  in  you,  you  did  not  believe
or  trust  me.  . .

His  words  cut  me  to  the  heart,  but  I could  not  say  anything  in
answer.  I knew  only  one  thing:  in  a moment  the  telephone  would  be
ringing,  and  if  anybody  got  in  my  way  I would  shoot.

Again  I caught  myself  wondering:  how  had  he  known  I was  still
here,  and  that  I was  going  today?  During  these  latter  days  there  had
been  many  possibilities  ...  Perhaps  he  had  learnt  the  news  in  the
course  of  his  official  duties?  Perhaps  in  his  Pocket  he  had  an  order
for  my  arrest?  I forced  that  thought  away  from  me,  and  got  up  and
walked  about  the  room.

Amdrei's  voice,  the  voice  of  a major  in  the  State  Security  Service,
came  as  an  answer  to  my  thoughts:

"Don't  be  angry  at  my  coming  here..

The  clock  ticked  like  falling  drops  of  water.

Quietly,  almost  inaudibly,  he  went  on:

"If  I hadn't  come,  others  would  have.  .

I wandered  about  the  room,  glancing  from  time  to  time  at  the
clock.

"Perhaps  you'd  like  to  borrow  my  car?"  he  asked.

"No,  thanks..."

"So  you're  going,  and  I remain."  IR  spoke  again.  "I  can  be  of

more  use  if  I remain  at  my  post ...  If  you  ever  think  of  me,  Grisha,
then  remember ...  I do  what  I can."

Once  more  the  silence  filled  the  chilly  room-broken  only  by  the


398


clock  ticking.

"Won't  you  give  me  something  as  a keepsake?"  He  spoke  again.

His  voice  sounded  strangely  unsure,  almost  unhappv.

I looked  round  my  empty  room.  My  gaze  rested  on  the  black
monkey  crouching  on  the  desk.  I stared  at  it  fixedly,  as  though
expecting  it  to  move.

"Take  that."  I nodded  at  the  bronze  statuette.

"A  black  ape  is  sitting  on  the  world,"  he  muttered.  "And  a man
strives  after  the  good,  the  pure  ...  and  then  you  see  that  it's  all
filth...  11

The  telephone  bell  rang  out  like  a pistol  shot.  Unhurriedly  I picked
up  the  receiver.  I heard  the  words  in  German:

"The  car  is  here."

"Very  good!"  I answered,  also  in  German.

"Well  ...  now  I've  got  to  go."  I turned  to  Andrei.

He  rose  heavily  from  his  chair  and  went  with  a wooden  step  to
the  door.  I followed  him.  With  a forced  movement,  as  though  he
were  mortally  weary,  he  drew  his  greatcoat  down.  The  collar  caught
in  the  gold  epaulette  of  his  tunic.  He  stared  at  his  shoulder,  then  pulled
on  his  greatcoat  so  violently  that  the  epaulette  was  ripped  away.

"The  wings  ...  of  a slave!"  the  words  sounded  heavy  and  slow  in
the  silence.  They  were  uttered  with  such  a depth  of  bitterness  that
involuntarily  I shivered,
ago

'"I  wish  you  a good  journey  !"  he  said,  and  held  out  his  hand.  I took
his  hand  and  shook  it.  He  stared  into  my  eyes,  tried  to  say
something,  but  only  gave  me  another  firm  handshake  and  went  down  the
stairs.  I gazed  after  him,  but  he  did  not  turn  round.

I stood  listening  until  the  sound  of  his  car  died  away.  Several
minutes  had  passed.  It  was  time  I was  going.

I had  already  handed  in  the  keys  of  my  apartment,  and  now  i
had  only  to  shut  the  door.  For  a moment  I hesitated  on  the


399


threshold,  then  slammed  the  door  hard  behind  me.  The  lock  clicked  home


Now  there  was  no  way  back.

I turned  and  walked  out  of  the  house:  to  face  the  future.


PRAEGER  PUBLICATIONS  IN  WORLD  COMMUNISM
' AND- RUSSIAN  HISTORY

The  most  important  series  of  political  and  historical  standard
works  on  the  area  dominated  by  Soviet  Russia  . . . provides
the  essential  background  information  needed  for  dealing  in-
telligently and  effectively  with  the  Kremlin  and  its  satellite
empire  . . .and  for  understanding  its  aims  and  intentions

• No.  l Hugh  SetonWatson,  THE  EAST  EUROPEAN

REVOLUTION $5.50

• No.  a Solomon  M.  Schwarz,  LABOR  IN  THE  SOVIET

UNION  ’ . , , . . . $6.00

• No.  3 Hugh  SetonWatson,  THE  DECLINE  OF  IMPER-

IAL RUSSIA $7.50

• No.  4 Walter  Kolarz,  RUSSIA  AND  HER  COLONIES  , $6.00

• No,  5 Edward  Rogers,  A CHRISTIAN  COMMENTARY

ON  COMMUNISM $3.50

• No.  6 CURRENT  SOVIET  POLlqiES-The  Documents

and  Proceedings  of  the  Nineteenth  Party  Congress
and  related  materials  including  Stalin’s  articles  on
Economic  Problems  of  Socialism  in  the  U.S.S.R.,
and  the  reorganization  after  Stalin’s  death.

Introduced  and  edited  by Leo  Gruliow  . . . $6.00

• No.  7 Samuel  Kucherov,  COURTS,  LAWYERS  AND

TRIALS  UNDER  THE  LAST  THREE  TSARS  . $6.00

• No.  8 Walter  Kolarz,  THE  PEOPLES  OF  THE  SOVIET

FAR  EAST  . . . (in  preparation)  $4.00

• No.  9 Georg  von  Rauch,  A HISTORY  OF  BOLSHEVIST

RUSSIA  . . . . (in  preparation)  S5.00

• No.  10  Hugh  SetonW atson,  ‘FROM  LENIN  TO  MALEN-

KOV—The  History  of  ^ World  Communism  . . $6.00

Frederick  A.  Praeger,  Publishers,  105  West  40  Street

New  York  18,  N.  Y.

v

BOOKS  THAT  MATTER


401
