TRUTH vs. POLITICAL TRUTH
Media Elites, Public Opinion
and the
Assassination of
John F. Kennedy
(essays. for a work in progress)
Raymond Marcus
Volume 1
Warren Commission
Liebeler, Lifton, Lawyers and Legalese
Historians
August, 2001

--- PAGE BREAK ---

TRUTHvs.POLITICAL TRUTH
Media Elites, Public Opinion
and the
Assassination of
John F. Kennedy
(essays for a work in progress)
Raymond Marcus
Volume 1
Warren Commission
Liebeler, Lifton, Lawyers and Legalese
Historians
jon
August, 2001
Her0
Hav
eerln
Q
c2se
mow
ppneci
Lcey
#70/100

--- PAGE BREAK ---

With many thanks to my sister-in-law, Diane
Marcus, who generously and cheerfully typed the
manuscript.
Some of the foregoing essays refer to writings of
several authors which I intend to include in the
completed work. They are not included here.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

There comes a point where, after all, the emperor may rely
on his power to demand that he is clothed.And this is not
only a function of power, it is also a function of relative
probability,anda concession to the shortness of life.
Theunconsciousnotionthattheemperorwillbeclothedisa
very powerful notion torely on.
WesleyLiebeler
Former Warren Commission Counsel

--- PAGE BREAK ---ability,anda concession to the shortness of life.
Theunconsciousnotionthattheemperorwillbeclothedisa
very powerful notion torely on.
WesleyLiebeler
Former Warren Commission Counsel

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Starting from the premise, based on the overwhelming preponderance of
evidence, that John F. Kennedy's death was the result of a conspiracy, an important
question that presents itself is; why would the highly intelligent and sophisticated
individuals who made up the Warren Commission's membership and staff be willing to
place their names on the no-conspiracy conclusions of the Warren Report? Why would
they choose to leave as their permanent contribution to history, and as an important part
of their personal and public legacy, their sponsorship and endorsement of the most
massively fraudulent document ever foisted on the American people by its Govermment?
Given the difficulties of attempting to enter the mind of another person, motives
can only be inferred from actions and context. However, one element common to those
involved is that they were all lawyers, a profession to which truth seeking is often
irrelevant. The difference between the thrust-and-parry of advocacy argument - the
common mode of lawerly discourse - and an objective pursuit and analysis of facts in
search of truth, regardless of what that truth may be or to where it may lead, needs'no
furtherelaborationhere.
Despite self-serving statements to the contrary, it is evident from its own records
sd e s nq ru-  e se ie nu p iss unm s r
body, and a.dishonest one at that. Lacking a serious investigative capability of its own,
the commission accepted its basic infomation from the CIAand FBI,which had
immediately named Oswald as the lone assassin, and then proceeded to ignore, suppress,
and ridicule contrary information.*
. No doubt, among the individual members and staff, motives varied in kind and
national security, public morale, preservation of confidence in governmental institutions;
and at its most extreme, the prevention of nuclear war - the possibility of which was
brought frighteningly close during the Cuban missile crisis barely one year earlier.
C
Indeed, this possibility apparently weighed heavily in Earl Warren's decision to yield to
President Johnson's pressure and agree to lead the Commission after having at first
declinedtoserve.
But despite the common front of public solidarity generally maintained in support
of the official myth, there are indications that from the earliest stages a significant
number of Warren Commission members and staff harbored serious doubts about the
adequacy of its procedures and the validity of its conclusions.
I wrote to Earl Warren on December 29, 1963, expressing my concerms as well as
my confidence that the Commission under his leadership would seek and find the truth.
My confidence soon proved to have been naively misplaced. The FBI continued to leak
lone-assassin/no-conspiracy factoids to a largely unquestioning media, without effective
restraint by the Warren Commission - despite some executive session rumblings of
discontent. On December 9, 1963, the Commission reviewed the first formal report onuestioning media, without effective
restraint by the Warren Commission - despite some executive session rumblings of
discontent. On December 9, 1963, the Commission reviewed the first formal report on

--- PAGE BREAK ---2
WarrenCommission
the assassination issued by the FBI.

At the outset of the meeting, Warren set the tone by
commenting, "Well, gentlemen, to be very frank about it, I have read the FBI report two
or three times and I have not seen anything in there yet that has not been in the press."
Counsel Melvin Eisenberg wrote an intermal memo on February 17, 1964,
covering the first staff conference which Earl Warren held on January 20.

He notes that
Warren emphasized “...that the Commission had to determine the truth, whatever that
Ma5,464
might be." But the same memo also states that President Johnson had told Warren that
rumors were circulating “...attributing the assassination to a faction within the
govermment wishing to see the Presidency assumed by President Johnson.

Others [of
foreign conspiracies] if not squelched could conceivably lead the country into a war
whichcould cost forty million lives."
On November 24, J.

Edgar Hoover spoke to Johnson aide Walter Jenkins, saying,
"The thing I am concermed about, and so is [Dep.

Atty.

Gen.

Nicholas D.] Katzenbach is
Mars,
having something issued so we can convince the public that Oswald is the real assassin.

459-
Mr.

Katzenbach thinks that the President might appoint a Presidential Commission of
three outstanding citizens to make a determination.

On November 25, Katzenbach wrote his famous memorandum to Johnson aide
Bill Moyers.

emphasizing that “...the public must be satisfied that Oswald was the
assassin...that he did not have confederates [and] that the evidence was such that he
would havebeen convicted attrial."
It is clear that from its inception the actual role intended for the Warren
Commission and the one it fulfilled was to avoid any possible negative consequences by
refuting all ‘rumors’ of conspiracy and upholding the FBI's lone-assassin story.

A
significant manifestation of this was the intemal dispute concerming the single-bullet
theory, first propagated by Counsel Arlen Specter.--- PAGE BREAK ---

emphasizing that “...the public must be satisfied that Oswald was the
assassin...that he did not have confederates [and] that the evidence was such that he
would havebeen convicted attrial."
It is clear that from its inception the actual role intended for the Warren
Commission and the one it fulfilled was to avoid any possible negative consequences by
refuting all ‘rumors’ of conspiracy and upholding the FBI's lone-assassin story. A
significant manifestation of this was the intemal dispute concerming the single-bullet
theory, first propagated by Counsel Arlen Specter. While an objective assessment of the
evidence made clear that (1) a single bullet did not strike both Connally and Kennedy, it
was also clear that (2) it had to have done so for the lone-assassin theory to have even a
minimum degree of viability. (Norman Redlich, special assistant to General Counsel Lee
 is  ss si s s   m A as o, is u
were two assassins.") Therefore, when three commissioners, Senator Richard Russell,
Senator John Sherman Cooper, and Congressman Hale Boggs, expressed their lack of
confidence in the single-bullet theory, Warren and Commissioner John McCloy stressed
the vital importance of having a unanimous report; and when Russell initially balked at
signing the report which said both men were hit by the same bullet, requesting instead a
footnote indicating his dissent, Warren declined to include one.*
Warren's attitude is indicative of his conviction that anything less than unanimity
would engender public skepticism of its as yet unannounced but virtually certain no-
Re
conspiracy conclusion. That public credibility and media acquiescence weighed heavily
on his mind is demonstrated by Warren's extraordinary suggestion, made during an
a
executive session meeting on April 30, 1964, that the Commission involve the heads of

--- PAGE BREAK ---hed heavily
on his mind is demonstrated by Warren's extraordinary suggestion, made during an
a
executive session meeting on April 30, 1964, that the Commission involve the heads of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3
Griffin
the two principal U.S news services, Associated Press and United Press Intermational, in
theinvestigation.
On May 14, 1964 Commission counsels Burt Griffin and Leon Hubert, charged with
the Ruby investigation, sent a long memo to Chief Counsel Lee Rankin, detailing the
areas they felt had not been adequately investigated. In it they said the Commission had
Their
recommendations were not seriously pursued, and Hubert eventually resigned.
Years later Griffin told Washington correspondent Seth Kantor "They were in a
different ballgame than we were. They thought ours was psychotic. They really thought
ours was crazy and that we were incompetent." Fifteen years after his service on the
Warren Commission, the Report of the House Select Committee on Assassinations
2
(HSCA) vindicated Griffin's position on Ruby.  In addition to finding that the
assassination was the result of a conspiracy, it said Ruby had been involved with people
motivated to kill the President. They found that vital aspects of the case had been glossed
over by the Warren Commission, and that Ruby probably received assistance in gaining
access to the jail basementwhereheshot Oswald.
In 1977 Griffin told Anthony Summers and a BBC colleague, "I feel betrayed. I
feel that the CIA lied to us, that we had an' agency of the Govemment here which we
were depending upon, that we expected to be truthful with us, and to cooperate with us,
and they didn't do it. The CIA concealed from us the fact that they were involved in
efforts to assassinate Castro, which could have been of extreme importance to us.
Especially the fact that they were involved in working with the Mafia at that time."
Griffin also made clear to Summers that his negative views applied also to. the FBI's role,
saying, "What is most disturbing to me is that two agencies of the government that were
supposed to be loyal and faithful to us, deliberately mislead us."*
More that a decade earlier, Griffin had voiced doubts publicly. Late in July, 1966,
during a radio program in which noted investigative joumalist Fred Cook also
participated, Griffin responded to the moderator's question if he thought that Oswald had
been connected with the FBI by saying no one was ever going to know. Pressed by Cook
on this, Griffin said, “I am just stating a fact of life", adding that, “"if anyone from an
important federal agency was involved, the record would have been so thoroughly
covered up that no one would ever find out." After the program was over Griffin asked
I aq 'op on sun are aldoad nok zeum ane I, pies pue yoo on Auosiad yeads oi
have to tell you that you're not going to get anywhere", but that the critics were
nevertheless performing a public service because if anything like this ever happened
***pue yoo on Auosiad yeads oi
have to tell you that you're not going to get anywhere", but that the critics were
nevertheless performing a public service because if anything like this ever happened
***

--- PAGE BREAK ---yeads oi
have to tell you that you're not going to get anywhere", but that the critics were
nevertheless performing a public service because if anything like this ever happened
***

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4
Warren Commission
Lee Rankin, a former U.S. Solicitor General, was Earl Warren's second choice for
Chief Counsel. His first choice was Warren Olney, who had been his deputy when he
was District Attomey of Alameda County, Califomia. But Olney, as an assistant U. S.
Attomey General, once prosecuted a New York company that had been caught smuggling
arms into pre-revolutionary Cuba. The company was a CIA front, and the Agency urged
him not to proceed. Olney, however, was not a member of the CIA's old-boy network,
and he refused their request. Former CIA Director Allen Dulles, informed by the Agency
of Olney's transgression, persuaded Warren to drop him, and the job went to Rankin
instead. Rankin.then selected a total of twenty-six individuals as assistant counsel and
staff. His was the key position, the sole contact between the staff and the Commission
members,and the overseer of the final report.
In a September, 1965 interview Rankin told Edward Jay Epstein that although the
investigation was to be “independent," the Commission decided to rely. on federal
agencies to conduct its basic investigating, because it would have been impractical for the
Commission to attempt to recruit its own investigative force. In a separate interview that
same month Allen Dulles explained that independent investigators would cause needless
friction in dealing with govemmental agencies and would complicate the security
problem.
At an early Commission meeting, when confronted with the allegation that
Oswald was a govemment informant, Rankin said: "We have a dirty rumor...and it must
be wiped out insofar as it is possible to do so by this Commission." But it was also
Rankin who told the Commission, “"They [the FBI] haven't run out all the leads, but they
are concluding that Oswald was the assassin...that there can't be a conspiracy. Now that
y
is not.normal... Why are they so eager to make both of these conclusions? On January
22, 1964, he exploded in sarcastic anger against the Bureau's insistence. He said, "They
would like to have us fold up and quit...they found their man. There is nothing more to
do. The Commission supports their conclusions, and we can go on home and that's the
end of it.".
By June the Commission was becoming increasingly anxious to terminate the
investigation and get the report out. Commissioner John McCloy said he was concemed
with “ugly rumors” that were circulating in Europe, and he feared that delay in publishing
the report would “cause them to spread like wildfire." The Congressional members of
the Commission felt it was necessary to release the report well before the November
elections. Responding to this pressure from above, Rankin in tum transmitted it to the
lawyers, pressing them to "close down their investigations and submit their chapters."
But Rankin's most important on-the -record statements by far were not made
D s o     o  r s  ansmitted it to the
lawyers, pressing them to "close down their investigations and submit their chapters."
But Rankin's most important on-the -record statements by far were not made
D s o     o  r s  a

(HSCA) document # 008815, dated May 31, 1978, which was ordered released by the
Assassination Records Review Board (ARRB) on October 10, 1996. It is a memorandum
of a phone call to Rankin from an HSCA attomey. In it Rankin is quoted as saying that

--- PAGE BREAK ---Rankin/Katzenbach
5
"our problem at the outset was having no investigative staff to call our own," that he
wanted one, but was overruled by higher authority.

He stated that "hindsight makes it
clear that both Hoover and the CIA were covering up a variety of items" from the
Commission and from him personally.

He commented that the destruction of the Hosty
 e,  [ s  a      ] o
committed by the FBI...which directly related to the assassin's most important activities
and motives during the final days" before the murder.

He said that if the staff had known
about it at the time they "...couldn't have used the people involved in any further way..

the FBI would have been regarded as a suspect in that instance, and that in tum would
have affected everything.

Rankin then askedwhetheritwas true that the CIA hadbeeninvolved in using the
Mafia to attempt to assassinate Castro.

When told that the charges had been proven,
Rankin replied, “Ah, yes, I've been very afraid that it was all true...I would find the plots
with the MafiaThe Mafia being mixed up with the CIA and these Cubans -- frightening.

You've got to go after that." He said that Helms'role in the plots and his concealment of
them from the Commission “would be just unconscionable." When assured that the
HSCA staff was continuing to investigate this area, Rankin said, “"Good, good.

That is
critical..." and that the plots would have had “a yery direct bearing on the areas of
plots on thebasisofwhether theywere covered upby theCIAbecausesomeof thevery
people involved in them could have been involved in the President's assassination?"
Assured that indeed they were pursuing that question, Rankin replied, "Good.

Good.

You have to look at it that way." But when informed they were also looking into charges
that Castro might have retaliated for the plots by having Kennedy killed, Rankin was
incredulous and protested.

“Where is any evidence of that?--- PAGE BREAK ---

You have to look at it that way." But when informed they were also looking into charges
that Castro might have retaliated for the plots by having Kennedy killed, Rankin was
incredulous and protested. “Where is any evidence of that? I think the other approach
wouldbemuchmorelogical."
On the same day, the HSCA attomey also phoned Nicholas Katzenbach, who as
Deputy Attomey General had played a key role in the Commission's formation and early
stages. In his November, 1963 memorandum to Johnson aide Bill Moyers,he stressed
that "the public must be satisfied that Oswald was the assassin; that he did not have
confederates who are still at large; and that the evidence is such that he would have been
convicted at trial."
The day before, Hoover stated to Johnson aide Walter Jenkins, “The thing I am
concemed about and so is Katzenbach, is having something issued so we can convince
the public that Oswald is the real assassin. Mr. Katzenbach thinks that the President
might appoint a Presidential Commission of three outstanding citizens to make a
determination."
Katzenbach and Solicitor General Archibald Cox met with Johnson's close friend,
Abe Fortas. These three, with the assistance of Yale law professor Eugene Rostow,
Secretary of State Dean Rusk, and columnist Joseph Alsop, convinced President Johnson
not to proceed with his plan for a Texas investigation, saying that it could be
misinterpreted as an attempt to cover up the crimes of Johnson's home state. The

--- PAGE BREAK ---d President Johnson
not to proceed with his plan for a Texas investigation, saying that it could be
misinterpreted as an attempt to cover up the crimes of Johnson's home state. The

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6
WarrenCommission
   s        
unimpeachable integrity. On November 29, the same day that President Johnson
announced his plans for the special commission, it was Katzenbach (along with
Archibald Cox) who first visited Warren to ask him to serve as chairman. In the next few
days Katzenbach and Fortas prepared a list of seven prominent men to serve on the new
commission.Katzenbach was also present at the first executive session of the
Commission onDecember5,1963.
While he never wavered in publicly supporting the Warren Commission's
conclusions, Katzenbach—like Rankin-expressed very different sentiments to the
HSCA in 1978. He said he hoped the Committee was "... going after the FBI and CIA on
what they did with the Commission." Told the HSCA was examining the agencies
cooperation with the Commission, Katzenbach laughed, saying "Cooperation? I don't
think the term is applicable. It's unbelievable some of the stuff they concealed from the
Commission." Katzenbach immediately brought up the CIA-Mafia plots, saying “that
6
was pretty incredible, concealing that." He said "Dulles was obviously the CIA's spy on
the commission. They should have never gone for that." Katzenbach then said that
"Hoover was impossible in those days. His real talent was running over people and
covering up in the process." He said he had great sympathy for the Commission itself
and did not regret his role in creating it, but has a different impression of the investigation
now in hindsight.
The views expressed in these HSCA documents by both Rankin and Katzenbach,
now made public by order of the ARRB, are clearly of major historical importance to the
participation in the cover-up—-indeed as its indispensable actorsone would expect the
major media to show considerable interest in them. After all; here is former Warren
Commission Chief Counsel Rankin expressing his belief that the murder of President
Kennedy may have originated from within the CIA/Mafia anti-Castro nexus, and
ridiculing the idea that it was instigated by Castro—one of the false scenarios long
favored as a diversionary ploy by disinformation agents. And here is former Attomey
General Katzenbach making allegations about the FBI and CIA which, by any reasonable
standard, undermine the integrity of the Warren Commission's operations and
conclusions.
The media, however, is deliberately unaware of these documents, though not
entirely of the ARRB's existence. To the very limited extent that they mentioned the
Board's activities at all, they have characterized the hundreds of thousands of released
documentsmany of which contradict the Commission's conclusions—as in fact
supportive of those conclusions. In this, their conduct has been fully consistent with their
chosen role, but in shameful disregard of their historic duty.
常*****e Commission's conclusions—as in fact
supportive of those conclusions. In this, their conduct has been fully consistent with their
chosen role, but in shameful disregard of their historic duty.
常*****

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Liebeler
Wesley Liebeler was recommended for Warren Commission service to Howard
Willens, then acting as Chief Counsel Lee Rankin's chief of staff, by the dean ofric duty.
常*****

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Liebeler
Wesley Liebeler was recommended for Warren Commission service to Howard
Willens, then acting as Chief Counsel Lee Rankin's chief of staff, by the dean of

Liebeler, a former Wall Street lawyer, described himself as “definitely not
establishment." In a meeting with David Lifton on November 30,1965, little more then a
year after the Warren Report was published, Liebeler commented on the #2 and #5 - man
images in the Moorman photo: “There is an establishment in this country, let's face
Be
Liebeler as junior counsel (along with Albert Jenner as senior counsel) was
assigned by Willens to Area II, Oswald's background. Their job was to explore
Oswald's life and to delineate factors which might have “caused him to assassinate the
President."
On July 20, 1964, Liebeler submitted his Chapter 7, on Oswald's motives. Chief
194
Counsel Lee Rankin and his special assistant Norman Redlich thought that it was “to0
psychological" and too sympathetic to Oswald. Staffer Alfred Goldberg was given the
task of revising and re-writing portions of it.
In his work on the Commission Liebeler sometimes appeared to play the role of
103
devil's advocate. When he wrote a 'memo to Rankin in which he differed with the
bu
Commission's total rejection of Sylvia Odio's story, Rankin responded by saying, “At
this stage we are supposed to be closing doors, not opening them." In a conversation
with Redlich, Liebeler criticized the Commission's reliance on Helen Markham, the only
135
witness who claimed to have seen Oswald shoot officer J.D. Tippett. Liebeler said he
considered her testimony contradictory and worthless. Redlich replied, “the Commission
wants to believe Mrs. Markham and that's all there is to it." (Joseph Ball, a Commission
senior counsel, took Mrs. Markham's testimony, as did Liebeler. During a debate with
Mark Lane at Beverly Hills High School on the night of December 4, 1964, Ball
Faced with the problem of selecting from tens of thousands of pages of evidence
without the counter argument of defense counsel, Redlich said the difficulty could be
Jng.13y
you start to make an argument the minute you select a fact."
Chapter 4 of the report dealt with the evidence that, according to the Commission,
130
identified Oswald as the assassin. Redlich had re-written the chapter after the original,
.bnI
written by Joseph Ball and David Belin, had been rejected by the re-edit committee as
"totally inadequate." Liebeler read the galley proofs of Redlich's re-write on September
5, 1964, and did not like what he saw. He later said, “"It read like a brief for the
prosecution."
On that weekend he wrote a twenty-six-page memo which atacked the chapter
Ing.137
point by point, and warned, "To put it bluntly, this sort of selection from the record couldief for the
prosecution."
On that weekend he wrote a twenty-six-page memo which atacked the chapter
Ing.137
point by point, and warned, "To put it bluntly, this sort of selection from the record could

--- PAGE BREAK ---8
WarrenCommission
seriously affect the integrity and credibility of the entire report.

Liebeler submitted his
memo to Rankin on September 6.

Rankin at first refused to accept it, saying, "No more
memorandums!

The report has to be published!" Liebeler, however, was insistent, and
146-7
Rankin finally read the memo, after which he summoned Redlich to Washington.

b
According to Liebeler, Redlich indignantly disputed his criticisms, saying he had written
the chapter exactly the way the Commission wanted it written.

Liebeler criticized chapter 4's attempt to minimize the difficulty of Oswald's
alleged feat of marksmanship.

He said that the chapter glossed over evidence that
Oswald was in fact a poor shot, and created a “fairy tale” that he was a good shot, and
had actually accomplished and “easy shot” in his alleged killing of President Kennedy.

Adding that the chapter's description was “simply dishonest,”" he concluded his critique
of that section by saying that, “This conclusion will never be accepted by critical persons
Commission."
In his memo, Liebeler again ridiculed the value of Helen Markham's testimony,
saying that contrary to the impression in chapter 4, "..that some question rmight be raised
when the public discovers that there was only one eyewitness [Markham] to the Tippett
killing, i.e., one person who saw Oswald kill him...

Mrs.

Markham is nicely buried there,
but I predict not for long.” Finally, Rankin rejected most of Liebeler's criticisms, but did
allowafewminorchanges.

In 1966, Liebeler, by then a law professor at UCLA, had a contract to write a
book about theWarren Report.He asked David Lifton, then a UCLA graduate student in
engineering, to participate in the project.

He invited Lifton to attend the law class he
taught on the Warren Report, to play devil's advocate, and to extend that role in a series
of private meetings with him.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In 1966, Liebeler, by then a law professor at UCLA, had a contract to write a
book about theWarren Report.He asked David Lifton, then a UCLA graduate student in
engineering, to participate in the project. He invited Lifton to attend the law class he
taught on the Warren Report, to play devil's advocate, and to extend that role in a series
of private meetings with him. In Best Evidence (1980), Lifton writes, "Liebeler's attitude
was: Prove to me we were wrong, and I'll say so in my book."
NeM
-In-October of that year, Lifton discovered the report by FBI agents Sibert and
O'Neill which said that when President Kennedy's body arrived in the autopsy room at
Bethesda Naval Hospital, there had been “...surgery of the head area, namely, the top of
the skull." Lifton quotes Liebeler"s reaction, “My God, David, do you realize what
you've found? You've found new evidence!" Liebeler phoned Arlen Specter to tell him
of Lifton's discovery. After the call, Lifton asked Liebeler for Specter"s reaction. Liebeler did not want to answer, but when Lifton persisted he blurted out, “Arlen hopes
he gets through this with his balls intact."
The following week Liebeler asked Lifton to assist him in preparing a
memorandum to Chief Justice Warren, raising the Sibert-O'Neill report and setting forth
questions concerming the autopsy x-rays and photos (which the Warren Commission had
never examined, having relied instead on drawings prepared by the autopsy doctors.)
The memo said, referring to the passage about head surgery in the FBI report: “It should
be noted that no head surgery was performed at Parkland Hospital in the area of the
President's head." Liebeler then said, “in assessing the probable reaction to the statement

--- PAGE BREAK ---Liebeler/Lifton
9
concerming surgery in the President's head area, it should be noted that neither the Sibert
and O'Neill report nor the comment about head surgery is set forth or discussed
anywhere in the Report or twenty-six volumes of underlying evidence." Liebeler added,
"Attention was first drawn to the above statement by Mr.

David Lifton of Los Angeles.

Mr.

Lifton is quite familiar with the Report and the underlying evidence.

He has agreed
not to focus public attention on this matter until an attempt has been made to effect a
responsible analysis of the autopsy photographs and X-rays to determine whether or not
the Sibert and O'Neill report is accurate." Liebeler sent copies of his memo to all former
Warren Commissioners, certain members of the staff, Assistant Attomey General
Ramsey Clark, and Burke Marshall, the Kennedy family attomey.

In a letter dated December 1, 1966, Liebeler received a stinging rebuff from
Rankin in which he said he was satisfied with the testimony of the autopsy doctors, and
that "In the final analysis I think our report must stand or fall on the basis of what it
contains."
So how does one assess Liebeler's role?

Clearly he was very critical of a number
of evidentiary matters relied on by the Commission to implicate Oswald as the lone
assassin.

Was he the conscience of the Commission, or was he playing devil's advocate?

Or was he merely a clever script-doctor attempting to make more palatable the
Commission's conclusions which, even then, must have appeared to Liebeler as dubious
sure what was in his mind.

But whatever his private beliefs he has publicly remained one
of the most adamant defenders of the Report, and was particularly vociferous in a number
of TV appearances after the 1991 release of Oliver Stone's “JFK."
Perhaps Liebeler's basic attitude was reflected in a conversation with Lifton some
time after his November 1966 memo had been rejected by Rankin.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Or was he merely a clever script-doctor attempting to make more palatable the
Commission's conclusions which, even then, must have appeared to Liebeler as dubious
sure what was in his mind. But whatever his private beliefs he has publicly remained one
of the most adamant defenders of the Report, and was particularly vociferous in a number
of TV appearances after the 1991 release of Oliver Stone's “JFK."
Perhaps Liebeler's basic attitude was reflected in a conversation with Lifton some
time after his November 1966 memo had been rejected by Rankin. Voicing skepticism of
Lifton's theory (of posthumous surgical alteration of President Kennedy's wounds to
appear consistent with the lone-assassin story) Liebeler's response may have significance
well beyond the question of the theory's validity. He said, "Well, I don't think that
699
responded, “"Because of the presumption that the emperor is clothed...because it's
relatively unbelievable. You know...there comes a point where, after all, the emperor
may rely on his power to demand that he is clothed. And this is not only a function of
power, it's also a function of relative probability, and a concession to the shortness of
life...the unconscious notion that the emperor will be clothed is a very powerful notion to
rely on..."
The following year, at my request, Liebeler and I met privately in his UCLA
office. I told him that the purpose of my visit was to try to persuade him that with public
confidence in the Warren Report now shattered, it would be an honorable and responsible
action on his part if he were to be the first former Warren Commission attomey to call
publicly for a complete new investigation. I briefly went over with him a few evidentiary
items including the pristine bullet (C.E.399), the single-bullet theory, and the Moorman
#5 man. He made no attempt to refute the pro-conspiracy implications of this evidence.

--- PAGE BREAK ---iary
items including the pristine bullet (C.E.399), the single-bullet theory, and the Moorman
#5 man. He made no attempt to refute the pro-conspiracy implications of this evidence.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
Warren Commission /  notes
Instead, after a lengthy silence during which he appeared to be carefully weighing my
suggestion, he demurred, saying; “"Mr. Marcus, sometimes we get caught up in things that
Maw!
arebigger than we are."
NoV,22,
Ma
Footnote # 1
In executive session at the very first Warren Commission meeting, December 5,
1963, Earl Warren said: “At the present time I do not feel that it would be necessary for
us to have any staff of investigators. I am of the opinion that we should not conduct our
hearings in public, that it is not necessary for us to bring witnesses before us... Having
that view, I do not believe it is necessary for us to have the power of subpoena. I believe
that thepowerofsubpoenaand holdingpublichearingswouldretardratherthanhelpour
investigation. And I already have evidence of the fact that there are a good many people
who would like to be witnesses at such hearings if we should have them, some who have
had visions that told them exactly what happened in this situation and others who believe
they know of govemment conspiracies, etc., ramified greatly. And if we have public
meetings and have witmesses in public, I feel quite sure that some of that type of
witnesses will try to force themselves upon us and if we don't use them in public they
would claim that we had suppressed their evidence and taken only that which was
agreeabletous.
"I think most of that can be avoided if we do it through an investigative process
and in doing so rely on our govermmental agencies. If we cannot rely on them I couldn't
think of any investigators we can get to do it anyway. So I hope that we can hold our
meetings and take any evidence or any statements that we want in camera, and eventually
?
make our report without any great fanfare throughout the country. I think any report we
2
would make would carry with it a great deal more influence done in that way than if we
Q
of commissioners to reverse Warren's announced intention not to subpoena witnesses.)
Footmote # 2
In Inquest (1966), p.149, Edward Jay Epstein reports that Senator Cooper told
him, “I too objected to such a conclusion; there was no evidence to show both men were
hit by the single bullet. Congressman Boggs said, “"I had strong doubts about it,”" adding
that he felt the question was never resolved. Later, Senator Russell told a researcher that
12
no one man could have done the shooting.
With public confidence in the Warren Report collapsing, Boggs and Russell
voiced their reservations publicly. In 1966 Russell.told the Austin Jourmal he was not
fully satisfied with the Report, and had prepared dissents that led to revisions in the final
version. One was an objection to original wording that said categorically that there had
been no conspiracy involved. Russell was quoted as saying Chief Justice Warrenat led to revisions in the final
version. One was an objection to original wording that said categorically that there had
been no conspiracy involved. Russell was quoted as saying Chief Justice Warren

--- PAGE BREAK ---in the final
version. One was an objection to original wording that said categorically that there had
been no conspiracy involved. Russell was quoted as saying Chief Justice Warren

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11
notes
" ... finally took that part out and re-wrote it himself [because] Warren was determined he
was going to have a unanimous report." The final version said "the Commission has
found no evidence that either Lee Harvey Oswald or Jack Ruby was part of any
conspiracy, domestic or foreign, to assassinate President Kennedy."
In a 1970 Washington Post article, Russell said he had come to believe that a
criminal conspiracy had resulted in President Kennedy's death.Russell worked with
veteran assassination researcher Harold Weisberg in an effort to obtain Commission
467
transcripts. In a court affidavit Weisberg stated: “Privately, Senator Russell told me that
he was convinced that there were two areas in which the Warren Commission members
had been deceived by Federal agencies responsible for investigating the assassination of
President Kennedy. These two areas were (1) Oswald's background; and (2) the ballistic
evidence."
Footnote#3
Author and investigative joumalist Anthony Summers quotes Congressman Hale
Boggs as saying, “Hoover lied his eyes out to the Commission, on Oswald, on Ruby, on
their friends, the bullets, the gun, you name it..." In 1965, when experts confirmed the
Senate Judiciary Committee's suspicions that their offices had been bugged by the FBI,
members of Congress held worried meetings in the Speaker's office, but felt impotent to
take action. The matter was not aired publicly until 1971 when Boggs, then House
Majority Leader, claimed the FBI had been bugging Congressional phones. He accused
Hoover of using “"the tactics of the Soviet Union and Hitler's Gestapo," and that “...it
was way past time that [Hoover] no longer be Director." Hoover denied the charge and
years later, Boggs' son Thomas Boggs, then a prominent Washington attorney, said his
C
father had absolute proof of his chargestranscripts of bugged conversations given to
him by Bureau officials with uneasy consciences. Moreover Boggs' telephone company
p s   h      ud u sr   i
his father's service on the Warren Commission, he felt pressured to follow the FBI's line
on the assassination, and, said Thomas, “ felt personally intimidated by the FBI's visits
to see him. It was, you know, ^we know this and that about you, and a lot of things could
come out in public about you'... My father tried not to let it affect his judgement." Hale
Boggs died in a plane crash in Alaska in 1972.w, ^we know this and that about you, and a lot of things could
come out in public about you'... My father tried not to let it affect his judgement." Hale
Boggs died in a plane crash in Alaska in 1972.

--- PAGE BREAK ---that about you, and a lot of things could
come out in public about you'... My father tried not to let it affect his judgement." Hale
Boggs died in a plane crash in Alaska in 1972.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12
WarrenCommission
Footmote # 4
The HSCA declared in its 1979 report that “...the CIA-Mafia-Cuban plots had all
the elements necessary for a successful assassination conspiracy--people, motive, and
means--and the evidence indicated that the participants might well have considered
using the resources at their disposal to increase their power and alleviate their problems
by assassinating the President. Nevertheless, the Committee was ultimately frustrated in
its attempt to determine details of those activities that might have led to the
assassination-—-identification of participants, associations, timing of events, and so on..".
Footnote#4A
*Wesley Liebeler was a panelist at a discussion of the Warren Report at the
TheatreofIdeasinNewYorkCity onSeptember30,1966.
Conceding that much of Epstein's book was based on "my own personal files that
I let him look at," Liebeler explained: "He came up to my farm in Vermont and advised 
me that he had been given access to the files in the Archives. So I said, Fine, in that -
case, you can look at mine. I'm too busy to talk to you right now.' He looked at my files
[and] it later turned out that he hadn't in fact been given access to the Commission's files,
and so when his book came out about a year later, I discovered that I had in effect written
a book for Mr. Epstein, or a very large part of it, or made substantial contributions to it.
So I think, in a sense, I'm perhaps closer to the underpinnings of Epstein's book than
anybody else, [with the] possible exception of Mr. Epstein himself, who unfortunately
isn't here tonight. He's in England, selling his book."
Foomote#5
Despite the categorical certitude expressed in the FBI report that there was no
conspiracy, there are indications that Hoover was privately less confident about its lone-
assassin conclusions. Less than four hours after the shooting, Assistant Attormey General
Norbert Schlei was astonished to hear Hoover declare himself “quite convinced they had
found the right party." Yet, when briefing President Johnson the next day, November 23,
he seemed far from certain. Jotting down Hoover's remarks, Johnson wrote: "Evidence
not strong...not strong enough to get conviction.."'. More than three years earlier, when
Oswald was living in the Soviet Union ostensibly as an obscure defector, Hoover sent a
memo to the State Department dated June 30, 1960. In it he warmed “There is a
B   o   n si s   s
  a    g   ss  ae  s 
following day, only two hours after Oswald had been permanently silenced by Ruby,
人
R
Hoover was telling new White House aide Walter Jenkins, "The thing I am concermed
about is having something issued so we can convince the public that Oswald is the real
assassin."ilenced by Ruby,
人
R
Hoover was telling new White House aide Walter Jenkins, "The thing I am concermed
about is having something issued so we can convince the public that Oswald is the real
assassin."

--- PAGE BREAK ---Hoover was telling new White House aide Walter Jenkins, "The thing I am concermed
about is having something issued so we can convince the public that Oswald is the real
assassin."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

notes
13
Nevertheless, after leaming that Oswald's name was not in the FBI's voluminous
330
Security Index, Hoover immediately ordered an intermal inquiry into the “investigative
八
deficiencies in the Oswald case." After reading the report he despaired that the findings
"have resulted in forever destroying the Bureau as the top level investigative
organization." Early in December he secretly censured seventeen FBI officials; and
months after the assassination, in the privacy of his office, Hoover told a visitor that the
casewas“a mess,a lot ofloose ends."
In 1988 two FBI veterans talked to Anthony Summers about their rushed
investigation. Assistant Director Courtney Evans said, "Hoover's obsession with speed
there do their work, let things take their normal investigative course, something other
than the simple Oswald theory might have been developed.But Hoover's demand was
Harry Whidbee was assigned to talk to people who had known Oswald in Califormia
during his Marine service. He told Summers “I remember it distinctly. It was a hurry-up
job. Within three weeks a letter of general instruction came to the field divisions. We
were effectively told They're only going to prove he was the guy who did it. There were
. no co-conspirators, and there no intemational conspiracy...' I had conducted a couple of ?
interviews, and those records were sent back again and were rewritten according to
Washingtonrequirements."
Hoover was close with oil millionaire Billy Byars.On the afternoon JFK was
assassinated, the phone log for his office shows the only phone call he made, aside from
those to Robert F. Kennedy and the head of the Secret Service, was to Byars. Each
339
summer Hoover and Byars used adjoining bungalows as guests of their mutual friend,
Texas oilman Clint Murchison, at his Califomia hotel, Del Charro. They were there in
the summer of 1964, as was Byars' son, Billy, Jr., then a student. In a 1988 interview
with Byars, Jr., (Sr. had since died) he told Anthony Summers that he had asked Hoover
about the assassination: "I asked him, *Do you think Lee Harvey Oswald did it?' And he
stopped and looked at me for a long time. Then he said ‘If I told you what I really know,
it would be very dangerous for the country. Our whole political system could be
disrupted!
On April 23, 1976, the Senate's Church Committee, which had been investigating
Free
A-
govermment intelligence activities, issued its Final Report. Of the FBI's performance in
1978
the JFK investigation it said, "The FBI conducted its investigation in an atmosphere of
concem among senior Bureau officials that it would be criticized and its reputation
te
tamished. Rather than addressing its investigation to all significant circumstances,
A
including all possibilities of conspiracy, the FBI investigation focused narrowly on Lee
cinu
Harvey Oswald."
Beokamished. Rather than addressing its investigation to all significant circumstances,
A
including all possibilities of conspiracy, the FBI investigation focused narrowly on Lee
cinu
Harvey Oswald."
Beok

--- PAGE BREAK ---addressing its investigation to all significant circumstances,
A
including all possibilities of conspiracy, the FBI investigation focused narrowly on Lee
cinu
Harvey Oswald."
Beok

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14
Warren Commission/ notes
Still more evidence of Hoover's attitude came to light recently as a result of
documents ordered released by the Assassination Records Review Board (ARRB). These
indicate that someone pretending to be Oswald made a series of calls in Mexico City to
and from the Cuban and Soviet consulates between September 28 and October 1, 1963.
In one document, FBI agents familiar with Oswald's voice listened to two tapes after the
be
assassination and said it was not Oswald.
P?Ob
Jeohu
In a second, a transcript of a phone call to President Johnson on November 23,
sept.
1999
1963, Hoover informs him that it is not Oswald's voice on the tapes. A third document
proves that the CIA did have these tapes, despite their subsequent sworm denials. In a
fourth, an FBI memo from subordinates discussing how to monitor CIA operations in the
US, Hoover wrote, "OK, but I hope you are not being taken in. I can't forget the CIA
withholding the French espionage activities in the USA nor the false story re Oswald's
trip to Mexico, only to mention two instances of their double-dealing."
Footmote#6
Nor did the FBI lack for representation on the Warren Commission. Hoover used
Assistant Director Cartha De Loach to meet secretly with two Commission members,
Senator Richard Russell and Congressman Gerald Ford. Ford gave details of secret
commission deliberations to DeLoach, who gave him a secure briefcase to carry
documents. Former Assistant Director William Sullivan said that Ford was a member of
the FBI's "congressional stable"...'our man' on the Warren Commission. It was to him
that we looked to protect our interests and to keep us fully advised of any development
that we would not like...and he did." (Sullivan was shot to death in 1977 in an apparent
hunting accident, shortly before a scheduled appearance before the HSCA).p us fully advised of any development
that we would not like...and he did." (Sullivan was shot to death in 1977 in an apparent
hunting accident, shortly before a scheduled appearance before the HSCA).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Ehrlichman's lawyer (objecting during Watergate trial
to comments by co-defendant Haldeman's lawyer):
Your Honor, I object! Aren't we trying to get at
thetruthhere?
JohnWilson (Haldeman's lawyer):
We are not - we are trying a law case!

--- PAGE BREAK ---o comments by co-defendant Haldeman's lawyer):
Your Honor, I object! Aren't we trying to get at
thetruthhere?
JohnWilson (Haldeman's lawyer):
We are not - we are trying a law case!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15
lawyers
 a pa soad o are sa pue ug a  ps ua s i
single language. Whatever truth this aphorism still holds at the end of the twentieth
century, it is certainly true that it applies between lawyers and non-lawyers, the former
This misunderstanding -- usually on the part of non-lawyers -- arises from the fact
that the two groups, while often using the same words, intend different meanings.
Let's start with the word "guilty." Non-lawyer A, sitting in his living room, hears
two people engaged in a heated argument on the sidewalk in front of his house. A looks
and fire repeatedly at point-blank range into C's chest, killing him instantly. In A's mind
there is no doubt that Bhasmurdered C,and therefore A hasnodoubt that Bisguilty--
meaning that he did the deed just witnessed by A.
insist that B is not guilty; for that to be true he would first have to be charged, tried, and
convicted, in most states by a jury of twelve citizens unanimously agreeing on his guilt
beyond reasonable doubt. Therefore,legally, as far as shooter B is concermed, no crime
has been committed for which he has any responsibility.
The point here is not that one interpretation is right and the other wrong, but that
two different concepts are being considered; on one hand, the actual occurrence of an
event -- the killing of C by B -- and on the other, the possible verdict of a jury that may
        sd g  go p  n  
actual eventwitnessed byA.
This confusion, arising from the same word conveying different meanings to
lawyers and non-lawyers when referring to a criminal act, frequently leads to corollary
public confusion as to the meaning of the commonly cited maxim, innocent until proven
guilty, a central tenet of our criminal justice system.
This admonition, properly addressed to the jury in criminal trials, is routinely used
by criminal defense lawyers as a means of inhibiting the public from engaging in normal
thought processes leading to reasonable conclusions as to whether or not an individual
has committed a specific criminal act.
Verbal acrobatics also surround the concept of reasonable doubt. Criminal
defense lawyers, while paying lip service to the term, often encourage its erroneous
interpretation to mean beyond a shadow of doubt, i.e., absolute certainty. They do not
want the public -- and certainly not the jury -- to decide the matter against their client by
"connecting the dots", by thinking logically about the totality of evidence, by drawing
reasonable inferences, and reaching common sense conclusions. Instead, it is their aimr against their client by
"connecting the dots", by thinking logically about the totality of evidence, by drawing
reasonable inferences, and reaching common sense conclusions. Instead, it is their aim

--- PAGE BREAK ---16
lawyers
sufficient doubt in the jury's mind so that they may reject each individual item in isolation
from the others; thereby ignoring the pattem that emerges when considering the evidence
as a whole.

Similarly, lawyers tend to interpret the word lie very narrowly when applied to
arguments favoring their client, limiting the term only to direct black-is-white falsehood.

Selective presentation of facts with the intention of leading a target audience to a specific
conclusion, whether or not that conclusion corresponds to the truth, is the primary aim of
advocacy argument.Yet most non-lawyers would consider the use of language to
mislead -- the decision to include or omit words and phrases in order to convince
someone that what is false is actually true and vice-versa -- in short, what has come to be
commonly know as "spinning" -- is, if not quite lying in form, virtually indistinguishable
from it in intent and effect.

If in the preceding I have focused primarily on the tactics of criminal defense
lawyers, it is not because abuses by prosecutors are uncommon, but because it is
   s  s        sa
diligently and conscientiously within the law -- as most certainly do -- their efforts tend
much more often to reflect the truth of the charges than is the case with defense attormeys,
who when performing their duties properly must do all in their power to prevent the
conviction of their (usually guilty) client, or at least to minimize the penalty.

Ehrlichman's lawyer said in answer to this question by opposing counsel, "We are not --
we are trying a law case!"
Other attorneys, choosing to answer this question less directly, often respond,
"Truth is what the jury decides."
David Lifton's experience with former Warren Commission counsel Wesley
Liebeler's lawclass atUCLAin1966illustrates theproblems involvedinexpectingany
significant number of lawyers -- even in their relatively unjaded and perhaps idealistic
law school years -- to.search for truth in the JFK case.If in the preceding I have focused primarily on the tactics of criminal defense
lawyers, it is not because abuses by prosecutors are uncommon, but because it is
   s  s        sa
diligently and conscientiously within the law -- as most certainly do -- their efforts tend
much more often to reflect the truth of the charges than is the case with defense attormeys,
who when performing their duties properly must do all in their power to prevent the
conviction of their (usually guilty) client, or at least to minimize the penalty.

Ehrlichman's lawyer said in answer to this question by opposing counsel, "We are not --
we are trying a law case!"
Other attorneys, choosing to answer this question less directly, often respond,
"Truth is what the jury decides."
David Lifton's experience with former Warren Commission counsel Wesley
Liebeler's lawclass atUCLAin1966illustrates theproblems involvedinexpectingany
significant number of lawyers -- even in their relatively unjaded and perhaps idealistic
law school years -- to.search for truth in the JFK case.

The self-selection often involved
in choosing to become a lawyer, the mind-set characterized by the phrase"thinking like a
lawyer", and the objective of "winning" which involves the careful selection and
presentation of facts and factoids which constitutes the heart of advocacy argument, all
combine to militate strongly against truth-seeking as a priority -- and certainly so when
such truth-seeking poses a profound and historic challenge to an official myth accepted
and propagated by all "respectable" centers of establishment civil power -- legal,
political, academic, and joumalistic.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Ehrlichman's lawyer said in answer to this question by opposing counsel, "We are not --
we are trying a law case!"
Other attorneys, choosing to answer this question less directly, often respond,
"Truth is what the jury decides."
David Lifton's experience with former Warren Commission counsel Wesley
Liebeler's lawclass atUCLAin1966illustrates theproblems involvedinexpectingany
significant number of lawyers -- even in their relatively unjaded and perhaps idealistic
law school years -- to.search for truth in the JFK case. The self-selection often involved
in choosing to become a lawyer, the mind-set characterized by the phrase"thinking like a
lawyer", and the objective of "winning" which involves the careful selection and
presentation of facts and factoids which constitutes the heart of advocacy argument, all
combine to militate strongly against truth-seeking as a priority -- and certainly so when
such truth-seeking poses a profound and historic challenge to an official myth accepted
and propagated by all "respectable" centers of establishment civil power -- legal,
political, academic, and joumalistic. While it is a given that under our legal system even the most unquestionably
guilty perpetrator of a crime is entitled to due process and a competent defense, in
Oswald's case, although he repeatedly maintained his innocence in the two days between
his arrest and his own violent death, the budding lawyers of Liebeler's class did not
attempt to objectively examine the evidence against Oswald with the view of defending

--- PAGE BREAK ---between
his arrest and his own violent death, the budding lawyers of Liebeler's class did not
attempt to objectively examine the evidence against Oswald with the view of defending

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Lifton/Liebeler
17
him. Instead, they not only accepted uncritically the information supplied by the FBI and
CIA to the prosecuting Warren Commission, they effectively became advocates for the
prosecution. Here, under Liebeler's guidance, they were following the example set by
virtually the entire legal establishment in its collective non-feasance of failing to protect
Oswald's rights and interests, either before or after Jack Ruby silenced him forever in the
Dallaspolicegarage.
note
Another significant example of legal/linguistic legerdemain is in the use the
Warren Commission makes of the phrase "(we) found no evidence...", used ubiquitously
whenever such evidence might lead away from the commission's no-conspiracy mantra.
By itself, interpreted literally and narrowly, it means just that; they found no evidence.
Leaving aside for the moment the fact that their own records contained more than ample
evidence pointing to conspiracy, the phrase does not say that there was no evidence,--nor
  e          
Commission sought to convey in its report, but instead clearly wanted the public to
understand their finding more broadly -- in fact to believe that they found no evidence of
conspiracy because there was no conspiracy. The commission believed it could have it
both ways because they had reason to be confident that the supinely complicit media
would spin it in the desired direction. However, as the years passed and as increasing
majorities of Americans came to reject their findings, some former commission members
and staff, when queried, retreated to their prepared fall-back position, “"Well, we never
said there was no conspiracy, but only that we found none."

--- PAGE BREAK ---some former commission members
and staff, when queried, retreated to their prepared fall-back position, “"Well, we never
said there was no conspiracy, but only that we found none."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Abraham Lincoln, in declining to appoint a special commissioner to investigate
causesof NewYork draft riots(1863):
A thorough investigation would "have simply
touched a match to a barrel of gunpowder."
Better to shy aw ay from the issue.
*One rebellion at a time is about as much as we can conveniently
handle."
Lincoln, David Donald, p. 448
SirWinstonChurchill:
*In w artime, truth is so precious that she should always be
attended by a bodyguard of lies."
Bodyguard of Lies, A.C. Brown,1975, p.432
Harry Truman, onthe difference between real truth and political truth":
Political truth can be the biggest and damnedest lie ever,
but if motivated toward a pragmatic political goal, preferably
for reasons of national interest,and stated with total belief and fervor,it
becomestrue.
Esquire,August 1971,Robert Alan Arthur

--- PAGE BREAK ---ivated toward a pragmatic political goal, preferably
for reasons of national interest,and stated with total belief and fervor,it
becomestrue.
Esquire,August 1971,Robert Alan Arthur

--- PAGE BREAK ---

19
historians
If as is unquestionably the case, the massive cover-up which followed President
Kennedy's assassination would have been impossible without the active participation of
the mainstream media, it would have also been more difficult to maintain without the at
least passive cooperation of mainstream historians.
Since the mid-1960's polls have shown that up to eighty-percent and more of the
American public rejected the Warren Report's lone-assassin theory. While this fact
demonstrates clearly the failure of the cover-up in this regard, it in no way mitigates the
near total abandonment of responsibilitybyprofessional historians.
Historians often remind us that they are not joumalists--that what they do requires
the perspective gained by the passage of time. Whatever validity this rationale may have
had in the months and years following the assassination has long been urdermined by the
decades which have passed since November 22, 1963. How is one to explain this
egregiouslapse?
ignore the role of covert govemment influence that proliferated on university campuses--
and particularly at elite schools--following the establishment of the CLA in 1947.That
this insidious and anti-constitutional influence,corrosive to the central concept of the free
university, involved faculty and administrators as well as students is beyond serious
question. It then follows logically from available evidence that govemment intelligence
agencies employed assets-in-place on university campuses--as they surely did in the
major media--to support theWarren Report and to discredit senious criticism and
alternate conclusions. These efforts took various forms: appearances on broadcast media,
newspaper and magazine articles, books and book reviews; and included works
ostensibly in opposition as well as those supporting the official story. (Even by itself
CIA Document No.1035-960 instructing station chiefs "To employ propaganda assets to
answer and refute the attacks of the critics" leaves no serious room for doubt on this
score.) Therefore, it would be self-deluding not to recognize that from early on the
assassination literature has included books and articles of pseudo-scholarship, of varying
levels of sophistication which were actually works of deliberate disinformation.
This extensive and purposeful muddying of the historical waters presents a
daunting obstacle to would be truth-seekers among professional historians. To any hardy
soul contemplating such an undertaking, the steadily growing mass of often contradictory
data and theories would make the prospect appear as inviting as a head-long plunge into a
quagmire.o any hardy
soul contemplating such an undertaking, the steadily growing mass of often contradictory
data and theories would make the prospect appear as inviting as a head-long plunge into a
quagmire.

--- PAGE BREAK ---20
historians
Furthermore, with each year it became increasingly clear that in "respectable"
academic circles across a broad spectrum of political belief--no less than with the
mainstream media--serious discussion of the Kennedy assassination was simply outside
the parameters of permissible discourse; and any persistent attempt to circumvent the
boundaries could constitute a major career-inhibiting action.

Historian William Manchester set the precedent for the politically acceptable
position concerming the assassination in his "Death of a President" (1967), in which he
adopts without challenge the Warren Commission's conclusions.

Most other historians,
with rare exceptions, have largely avoided the issue, choosing neither critical analysis nor
explicit compliance with the official myth.

No historian was closer to the Kennedy family than Arthur Schlesinger, but that
fact has to date not provided sufficient motivation for him to delve seriously into the
question.

Indeed, perhaps his close association and friendship has made it even less
likely that he do so, despite credentials as one of the most eminent U.S.

historians of the
twentieth century.

During a brief private meeting in Los Angeles with him in 1967,
arranged by a local TV-news personality, I attempted to discuss with him photographic
evidence which--at a minimum, tended to prove conspiracy (These included the Zapruder
frames and the Moorman photo.) He glanced at the photographs displayed on a table and
was visibly shaken.

He immediately tumed away saying, "I can't look and won't look."
However, the record indicates that Schlesinger did not take lightly the question of
Xmperia)
an assassination conspiracy.

He has written that President Kennedy was impressed with
"Seven Days in May", a 1962 fictional account of a plot by right wing generals to
overthrow the President.When Kennedy heard that a film was to be made of the book,
8b
P.417
he offered the White House as a shooting location.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He immediately tumed away saying, "I can't look and won't look."
However, the record indicates that Schlesinger did not take lightly the question of
Xmperia)
an assassination conspiracy. He has written that President Kennedy was impressed with
"Seven Days in May", a 1962 fictional account of a plot by right wing generals to
overthrow the President.When Kennedy heard that a film was to be made of the book,
8b
P.417
he offered the White House as a shooting location. According to Schlesinger, who at the
time served as Special Assistant to the President, Kennedy believed the film would be a
waming to thenation. Schlesinger was intimately familiar with an important series of contacts which
took place between American and Cuban representatives, including Castro himself during
the two months prior to November 22, 1963. The purpose of these extremely sensitive
meetings was to explore the possibility of improving relations between the two countries. 407
President Kennedy authorized Ambassador William Attwood, Special Advisor to the
U.S. delegation to the United Nations, to proceed with exploratory talks; and instructed
that they be conducted in strict secrecy, ordering specifically that the State Department
and the CIA not be informed. Some months earlier, through Dr. Rene Vallejo--Castro's personal physician and
trusted aide--Kennedy had leamed of a rift that had developed in the Cuban leadership
between communist hard-liners and Castro, who wanted a more independent line and a
possible rapprochement with the U.S.