JesseJackson speaks atLincoln Collge afterreceivinganhonorary Doctor of Divinity degree
by JOHN PEKKANEN
The Jesse Jackson style:
1/21/69
militantbutnonviolent
On Saturday mornings,just before10Jesse Jackson,28years
old, ambles onstage at Chicago's Capitol Theater for the week-
BlackHope
ly broadcast of Operation Breadbasket.Resplendent in turtle-
neck and bell-bottoms, he strides to the podium and the au-
dience of 4,000, mostly well-dressed black women, rises. Ben
Branch's gospel band reverberates with HardTimes,theBread
basket choir belts out the words, and there is rhythmic applause.
White Hope
Jackson gives a palms-down signal and the audience sits, and
he offers a prayer,his reverence real and moving.
Then he preaches-often on the economic disparity between
 ,  pu o pnu q e eum pe ood pue y
about America being a melting pot, but it is more like a vege-
CONTINUED

--- PAGE BREAK ---‘WhenI see a beautiful woman with a miniskirt on,my
eyes get big as teacups.

Oh, yeah!I ain’t gonna be lying’
The cost ofa college educationis up 68%since1957.

coNTinueD table soup and we've been pushed down to the bottom of
the pot.

We are going to come up and be recognized or
turn the pot over.” Sometimes he preaches on the legacy
What!

of slavery, and one senses that as he stands up there, his
eyes ablaze, arms flailing, neck veins rigid, he is feeling
every lash of every old whip.

During these sermons Jack-
You still don't
son sweats profusely, the only visible symptom of sickle-
cell trait,a chronic blood disease that saps his stamina
but which he ignores in the drama of the moment.

own any
Jackson talks about himself at these meetings.

Once he
told of his days as a waiter at the Jack Tar Hotel in his
mutual funds?

home town of Greenville, S.C.

Just before leaving the
kitchen he would spit into the food of white patrons he
hated and then smilingly serve it to them.

He did this, he
was something everybody in the audience understood.

Re-
cently he launched into an angry denunciation of rumors
about his personal life which had been spread,he told the
audience, by jealous but unspecified people “who seek to
divide us.” Clearly he felt that, after what he had done
for blacks as head of Operation Breadbasket, he shouldn’t
have to deny venal rumors that had him growing rich off
the Saturday morning collections, keeping a harem of
white women, living in a wealthy white area, and even
that he is homosexual.

Typically, he answered the last ru-
mor this way: *When I see a beautiful woman with a mini-
e, 61 Broadway, N.Y.

skirt on, my eyes get big as teacups.

Oh yeah!

1 ain’t gonna
Carpenter's Secret
be lying.

They swell up because I'm young and I'm healthy
mentally and physically." Jackson is in fact married to
Makes Hinge Screw
an adoring wife, has three children, lives in a spacious but
Holes Vanish
not luxurious South Side apartment and makes a modest
S8,500 a year.1 ain’t gonna
Carpenter's Secret
be lying.

They swell up because I'm young and I'm healthy
mentally and physically." Jackson is in fact married to
Makes Hinge Screw
an adoring wife, has three children, lives in a spacious but
Holes Vanish
not luxurious South Side apartment and makes a modest
S8,500 a year.

(Mr.W.C.B., Norristoun, Pa.)
Operation Breadbasket-the Chicago-based national
Fill unsightly hinge serew holes
effort to harness black economic power to promote black
PLASTIC WOOD.Handles
like professional carpenters do with
like
economic gains-was a project begun by the late Martin
Sandpaper it.Varnish or
putty.Hardens like wood.

Plane it.

Luther King Jr., and it is to King that Jesse Jackson is
paint it for perfeet fin sh.

most often compared.

King appealed to white guilt and
Get PLASTIC WOODin
white good intentions.Jackson appeals to black pride and
tube or can.Walnut,ak,
the black's desire for a real piece of the action.King was
At all hardware outlets.

mahogany or natural co or.

a moralist whose confrontations always became moral
PLASTIC
GENUINE
questionsJacksonis partly that,butbasicallyheisanco
PLASTIC
nomic manipulator and a politician—a far more astute
VO0D
PLEASE!

Only you can
politician than King was.And there is, of course, a dif
WOOD°
PREVENT FOREST FIRES
ference in style.Jackson’s style is essential for black lead-
ership today, and he knows it.

It is a style, he says, *that
CELLULOSE FIBRE FILLER
relates emphatically to my people.

Bayard Rustin agrees:
call Roto-Rooter
"Jesse Jackson is the incarnation of all the manly qual-
ities the black community respects."
It is abundantly clear at these Saturday meetings that
1
(ther's the name)
Jackson is both a man of God and a shrewd, even ar-
Roto-Rooter Company for prompt service.The
Sewer clogged?

Drains slow?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bayard Rustin agrees:
call Roto-Rooter
"Jesse Jackson is the incarnation of all the manly qual-
ities the black community respects."
It is abundantly clear at these Saturday meetings that
1
(ther's the name)
Jackson is both a man of God and a shrewd, even ar-
Roto-Rooter Company for prompt service.The
Sewer clogged? Drains slow? Call your local
und
rogant,political infighter.He can deal harshly with those
Roto-Rooter man Razor-Kleens* any sewer
who donot goalong with him,as one black state senator,
or drain—kitchen,bath,lasement or laundry. away
a man notorious for his fidelity to himself, found out. Leaves 'em like new. No muss, no fuss. Call
The senator, eager for an introduction from Jackson,
the company millions depnd upon... Roto
RooterThere'sanlyone...youifindyours
something any black politician would covet, was not in-
listed in the phone book. troduced. Instead, Jackson told him to take up the col-
the'drain
lection, which he did, smiling obsequiously. Jackson's ul-
RO1O-
timate goal of a better life for black people is the force
ROOTER
that reconciles these disparate sides of his nature. And he
is driven also by a yearning forrecognitionfor himselfa
SEWER
force equal to his commitment to his people. A poor boy,
SERVICE
ROTO-ROJTER CORPORATION,
born out of wedlock, he was once ashamed of his origins
West De: Moines, lowa 50265
* U 1 g 3
CONTINUED
68

--- PAGE BREAK ---pocket alarm
Twistthe dial
set from
5.to60minutes.

When timeis up.

spunosjazznge
Raipn Abernazhy joks with Jeckson berore an SCLC mceting
solves ALL your
ONTINUED
but is now proud of them.Possessing a monumental am-
bition, an iron will and a facile mind, he was Mr.

Ev-
gift-giving problems
erything inhigh school and collegestar athlete, student
body president,top scholarThen he became acivilrights
leader,and he wants to bea star there too.He likesitu
Hickoff alf thenamesonyour-lisith
nome
there where the applause is deafening and the adulation
Everyoneyou know including yoursel) can
endless, and he wants to keep on going.All this explains
usethisingeniousinstrument-made by Swiss
much about him,including the fact that he is constantly
craitsmen,
Itshight,
late.He heldup two graduation ceremonies at which here-
ceived honorary doctorates of divinity,and he was40min-
utes late for an appointment with the mayor of Peoria,
woman,orchid
whose support he was seeking.

About to meet Chief Jus-
Erme
parkimg
tice Warren at a graduation ceremony some time ago,he
IOM
muttered,A fwyears ago Ida popped over and said,
mR
“Yessuh, Mr.

Chief Justice, Sir.

But no more,brother.

Let him come over here.” I'm important now, Jackson
when.fo.come
seems always to be saying, and you're going to have to
wait a little bit untilIgetreadyto see yo.You can seeit
when he orders around a coterie of aides, men older than
he, who forever get his food, run his baths, pack his bags
cathen
Mother
Anmr
and laugh when he tells them something is funny.

It is an
Busine
enormous ego at work, one that perhaps grew large be
fore he was fully ready for it, but it is getting results.

MemoLimer
Jesse Jackson has been hailed both as the great white hope
oneandberemembered
because heissuccessfullynonviolentandasthe greatblack
hope because he is successfully pursuing economic parity
for blacks.

Nothing exemplifies this success better than
MemoTimer
the A&P fight Operation Breadbasket waged in Chicago.--- PAGE BREAK ---

MemoLimer
Jesse Jackson has been hailed both as the great white hope
oneandberemembered
because heissuccessfullynonviolentandasthe greatblack
hope because he is successfully pursuing economic parity
for blacks. Nothing exemplifies this success better than
MemoTimer
the A&P fight Operation Breadbasket waged in Chicago. $95
It began in July 1968,when staffmembers of Breadbas-
mmodat delivenalf
3
ket,making their periodiccheck ofbusinessesinthe black
areas of Chicago,found that A&Pwas notcomplying with
its 1967 pledge to hire 770 blacks.When negotiations be-
tween A&P and Breadbasket broke down, the alarm to
boycott was sounded. The word not to buy at A&P went
(PLEASEPRINT CAREFULLY)Enclosed isa check ormoney order for
out to black Chicago from the pulpits of the more than
MemoTimers@3.95each.amadding50gforextrafast Airmail
(Canadian orders will be shipped from Canada)
100 black churches that forrn Breadbasket's organization-
al network. NAME
Black
Within a few weeks allof the 40 A&Pstores in black Chi-
White
cago were being picketed. A group of 900 sympathetic
ADDRESS
Red
whites from the wealthy suburbs that stretch from Ev-
CITY-
STATE
ZIP
Blue
anston to Highland Park oined in the boycott and pick-
eted,hitting anadditional0 stores inwhite areasHalf
MAIL COUPON TOGETHER WITH CHECK OR MONEY ORDER TO:
the A&P stores in metropolitan Chicago were under siege. Charles Alshuler Co.(Exclusive U.S.Importer)
Box3720,Milwaukee,Wis.53217
CONTINUED
6S

--- PAGE BREAK ---Ancient Age.

If you can find a
WhatIfeared and still fear is thatblack power would
better bourbon
stopwith new hair styles'
buy it.

d
pany's vitals, and a company's vitals is its profit margin."*
After 14 weeks, its sales down substantially, A&P ca-
pitulated.

The “covenant” it signed with Breadbasket is
enormous in scope.

Beside providing for the hiring of hun-
dreds of black employes,it requires A&P stores in black
neighborhoods to use black janitorial,extermination and
garbage-collection services; to give prominent shelf dis-
play to black products such as Mumbo Barbecue Sauce
and Joe Louis Milk; to use black contractors for con-
struction of new stores in black areas; the use of black
media to advertise; the hiring of a black public relations
firm; the promise of investment in black banks; the cre-
ation of *sensitivity seminars” for A&P executives to at-
tune them o the racial situation;and,nally,amonthly
meeting between Breadbasket and A&P to assure com-
p,ss
black people.

An A&P spokesman will say only that
Breadbasket took too much credit for it.

The Chicago branch of Operation Breadbasket was
formed in February 1966.

For two years prior to that, Jack-
son, after graduating from North Carolina's A&T Col-
Jege at Greensboro,wasa student at the Chicago Theo-
logical Seminary and also worked part time for the Co-
ordinatingCouncilofCommunity Organizations(CCCO),
a loose-knit coalition of civil rights organizations which
became the local base for Martin Luther King’s Chicago
Freedom Movement.

In January of 1966, when King came to Chicago, he
urged the 60 ministers who were a part of CCCO to begin
a local Breadbasket program.

The Breadbasket idea,
which had enjoyed moderate success in gaining jobs for
blacks inAtlantawas based onthe concept ofselective
s
Reverend Leon Sullivan in Philadelphia.

The Chicago
ministers quickly put the organization together and sug-
gested Jackson, with whom they had worked, as its di-
rector.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Breadbasket idea,
which had enjoyed moderate success in gaining jobs for
blacks inAtlantawas based onthe concept ofselective
s
Reverend Leon Sullivan in Philadelphia. The Chicago
ministers quickly put the organization together and sug-
gested Jackson, with whom they had worked, as its di-
rector. King had observed Jackson’s work in civil rights
causes, was impressed with him and approved of the ap-
pointment. Jackson, tired of *Bible stories,” was attract-
ed by the idea of action rather than contemplation and
Jeft the seminary several months short of graduation. What Ieared thenandwhat I stillfear,e saysis
that black power would remain at the level of psycholog-
ical self-esteem.That we would stop with new hair stylesin-
stead of striving onward for new life styles." With Jack-
son as its director, Breadbasket began functioning in Chi-
cago and was taken under the organizational umbrella of
King's Southern Christian Leadership Conference. Jack-
son brought his tactical skill to bear byrelying heavily on
the black church, still themost vitalinstitution inthe black
community, as the basis of Breadbasket's structure-and
Breadbasket soon got results. Dairies were boycotted that
spring because,Jackson explains,“milk can’t sit too
long, and soft drink companies were hit in the summer,
the peak season. In August 1967, King tapped Jackson to be national di-
rector of Operation Breadbasket,an organization with
branches similar to Chicago's in 15 cities. By then, Bread-
basket's reputation had become so firmly established in
Chicago that many ghetto businesses capitulated merely
at the threat of boycott. Today, after three years in Chi-

--- PAGE BREAK ---Would we tell you
cago,Breadbasket hasbtained more than400jobsd
rectly and an estimated 1000by indirect influence,and
to buy a
has brought black businessmen good markets for their
products.“We dare any cat in the ghetto to take us on,”
Jackson will say.

*We'll destroy him."
better bourbon if
Nevertheless, Breadbasket has had and continues to
have many internal troubles.From the beginning, the more
militant black members were resentful of Jackson’s key
there was one?

use of white people,many of whom Jackson brought with
him from.the seminary.Jackson sympathized with their
objections but fought vigorously to keep Breadbasket in-
tegrated, and at a showdown threatened to resign if the
“"all-black” faction prevailed.

He won.

There has been some friction between Breadbasket's
black businessmen and ministers.

As one businessman put
it, *The ministers just don’t seem to consult us much and
seem to forget at times that we're supplying a lot of the
money to keep them going.” But, though there are now
more than 300 businessmen in Breadbasket, they accept
the fact that the ministers are running the show.

There is also resentment of Jackson himself,largely from
older staff members who see him usurping all the glory
while they do much of the scut work.

One particularly em-
bittered staff member grumbles: *Why do you think he's
able to jet around the country giving speeches and going
on television?

It's because of us.

I've worked and sweated
12 and 14 hours a day for years for my people, and he
gets allthe credit.”But Breadbasket's asstant director,
Rev.Calvin Morris,who gave up pursuit of a doctorate
ership is that he is big enough to get people to work for
him who are sharp themselves."
Jackson shrugsoff thiscriticismbut thereis onelong
standing criticism of Breadbasket that truly bothers him.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It's because of us. I've worked and sweated
12 and 14 hours a day for years for my people, and he
gets allthe credit.”But Breadbasket's asstant director,
Rev.Calvin Morris,who gave up pursuit of a doctorate
ership is that he is big enough to get people to work for
him who are sharp themselves."
Jackson shrugsoff thiscriticismbut thereis onelong
standing criticism of Breadbasket that truly bothers him. It is the charge that Breadbasket helps the black middle
class and that the people who truly need help, the hard-
core poor, are being ignored; that the jobs Jackson has
gained have gone to those who can hold jobs; and that
the black products he has helped sell brought profits to
men already comfortable.Jesse tries to shrug offthe mid-
dlc-class label they stuck on Breadbasket,"' says one friend-
ly critic.But even thoughitisn'tcompletely trueitboth
ers him. He'll say that the middle class provides the lead-
ers, so you have to begin there. I think it was a big reason
for his hunger drive this spring."
The hunger drive,inMay, was part f the second phase
of the Poor People's Campaign begun in Resurrection City
in 1968. While the drive failed to rouse the national con-
science as Jackson hoped it would, it did succeed in in-
fuencing the Illinois legislature in Springfield to accept
AncientAge
CONTINUED
Jackson presides at weekly Saturday meeting of Operation Breadbasket
"Tfyou can finda better bourbon than Ancient Age.buy it."
And in that time.Ancient Age has become
America'slargest-selling 6-year-old Kentucky bourbon. Andyou willtoo when you
give Ancient Agethis holiday season. America's largest-selling 6year old Kentucky bourhon. STRINUCOEPRECDITNOY

--- PAGE BREAK ---Before America
was America,we
Jackson got one Republican legislator so incensed he
muttered obscenities andkicked the wall
were a radition.

CONTINUED
two of its four major demands.

The first was a free-lunch
program for poor schoolchildren.The second,on which
Jackson had only slight effect,was to place a higher tax
levy oncorporations than on individuals underanewstate
tax law passed by the legislature.

Jackson’s maneuvering duringthe hunger campaign eft
no doubt that he is far and away the most astute black po-
litical leader in the state,prhaps in thenation.Dealing
with the entrenched political leadership in Springfield,he
was able to shift effortlessly from the area of economics
and civil rights protest to politics and self-promotion.Ear-
ly in the hunger drive, the conservative speaker of theI
linois House,Representative Ralph Smith (now U.S.

sen-
ator)introducedabill to cut the statewelfarebudgetby
$1.25 million, or about S15 per person per month.

De-
son quickly arrangedfor 3,000 people to protest at the
capitol in Springfield.

The day they arrived from Chica-
go,Jackson met privately with Governor Richard Ogil-
vie, who admitted Smith’s bill was bad and indicated to
Jackson he would see toit that it was killed.Aware of the
value ofa public victory forhimself and thehunger drive,
Jackson answered thatif the bill were to be killed,he would
help killit,and theexecutionwould not be inthequietcon-
fines of the governor’s offce.The next day Jackson ap
peared to testify before the entire House on Speaker
Smith's bill.Rather than testimony, he delivered a ser-
mon that attacked the bill and decried the plight of the
poor.It was a masterful show,withJackson exerting to-
tal control over the gallery, which was packed with hisfol
BOTTLED IN SCOTLAND
lowers.De-
son quickly arrangedfor 3,000 people to protest at the
capitol in Springfield.

The day they arrived from Chica-
go,Jackson met privately with Governor Richard Ogil-
vie, who admitted Smith’s bill was bad and indicated to
Jackson he would see toit that it was killed.Aware of the
value ofa public victory forhimself and thehunger drive,
Jackson answered thatif the bill were to be killed,he would
help killit,and theexecutionwould not be inthequietcon-
fines of the governor’s offce.The next day Jackson ap
peared to testify before the entire House on Speaker
Smith's bill.Rather than testimony, he delivered a ser-
mon that attacked the bill and decried the plight of the
poor.It was a masterful show,withJackson exerting to-
tal control over the gallery, which was packed with hisfol
BOTTLED IN SCOTLAND
lowers.

Many legislators resented his take-over of their
chamber.One of them,a Republican known for his back-
lash sentiments, was so incensed he muttered obscenities
and repeatedly kicked the walluntil two fellow legislators
quieted him.

Jackson had given his speech and captured the head-
lines.But almost ignored in the drama was the fact that
Smith's bill, now dead, had been killed before Jackson
ever entered the House that day.Earlier that morning,
SmithpubliclyreadaletterfromGovernor Ogilvie,aclose
personal friend,which said that the state could meet its
welfare budget without the proposed cut.

In a move un-
precedented for a speaker, Smith withdrew the bill.Not
surprisingly,however,Jackson was publicly hailed as th
man who forced Smith to back down.The response from
black people around the state was enormous; Jackson
could nolongerbefairly labeled as a man who fought only
for the black middle class.A welfare mother marchingina
Jackson-led hunger march in Peoria spoke for many: “If
they cut the welfare it would have killed me and my kids.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Jackson had given his speech and captured the head-
lines.But almost ignored in the drama was the fact that
Smith's bill, now dead, had been killed before Jackson
ever entered the House that day.Earlier that morning,
SmithpubliclyreadaletterfromGovernor Ogilvie,aclose
personal friend,which said that the state could meet its
welfare budget without the proposed cut. In a move un-
precedented for a speaker, Smith withdrew the bill.Not
surprisingly,however,Jackson was publicly hailed as th
man who forced Smith to back down.The response from
black people around the state was enormous; Jackson
could nolongerbefairly labeled as a man who fought only
for the black middle class.A welfare mother marchingina
Jackson-led hunger march in Peoria spoke for many: “If
they cut the welfare it would have killed me and my kids. But Reverend Jackson wouldn't let them do it."
Through his politicking (he calls it “wheelin’ and deal-
in’) during the hunger driveJackson’s influence spread
into other areas. None is more obvious than his new stat-
urewithmanyofthe18black statelegislators17ofwhom
White Horse. are from Chicago.He has helped prod them toward great-
er militancyand increasingseparation from the Democrat-
The difference between
ic machine that gives them their political life. Many of
them consultJackson about strategy.InearlyJune several
helda secret midnight meeting with Jacksonin which they
ordinary and legendary. unveiled a plan to stage a flibuster.The next dayit was
held, dramatizing theneed forjobs and also drawingatten-
BLENDED SCOTCH WHISY 6PROF FOUR ROSES DISTILLERS CO.Y.C,
CONTINUED
72

--- PAGE BREAK ---The RCA Stereo/Cassette.

‘Jesse is the man right now.He's creating for himself
For people plagued
the kind of power base in the black community that
Daley has in the white community'
with indecision.

rcord-
Should you buy
astereotapeunitthatplaysbeati-ingsrsomeoneelse's）ofumbling
fulmusi,rcasstteunitformakingwitrelsitherustsnainhas
CONTiNueo tion to the hunger drive, something Jackson needed then.

your own recordings?Should it beseteand enjoy.Indoorson AC
Jacksons personal impact on the black politicians is
atable modelora portable?current,outdoors on“D" batteries.

considerable.For example,one state representative,an
old-line machine Democrat,has converted from taking
decisonsbefore.Sowerefferingetandthehandle servesasstn
taperecorder with everything.

sesdod  ug, so
Nowthatyou'reconvinced,slipinto
Our Stereo/Cassette records
due to Jackson’s influence.

your RCA dealer for
or plays back in breath-
the details.What could
Jackson says of his relationship with the legislators:
taking stereo.

(Play your
be simpler?

can act.I am in the tradition of the prophet,giving these
men new alternatives not open to them before.He also
didn’t,they know we can mention it on the radio in Sat
urday at Breadbasket."
AfterMartin Luther King was shot,nationally syndicat
ed columnists called for Jackson to assume the presiden-
but Ralph Abernathy had taken over,the organization
would have been in a shambles,because no one would
have followed Jesse or any of the younger ones.

We al
ways fought like hell over things, and Dr.

King and Ralph
were the only two with enough stature to arbitrate them.

Fulflling Kingswish,Reverend RalphAbernathybecame
the newleaderofCLCbutthereweresoonrumorsfin
ternecine intrigues, with Jackson always in the picture.King and Ralph
were the only two with enough stature to arbitrate them.

Fulflling Kingswish,Reverend RalphAbernathybecame
the newleaderofCLCbutthereweresoonrumorsfin
ternecine intrigues, with Jackson always in the picture.

There werereasonsfor therumors,the strongestbeing
BLISTEX/BLISTIK
that Jackson, despite all the disciaimers and denialsreal
Ifa smile is as contagious as the old song says,you
ly doesn’t respect Abernathy's leadership.(Jackson gave
shouldn't stop smiling because of chapped or sore lips.And
you won't with our great lip-care team.

the right things.

So what if he doesn't say them well.")
Blistex.

The No.1 lip salve.

It'sguaranteed to promote
There was also a bitter fight between Jackson and the vol-
fast healingofcoldsores,fever blisters,and cracked lips.

atile Hosea Williams over the mayoralty of Resurrection
And Blistik.Our highly medicated lip balm.It gives quick
City last summer.Jackson was appointed by Abernathy
relief.Aids in preventing dry,chapped or sunburned lips.

to the job,but Williams took it over, and the resultant
clash exasperated Abernathy and strained his relations
And comes in a handy,plastic twist-dial stick.

with Jackson, who was reassigned and left the camp be-
Both are available wherever drug products are sold.Ask
fore the summer ended.

for them.

The world will appreciate it.

The fact is that, since the 965 Selma march, SCLChas
And thewholeworld
not scored a major success other than Breadbasket,and
this raises the question of who needs whom more.

Should
the two organizations go their separate ways, Jackson
will smile with you.

would be hurt littleThe chances are,however,that e
will stay with SCLC—his loyalty to Martin Luther King
is stronger than his lack of enthusiasm for Abernathy.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Should
the two organizations go their separate ways, Jackson
will smile with you. would be hurt littleThe chances are,however,that e
will stay with SCLC—his loyalty to Martin Luther King
is stronger than his lack of enthusiasm for Abernathy. With Chicago's blackmiddle class already largely com-
mitted to him and a solid footing now in the long-ignored,
hunger-driven black underclass, Jackson has created a
Chicago constituencythatiscohesive,responsiveandself
reliant.Hehas broadenedhis scopeconsiderably.Heis vir
tually on a national speaking tour all the time.He is also
amajorcatalyst in theblack protest against the construc
watched him for several years observes:*Jesse is the man
right now.He's moving in many directions,creating for
himself the kird of power base in the black community
that Daley has in the white community: a broad appeal
Blistex
to all factions andrecognition that he's the one to come
to when you want something done."
Jackson has ofset Mayor Richard Daley's power,not
the lip-careteam
merely by welding his own constituency but by working
CONTINUED
74

--- PAGE BREAK ---one to come
to when you want something done."
Jackson has ofset Mayor Richard Daley's power,not
the lip-careteam
merely by welding his own constituency but by working
CONTINUED
74

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Jackson is vain to the point of narcissism,unable
to resist peeking at himself in every mirror he passes
cONTINuED to erode Daley's. In the 1968 gubernatorial election,Jack-
son, to everyone's great surprise, endorsed the Republi-
can,Ogilvie,rather than Daley's candidate,the incum-
bent Governor Samuel Shapiro, who was considered a
liberal. Ogilvie won.“Ogilvie is a pharaoh, Jackson ex-
plains, “but Daley is a pharaoh’s pharaoh. I wanted to
split Daley's power-sort of divide and conquer.Before,
to get to the governor, you had to work down from Da-
ley. Now we go directly to the governor."
“Daley isn’t afraid of Jesse because Daley isn’t afraid
of anybody,” says one Illinois politician. “But he would
do his damnedest to avoid a head-on clash." It is a fact
that Daley pays Jackson grudging respect by meeting
promptly with him when Jackson demands a meeting,a
tacitrecognitionthatJacksonatleastmustbe toleratedde-
spite Daley's dislike for him.
Jackson has stature and he knows it, but there are times
when he seems insensitive to its implications. He can weep
openly at the sight of a malnourished child, as he did re-
cently during a hur ger tour of Rockford, and then arrive
for the next tour in Peoria in a rented Cadillac limousine,
courtesy of SCLC,and appear oblivious when eyebrows
are raised. He is vain almost to the point of narcissism, un-
able to resist peeking at himself in every mirror he passes.
He once ordered his car stopped in traffic and told an
aide to fetch him a copy of TiME magazine when he was
told there was a story about him appearing. He has dem-
onstrated little capacityfor self-criticismhe calls crit
truth." These are troublesome but not fatal flaws, and
Jackson will acknowledge that he might have shortcom-
ings. “It ain't nothing new,” he'll tell you, “for God to
speak through imperfect people."
FLEISCHMANNS:
THEWASHKD
Jackson talks with black legislators at Springfield statehouse
VODKAO
Thealmost
touchable
pleasure of things
absolutely clean..
Because not one,
but277extra-care:
distilling steps have
washed and dried its
FEISCHMAN
spirits to their brightest.
Fleischmann's Royal,
The Washed Vodka.
PODRa
Nothing cleaner tasting
can brighten your glass.
You'llalwaysfeelright,
so g
76