e
8/2/75
Rap. Charles H.Wilson (D.,Ca.)
House of Representatives
Washington, D.c.
Dear Congressmen Wilson,
Your investigation into mail suzveillance intereats me as a citixen who is
concerned about the persistant whdttling avey of our traditional freedoms and
because I am one of the victims of this surveillance.
All of my intercepted mall hadmto do vith the exerciae of firet-anendment
rightm. However,I do not believe that only ny mail to eaatern Buzope was inause I am one of the victims of this surveillance.
All of my intercepted mall hadmto do vith the exerciae of firet-anendment
rightm. However,I do not believe that only ny mail to eaatern Buzope was in

intrusdon into ny correspondance with England and Weat Germany.
I would very much Llike to go over all of the testi mony you have taken and
that of aay other comd ttees of whioh you know.If this teatimony is not printed
I would be glad to return galley proofs which I used to make available to
writers when I was an editor for the Senate)or transcripts if it would not be
neceseary to examdine them in your offioese
influences inside the postal-investigation service end other domestie acte I
believe to be improper.
These were both before and during Mr.Cotter's tenurea
There were three supposed investigations I can recall and of which I have
recordas. Two resulted in my being assured there vas no iaterference of any kind
true. The third failled to turn upya aingie copgas of even one of hundreds of
mndelivered books every one of vhich had ny address ptinted in it.(Regulatione
required retuxn to an identiried addross and the salvage of all paper.)
In another case of overt mall fraud,I still have the evidence the inspection
service aeleoted af the much greater amoumt Ioffered it in the package in which
that acting as my own laryer I obtained a 1oo% settlament plus costa and interest
without going to couzt.
posure of their failinga and misdeeds in the political assassinations.To this day.
after a decede of it, no single agoncy. in·or out of court, has attributed factual
error to me or to any charge I have made.I hsve made these charges mder cath.It
thus also is pointless for me to try to pursue another case af overt meil fraul beo
cause the defrauding serves the political intereste of federal investigators.
Oa the part of the CIA, they deny in writing having any domestic files on me
even after I inform them I have copies of some. The latost response of the FBI to my
more about the subjects with which I work then anyone in the FBI. I belieye these two
ofmany instances indicates what I allege to the pos
Harold Welsberg