. in si a i r< cm'i.Hi

, vlcmorandum


NT


i o


. Belmont


0


date: December 17,


ihom A. Rosen. < ) i

A

subject: WARREN COMMISSION

ASSASSINATION OF THE PRESIDENT

/, •

~*Mi\ J. Lee Rankin telephonically advised that as a result of
the meeting of the Commission on Monday afternoon there would be a formal
request in writing for the raw reports, of the Bureau which would back up the
material that the Bureau has furnished to the Commission. Mr. Rankin was
advised that based on the publicity given to the Commission's meeting yesterday
* this material is being gotten together and would be forthcoming as soon as
possible. Mr. Rankin advised that there had been somejUffjcu^

of the Commission members in understanding som e of the ha ndwriting specunenjs
and would like to get"a clarification on this. Malley has an appointment with
Mr. Rankin today at 4:00 "p.m. ,'at which time sufficient details will be obtained

I in order to clarify this.


Mr. Rankin staled the Commission was interested in obtaining
oat a concerning the income tax returns of Jack Rubensteip, also known as
Jack Ruby, and Oswald as well as Mrs. Ruth Paine_of_Irsyng,_Texas, and
that these, returns should’cover a number of .years. This will be further
clarified with Rankin today.

Mr. Rankin advised that the Commission was very much interested
in the medical reports relative to the shooting of the Presid_ent,. both the results
of t he examination at Parkland Hospital, Dallas, Texas* as well as the medical
reports from the U._S/Naval Hospital, Bethesda, Maryland. Rankin was advised
that the reports from the Parkland Hospital were readily available and had been
included in one of our reports; however, the medical report from the U. S.

Naval Hospital at Bethesda was not in the possession of the Bureau and had not
been included inasmuch as the President’s family had indicated a desire that
the report be kept confidential. The medical : report from the Bethesda Hospital
I is h\ the possession of Jecret Service and can be obtained upon asking. This
^ will lx? further discussed with Rankin today. ^

1 - Mr. Sullivan


JRM:hw

) 7 (

(18 l)V ( ‘ ‘i< 1963


I J_

NOT RECORDED

199 DEC 20 1 9P3


—

‘5 DEC 20 19S3


- “ 2 F


nn —r-ffTr-rr ’ — «.r.


Si &


s


Memorandum to Mr. Belmont
HI!: WARREN COMMISSION


Mr. Rankin mentioned that the Commission was also interested
n am postal money orders that had been sent or received by either Ruby or
O w aid. It is known that the Bureau lias already developed a good deal of
information concerning the non-existence of money orders in the Dallas,

Texas, area mid the Commission’s request for money orders will be further

clarified today.

With reference to the report prepared by the Bureau, copies of
which were delivered to the various members of the Commission, Mr. Rankin
inaic.ated that he would like to obtain an aduitional twenty copies of this report
along with the exhibits that were sent with the reports. Mr. Rankin was
advised that Malley was not aware of the exact number of copies that were
in existence, and R.ankin immediately replied that if half this number of copies
could be made available it would be very helpful. There are in existence and
( readily available at the present time twenty-one copies of the report and the
| exhibits.

ACTION:


If approved, ten copies of report previously furnished the
members of the Commission as well as the exhibits will be made available
to Mr. Rankin.

• :\ ' f*


nDDEKDUII (Alii’: hvufi) 1 2/17/ 53: Supervisor Papich, through ADgleton of

CIA, picked up comments by Allen Dulles to the effect that Rankin s
considering an investigative staff to conduct additional investiga-
, tion. Also, the Commission will consider relations between various
Federal agencies to see if there are defects and whether these should
I corrected by legislation. -Iso, the Commission will be i" b ^iness
, r P Ton- time and will co- • r a broad field and may even talk to some
' our A -ents who <*onductc i j-.stigation of the assassination and

I . bv cases .


Frankly , I think
vestigative staff and


Rank T should be discouraged from having an
that ± g._ Malley should make it clear to him


to . :r. I'clmont

Ct ; ’! i I SS ION


. stand ready to run out an;
ission wants covered. I'
n!-in only ten additional co


additional investigative leads the ^
tills light, it may be well to give
pies of the report at this time.
