MEMO
Bovember 1. 1963
Wednesday. 0ctober 30, 1963.Talked to “G" in Georgla long distance and
in our discussion he told me he had gone to Captain Little and, also.
a           
Little again on Friday. That things looked very good, he was toget
evidence together and prepare information for Bar Association against
Stoner to disbar him.I promised to give hlm what information we'could
from Birminghan.
Rev.M. L. King made statement in New York to investigators for AeL·he
RRL
was worried and tired and looking to retire ln near future that he was
investigating several people to take his place. It is still'plans'for
meet 1n Birmingham November 7. 8 or 16 to introduce this group to the
King brothers for a Nation wide appeal to be made by these people through
their own organization for one last big push by King.
Warner was arrested at his home after complaint against F.B.I, being
communist.Case set for lo:oo in Ensley.Informer "J" was in the
house at the time. also. was out there again Wednesday night.
Called
Detective Jones, it was relayed to Liuetenant House that they would pass
the case this morning as their attorney was not able to be here.It was
to practice in the State of Alabama only reason he practiced here vas
by the courtsey of the Court. Also, that they would attempt to summons
the F.B.I. men as witnesses. Information from "J" that if we could get
Warner we would have possibly the weakest man in the organization as
the organization would not let Warner stay in jail any length of time
It isbelief of informer "J" that this order is given because Stoner:
feels that he might talk. He stated that Warner and Dutton left 1865
every afternoon at 6:oo and went to supper some place and stayed out till
soneone else cane to stay there.Both of these parties,they say.are
very nervous and scared.Our informer sometines has gone with then.
He drives a'57 blue and white ford.He has been stopped and given a
ticket which he paid. "J" also informed us that Warner wouidn'tgo to
sleep without locking his door.He locks his door as he comes downstairs.
Det. Jones talked to Berry. Fire Inspector. about having a fire inspection
there next week and "J" informed us that the floor furnace is bad and
papar piled all over the place. And also that kerosene is stored in the
place."j" informed us that the bathroon floor should be fixed as it is
on windows being broken that they had broke then themselves to maka
complaint. They are still talking about police refused to cane toFleld's
house when he had a bomb threat. Our information ls that Fields can cashing broken that they had broke then themselves to maka
complaint. They are still talking about police refused to cane toFleld's
house when he had a bomb threat. Our information ls that Fields can cash

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Paden Dr
C89
BiemiaghanAl
3saal
Harold Weisbera
Zla7 Old Receiver
Coed
FeericL， MD
a702