THE ESSENTIAL MAE BRUSSELL:
INVESTIGATIONS OF FASCISM IN AMERICA
© 2014 BY ALEX CONSTANTINE
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
A FERAL HOUSE BOOK
ISBN: 978-1-627310-06-2
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
FERAL HOUSE
1240 W SIMS WAY
SUITE 124
PORT TOWNSEND WA 98368
WWW.FERALHOUSE.COM
DESIGNED BY GREGORY FLORES

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONTENTS
PREFACE
BRUSSELL SPROUTS, BY ADAM PARFREY
INTRODUCTION
THE MIND OF MAE BRUSSELL, BY PAUL KRASSNER
CHAPTER ONE
DEFENSE INDUSTRY AND NAZIS LINKED TO JFK ASSASSIN – MAE BRUSSELL PROFILE, SAN FRANCISCO
CHRONICLE, JANUARY 7, 1981
CHAPTER TWO
FASCISM IN AMERICA – MAE BRUSSELL INTERVIEW, KLRB-FM, CARMEL, CALIFORNIA, 1971
CHAPTER THREE
THE NAZI CONNECTION TO THE JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION
CHAPTER FOUR
TIMELINE – HOW THE PAST AFFECTS OUR FUTURE AND THE PRESENT
CHAPTER FIVE
HOW NIXON ROSE TO POWER
CHAPTER SIX
WHY IS THE SENATE WATERGATE COMMITTEE FUNCTIONING AS PART OF THE COVER-UP?
I. KNOWLEDGE OMITTED FROM THE CAMPUS
II. THE COVER-UP
A. CONCEALING THE MOTIVES
B. WITNESSES NOT CALLED
1. MARTHA MITCHELL
2. LOUIS TACKWOOD
3. TOM CHARLES HUSTON
4. WILLIAM SULLIVAN
III. MARTIAL LAW WITHOUT THE RIOTS
A. INSTITUTIONS TO DISMANTLE
B. THE ENEMY LIST
C. THE WARFARE STATE
D. POLITICAL PRISONERS OF AMERICA
CHAPTER SEVEN
THIRTY WATERGATE WITNESSES HAVE MET VIOLENT DEATHS
CHAPTER EIGHT
LETTER TO PRESIDENT RICHARD M. NIXON
CHAPTER NINE
THE EVIL FEEDBACK LOOP & EMERSON’S LAW OF CONSERVATION – 1978 CONSPIRACY DIGEST
INTERVIEW
CHAPTER TEN
WHY WAS PATRICIA HEARST KIDNAPPED?
I. WHY WAS PATRICIA HEARST KIDNAPPED?
II. CAST OF CHARACTERS

--- PAGE BREAK ---LOOP & EMERSON’S LAW OF CONSERVATION – 1978 CONSPIRACY DIGEST
INTERVIEW
CHAPTER TEN
WHY WAS PATRICIA HEARST KIDNAPPED?
I. WHY WAS PATRICIA HEARST KIDNAPPED?
II. CAST OF CHARACTERS

--- PAGE BREAK ---

III. CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS
IV. WHY WAS THE SLA CREATED – THE MOTIVES?
V. THE TELL-TALE REVOLUTIONARIES: CONSPICUOUS BANDITOS OR PROVOCATEURS?
VI. TACTICAL SUPPORT – WHERE DID IT COME FROM?
VII. HOW DANGEROUS WAS THE SLA?
VIII. WHY THE CHARGES AGAINST PATTY?
IX. THE DEATH TRAP – HOW DO YOU TELL A CIA ESPIONAGE PLOT FROM A REVOLUTIONARY,
RADICAL, TERRORIST GUERRILLA ARMY?
1. COVER STORY
2. COINCIDENCE?
3. DUMMY FRONTS
4. USE OF MEDIA AND PROPAGANDA
5. CIA COLLUSION
6. FBI COLLUSION
7. TOM CHARLES HUSTON PLAN, COMBINED MILITARY, JUSTICE DEPARTMENT, CIA, FBI, POLICE
DEPARTMENTS, DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS, STANFORD RESEARCH INSTITUTE, PRESIDENT
RICHARD NIXON, VICE-PRESIDENT GERALD FORD
XI. INDICATIONS THE SLA WAS PART OF A LARGER NATIONAL CONSPIRACY
XII. WAS THIS PLAN NECESSARY?
CHAPTER ELEVEN
OPERATION CHAOS – FROM MONTEREY POP TO ALTAMONT: THE CIA’S WAR AGAINST THE SIXTIES
COUNTER-CULTURE
I. DEATH, DRUGS AND DEPRESSION
II. THE BEAUTIFUL PEOPLE
III. THE ENEMY
IV. THE BATTLEGROUND
V. THE FINALE … HELTER SKELTER, GIMME SHELTER
CHAPTER TWELVE
THE ASSASSINATION OF JOHN ONO LENNON (INTERVIEW)
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
ABOUT WOMEN … – PLAYGIRL INTERVIEW, 1974
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
WORLD WATCHERS PROGRAM OUTLINE, OCTOBER 4, 1982
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
THE MURDER OF JOHN BELUSHI
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
WHO KILLED CONGRESSMAN LARRY MCDONALD? – RONALD REAGAN, THE WESTERN GOALS
FOUNDATION, AND THE DOWNING OF KAL FLIGHT 007
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
NASA’S CHALLENGER, R.I.P., JANUARY 28, 1986
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
MAE BRUSSELL ON THE AIR – MISCELLANEOUS RADIO TRANSCRIPTS
THE CORPSE OF LEE HARVEY OSWALD
URANIUM AND THE MORMON CHURCH
NIXON’S RECRUITMENT
“ANTI-TERRORISM” & GOVERNMENT SURVEILLANCE

--- PAGE BREAK ---E BRUSSELL ON THE AIR – MISCELLANEOUS RADIO TRANSCRIPTS
THE CORPSE OF LEE HARVEY OSWALD
URANIUM AND THE MORMON CHURCH
NIXON’S RECRUITMENT
“ANTI-TERRORISM” & GOVERNMENT SURVEILLANCE

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONGRESSIONAL INVESTIGATION OF NAZIS IN AMERICA SABOTAGED
POLITICAL MURDERS, THE MOB, A MISSING SHIPLOAD OF HEROIN & THE ATTEMPTED MURDER OF
BERNADETTE DEVLIN
THE WORST KIND OF ILLEGAL ALIEN
JOSEPH MENGELE & “THE BOYS FROM GUYANA”
RONALD REAGAN, BITBURG SANDWICH
HUNT FAMILY UPDATE
CHAPTER NINETEEN
CIA-MAFIA CONSPIRATORS CAN REST EASIER – MAE BRUSSELL OBITUARY
INDEX

--- PAGE BREAK ---IEN
JOSEPH MENGELE & “THE BOYS FROM GUYANA”
RONALD REAGAN, BITBURG SANDWICH
HUNT FAMILY UPDATE
CHAPTER NINETEEN
CIA-MAFIA CONSPIRATORS CAN REST EASIER – MAE BRUSSELL OBITUARY
INDEX

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PREFACE
BRUSSELL SPROUTS
The Lance deHaven-Smith book Conspiracy Theory in America (published by the University of Texas)
reveals that the phrase “conspiracy theory” was invented by the CIA to discredit doubters of the Warren
Commission, which claims that John F. Kennedy’s assassination was carried out alone by a single “lone
gunman.”
Distraught by the murder of President Kennedy, a Beverly Hills housewife named Mae Brussell took it
upon herself to buy all 26 printed volumes issued by the Warren Commission report, and attempt to make
sense of the thing by cross-indexing the entire work. Mae was disturbed by the contradictory information
and unreported realities she discovered in those volumes. As a result, she started subscribing to many
major newspapers and magazines, whose stories she filed and organized, uncovering disquieting
connections and patterns behind government and corporate malfeasance.
An impressed John Lennon donated money to Paul Krassner’s hip counterculture magazine, The
Realist, so he could afford to print Mae Brussell’s work. Throughout the ’70s and ’80s Mae reported, in
radio programs primarily, about the horrors infecting American culture. Mae’s work was followed by a
number of devoted listeners who were known as “Brussell Sprouts,” who often expanded upon the
conspiracy theories with their research.
The current administration’s legal “Czar” who goes by the name Cass Sunstein was recently appointed
to serve on the “NSA Oversight Panel” despite the fact that two words “NSA” and “oversight” rarely if
ever fit together. He also wrote a book called Conspiracy Theories and Other Dangerous Ideas to make
sure that the academics and the American public dismiss so-called conspiracy theories about the JFK
assassination and other American events of a largely fascist nature. Cass Sunstein claims that this sort of
reportage only leads to discontented Americans who turn violent with their distrust.
If Mae Brussell hadn’t died in October 1988, she would have no doubt investigated Cass Sunstein’s
background and printed material to fill us in on why Cass Sunstein is encouraging American academics
and intelligence and police agencies to move against those who write and publish “conspiracy theories.”
Now that Mae has passed, it’s a job for one or more of Mae’s Brussell Sprouts.
We hope you enjoy this collection of this influential woman’s work.
— Adam Parfrey, Feral Housesh “conspiracy theories.”
Now that Mae has passed, it’s a job for one or more of Mae’s Brussell Sprouts.
We hope you enjoy this collection of this influential woman’s work.
— Adam Parfrey, Feral House

--- PAGE BREAK ---INTRODUCTION
THE MIND OF MAE BRUSSELL
IS “THE QUEEN OF CONSPIRACY” GOING TO BREAK THE JFK CASE WIDE OPEN, OR IS SHE JUST A PARANOID
HOUSEWIFE WHO LIKES TO CLIP NEWSPAPERS?

BY PAUL KRASSNER
(FROM OUI MAGAZINE, MAY 1978)
“Nothing just happens in politics.

If something happens you can be sure it was planned that way.”
— Franklin D.

Roosevelt
There she is, the Bionic Researcher.

Every day she feeds herself ten newspapers from around the
country.

This diet is supplemented with items sent to her by a network of conspiracy students (she called
them Brussell Sprouts—Alex Constantine was one of them).

She also consumes magazines, underground
papers, unpublished manuscripts, court affidavits, documents from the National Archives, FBI and CIA
materials obtained through the Freedom of Information Act and hundreds of books on espionage and
assassination.

“About 80 percent of all CIA intelligence information comes from printed news,” she says,
“so I am doing what they are doing but I’m using all the material.” Each Sunday, she sorts out the week’s
clippings into various categories as though she were conducting a symphony of horror.

Yet she is cheerful.

She almost sways in counterpoint to the rhythms of hypocrisy.

For, while there are those who try to
discredit her by saying she’s crazy, Mae Brussell remains high on her responsibility.

Mae has been our nation’s number-one, self-appointed conspiracy freak since the day Jack Ruby shot
Lee Harvey Oswald.

She has written hundreds of articles detailing the unpleasant connections between
what most people consider diverse chapters in American history—like Oswald and Francis Gary Powers,
the Kennedy murders and Watergate.

For the past seven years, the house-wife-turned-crusader has
shocked and dismayed listeners of her syndicated radio program, Dialogue: Conspiracy (KLRB-FM,
Carmel, California), uncovering choice tidbits about everything from Chappaquiddick to Chowchilla.

She
unabashedly calls herself the country’s best researcher.--- PAGE BREAK ---

For the past seven years, the house-wife-turned-crusader has
shocked and dismayed listeners of her syndicated radio program, Dialogue: Conspiracy (KLRB-FM,
Carmel, California), uncovering choice tidbits about everything from Chappaquiddick to Chowchilla. She
unabashedly calls herself the country’s best researcher. It would be difficult to question that she knows as much as anyone about people involved in “The
Assassinations.” The Queen of Conspiracy is currently writing five separate books on what happened that
day in Dallas, all of which, she claims, “contain entirely new material. Collectively, these books will
finally answer the question: Who killed JFK?”
At 54, she is plump and energetic; she wears long peasant dresses patch-worked with philosophical
tidbits, and her favorite adjective is “cute.” Occasionally, she slurs her words—information overload—
but her eyes seem to reveal the deep sense of compassion permeating every fact she shares. One senses a
touch of appropriate incongruity about this white, upper-middle-class, twice-divorced mother of a
talented brood, who is knitting a sleeve while calmly describing the architecture of a police state in
progress. I first met Mae Brussell when she provided me with leads for a story I did on Charles Manson. Then, a
few months after the break-in at Democratic Party headquarters in the Watergate Hotel, Mae rang me up. She recognized names and methods of operation from her assassination research. For example, she knew
that Watergate burglar James McCord had crossed paths with Lee Harvey Oswald when both had been

--- PAGE BREAK ---working for CIA intelligence, and that Frank Sturgis had been interrogated by the FBI in Miami the day
after JFK was assassinated.

She also had a possible tie between McCord and a “secret army” of police
who allegedly had planned to disrupt the 1972 Republican Convention with riots and possible
assassination attempts on Nixon, which would then be blamed on leftist radicals and hopefully result in a
further shift to the right—possibly under the figurehead leadership of Spiro T.

Agnew.

And then there was L.

Patrick Gray, who as acting director of the FBI would later burn evidence from
the files of E.

Howard Hunt and deep-six numerous documents.

Mae recalled the murder of a Los Angeles
reporter, Ruben Salazar, at the first Chicano-sponsored antiwar protest.

U.

S.

Attorney Robert Meyer was
later pressured by Gray into halting his investigation and resigning from his post.

Mae called Meyer,
asking if he would help with her research.

She wanted to find out why the Justice Department in
Washington was stopping an attorney in Los Angeles from investigating the simple killing of a reporter.

A
month or so later, ex-U.

S.

Attorney Meyer was found dead “of an apparent heart attack” in a parking lot
in Pasadena.

Three weeks after the Watergate break-in, while the establishment press was calling it “a caper” and “a
third-rate burglary,” Mae Brussell completed a manuscript titled “Why Was Martha Mitchell
Kidnapped?” She named names—John Mitchell, L.

Patrick Gray, Richard Nixon, the FBI, the CIA—and I
published her first by-lined article in The Realist.

“The CIA that killed President Kennedy and Robert Kennedy,” she wrote, “did a test case in Greece on
canceling elections.

Andreas Papandreou, often compared with John Kennedy, appeared to have a good
chance of winning the Greek election in 1967.

The US Army, the CIA and government agencies helped
replace their elections with a coup d’état .

.

.

..

.

The significance of the Watergate affair is that every
element essential for a political coup in the United States was assembled at the time of the arrests.”
Mae Brussell contends that Nixon’s own Watergate plumbers, and the entire intelligence network they
represented, were prepared to overthrow Nixon whenever it was deemed necessary by the true powers.

Ultimately, she believes, the same men who brought Nixon to power via the Kennedy assassinations were
also pulling the strings at Watergate.

Papandreou wrote to her from exile in Canada: “I am overwhelmed by the amount of work you have
done and the documentation you bring to support your thesis.

I have tried myself for a long time to bring
out the conspiratorial aspects of the Greek coup of 1967.

People are now beginning to understand how it
happened that Greece went under a dictatorship.

Your work is tremendously important.

You have
understood the framework in which these events take place, but more than that, you have dug out the
facts.”
Five days before Richard Nixon’s would-be adversary, Robert Kennedy, was assassinated in Los
Angeles, Mae Brussell handed a letter to Rose Kennedy, expressing her fear of imminent danger to his
safety.

A month before Mary Jo Kopechne died at Chappaquiddick, Mae warned Teddy Kennedy of “the
nest of rattlesnakes” that wanted to abort his presidential possibilities.

A few weeks before the SLA
kidnapped the media as well as Patty Hearst, she told a Syracuse University audience that the SLA
shooting of a black school superintendent in Oakland was merely the preliminary to a main event yet to
come.

“A lot of stuff comes to me psychically and then the documents follow,” Mae explains.

“After Jack
Ruby shot Lee Harvey Oswald, I found it very interesting that one of the first things Ruby said was: ‘I
wanted to show them that a Jew had guts.’ Well, the most anti-Semitic man in Dallas was H.L.--- PAGE BREAK ---

“A lot of stuff comes to me psychically and then the documents follow,” Mae explains. “After Jack
Ruby shot Lee Harvey Oswald, I found it very interesting that one of the first things Ruby said was: ‘I
wanted to show them that a Jew had guts.’ Well, the most anti-Semitic man in Dallas was H.L. Hunt, and
he was publishing Lifeline and was meeting with Reverend Billy Hargis and all these neo-Nazi groups
and the Minutemen down in the Dallas-Fort Worth area. A radio script from a Hunt-owned station about
being a ‘hero’ was found in Jack Ruby’s car. No one ever asked him to explain how he got it. The
Wednesday before the assassination, Ruby took a young woman to Hunt’s office, trying to get her a job. Suddenly the whole plot of the Kennedy assassination began to open up in front of me. Here was this Jew,

--- PAGE BREAK ---Jack Rubinstein, being used to kill Lee Harvey Oswald.

When the Warren Report came out, the very first
witness I pulled to, the most important of the 552, was Oswald’s friend George de Mohrenschildt, a man
surrounded by neo-Nazi oil people, who was also suspected of being a Nazi during World War Two.

De
Mohrenschildt had set Oswald up with his oil-industry contacts in Texas.

He also helped arrange for
Oswald to get his job at the schoolbook depository and at the printing office where he learned all the
details of the Dallas motorcade.”
In 1977, shortly before he was to undergo more questioning, De Mohrenschildt purportedly “shot
himself” to death with a shotgun.

According to the report in the Dallas News, just prior to his death he had
been under the impression—or delusion—that the FBI was out to “get him” and therefore had been in a
mental ward at Parkland Hospital.

Mae Brussell spent eight years cross-filing the Warren Commission report on the assassination of John
F.

Kennedy.

She cross-filed every single minute of Jack Ruby’s life that doubly fatal weekend, from
Thursday (the day before Kennedy was killed) through Sunday (the day Ruby shot Oswald).

She was able
to account for his whereabouts totally, except for two hours in the afternoon on Saturday.

Although she
cannot prove it, she is convinced he was at the home of H.L.

Hunt.

“And then there was the testimony of Bernard Weissman.

He was only one of twelve military
intelligence people that were brought from Germany to Dallas for the assassination.

He testified that
Lamar Hunt and twenty members of the Birch Society used his name on that inflammatory ‘Wanted for
Treason’ ad in the Dallas Times Herald about Kennedy because he was Jewish and they wanted a Jewish
name on it.

Somehow, on November 24, 1963, the Nazi link, the oil Nazis, the American military from
Munich and the two Jew patsies, Rubinstein and Weissman, were all right there in Dallas.He testified that
Lamar Hunt and twenty members of the Birch Society used his name on that inflammatory ‘Wanted for
Treason’ ad in the Dallas Times Herald about Kennedy because he was Jewish and they wanted a Jewish
name on it.

Somehow, on November 24, 1963, the Nazi link, the oil Nazis, the American military from
Munich and the two Jew patsies, Rubinstein and Weissman, were all right there in Dallas.

As I collected
every possible document, the world picture began to get clearer to me, and my interest in the Kennedy
assassination became more involved with the Nazi links than with the anti-Castro Cuban links.

My
disagreement with researchers at large is that they want to stop with the Bay of Pigs operation, and I think
it’s bigger.”
But why the Nazis?

Racism, for one thing, says Mae.

The Bormann Society, still dedicated to the
establishment of the Fourth Reich, did not appreciate Kennedy’s drive to educate Southern blacks and
register them to vote.

Nor did they care for the fact that he was Catholic and stood in opposition to the
neo-Nazi oil interests.

Mae Brussell’s ascension to the throne as the queen of conspiracy investigations began with a harsh
dose of culture shock during her childhood.

Raised in Beverly Hills affluence, she was unhurt by the
Depression (her grandfather founded the posh I.

Magnin), and her family’s house-guests ranged from Jack
Warner and Louis B.

Mayer to Thomas Mann.

Her father used to go bike riding with Albert Einstein.

“I
grew up,” she recalls, “thinking this is the way life was.” Then, in her early teens, the family took a trip
around the world, and her awareness of suffering expanded in the process.

In Bombay, she saw people
sleeping in the streets.

They had no homes or possessions, let alone memberships in tennis clubs.

In
Shanghai, their boat hit a sampan and split it in half.

Other people came out in boats to get the clothes off
the victims’ bodies.

Some lived and died on their sampans, never getting to shore.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Other people came out in boats to get the clothes off
the victims’ bodies. Some lived and died on their sampans, never getting to shore. She was not used to
seeing such overwhelming poverty. In Egypt, it was the same. In Tel Aviv, the hotel her family stayed at
was bombed. They were the last Americans out of Spain in 1936. “We were happy little tourists,” she muses. “But it always bothered me. I never felt the same again. I
was haunted by the imbalance. I wanted to help people, but I didn’t know what form it would take.” In a
few years, she would attend Stanford University, majoring in philosophy. “I think the discipline of it
helped me with my research later.”
Then there was the influence of Henry Miller during Mae’s 40s. “Henry freed me from a lot of hang-ups
that I was brought up with. He opened up the whole field of sex as being normal as the air you breathe. He
also helped me realize that freedom of the press; freedom to live and to love is what the struggle is all

--- PAGE BREAK ---about.

It’s simply rhythm.

People gotta shake their bodies—and relate to each other in their minds and
hearts.”
A turning point in her comprehension of the global aspect of conspiracy occurred when she came
across the story of a Heidelberg professor named E.

J.

Gumbel, in the book Inspection for Disarmament
by Seymour Melman.

Gumbel was forced to resign from his academic post during the Nazis’ rise to
power, because of his unpopular stance as a pacifist and an anti-fascist.

He wrote three books between
1919 and 1922—Four Years of Lies, Two Years of Murders and Four Years of Political Murders.

In
these, Gumbel documented over 400 political assassinations, most of which were admitted to by the
Minister of Justice in 1924.

Mae Brussell began to study the pattern of Nazis coming to the United States after World War Two and
patterns of murders identical to those in Nazi Germany.

It was as if an early Lenny Bruce bit—on how a
show-bit booking agency, MCA, chose Adolf Hitler as dictator—had actually been a satirical prophecy of
the way Richard Nixon would rise to power.

“How much violence was there in Nazi Germany,” Mae asks rhetorically, “before the old Germany, the
center of theater, opera, philosophy, poetry, psychology and medicine, was destroyed?

How many
incidents took place that were not coincidental before it was called Fascism?

What were the transitions?

How many people?

Was it when the first tailor disappeared?

Or librarian?

Or professor?

Or when the
first press was closed or the first song eliminated?

Or when the first political science teacher was killed
coming home on his bike?

How many incidents happened there that were perfectly normal until people
woke up and said, ‘Hey, we’re in a police state!’
“Hitler was gassed in World War One and they took him to the hospital and, according to a US Navy
Intelligence report, they brought in a Dr.

Forster, a hypnotist, and they groomed him.How many incidents happened there that were perfectly normal until people
woke up and said, ‘Hey, we’re in a police state!’
“Hitler was gassed in World War One and they took him to the hospital and, according to a US Navy
Intelligence report, they brought in a Dr.

Forster, a hypnotist, and they groomed him.

They told him that he
would have troops that would someday invade Russia and kick the Communists out.

They hypnotized him
so that he would always believe that he’d be a great leader, like Joan of Arc.

“Now, take a man like Nixon, a man who is going to be President of the United States.

He’s known for
his poker playing, his straight face.

He already has a proclivity for intelligence.

He wrote to Hoover,
asking to join the FBI.

After World War Two, the great poker player of the South Pacific was assigned to
the Navy Bureau of Aeronautics, negotiating settlements of terminated defense contracts, where he helped
escalate the importation of 642 Nazi specialists into the U.

S.

defense and aerospace industry—Project
Paperclip.

Then he gets a call from Murray Chotiner, who works with Howard Hughes and the Bank of
America, inviting him to run for Congress against Jerry Voorhis.

What did he have besides a poker face?

In 1951 Senator Nixon introduced a bill to bring Nikolai Molaxa into the U.

S.

Molaxa was a former head
of the Iron Guard and was allegedly involved in Nazi atrocities.

Nixon set him up in an office of his
own.”
Another turning point in Mae’s research occurred when she attended the trial of Hugo Pinell, who had
been charged with killing a Soledad prison guard.

“A public defender was assigned on Friday to begin the
case on Monday, and none of his witnesses could appear.

The whole trial was rigged, and I was just
outraged.

It was then that I decided not only to study who killed John Kennedy, but also to find the
relationship between the corruption of the courts, political prisoners in this country and the political
assassinations and conspiracies.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The whole trial was rigged, and I was just
outraged. It was then that I decided not only to study who killed John Kennedy, but also to find the
relationship between the corruption of the courts, political prisoners in this country and the political
assassinations and conspiracies. When you think of Hitler, you think of prisons like Auschwitz and
Dachau. And when I thought about the killing of Kennedy and all the Nazis involved, I realized that the
prison system had to be directly related to it. And that’s when I began to correspond with prisoners and
make friends with them and get more information about prison deaths and mind-control experiments. I
found there were incidents identical to what occurred in Nazi Germany, where the innocent were locked
up or killed and the guilty were allowed to go free. “Instead of just researching the deaths of John Kennedy, Robert Kennedy, Malcolm X, Martin Luther
King, Mary Jo Kopechne, and the George Wallace shooting, I began collecting articles about the murders

--- PAGE BREAK ---of people involved in those cases.

And I began paying attention to the deaths of judges, attorneys, labor
leaders, musicians, actors, professors, civil rights leaders—studying what I considered to be untimely,
suspicious deaths.”
In preparation for an upcoming campus lecture in Seattle, Mae spends a day and a half cross-filing one
ten-year-old article—“The Murder of Malcolm X” by Eric Norden—into some 30 different subjects.

The
actual motives behind the assassination.

Collusion between Federal intelligence and local police.

Involvement of bodyguards.

Prime witnesses killed.

Perjured testimony that doesn’t fit the evidence.

.

.

Sometimes Mae’s theories seem like they’ve been pulled from the pages of a James Bond—or perhaps
an E.

Howard Hunt—spy thriller.

“I found it interesting that the Cuban Watergate burglars—who were
later given a $200,000 payoff by the CIA—were looking for the air-conditioning plans for the hotels in
Miami, when later it was discovered that Legionnaire’s Disease may have come through the air-
conditioning ducts.

There is the capability to use germs to neutralize people.

The CIA has the germs.

Legionnaire’s Disease has the exact symptoms of a disease they were experimenting with at Fort Detrick,
Maryland.

When you hear of weapons control, you think of guns, tanks, planes, but you don’t hear that
they’re selling germs, or that Nixon ordered Richard Helms to destroy the germs at Fort Detrick and
Helms didn’t.

Nixon was put out as a bad man, isolated and ridiculed, but Helms went on to become
ambassador to Iran and is immune to perjury charges.”
And now the Bionic Researcher is rolling her big wax ball of conspiracy at full speed.

“Jimmy Carter and the Pentagon can talk about disarmament, but the real tragedy is the chemical
weapons used for mind control.

Some people are programmed and have lost their minds.“Jimmy Carter and the Pentagon can talk about disarmament, but the real tragedy is the chemical
weapons used for mind control.

Some people are programmed and have lost their minds.

What we call the
motiveless crime or senseless killings are actually people being trained as zombies.”
She zips out the Congressional Record from February 24, 1972, and reads the testimony of Dr.

Jose
Delgado from Yale University, who was arguing against the proposed discontinuation of research into
psychosurgery:
We need a program of psychosurgery for political control of our society.

The purpose is physical control of the mind.

Everyone
who deviates from the given norm can be surgically mutilated.

The individual may think that the most important reality is his own
existence, but this is only his personal view.

This lacks historical perspective.

Man does not have the right to develop his own
mind.

This kind of liberal orientation has great appeal.

We must electrically control the brain.

Someday armies and generals will
be controlled by electric stimulation of the brain.

“So these are not just feelings I have,” says Mae.

“That speech was greeted by Congress with
thundering silence—and money—government-funded programs paid for with our tax dollars.

We are
witnessing pockets of violence, because they are now able to electronically, surgically and hypnotically
kill citizens.

The army alone spent $26 million in projects to alter human behavior, and they not only did it
with electrode implants but with LSD plus electrodes.

They alter minds so that people act without
knowing why.

They can make someone murder a whole family and then kill himself.”
And that is where the prison system comes in.

It is like a farm team to develop “talent” for the outside
world.

“You can’t just take anybody off the street and make him decide to walk up and shoot people,”
Mae insists.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is like a farm team to develop “talent” for the outside
world. “You can’t just take anybody off the street and make him decide to walk up and shoot people,”
Mae insists. “But take people who have had no love or affection, who are in prison, who in adolescence
broke a school window and the court put them away. You lock them up—heterosexuals with homosexuals
—you break their spirit, dehumanize them, take away chances for education, increase their feelings of
inferiority. If you have hostility combined with this lack of opportunities, you begin nurturing a situation
where children or young adults like Charles Manson or Gary Gilmore—people with high intelligence but
a lot of misery—sit smoking and watching TV, covering up their anger, and become very ripe for
indoctrination. These are the people that they select for electronic or hypnotic control. Hitler was gassed
and told his mother had cancer, that a Jewish doctor let her die. . . so he transferred his various hatreds.”
“The case of Donald DeFreeze is identical to Adolf Hitler’s. Colton Westbrook, a mind-control expert

--- PAGE BREAK ---who worked with [CIA Director William] Colby in Southeast Asia, helped DeFreeze with the Black
Culture Association at the Vacaville prison in California.

DeFreeze was told he would be a new black
leader to replace Malcolm X and Martin Luther King.

Later, he was shot and burned to death with all-
white associates, no blacks, in the company of agents from the Defense Department—no different from
Hitler or Lee Harvey Oswald.”
If, indeed, we each create our deities as extensions of our own personalities, then the first thing that
Mae Brussell’s version of God would have done was to make a list.

She can spew out a ticker tape with
names of dead witnesses—literally hundreds of deaths she finds not exactly above suspicion.

Labor leaders: Walter Reuther, Joseph Yablonski, Saul Alinsky, Jimmy Hoffa, Sam Bramlet—“And
there was a contract to kill Cesar Chavez, from the Treasury Department no less—the Alcohol, Tobacco
and Firearms agency.

Meanwhile, Argentine, Chilean and Brazilian police squads are killing off labor
people.”
Mafia leaders: Sam Giancana, Jimmy Hoffa, John Roselli—“It was just a fluke that he bounced up; his
legs were cut off and his torso put in an oil drum.

Carlo Gambino—given a shot of swine flu inoculation
when he had a heart disease.

Sheffield Edwards was killed and William Harvey was killed—the CIA
contacts with the Mafia people—and the CIA agent Guy Bannister was killed.

He worked with Robert
Maheu and with Lee Harvey Oswald, and he flew out a window.

The same people who were behind it are
alive today, and they’re sweeping away the bodies.

It’s at the highest levels that these conspiracies are
planned, not just with a few Cuban exiles.”
Musicians: Otis Redding, Janis Joplin, Jimi Hendrix, Brian Jones, Jim Morrison, Mama Cass Elliott,
Jim Croce, Tim Buckley—“And almost thirty other fine musicians have died under mysterious
circumstances.The same people who were behind it are
alive today, and they’re sweeping away the bodies.

It’s at the highest levels that these conspiracies are
planned, not just with a few Cuban exiles.”
Musicians: Otis Redding, Janis Joplin, Jimi Hendrix, Brian Jones, Jim Morrison, Mama Cass Elliott,
Jim Croce, Tim Buckley—“And almost thirty other fine musicians have died under mysterious
circumstances.

Rock musicians had an ability to draw together youth at a time when protest meetings were
being broken apart, and the hippie, antiwar youth became too visible with their own, unique art form at
Woodstock.

The Senate investigation documented that persons seeking ‘racial harmony’ and ‘social
protest’ were defined as enemies of the state.

Only people like Sonny and Cher, the Osmonds, John
Denver and the Captain and Tennille make it as role models.

They either have to tame you or kill you.”
And then there’s Freddy Prinze.

“He was an active Democrat, entertained by the President at the White
House, a symbol for the Chicano.

He had a deep concern about who killed Kennedy.

He had a copy of the
Abraham Zapruder film, and he kept playing it over and over.

Time magazine says he had an intrigue about
death because he kept watching Kennedy die.

Well, you could say he was worried about how Kennedy
was killed.

“I know researchers who’ve played that film over two hundred times.

It’s not because they are
preoccupied with death, but because it’s perfectly obvious that the government is lying, that Kennedy’s
head is going back.

And here’s a guy, Freddy Prinze, who every time somebody comes over, he shows the
film to them and talks about it.

He tells a psychiatrist he’s suicidal, who takes his gun, and then when he
leaves, he hands it back to him.

Then Freddy goes to Vegas and picks up a hundred Quaaludes from
another doctor.

The removal of Freddy Prinze means one less visual person from that stratum of society.

They lose a symbol for the Puerto Rican kids sitting on the steps in New York.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The removal of Freddy Prinze means one less visual person from that stratum of society. They lose a symbol for the Puerto Rican kids sitting on the steps in New York. There are no positive
visual images of Chicanos on the screen. No encouragement for the young ones, because this one’s heavily
doped and has blown his brains out.”
In lieu of the frightening conclusions she’s made, does she have any basis for optimism? “No, I’m not optimistic now—not when government agents work with germ warfare and genocide, and
those who put Hitler into power are still at it. Instead of having low-cost housing, there are SWAT teams
for food riots when there’s no shortage of food. “I see pockets of fascism. You can still read about a Jewish butcher in Miami having his window
broken every night, and in San José a bookstore broken into like in Nazi Germany, and Mein Kampf
coming out all over Latin America. Those Nazis were brought there and now they’re surfacing. The

--- PAGE BREAK ---Rockefellers’ attorney, Allen Dulles, consulted with Reinhard Gehlen, the Nazi intelligence chief, to form
our own CIA.

George Ball writes about getting rid of people by the millions.

Patrick Buchanan writes an
article justifying the use of torture.

Zbigniew Brzezinski, head of our National Security Council, writes
that ‘with the use of computers, human behavior itself will become more determined and subject to
deliberate programming,’ and that ‘it will soon be possible to assert almost continuous surveillance over
every citizen.’
“I believe that the Nazis and the Minutemen and the Christian movement are going to get very strong,
and at the same time there’s going to be a massive depression.

I see large masses of people around the
world being deliberately starved every day.

I see terrible things happening to reduce the population of this
earth, so that those who control the corporations don’t have to provide for the needs of the poor.”
At KLRB one Monday, somebody called and asked Mae the question that she is asked most often:
“How come you’re still alive?”
“Well, I’m not,” she chuckled.

“I’m a robot.”
But it is a question that Mae Brussell has obviously considered.

If she knows so much, why haven’t
they killed her?

“The way they handle you is to ignore or discredit.

But if I were at Madison Square Garden and had
that big an audience, then I wouldn’t be alive.

I don’t want to meet large masses of people.

My role is
mostly to educate people and let them figure it out for themselves.

Tell them books to read and sources of
information.

The main contribution that I’ve tried to make with my research is to study things individually
and then find the connecting links.

I’m not a movement or organization, because if I had five people, one
would probably be an agent.

The ratio is four to one.”
She pauses to count her stitches.

Mae is knitting sweaters for each of her children.

“That’s why the CIA works on a basis of need-to-know.Mae is knitting sweaters for each of her children.

“That’s why the CIA works on a basis of need-to-know.

Because if you know too much, you may not do
what you’re supposed to do.

If you know that the end result is that somebody’s going to be blown up
twelve miles away—and all you’re supposed to do is deliver an envelope—you may think about it.

One
man who called me had killed ten people—a number of the murders were chemically induced ‘apparent
heart attacks’—for the CIA.

But when he was ordered to kill a Congresswoman, he refused.

Another CIA
agent then tried to kill him by cutting his jugular vein, but he had it sewn up and survived.

Now he’s
vowed vengeance against them.

He told me that agents listen to my show, Dialogue: Conspiracy, and I
asked, ‘What do they think about it?’ He said they think it’s right on, that they can understand.

That it’s
also a safety valve for them, something that lets them know just how far things are going.”
And so we are left with the bizarre possibility that the intelligence community allows the Bionic
Researcher to function precisely because she knows more than any of them do.

Despite her obsession, Mae Brussell claims she has not had to sacrifice her family because of her
work.

“It’s not my whole life,” she says.

“It’s important to find out who killed Kennedy, but not at the
expense of your own humanness.

I don’t lose anything if they never find out who killed him.

I still have my
self-respect.

And I like having children and preparing meals and mastering everything having to do with
the home.

In fact, my initial concern over who killed John Kennedy was basically a selfish one.

I wanted
to find out if there had been a coup, if the United States was going fascist.

Would I be like Anne Frank’s
father, who told his family that things were OK and that people were basically good—while they were
living their last days?

They never fought Nazism, but just watched it all go by and hid in the attic until
their time came around to be taken away.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Would I be like Anne Frank’s
father, who told his family that things were OK and that people were basically good—while they were
living their last days? They never fought Nazism, but just watched it all go by and hid in the attic until
their time came around to be taken away. With a family of five children, my husband and myself, I had an
obligation to understand the world outside my home. “When Hitler failed, his officers were brought to the US, from inside Rockefeller Center, and to the
Bahamas and Southern states to build that dream of the Fourth Reich. It is in this context that the
Kennedys, Malcolm X, Martin Luther King, labor leaders, judges, entertainers, reporters, authors,
students, Black Panthers, Indians, Chicanos and hippies are being slain, and why the masses are being

--- PAGE BREAK ---, Martin Luther King, labor leaders, judges, entertainers, reporters, authors,
students, Black Panthers, Indians, Chicanos and hippies are being slain, and why the masses are being

--- PAGE BREAK ---

doped into control.”
In December 1970, Mae’s daughter, Bonnie, was killed at the age of 15 in a suspicious auto accident.
The driver of the other car—a soldier in the US Army at Fort Ord—went AWOL two weeks after the
crash, returned to his home and was not sought by authorities. Barbara Brussell, another daughter, was
also in that accident. Her legs were severely injured; she also suffered from a broken back, face injuries
and a broken nose and arm, but now dances with graceful agility. She took a course called “American
Assassinations” that Mae taught at Monterey Peninsula College. “Mom combines being a researcher and a
mother,” Barbara says. “They have to overlap at times. Mom tends to doubt almost everything; that’s her
first instinct—especially as events are described in the news—instead of taking any chances of agreeing
first, then having to go back later. It’s a way of perceiving things that adds a little negativity to events—
worrying or being suspicious if a person is an agent or not. But it’s her world.”
Her mother is casually devouring the obituary page for clues. A neighborhood pharmacist has died at
the age of 81 of “natural causes.” The clipping triggers no conspiratorial connections in Mae’s computer.
“Here,” the Bionic Researcher laughs, “I’ll give you this one …”

--- PAGE BREAK ---s died at
the age of 81 of “natural causes.” The clipping triggers no conspiratorial connections in Mae’s computer.
“Here,” the Bionic Researcher laughs, “I’ll give you this one …”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER ONE
DEFENSE INDUSTRY AND NAZIS LINKED TO JFK
ASSASSIN –
PROFILE OF MAE BRUSSELL, SAN FRANCISCO CHRONICLE, JANUARY 7, 1981
“I don’t want to convince anyone who doesn’t believe me.
They do their thing and I do mine.”
— Mae Brussell
Her thing is a tireless search for names and dates—facts that provide the scaffolding supporting her
speculation about how they are all related in some strange but inevitable way—the deaths of the
Kennedys, Lee Harvey Oswald, Jack Ruby, Martin Luther King, Jimmy Hoffa, Martha Mitchell, Dag
Hammarskjold, Fay Stender, George Moscone—even singers: Elvis Presley, Jim Morrison, Mama Cass,
Jimi Hendrix, John Lennon.
What do these strange cases have to do with the Mafia, the CIA, Alger Hiss, Gary Powers, J. Edgar
Hoover, Howard Hughes, Sirhan Sirhan, Charles Manson, George Wallace, Larry Flynt, Patty Hearst, Jim
Jones, Nelson Rockefeller, Dan White, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, David Berkowitz -- Mark David
Chapman?
Murder, blackmail, coups d’état, break-ins, payoffs, cover-ups, media manipulation, mind control,
psychic surgery, drugging, hypnosis, gene splicing, eugenics - activities whose ultimate aim is . . . what?
Brussell has spent 20 years finding connections, meditating on implications, sounding the tocsin.
Her analyses have been heard weekly on radio station KLRB-FM in Carmel for nine years, appear on a
spot basis with the big San Francisco AM stations, go out in cassette form with supporting documentation
to members of World Watchers International, a nation-wide organization she founded.
Her home in the hills above Carmel Valley is awash in thousands of books and documents. Among them
is the 26-volume Warren Commission hearings and her 27,000 pages of textual analysis. “I studied it for
eight years. It was like the Rosetta Stone. It unlocked every other conspiracy,” Brussell says.
“Martin Luther King, Malcolm X, the Kennedys—there is always a pattern where a piece of
information is destroyed, in which a witness is killed. It’s so predictable, you can go back and look up old
cases.”
The daughter of Rabbi Edgar Magnin of Los Angeles, Brussell was a Beverly Hills matron and mother
of four who was married to a wealthy clothier when JFK was slain in 1963.
“I started saving every newspaper article about it. I wasn’t a researcher. I was just curious. How could
someone rule the United States for a thousand days and then be lopped off so nonchalantly?”
Years passed, marriage ended, the questioning habit of mind made greater demands. Brussell took odd
jobs to support her research.
Her work became a source upon which other conspiracy buffs drew. Brussell came to know so much
that increasingly it was impossible to provide brief answers to questions: dense yards of paragraphsrch.
Her work became a source upon which other conspiracy buffs drew. Brussell came to know so much
that increasingly it was impossible to provide brief answers to questions: dense yards of paragraphs

--- PAGE BREAK ---

about background had first to be understood. Her high-speed conversation swiftly sketches connection
between crime and politics, mob and government agency. If the listener allows his mind to stray during
these monologs, the linkage is lost.
“I began to realize,” she says at one point, “that everyone around Lee Harvey Oswald was a Nazi or in
the defense industry.”
She has a copy of an FBI memorandum dated Sept. 18, 1967, describing her contacts with former New
Orleans District Attorney James Garrison: “She pictures America as controlled by conspirators in the
government, which view she has stated publicly,” the memo says.
She ruminates about the secret power of giant corporations, the possibility of clandestine meetings
where powerful men plot the future, the real reason that a ringer is buried in Howard Hughes’ grave.
“I’m just one person and I’m doing all I can,” she says.

--- PAGE BREAK ---CHAPTER TWO
FASCISM IN AMERICA
MAE BRUSSELL INTERVIEW (1971)
(DIALOG: ASSASSINATION, KLRB-FM IN CARMEL CALIFORNIA; GLORIA BARON, HOST; NOVEMBER 28, 1971)
GB: Eight years ago today you started your research on the assassination of John Kennedy, right?

MB: That’s right, it’s been eight years, Gloria.

A lot of things come to mind.

You know, I read the paper
yesterday about the celebrations and various religious services and dedication services commemorating
John Kennedy.

And I got up and I looked at my study, my library, around the walls and the books and
closets and the documents and it was a time of contemplation—what is this all about?

…
There is an article in Ramparts that I helped write on the John Kennedy murder.

It was done, oh, many
years ago, around 1966.

And there was an insert by Penn Jones on the deaths of people involved with the
assassination, or close to the assassination scene.

David Welsh came over to my house.

I helped him write
the article and kept my name out of it.

He listed the other “buffs,” but at that time I wanted privacy.

At
least for a few years, and did not want to be in the public eye because I was very curious about Lee
Harvey Oswald, the person—and all the other researchers working on the assassination were concerned
with ballistics, the bullet trajectory, the autopsy, the shooting of Officer Tippit.

My interest was in Lee Harvey Oswald and Jack Ruby—who they knew, where they met and their
contacts.

Were they set up to be killed, to act as decoys?

I spent many years charting their course, and
documenting the banks they visited, the associations they had in common.

Jack Ruby did not know
Oswald, but there were the links, common people who worked together, and I want to show, as I
mentioned, some of those links.

…
I have put aside many, many things for eight years, because you have to speak with steel.

You have to
answer steel with steel.

And you have to refuse imitations of the real thing.--- PAGE BREAK ---

You have to
answer steel with steel. And you have to refuse imitations of the real thing. Everybody is taking an
imitation of the real thing, and they are giving it all kinds of names, “credibility gap,” or “national
security” or “top secret.” And I could bring to you, the listeners, over the air, all the articles I showed to
Gloria this morning when I came in here. The news this week of actual repression of laws, of harm that
has happened since the assassination. Because people accept the phony for the real. That wasn’t a real
election in 1964. It was not a real election in 1968, any more than the election of Thieu was an election in
Vietnam. If you accept that, you accept the paper this morning, what Muskie was saying, or what Hubert
Humphrey was saying. They’re just puppets. They’re puppets of a system that is propped up. Or if you
think McCloskey is a liberal, you don’t read his voting record. How he really votes on every issue,
because you like these pat, comfortable answers. This has been one of the big problems. Jules Feiffer had a cartoon in Sunday’s paper, where two
gentlemen are talking to each other. And one man is standing with his hands behind his back, with ropes. And he says, “My hands are tied, right?”

--- PAGE BREAK ---And he says, “My feet are shackled, right?

And my eyes are blindfolded, right?

And my movements
are…” and he starts to mumble.

And the other man looks at him, and says, “When do you break free?”
And the man who is tied and shackled says, “What do you mean, break free?

I like it.” And that’s about
where people are today in the community and the nation at large.

They don’t mind the position they are in,
and it’s difficult to shake them to the fact of what happened in Dallas in 1963.

And I will read part, as much as time allows in the second half, of the new issue of Computer and
Automation, the November 1971 issue.

And the statement above the article is on the assassination of
President Kennedy.

It’s the pattern of coup d’état and public deception.

And it begins with this quotation
of author Edmund Berkeley.

We must begin to recognize history as it is happening to us.

We can no longer toy with illusion.

Our war adventures in Asia are
not related to national security in any rational sense.

A coup d’état took place in the United States on November 22, 1963, when
President John F.

Kennedy was assassinated.

That came eight years after I began my research.

People talk about never having fascism in this country
or never being overthrown – they have already been overthrown, and they’re not aware of it.

I was invited to the high school this week to speak to one of the classes, a group of seniors, on
revolutionary change.

I went to the class, and we had a one hour discussion, which barely gets into the
subject of how the government was overthrown.

And how to get it back again.

You have to have a
revolution to get it back, intellectual or spiritual, a practical or a bloody revolution to get the country, the
economy and the duty of this nation back in some national course of sanity.

And then I was sure the teacher was somewhat in a state of shock, you know, his mouth was open.You have to have a
revolution to get it back, intellectual or spiritual, a practical or a bloody revolution to get the country, the
economy and the duty of this nation back in some national course of sanity.

And then I was sure the teacher was somewhat in a state of shock, you know, his mouth was open.

He
just couldn’t believe what I was saying, and he was teaching these young people revolutionary change.

I
said the reason students are dropping out of high school, or finding what they are learning in the
classroom not meaningful, is that teachers can’t tell them what has happened to them.

Therefore, they can’t
instruct them on how to survive or explain the news of the day.

The teachers themselves will not face the
fact that the country was overthrown.

So how can they teach a class on American History that is
meaningful?

GB: And the whole basis of this country is freedom.

How could they explain to the kids that there
was a coup d’état ?

MB: That’s right, the whole basis is free speech, free choice of candidates and places to meet and
congregate and express your opinions.

But you’re photographed at every meeting that you attend.

There
are recordings of your voice, you’re put into a data system, the threat of losing a job or getting a security
clearance hangs over you – your economic independence—you are intimidated down the line, and you
feel it.

And then what do you do with that kind of intimidation?

You see, the system was set up after the political assassination of John F.

Kennedy to bring in more
repression.

And then in 1968, after the assassination of Robert Kennedy, national security and wire-
tapping and surveillance increased even more.

To effect a change you have to speak about a revolution
now, and that’s a long way off, because people don’t yet know that they’ve been had.

They will disagree
with everything I say, but they haven’t examined the documents.

And that’s a very pathetic situation to be
in.

Now, a few words on the past eight years that affected me.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And that’s a very pathetic situation to be
in. Now, a few words on the past eight years that affected me. The first thing that I had to learn was not to
be bitter, I had to … be tolerant that other people had not yet caught up with what I was seeing. Even
though they didn’t gather the data, they would say, “I don’t have the time that you have. I don’t have the
leisure.” They still don’t want to know what I did with that leisure. I have backed up everything with
documents, even from the words of the Commission themselves, or the chief of police in Dallas. But they

--- PAGE BREAK ---don’t want that.

They still want to go back to another world.

I have to be very tolerant of people because I
can see events and not be afraid to look at them as they are, like the diagnosis of a disease.

Others are
going to have to wait many years to find out what happened—to them—and I have to not be bitter with
them.

That doesn’t mean I have to accept them or respect their opinions, but I have to not be bitter with
them….

Another lesson I learned was really a disappointment – that the intellectual class, the liberals, do not
care to know at all.

And this turns you off to formal education.

It teaches you how Nazi Germany came
about.

The educated class does not care to know, either.

There is no groundswell of history professors
running to my house yet, and I’ve been on the air for twenty weeks.

There’s no intellectual curiosity
among members of the Democratic party, or the Republican party, or the lawyers in the community, or
Fulton Freeman, who worked with John Kennedy, who is the head of the Monterey Institute—these
“intellectual” places of learning are headed by people who do not want you to usurp their position by
saying that they have some responsibility for making the world any different than they just want to do it.

They want their positions, and they will turn off this station, or they will hang on to one thing you say, and
say, “that’s not true, therefore nothing else [you say] is true.”
So there are liberals here that have campaign lunches for people, [they] may as well be Gepetto
carrying Pinocchio on a string.

I also learned how uninformed people are.

Because everyone plays the authority: You go out to dinner
parties Friday, Saturday and Sunday night, and people pass off their knowledge as if they really read a
paper.

And once you study any particular subject really well, as I’ve done with political assassination for
eight years, you begin to gauge their awareness about political events … because they’ll throw out things
that are totally untrue.Because everyone plays the authority: You go out to dinner
parties Friday, Saturday and Sunday night, and people pass off their knowledge as if they really read a
paper.

And once you study any particular subject really well, as I’ve done with political assassination for
eight years, you begin to gauge their awareness about political events … because they’ll throw out things
that are totally untrue.

And if they do it on that subject, they’ll do it on many, many other things….

I don’t know how they get
their opinions, but I sit there and read the paper and cut out articles and I’m willing to have a dialogue
about it, and I find that most people are totally uninformed.

They don’t read – or they’ll read the top of an
article and never get to the bottom.

And the bottom is the most interesting of all.

In fact, apropos the John Kennedy anniversary of his death, there was an article in the San Francisco
Chronicle this Sunday about the Texas Book Depository Building.

This is the beginning of the article:
“Eight years ago tomorrow, a sick, young, self-styled Marxist named Lee Harvey Oswald sneaked up to
the sixth floor of a drab, red brick building in Dallas.

There he waited until 11:30 a.m., when he fired
three rifle shots that rang around the world and took the life of President John F.

Kennedy.

In the years
since that awful moment, there have been countless controversies about the assassination.

Most of them
have by now faded away.

That is, all except one.”
They’re hoping the discrepancies have faded away….

They go on to tell you about the Texas Book
Depository.

This was the building that Oswald worked in for six weeks before the motorcade went in
front of it.

It stands at the corner there where the car passed around the curb into the underpass.

After the
assassination, the building was closed off.

The top floor was closed off where Oswald was supposed to
have been, and nobody can use that floor.--- PAGE BREAK ---

After the
assassination, the building was closed off. The top floor was closed off where Oswald was supposed to
have been, and nobody can use that floor. At the time that the researchers wanted to reconstruct the crime,
and the trajectory of the bullet, they couldn’t use that floor. And when NBC News made a 4 hour
television series on reconstructing this murder in order to put down Jim Garrison’s case, they went to the
fifth floor to duplicate the shot that Oswald took, but the trajectory from the sixth floor is higher up and
more straight down, which would change the course of the bullet, because it [supposedly] entered his
back five inches below the neck and exited uphill through the Adam’s apple, which is against the law of
physics. The Book Depository was open for business until about a year ago in April 1970, when a man from
Nashville, Tennessee by the name of Audrey Mayhew bought the building. He is known as a Kennedy
buff. He researches the murder of John Kennedy. Mayhew paid $650,000 for the building, and the city of

--- PAGE BREAK ---Dallas was glad to have [it] sold.

And they thought this would end the controversy, that he would tear it
down or do something with it.

It turns out that Audrey Mayhew has a different intention for the building.

What he wants to do is put a collection of 20,000 items pertaining to the assassination that he has
collected into this building, and the Dallas people are very concerned that it would become a tourist trap.

They have one memorial to John Kennedy, and they don’t want it rubbed in that people are putting another
memorial to him.

Right at the corner where he was shot.

Across from the book depository is a tourist trap that shows movies of the assassination, and a shrilling
voice that says, “My God, they’re going to kill us all.” I’ve been in that place across the street, and it’s not
really a living memorial to John Kennedy.

They sell bumper stickers that say, “America – Love it or
Leave it,” and all-American flags, ashtrays with pictures of Jacqueline, and it’s hardly a fitting
description of a memorial.

It is a real tourist trap, right across the street from the Book Depository.

But
what Mr.

Mayhew wants to do is use this building to house microfilms and books and newspapers about
the assassination and provide facilities for what he calls “a continuing study of what happened here that
day.”
In other words, Audrey Mayhew does not think the case is closed.

Now that is not pleasing the Dallas
people, because they want to forget anything happened at that corner in spite of the fact that three to four
thousand people pass every single day and take pictures of the corner.

One man wanted to buy Mr.

Mayhew out, so he offered him one million dollars for the bricks of the
building, the bricks alone, and he’s turned that down.

A wax museum offered one million dollars.

You
know, money is no problem—you can buy Mr.

Mayhew out if he can be had, because you want to tear
down this living symbol of John Kennedy.--- PAGE BREAK ---

You
know, money is no problem—you can buy Mr. Mayhew out if he can be had, because you want to tear
down this living symbol of John Kennedy. And the Tragedy Museum offered him $100,000 just for the
casings from the sixth floor window Oswald was supposed to have poked his rifle out. But Mr. Mayhew
said, “I want a continuing study of what happened here that day.”
The people in Dallas are simply furious, and Senator Mike McCool wants funds to be brought up to the
state legislature to buy the building back. He is having a fit. He says it has tremendous historical value
and should belong to the people of Texas. And they want to tear down this building! It should be torn
down. The state legislature in Texas is coming up with millions of dollars, trying to get a law to tear the
building down. Mr. Mayhew has said, “over my dead body” would he let them do it. “I will fight it with everything I
have, and I’ll fight it to the Supreme Court.” Well, when he gets to the Supreme Court he’s going to have
to fight Mr. Powell and Mr. Rhenquist. So that’s another subject—Mr. Powell is supported by Leon Jaworski, we’ve mentioned this before,
who represented the State of Texas for the Warren Commission, head of the American Bar Association. Mr. Powell is heavily associated with people who would defend the Warren Report, so try and take this
case to the Supreme Court. GB: You’re listening to Dialogue Assassination with Mae Brussell. …

--- PAGE BREAK ---avily associated with people who would defend the Warren Report, so try and take this
case to the Supreme Court. GB: You’re listening to Dialogue Assassination with Mae Brussell. …

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER THREE
THE NAZI CONNECTION TO THE JOHN F.
KENNEDY ASSASSINATION
EVIDENCE OF LINK BETWEEN NAZIS IN OPERATION AFTER WORLD WAR II TO THE STILL UNSOLVED MURDER
OF JOHN F. KENNEDY
(FROM THE REBEL, JANUARY 1984)
1940-1945: The Nazi Connection to Dallas – General Reinhard Gehlen
The sparrow-faced man in the American general’s uniform clambered down the steps of the U.S. Army
transport plane upon its arrival at Washington National Airport. It was August 24, 1945, two weeks after
the surrender of Japan, three months after the German capitulation. The general was hustled into a van
with no windows and whisked to Fort Hunt outside the capital. There he was attended by white-jacketed
orderlies, and the next morning fitted with a dark grey business suit from one of Washington’s swankiest
men’s stores.
General Reinhard Gehlen was ready to cut a deal.
Gehlen was, until the recent capitulation, Adolf Hitler’s chief intelligence officer against the Soviet
Union. His American captors decked him out in one of their uniforms to deceive the Russians, who were
hunting him for war crimes. Now U.S. intelligence was going to deploy Gehlen and his network of spies
against the Russians. The Cold War was on.
This is a story of how key Nazis, with the Wehrmacht still on the offensive, anticipated military disaster
and laid plans to transplant Nazism, intact but disguised, in havens in the West. It is the story of how
honorable men, and some not so honorable, were so blinded by the Red menace that they fell into lockstep
with Nazi designs. It is the story of the Odd Couple Plus One: The mob, the CIA and fanatical exiles, each
with its own reason for gunning for Kennedy. It is a story that climaxes in Dallas on November 22, 1963,
when John Kennedy was struck down. And it is a story of the assassination’s aftermath—America’s slide
to the brink of fascism. As William L. Shirer, author of The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich, said,
speaking of the Nixon administration’s excesses: “We could become the first country to go fascist through
free elections.”
Even Robert Ludlum would have been hard put to invent a more improbable espionage yarn. Reinhard
Gehlen was an “asset” of staggering potential in the eyes of the CIA. He was a professional spymaster,
violently anti-Communist, and best of all the controller of a vast underground network still in place within
Russian frontiers, his checkered past notwithstanding. “He’s on our side and that’s all that matters,”
chuckled Allen Dulles, then a U.S. intelligence officer, later director the CIA. “Besides, one need not ask
a Gehlen to one’s club.”
Gehlen manipulated his American “hosts” with the cool hand of a Las Vegas gambler. During the war,
he had looked to the future and the German collapse. He lugged all his files to the Bavarian Alps and
cached them at a site called, appropriately, Misery Meadows. Then he buried his Wehrmacht uniform withad looked to the future and the German collapse. He lugged all his files to the Bavarian Alps and
cached them at a site called, appropriately, Misery Meadows. Then he buried his Wehrmacht uniform with

--- PAGE BREAK ---the embroidered eagle and swastika, donned an Alpine coat, and turned himself in to the nearest U.S.

Army detachment.

When the advancing Russians searched his headquarters at Zossen, all they found were
empty file cabinets and litter.

The deal Gehlen struck with the Americans was not, for obvious reasons, trumpeted in the Washington
Post.

Heinz Hohne and Hermann Zolling wrote in The General Was A Spy that Gehlen took his entire
apparatus, “unpurged and without interruption into the service of the American superpower.” There is no
evidence that he renounced the Third Reich’s postwar plan, advanced by his own family’s publishing
house, to colonize vast regions of Eastern Russia, create a huge famine for 40 million, and treat the
remaining 50 million “racially inferior Slavs as slaves.”
Allen Dulles may not have invited such a man to his club, but he did the next best thing—he funneled an
aggregate of $200 million in CIA funds to the Gehlen Organization, as it became known.

Directing
operations from a fortress-like nerve center in Bavaria, Gehlen reactivated his network inside Russia.

Soon, news of the MiG-15, the first Russian jet fighter, was channeled back to the West.

In 1949, the
general scored an espionage coup when he turned up Soviet plans for the remilitarization of East
Germany.

When Dulles spoke, Gehlen listened.

The CIA chief was convinced, with his brother, Secretary of State
John Foster Dulles, that the “captive nations” of the Soviet bloc would rise up if given sufficient
encouragement.

At his behest, Gehlen recruited and trained an exile mercenary force ready to rush in
without involving American units.

Also at Dulles’ direction, Gehlen tapped the ranks of wartime Russian
collaborators for a cadre of spies to be parachuted into the Soviet Union.

Some of these spies were
schooled at the CIA’s clandestine base in Atsugi, Japan, where, in 1957, a young Marine named Lee
Harvey Oswald was posted to the U-2 spy plane operation there.Also at Dulles’ direction, Gehlen tapped the ranks of wartime Russian
collaborators for a cadre of spies to be parachuted into the Soviet Union.

Some of these spies were
schooled at the CIA’s clandestine base in Atsugi, Japan, where, in 1957, a young Marine named Lee
Harvey Oswald was posted to the U-2 spy plane operation there.

Atsugi was only one station on Oswald’s Far East intelligence route.

He was also assigned the U-2
base at Subic Bay in the Philippines, and for a short while at Ping-Tung, Taiwan.

In 1959, he was
transferred to a Marine base in Santa Ana, California for radar surveillance instruction.

His training
officer graduated from the Georgetown School of Foreign Service, with its close Agency ties.

In May,
1960, when President Eisenhower planned a summit meeting with Soviet Premier Khrushchev, a U-2 was
shot down over Russia and its pilot captured.

Francis Gary Powers, the pilot, blamed the shoot down on
Lee Harvey Oswald.

The U-2 affair effectively sabotaged Ike’s summit meeting.

By pre-arrangement, the Gehlen Organization was transferred in 1955 to the West German Government,
its first intelligence arm, the BND.

The BND was a Siamese twin of the CIA’s global operation.

In 1953,
they had collaborated well together in Iran, where the country’s first democratic government was in
power.

But two years earlier, Premier Mossadegh had rashly nationalized the oil industry.

Dulles, with
Gehlen’s help, engineered the coup that toppled Mossadegh and reestablished the Pahlevi family regime.

The Pahlevi’s patriarch, General Reza, had been banished from the country for his pro-Nazi subterfuges
during the war.

Now his son, Mohammed Reza Pahlevi, ascended the Peacock Throne.

The Shah of Iran
was one of the CIA’s most faithful assets.

Gehlen pioneered the use of dummy fronts to support his far-flung covert operations.

One such was the
formation of Eastern European émigré groups in the U.S.

to deploy against the Soviets.--- PAGE BREAK ---

One such was the
formation of Eastern European émigré groups in the U.S. to deploy against the Soviets. Both the Tolstoy
Foundation and the Union of Bishops of the Orthodox Church Outside Russia were funded by the CIA. When Lee and Marina Oswald disembarked from the Soviet Union in June, 1962, they were befriended by
some three dozen White Russians in the Dallas-Ft. Worth area. Many had identifiable Nazi ties; others
were in the oil and defense industries. It was an improbable social set for a defector to the U.S.S.R. and
his wife from Minsk. By the time the Gehlen Organization was grafted to the West German state, Gehlen already had his
agent-in-place in the United States. He was Otto Albrecht von Bolschwing, a captain in Heinrich

--- PAGE BREAK ---Himmler’s dreaded SS and Adolf Eichmann’s superior in Europe and Palestine.

Von Bolschwing worked
simultaneously for Dulles’ OSS.

When he entered the U.S.

in February, 1954, he concealed his Nazi past.

He took over the Gehlen network, not only in this country but in many corners of the globe.

He became
closely associated with the late Elmer Bobst of Warner-Lambert Pharmaceutical, a godfather of Richard
Nixon’s political career.

This brought him inside Nixon’s 1960 campaign for the presidency.

In 1969, he
surfaced up in California with a high-tech firm, the Trans International Computer Investment Corporation
(TCI), with classified Defense Department contracts.

His translator for German projects was Helene von
Damm, Governor Ronald Reagan’s appointments secretary.

Von Damme moved on to an appointment as
U.S.

Ambassador to Austria under Reagan.

In 1968, Reinhard Gehlen withdrew to his chalet in Bavaria.

The chalet had been a gift from Allen
Dulles.

Wild Bill Donovan of the OSS, Allen Dulles and the Vatican
Allen Dulles code-named it Operation Sunrise.

He mounted it from his walk-up office in Bern,
Switzerland, where he’d maintained contact with key Nazis since 1942.

Operation Sunrise was conceived
when these Nazis decided, in the face of defeat, that they preferred surrender to the Americans and
British.

The agreement, which double-crossed the Russians, was signed April 29, 1945.

The principle negotiator on the German side was SS Commander Karl Wolff, head of the Gestapo in
Italy.

Wolff, former chief of Heinrich Himmler’s personal staff, acted with full authority.

His relationship
with Dulles spared him from the dock at Nuremberg, but when it was later discovered that he had
dispatched “at least” 300,000 Jews to the Treblinka death camp, he was handed a token sentence.

In 1983,
Wolff made the social pages when he and some of his old SS buddies sojourned on the late Hermann
Goering’s yacht, Carin II of Hamburg.

The skipper was Gerd Heidemann, an avowed Hamburg Nazi.In 1983,
Wolff made the social pages when he and some of his old SS buddies sojourned on the late Hermann
Goering’s yacht, Carin II of Hamburg.

The skipper was Gerd Heidemann, an avowed Hamburg Nazi.

The
yacht belonged to the widow Emmy Goering, whose estate attorney was the celebrated Melvin Belli.

Belli has always had an eclectic clientele.

He represented Jack Ruby after he shot Oswald.

And he
represented actor Errol Flynn’s family interests.

Flynn, once a close friend of Ronald Reagan, was a
Gestapo collaborator.

When Wolff hammered out secret surrender terms with Dulles, he had in the back of his mind a safe
diaspora for his Nazi compatriots.

This is where the OSS, William Donovan and the sovereign state of the
Vatican came in.

“Wild Bill” Donovan was top dog in the OSS.

Shortly before the Germans overran
Europe, Father Felix Morlion, a papal functionary, had set up a Vatican intelligence organization called
Pro Deo in Lisbon.

When the U.S.

entered the war, Donovan moved Morlion lock, stock and barrel to
New York and opened a sizeable bank account for him.

The priest founded the American Council for
International Promotion of Democracy Under God, on 60th Street.

In the same building was the office of
William Taub, whose name surfaced during the Watergate affair.

Taub was a well-known and wide-
ranging middleman for such powerful figures as Nixon, Howard Hughes, Aristotle Onassis and Jimmy
Hoffa.

His behind-the-scenes maneuvers were invaluable to Nixon in his 1960 run at the presidency.

Taub
was especially close to Cardinal Alfredo Ottaviani of the Holy See, who arranged Mussolini’s 1929
“donation” of $89-million to the Vatican to ensure its neutrality with Mussolini and Hitler.

The money
went into a special account at the Vatican Bank, and after the war some of it was entrusted to Michele
“God’s Banker” Sindona for investment.

Sindona channeled a good chunk of it to the Nixon campaign.

When Rome was liberated in 1944, Morlion and Pro Deo relocated there.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sindona channeled a good chunk of it to the Nixon campaign. When Rome was liberated in 1944, Morlion and Pro Deo relocated there. In recognition of Donovan’s
good works on behalf of Pro Deo, Pope Plus XII knighted him with the Grand Cross of the Order of St. Sylvester. And before he flew off to Washington to cut his deal with the CIA, Reinhard Gehlen received
the Sovereign Military Order of Malta award from the Pontiff. So did James Jesus Angleton, a Donovan
operative in Rome, the CIA’s director of counterintelligence.

--- PAGE BREAK ---For Dulles, Operation Sunrise was a personal triumph, one that set in motion his rise to the top of the
intelligence heap.

In 1963, by virtue of that position, he was appointed the CIA’s representative on the
Warren Commission.

John J.

McCloy and Chase Manhattan
President Lyndon Johnson also asked John J.

McCloy to serve on the Warren Commission.

No less than
nine presidents had called on the Wall Street lawyer for special assignments, yet he was little known to
the public.

McCloy said he entered the investigation “thinking there was a conspiracy,” but left it
convinced that Oswald acted alone.

“I never saw a case that was more completely proven,” he asserted.

McCloy had long been involved in the murky world of espionage, intrigue and Nazis.

He spent the
decade of the 1930s working out of Paris.

Much of his time was spent on a law case stemming from
German sabotage during World War I.

His investigation took him to Berlin, where he shared a box with
Hitler at the 1936 Olympics.

McCloy was in contact with Rudolph Hess before the Nazi leader made his
mysterious flight to England in 1941.

When the Nazis occupied Europe, banking exchanges between Britain and the U.S.

on the one hand, and
Germany on the other, continued.

In Trading With the Enemy, Charles Higham documented the role of
Standard Oil of New Jersey, owned by Chase Manhattan Bank, and I.G.

Farben’s Sterling Products with
the Bank for International Settlements.

Standard Oil tankers plied sea-lanes with fuel for the Nazi war
machine.

Prior to the war, McCloy was legal counsel to Farben, the German chemical monopoly.

As an
assistant secretary in the War Department:
•  McCloy blocked the executions of Nazi war criminals.

•  Forged a pact with the Vichy Regime of pro-Nazi Admiral Darlan.

•  Displaced Japanese-Americans in California to internment camps.--- PAGE BREAK ---

•  Forged a pact with the Vichy Regime of pro-Nazi Admiral Darlan. •  Displaced Japanese-Americans in California to internment camps. •  Refused to recommend the bombing of Nazi concentration camps to spare inmates on grounds “the cost
would be out of proportion to any possible benefits.”
•  Refused Jewish refugees’ entry to the U.S. When the curtain fell on the war, McCloy shielded Klaus Barbie, the “Butcher of Lyons,” from the
French. Barbie and other vicious dogs from Hitler’s kennel were hidden out with the 370th Counter
Intelligence Corps at Obergamergau. One of their keepers was Private Henry Kissinger, soon to enter
Harvard as a McCloy protégé. In 1949, McCloy returned to Germany as American High Commissioner. He commuted the death
sentences of a number of Nazi war criminals, and gave early releases to others. One of them was Alfred
Krupp, convicted of using slave labor in his armaments factories. Another was Dr. Hjalmar Schacht,
Hitler’s financial genius, who was on the payroll of Aristotle Onassis after the war. In 1952 McCloy left a Germany that was prepared to re-arm to return to his law practice. He was
named president of the Chase Manhattan Bank, director of a dozen blue-chip corporations and legal
counsel to the “Seven Sisters” of American oil. During this period he acquired a client, the Nobel oil
firm, whose interests in Czarist Russia had been managed by the father of George de Mohrenschildt, Lee
and Marina Oswald’s “best friend” in Dallas. Busy as he was, McCloy found time to supervise construction of the new Pentagon building. It was
nicknamed “McCloy’s Folly.”
J. Edgar Hoover and Interpol
FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover “mistrusted and disliked all three Kennedy brothers. President Johnson

--- PAGE BREAK ---and Hoover had mutual fear and hatred for the Kennedys,” wrote the late William Sullivan, for many
years an assistant FBI director.

Hoover hated Robert Kennedy, who as Attorney General was his boss,
and feared John.

In turn, the President distrusted Allen Dulles, and eased him out as CIA director after the
1961 Bay of Pigs debacle.

When JFK moved to lower the oil depletion allowance, he incurred the
displeasure of John McCloy, whose clients’ profits would be trimmed.

Hoover, Dulles and McCloy did not belong to the Kennedy fan club.

Hoover controlled the field
investigation when the president was shot.

Dulles and McCloy helped mold the final verdict of the Warren
Commission.

When America stood on the threshold of World War II, Hoover continued a friendly relationship with
the Nazis dominating Interpol, the Berlin-based international secret police.

He’d been obsessed with the
“Red menace” since 1919, when he took the helm of the Bureau’s General Intelligence Division.

Heinrich
Himmler, Reinhard Heydrich, Arthur Nebe and other Nazi fanatics were active in Interpol.

Even after
Hitler occupied Czechoslovakia, Hoover ignored all evidence of Nazi death squads and atrocities and
cooperated with the boys in Berlin.

When France fell, Hoover exchanged lists of wanted criminals,
enclosing autographed photographs of himself.

It was not until three days before Pearl Harbor that he
called a halt to the fraternization—and then only because he feared his image might be tarnished.

When war was imminent, Roosevelt charged Hoover with ferreting out Nazi spies in the Western
Hemisphere.

Two escaped his notice.

As early as 1933, Gestapo agent Dr.

Hermann Friedrich Erben
recruited Errol Flynn as an intelligence source.

Erben went on to naturalized American citizen status, but
never abandoned his loyalty to Hitler.

Flynn went on to make Santa Fe Trail in 1940, co-starring Ronald
Reagan, and the two paired up for Desperate Journey in 1942.Erben went on to naturalized American citizen status, but
never abandoned his loyalty to Hitler.

Flynn went on to make Santa Fe Trail in 1940, co-starring Ronald
Reagan, and the two paired up for Desperate Journey in 1942.

George de Mohrenschildt, the Oswalds’ genial host in Dallas, was a Nazi spy, according to wartime
FBI files.

Hoover’s G-men noted that Baron Maydell, his cousin, had Nazi ties and that his uncle
distributed pro-Nazi films.

FBI suspicions were confirmed when de Mohrenschildt was tailed from New
York to Corpus Christi.

On October 8, 1942 a “lookout” was placed in his file in case he applied for
another passport.

The parts left out of J.

Edgar Hoover’s investigation before and after Kennedy was killed were the
Nazi associations de Mohrenschildt had while working for U.S.

intelligence.

George’s cousin, the movie
producer Baron Constantine Maydell, ranked among the top German Abwehr agents in North America.

Gehlen recruited Maydell in the postwar era to run the CIA’s Russian emigré programs.

Gehlen recruited veterans of Maydell’s Abwehr Group to collude with East European emigré
organizations inside the U.S.

Lee and Marina’s red-carpet treatment in the U.S.

began with their arrival from the USSR.

Spas T.

Raigkin was the ex-secretary general of an exile group of the sort run by Baron Maydell, the American
Friends of the Anti-Bolshevik Bloc of Nations (ABN).

With CIA funding, he assisted Lee and Marina in
resettling.

J.

Edgar Hoover was trained only to find Communists, defuse the red menace.

The Abwehr, Reinhard
Gehlen and Maydell were of no interest to the FBI.

After the war, Interpol ostensibly cleaned up its act, moved to Paris and installed the prestigious
Hoover as vice president.

Yet Interpol steadfastly refused to search for Nazi war criminals, contending
the international police organization was independent of politics.

The excuse appeared a bit lame when
former SS officer Paul Dickopf was installed as president in the 1970s.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Yet Interpol steadfastly refused to search for Nazi war criminals, contending
the international police organization was independent of politics. The excuse appeared a bit lame when
former SS officer Paul Dickopf was installed as president in the 1970s. “Sir” Charles Willoughby, a Franco-German American Nazi
He was a bull of a man who spoke with a German accent, wore a custom-tailored general’s uniform
and affected a monocle. An officer in the U.S. Army, his true name of Adolf Charles Weidenbach, born in

--- PAGE BREAK ---Heidelberg, March 8, 1892.

But by the time he became Douglas MacArthur’s chief of intelligence for the
war in the Pacific, he was Major General Charles A.

Willoughby.

Behind his back he was derisively
tagged “Sir Charles.”
For a man with Teutonic traits, it was odd that Willoughby preferred his fascism with a Spanish accent.

But this was an accident of geography.

While serving as a military attaché in Ecuador, he received a
decoration from Mussolini’s government—the Order of Saints Maurizio and Lazzaro.

After delivering an
impassioned paean to Spanish dictator Generalissimo Francisco Franco at a lunch in Madrid, he was
toasted by the secretary general of the Falangist Party, “I am happy to know a fellow Falangist and
reactionary.

MacArthur’s pre-war headquarters were in the Philippines, where commerce was dominated by the
resident Spaniards.

The Daddy Warbucks of this crowd was Andres Soriano, who owned an early-day
conglomerate of airlines, mines, breweries and American distributorships.

During the Spanish Civil War,
Soriano was one of Franco’s principal moneybags.

When the Rising Sun flag was raised over the
Philippines, Soriano fled to Washington to become finance minister of the government-in-exile.

But there
was such a fuss in the District of Columbia over his fascist reputation that the colonel flew off to
Australia to join MacArthur’s staff.

Willoughby accompanied the Supreme Commander to Tokyo for the occupation of Japan.

His
preferences remained the same: when military police shook down his hotel searching for a fugitive, they
found Willoughby at dinner with the stranded Italian fascist ambassador to Japan and members of his staff.

He was a heavy-handed censor and suppressed unfavorable news to the States.

He delighted in falsely
labeling correspondents who defied him as “Communists,” a tactic Senator McCarthy would adopt with
enthusiasm.He was a heavy-handed censor and suppressed unfavorable news to the States.

He delighted in falsely
labeling correspondents who defied him as “Communists,” a tactic Senator McCarthy would adopt with
enthusiasm.

But the general’s priority project was a dressed-up history of the Pacific War in which
MacArthur would be the towering hero.

Willoughby brought in Japanese military brass for a view from
the enemy side, a move that may have had an ulterior motive.

The possibility existed that Willoughby was
down-playing Japanese war crimes so perpetrators could be protected for use against the Soviets later.

This was happening in Germany where the top Nazis were writing the history of Malmedy.

The tight
security in which Willoughby wrapped the project only adds to this impression.

One woman had a
passkey, the wife of Dr.

Mitsutaro Araki, a former exchange lecturer in Germany closely tied in with high
Nazis in Tokyo and the Tojo clique.

Willoughby harbored another secret that only came to light last year.

During the war, the Japanese
conducted germ warfare experiments with human guinea pigs (at least 3,000 died, including an
undetermined number of captured U.S.

military).

The Pentagon decided that the biological research might
prove handy against the Russians, and the Japanese scientists responsible were granted immunity from
prosecution in return for their laboratory records.

On December 12, 1947, the Pentagon acknowledged the
“wholehearted cooperation” of Willoughby in arranging the examination of “human pathological material
which had been transferred to Japan from the biological warfare installations.”
As his final public gesture to Franco, Willoughby lobbied in August, 1952 to authorize $100 million for
the anti-Communist dictator’s needs.

Then he settled down in the U.S.

to do battle with the domestic
enemy.

As Sir Charles and his right-wing allies saw it, Marxism wasn’t the true enemy—liberals were.--- PAGE BREAK ---

to do battle with the domestic
enemy. As Sir Charles and his right-wing allies saw it, Marxism wasn’t the true enemy—liberals were. 1952: The Travels of Klaus Barbie, Evita Peron, Otto Skorzeny, and Nicolae Malaxa
By 1952, Klaus Barbie had arrived in Bolivia via a stop in Argentina. He was spirited out of Germany
by the CIA with a hand from the Vatican. Barbie teamed up with SS Major Otto Skorzeny, now also
affiliated with the CIA. Fritz Thyssen and Gustav Krupp, both beneficiaries of McCloy’s amnesty,
bankrolled Skorzeny from the start. Barbie and Skorzeny were soon training death squads such as the
Angels of Death in Bolivia, the Anti-Communist Alliance in Argentina, and in Spain, with Stephen Della

--- PAGE BREAK ---Chiaie, the Guerrillas of Christ the King.

Martin Bormann’s money was released in 1952.

In Argentina,
Evita Peron died of cancer at age 33.

The Nazi money was deposited in her name at 40 Swiss banks.

There was $100 million in cash, another $40 million in diamonds.

Several hundred million more were set
aside with Evita’s brother, Juan Duarte, the courier.

This led to three murders the following year:
•  Juan Duarte was shot to death.

•  Heinrich Dorge, an aide to Hjalmar Schacht, killed.

•  Rudolf Feude, Nazi banker who knew the whereabouts of the money, poisoned.

Skorzeny, released from American custody in 1947, moved to Madrid in 1952.

He created the
International Fascista and was dispatched by the CIA and Gehlen BND to “trouble spots.” On his payroll
were former SS agents, French OAS terrorists and secret police from Portugal’s PDID.

SS Colonel Skorzeny’s CIA agents participated in terror campaigns waged by Operation 40 in
Guatemala, Brazil and Argentina.

Skorzeny was also in charge of the Paladin mercenaries, whose cover,
M.C.

Inc., was a Madrid export-import firm.

Dr.

Gerhard Hartmut von Schubert, formerly of Joseph Goebbels’ propaganda ministry, was M.C.’s
operating manager.

The nerve center for Skorzeny’s operations was located in Albufera, Spain.

It was
lodged in the same building as the Spanish intelligence agency SCOE under Colonel Eduardo Blanco,
which doubled as a branch office of the Central Intelligence Agency.

The Albufera building was the kind of intelligence nest duplicated in New Orleans in 1963.

That
summer, Lee Harvey Oswald handed out pro-Castro literature stamped with the address 544 Camp Street,
a commercial building.

This was a blunder because Oswald actually was under the control of an anti-
Castro operation headquartered there.

W.

Guy Banister, his controller, had connections in military
intelligence, the CIA and a section of the World Anti-Communist League set up by Willoughby and his Far
Pacific intelligence unit in Taiwan.W.

Guy Banister, his controller, had connections in military
intelligence, the CIA and a section of the World Anti-Communist League set up by Willoughby and his Far
Pacific intelligence unit in Taiwan.

In The Great Heroin Coup, Henrik Krüger disclosed that the
International Fascista was “not only the first step toward fulfilling the dream of Skorzeny, but also of his
close friends in Madrid, exile Jose Lopez Rega, Juan Peron’s grey eminence, and prince Justo Valerio
Borghesé, the Italian fascist money man rescued from justice at the hands of the World War II Italian
resistance by future CIA counterintelligence whiz James J.

Angleton.”
A subcommittee on international operations of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee prepared a
report, “Latin America: Murder, Inc.,” that is still classified.

(Lyndon Johnson gave the book its title three
months before he died: “We were running a Murder, Inc.

in the Caribbean.”) The report concluded that the
United States “had joint operations between Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Paraguay and Uruguay.

These operations were known as Operation Condor, comprising special teams used to carry out
‘sanctions,’ the killing of enemies.”
Jack Anderson gave a few details in his column, “Operation Condor, an Unholy Alliance” on August 3,
1979:
Assassination teams are centered in Chile.

This international consortium is located in Colonia Dignidad, Chile.

Founded by Nazis
from Hitler’s SS, headed by Franz Pfeiffer Richter, Adolf Hitler’s 1000-year Reich may not have perished.

Children are cut up in
front of their parents, suspects are asphyxiated in piles of excrement or roasted to death over barbecue pits.

Otto Skorzeny code-named his assault on American soldiers at the Battle of the Bulge Operation Greif,
the “Condor.” Skorzeny’s father-in-law was Hjalmar Schacht, president of Hitler’s Reichsbank.

Schacht
guided Onassis’ shipyards in rebuilding German and Japanese war fleets.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Otto Skorzeny code-named his assault on American soldiers at the Battle of the Bulge Operation Greif,
the “Condor.” Skorzeny’s father-in-law was Hjalmar Schacht, president of Hitler’s Reichsbank. Schacht
guided Onassis’ shipyards in rebuilding German and Japanese war fleets. In 1950, Onassis signed on Lars
Anderson for his whaling ships in the hunt off Antarctica and Argentina. Anderson had belonged to
Vidkum Quisling’s Nazi collaborationist group in Norway during the war. Clay Shaw, charged by New
Orleans D.A. Jim Garrison with complicity in the JFK assassination, was a close friend of Hjalmar

--- PAGE BREAK ---Schacht.

In 1952, Nicolae Malaxa moved from Whittier California to Argentina.

Malaxa had belonged to Otto
von Bolschwing’s Gestapo network, as did his associate, Viorel D.

Trifia, then living in Detroit.

They
were members of the Nazi Iron Guard in Romania and had one thing in common – they were friends of
Richard Nixon.

Trifia had been brought to the U.S.

by von Bolschwing.

Malaxa escaped from Europe with over $200
million in U.S.

dollars.

Upon arrival in New York, he picked up another $200 million from Chase
Manhattan Bank.

The legal path for this was smoothed by the Sullivan & Cromwell law offices, the
Dulles brothers firm.

Undersecretary of State Adolph Berle, who had assisted Nixon and star witness
Whittaker Chambers convict Alger Hiss, personally testified on Malaxa’s behalf before a congressional
subcommittee on immigration.

In 1951, Senator Nixon introduced a private bill to allow Malaxa
permanent residence.

Arrangements for his relocation in Whittier were made by Nixon’s law office.

The
dummy front cover for Malaxa in Whittier was Western Tube, a fictional corporation.

In 1946, Nixon
received a call from Herman L.

Perry asking if he wanted to run for Congress against Rep.

Jerry Voorhis.

Perry was subsequently named president of Western Tube.

When Malaxa flew to Argentina in 1952, he linked up with Juan Peron and Otto Skorzeny.

Questions
were raised at the time about J.

Edgar Hoover, the Iron Guard, Malaxa and Vice President Nixon.

1960 Elections: Richard Nixon vs.

John F.

Kennedy
Before the election, a group within the Christian Right plotted to kill John Kennedy in Van Nuys,
California while he was still a candidate.

This group was a meld of anti-Castro Cubans, Minutemen and
homegrown Nazis.

Some were sought by Jim Garrison following the arrest of Clay Shaw for testimony
before the New Orleans grand jury.

When Garrison forwarded extradition papers for Edgar Eugene
Bradley, a member of the group, Governor Ronald Reagan refused to sign them.Some were sought by Jim Garrison following the arrest of Clay Shaw for testimony
before the New Orleans grand jury.

When Garrison forwarded extradition papers for Edgar Eugene
Bradley, a member of the group, Governor Ronald Reagan refused to sign them.

The Christian Defense League (CDL), the most influential of these groups, was led by the Reverend
William Potter Gale.

During the war, Gale was an Army colonel and trained guerilla bands in the
Philippines.

His superior officer was Charles Willoughby.

By the late 1950s, Gale was recruiting
veterans for his racial “Identity” group, financed by a wealthy Los Angeles man.

A leading CDL contact was Captain Robert K.

Brown, a special forces professional from Fort Benning,
Georgia.

Brown worked with anti-Castro Cubans, armed mercenaries similar to Skorzeny’s teams.

Brown
is now publisher of Soldier of Fortune magazine, and paramilitary texts such as Silencers, Snipers, and
Assassins.

The book details how Mitchell WerBell made special weapons for the CIA, Bay of Pigs
assault squads and other customers.

WerBell, son of a wealthy Czarist cavalry officer, perfected a
silencer so effective a gun can be shot in one room and not heard in the next.

It is ideal for assassinations.

There has been prolonged controversy over how many shots were fired the day Kennedy was killed.

The President’s wounds, nicks on the limousine and curb, and other bullet evidence indicated quite a few.

But the Warren Commission concluded there were only three.

It took the testimony of spectators in Dealy
Plaza who said they only heard three.

It never considered the possibility that silencer-fitted guns were
fired.

When Clay Shaw was arrested by Jim Garrison, the news was of particular interest to the Italian
newspaper Paesa Sera.

It followed up with a report that Shaw had ties to a cover organization in Rome
named Centro Mondiale Commerciale (CMC).

CMC was founded in 1961, one year after Kennedy was
elected.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It followed up with a report that Shaw had ties to a cover organization in Rome
named Centro Mondiale Commerciale (CMC). CMC was founded in 1961, one year after Kennedy was
elected. Its principals worked with fascist networks after World War II. Its location was frequently
moved, its presidents rotated and modus operandi altered. CMC included Italian fascists, elements of the
European paramilitary right, the CIA, and the U.S. Defense Department. There were major shareholders
with banks in Switzerland, Miami, Basel and other major cities.

--- PAGE BREAK ---The board of directors included Ferenc Nagy, a former Hungarian premier who led that country’s Anti-
Communist Countrymen’s Party in exile.

J.

Edgar Hoover brought Nagy to the United States, where there
were numerous Gehlen-supported emigré organizations.

On August 18, 1951, the Saturday Evening Post
pictured Nagy with Czech, Pole, Hungarian and Russian exiles under the heading: “They Want Us To Go
to War Right Now.” On November 22, 1963, Nagy was living in Dallas.

CMC was a subsidiary of Swiss-based Permindex, whose president was Prince Gutierez de Spadafora,
Italian industrialist and landowner.

Spadafora’s daughter-in-law was related to Hjalmar Schacht.

Clay
Shaw, who managed the New Orleans International Trade Mart, was a director.

Another was Giorgio
Mantello, aka George Mandel, who moved to New Orleans.

Once convicted of “criminal activities” in
Switzerland, Mantello worked closely with fellow Hungarian Nagy.

One of the stated goals of the CMC was that “Rome will recover once again her position as center of
the civilized world.”
Major L.M.

Bloomfield, a veteran of the OSS living in Montreal, was a suspect Garrison wanted to
question.

In Canada he controlled Credit Suisse, Heineken Breweries, Israel Continental Company,
Grimaldo Siosa Lines and other international firms.

Shaw’s name was found among 11 directors of a
company in Montreal based in Rome.

Who was giving virtually unlimited money to the CMC and who
was pocketing it?

The answer might have been found in the huge withdrawals flowing from Evita Peron’s
accounts.

Paesa Sera reported on March 4, 1967 that CMC was a creature of the CIA, a money conduit, and that
Shaw and Bloomfield conducted illegal political espionage under its cover.

In New Orleans, Shaw was
the respected citizen.

He had helped restore the French Quarter.

In Rome he was a vital member of the
boards of twin companies covering for fascists accused of European assassinations.He had helped restore the French Quarter.

In Rome he was a vital member of the
boards of twin companies covering for fascists accused of European assassinations.

Shaw’s address book
contained the private number of Principessa Marcelle Borghesé, now Duchessa de Bomartao, related to
Prince Valerio Borghesé.

Called the “Black Prince” or “The New Duce,” Borghese was leader of the
Movimento Sociale Italiano, a neo-fascist syndicate.

The Black Prince, a decorated submarine captain in
the First World War, was convicted of cooperating with the Nazis in WWII and convicted to 12 years in
prison.

The Black Prince is the same Borghesé rescued by Angleton.

No wonder James Jesus Angleton was
awarded the Sovereign Military Order of Malta by the Pope after the war.

This may explain what
Angleton was hinting at when questioned about the murder of JFK: “A mansion has many rooms; there
were many things during the period; I’m not privy to who struck John.”
Clay Shaw’s affiliation with Permindex plugged in later to Argentina, Spain, Rome, New Orleans and
Dallas.

The international hit teams, financed by the CIA with funds diverted overseas to Gehlen’s cover
companies, started coming together after Shaw’s arrest.

In November, 1960 it would be Nixon versus Kennedy.

Frank Sinatra introduced Judith Exner to John
Kennedy on the eve of the New Hampshire primary.

A few weeks later, Sinatra introduced Judith Exner to
Chicago Mafia boss Sam Giancana.

Exner became involved, as William Safire put it, in a “dual affair
with the nation’s most powerful mobster and the nation’s most powerful political leader.”
Giancana was busy with more than his love life – he was hired to form assassination teams to kill Fidel
Castro.

He was retained by Robert Maheu, a former FBI and CIA operative.

It was a classic cut-off.

Maheu never mentioned that the CIA was behind it.

He intimated to Giancana that wealthy Cuban exiles
were the source of the funds.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Maheu never mentioned that the CIA was behind it. He intimated to Giancana that wealthy Cuban exiles
were the source of the funds. This sounded plausible, since Maheu was Howard Hughes’ right-hand man. Giancana placed Johnny Roselli, his Los Angeles lieutenant, in charge of the hit squads. In 1978, when
the House Select Committee questioned him, Roselli hinted that his assignment was aimed at Kennedy as
well as Castro. Shortly afterwards, his mutilated body was found floating in an oil drum off the Florida
coast. Giancana never had a chance to testify. He was shot to death in his Chicago home. The Howard Hughes organization, cover for the kill-Castro conspiracy (Hughes thought it was a

--- PAGE BREAK ---patriotic idea), has long retained Carl Byoir Associates as its public relations arm.

Throughout the war,
Byoir represented Nazi bankers, industrialists and the I.G.

Farben interests.

One of his clients was Ernest
Schmitz of I.G.

Farben-Ilgner and the German-American Board of Trade.

His Information Services was
subsidized by the Nazi government.

George Sylvester Viereck, editor at the German Library of
Information, was also in business with Byoir.

A well-known Byoir client was the Frederick Flick Group.

Flick, a Nuremberg defendant released by McCloy, was the single greatest power behind Hitler’s military
muscle.

Frederick Flick’s son had interests in the W.R.

Grace Company, and invested over $400,000 in
partnership with J.

Peter Grace in the United States.

During the war, W.R.

Grace was accused in a
military report of protecting a certain Nazi Colonel Brite in Bolivia.

In 1951, when the CIA smuggled
Barbie out of Germany, he was sent to join the same Colonel Brite.

George de Mohrenschildt was a close
associate of William Grace, the company’s founder.

De Mohrenschildt was a man of many faces.

He befriended Lee and Marina Oswald, introduced them
to the White Russian community, made phone calls to obtain housing.

He explained to the Warren
Commission that he was fascinated with this strange couple just out of Russia – but at the Petroleum Club
in Dallas, De Mohrenschildt sang the praises of Heinrich Himmler.

His travels took him all over the
world on missions identified with intelligence.

In 1956 he was employed by Pantepec Oil Company
owned by the family of William Buckley.

De Mohrenschildt often discussed Oswald with J.

Walton Moore, the CIA’s Domestic Contacts
Division resident in Dallas.

In the spring of 1963, after visiting the Oswalds, he dashed off to Washington.

There is a record of a phone call de Mohrenschildt made on May 7, 1963, to the Army Chief of Staff for
intelligence.

Also in May, he met with a member of that staff.--- PAGE BREAK ---

There is a record of a phone call de Mohrenschildt made on May 7, 1963, to the Army Chief of Staff for
intelligence. Also in May, he met with a member of that staff. His military connections seem to have been
numerous. One of the first persons de Mohrenschildt took the Oswalds to visit in Dallas was retired
Admiral Chester Burton. Although De Mohrenschildt and his wife Jeanne testified at length before the Warren Commission, only
attorney Albert Jenner and Pentagon historian Alfred Goldberg attended. One of Jenner’s clients was
General Dynamics, maker of the F-111 fighter that would achieve fame in Vietnam. Max Clark, chief of
security for General Dynamics in Dallas, was another De Mohrenschildt associate; he donated funds to
help Marina while George found Lee his next job in Dallas. Oswald took one at the graphics house of
Jagger-Chiles-Stovall, which held classified military contracts. Jeanne de Mohrenschildt was brought to the U.S. by a relative employed at the Howard Hughes
organization. In 1977, George was found shot dead, allegedly a suicide, on the day a House Select
Committee investigator stopped by looking for him. Jeanne consented to a press interview. She said
George had been a Nazi spy. Oswald’s job allowed him to visit the Sol Bloom agency at least 40 times—the same agency that
planned the motorcade route for Kennedy’s fatal visit. Ruth Paine, whom Oswald met via George, had called Roy Truly and procured work for Oswald at the
Texas School Book Depository. Maydell and the Gehlen knew all the right moves to create their patsy. 1960: Young Americans for Freedom
President Harry Truman warned of the CIA “Gestapo” he had created. President Eisenhower left the White House fearing the “military-industrial complex” he handed to us. In 1960, candidate Nixon was qualified for the job of President. Many influential people were sure he
was the only choice. Nixon knew every red scare tactic from his campaign against Jerry Voorhis in 1946 for the House seat,was qualified for the job of President. Many influential people were sure he
was the only choice. Nixon knew every red scare tactic from his campaign against Jerry Voorhis in 1946 for the House seat,

--- PAGE BREAK ---and vs.

Helen Douglas in the Senate, and working with Sen.

Joe McCarthy.

The prosecution of Alger Hiss
on flimsy evidence proved his value.

But Nixon had also established lasting connections with members of the mob, the Vatican hierarchy,
defense industries and known Nazis.

He knew them all.

What if he lost after his 17 years of preparation?

Would there be a backup team for the future?

Could
the Pentagon or Reinhard Gehlen visualize leaving the United States presidency to chance elections?

Senator Robert Kennedy was murdered on the eve of his primary election in June, 1968.

With both
Kennedys gone, Nixon finally made it.

In September, 1960, two months before the election, William F.

Buckley, Jr.

launched his Young
Americans for Freedom (YAF), from the grounds on his Connecticut estate.

Buckley’s career was one of
the most conservative in the U.S.

Following his graduation at Yale, mentor Frank Chodorov grabbed him
for purposes related to his job with McCormick’s Chicago Tribune.

Buckley was stationed by the CIA in Japan from 1950 to 1954.

He also did a stint in Mexico with E.

Howard Hunt.

Co-founder of YAF was Douglas Caddy, whose offices were used by the CIA and Howard Hughes
organization for the illegal Watergate entries, wiretaps and other dirty tricks.

After his return from Japan,
Buckley was ready to publish his own magazine, The National Review.

This was an unusual opportunity
to bring together the world’s most conservative writers for publication and much propaganda
accompanied by Buckley’s glib innuendos.

Once the publication was a going concern, Buckley took Young Americans for Freedom to the campus –
old ideas, old money and young minds to mold.

Behind the project were well-funded military masters,
including the YAF’s Tom Charles Huston and the Cointel-Program cooked up by Nixon.Once the publication was a going concern, Buckley took Young Americans for Freedom to the campus –
old ideas, old money and young minds to mold.

Behind the project were well-funded military masters,
including the YAF’s Tom Charles Huston and the Cointel-Program cooked up by Nixon.

The selected advisory board for YAF was a Who’s Who of ultraconservative oldies even then: Senator
Strom Thurmond, Senator John Tower, Ronald Reagan, Professor Lev Dobriansky, General Charles
Willoughby and Mr.

Robert Morris are but a sampling.

Robert Morris may not be a household name, but Buckley knew him well, and Morris, Nixon, and
Senator Joe McCarthy were team players.

Joe McCarthy’s strongest supporters in his bid to represent
Wisconsin in the senate were Frank Seusenbrenner and Walter Harnisfeger.

Both admired Adolf Hitler
and made continuous trips to Germany.

Senator McCarthy was obliging enough.

Before pursuing commies in the State Department, he had to
release a few of Hitler’s elite Nazis lingering at the Dachau prison camp.

McCarthy beat John McCloy by
about three years.

In 1949, during congressional hearings on the Malmedy Massacre, the bloody Battle of the Bulge,
McCarthy invited himself to take over the entire testimony.

He wasn’t satisfied until the prison doors flew
open.

The most detestable and ugly battle of World War II, an assault upon Americans and civilians in
Belgium, was ignored.

Hitler’s precious Generals Fritz Kraemer and Sepp Dietrick, along with Hermann
Priess and many others, were set free.

With that business finished, McCarthy took on Robert Morris as Chief Counsel for the Senate Internal
Security Subcommittee.

Morris’ training in Naval intelligence in charge of USSR counter-intelligence and
psychological warfare were useful to Senator Joe.

Particularly the latter.

After McCarthy died, Morris
moved to Dallas.

He was a judge and was named president of Dallas University.--- PAGE BREAK ---

After McCarthy died, Morris
moved to Dallas. He was a judge and was named president of Dallas University. In 1961, a year after Buckley founded YAF, another conservative organization was founded in Munich,
Germany: Conservatism USA (CUSA)—not students but troops in the U.S. Army mustered out to Dallas,
Texas by November 1963. Their host would be Robert Morris. Letters between Larry Schmidt in Dallas
and Bernie Weissman in Munich, Germany, in preparation for the arrival of CUSA, were published in the
Warren Commission Hearings, Vol. XVIII. Segments of the letters:

--- PAGE BREAK ---November 2, 1962: Dallas to Munich, Larry Schmidt: “Gentlemen, we got everything we wanted … It
saved the trouble of infiltration … Met with Frank McGee … (president of the Dallas Council of World
Affairs) … Suggest Bernie convert to Christianity and I mean it.”
(Bernard Weissman, the only Jew, was brought all the way to Dallas on November 22, 1963 to lend his
name to the “Wanted for Treason” fliers handed out to welcome JFK.

He testified that the John Birch
Society paid for the ads and “wanted a Jewish name at the bottom.”)
“We must all return to the church … These people are religious bugs … I think in terms of 300,000
members, $3,000,000.”
“The John Birch Society has a million members.

Look for us to merge with them in 1964.”
“Arrangements are being made for me to meet the heads of the Dallas John Birch, General Walker and
H.L.

Hunt, Texas oil millionaire.” (General Walker had been retired from the military by John Kennedy
for his compulsory Pro-Blud indoctrination.) “I have already met the top editors of the Dallas Morning
News, the country’s most conservative newspaper.”
“These people are radicals but there is a method in their madness.

You see, they’re all after exactly
what we’re after.”
“No liberal talk whatsoever, none … Down here a Negro is a nigger … I mean, no one is ever to say
one kind word about niggers.”
“Liberals are our enemies.”
“The conservative isn’t against the Niggers, he just wants to keep him in his place for his own good.”
(President John Kennedy and Attorney General Robert Kennedy had waged a bitter battle from Sept.

30 to
Oct.

3, 1962 at the University of Mississippi.

The integration of one black student brought in the U.S.

Army and the confinement of General Edwin Walker.)
January 4, 1963: Larry Schmidt to B.The integration of one black student brought in the U.S.

Army and the confinement of General Edwin Walker.)
January 4, 1963: Larry Schmidt to B.

Weissman, Munich: “I want big men … believe me if I had a
dozen such men I can conquer the world … I will go down in the history books as a great and noble man,
or a tyrant … I expect to see you here in Dallas, especially Norman and Larry … If Jim Mosely is not
here by Feb.

15, he is finished … One thing had best be understood, I am not playing games here in Dallas
and expect you not to play games in Munich.”
“I am not here in Dallas for my health or because I think Dallas is a wonderful place … Continue to
have regular meetings and try to get things back in order in preparation for the big meetings.”
February 2, 1963: Larry Schmidt: “We have succeeded, the mission with which I was charged in
Dallas has been achieved … Friday night I attended a gathering of the top conservatives in Dallas.

The
meeting was at the home of Dr.

Robert Morris, President of the Defenders of American Liberty.

Present
were Mr.

George Ward, Detective for Dallas City Police, Mr.

Ken Thompson, editorial writer for the
Dallas Morning News, Mr.

Clyde Moore, former PR man for H.L.

Hunt, former UPI writer [eight
others].”
“I told them exactly what I wanted.”
“Others suggested using an already existing movement, named the Young Americans for Freedom, with
already 50,000 members … CUSA, as set up in Munich, is now an established fact in Dallas, only we are
calling it YAF.

I think you catch on.

We are starting Munich chapters of YAF.

To spread to Stuttgart,
Frankfurt, Heidelberg, Berlin, Kaiserslautern.

We are getting every top name in business, education,
politics, and religion to endorse YAF.

Change all your records to read YAF.”
“All those months in Munich were not wasted.

I accomplished my task in Dallas.

I need you here soon.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I accomplished my task in Dallas. I need you here soon. I sold these people on each of you and they are expecting you to come to Dallas and play an important
role … The days of leisure are over. We want to see you, Norman, Jim and Bill Burley back here in
Dallas. Sheila and my brother will be here in August; Ken Glazebrook in Sept.”
June 13, 1963: Larry Schmidt to B. Weissman in Munich, Germany: “Warren Carroll, our only other
recruit to CUSA, is already a PhD and two MS’s. Warren is a scriptwriter for Lifeline, the H.L. Hunt

--- PAGE BREAK ---television and radio series.

Hunt is the millionaire oilman.

Warren is 32, former CIA man.

Don’t worry,
he has been checked out.

Hunt checked him out.” (This appears to be a DIA action.

After Jack Ruby was
arrested for killing Oswald inside the Dallas jailhouse, there were copies of Warren Carroll’s Lifeline on
the seat of his car, opened to a section on “Heroism.” This is interesting because one of the first reasons
Ruby gave for killing Oswald was, “I wanted to show them a Jew had guts.”)
“We want to get Norman into the Republic National Bank … where we are building our credit like
crazy for the day we need ready cash.” (The Dallas Republic National Bank was identified by the
Washington Post, February 26, 1967, as a conduit of CIA funds since 1958.

Connie Trammel, who
worked at the Republic National Bank, accompanied Jack Ruby to the office of Lamar Hunt, Wednesday,
Nov.

20, 1963, two days before Kennedy was assassinated.)
October 1, 1963: Larry Schmidt to Munich, Germany: “I have a lot of contacts, bankers, insurance men,
realtors … My brother began working as an aide to General Walker.

Paid full time … National
Indignation Committee will merge in the Fall of 1963, as soon as Bernie and Norman are in Dallas.

This
is a top secret merger and is not to be discussed outside the movement.”
October 29, 1963: Larry Schmidt to Munich, Germany – “This town is a battleground and that is no
joke.

I am a hero to the right, a stormtrooper to the left … I have worked out a deal with the chairman of
YAF.

The arrangements are always delicate, very delicate.

If I don’t produce the bodies it is likely Dale
(Davenport) will think me a phoney.

He needs our help now.

Adlai Stevenson is scheduled here on the
24th.

Kennedy is scheduled in Dallas on November 24.

All big things are happening now.”
1963: A Few Connections in Dallas—Gen.

Walter Dorberger, Michael and Ruth Paine
When George de Mohrenschildt introduced Lee and Marina to the Dallas-Ft.All big things are happening now.”
1963: A Few Connections in Dallas—Gen.

Walter Dorberger, Michael and Ruth Paine
When George de Mohrenschildt introduced Lee and Marina to the Dallas-Ft.

Worth White Russian
displaced Czarists, he kept their social level on par with his American contacts.

One casual dinner in the
company of Michael and Ruth Paine was enough to set the Oswalds’ course.

George and Jeane didn’t
have to meet with them again.

Ruth Paine provided housing for Marina while Lee went to New Orleans.

A few weeks later, she drove
Marina to join Lee.

Ruth returned from summer vacation at Wood’s Hole, Mass., and brought Marina to
her home in Irving, Texas while Lee was sat on the bus to Mexico with Albert Osborne/John Bowen and
four other Solidarists from the Russian network.

After Kennedy was murdered, Dallas police rushed to the Paine’s home.

From their garage and
elsewhere (via the Paines) came most of the incriminating evidence against Oswald.

It never could be
proven by the Warren Commission that the alleged murder weapon came from the Paine’s garage.

The cropped photo that Life printed with Oswald holding a rifle was found in a box removed from the
garage and taken to the police department, then returned the next day with no one present to identify its
origin.

Accessory after the fact, a letter was delivered to Marina in December undated and unsigned to cover
up General Walker’s anxiety over blaming a “Communist,” Lee Oswald, for shooting at him in April.

Ruth
Paine gave the letter to Marina.

It wasn’t in the home before then.

The Warren Commission required planted evidence to divert attention from Oswald’s links to the
Defense Department.

Michael Paine was employed by Bell Aircraft, a DoD contractor.

This job required
security clearances—what would the Oswalds, an American “defector” and his transplanted Russian
wife, be doing in his home?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Michael Paine was employed by Bell Aircraft, a DoD contractor. This job required
security clearances—what would the Oswalds, an American “defector” and his transplanted Russian
wife, be doing in his home? Paine’s boss at Bell Aircraft as director of research and development was none other than General
Walter Dornberger, the notorious war criminal. Dornberger was meant to hang at Nuremburg for his
crimes, mass murders and slave labor. The British warned the U.S. not to let him live, because even after
the war he was plotting another one. As stated, “Dornberger is a menace of the first order who is

--- PAGE BREAK ---untrustworthy.

His attitude will turn ally against ally and he would become a source of irritation and
future unrest.” (Project Paperclip, Clarence Lasby.) The very first call to authorities after the gun went off
on November 22, 1963 was from an employee at Bell Helicopter who suggested “Oswald did it.” Police
never found the source who gave them both Oswald addresses that day.

Michael Paine took Lee to a meeting with General Edwin Walker shortly before the assassination.

Soon
Oswald would be charged with shooting at Walker in April, and the latter would call Nazi cronies in
Germany, 24 hours after JFK was killed, to tell them that he finally knew “who shot through his window”
seven months earlier—the same Oswald.

Who were the Paines?

To believe the Warren Commission and the CIA staff of lawyers, they were Mr.

and Mrs.

Good Neighbor, all heart, altruistic.

Ruth simply wanted to learn more Russian from a native.

For that price, she housed Marina, a two-year-old daughter, a new infant, with all the fuss and mess of
three extras in a tiny house.

Michael Paine was a descendant of the Cabots on both sides.

Thomas Dudley Cabot, his cousin, a
former president of United Fruit, offered his Gibraltar Steamship as cover for the CIA during the Bay of
Pigs.

Another cousin was Alexander Cochrane Forbes, a director of United Fruit and trustee of Cabot,
Cabot & Forbes.

Both Allen Dulles and John J.

McCloy were part of the United Fruit team.

The Paine
family had links with circles of the OSS and the CIA.

Ruth Hyde Paine maintained close ties with the Forbes families.

University of California researcher
Peter Dale Scott investigated “the patrician Paine and Forbes families.” A far cry from anyone’s neighbor.

Michael’s education came as a tradition.

He was a third generation physicist at Harvard before working
for Bell Helicopter.

The British were correct on the Dornberger evaluation.He was a third generation physicist at Harvard before working
for Bell Helicopter.

The British were correct on the Dornberger evaluation.

Another clue was Albert Speer, Hitler’s Reichmaster for munitions and war production, General
Dornberger, and their meeting in April, 1943.

When it was obvious to Hitler they would be losing the war
against the USSR, ranking Nazis made plans.

Speer met with Dornberger at Peenemunde, the missile and
rocket factory run with Werner Von Braun, and instructed him in “the dispersion of functions throughout
the Reich.”
Translated, that meant get ready to go to the U.S.

Lee Harvey Oswald, Albert Osborne
When Lee Harvey Oswald crossed into Mexico at Laredo, Texas, on Sept.

26, 1963, his companion on
the Red Arrow bus was Albert Osborne, alias John Howard Bowen.

Bowen-Osborne had been running a school for highly professional marksmen in Oaxaca, Mexico, since
1934.

The cover for the place was his particular mission, and he was the missionary.

FBI records on
Bowen date back to June 4, 1942, in Henderson Springs, Tennessee.

He operated a camp for boys known
as the “Campfire Council.” Neighbors complained it engaged in pro-Nazi activities with young fascists.

Bowen vehemently opposed the U.S.

going to war with Nazi Germany.

Before the war, beginning in 1933, Bowen worked for the Tennessee Valley Authority.

Dual British and
American citizenship took him across the entire globe.

So did his use of multiple aliases.

After the Warren Commission published its report in September 1964, attorneys in the Jake Floyd
murder case recognized the name Osborne.

On September 8, 1952, Floyd was murdered.

The intended
target was his father, District Judge Floyd.

Two suspects were caught, one fled.

Their testimony related to
Osborne and his school for assassins.

Later investigation revealed Osborne’s connections to Division V
of the FBI and Clay Shaw’s Centro Mondiale Commerciale, with funding from New Orleans for Anti-
Castro Cubans and others.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Their testimony related to
Osborne and his school for assassins. Later investigation revealed Osborne’s connections to Division V
of the FBI and Clay Shaw’s Centro Mondiale Commerciale, with funding from New Orleans for Anti-
Castro Cubans and others. Lee Harvey Oswald applied for a tourist card to enter Mexico while still in New Orleans on

--- PAGE BREAK ---September 17, 1963.

Four others with consecutive tourist numbers departed nine days later, like Oswald,
all to arrive at the same time, disembarking from several different cities.

They were with the White
Russian Solidarists, the Gehlen emigré community.

This assassination team funded Maurice Brooks
Gatlin, Guy Bannister and the Miami office of Double Check Corporation.

J.

Edgar Hoover’s Division V,
domestic intelligence, working with the American Council of Christian Churches, had used this group
from the Bowen-Osborne academy of assassins.

Volume XXV of the Warren Commission transcripts has many pages of interviews with people who had
sent money to Jack Bowen.

They never met him, and some like Mrs.

Bessie White, Pikesville, Tenn.,
mailed “$35 a month to John Howard Bowen who she believed had been doing missionary work for 18
years in Mexico.” Osborne-Bowen had a mission.

Lee Harvey Oswald, an agent from the U.S.

Defense Dept., had a team of doubles impersonating his
behavior, leaving trails of anti-American frustration and meetings with various people.

While Oswald was in Mexico just prior to Kennedy’s murder, the purpose was concealed.

Meanwhile,
the CIA and various authorities led Oswald to the Cuban and Soviet embassies.

When the face didn’t
match the authentic Oswald, it didn’t matter, given a difference of 40 to 50 pounds.

The obvious
conclusion of all this was that Oswald wanted to go to Cuba next.

Which Oswald?

The objective was
creating an illusion of Castro fascination just days before Kennedy was killed.

Senator John Tower and Marina Oswald
One of the most consistent conservatives among Buckley’s YAF Advisory Board was Senator John
Tower of Texas.

If there is anything he wouldn’t want in his back yard, it was a defector and his allegedly
Communist wife from Minsk.

Yet two years after joining the YAF team in 1960, Tower passed all
waivers for Marina Oswald to come to the United States as soon as possible.--- PAGE BREAK ---

If there is anything he wouldn’t want in his back yard, it was a defector and his allegedly
Communist wife from Minsk. Yet two years after joining the YAF team in 1960, Tower passed all
waivers for Marina Oswald to come to the United States as soon as possible. Without his permission, this
trip might never have taken place. Many wives from the USSR are not that lucky. On March 22, 1962, Senator Tower cooperated. “The sanctions imposed on immigration and
nationality are hereby waived in behalf of Mrs. Oswald. The file check on Marina by the FBI, CIA, Dept. of Security Office, Division of biographical intelligence and passport office,” (Volume XXIV, 298). George de Mohrenschildt testified (Volume IX, pp. 228-229): “Marina Oswald’s father had been a
Czarist officer of some kind. I don’t remember whether it was army or navy.” Her real father was never
identified by name anywhere in the testimony. Between 1948 and 1950, over 200 Byelorussian Nazis and their families resettled in New Jersey. Both
George de Mohrenschildt and Marina were from Minsk, in the Byelorussian area. Reinhard Gehlen’s emigrés were useful to every phase of the Kennedy assassination cover-up. John Tower knew Marina was a safe bet. Otherwise, why the rush? Our CIA and the Defense
Department knew all there was to know about both Oswalds. Tower signed the immigration papers. The Argentine Connections—Isaac Don Levine and the Ziger Family
The Warren Report wasn’t published until September, 1964. Testimony of witnesses and exhibits were
still being submitted up to the day of printing. Yet as early as June 2, 1964, Isaac Don Levine, the arch anti-communist editor of Plain Talk magazine,
arranged with the Warren Commission staff to bring the daughters of Alexander Ziger, Oswald’s boss,
from the Minsk Radio factory to Argentina. He suggested drawing on CIA assistance. What was that about? “When the Oswalds left Russia they smuggled out a message to one of the relatives of the Zigers livinghe Minsk Radio factory to Argentina. He suggested drawing on CIA assistance. What was that about? “When the Oswalds left Russia they smuggled out a message to one of the relatives of the Zigers living

--- PAGE BREAK ---in the U.S.

They wanted help to get the Zigers’ daughters out of Russia.

The daughters, having been
born in Argentina, could claim Argentine citizenship.

Levine suggested some confidential source in the
American Government such as the CIA should contact the Argentine Government to set machinery in
motion.”
– “Memorandum from W.

David Slauson: Conference with Mr.

Isaac Don Levine,” Warren Report, May 23, 1964
On January 21, 1964, John J.

McCloy told Commission members before any witness was called, “this
fellow Levine is a contact with Marina to break the story up in a little more graphic manner and tie it into
a Russian business, and it is with the thought and background of Russian connections, conspiracy
concept.”
If there was a Russian conspiracy to kill President John Kennedy, John McCloy, Isaac Don Levine,
Allen Dulles, and J.

Edgar Hoover, Nixon and others would squeeze that out.

Remember that Gary Powers strongly hinted at Oswald’s role in downing the U-2, breaking up the
Eisenhower-Khrushchev meeting while Lee was employed at the Minsk Radio factory?

Nicolae Malaxa,
Otto Skorzeny, and international CIA-DIA agents were thick in Minsk and Argentina.

It was Alexander
Ziger and his family who introduced Lee to Marina Oswald.

That same evening, they were at the home of
an unidentified woman just returned from the U.S.

The president was murdered in 1963.

Six months later,
the CIA was assisting the Ziger daughters?

…
One more connection to Richard Nixon.

When poor Whittaker Chambers almost collapsed from the strain of testifying against Alger Hiss, it
was Isaac Don Levine who took “Chambers by the arm, a reluctant Chambers, and arranged the meetings
where he would begin to smear Hiss.” (Friendship and Fratricide, Meyer Zelig).

Levine also did business with James Martin, Marina’s new manager, while searching for a “Soviet
connection” to Kennedy’s death.--- PAGE BREAK ---

When poor Whittaker Chambers almost collapsed from the strain of testifying against Alger Hiss, it
was Isaac Don Levine who took “Chambers by the arm, a reluctant Chambers, and arranged the meetings
where he would begin to smear Hiss.” (Friendship and Fratricide, Meyer Zelig). Levine also did business with James Martin, Marina’s new manager, while searching for a “Soviet
connection” to Kennedy’s death. It was Martin who sold the photo of Oswald posing with communist
literature and a rifle, the same evidence pulled from the Paine’s garage. Note the similarity to Whittaker
Chambers’ “pumpkin papers” years earlier, the lie that launched Nixon’s political career and convicted
Alger Hiss. If the evidence didn’t fit the conclusions of investigators, one photo would sell the Oswald assassin
story. Treason for My Daily Bread –
Argentina and Martin Bormann
In August 1971, a French paper headlined a news story, “Martin Bormann behind the Kennedy
murders.” It listed an international band of killers based in Texas. They carried out the two assassinations
at German command. Six years later, June 8, 1977, the London Guardian reported, “Bormann Linked with Kennedy Murder.”
This story was based on a new book titled, Treason for My Daily Bread, by Mikhail Lebedev. Lebedev detailed how Martin Bonnann left Europe, established his current life in Paraguay, and how
the fatal head shot to Kennedy was delivered by an agent paid by Bormann, alias of Zed. Is any of this true? Many of these allegations and names come together with Paris Flammonde’s The
Kennedy Conspiracy, and Nomenclature of an Assassination Cabal, otherwise known as the Torbitt
Document. “Zed” allegedly used a .45 for the final shot. Buddy Walters, murdered January 10, 1969, picked up a .45 slug in Dealey Plaza and gave it to the
Dallas Police. There were two assassination teams in Dallas.

--- PAGE BREAK ---The military from Munich, Germany that was to take over the YAF, with Robert Morris’ help, have yet
to be identified or interviewed (Morris was from U.S.

intelligence and had experience in covert functions
inside the USSR.) Gen.

Edwin Walker’s arrangement with U.S.

military in Germany, the arrival of
Germans in Dallas, is open to question.

Albert Osborne’s “mission” in Mexico, with direct links to Clay Shaw’s Centro Mondiale
Commerciale, has never been touched.

This was the international Borghesé-Angleton band of killers with
operations throughout the world.

Otto Skorzeny’s CIA team and Gehlen death’s squads, with headquarters in Madrid, were funded by
Martin Bormann after the Evita Peron funds were released in 1952.

Lebedev mentions “Ruth,” David Ferrie, Clay Shaw, Guy Bannister and Colonel Orlov.

The very first
day George de Mohrenschildt visited Marina Oswald, she was alone and Lee was working.

He brought
with him a “Colonel Orlov.”
The House Select Committee on Assassinations “investigated” the murder of President John F.

Kennedy
from 1976-1978.

The information about Bormann was available from 1971.

Treason for My Daily Bread
was published while they were supposed to be finding the smoking gun.

G.

Robert Blakey, chief consul of
the Committee, refused to admit any research or documents on these subjects.

He would hang up the
telephone and even refused to say if he had ever seen the Torbitt Document.

Six million dollars was allotted by Congress to investigate the assassination of President Kennedy.

Martin Bormann had his motives.

What were G.

Robert Blakey’s?

Bob Edwards, in A Study of a Master Spy (London, 1961), reports that a member of Parliament and
Kenneth Dunne presented documentary evidence that Allen Dulles held secret conferences with
representatives of Hitler’s SS Security Office in February and March 1943.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Robert Blakey’s? Bob Edwards, in A Study of a Master Spy (London, 1961), reports that a member of Parliament and
Kenneth Dunne presented documentary evidence that Allen Dulles held secret conferences with
representatives of Hitler’s SS Security Office in February and March 1943. They learned, “Official
Washington knew Martin Bormann, Deputy Fuehrer of Hitler’s Germany, master-minded the international
‘Die Spinne’ (Spider) underground organization which is planning to revive Nazism as soon as West
Germany is adequately rearmed by the United States. Official Washington seems disinterested.”
With John J. McCloy, Allen Dulles and J. Edgar Hoover in control of the Kennedy assassination
investigation, these Nazi connections were buried. The CIA’s Man: The Chronology of Helmet Streikher
1937: Training for the Gestapo. A graduate of The University of Bonn, Germany. Went to Military
School at Blutordensberg, Vogelsang Castle. 1938: Assigned to join General Francisco Franco in Spain. 1939-1940: In the U.S., he learned English and American customs. His cover was a German journalist
working for Adolf Hitler. 1940-1941: With Reinhard Gehlen in Eastern Europe. He will join Gehlen when they are both working
for Army intelligence. 1943-1945: Streikher worked with Skorzeny. 1945: On May 7, Streikher surrenders to Allies and is cleared for intelligence. 1946-1947: He works for the OSS (Officers of Strategic Services) in Europe, Central Intelligence
Group (CIG). 1948-1950: Streikher stationed in Israel, Greece, Europe, Africa and the Middle East. OSS becomes
CIA. 1951-1957: CIA assigned back to General Gehlen, now in the German offices of the BND. 1958: In the U.S. training Army Intelligence officers and CIA. 1958-1961: Helps plan Cuban Invasion. Active in the Bay of Pigs. 1961-1965: In Africa, the Middle East and United States on CIA assignment. On November 22, 1963,

--- PAGE BREAK ---he said, “One of the worst kept secrets [in the world] is the truth about the President’s murder.

It wasn’t
Castro or the Russians.

The men who killed Mr.

Kennedy were CIA contract agents.

… It had to happen.

The man was too independent for his own good.”
1968-1970: Senior field agent for the CIA.

Disguised as a writer.

1971-1973: Back in the United States.

Langley, Virginia, training and making plans under assignment.

1974-1977: Under George Bush, then director of the CIA, Streikher sent to Africa and Middle East.

1978-1980: Contract agent on special assignment for CIA.

June 15, 1980, he retires.

Other Known Aliases: U.S.

Army officer Captain William Raine, also known as Ross Meyers, Hans
Mollof, Karl Rolff and Mark Schmidt.

He had nine other pieces of identification in assorted names and
nationalities, some in the form of passports.

The Bunge Corporation, Argentina & Germany
The stock market dropped 24 points in 27 minutes when news of President Kennedy’s assassination
was announced.

2.6 million shares were sold off.

It was the greatest panic since 1929.

Somebody made a huge profit selling short in many markets.

Somebody made half a billion dollars in one day.

Coincidentally, the Allied Crude Vegetable Oil
Refining Corporation, headed by New Jersey commodities dealer Anthony De Angeles, crashed the same
day, driving the market down.

Allied Crude was owned by the American Bunge Corporation and financially controlled by a group of
shareholders headquartered in Argentina, “Bunge and Born, LDA.” Business Week of October 19, 1963,
one month before the Kennedy assassination, described the Born family of Argentina, the biggest
shareholders in Bunge, as European, specifically German.

Everything about Bunge has German influence.

They have a $2 billion annual business in 80 countries.

There are over 110 corporate offices, all linked by Telex and under-the-ocean telegraph channels.

The
Bunge Corporation is also known as “the Octopus.”
The book Were We Controlled?--- PAGE BREAK ---

There are over 110 corporate offices, all linked by Telex and under-the-ocean telegraph channels. The
Bunge Corporation is also known as “the Octopus.”
The book Were We Controlled? detailed the relationship of the Bunge Corporation, the foreknowledge
of Kennedy’s murder, and the Argentine-German connections. General Edwin Walker and the Hitler Nazis
The Eagle’s Nest, now a mountain restaurant, was given to Adolf Hitler by Nazi aide Martin Bormann
for the Fuehrer’s 50th birthday. It is not far from Hitler’s former summer home in Berchtesgaden. Nearby is the Platterhof Hotel, built for guests when they came to pay their respects. The Platterhof has
changed its name to the General Walker Hotel. November 23, 1963, one day after Kennedy’s death, Gen. Edwin Walker called Munich, Germany from
Shreveport, Louisiana. Walker’s important call via transatlantic telephone was to the Nazi newspaper
Deutsche National Zeitung un Soldaten-Zeitung. Walker couldn’t wait to tell Munich that Lee Harvey
Oswald, the lone suspect in the Dallas murders, was the same man who shot through his window in April,
1963. There was never a shred of evidence or reliable witness that could make this connection. Dallas police
and FBI were taken by surprise. To cover this over-exuberance, linking a Marxist assassin to the
altercation, it became necessary to have Ruth Paine deliver that ridiculous letter to Marina Oswald on
December 3, 1964. The delayed letter was to have been written the night Lee was out shooting at
Walker’s home. The only bullet fragment that remained in custody was never positively identified as
coming from the 6.5 Mannlicher Carcano, and there is no proof Oswald even handled this rifle. Why was
General Walker in such a hurry to have his information printed in Germany before anybody in Dallas

--- PAGE BREAK ---heard about it?

Kurt-George Kiesinger had just been installed as Chancellor of West Germany and Franz-Josef Straus
as finance minister.

Kiesinger entered the radio propaganda division of Nazi Foreign Minister von Ribbentrop at age 36.

He was then directing a world-wide radio propaganda apparatus with 195 specialists under his
supervision during the war.

He was the liaison officer, coordinating his department’s work with that of
Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels.

Richard Nixon and Kurt-George Kiesinger were pals.

Nixon tried to hide his Nazi past.

But General
Walker, now home from military service in Munich, knew the importance of such propaganda.

He was
calling the same people who, under Hitler, published and controlled the newspapers.

There were two motives for this call.

First, it gave international attention to the fact that Oswald, the Marxist gunman, was shooting at Walker
as well as the President.

General Walker knew too many people in the Defense Department and in the Dallas-Fort Worth area
that could be part of this assassination.

The claim made him appear a victim and not a suspect.

It also
created a profile for Lee Harvey Oswald.

No possible motive could explain why Oswald would really want to kill President Kennedy.

By
making it appear that Oswald shot at the right-wing General Walker with his John Birch connections, and
then shot Kennedy (the commie-symp that Walker accused of treason), it would seem that Oswald was just
nuts.

He didn’t know right from left.

The Munich newspaper Walker called was linked to the World Movement for a Second Anti-
Komintern, an arm of the Gehlen apparat.

Some of Hitler’s ex-Nazis and SS-men were on the staff.

Gerhard Frey, the editor, was a close friend
of various Nazi Party members of the Witiko League.

The Witiko League and the Sudetendeutch
Landsmannscraft were organizations for displaced refugees.

By the summer of 1948, they formed large
organizations, and by 1955 Dr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Witiko League and the Sudetendeutch
Landsmannscraft were organizations for displaced refugees. By the summer of 1948, they formed large
organizations, and by 1955 Dr. Walter Becher was elected to the executive board of the Witiko League. Becher was one of the kingpins of Nazi front organizations. The links of Sen. Joe McCarthy, Charles Willoughby, Gen. Edwin Walker and Robert Morris to the
Nazis converged when Dr. Walter Becher set up offices in Washington, D.C. in 1950. By July 16, 1957, Becher, praised by American Opinion and other extreme right-wing publications,
initiated his liberation campaign. MacArthur, McCarthy, Willoughby, members of the U.S. Congress and
public officials then began openly to cooperate with the Nazi resurgence. Dan Smoot, former Dallas FBI
agent, kept in touch with Dr. Becher in Munich. His printed sheets were identical to Goebbels propaganda
under Hitler, and Walker’s disinformation one day after Kennedy was killed. Volkmar Schmidt came from Munich, Germany to work full time for General Walker. How long did he
work, and where was he on November 23, 1963, when Walker made the call to the same city that gave us
the CUSA imports? The YAF crowd in Dallas was an interesting gang: Col. Charles Willoughby, intelligence chief in the
South Pacific; Robert Morris, U.S. counter-intelligence and psychological warfare; Gen Edwin Walker,
brought home from Munich by JFK; William Buckley, Jr., CIA in Japan, Mexico, and elsewhere; Sen. John
Tower, who cleared all bureaucratic obstacles for Marina’s emigration to the U.S. 1964: The Warren Commission
President Lyndon Johnson was forced to select a commission to investigate the assassination of
President Kennedy and the murder of Lee Harvey Oswald by Jack Ruby. Texas authorities were called
upon to conduct the original investigation. There were too many suspicious people around the world who

--- PAGE BREAK ---believed a conspiracy existed.

Those rumors had to be squelched.

J.

Edgar Hoover’s FBI never budged from its position that Lee Harvey acted alone.

Any evidence that
didn’t conform to this conclusion was ignored.

Twenty-six volumes of witness testimony and exhibits were published, and only 8,000 copies were
sold.

No more reprints.

The contradiction between the conclusions of the Warren Report, and the
abundance of discrepancies in the other volumes, makes fascinating reading.

Chief Justice Earl Warren, John J.

McCloy and Allen Dulles were LBJ’s logical choices.

President
Kennedy didn’t trust CIA Director Dulles.

Now JFK was dead and Dulles would be in charge of all
possible “conspiracy” investigations.

Richard Nixon, temporarily retired from politics for the first time
since 1946, selected Rep.

Gerald Ford to sit on this commission.

Nixon selected Ford a second time
when he ran home to escape impeachment during the Watergate hearings.

One of the first subjects for commission members to share in January, one month before witnesses were
selected, was the matter of Lee Harvey Oswald’s status as a government agent.

Gerald Ford was the only
member of the group to write a book on the assassination.

It opened with the hushed and secret meeting in
which allegations were received that Oswald worked for the FBI.

What Ford left out of his book and
commissioners ignored in their report was that Oswald had been working for the CIA.

Chairman Earl
Warren and Commission Attorney Leon Jaworski knew about this.

They stated that “Mr.

Belli, attorney for
Jack L.

Ruby, was familiar with these allegations.”
Oswald’s informant number was 110669.

How was that for a starter?

The next move was to start building the myth and ignore fact one, stated above.

This grand commission
would call in a doctor who never met Lee Oswald or Jack Ruby to assist with the cover up.

Justice Warren suggested bringing in Dr.

Overholser, who “of course is not a lawyer.

He is a doctor
from St.Overholser, who “of course is not a lawyer.

He is a doctor
from St.

Elizabeth’s Hospital.” As the chairman went on to explain, “we felt we ought to have someone
who, in that field, could advise us on matters concerning the life of Oswald and possibly the life of Ruby
also.”
The next order of business was who should write the report.

By January 21, 1964, that had to be
decided.

Chairman Warren: “we consulted with the Defense Department, and they have offered to lend us
one of their historians to do this job, and we think that it is quite essential to the work of the
Commission.” Mr.

Goldberg would assist from the Air Force.

Mr.

Cokery was from the Army.

“Mr.

Winnaker recommended them,” Chief Counsel J.

Lee Rankin offered.

“We would work with them
to try to anticipate all of the various historical aspects.”
Who’s Who in the CIA describes “Mr.

Winnaker” as a native of Germany, born in 1904.

His full name
is Dr.

Rudolph August Winnacker.

He was an analyst for the OSS, a historian in the War Department,
1945-1949, and then chief of the Historical Division at the Pentagon.

Was Dr.

Winnaker the ilk of
Willoughby or Gehlen?

When did he come here from Germany?

Where is he now?

Marina Oswald was the first witness to testify on February 3, 1964.

Warren wanted nothing more than to make her comfortable.

The first question dealt with the General Walker story because he’d blown it by calling Munich so
soon.

That scandal had to be put to rest immediately.

Warren asked Marina “if Exhibit Two was familiar to her because it was a picture of General Walker’s
house?” Marina said, “no,” but that wasn’t good enough.

She was asked again and once more said, “I
didn’t see it, at least, taken from this view I can’t recognize it.

I never saw the house itself at any time in
my life.” That wasn’t sufficient.

She just couldn’t remember “this particular one.” Chairman Warren was
ready to go “off the record.”
They had only just begun.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I never saw the house itself at any time in
my life.” That wasn’t sufficient. She just couldn’t remember “this particular one.” Chairman Warren was
ready to go “off the record.”
They had only just begun. Chief Counsel Rankin suggested he show her “more pictures,” then maybe she would recognize the
Walker home. This time she was given a selection of a location in New Orleans, two snapshots from

--- PAGE BREAK ---l Rankin suggested he show her “more pictures,” then maybe she would recognize the
Walker home. This time she was given a selection of a location in New Orleans, two snapshots from

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Leningrad, and the same shot of the Walker home. Because Walker wasn’t living in a castle in Leningrad,
Marina assumed that house in Dallas must belong to “General Walker.”
This was admitted for identification. “Marina Oswald positively identified the photograph of General
Walker’s home among Lee’s possessions.”
The construction of the myth could now proceed. There is much that remains to be said about this
commission and its phony report. Admission of an old card trick at the beginning set the tone for the
charade to follow. The surrounding of Lee and Marina Oswald by Reinhard Gehlen agents for the
purposes of covering up the assassination conspiracy would never come out.
Two Lee Harvey Oswalds existed.
One memorized the Marine manual by age 17, went directly into radar and electronic work. He trained
at U-2 bases, learned the Russian language, got himself into and out of the Soviet Union, wrote clear and
literate letters. He was met on arriving back home by government agents, given jobs, fathered two
children, owed no debts, traveled a great deal, met with interesting oil geologists, defense department and
intelligence agents. Their social circle included the “Cabots and Lodges” from Czarist Russia, Admirals
and some fancy folks.
The other Oswald was one developed by the Warren Commission to divert attention from the facts. No
one ever saw the original “diary” that he couldn’t have possibly written.
Every Gehlen witness and emigré associated with the CIA, Tolstoy Foundation or Greek Orthodox
Church was directed by the most ridiculous questions. From this garbage, the Defense Department
extracted a history.
But the facts speak for themselves.

--- PAGE BREAK ---oundation or Greek Orthodox
Church was directed by the most ridiculous questions. From this garbage, the Defense Department
extracted a history.
But the facts speak for themselves.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER FOUR
TIMELINE – HOW THE PAST AFFECTS OUR FUTURE
AND THE PRESENT
WORLD WATCHERS INTERNATIONAL, AUGUST 17, 1979 AND AUGUST 24, 1979
1826: The murder of William Morgan, writer, for revealing secrets of the Freemasons. Hitler will
oppress Masons as well as Jews later.
1830: Mormon Church, Joseph Smith, Revelations. The Church is now a front for CIA, computer-fed data
banks, the repository for all of our lives.
1838: U.S. Civil War. Southern industry destroyed to block further wars. The South turned to armaments,
soldiers, its revenge only coming to fruit with the 1980 election.
1860s: Czar Alexander II and USA, President Abraham Lincoln working to advance Russian technology.
Standard Oil, USA, British Empire, Royal Dutch Shell to be threatened. They will want Russia subdued.
1862: Nobel family, gunpowder and other inventions, danger to British fleets in Baltic, Crimean War.
1872: Robert Nobel established in Baku, Russia, building pipelines, railroads, storage for oil. First oil
tankers. Baron Von Mohrenschildt, father of George, Oswald’s friend, in charge.
1877: Standard Oil, USA, gains national ascendancy of oil market.
1870s to 1919: German secret cults forming. Anti-Semitic, nationalistic. Pan German movement
VOLKISCH, interest on occultism. This movement never ended. Strong today. Strength behind Hitler.
1891: Cecil Rhodes, S. Africa, controlled 90% of world’s diamond supply. Formed Round Table, Great
Britain secret society. Rockefeller, Standard Oil started funding University of Chicago.
1902: Rockefeller Medical Institute, Rockefeller U. New York. Oil baron now in “medicine, education.”
Our institutions of learning and health began to be controlled by industry.
1905: First Russian uprisings, revolutions, hints of future. Japan wiped out Russian fleet, believed they
could be conquered.
1906: Russia, Great Britain, France planning containment of Germany. Russians wanted Dardanelles,
France wanted to restore Alsace and Lorrain, iron mines and coal, Britain their empire holdings.
Germany building a navy to threaten British supremacy.ainment of Germany. Russians wanted Dardanelles,
France wanted to restore Alsace and Lorrain, iron mines and coal, Britain their empire holdings.
Germany building a navy to threaten British supremacy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Russians wanted Dardanelles,
France wanted to restore Alsace and Lorrain, iron mines and coal, Britain their empire holdings.
Germany building a navy to threaten British supremacy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1908: Col. House, Texas, in Britain with Herbert Hoover. Round Table conspirators. Would defeat
Woodrow Wilson’s goals later.
1908-1924: William Buckley, Sr. in Mexico City for Rothchild’s Shell, Rockefeller oil.
1910: Secret meeting of bankers, Jekyll Island, Ga., started Federal Reserves Act. Finalized in 1913 by
Woodrow Wilson.
1912: Founding of Germanen Order. To merge with Thule Society. After defeat of Kaiser Wilhelm II’s
regime, Thule searched for a Fuehrer. Anti-Semitic, identified with Hindu racial purity.
1913: Rockefeller Foundation founded. Affects news, TV, radio, culture and communications.
1914: Assassination of Archduke Francis Ferdinand of Austria, WWI begins. Ten million died, lost in
famine, epidemics. The plots hatched in 1906 finally “worked.”
1915: Lusitania sunk, sacrificed by British, anti-German hysteria. Other planes, boats lost the same way
to present date.
1915-Present: FBI founded by Charles J. Bonaparte, grandson of Napoleon’s brother, got into political
acts with World War I. “Stiff neutrality laws” (plans of Hindu uprising vs. British), to “Slicker raids,”
rounding up men who failed to register. Established Alien Act of 1918, deport, exclude anarchistic
classes. Bonaparte and Bouvier family had close links.
1917: Bolshevik revolution breaking out in Russia as war against Germany almost over. U.S., Britain
troops sent inside Russia to try to save the retreat at that end. Volunteer army of exiles formed, used to
present day.
1919-1920: Versailles Treaty, Wilson poisoned, comes home to die. Ku Klux Klan in the USA, Thule
Society in Germany, expand. Now anti-Wilson. Col. E.M. House, Institute of International Affairs.
Urgency on how to deal with communism, loss of empires, fallen eagles.
1919: South Africa, Broederbond “religion.” An experiment of total control, children, education,
thoughts. To link with Nazis later. Gerrit Viljoen, head of Broederbond, Rand Afrikaans University.
Without exception, every prime minister, state president in South Africa from 1948 to the end of the
Apartheid era in 1994 was a member of the Afrikaner Broederbond.
1920: National Socialist Movement born. For Germans around the world. Self-determination for all
Germans.
1920s-1930s: Lt. Col. White, with Tong Song gang, Asia, pre-Mafia, to move to Toronto, begin mind
control experiments for OSS, 1942, then CIA. Move to California for further experiments.
1919: Sen. Henry Cabot Lodge, Mass., Senate Foreign Relations Committee, against Wilson and League
of Nations. Lodge, Jr. to lose senate seat to John F. Kennedy in 1952.
1920: Scheme against restrictions of Treaty of Versailles. Gen. Reinhard Gehlen joined New German
Army. Later to head East Europe spy system for Hitler, form CIA for USA under Allen Dulles. Gehlen
Nazi agents involved with JFK assassination and cover-up.les. Gen. Reinhard Gehlen joined New German
Army. Later to head East Europe spy system for Hitler, form CIA for USA under Allen Dulles. Gehlen
Nazi agents involved with JFK assassination and cover-up.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ehlen joined New German
Army. Later to head East Europe spy system for Hitler, form CIA for USA under Allen Dulles. Gehlen
Nazi agents involved with JFK assassination and cover-up.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1921: Council on Foreign Relations formed. Press, corporations, bankers, utilities, transportation,
retailers, industrialists to advise army, White House, how to gain profits. Navy, Air Force, Marines,
Army fight for their gains. We pay.
1921: Hoover Institute think tank, Stanford University, Palo Alto, California. Recipient of files of
Okhrana, Czarist secret police. Later to receive diaries of Goebbels, Himmler, others. U.S. agencies use
these documents to “handle radicals,” “protesters.”
1922: British put in Mussolini, Italy. Russia becomes Union of Soviet Socialist Republic, official.
Onassis in Argentina selling “tobacco,” on way to millionaire. Time Magazine started by Henry Luce.
Hitler writing Mein Kampf.
1923: Interpol started. Vienna, later to Berlin. Gestapo Police force. Moved to France after WWII, J.E.
Hoover, Nazi connections, later Vice-President. Accumulated files now in Mormon vaults. In August,
President Harding killed in S.F. Concealed Teapot Dome, govt. and oil conspiracies. Harding wanted
“Dictatorship” in USA.
1924: W. Buckley, Sr. moved from Mexico, sets up oil interests in Venezuela. George De Mohrenschildt
working for Creole Petroleum, a subsidiary. Later to link with Auchincloss family, Jackie, Oswald. Lenin
dies. Stalin as dictator began purge of opponents. Howard Hughes Sr. died. Howard, orphan, age 19,
“guided” by Noah Dietrich, “public accountant” from Doheny oil, to supervise Hughes Tool Co. Without
the tool bit invention, oil companies were limited to breaking the surface. Howard worked on planes,
movies.
1930: Russian fascists from Harbin, Russian Manchuria, moved to US, Connecticut fascist party. 50,000
based here.
1932: Broederbond begins removing all children, age seven, from homes. Joined Nazi Secret Society,
Des Ahnenerbe. Later, will instigate South African separation of races.
1933: E.J. Gumbel, who wrote of “400 political assassinations” prior to Hitler election, 1933, fired as
professor from Heidelberg, Germany. Time, Sept. 5, 1932: “Nazis had one victory for the week.” Gumbel.
Hitler becomes Reich Chancellor. Cover of Time. Total power. Dachau concentration camp built. Book
burning. Boycott of all Jewish-owned businesses. Gestapo formed.
1934: Roosevelt inaugurated. Jack Ruby moves from Chicago to LA, with John Roselli. Plot to Seize the
White House. Exposed by Gen. Smedley Butler. Feb. 15, 1935, report to Congress, no one is prosecuted.
J. Howard Pew, long associate of Robert Welch, Birch Soc., involved. 1963, Birch Soc., Buckley, Caddy
Nazis involved in JFK-YAF links to assassination in Texas. Best kept secret to date.
1936: Hitler invades Rhineland. Swiss Bank Account became haven for secrecy. To fund fascism and
rightist causes. Used today. Roosevelt re-nominated. Spanish Civil War, testing ground for German-Italian
Fascism. It worked. Ford Foundation started.
1937: France sabotaged by Cagoulards, (“hooded men”) aided in arms from Germany and Italy,
undermining the country for takeover.ground for German-Italian
Fascism. It worked. Ford Foundation started.
1937: France sabotaged by Cagoulards, (“hooded men”) aided in arms from Germany and Italy,
undermining the country for takeover.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1938: Germans staking out 600,000 square acres, Antarctica. To be used five years later, massive
escapes, money, gold, Nazis. U.S. joined Interpol. J.E. Hoover in touch with top Nazis until Pearl Harbor,
then went under for a few years. Night of Broken Glass, synagogues destroyed, shops torn down, 26,000
sent to concentration camps. Jews expelled from schools.
1939: Subversion of France. Cells since 1934. German, Italian financed. CSAR, Comite D’Action
Revolutionnaire. Hooded ones, Cagoulards. Jean Marie Bouvier, son of French industrialist, involved.
Bouvier member of CSAR. Hugh Auchinloss, Jackie’s step-father’s first wife, Maya DeChrapovitsky,
White Russian Czar’s entourage. Auchinloss, Naval Intelligence, wealthy stockbroker, host to George
DeMohrenschildt when Jackie was a young child. Is the “mystery” of Jackie, Kennedy, Onassis linked to
Nazi, Czar, CSAR organizations? Was she a plant when JFK defeated H. Lodge, Jr.?
1939: Jack Ruby, Chicago, aiding Hoffa, Waste Handler’s Union. Founder murdered. (In 1947, Nixon,
then a member of House Committee on Un-American Activities, bailed Ruby out of a jam.) Giancana,
Paul Dorfman take over the Union.
1939: Chaing Kai-Shek given $25 million in credits from US.
1939: James W. Young, advisor to Nelson Rockefeller, to become Vice-President and director of J.
Walter Thompson advertising agency (Watergate front). Consultant to Ford Foundation on mass
communication. Ford funded Hitler, built tanks and trucks for the German war machine.

--- PAGE BREAK ---J.
Walter Thompson advertising agency (Watergate front). Consultant to Ford Foundation on mass
communication. Ford funded Hitler, built tanks and trucks for the German war machine.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER FIVE
HOW NIXON ROSE TO POWER
(MAE BRUSSELL, REPRINTED FROM THE REALIST, AUGUST 1972)
The rise of Adolf Hitler and fascism in Germany were carefully planned.
It began with the secret rearmament following defeat in World War I, a flagrant violation of Versailles
Treaty disarmament agreements. American munitions manufacturers aided the military leaders of Germany
in the covert rearmament.
Over 400 political assassinations of legitimate government officials in Germany occurred in this
period.
The courts assisted the growing military regime from 1920-1933. Two governments, one official and
legal, one secretive, existed side by side. Hitler, front man and leader of the illicit rearmament, mistaken
for comical by intellectuals, was administered the oath as chancellor of the German Reich on January 30,
1933.1
The rise of Richard Nixon and fascism in the United States were carefully planned.
American financiers, disdainful of the Versailles Treaty, fed and supported Germany’s rearmament. The
same attitude also met the Geneva Accord, approved by Dwight Eisenhower for Indochina in 1945.2
A study of the State Department and espionage establishment reveals that we had clandestine armies
functioning abroad and in the United States.3
Hundreds of political assassinations related to minority races, labor leaders and spokesmen against
fascism have taken place in the U.S. since World War II. In 1963, the assassination of President John
Kennedy in Dallas allowed our own hidden, clandestine government to maintain control.
The candidate for President in 1968, Robert Kennedy, was murdered by the same people on the night of
his victory in the primaries.
The judiciary, including the Supreme Court, have supported secret government by lending its authority
to the concealment of conspiracies to murder our leaders. They refuse to examine documents that exist,
allow truth to remain locked in the National Archives to perpetuate the “national security” lie.
Richard Nixon, front man and leader of this illegal government, mistaken for comical by intellectuals,
was administered the oath of president of the United States on January 20, 1969.
Military and industrial fanatics felt deprived and defeated when John Kennedy would not make war
with the Soviet Union as late as 1961. E.M. Dealey, militant publisher of the Dallas News, told President
Kennedy: “We need a man on horseback to lead this nation. Too many people in Texas and the Southwest
think you are riding Caroline’s tricycle.”4
John Kennedy was murdered two years later in Dealey Plaza. He feared the hidden government behind
his back, publicly stating he wanted “to splinter the CIA in a thousand pieces and scatter it to the winds.”5
The day our President was murdered, the streets of Dallas were filled with posters and handbills
proclaiming him a traitor. This was the same motivation for illegal assassinations and killings in Nazi
Germany.6r President was murdered, the streets of Dallas were filled with posters and handbills
proclaiming him a traitor. This was the same motivation for illegal assassinations and killings in Nazi
Germany.6

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Warfare State was set free after November 22, 1963 to show its ugly face.

The war in Asia
escalated with no noticeable provocation only three weeks after the murder of President Kennedy.7
John Foster Dulles was U.S.

Secretary of State from 1953-1959.

Before and after, this public servant
wielded tremendous power and influence with the military and industrial monopolies of power and
wealth in the world.

He was the architect of “containing communism.”8 Mr.

Dulles confided: “President
Eisenhower surrendered all his power to me.” In 1956, he said, “Don’t bother about what the President
said.

I write what he says.”9 The State Department was “in my hat.”10
Allen Dulles, his brother, headed the spy agency formerly known as the OSS.

As long as John Foster
was Secretary of State, Allen Dulles had no need to “chafe under political control.” Both of them placed
“supreme confidence in their personal judgments.” They were completely trusted, able to act at will,
“shielded from any unpleasant consequences.”11
Adolf Hitler declared war in 1941.

By 1942, Allen Dulles was moved to Switzerland for the purpose
of rounding up and importing German scientific “specialists” to the United States.

Two years before the
war ended (or its fate was decided), the United States was making arrangements for Nazi scientists, arms
experts, to come to our democracy (for which the boys were fighting and dying at that moment).12
From 1945 until 1952, the U.S.

military brought over 642 alien “specialists” and their families from
Nazi Germany.

They were known collectively by the code-name “Paperclip.” German missile and rocket
experts, munition makers, war experts were carefully selected and placed in aerospace programs and
armament manufacturing.13
Violent anti-communist fears by the military and munition makers justified the transformation of a once
democratic nation into the fascist state we have today.military brought over 642 alien “specialists” and their families from
Nazi Germany.

They were known collectively by the code-name “Paperclip.” German missile and rocket
experts, munition makers, war experts were carefully selected and placed in aerospace programs and
armament manufacturing.13
Violent anti-communist fears by the military and munition makers justified the transformation of a once
democratic nation into the fascist state we have today.

Members of the Nazi Party now hold key positions
in our universities, factories, aircraft and aerospace programs.14
When the Nazi empire collapsed in 1945, General Reinhard Gehlen joined forces with our OSS.

Gehlen was placed in charge of wartime intelligence for Foreign Armies East.

“It was not long before
Gehlen was back in business, this time for the United States.

Gehlen named his price and terms.”15 A
series of meetings was arranged at the Pentagon with Nazi Gehlen, Allen Dulles, J.

Edgar Hoover and
others.16 The Gehlen organization combined forces and agents with the OSS, which was soon to become
known as the CIA.

Experts in clandestine and illegal control of Germany through political
assassinations and reversal of judicial processes became the teachers of Allen Dulles and Richard
Helms.

They helped form the new CIA in 1947, based upon clandestine activities in Nazi Germany.17
Espionage networks were to spy out secrets of other nations.

Instead they have secretly engaged in
overthrowing governments.

Maintaining billion-dollar war machines and related armament and aircraft factories requires
controlling people, political leaders and otherwise legal governmental agencies.

The communist scare,
hot war and cold war propaganda, would continue to manipulate the majority of the people.

This scare
was the brainchild of fascist strategists.

Enter Richard Milhous Nixon.

He applied to the FBI following graduation from law school and received no response.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Enter Richard Milhous Nixon. He applied to the FBI following graduation from law school and received no response. When the
United States entered World War II, Nixon requested sea duty and was assigned to the South Pacific
Combat Air Transport Command.18 Nixon’s 15 months in the South Pacific ended when he was
transferred to Fleet Air Wing 8 at Alameda, California. The next step, on special orders to the Navy
Bureau of Aeronautics, was winding up active contracts with aircraft firms, including Bell and Glenn
Martin.19 As a Lieutenant-Commander in the Navy, Richard Nixon’s next task was “negotiating
settlements” of terminated war contracts at the Bureau of Aeronautics Office at 50 Church Street, New
York City.20
That was 1945, when immigration began for the 642 Nazi rocket and aerospace experts and scientists

--- PAGE BREAK ---from Germany.

Through the “generosity of the Guggenheim Foundation,” they obtained a suitable site – a
huge medieval castle, built by financier Jay Gould on a 160-acre estate at Sands Point, Long Island.

Here
the Germans began work on a secret project for the Navy’s Office of Research and Inventions.21
April, May, June and July, 1945: worldwide attention fell upon German atrocities.

From Belsen,
Nordhusen, Buchenwald, and Dachau came stories of slaughter and grotesque medical research conducted
in the name of science.

Public opinion polls gave no evidence of generous feelings toward any group in
the German population.

But opinions do not automatically create policy.22
By 1945, the armed services accepted Nazi mentality as indispensable to American military power.

Young advisors were not alarmed by the devastations of the Third Reich.

They looked upon the German
scientists with excitement and anticipation.23 The Department of Navy was the first to act on the
emigration.24
The South and Southwest states benefited economically from this influx of munitions makers to the
rocket and space industries.

Segregated, racist states were natural habitats for imported Germans.

Cold
war propaganda, perpetuated by hatred of the Soviet Union and much of Asia, was financed and fostered
for the most part in Florida, Louisiana, Georgia, Ohio, Texas, Alabama, Arizona, Nevada, New Mexico
and California.

The same mentality that justified genocidal, inhuman slaughters on the continent of Europe built
machinery to extend pain and warfare in Southeast Asia.

Richard Nixon was in New York, serving in the Navy, the summer that importation plan started going
into effect.

He soon moved to Maryland where a very important telegram would arrive …
“He wanted to get out of the service, but there was the great question, ‘What now?’ While he pondered
his alternatives, events and circumstances were deciding the question for him.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Richard Nixon was in New York, serving in the Navy, the summer that importation plan started going
into effect. He soon moved to Maryland where a very important telegram would arrive …
“He wanted to get out of the service, but there was the great question, ‘What now?’ While he pondered
his alternatives, events and circumstances were deciding the question for him. A telegram was the
instrument of fate.”25
– RaIph De Toledano
In August, 1945, the “Committee of One Hundred Men” in California placed an advertisement in 26
newspapers:
WANTED – Congressman candidate with no previous political experience to defeat a man who
has represented the district in the House for ten years. Any young man, resident of district,
preferably a veteran, fair education, no political strings or obligations and possessor of a few ideas
for betterment of country at large may apply for the job. Applicants will be reviewed by 100
interested citizens who will guarantee support but will not obligate the candidate in any way.26
That ad was typical, a pretension that this was an open contest for office. Richard Nixon, living in
Maryland, still in the Navy, received a telephone call from Herman Perry: “Are you a Republican and are
you available?” were the two questions asked of Nixon.27
Herman Perry was vice president of Bank of America28—soon on its way to becoming the largest
private bank in the world. By 1960, one hundred top corporations were spending $21 billion for military
goods. In California alone, fully half of all jobs related directly or indirectly on the continuance of the
arms race.29
Richard Nixon—poor, from an unknown family, absent from California for many formative years during
law school and military service – was selected to represent old guard California Republicans in
Congress.30 He was called upon to serve the strategists. Nixon was “discovered.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---Central to the political escalation of Richard Nixon from congressman to vice president was the Alger
Hiss case.

The Hiss case was to Nixon what the Reichstag fire was to Hitler.

Both were dramatic lies
planned and executed by clandestine strategists.

Parallels to German strategy—assassinations, destruction of evidence, distortions to discredit
legitimate public servants – were found in America.31 In 1934, Alger Hiss was legal counsel for the
Senate Nye Committee, set up for the purpose of investigating illegal rearmament practices.32 Hiss
antagonized American industrial and banking giants.

Germany was rearming illegally.

It became necessary
to discredit anyone who, like Hiss, worked for legitimate peaceful alternatives.

Whittaker Chambers made a point of becoming acquainted with Alger Hiss in 1934.

Chambers was a
suspected German spy.33 Imported techniques were used to discredit Hiss.

After several years, Hiss could
be strategically placed in various Government services.

John Foster Dulles was instrumental in
appointing Hiss to the chair of the Carnegie Foundation, a group associated with peace and the United
Nations.

Attacks on Hiss began in 1941, attempts to associate him with communists, and these exploded like a
time bomb in 1948.

The total effect in delaying the smear was to discredit an era.

Richard Nixon was a
recipient of these efforts.

The reputation of Roosevelt, the New Deal, Dumbarton Oaks Conference,
United Nations and Truman’s administration all were tinted “red.” Joe McCarthy entered this milieu and
expressed fears fomented in lies.

Richard Nixon also served his masters by employing fear and hysteria.

His original campaigns against
Jerry Voorhis and Helen Douglas were unfounded red smears.

That is the how he operated.--- PAGE BREAK ---

His original campaigns against
Jerry Voorhis and Helen Douglas were unfounded red smears. That is the how he operated. One of the clues that the framing of Hiss was a covert operation was the common mishandling of
evidence (as seen, for instance, in the murder of John Kennedy—bullets, clothing, weapons, X-rays,
photographs, car interior, autopsy reports, cameras, street sign, curb, lamppost, clothing of John Connally,
diaries, FBI documents, CIA reports and State Department papers were either burned, flown to Michigan
and destroyed, altered, planted, missing or locked up.34)
Evidence in the murder of Robert Kennedy is “locked up for 75 years.”35
What happened to the lone piece of evidence in the Alger Hiss case critical to his conviction, the
famous Woodstock typewriter? Because Richard Nixon said his “name, reputation and career” were
linked to this case, he will tell you about the typewriter himself:
“A massive search was initiated for the key ‘witness’ in the case, the old Woodstock typewriter on
which Chambers said Mrs. Hiss had typed the incriminating documents. On December 13, FBI agents
found the typewriter. The same day I appeared before the Grand Jury with the microfilm.”
– Richard Nixon, Six Crises, 1962
For five dollars less, you could buy the same story six years later, by the same author, without the
typewriter:
“A massive search was initiated for the key ‘witness’ in the case, the old Woodstock typewriter on
which Chambers said Mrs. Hiss had typed the incriminating documents. On December 13, FBI agents
were unable to find the typewriter, but they did find some old letters which Priscilla Hiss admitted
having typed on the Woodstock.”
– Richard Nixon, Six Crises, 1968
At this point, Nixon added a footnote blaming the “press.”
Nixon failed to inform the reader that the Woodstock typewriter was found not by 35 FBI agents several
months later, after turning Washington upside-down searching for it. The typewriter was actually foundfailed to inform the reader that the Woodstock typewriter was found not by 35 FBI agents several
months later, after turning Washington upside-down searching for it. The typewriter was actually found

--- PAGE BREAK ---by Donald Hiss and his own investigators, and presented as an exhibit for the defense by Alger Hiss at
the first trial.

Richard Nixon, the chief prosecutor of the Alger Hiss case, could not write honestly in his own book
about key evidence in the case.

The smear would be used as the excuse for elevating Nixon into the office
of vice president of the United States.

Allen Dulles and John Foster Dulles would control all State
Department policies and espionage activities for the president.

There was another observation regarding the famous Woodstock typewriter.

Robert Kennedy, as
Attorney General of the United States in 1962, had made a “recent check and [found that] the FBI never
had the Woodstock typewriter.

Writing to Meyer Zeligs, Claude Cross, Hiss’s attorney in the second trial,
mentioned, “In my mind there is a mystery connected with this typewriter and its whereabouts from the
period just prior to the trial.”36
Why was Robert Kennedy searching for this important evidence, the link in the Nixon saga?

Were the
Kennedys preparing to investigate Richard Nixon’s uses of planted evidence, slander and redbaiting?

Three of Alger Hiss’ friends who could have changed the tide of history—Harry Dexter White, Walter
Marvin Smith and Lawrence Guggan—were found dead shortly after contact with the FBI.37 When covert
government creates a plot, in Germany or the United States, nobody stands in its way.

Isaac Don Levine took a reluctant Whittaker Chambers “by the arm” and arranged the meetings in
which he would begin to smear Alger Hiss.38 It was no coincidence that the same Isaac Don Levine
would meet with Marina Oswald, widow of Lee Harvey Oswald, immediately after the murder of
President Kennedy.

They were in a huddle to exchange money for squeezing a “communist” story out of a
CIA plot.39
Levine served Richard Nixon’s career faithfully and often through the years.Isaac Don Levine took a reluctant Whittaker Chambers “by the arm” and arranged the meetings in
which he would begin to smear Alger Hiss.38 It was no coincidence that the same Isaac Don Levine
would meet with Marina Oswald, widow of Lee Harvey Oswald, immediately after the murder of
President Kennedy.

They were in a huddle to exchange money for squeezing a “communist” story out of a
CIA plot.39
Levine served Richard Nixon’s career faithfully and often through the years.

“This fellow Levine is in contact with Marina to break the story up in a little more graphic manner
and tie it into a Russian business, and it is with the thought and background of a Russian connection,
conspiracy concept.”
– John J.

McCloy, Warren Commission minutes, Jan.

21, 1964
Alger Hiss said that Richard Nixon was up to something “beyond his scope and size.”40 Nixon, like
Adolf Hitler, is a patchwork quilt.

Both men represent the sum total of all murders, secret plans and
behind-the-scene covert imaginations that created them.

They were hand-sewn and designed by identical
masters.

It was a community project between persons from Nazi Germany and the United States military
and intelligence agencies.

They are in power today, continuing mass murders, political assassinations.

Industrial giants scrape the
bottom of the ocean, the surface of the moon, the face of the earth for the oil, gold, minerals, resources
within their grasp.

It is the moral obligation of human beings to halt this hunger for power and legalized
greed toward the majority of persons on the planet earth.

High summit meetings, a false sense of euphoria preceding elections, does not conceal increased
budgets for weaponry, new laws of repression or further concentration of power in the White House.

The
family of humanity is not represented by the strategists who are few in number, still holding on to their
power.--- PAGE BREAK ---

High summit meetings, a false sense of euphoria preceding elections, does not conceal increased
budgets for weaponry, new laws of repression or further concentration of power in the White House. The
family of humanity is not represented by the strategists who are few in number, still holding on to their
power. Secret organizations such as the Lincoln Club, formed in 1963, continue to finance and dictate to
Richard Nixon.41 This group should be carefully examined. Nixon’s kind of power—over other lives—is elusive and vanishes rapidly in a moment. The human
family has new weapons in the war against secrecy. Information is power. Speed of communications is
power. Ability is power. Sheer numbers of intelligent and concerned citizens becomes power. Facts are
power. Documentation of past political assassinations must be presented in a public forum before the next

--- PAGE BREAK ---eer numbers of intelligent and concerned citizens becomes power. Facts are
power. Documentation of past political assassinations must be presented in a public forum before the next

--- PAGE BREAK ---

election in 1972. The coup d’état in 1963, and again in 1968, did not represent the interests of the
majority.
It is time to call a halt to the cold war, the hot war and the war against ourselves. By examining the
evidence of political assassinations, it is possible to understand how the country was misled down the
line by a select, elite minority.
The strategists do not represent the people or the interests of the people of the United States.
NOTES
1. Seymour Melman, ed., “Clandestine Rearmament of Germany,” Inspection for Disarmament, Columbia Press, 1968, pp. 203-19.
2. Attitude to Geneva Accord in Pentagon Papers, New York Times paperback, p. xi.
3. David Wise & Thomas Ross, “Clandestine armies of U.S. home and abroad,” Invisible Government, Bantam, 1965; cf., David Wise &
Thomas Ross, Espionage Establishment, Random House, 1967.
4. Fred Cook, Warfare State (Kennedy, Dealey), Macmillan Press, 1967.
5. “Splinter the CIA,” New York Times, April 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 1966.
6. “Treason,” Hearings before the Commission, XVIII, p. 835.
7. On escalation of the war, Computers and Automation, December, 1971, p. 39.
8. “Containing Communism,” Encyclopedia Almanac, 1970, New York Times, p. 544.
9. “Eisenhower surrendered power to me,” conversation with McMillan, New York Times, April 24, 1971.
10. Roger Hilsman, “State Department in my hat,” To Move a Nation, Doubleday, 1967, p. 67.
11. On the Dulles brothers, New York Times, April 29, 1966.
12. Clarence Lasby, Allen Dulles, 1942, Switzerland, Project Paperclip: German Scientists and the Cold War, Atheneum Press, 1971; also,
Saturday Review December 11, 1971.
13. Ibid., Rounding up Nazis, Project Paperclip, p. 5.
14. Ibid., Nazis in industry, schools, factories in U.S.
15. Wise and Ross, Collapse of Germany, Gehlen, pp. 134-35.
16. Louis Hogan, Secret War for Europe, Stein & Day, 1969, pp. 35-6.
17. Ibid., pp. 115-16, 132-76.
18. RaIph De Toledano (on the Air Transport Comman, Duell, Sloan, Pearce), Nixon, p. 35.
19. Ibid., p. 37, Alameda, air contracts, p. 37.
20. New York, Contracts, Six Crises, Pyramid Books, 1962, p. 81.
21. Lasby, pp. 4-5.
22. Ibid., p. 61.
23. Ibid., p. 64.
24. Ibid., p. 66.
25. De Toledano, p. 37.
26. Ibid., pp. 39-40.
27. Ibid., p. 40.
28. Herman Perry in Emile Di Antonio’s Milhous.
29. Cook, p. 23.
30. Richard Nixon selected by old guard, New York Times, February 16, 1972.
31. Computers and Automation, October 1971, pp. 41-45.
32. Meyer Zeligs, Friendship and Fratricide, Viking Press, p. 192.
33. Ibid., p. 3.
34. Computers and Automation (JFK, evidence locked up, altered), May, June, July, Nov., 1970; March, May, June, July, Aug., Sept., Oct,
Nov., Dec., 1971; Jan., Feb., 1972.
35. Ibid., Aug. and Oct, 1970, April, 1971, on the Robert Kennedy murder.
36. Zeligs, p. 368.
37. American Opinion (Hiss, death of friends), Feb., 1971, pp. 51-53.Nov., Dec., 1971; Jan., Feb., 1972.
35. Ibid., Aug. and Oct, 1970, April, 1971, on the Robert Kennedy murder.
36. Zeligs, p. 368.
37. American Opinion (Hiss, death of friends), Feb., 1971, pp. 51-53.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

38. Zeligs (Isaac Levine, Chambers), p. 23.
39. Hearings Before the Commission, vol. XXIV, pp. 24-25.
40. Zeligs, pp. 282-283.
41. New York Times (Lincoln Club, secrets), Feb. 16, 1972.

--- PAGE BREAK ---eligs (Isaac Levine, Chambers), p. 23.
39. Hearings Before the Commission, vol. XXIV, pp. 24-25.
40. Zeligs, pp. 282-283.
41. New York Times (Lincoln Club, secrets), Feb. 16, 1972.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER SIX
WHY IS THE SENATE WATERGATE COMMITTEE
FUNCTIONING AS PART OF THE COVER-UP?
(MAE BRUSSELL, ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED IN THE REALIST, JULY 1973)
I. KNOWLEDGE OMITTED FROM THE CAMPUS
II. THE COVER-UP
A. CONCEALING THE MOTIVES
B. WITNESSES NOT CALLED
1. MARTHA MITCHELL
2. LOUIS TACKWOOD
3. TOM CHARLES HUSTON
4. WILLIAM SULLIVAN
III. MARTIAL LAW WITHOUT THE RIOTS
A. INSTITUTIONS TO DISMANTLE
B. THE ENEMY LIST
C. THE WARFARE STATE
D. POLITICAL PRISONERS OF AMERICA
I. KNOWLEDGE OMITTED FROM THE CAMPUS
There are hundreds of conspiracies taking place. They are all ordered from the White House. Political
assassinations, the killing of presidential candidates, is for the purpose of denying our freedoms.
The arrests at the Watergate Hotel in Washington D.C. took most Americans by surprise. We had been
educated with a continuous series of denials that conspiracies at the White House level could exist. The
news media treat high-level conspiracies with platitudes, indifference and unimaginative cover stories.
Propaganda is an important weapon of the fascist state. TV and the media are filled with clandestine
agents, some posing as liberal writers, whose purpose is to break the credibility of researchers or
discredit evidence that would confirm conspiracies.1 Colleges and academic institutions offer no courses
on agents provocateurs or how to recognize covert operations.2 When an accurate history of the violence
in the 1960’s and ’70’s is written, facts will reveal that government provocateurs created most of it. A
series of our own Reichstag fires was the justification for a sweeping domestic operations program

--- PAGE BREAK ---designed to deny liberties guaranteed by the Constitution.3
There is no textbook on protecting society from sabotage.

The Watergate Affair exposes how the Justice
Department colludes with espionage agents in acts that amount to treason.4 Top lawyers ignore the law
and pursue corporate interests for purposes of power and profits.5 G.

Gordon Liddy, counsel for the
White House and CREEP, helped create the infamous April 7, 1972 law allowing concealment of
campaign donations and illegal corporate financing.

History classes devote little time to the evils of
fascism.

They seldom teach the specific strategies that bring the condition into existence.

Classrooms in
the U.S.

do not discuss the edicts of repression in Greece following the military junta in 1967.

This coup
d’état, planned and financed in the U.S., would be invaluable to study as a protection against an identical
occurrence in this country.

A clear understanding of covert operations and how they are carried out is avoided.6 The electoral
process and our civil liberties have been sabotaged.

White House documents exist to prove this fact.7
Techniques for running clandestine operations and controlling the population were illustrated in the
Watergate exposures.

There will be pressure to halt the televised hearings and detract from their
significance because this is the first time we have been given a peek at the spies, and the methods used to
protect their operations.

They are not difficult to follow.

Once the agents and their tactics are identified,
there may be a better chance to end the continuous and systematic infiltration taking place.

Clandestine assignments are composed of a combination of acts obscured by secrecy and lies.

Secrecy
is necessary because most of the methods are illegal.

The operations, when discovered, are covered by
lies.8
The patterns of criminal spy operations, with certain agents reappearing in many of the same
assignments, become more complicated every day.Secrecy
is necessary because most of the methods are illegal.

The operations, when discovered, are covered by
lies.8
The patterns of criminal spy operations, with certain agents reappearing in many of the same
assignments, become more complicated every day.

They are all CIA operations:
1.

1954 assassination of President Jacobo Arbenz Guzman, Guatemala – E.

Howard Hunt, Frank
Sturgis involved in this murder, identical to Kennedy assassination in 1963.

After the President Arbenz
assassination, an “extreme leftist lone assassin” was murdered.

2.

Richard Nixon, Fourth Crisis, Latin American Tour as cold war propaganda – Votes were lagging
for Ike and Dick.

The CIA arranged this tour, staged for the “hard line on Communists” hook.

Nixon
briefed by CIA and Allen Dulles on intelligence estimates of anti-American demonstration.

Col.

Vernon
Walters, CIA, was Nixon’s interpreter.

Gen.

Robert Cushman, CIA, gave rundowns of reactions to riots.

E.

Howard Hunt in Latin America, attached to CIA station, 1956-60.

His cover was advisor to Defense
Department.

3.

U-2 Flights Over USSR to Sabotage Cold War Summit Conference – Allen Dulles, in
coordination with James McCord, who found and identified the Soviet intelligence agent questioned by
airmen.

Lee Harvey Oswald, Naval Intelligence, trained in radar at Atsugi Air Base where the U-2s were
monitored.

Oswald watched for possible vapor trails over USSR.

E.

Howard Hunt was engaged during
the 1950s in the U-2 spy plane project.

He arranged takeoff and landing of CIA aircraft.

4.

Bay of Pigs – Richard Nixon in charge of that operation, wanted nothing wrong.

Bob Cushman and
Howard Hunt had private phones to the White House.

When Hunt needed his contacts, Nixon and
Cushman were beaten by Kennedy in the 1960 election.

Bernard Barker, Frank Sturgis, Martinez,
Gonzales and the entire Watergate cast of Miami Cubans involved in the Bay of Pigs and Watergate
operation.--- PAGE BREAK ---

When Hunt needed his contacts, Nixon and
Cushman were beaten by Kennedy in the 1960 election. Bernard Barker, Frank Sturgis, Martinez,
Gonzales and the entire Watergate cast of Miami Cubans involved in the Bay of Pigs and Watergate
operation. In Six Crises, Nixon claimed credit for the covert training of Cuban exiles by the CIA. 5. 1963 assassination of President Kennedy – José Romero, soldier of fortune, was approached by a

--- PAGE BREAK ---hired assassination team from the U.S.

They planned to kill Kennedy during his 1961 visit to France.

Romero definitely remembers Frank Sturgis as one of the representatives.

James McCord, according to
Louis Tackwood, was in Dallas the day Kennedy was shot and flown afterwards to the Caribbean.

The
National Archives have FBI reports on file indicating that Frank Sturgis a friend of Lee Harvey Oswald
and David Ferrie.

Sturgis had a Miami arsenal of weapons, and original plans were to kill JFK in Miami
in 1963.

6.

Plans to assassinate the President of Panama in 1971 – Hunt and Liddy at the White House made
Operation Intercept their cover.

The President of Panama was “not cooperating” in the “control of
narcotics,” and one of their jobs was to kill him.

7.

ITT, CIA, Chile, and Watergate – William Broe, CIA, offered to help ITT “create economic chaos
in Chile.” Broe combed corporate files to determine if CIA was involved in Watergate.

This cleaning out
is identical to L.

Patrick Gray looking for evidence in the FBI reports.

Hunt and Liddy, while in the White
House, worked for the CIA and ITT at the same time, helping out with Dita Beard’s kidnapping and
hospitalization in Denver.

8.

The Daniel Ellsberg, Dr.

Fielding robbery – Hunt, Liddy, members of the Cuban committee working
for the CIA.

Gen.

Robert Cushman supplied the cameras, film developing, disguises, safe houses.

None of these people, including the president, believed they were breaking any laws.

Certain members
of the Defense Intelligence Agency, CIA, Division V of the FBI, Secret Service, armed forces and NSC
have been warfare killers and war criminals for a long time.

They are now conducting paramilitary
warfare inside the U.S.

Opening Statement by Senator Sam J.

Ervin Jr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Opening Statement by Senator Sam J. Ervin Jr. Before the Senate Select Committee on Presidential Campaign
Activities – May 17, 1973, the First Day of Hearings
What they were seeking to steal was not the jewels, money or other property of American citizens,
but something much more valuable, their most precious heritage: the right to vote in a free election. The Select Committee must probe into assertions that the very system itself has been subverted and
its foundations shaken. If the allegations that have been made in the wake of the Watergate Affair are substantiated, there
has been a very serious subversion of the integrity of the electoral process, and the committee will be
obliged to consider the manner in which such a subversion affects the continued existence of this
nation as a representative democracy, and how, if we are to survive, such subversions may be
prevented in the future. Following the Watergate break-in, there has been a massive attempt to cover up all the improper
activities. Evidence that has surfaced has cast a black cloud of distrust over our entire society. Our citizens do
not know whom to believe, and many of them have concluded that all the processes of government have
become so compromised that honest government has been rendered impossible. The health, if not the survival of our social structure and of our form of government requires the
most candid and public investigation of all the evidence and of all the accusations that have been
leveled at any persons, at whatever level, who were engaged in the 1972 campaign. My colleagues on the Committee and I are determined to uncover all the relevant facts surrounding

--- PAGE BREAK ---these matters, and to spare no one, whatever his station in life may be, in our efforts to accomplish this
goal.

The American people are looking to this committee for enlightenment and guidance regarding the
details of the allegations regarding the subversion of our electoral and political process.

The purpose of this committee is to provide full and open public testimony in order that the nation
can proceed toward the healing of wounds that now afflict the body politic.

History and the nation are
watching us.

We cannot fail our mission.

Murders, conspiracies, entrapment, assaults, false imprisonments are acts of warfare.

Unsuspecting
citizens are taken by surprise because they did not realize that white America was the enemy.

Blacks,
Indians and Chicanos have long known of the open war against their existence.

Watergate is a revelation
of a civil war that is not likely to go away without a struggle.

Expect a counter-attack by the White House
and even the armed forces if necessary.

A web of conspiracies has been strangling this nation.

The Senate Select Committee on Presidential Campaign Activities is part of the cover-up.

The
committee’s structure and methods are reminiscent of the fictitious Warren Report their colleagues put
together for us ten years ago.

Are these errors caused by ignorance or stupidity or complicity?

The question was asked of Haldeman
if demonstrators were known to be paid by McGovern or Wallace or other opponents.

The question
wasn’t how much Republican money paid provocateurs to defecate or urinate on the streets in Miami.

There is evidence that provocateurs were in fact hired, including a female FBI agent who swam nude at
the convention.

Are the errors only one more con game directed at citizens who deserve better than they are getting
from witnesses?

Spiro Agnew praised the Watergate hearings.

He said they are “evidence that our society is more open
than ever.” Instead of secret hearings, they are open and allow us to watch the cover-up.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Spiro Agnew praised the Watergate hearings. He said they are “evidence that our society is more open
than ever.” Instead of secret hearings, they are open and allow us to watch the cover-up. If the committee
did its job with an understanding of the magnitude of the crimes, Agnew would be investigated, too,
because he is part of the problem: the selection of our candidates is forced upon us by violence and
murders. The election sabotage that took place in 1972 had as much to do with Agnew supporters as the Nixon
plumbers. James Earl Ray, the alleged assassin of Martin Luther King, said, “King had to be killed in an election
year.” It was Agnew who benefited by this murder. He had close ties to the FBI, and was prompted into
an anti-black, law-and-order position for election purposes. Greek military money expressly for Agnew, running into millions, was secretly stashed away and
determined American foreign policy in the Middle East. Oil profits and military interests have placed
Agnew in the vice-presidency. The Constitution made no provisions for election robberies or clandestine agents posing as candidates. President Nixon, intelligence agencies and the armed forces deny our Constitutional rights, then expect an
orderly Constitutional succession of power. This situation is the first of its kind in the U.S. and should be tested by popular election. Senator
Muskie or Kennedy would defeat Agnew tomorrow, indicating he does not represent the majority in this
democracy. The election was a fraud, and Agnew supporters and his finances were directly involved in
the Watergate Affair through Mullen Associates and specific White House aides. There are many methods of conducting a lengthy, voluminously and costly investigation without ever

--- PAGE BREAK ---serving truth or justice.

While giving the appearance of attempting to solve Phase I of the Watergate
Affair, there is a basic dishonesty exhibited in the unskilled procedures.

No wonder American citizens are as confused about the White House espionage squad as they were a
year ago.

The Senate Select Committee, by making many errors, increases the problem of solving
sabotage and conspiracy.

Some of these include:
1.

Wrong witnesses called.

Last July, 1972, it was obvious that Al Wong, the Secret Service man who
hired James McCord, should be a major witness.

When it was disclosed by Alexander Butterfield that the
White House was bugged, Al Wong appeared to be holding the tapes.

Wong and McCord were close
associates.

Other men were at the Watergate and fled to Miami.

They were never arrested or called as witnesses.

Donald Segretti was “one of 50 agents.” Where are the other 49?

Who controls the Washington prison that sent men in to beat up Liddy and Hunt the night before they
testified before the Grand Jury?

There were two guards on duty at the Watergate Hotel on June 17, 1972.

One “went home early.” Who
arranged that?

The Watergate Hotel manager knew the espionage team.

He was told to “shut up” and never
interviewed.

2.

Wrong questions are asked.

When the correct witness is on the stand, the wrong questions are
asked.

It is impossible to shed light on a problem made more difficult by a cover up.

3.

Change of subject.

When the right witness is on the stand and the correct question is asked, there is
a quick change of subject to obstruct information that might flow.

After a Senate vote, many good
questions were dropped.

The Warren Commission went “off the record.” The voting pattern serves to
break up the testimony and evidence.

4.

Questions are made out in advance.

There is a narrow inquiry into Phase I, the Watergate, that
can’t be limited, the hotel entry is part of the entire “plumbers operation.” They can’t be separated.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Questions are made out in advance. There is a narrow inquiry into Phase I, the Watergate, that
can’t be limited, the hotel entry is part of the entire “plumbers operation.” They can’t be separated. Their
plans for violence and provocateurs have to do with the Democratic offices entry. The John Kennedy assassination, and Jack Ruby’s killing Oswald, were one espionage plan. The
Warren Commission, and Ruby’s trial, attempted to have the public believe these were separate, isolated
events. In the same manner, the Senate Committee and witnesses involved want to separate the “caper”
from the “horror stories.” Both involved identical plans, funds and a team that worked together for many
years doing the same kinds of sabotage. 5. Time limits imposed. The restoration of confidence in government will come about by delving into
all leads, not being limited by a clock or calendar. The testimony about Tony Ulasewicz’s other
assignments was cut short for “lack of time.” Hours spent on repetitious questions. Important matters are
limited in subject matter by a 10-minute agreement. 6. Not equipped to recognize or question espionage agents. The Senate Committee asks serious
questions without clarifying that lies, perjuries, denials are part of the operation. There are other ways of
locating evidence of sabotage. Witnesses are allowed face-saving devices and not exposed as intelligence
operatives. If Ulasewicz had been allowed to describe his “35 assignments for the White House,” a
conclusion, not so humorous, would be drawn. 7. No cross-examination. Mild discrepancies, important, are ignored. James McCord said he had

--- PAGE BREAK ---“nothing to do with the Kennedy assassination,” and this may be a fact—he didn’t shoot the weapon.

His
presence in Dallas on that day, or identification of the plane that took him to the Caribbean would be
helpful in describing some of McCord’s duties for the CIA.

8.

Documentary evidence exits to illustrate charges of treason and conspiracy.

Arthur Bremer’s
second gun, found in his car, and bullets taken from the Wallace shooting, could be compared.

The White House inter-agency espionage operational plans could be shared with the public to
understand the minds in the Oval Office.

Louis Tackwood’s tapes of planned San Diego martial law for 1972 could be played and exposed.

In spite of the exclusion of White House logs from examination, and massive evidence destroyed, there
is enough evidence available to purge an administration that remains in power.

9.

Deaths, threats of death, assaults.

The Senate Committee is not interested in jail problems, or
local police and the CIA working together.

G.

Gordon Liddy was hurt in a prison fight the night before his
appearance at the Grand Jury.

E.

Howard Hunt was beaten up on the eve of his grand jury testimony in May, 1973.

Evidence of the
sabotage of Mrs.

Dorothy’s Hunt’s plane is ignored.

Questions are not asked Tony Ulasewicz regarding the death of Mary Jo Kopechne.

What hour did he
arrive on the island?

Was he there before she was killed?

One security guard saw Mary Jo asleep in back
of the car at 11 p.m.

Who was that?

The guard was giving press interviews to Time, Colson’s outlet for
smear.

James McCord stated he had “worked for the CIA long enough” to know he could be killed once he
was sent to prison.

The phone call McCord received from Tony Ulasewicz, attempting to force a “guilty
plea” like the others, was interpreted as a threat to his family and himself.

The only member of the Senate Committee who shows the appropriate disgust and anger is Senator
Weicker.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The phone call McCord received from Tony Ulasewicz, attempting to force a “guilty
plea” like the others, was interpreted as a threat to his family and himself. The only member of the Senate Committee who shows the appropriate disgust and anger is Senator
Weicker. He seems to understand clandestine operations and the slimy arrogance of super-patriots who
disgrace our nation. Members of the Black Caucus once asked then-Attorney General John Mitchell about future programs. He answered, “Don’t listen to what I say, watch what I do.” This same advice would serve investigators
of conspiracy operations. Concealing and covering by lies and perjury will never expose the crimes
committed by this team. Going back to the John Kennedy assassination, to Robert Kennedy’s murder and other arranged
tragedies, the bullets, autopsies, medical reports all exist to prove conspiracies. It is time to examine
evidence and not ask the masters of subversion for answers to stupid questions. Watergate has logs,
evidence, arrangements for Miami, tapes of treason. Get them out in the open and we shall be the judge. Senator Ervin said the “government was subverted,” “citizens do not know whom to believe,” “the
processes of government were compromised.”
Don’t depend on liars or Senate Committees guilty of covering for the Nixon Administration they are
criticizing. Produce the documents and homicide records. We can figure out what is happening for
ourselves and save time and money wasted in perpetuating a dying system of government. There is no
place for the CIA, DIA, intelligence operations or their continuous infiltrations. The Senate Committee is arranging the witnesses and questions in such a way that little can be
accomplished to prevent the continuation of the existing military junta. II. THE COVER-UP

--- PAGE BREAK ---A.

CONCEALING THE MOTIVES
The twenty-million-dollar question: More than a year has passed since the illegal entry of Democratic
National Headquarters in Washington, D.C.

The motive for this assignment, planned almost six months in
advance, remains the carefully guarded secret.

There is reason for this silence, and it is not lack of
evidence.

The men who planned the operation, as well as those who covered it up, and the courts
investigating, wish to keep this important information secret.

Why?

Racism, prejudices and fear of
changing the status quo are so deeply embedded in our ruling class that there is a silent and tacit
agreement to protect each other.

“National security” may be used to soften the inquiry, as it was used to
lock up evidence in the John Kennedy assassination.

It is impossible, the way the courts are constructed, to force revelations that would damage the existing
power structure.

If Richard Nixon moves out of office, Spiro Agnew moves in and Ronald Reagan will
follow.

The depth of corruption and links to the sabotage will not be touched.

The power base of
manipulations and political dishonesty remains.

My Lai, Kent State, Attica, riots at Isla Vista, the San Quentin shootout, political assassinations, illegal
bombings, Jackson State and a hundred other conspiracies are covered up.

Exposing white America, the so-called law-and-order people, as burglars, wiretappers, forgers,
extortionists and thieves can only go so far.

They can obstruct justice, get refunds on illegal donations,
commit perjury and violate election laws.

Their prosecution as murderers, criminals or conspirators
never happens.

Treason is not even whispered when that is exactly what is taking place.

Last year was the most important election in U.S.

history.

Corporations and conglomerates were
meeting a crisis.history.

Corporations and conglomerates were
meeting a crisis.

Special interests such as ITT, Howard Hughes, oil companies, warfare contractors and
aerospace industries always select the president and vice-president, but this victory was vital in 1972.

Certain countries were agitating against conglomerates.

Kidnappings and confiscations could escalate.

ITT was nearly divested of interests this administration saved for them.

Chile’s President Salvadore
Allendé spelled matters out at the UN.

He charged “ITT, CIA and armed forces with creating economic
chaos, altering free elections, instigating civil war and wanting to create a military dictatorship.” The
Cold War manipulations that we enforced in over 90 countries could be halted with a new
administration.9
Warfare industries were in trouble without a Nixon-Agnew victory.

The war in Asia could escalate
after elections.

The Middle East is waiting for the next U.S.-fomented war.

A Democratic president might
change the course of U.S.

economic dependence on warfare hardware into domestic needs.

There is less
profit in building the U.S.

than bombing Cambodia or importing and distributing narcotics.

The drug
traffic from Asia involves more billions than military profits.

Anti-war protestors, particularly Vietnam veterans, were an embarrassment.

Domestic programs were to be solved with Caspar “the Ax,” or Malek “the Hatchet” once the
“mandate” was declared.10
The election victory of Nixon-Agnew was ordered.

Maurice Stans went around telling the corporations
exactly what percentage to put into the till.

The foot soldiers then put the money to work.

Over $60 million went into Republican funds to re-elect the incumbent and popular President.

Another $20 million in secret, consecutive $100 bills was set aside to be sure they won the election by
any means necessary.

That is where the motives for the Watergate Hotel entry start to become important.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Another $20 million in secret, consecutive $100 bills was set aside to be sure they won the election by
any means necessary. That is where the motives for the Watergate Hotel entry start to become important. The conservative Republican, the old guard traditional politician who can win or lose elections fairly,
becomes separated from the espionage operation. Some money goes into legal spending such as TV time,
office expenses, etc. And some money goes into the illegal guarantee of success when the polls close. There are a lot of reasons for keeping political donations to the President and Vice-President secret.11
None of them except the obvious illegal discretions require such complicated secrecy. If more than favors

--- PAGE BREAK ---are expected, and serious crimes will be committed to select candidates through violence, all techniques
of secret funding are employed.

The $5,300 in consecutive $100 bills found on the Watergate espionage squad was part of the
complicated funding.

Potential candidates for the 1968 and 1972 elections were eliminated by murder, a contrived scandal
involving a murder, attempted murder, forgery and harassment.

These favors require a lot of money that
will never be accounted for.

They might be the missing millions.

$20-million was delivered in cash, some
of it deliberately burned to conceal consecutive serial numbers.

Donations were hidden in 45-90 dummy
fronts that never existed.

Money was pulled from “1968” accounts in Mexico, the Middle East,
Switzerland, Los Angeles, New York, Houston and other cities.

Complicated money laundering financed five or six operations, travelled from Texas, to Mexico,
Houston, Washington, Florida and back to Washington.

Safes stuffed with cash were inside the White
House, Maurice Stans’ offices and elsewhere.

Consecutive $100 bills were passed in suitcases, unmarked
envelopes, put in desk drawers when the recipient left the room.

Money was given to unknown persons,
for unknown reasons, from unknown sources, left in telephone booths, passed inside taxicabs, near
airports, handed on park benches, in hotel lobbies, on golf courses, and donated by friends from the
Philippines.

A super-secret account was located in Bethesda, Maryland under the name of Henry Buchanan, brother
of White House aide Patrick Buchanan.12
Donald Nixon made two secret trips to Greece for a $10 million loan from the Marriott Corporation
during the time Republicans were seeking money to silence the Watergate defendants.13 Martha Mitchell
was delivered to the Marriott New York apartment, a la Dita Beard, after her abduction from California
and her famous call to Helen Thomas of UPI.14 Martha said she would be receiving $2 million for a book
—to buy her silence.Money was given to unknown persons,
for unknown reasons, from unknown sources, left in telephone booths, passed inside taxicabs, near
airports, handed on park benches, in hotel lobbies, on golf courses, and donated by friends from the
Philippines.

A super-secret account was located in Bethesda, Maryland under the name of Henry Buchanan, brother
of White House aide Patrick Buchanan.12
Donald Nixon made two secret trips to Greece for a $10 million loan from the Marriott Corporation
during the time Republicans were seeking money to silence the Watergate defendants.13 Martha Mitchell
was delivered to the Marriott New York apartment, a la Dita Beard, after her abduction from California
and her famous call to Helen Thomas of UPI.14 Martha said she would be receiving $2 million for a book
—to buy her silence.

Marina Oswald was offered $125,000 to write a book.

It was never published.

Howard Hunt sent a message to the White House stating that he was “writing a book.” This is a typical
clandestine message in seeking a bribe.

Edward Nixon, the President’s other brother, flew a helicopter from New York to New Jersey to
discuss the famous $200,000 delivered at the airport, donated by Robert Vesco.

Nixon decided whether it
would be check or cash.15
The Federal Reserve System distributes money to commercial banks, but were unable to trace $10,000
found in consecutive $100 bills marked with the serial “B.” The money, found in Mrs.

Dorothy Hunt’s
purse after her fatal airplane crash, was not recorded in New York.

“Unlike other areas, this bank does
not keep track of the serial numbers.”16
At least eight persons connected with the mysterious funding alone have been killed since last year.17
Provocateurs had been paid those consecutive $100 bills in Miami by the CIA, and reservations were
made for demonstrations to take place.

Where was all this secret money going?

There is a way to find out.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Where was all this secret money going? There is a way to find out. Tony Ulasewicz, bagman for Herbert Kalmbach (who wears gloves when he handles the cash), was
paid $100,000 in 1969 by the president’s attorney. Other years he earned $22,000 plus “expenses.”
Ulasewicz has a New York accent. Arthur Bremer, arrested for the Wallace shooting and recently denied a re-trial, was seen in Michigan
talking politics with a man 6’2,” 220 lbs., “with a New York accent.” Maryland police stopped a suspect
after the George Wallace shooting described as 6’2,” weighing 220 lbs., in a light blue Cadillac. Arthur Bremer spent a lot of money on airplane tickets, the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in New York, nights
at the ITT Sheraton Plaza in Maryland, and with a CIA agent in Toronto at the Lord Elgin.

--- PAGE BREAK ---There was money spent in the Wallace shooting.

A New York accent, to be identified, should have been interviewed.

Did any of the secret $20 million
finance the Wallace shooting?

Was Ulasewicz with Arthur Bremer?

Did any of the Kalmbach $400,000 from New York to defeat Wallace get to Maryland police, agents—
were these funds involved in the Wallace shooting?

Complicated money transactions took place, secure
and secret; the 1972 election was almost secure.

J.

Edgar Hoover, who strenuously objected to the illegal sabotage, was dead.

The Domestic Intelligence Agency intended to have the Director of the FBI as its head.

Hoover
objected to every section of it, so it was unlikely they could proceed if he were alive.

L.

Patrick Gray, on
the other hand, was a master of stopping all investigations of Justice Department conspiracies.

He quelled
the Watergate Affair by burning documents, closed the ITT case, halted the Ruben Salazar and Jerie Lee
Amie murder investigations in Los Angeles, stopped the Isla Vista riot investigation, halted the
Teamsters-Mafia wiretapping regarding health plans in California.

Gray fired U.S.

Attorney Robert
Meyer for refusing to prosecute the Ellsberg case.

A few months later Robert Meyer was dead.

J.

Edgar Hoover did not have an autopsy.

His body was not removed in a hearse.

There was no
indication of poor health.

There is reason to exhume his remains: the possibility of poison in his apple pie
might be discovered.

Mary Jo Kopechne, former secretary of Senator Smathers of Florida, was dead, eliminating Senator
Ted Kennedy as a candidate.

George Wallace’s 20-26 million votes were back in Republican ballot boxes.

Senator Muskie was sufficiently smeared to lose the New Hampshire primaries.

Senator Humphrey,
followed by Sedan Chair 2 and Sedan Chair 88, was well under control, with a few smear letters thrown
in for bad luck.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Senator Muskie was sufficiently smeared to lose the New Hampshire primaries. Senator Humphrey,
followed by Sedan Chair 2 and Sedan Chair 88, was well under control, with a few smear letters thrown
in for bad luck. Senator Eagleton’s hospital records were with John Ehrlichman, probably in the same drawer as the
illegal bugging tapes ordered by Henry Kissinger and General Haig. Things were looking pretty good for the GOP—but…
What would happen if the Democrats came up with a combination of candidates who could still win the
election in 1972? John Mitchell testified that “in June 1972 the Republicans were not sure of an election
victory.” And Ehrlichman testified that the surveillance changed from Muskie to McGovern and Ted
Kennedy. The only alternative remaining, to be sure of winning, would be the anticipated alternate solution
planned since the fall of 1971. The CIA, Litton Industries and U.S. tested a coup d’état in Greece that is still going strong. The CIA,
FBI and armed forces practiced in the Philippines. The CIA, DIA, FBI, armed forces, Internal Security, Secret Service and Justice Dept. would be called
to help create martial law. All the nation’s top law enforcement agencies and top agents were cooperating in the Watergate
operation. They aided in the cover-up, and they influence investigations now. Claims to the contrary
notwithstanding, there is no way such an extravaganza of characters could be assembled for a “stupid”
and “uninformative” adventure. The highly trained team of Hunt, Liddy and McCord were arrested. The nation came to a standstill and there was an economic crisis abroad. All investigative and government agencies were tainted by scandals and covering up. The entry to
Democratic headquarters was the culmination of two years preparation for assuring a 1972 election
mandate. The White House “Plumbers” worked closely, in every CIA operation, with the armed forces
and investigative agencies.

--- PAGE BREAK ---of two years preparation for assuring a 1972 election
mandate. The White House “Plumbers” worked closely, in every CIA operation, with the armed forces
and investigative agencies.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the end, James McCord feared a CIA takeover identical to Nazi Germany intelligence operations.
J. Edgar Hoover feared the CIA takeover and destruction of all civil liberties. Hoover didn’t mind
helping a couple of Kennedys get killed, or the systematic slaughter of 28 Black Panthers with more in
prison today. He drew the line at martial law. He would not have allowed George Wallace to be
assassinated.
The Plumbers Connection
David Young worked under Henry Kissinger at the National Security Council. He was transferred to
head the White House “Plumbers” unit under John Ehrlichman.
Young went to then-Director of the CIA Richard Helms to obtain a psychiatric profile of Daniel
Ellsberg. Helms said that although the original 1947 charter of the CIA forbade engagement in
domestic intelligence, Young insisted that it was very important to the White House, that the
assignment came from Ehrlichman’s highest authority, and the request was granted.
Helms testified that he put Young in touch with Howard Osborn to prepare the profile. FBI
documents, included in the Warren Commission Hearings on the Assassination of John F. Kennedy (Vol.
XXV, pp. 1-60), show that Albert Osborn, also known as John Howard Bowen, sat on the bus to Mexico
with Lee Harvey Oswald on September 26, 1963.
Osborn ran a missionary school in Mexico that was a front for political assassins sent all over the
world. A Mr. Osborn purchased the 1,000 “Hands Off Cuba” leaflets that Oswald distributed in New
Orleans with Carlos Brienguier.
During the 1972 election campaign, Spiro Agnew is alleged to have taken several trips to New
Orleans to meet with this same Carlos Brienguier.
Howard Osborn is a name used in a previous assassination, and reappears now as the contact man
between the CIA and the White House, working with William Sullivan of Division V of the FBI in the
“Plumbers”—the interagency spy group that even the late J. Edgar Hoover believed to be a threat to
the nation’s civil liberties. Hoover objected to the CIA using the FBI as a front for domestic
intelligence.
Richard Nixon was in trouble, according to Andrew Tully, Hoover’s friend. He was surrounded by the
same CIA that McCord and Hoover feared. “He needed me around to protect him from those people
around him”—statement by Hoover in January, 1972—and this may be the reason Hoover had to be
killed. This would fit into the assassination plans for Nixon in the fall of 1972.
The top intelligence and law enforcement agents involved in the Watergate and Gestapo operations
were:
– Acting Director of the FBI, L. Patrick Gray
– William Sullivan, Division V, FBI, Domestic Security
– Assistant Attorney General Robert Mardian
– Director of the CIA Richard Helms
– CIA Deputy Director Lt. Gen Cushman
– CIA Deputy Director Vernon Walters
– Henry Kissinger, NSC
– General Alexander Haig, NSC, now Chief of Staff, White House
– Inspector General of the CIA, William BroeDeputy Director Lt. Gen Cushman
– CIA Deputy Director Vernon Walters
– Henry Kissinger, NSC
– General Alexander Haig, NSC, now Chief of Staff, White House
– Inspector General of the CIA, William Broe

--- PAGE BREAK ---– Assistant Attorney General Henry A.

Peterson
W.

Clement Stone, who has contributed nearly $7 million to Republicans since 1968, said, “I felt this
provided the one chance in a lifetime to change the course of history for the better.” The feeling of
necessity and desperation he expressed—translated into “better” business, I suppose—was identical to
the attorney general’s and others who knowingly broke laws to preserve the presidency for two special
men.

The second illegal entry of Democratic offices required nine men, a hotel room across the street,
special “Gemstone” files and a complicated system of passing a message to the Oval Office.

When five men were arrested on June 17, 1972, the frantic telephone calls, denials and secret meetings
took place.

White House aides were burning documents and carting away file boxes, opening Hunt’s desk
and safe.

The Gemstone papers had to be destroyed immediately.

Tapes of conversations taken from Mr.

Oliver had to be destroyed.

If conversations were “foolish and stupid, unfruitful,” why not produce the tapes to show what an ill-
advised adventure this was?

That could have cleared the air.

But what if provocateurs entered Democratic offices—Republican spies registered as Democrats, like
Donald Segretti?

Republicans sent allies to the Watergate to secure room plans for the Miami
conventions.

What if the telephones were used to discuss radicals, planned violence in Miami or the intention to kill
President Nixon?

James McCord testified that the objective was “to look for information if President Nixon were secure
in Miami.” In clandestine operations, when you “look,” you plant evidence.18 G.

Gordon Liddy received
campaign funds to determine what to do if the crazies made an attack on the President.

Louis Tackwood, agent provocateur for nine years with the LAPD, was hired to join this White House
espionage squad for planned violence in San Diego.Gordon Liddy received
campaign funds to determine what to do if the crazies made an attack on the President.

Louis Tackwood, agent provocateur for nine years with the LAPD, was hired to join this White House
espionage squad for planned violence in San Diego.

Those plans included “getting Nixon” after martial
law was declared.19
The Secret Service, FBI and armed forces could protect President Nixon without this secret espionage
group.

Andrew Topping, a wealthy New Yorker, made arrangements to murder Nixon between his
nomination and the election.20
Tight-lipped Al Wong of the Secret Service (he hired James McCord) and Alexander Butterfield knew,
via bugging devices, every room that Richard Nixon entered.

McCord, Hunt and Liddy could receive
messages from Wong.

Dwight Chapin, Nixon’s appointment secretary, has been silent about Topping.

Nobody mentions his name.

If conversations were produced after the planned events, martial law or Nixon’s assassination, the anti-
war protestors, radicals and McGovern supporters would be blamed.

G.

Gordon Liddy proposed illegal
kidnappings of radicals until after the elections.

All voices against future wars or domestic repressions
would be in prison.

Internal Security provided lists of desired political activists.

They worked with James McCord every
day in the spring before the Watergate arrests.

The White House emergency division exists today.

McCord’s links have been silenced and ignored.

In The Politics of Lying, David Wise describes
McCord’s important position with a military reserve unit, the Special Analysis Division, and his
preparation of a national watch list.

The martial law plan would secure the presidency for selected agents Nixon and Agnew, silence
protestors and clear the way for a list of domestic strangulations of civil liberties.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In The Politics of Lying, David Wise describes
McCord’s important position with a military reserve unit, the Special Analysis Division, and his
preparation of a national watch list. The martial law plan would secure the presidency for selected agents Nixon and Agnew, silence
protestors and clear the way for a list of domestic strangulations of civil liberties. Many important
witnesses who could shed light on the complicated motives for entry into the Democratic offices will
never be called before the Senate Committee or by Special Prosecutor Archibald Cox, unless we continue

--- PAGE BREAK ---to expose their cover-up roles.

Sherman Skolnick, independent investigator from Chicago, has kept alive the facts about possible
sabotage of United Airlines flight 553 and the killing of Mrs.

Hunt.

Other information and witnesses will
be forced into the open if the public demands that the truth be told.

B.

WITNESSES NOT CALLED
1.

MARTHA MITCHELL
Who’s afraid of Martha Mitchell?

White House documents signed by President Nixon exhibited a “gestapo mentality,” said Senator Ervin.

Louis Tackwood said the LAPD, connected to the White House special squad, wanted a “gestapo.”
Fascism isn’t a piece of paper.

The treatment of Martha Mitchell exemplifies what dictatorship is about.

The quashing of her testimony is identical to gestapo kangaroo courts.

The Senate Committee is
protecting the guilty.

In California, after the arrests, she might know who was involved in the cover-up.

At
least seven people directly involved in the Watergate entry, planned months earlier, were with the
Mitchells in California.

Kidnapping: Serious charges were made by Martha Mitchell.

When she called for help, the telephone
was torn from the wall.

All communications ceased.

Only non-English-speaking persons entered her
room.

She was forcibly detained while her husband used their Washington D.C.

apartment for clandestine
meetings.

Robert Mardian and Fred LaRue met with Mitchell on June 19, 1972.

Martha was forced to
remain in California.

Private Armies: The White House hired private thugs to take care of demonstrators.

“Unsalaried”
police travelled with Nixon, tore down signs in Illinois.

Private cop Tony Ulasewicz worked on a salary
of $22,000 for political espionage.

What private police force of four men was called to contain Martha?

Steve King couldn’t handle her alone.

She said there were five men.

Hotel staff said they couldn’t be
responsible.

California police and the FBI didn’t respond.

Where do the private guards come from?

Assault: Herbert Kalmbach, Nixon’s attorney, took Mrs.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Where do the private guards come from? Assault: Herbert Kalmbach, Nixon’s attorney, took Mrs. Mitchell to the hospital. Strangers occupied
her room. Her body was very badly bruised in many places. Hospital records were not subpoenaed to
determine the treatment she required. Martha asked why the men who detained her were not arrested. They were not only not exposed, but promoted. Steve King, who did most of the damage, was promoted to
chief of security for CREEP. Mental illness: To this day, Martha is made to seem drunk, stupid, deranged. A psychiatric profile from
the CIA is spread around. Like Jim Garrison, Dita Beard or Marguerite Oswald, when certain persons
know too much about government conspiracies, they have to be discredited. Bribery, blackmail: When Howard Hunt wanted money for silence, he said he was “going to write a
book.” Martha was offered $2-million for a book. John Mitchell will never say anything to embarrass
President Nixon. The book money could help support them for a few years. Safe-Houses: Martha couldn’t go back to her Washington apartment after the arrests. Her move to the
Marriott in New York, following the disclosures, indicates the deep involvement of high officials. That
was no reason to dislodge a family, in an election year when her husband would still be working with the
president every day.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Protection of the guilty: No testimony taken from Martha.

She said she could “name names.” The
phony investigators want her far away.

She will spoil the illusion of inquisitiveness.

The real facts remain
hidden in spite of the good TV show.

FBI are protected: Why were FBI men in her room?

She didn’t do anything wrong.

Martha said her
room in California was filled with the FBI.

Did she mean John Mitchell, L.

Patrick Gray, William
Sullivan or other members of the team?

Promotions: The guilty get promotions for their cooperation.

Steve King, former employee of Senator
Gurney of the Senate Committee, earned $18,000 a year working for him.

He had a security clearance at
the Justice Department.

Mitchell “loved King like a son.” Steve King is now in the Department of
Agriculture.

Do they send the thugs, the same who assaulted and injected Martha, to beat up United Farm
Workers?

Martha Mitchell and James McCord: McCord was in the Mitchell apartment at the Watergate Hotel
January 6, 1972.

CREEP paid $207 for “technical inspection.” John Mitchell was attorney general at this
time, and could have used the FBI, not private funds or McCord.

The fee was for “smoke detectors.”
When arrested, McCord had a case marked “Smoke Detectors.” John Mitchell said he “only saw McCord
once.” Martha would know if there were any listening devices in their apartment.

2.

LOUIS TACKWOOD
Louis Tackwood should have been the first witness before the Senate Committee.

In a press conference
held on October 25, 1971, he asked Congress to investigate a secret espionage squad inside the White
House.21 One year after the Watergate arrests, all of the Tackwood allegations are proven accurate.

Listed
below are his charges and a brief reference to massive evidence now available to support his warnings:
1.

An espionage squad was formed inside the White House, a secret operation.

Judge Morell E.--- PAGE BREAK ---

An espionage squad was formed inside the White House, a secret operation. Judge Morell E. Sharp refused to work with the Domestic intelligence plan because it was “too secret.” This was six
months after it was allegedly “rescinded.” No evidence exists to prove the necessity of the squad except
for political sabotage. Tackwood was referring to the Domestic Intelligence and Internal Security Group. 2. This secret squad was formed in the fall of 1971. E. Howard Hunt, G. Gordon Liddy moved into
White House in the fall of 1971. Donald Segretti and other operatives started hiring provocateurs in the
fall of 1971. 3. The group was connected to the FBI and other intelligence agencies. William Sullivan, Division
V, FBI, left J. Edgar Hoover to work with this group. Logs were taken from the FBI. FBI agents involved
with Division V in other election manipulations. 4. Domestic White House police force connected to California up and down the coast worked with
Attorney General Evelle Younger. California is the center of major Justice Department conspiracy cases. Black Panthers, Chicanos, political prisoners are victims of the White House working with Asst. Attorney
General Robert Mardian. The Grand Jury is used to force litigations, conspiracy trials and imprisonment. 5. Murders and violence were planned for the Republican National Convention in 1972. Arsenals
of weapons were purchased for Miami. Violent demonstrations were planned. Liddy, Hunt, LaRue were
armed with weapons in White House desk, attaché cases. William Lemmer, Special Forces, U.S. agent,
told his girlfriend: “Don’t come to Miami. Stay out, there will be fighting and shooting.”22

--- PAGE BREAK ---6.

Provocateurs would be hired to incite violence.

Hundreds of Republicans were brought in for
demonstrations.

Segretti met with Hunt to hire provocateurs.

White House private phone, billed to
Kathleen Chenow in Virginia, was used by Hunt for calls to Bernard Barker in Miami.

Miss Chenow was
immediately spirited to a London “vacation” after the Watergate arrests.

She was secretary to White
House “Plumber” David Young.

7.

Radicals were to be rounded up, Internal Security working to get them.

James McCord met daily
with Internal Security.

The Watergate squad had access to lists if protection from violence was the
motive, rather than arrests.

8.

Code names in White House to contact were “Martin” and “White.” James McCord registered at
the Washington police station as Edward Martin.

E.

Howard Hunt was known as “White.”23
9.

Public relations offices would cover the martial law and secret squad front.

Mullen Associates:
Hunt kept a desk there at the same time he worked at the White House and went back and forth between
the two.

Mullen represented the business interests of ITT and Howard Hughes.

Hunt and Liddy did
errands for ITT, kidnapped Dita Beard and interviewed her in Denver.

Liddy was using a Hughes airplane
to gather valuable information – allegedly Howard Hughes’ game plans for elections—in Las Vegas
publisher Hank Greenspun’s safe.

“Public Relations”: The office name for CCS, the Los Angeles section of the L.A.

Police Department
that creates criminal conspiracies for White House purposes.

FBI Public Relations—L.

Patrick Gray threw in with the Justice Department’s squad to put the lid on
conspiracies, and worked in the PR office awaiting confirmation as FBI director.

10.

Ten million dollars was set aside for the secret martial law plans.

A secret $10 or $20 million
will never be accounted for.

G.

Gordon Liddy burned consecutive $100 bills that could be traced to the
CIA to fund political sabotage.--- PAGE BREAK ---

G. Gordon Liddy burned consecutive $100 bills that could be traced to the
CIA to fund political sabotage. $10 million was passed to provocateurs and others before March, 1972, in
anticipation of the April 7th deadline when donors would be identified. But the convention was moved from San Diego to Miami in mid-March due to the ITT scandal. That
required another $10 million for hired soldiers, provocateurs and imported violence to round up radicals. This would explain the frantic effort to accumulate $10 million in only three weeks. Hugh Sloan testified
April 5-6 that $5 to $6 million arrived in cash at CREEP offices. If the names did not have to be revealed, per campaign law current on April 7, 1972, why did the
money have to be delivered in cash? How could so much of it have consecutively numbered bills? 11. After martial law was declared, the plans included “getting Nixon.” Andrew Topping’s
assassination plan confirms this. Testimony of Harold W. Eldridge could confirm this.24 Investigation of
the death of Secret Service agent J. Clifford Dietrich might confirm this. Secret Service agent Robert H. Taylor was transferred. He had a rift with H.R. Haldemen, who tried to
change security arrangements. Taylor threatened to arrest Haldeman for interfering with security when he
wanted a “spontaneous demonstration” for the president in New Hampshire. A duplication of the Wallace
shooting could clear the way for Agnew.25
12. The goal was a U.S. Gestapo. Senator Ervin described the espionage squad inside the White
House as a “gestapo mentality.” J. Edgar Hoover refused any part of the gestapo, saying the secret
Domestic Intelligence operations “denied our civil liberties.” The Inter-Agency Group (IAG) on

--- PAGE BREAK ---Domestic Intelligence and Internal Security includes members from the FBI, CIA, DIA, NSA, Counter-
Intelligence agencies of the Army, Air Force, Navy and Police Departments.

[As this article went to press, Louis Tackwood was picked up by Los Angeles police, beaten, his arm
broken in prison.

Realist note: “It should be the duty of the Senate Committee and the special federal
prosecutor to protect the life of this vital witness.

He has documentation and names linking the White
House plumbers to California law enforcement agencies.

He could also be a deciding factor in the San
Quentin Six and other trials.”]
3.

TOM CHARLES HUSTON
Orders for Nixon – The “Huston documents” are a cover.

Tom Charles Huston did not write these.

Who did?

Huston is a cut-out, a delivery boy.

There are instructions for President Nixon, supposedly Huston giving orders:
“I am attaching my recommendations on the decision the President should make with regard to these
operational restraints.”
“It might be helpful to add my specific recommendations and reasons in the event the President has
some doubts on specific courses of action…”
I recommend the President call in Mr.

Hoover for stroking sessions.

The President explains the
decisions he made.

He thanks Hoover for his candid advice and past cooperation.

He indicates he is
counting on Edgar’s cooperation in implementing the report.

He announces his decision.

Follow this
up with a meeting in the Oval Office.

Thank members for their report.

Announce his decisions.

Indicate his desire for future activities.

Present each member with an autographed copy of photo of first meeting where OLLIE took place.

Huston, whoever he represents, had advice for the military and intelligence agencies pushing his
domestic “emergency” plans.

Having seen the President in action with Mr.

Hoover, I am confident he can handle the situation in
such a way that we can get what we want without putting Edgar’s nose out of joint.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Having seen the President in action with Mr. Hoover, I am confident he can handle the situation in
such a way that we can get what we want without putting Edgar’s nose out of joint. At the same time
[that Nixon is placating Hoover] we can capitalize on the good will the President has built up with the
other principles and minimize the risk that they may feel they are being forced to take a back seat to
Mr. Hoover.26
Tom Charles Huston came to the White House from Young Americans for Freedom. Douglas Caddy, the
attorney called to the Washington jail the night five men were arrested at the Watergate, was founder of
Young Americans for Freedom. Military intelligence agents arrived in Dallas from Munich, Germany to infiltrate and take over Young
Americans for Freedom. Those agents were involved in the assassination of President Kennedy in 1963. Their goal was to take
over the White House by 1970.27
Herbert Kalmbach, attorney for President Nixon, had meetings with Douglas Caddy, as did many others
from the White House espionage teams. With the cooperation of the Justice Dept., intelligence agencies and the armed forces, it appears that
Tom Charles Huston was performing his duties, as assigned, to carry orders to Richard Nixon. Caddy
took his orders from the military and intelligence agencies. Although he is described as a “White House
aide,” Huston was mentioned in testimony by Richard Kleindienst as general counsel to the CIA.

--- PAGE BREAK ---4.

WILLIAM SULLIVAN, DIVISION V, FBI
William Sullivan worked closely with Robert Mardian, Internal Security, and the White House
espionage squad.

When Sullivan left the FBI, he removed tapes in J.

Edgar Hoover’s possession that could do political
damage to Nixon-Agnew.

Senator Weicker at least asked John Dean if he knew William Sullivan.

The killing of President Kennedy was planned by Division V of the FBI under the cloak of the Defense
Intelligence Security Command.

Headquarters were in Muscle Shoals, Alabama, home of NASA.

Five fronts were utilized.

The same fronts employed for the complicated set of murders in Dallas—of President Kennedy, Officer
J.D.

Tippit and Lee Harvey Oswald—were familiars in the Watergate Affair.

Many of the agents involved
in 1972 election sabotage can be connected to earlier operations.

These include:
Solidarists: CIA foundations, centered in Houston, working with the emigré community, many
employed as scientists, oil operators.

They were connected to the Mexican money laundering, Siberian oil
contracts and warfare production.

Large donations to the Nixon campaign (and before that Johnson’s)
came from Houston and Dallas.

American Council of Christian Churches: Shortly before LBJ died, he revealed that curiosity led him
to find the real assassins of President Kennedy.

They were found in the Caribbean Murder, Inc.

A series
of Church fronts funded a school for assassins in Oaxaca, Mexico.

They dressed as missionaries.

The
same church people, interested in such activities, have direct contacts to important White House aides,
FBI and CIA agents.

Agency money is sent to churches, and it is passed to persons unknown.

This money
hires assassins.

Miami syndicate: Frank Sturgis delivered arms for Castro at one time, switched sides and left the
gambling tables.

From that moment on, he attempted to “save” Cuba from communists.

Gambling was an
important motive in anti-Castro operations.--- PAGE BREAK ---

From that moment on, he attempted to “save” Cuba from communists. Gambling was an
important motive in anti-Castro operations. Bernard Barker, bag man in the Miami area, worked for
Batista’s secret police. The Syndicate, hoping to return to control Cuba, promotes disturbances by hiring
Cuban exiles. Cuban Exile Group, Free Cuba Committee: The Cuban exile community worked closely with
government agencies and the Solidarists, coordinated by Division V of the FBI. Oil interests, geologists
and gambling interests utilized exile Cubans for foot soldiers to help reclaim Cuba for particular
purposes. Hatred of communism was their common motivation. Power and profit motives are played down, but financiers have always forced the White House to make
military decisions. Kennedy’s refusal to invade Cuba or kill Castro was one more proof he was not their
man. Security Division of NASA: Headed by Werner von Braun. Nazi headquarters were moved to the
Caribbean after World War II. The National Security Council, patterned after Hitler’s intelligence
apparat, provided the framework inside the White House for political assassinations, Watergate
“Plumbers” and election manipulations. Agents from military intelligence and the armed forces were concealed inside defense projects. The Syndicate worked with the Defense Industrial Security Command. Robert Sheridan, appointed by George McGovern to “investigate Watergate for the Democrats,” was

--- PAGE BREAK ---the direct liaison to departments involved in the Kennedy assassination.

The Watergate parallels are too
great to not suspect a continuous working of this operation.28
III.

MARTIAL LAW WITHOUT THE RIOTS
“They have the marshals, I have the Army.”
– Richard Nixon to John Dean
Ordering martial law under the guise of national emergency is no problem for the White House.

We are actually in a state of martial law at this time, with the judiciary and executive branches facing a
crisis in which the president will not account for criminal actions.

Richard Nixon is no longer receiving unwanted advice from Melvin Laird, but will accept Pentagon
orders and directions.

William Timmons of the White House espionage group wasn’t purged.

He’s now chief White House
lobbyist.

Roy Ash, who should have been removed from the White House for at least ten good reasons, has been
described as “expanding his perimeter.” The U.S.

will become like Greece, which Litton Industries and
Ash helped create.

General Haig said he didn’t give up his military career “to shuffle papers.” He intends to shuffle us
instead.

He refuses to fire White House aides involved with Watergate “whether they are guilty or not.”
There is no indication that the military and intelligence plans are not in operation, or that Haig and
others do not put ends far above the means.

The White House is controlled by the clandestine mind, operators who have instigated military coup
d’états and military dictatorships elsewhere.

They have determined that the majority are not able to
decide what is best for the conglomerates and financial empires.

Long before the 1972 elections, a series of government agencies formed to assure control of the
population.

A conflict was going to arise.

Billions would be spent on the production of military hardware.

Money
would be withheld from programs for domestic improvements and opportunities.

A civil war situation,
identical to those created by the CIA in Chile and elsewhere, would be forced.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Money
would be withheld from programs for domestic improvements and opportunities. A civil war situation,
identical to those created by the CIA in Chile and elsewhere, would be forced. We were entering a period of no-knocks, surreptitious entry, mail openings, imprisonment without
trials, elimination of mental hospitals, reduced minority benefits, systematic assassination of minority
leaders, closed borders into Canada and Mexico, police laser weapons, data banks and population unrest. With that in mind, we are left with those agencies still functioning, becoming stronger every day when
they should be broken up. If you can’t accept the martial law plans for 1972, insist that the Senate and federal prosecutors
examine data existing to prove this fact, such as the Louis Tackwood revelations and other evidence. A. INSTITUTIONS TO DISMANTLE
Only a few of the most dangerous institutions to dismantle include:
Office of Management Budget: Domestic funds and financial decisions belong in the hands of
Congress. Roy Ash was accused of taking $43-million from Howard Hughes contracts by shuffling the
books, then started the Litton Industries empire. Litton is fattened by large cost overruns, running into
billions. The excuse of the Office of Management Budget was to “save money.” Ash could save the
taxpayer by minding his own shipyard.

--- PAGE BREAK ---The close association of Roy Ash, the CIA’s John Maury and other top government officials to the
Greek military dictatorship is shocking.

The White House “Plumbers” and all agents involved in sabotage
and conspiracy worked through and with the Office of Management Budget at one time.

Fred Malek of that
Office should be sent back to the Pentagon, turned away from domestic affairs.

Office of Emergency Service: We all want warnings and protection from natural disasters.

That cover
story is for promoting the diabolical, 1984-Orwellian James McCord secret warning system.

This involves a two-way radio in every home.29
Ronald Reagan, hoping to be President, is pushing hard in California for the Office of Emergency
Service.

The Roseville, California tests on military equipment exploding was to further justify that office.

It was
a provocateur-type operation to create the need for legal repression.

Any natural disaster will come and go.

But the Office of Emergency Service will remain.

Inter-Divisional Information Unit (IDIU): This is a cover for domestic intelligence gathering.30
While the CIA is not supposed to be operating inside the U.S., it exists everywhere under different
covers.

There are military provisions to anticipate all future uprisings.

Drug and Law Enforcement (DALE): This is a dangerous new development.

The agency conceals
espionage operations and foments terror in the community.

Every manifestation of Nazi Germany has been realized inside the U.S.

with the exception of entering,
breaking homes apart, killing and leaving.

DALE is that missing link.

There are no promises that raids
will cease.

There is every reason to believe they will continue.

There will be more “errors.” Even when
the arrested have drugs on the premises, the methods and consequences of the discovery do not justify
DALE’s tactics.

Imported narcotics on CIA planes and otherwise serve three purposes important to the federal
government.

It is good business, exceeding war profits.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Imported narcotics on CIA planes and otherwise serve three purposes important to the federal
government. It is good business, exceeding war profits. Drug dealers work with the intelligence and military
sectors. Profits gained from drug traffic help support covert projects, including assassinations. Second, provocateurs and police agents purposely push narcotics into the ghettos to control minorities. According to Louis Tackwood, the LAPD distributed drugs, as do other police agencies. Third, the necessary violence and crime in the streets caused by supporting drug habits requires more
police, local helicopters, surveillance, arrests without warrants, framing selected patsies by planting
evidence, and makes the law enforcement agent the protector of our life and property. Planted marijuana in the binoculars of John Lennon was the excuse to deport him. In spite of the
cultural advancements that he and Yoko Ono have made, their outspoken criticism of war, genocide and
political imprisonment make them eligible for the “enemies list.” Planted narcotics becomes the excuse to
deny a family the right to find their child. DALE is a political tool of the administration.31
UCLA institute to Study the Causes of Violent Behavior: This is Ronald Reagan’s answer to
“solving violence by 1975.” Senator Ervin and others requested this study be put off at the time of
Watergate. Funded by CIA fronts, concealed grants and government money, the UCLA Institute hid behind the
California Council on Criminal Justice. Suicides, family beatings, minority problems can easily be solved in direct proportion to the amount of

--- PAGE BREAK ---money located in space and defense budgets transferred to domestic needs.

There is a concerted interest
in federal, CIA studies to justify brain experimentation, prisoner behavior modification and minority
experimentation on the basis that social unrest is not caused by economic deprivations.

Every effort to
pass this propaganda as fact should be challenged.

Twenty-five per cent of the Gestapo doing painful and subhuman experiments in Nazi Germany were
from the leading universities.

NASA scientist Dr.

Ross Adey at UCLA justified brain alteration by
claiming that “the brain feels no pain.”32
ENSKIDS: The National Security Act of 1947 made every provision for NSC-CIA sabotage and
infiltration inside the U.S.33 ENSKIDS is one of the provisions.

Anyone can be “suspected” of having
foreign contacts, thus justifying surveillance.

This was the excuse for following Mary Jo Kopechne, later
found dead inside Senator Ted Kennedy’s car.

Atascadero, California, Lister Unit, Vacaville, California: California prisons have been
experimenting with dangerous, painful drugs for a long time.

Empty units wait at the Lister Center in
Vacaville in the hope that the public will lose interest in prisoners.

Public opposition stalled the process
temporarily until the UCLA center appeared.

Federal funds, through LEAA, provide methods of social control.

These include various drugs and
techniques not allowed by the Nuremberg Code or AMA guidelines.

– Proloxin was used on 1,093 inmates in Vacaville in 1971.

– Anecetin has been used on at least 90 unwilling patients in California, and probably many more.

– Electro-convulsive shocks are administered as punishment.

– Castrations are common.

L.A.

Superior Court Judge Lawrence Turrentine ordered 60 castrations.

L.A.

Superior Court Judge Frank Collier ordered 41 castrations.

Genitals are wired inside California
prisons as experimentation on prisoners.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Superior Court Judge Frank Collier ordered 41 castrations. Genitals are wired inside California
prisons as experimentation on prisoners. – Sterilizations, 19,042 of them, were ordered by California judges for “preventive procreation.”
This is a national problem, but I have done research into the California prisons as related to California
conspiracy and espionage operations.34
U.S. Medical Center for Federal Prisoners in Springfield, Miss., Adirondack Treatment Center,
New York State, Behavior Research Center in Butner, North Carolina: Clockwork Orange is alive
and well in the United States. Anticipated social unrest will be challenged by removal of prisoners from
their home states. There will be no with those prisoners. Advanced behavior modification, imprisonment
without commission of a crime and transporting prisoners across state lines are escalations of Auschwitz,
USA. New Proposed Cabinet in California to Combine the Military, Prisons, Law Enforcement into One
Group: Ronald Reagan compared President Thieu in Vietnam to George Washington. Following all the
methods used by Thieu and the Phoenix program in Asia to silence over 40,000 political prisoners in
preparation for an election, presidential aspirant Reagan is clearing the way at home. The UCLA Institute to Study the Causes of Violent Behavior, the Office of Emergency Service, the new
proposal to establish a single manpower agency for employment and the new proposed cabinet are
Reagan’s pet projects, and he is pushing to implement them as soon as possible. If there was ever a time to question and fear one public servant, it is now and the man is Reagan. Almost each month a diabolic suggestion has appeared as a real nightmarish possibility. A “special task
force” has assembled to combine controls over the citizens under the guise of a “study.” A new California
cabinet is proposed. This would include the military, Highway Patrol, Office of Emergency Service,

--- PAGE BREAK ---California Criminal Justice (federal funds), Crime Technological Research Foundation, Department of
Corrections and the Youth Authority.35
B.

THE ENEMIES LIST
The White House intelligence operation was coordinated to handle domestic emergencies.

These
turned out to be political enemies of the administration, or the corporate structure as it wants to exist.

Procedures of operation, surreptitious entry, wiretapping, opening mail, etc., were listed and approved,
although clearly illegal.

Where did this counter-intelligence army learn who to attack?

From the White
House enemies list, of course.

What was the military objective?

Radicals, anti-war protestors, minority leaders and prisoners were
already under attack by existing military and federal agencies.

They were infiltrated, saturated with
provocateurs, bugged, busted and imprisoned.

Others were murdered, poisoned and crippled.

The president himself admitted approving an illegal operation of repression against campus and other
radical groups.

All that remained was the list to get the army moving.

“By 1970, it was public knowledge the FBI alone had added 1,200 agents for campus work, that
federal funds for local police surveillance were increased by 300%, and that the Justice Department was
turning its Internal Security Division into a national squad devoted to massive surveillance and
harassment.”36
The White House “Plumbers” and the agencies that coordinated with them were formed to damage
political enemies secretly.

Standard governmental departments made up of Republicans and Democrats
would have learned of these operations.

H.R.

Haldeman gave the approval for $400,000 to “defeat” George Wallace.

Supposedly it went to a
Democratic candidate for governor, but Haldeman didn’t know his name.

Couldn’t it also go to an
assassination team?

He only allocated the cash from a special, secret White House safe, but didn’t inquire
about the use of it when it was handed over.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Couldn’t it also go to an
assassination team? He only allocated the cash from a special, secret White House safe, but didn’t inquire
about the use of it when it was handed over. Only an intelligence operation, based on a need-to-know
basis, behaves in such a manner. There were ways to attack political enemies. In some manner, they would be “screwed” after the
elections. Investigating tax returns, the withholding of federal grants and contracts, litigation and
prosecutions were suggested. That is where the army comes in. They have to create the conspiracies to
“frame,” “screw,” “program” and “create scandals.”
Create scandals: Michael Dellums, son of black Representative Ron Dellums, was arrested recently. Were any of his companions provocateurs? Were they coerced? That is not far-fetched after studying lists
of those in prison today because of such planted conspiracies. The Trojan boys—The USC fraternity gang that ended up in the White House were stuffing ballot
boxes, creating disturbances and testing their political muscles as young adults. Sally Harmony testified about Robin Cranston early in the Watergate hearings. His name was on the
Gemstone papers. Robin, the son of anti-war Senator Alan Cranston, recently had legal troubles with a
female who claimed he put LSD in her drink. Was she one of Liddy’s choice women to be utilized in
Miami? Programming: Mr. and Mrs. A. Picker were to be “programmed.” The Pickers were large contributors
to the political campaign of Senator Muskie. What constitutes programming? Mrs. Dorothy Hunt, at the time of her death on a sabotaged flight to Chicago on December 8, 1972, had
the name of two neurosurgeons with her. An accomplished CIA agent in her own right, would these

--- PAGE BREAK ---persons perform for the accused a service that would save paying blackmail money the rest of their lives?

The present Attorney General Eliot Richardson seems to be knowledgeable about mind control,
behavior modification and programming.

Following the Detroit riots of 1967, a new method of handling minorities was explored seriously as an
alternative to social progress.

Frank Ervin, Vernon Mark and William Sweet, all from Massachusetts,
received aid from Eliot Richardson to begin studies and experimentation on the behavior modification of
minorities.

Richardson tapped Congress for project financing.

The project is the use of preventive psychosurgery on minority children in Massachusetts.37
C.

THE WARFARE STATE PRESIDENT RICHARD NIXON
The image of J.

Walter Thompson, cold war advertising agency, has been replaced without a cover
story.38
The Pentagon has taken over the Oval Office.

It was always there but concealed in a more subtle way.

Cold War provisions for the National Security Council, housed inside the White House to direct the
designated official, are followed through.

Domestic spy operations, illegal procedures, denial of Constitutional protections, were also ordered.

Armed guards seal all files and documents.

Tape recordings of presidential conversations can be used to blackmail the President if he forgets his
lines or does not respond appropriately to orders.

Intelligence agents hire the staff.

Vice-President Spiro Agnew
Plans to assassinate Richard Nixon indicate a desperation of the extreme right-wing to place Agnew in
the White House as soon as possible.

Watergate defendants and close working associates of the espionage teams were Agnew-Ashbrook
supporters.

YAF, Tom Charles Huston’s organization, supported Agnew in 1972.

There was a determination by conservatives to “get Nixon,” not Democrats or radicals.

Agnew’s
money and close links to the Greek military junta have not been mentioned with regard to 1972 election
financing.--- PAGE BREAK ---

There was a determination by conservatives to “get Nixon,” not Democrats or radicals. Agnew’s
money and close links to the Greek military junta have not been mentioned with regard to 1972 election
financing. Tapes exist to prove millions of dollars, through Tom Pappas, Esso Oil, placed Agnew on the
Republican ticket. Maj. Gen. John Dunn, Agnew’s deputy chief of staff, indicates a growing fear of a militarized White
House. Dunn, a colonel three years ago, was boosted to two-star general this March. The Greek military
junta came into existence during a 24-hour coup d’état, because the generals and older conservatives had
been systematically replaced prior to the takeover.39
Chief Justice Warren Burger
A new Constitution was written for use after the 1972 elections. It is a blueprint for a Nazi state. Warren Burger insisted the new Constitution eliminate trial by jury. Burger claimed, “trial by jury slows the wheels of justice.”40
The Supreme Court recently turned down, by a vote of 7-0, a request to examine documentary evidence
that Sirhan Sirhan did not kill Senator Robert Kennedy. The circumstances that allowed Nixon to become
president were unusual and horrendous. If evidence of political assassination are ignored, there is no
chance that illegal wiretapping will cause the president to move very far away from the source of his

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd horrendous. If evidence of political assassination are ignored, there is no
chance that illegal wiretapping will cause the president to move very far away from the source of his

--- PAGE BREAK ---

power.
General Alexander Haig, White House Chief of Staff
General Haig passed over 243 generals for his appointment. Rockefeller in New York directs his men:
Henry Kissinger, John Mitchell, Spiro Agnew. Haig is the protegé of Kissinger and maintains control over
the White House as the other men move out and shift positions after the Watergate scandals.41
Haig is a defendant in a suit by Morton Halperin for illegal wiretaps at his home and office. There is no
chance, with the Pentagon ruling the courts, that Kissinger or Haig will even receive a reprimand.
“National security” protects criminalized espionage agents from us. If their lies are revealed, as in the
Pentagon Papers, the punishment is pushed upon those who see and tell. There is more national security in
smoking these people out.
Maj. Gen. John C. Bennett, White House Staff,
Maj. George Joulwan
Bennett and Joulwan are aides, still on active duty at the present time. They are assisting General Haig
at the White House.42
William J. Baroody, Pentagon,
Fred Buzhardt, Counsel for the President
Buzhardt’s name came up at the time of the Pentagon Papers trial. Evidence was withheld to the
detriment of the defendants. March, 1971, Buzhardt testified that electronic surveillance of civilians by
the army did not directly interfere with civil rights.43
Clarence Kelley, new Director of the FBI
Famous for computerized police departments. Blacks, anti-war protestors, radicals harassed in Kansas.
Police killings of blacks, use of helicopters, data banks. LEAA funds for repressions followed violence
instigated by federal provocateurs. Heavily linked to federal police systems. Passed Senate approval 96-
0, indicating total ignorance of what Watergate espionage was really about. This appointment could have
been held up, like L. Patrick Gray’s, until more information was available.
William Colby, Director of the CIA
The CIA has been involved in domestic sabotage. Colby, as head of the dreaded Phoenix program in
Vietnam, became synonymous with population displacement, tortures, imprisonment of political voices
against Thieu, and dropping Viet Cong from airplanes. The arrogance of this nomination at this time by
Richard Nixon will be equaled by a Senate with no respect for human lives or liberty.
James Schlesinger, Secretary of Defense
“Knowledge is a form of power and most institutions exhibit an understandable reluctance to dissipate
this power in the absence of compensating advantages.” “The deliberate introduction of distortion and
fuzziness to improve the competitive position of one’s own agency or division is an unavoidable and
dominant feature of the bureaucratic landscape.”
“Politics, so far as mobilizing support is concerned, represents the art of calculated cheating, or more
precisely how to cheat without being really caught.”
– James Schlesinger, Systems Analysis and the Political Process, Rand Corp., June, 1967
D. POLITICAL PRISONERS OF AMERICAculated cheating, or more
precisely how to cheat without being really caught.”
– James Schlesinger, Systems Analysis and the Political Process, Rand Corp., June, 1967
D. POLITICAL PRISONERS OF AMERICA

--- PAGE BREAK ---Provisions for martial law and the institutions to implement a military dictatorship inside the U.S.

affect all facets of our society.

No persons suffer more than political prisoners, victims of the police state.

The prison system reflects the quality and justice of the surrounding society.

Tiger cages in Vietnam,
islands of torture in Greece, assassination police squads and torture in Brazil, extermination camps in
Germany have been powerful and necessary methods of silencing political opponents.

Knowing such
prisons exist keeps the moderate and frightened from voicing objections to oppression.

The same Justice Dept., FBI, counter-intelligence agencies working inside the White House that
condoned election sabotage and the “horror stories” come down upon radicals inside the prisons as well
as on the streets.

Raymond Procunier, director of State Department of Corrections in California, said, “If we’ve got a
group out preaching revolution, and we think that it’s dangerous, we lock them up.”44 Many U.S.

prisoners
have been murdered, framed and confined in isolation solely for their political beliefs and not for actual
crimes committed.

When the California authorities can’t find a crime, provocateurs create one and assure
that selected targets are blamed.

Throughout the 1960’s and ’70s, the consciousness of prisoners related
to the political nature of their situations has grown, and so have political movements on the outside.

The more they call attention to their conditions, the more inhumane is their treatment.

Prison
demonstrations or actions to voice existing conditions cause some men to be segregated for life.

If the White House defined moderates such as Hubert Humphrey or Edmund Muskie as “enemies” to be
defeated by any means necessary, what chance do radical prisoners have for a new definition or chance to
live?

The Adjustment Center, Maximum Security, is for political prisoners inside the United States.

Germans claimed to be ignorant of Dachau and Auschwitz.The Adjustment Center, Maximum Security, is for political prisoners inside the United States.

Germans claimed to be ignorant of Dachau and Auschwitz.

There are enough books and data available about the prisons to set innocent men free and force a
change of conditions.45
The Watergate espionage squad is directly linked to California agencies and prisons.

Elmer Davis, a
man currently held in the Calif.

State Prison at Folsom, was charged with the Ellsberg robbery of Dr.

Lewis Fielding’s office.

Davis was in prison at the time he was charged and could not have been in
Beverly Hills at the time.

A suit has been filed by Davis in U.S.

District Court against Richard Nixon,
John Ehrlichman, Egil Krogh, G.

Gordon Liddy, E.

Howard Hunt and California law enforcement
officials, including Beverly Hills law enforcement officers.46
The Elmer Davis case is only one from a long list of arrests that will indicate the inter-relationship of
the CIA, LAPD, California Department of Corrections and other offices.

In Los Angeles, Cuban terrorists waged armed arson attacks in 1970 against the Haymarket, a radical
meeting place and bookstore, the offices of the Socialist Workers Party, and Ashgrove, a coffee house
made available to radical causes.

Mario Pelaez, Reynaldo Castro and Reynaldo Gonzalez, all arrested, worked for the CIA.

Edward
Gritz and Sergeant Charles Loust of the LAPD Criminal Conspiracy Division confirmed the CIA
connection.

The Cubans were hired in May 1970 to “fight communism and get Cuba back.” The men
worked with Alpha 66, the armed guerrilla warfare group associated with Frank Sturgis, Bernard Barker,
Eugenio Martinez and other Watergate operatives.

Louis Tackwood revealed another CIA, LAPD, FBI conspiracy plot that took place at San Quentin, the
George Jackson murder and framing of radical prisoners for other deaths that occurred that day.

The White House espionage group was responsible for killing 28 Black Panthers and other minority
leaders.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Louis Tackwood revealed another CIA, LAPD, FBI conspiracy plot that took place at San Quentin, the
George Jackson murder and framing of radical prisoners for other deaths that occurred that day. The White House espionage group was responsible for killing 28 Black Panthers and other minority
leaders. They also were determined to exterminate leaders inside the prison. Eldridge Cleaver, writer and
Panther, fled to Algeria to avoid a prison sentence. Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms agents were making a
deal with Sonny Barger, Hell’s Angels leader, to “bring Cleaver home dead in a box.” Larry Shears, the

--- PAGE BREAK ---agent who exposed this arrangement, also revealed the plans of ATF to kill Cesar Chavez.47 This was at a
time when John Caulfield and G.

Gordon Liddy worked for the Treasury Department’s ATF.

Tackwood stated at his 1971 press conference that the LAPD Criminal Conspiracy Section, with links
to the CIA and FBI, had foreknowledge of the Judge Haley murder, Marin Courthouse shootout and the
San Quentin killing of George Jackson.

In line with murdering political leaders, writers and Black Panthers, George Jackson had been marked
for death several years in advance of the shootout.

Many prisoners were offered parole to kill or frame
him.

Refusal to comply brought more charges and punishments.

Ronald Reagan, Governor of California,
had information on the San Quentin killings on his desk four months in advance.

But like other staged riots
and acts of violence, this was meant to take place.

(The suppressed report on possible disturbances inside
the prison was described in the October 23, 1971 edition of the San Francisco Chronicle.)
As an agent provocateur for the LAPD, Tackwood was sent to prison disguised as an inmate to create
disturbances or to frame a particular prisoner.

As part of his LAPD employment, he testified at the trial of
Joseph Lee Jenkins and sent an innocent man to San Quentin for life.

Jenkins, innocent, is imprisoned for
political purposes.

Sergeant Woods, Homicide Division, LAPD, stated he would charge Clemmie E.

Henderson unless he cooperated and testified against Joseph Lee Jenkins.

The threat was made at the Antelope Valley Police Dept., Lancaster, California.

Henderson was given a
set of facts to testify to.

He was taken to the scene of the crime, shown photographs of the area.

Two other witnesses, Larry and Arnold Kendrick, were coerced.

Henderson did not see Jenkins kill
Darlene Smelcer.

He was instructed on August 13, 1969 to give false testimony.

Arnold Kendrick and
Clemmie Henderson killed Miss Smelcer, and Jenkins was not involved in the crime.He was instructed on August 13, 1969 to give false testimony.

Arnold Kendrick and
Clemmie Henderson killed Miss Smelcer, and Jenkins was not involved in the crime.

Jenkins was the only person among a group with an arrest record, so the police found him the “easiest
person to convict of the crime.” (This information is from the deposition of Clemmie E.

Henderson, State
of California, Marin County, recorded at San Quentin State Prison on Sunday, October 15, 1972, at the
request of Clemmie E.

Henderson, B-34006 and Joseph Lee Jenkins, B-33668.

Is there an attorney who
will come forward and represent Joseph Lee Jenkins?

He is innocent, and has already served four years
of his life in San Quentin for a crime he never committed.)
Lee Smith, another provocateur, testified before a House committee that he was “recruited to foment
prison unrest” at the California Men’s Colony in 1971.

He was to help plan and carry out a strike, and
worked with other prisoners to assault two California prison guards.

Agent provocateurs are hired to
blame “Marxist revolutionary forces” for prison unrest.

The conditions of prison then become more
secretive and controlled.48
Stephen Bingham was the agent provocateur of the San Quentin shootout.

Boyd Douglas was hired to
frame the Berrigans.

Whittaker Chambers was persuaded to imprison Alger Hiss.

Bingham was employed
for the murder of George Jackson and the subsequent imprisonment of six radicals: Fleeta Drumgo, Willie
Tate, Hugo Pinell, Johnny Larry Spain and Louis Talamantex.

Known as the San Quentin Six, they will be
on trial soon, two years after their arrests.

A common Nazi method of extermination was utilized—“killed while escaping.” George Jackson was
shot in the head.

There are discrepancies regarding the autopsy and location of the wounds.

Bingham was not a “Communist.” Tackwood told me he was sent from British intelligence, went to San
Quentin, provided the excuse for the George Jackson killing.--- PAGE BREAK ---

There are discrepancies regarding the autopsy and location of the wounds. Bingham was not a “Communist.” Tackwood told me he was sent from British intelligence, went to San
Quentin, provided the excuse for the George Jackson killing. He produced a gun supposedly hidden in
Jackson’s “wig.”
Charges against the San Quentin Six are for the murder of two other prisoners and three guards. Asst. Attorney General Robert Mardian, associated with the Watergate arrests and the White House
intelligence squad, created the grand jury system to suit administration purposes—to prosecute radicals,
anti-war protestors and political prisoners. The grand jury that indicted the San Quentin Six two years ago was divided by their stormy sessions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---One grand juror, in an unprecedented move, resigned in protest over the indictments.

He spoke of the
“inequalities and injustices of the secret indicting process.” Two other grand jurors walked out on the
meeting, declaring, “what this Grand Jury does is not justice but vengeance.”49
Grand jurors, attorneys and outside authorities were not permitted inside San Quentin for a length of
time, denied access to investigate the incident.

No impartial investigation was conducted after Jackson and five others were slain.

The cover story for
the murders was “throats were cut.” Scare stories frighten the outside population against prisoners, and
assures that political prisoners will remain locked up.

But throats were not cut in New York.

Nelson
Rockefeller, governor of New York, allowed the murder of 43 prisoners inside Attica that could also
have been avoided.

Who sent out that phony story?

Why?

If it was concluded that throats were not cut in
New York, after the prison was inspected carefully, what assurance is there that throats were cut in
California?

Nobody was allowed to enter and examine the evidence.50
Judge Haley’s body was exhumed in search of evidence in the Marin County Ruchell Magee trial, a
case involving the LAPD, CCS, Evelle Younger and the Department of Corrections.

Before the trial for
the San Quentin Six begins, their attorneys should demand bodies be exhumed to determine if that cover
story holds.

Taped conversations of Stephen Bingham, taken after the killings in Canada, also exist.

They should be
produced by the LAPD.

Immediately after the San Quentin murder of George Jackson, guards and inmates,
22 in all, sent out a letter pleading for someone to solve the conspiracy behind those bloody events.

Ten
years of research into the murders of President John Kennedy, Senator Robert Kennedy, Malcolm X,
Martin Luther King and then the Watergate Affair led me to the San Quentin killings.

Six men are anxious to prove their innocence.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Ten
years of research into the murders of President John Kennedy, Senator Robert Kennedy, Malcolm X,
Martin Luther King and then the Watergate Affair led me to the San Quentin killings. Six men are anxious to prove their innocence. They are denied lawyers of their choice. The trial will be a railroad if we allow this to happen. America must wake up, save the living, investigate and mourn the dead. The Watergate affair is not only about election sabotage. Watergate is about a White House President,
Department of Justice, FBI, CIA, intelligence agencies that conduct paramilitary operations against all
citizens alike. Indifference to conspiracy trials, created by agencies for silencing minorities, assures that
the real criminals will remain in power. The team that sabotages the Constitution and the Bill of Rights has locked innocent human beings in
isolated traps for 23 1/2 hours each day for the past two years. Two days before George Jackson’s trial, as one-third of the famous Soledad Brothers, he was killed. Two companions were acquitted. Prison violence is escalating in San Quentin now in anticipation of this
long and crucial trial. The defendants live with threats of death every day. Phony messages of “escape plans to Algeria and
Cuba” circulate. It is treacherous business to look for life and justice in the U.S. if you are marked by the
federal government to cease existing. California law enforcement agencies and planned conspirators
should be on trial. Free the San Quentin Six and investigate Watergate West. EPILOGUE
A “caper” is a “horror story.”
John Mitchell, former Attorney General, attempted to separate the Watergate Hotel entry and arrests
from the White House “horror stories.”
The Watergate Affair can’t be taken apart as a series of isolated acts. The entry into the Democratic Headquarters, forging documents, complicated money transactions,

--- PAGE BREAK ---kidnapping, blackmail, provocateurs, phony polls were part of an espionage establishment that has existed
for a long time.

They finally got caught.

Research into political violence and political assassinations would have clipped their wings much
earlier.

Refusal to expose their methods at this time or allowing specific agents to still control with power over
government agencies, assures their continued success.

Election reforms are a beginning, but a simplistic
approach to needed purges.

“McCarthyism” was firing and frightening innocent citizens by calling them “communists.” Guilt by
association was the charge.

The Watergate purge is different, involving actual criminals.

Murders, conspiracies, sabotage and treason should be the charges this time, or would be if the
investigators were not part of the conspiracies.

NOTES
1.

Jerry Policoff, “How All the News About Political Conspiracies in the United States Has Not Been Fit to Print in The New York Times,”
and “Liberal press intent on silencing conspiracies,” Realist, Oct.

1972.

2.

“An agent provocateur is a police agent who is introduced into any political organization with instructions to foment discontent … or to fake
a case in order to give his employers the right to act against the organization in question.” – Louis Tackwood, The Glass House Tapes.

Example: The White House took steps to assemble a political attack team for 1972.

They needed a cover, so called them “Plumbers” to
find leaks in SALT talks from the NSC.

All of their assignments were political, including the Ellsberg robbery, kidnapping Dita Beard, forging
State Department papers to blame JFK for the murder of Diem, collecting data to smear Ted Kennedy after Chappaquiddick, securing cover
stories for Arthur Bremer (arrested for shooting George Wallace).

William Becher from the NSC planted the leaks.

Becher was then
promoted to deputy assistant secretary for public affairs at the DoD.William Becher from the NSC planted the leaks.

Becher was then
promoted to deputy assistant secretary for public affairs at the DoD.

A provocateur, he created the excuse for unleashing repressive
operations against innocent citizens.

3.

Reichstag Fires in the U.S.: The Reichstag was the German government building burned by Hitler’s general as an excuse to imprison
radicals and protestors.

Domestic violence caused by Justice Department conspiracies: Murder of Martin Luther King.

Systematic killing of 28
Black Panthers.

Kent State, murder of four students.

Jackson State, murder of two students.

Urban guerrilla warfare; police and FBI
ammunition; bombs supplied.

Attica, three prisoners killed in riots, San Quentin, murder of George Jackson, two guards, three prisoners.

Chicago 1968 convention; police, armed forces causing violence.

Planned killings of 1972, violence for Republican convention, but arrests at
Watergate cancelled the plans.

4.

Acts of treason: Webster’s New Collegiate Dictionary defines treason as “(l) The betrayal of a trust, and (2) The offense of attempting
by overt acts to overthrow the government of the state to which the offender owes allegiance, or to kill or personally injure the sovereign or his
family.” Existing evidence can prove that acts of violence, and even the planned killing of the president, were planned for the fall of 1972.

The
Watergate Affair is about treason, not wiretapping and burglary.

5.

Watergate Lawyers: Attorney General John Mitchell; Attorney General Richard Kleindeinst; Asst.

Attorney General Henry Peterson;
Acting Director of the FBI, L.

Patrick Gray; Asst.

Attorney General Robert Mardian; William Sullivan, Director of Division V, FBI; California
Attorney General Evelle Younger; William Bittman; Charles Colson; John Dean; Paul O’Brien; Gordon Strachan; Egil Krogh; Donald Segretti;
Fred LaRue; John Ehrlichman; Herb Kalmbach; Kenneth Parkinson; Tom Huston; Richard Moore; G.

Gordon Liddy; Herbert Porter; Judge C.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Attorney General Robert Mardian; William Sullivan, Director of Division V, FBI; California
Attorney General Evelle Younger; William Bittman; Charles Colson; John Dean; Paul O’Brien; Gordon Strachan; Egil Krogh; Donald Segretti;
Fred LaRue; John Ehrlichman; Herb Kalmbach; Kenneth Parkinson; Tom Huston; Richard Moore; G. Gordon Liddy; Herbert Porter; Judge C. Richey; Richard Nixon. Lawyers not involved: Judge J. Sirica and Judge Morell E. Sharp, who had the good judgment to refuse involvement with the domestic
intelligence squad. 6. Methods by which covert acts are carried out – a few examples: Secret funding to conceal sources. Using provocateurs to conceal
motives behind the operations. A “public relations” office to hide the department planning the conspiracies. Dummy fronts, non-existing
businesses or firms. Cover stories, inaccurate descriptions of agents or operations. Cut-outs, hiring a middle-man so connecting agents are not
recognized as integral to a conspiracy. Need-to-know, hiring people but not divulging the larger plans; they “didn’t know” what the money was used for, or about the operation. Evidence is manipulated, destroyed, forged, “missing,” locked up, delayed (reconstructed to fit the cover story), altered, planted against the
innocent, withheld in National Archives. Disguises—wigs, speech impediments. False I.D.—passports, social security, birth certificates, union
cards, aliases. Code names, to lose identification, conceal projects. Job placements, salaries given but not working at that premise, promotions
for services, transfers. Arson, bombing, concealing evidence and motives, confuse. (I learned of a CIA agent working with McCord and others from Agency who

--- PAGE BREAK ---burned two churches in Washington.

The blame was placed on hippies and radicals, “anti-Christ” youth).

Transportation provided, private
planes, getaway planes, double license plates to switch states, double car ownerships and keys that fit several cars.

Illegal wiretaps, electronic
surveillance, robbery, forging.

Secret meeting places, safe houses, places to stay, change clothes, meet in parks, under bridges, hotel lobbies,
airports, inside taxicabs.

Oral instructions; no written memos, evidence removed, final plans made with a nod or sign of the hand.

7.

Removal of civil liberties: J.

Edgar Hoover objected to domestic CIA plans, lamenting, “our civil liberties would be denied.” The plan was
never rescinded: (1) July 13, 1970: President Nixon approved the plan.

Electronic surveillance, “surreptitious entry,” breaking and entering,
opening mail and operations still not revealed.

(2) July 28, 1970: the intelligence plan was “rescinded” after strong objections from FBI Director
J.

Edgar Hoover.

(3) Dec.

1970 and late Jan.

1971: Judge Morell E.

Sharp worked inside the White House and went over the plans because he
was recruited to head this “rescinded” squad.

He refused because of the secrecy.

Six months after the project was rescinded, interviews were
being held to keep it going into the future.

(4) July 15, 1970: Tom Charles Huston, “author” of the intelligence plan, said: “No one at the White
House gave formal orders to rescind the plan.” (5) June 10, 1973: The Washington Post revealed at least 22 covert operations conducted by
this domestic intelligence squad.

8.

How to cover clandestine operations if detected or arrested: Jeb Magruder told John Mitchell that he was going to tell the truth in court
and not perjure himself the second time around.

According to Magruder, Mitchell told him that was fine but that he was “going to have to take
the other route.” Keeping secrets is as important to spy operations as ammunition is to a weapon.

They are not given away.According to Magruder, Mitchell told him that was fine but that he was “going to have to take
the other route.” Keeping secrets is as important to spy operations as ammunition is to a weapon.

They are not given away.

Methods of
concealment are: Denial—Deny all charges.

When the denials are proven to be lies, they become “inoperative.” Can’t recall—Agents are
working as a team.

Some may or may not talk.

Answer to a question with a “yes” or “no” might be contradicted later.

“I can’t recall” covers
the territory.

Recall can return at any moment.

Suicides—Agents are provided with literal suicide medications.

Psychological suicide is to die
as a person, to lose traces with the other agents.

You are dead—to them and future contacts.

Disavowal—Gordon Strachan delivered money
to Fred LaRue.

LaRue wore gloves to receive it, and reminded Strachan that he didn’t know him.

Perjury—Perjury isn’t perjury; it is
rationalized as patriotism.

Lies are not considered lies; they are necessities to save America.

“Essentially gossip, nothing evidentiary” –
Richard Moore, Nixon’s attorney, never told him about information in the Washington Post or from other sources regarding CREEP or the
possible involvement of White House staff in the Watergate Affair.

His excuse was that it was “essentially gossip, nothing evidentiary.” The
gossip could be checked out with the Justice Dept.

or intelligence agencies.

So long as he didn’t bother, it remained “gossip.” Nothing illegal
— When Tony Ulasewicz was asked by Senator Weicker if any of his jobs for the White House were “illegal,” he answered “no.”
Howard Hunt was asked the same question by the grand jury in Washington on May 2, 1973.or intelligence agencies.

So long as he didn’t bother, it remained “gossip.” Nothing illegal
— When Tony Ulasewicz was asked by Senator Weicker if any of his jobs for the White House were “illegal,” he answered “no.”
Howard Hunt was asked the same question by the grand jury in Washington on May 2, 1973.

When asked if he was “aware or did participate
in what might commonly be referred to as illegal activities,” Hunt answered, “I have no recollection of any, sir.” Question: “What about
clandestine activities?” Hunt: “Yes, sir.” Question: “What about that?” Hunt: “I am not quibbling, but there’s a difference between
something that’s illegal and something that’s clandestine.

An entry into something like Dr.

Fielding’s office would simply be called an entry
operation conducted under the auspices of competent authority.”
9.

Allendé allegations, Dec.

1972.

United Nations: William Broe, chief of CIA clandestine services in the Western Hemisphere, proposed
to ITT officials a plan to accelerate economic chaos in Chile.

Broe has now become the CIA Inspector General and recently combed its
records for Watergate documents.

Broe has supervised a sweep of CIA records to determine whether they contain any further evidence
suggesting CIA links with the Watergate scandal.

U.S.

minorities and the unrepresented majority will have to take the same complaints to the
UN some day.

Our fiscal condition at the present time is identical to CIA “planned economic chaos.” (AP, San Jose Mercury, 6-22-73)
Prime Minister Michael Manley of Jamaica demanded that U.S.

Ambassador Vincent de Roulet be recalled.

He had suggested to Congress
they work out a pre-election deal in 1972.

Manley was promised that the U.S.

would not interfere in the elections if he agreed not to make
nationalization of the American-owned bauxite industry a campaign issue.

(AP, 7-23-73)
10.

Domestic programs to cut: Fred Malek, Office of Management Budget, “hatchet man,” cuts off jobs on a moment’s notice.(AP, 7-23-73)
10.

Domestic programs to cut: Fred Malek, Office of Management Budget, “hatchet man,” cuts off jobs on a moment’s notice.

Caspar
Weinberger, Health, Education & Welfare, known as the “Ax” or “Cap the knife,” reduces domestic needs.

11.

Some reasons for secret donations: Corporate political donations are illegal.

Favors in litigation before the Justice Dept.

Delay in smog,
pollution controls that are costly to factories.

Keep minimum wages down.

Raise the price of milk.

Wheat contracts and a $6 billion gas deal
with Soviet Union.

Navy bases on Greek Islands, oil transports and bases.

12.

Henry Buchanan account: Patrick Buchanan, White House aide, was a close personal friend of Spencer Oliver.

Oliver’s phone was
tapped at the Howard Johnson Motel.

Could this telephone be used for the Miami provocateurs?

Henry Buchanan, who kept the very special
secret account in Bethesda, gave some of this money to Ken Reitz.

Reitz was a college director in charge of “hiring provocateurs” for
demonstrations.

(Washington Post, 6-29-72)
13.

Donald Nixon, “loan from Marriott” after Watergate arrests: Herb Kalmbach needed money to keep Howard Hunt and others quiet.

The CIA couldn’t get involved at this late date when they were trying to work their way out.

Too many consecutive $100 bills had been passed
already.

Kalmbach went to New York for money.

There was a suggestion to ask “Mr.

Mitchell or Maurice Stans.” Mitchell stayed at a
Marriott apartment.

Stans had a very close relationship with Tom Pappas, the Greek military junta and Marriott.

Stans praised the Greek
dictatorship and conveyed Nixon’s “warm love.” (Evans & Novak, 9-21-71; Washington Post 5-11-73)
14.

Mae Brussell, “Why Was Martha Mitchell Kidnapped?” The Realist, August 1972.

15.

Donald Nixon, Vesco, $200,000 cash, Washington Post, June 6, 1973
16.

Federal Reserve can’t find serial number: Washington Post, AP, 4-26-73
17.

Eight persons killed with regard to funding:
(1) Mrs.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Federal Reserve can’t find serial number: Washington Post, AP, 4-26-73
17. Eight persons killed with regard to funding:
(1) Mrs. Dorothy Hunt – Carrying $40,000 cash, not $10,000, from Bernard Barker’s account. Also with $2,000,000 in securities, bonds,
money orders. Killed on Flight 553, United Airlines, Dec. 8, 1972. Mrs. Hunt said her “husband knows enough to impeach Nixon.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---(2) Rep.

W.

Mills.

(3) Col.

J.

Webster – Campaign manager for Mills.

(4) James Glover – Second in command of W.

Mills.

A total of $25,000 in mysterious funds passed through Mills’ account.

He claimed he didn’t know where it came from.

Two men who would
know are dead.

Maryland money is important in the context of the Wallace shooting in Maryland.

There are many people who would be paid
off or silenced to advance the plan.

(5) Mr.

Taub – Allegedly worked for Herb Kalmbach.

Died in Switzerland with $2 million on him, the same amount Dorothy Hunt had when
she was killed.

(6) Dennis Salvatore Cossini – CIA contact with Arthur Bremer.

Could have provided the money, like Mrs.

Hunt, be the cut-off.

(7) Mrs.

A.

Topping – Wife of Andrew Topping, the man hired to kill Nixon – $1,000 was paid to a Secret Service agent.

This could be
traced.

Did any of the money come from Watergate accounts?

Mrs.

Topping was murdered because of something she knew.

She was part of
her husband’s team.

Although her death was listed as “suicide,” like Rep.

W.

Mills, Topping said it was murder.

(8) Lou Russell – Carl Oglesby in the Boston Phoenix (July 31, 1973) refers to “the recent death of Lou Russell, an old-school security cop
employed by McCord Associates on the Republican convention security contract.

He brought about a dozen checks in different amounts from
McCord to Fensterwald’s Committee to Investigate Assassinations during a period in which McCord and Fensterwald are not supposed to
have known each other.”
18.

“Looking for evidence”: Howard Hunt testified before the Grand Jury that Charles Colson called from the White House and told him to
“go to Bremer’s apartment and see if there is left or radical reading material around.” The night before this testimony, June 11, 1973, Hunt was
hurt, beat up in his cell.He brought about a dozen checks in different amounts from
McCord to Fensterwald’s Committee to Investigate Assassinations during a period in which McCord and Fensterwald are not supposed to
have known each other.”
18.

“Looking for evidence”: Howard Hunt testified before the Grand Jury that Charles Colson called from the White House and told him to
“go to Bremer’s apartment and see if there is left or radical reading material around.” The night before this testimony, June 11, 1973, Hunt was
hurt, beat up in his cell.

(Washington Post, 6-21-73)
Bittman, Hunt’s attorney, asked for permission to review the record of the Wallace story and amend it later if necessary, because of the
possibility of mistakes after the attack.

Will he be forced to change testimony to protect the White House and Colson’s connections to the
Wallace shooting?

Herb Kalmbach was pouring money into the defeat of Wallace.

19.

Assassination plans for Nixon: “After the martial law they planned to get Nixon.” – Louis Tackwood, Glass House Tapes, Avon Press.

20.

Andrew Topping: Topping told Detective Peter Book that “rightist forces beyond his control caused his wife to be killed.” (Washington
Post, San Jose Mercury, 8-12-72)
21.

Tackwood press conference: October 25, 1971, New York Times.

22.

Violence in Miami: William Lemmer, Harper’s, Dec.

1972.

23.

Edward Martin, McCord: Washington Post, June 18, 1972.

“White.” E.

Howard Hunt: Los Angeles Times, June 20, 1972.

Ibid, Glass
House Tapes, page 237.

McCord was “Martin.”
24.

Washington Post, October 11, 1972.

25.

Working for Agnew, “The Man”: Harold W.

Eldridge co-wrote the letter in Florida that smeared Senator Muskie.

The purpose was to
keep Muskie from winning in 1972, otherwise the “Man” would not be able to run again in 1976.

Nixon had already been president.

The
“Man” who wanted the chance must have been Agnew.

If Muskie lost, Nixon would get the nomination in August and win the election in
November.The
“Man” who wanted the chance must have been Agnew.

If Muskie lost, Nixon would get the nomination in August and win the election in
November.

If Nixon was killed, “The Man” wouldn’t have to wait until 1976.

26.

Tom Charles Huston: “Details on Domestic Intelligence Plans, Orders for President Nixon,” New York Times 6-7-73
27.

Evidence of YAF infiltration, right-wing takeover of White House by 1970: “A Plot That Flopped,” by Patricia Swank, Look, 1-26-65;
Warren Report, cover-up, Doubleday, 1964, pp.

293-298, pass over high-level conspiracy; “Meetings before the Commission on the
Assassination of President John F.

Kennedy.” Vol XVIII, pp.

834-98.

28.

William Torbit, Nomenclature of an Assassination Cabal, Jan.

1970, unpublished manuscript put together by trial lawyers in the
Southwest who work with intelligence agencies and government agents.

He is a member of the American Trial Lawyers Assn.

29.

Office of Emergency Service: Two-way bedside radio, AP, Los Angeles Times, 11-11-72; “Big Brother,” Plans for a Dictatorship, Alan
Stang, American Opinion, January 1973; James McCord, censorship plans, Monterrey Peninsula Herald, 10-23-72.

30.

Inter-Divisional Information Unit: Supposedly abolished, Washington Post, 6-1-73.

31.

DALE: 6-25-73, New York Times.

32.

UCLA Inst.

to Study Causes of Violent Behavior: 4-1-73, San Francisco Examiner, temporarily put aside after Watergate.

33.

ENSKIDS: Los Angeles Times, 6-14-73, CIA infiltration into U.S.

through loopholes.

34.

Prison Experimentations: Lister Unit, San Francisco Chronicle, 11-21-72, Monterey Herald, 3-16-73.

Vacaville, L.A.

Free Press, 3-16-
73, Violations of Nuremberg Code, write Venceremos Prison Committee, 1969 University Ave., E.

Pale Alto, Calif.

94303.

35.

Ronald Reagan’s Super Gestapo Cabinet: San Jose Mercury, San Francisco Chronicle, June 2, 1973.

36.

Enemy list: Kirkpatrick Sales, L.A.

Times, 7-30-73.

37.

Eliot Richardson, “Secretary of Lobotomies,” Berkeley Barb, June 29, 1973.

38.

J.--- PAGE BREAK ---

38. J. Walter Thompson Advertising Agency, 3-5-73, New York Times: James Webb Young, former vice-president and director of

--- PAGE BREAK ------ PAGE BREAK ---

38. J. Walter Thompson Advertising Agency, 3-5-73, New York Times: James Webb Young, former vice-president and director of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Thompson, conceived the idea during World War II of a “War Advertising Council” to aid the war effort with advertising campaigns at no cost
to the government. Young worked for the Ford Foundation and Nelson Rockefeller as coordinator of Inter-American Affairs in South
America.
39. Agnew, Maj. Gen. Dunn: Jack Anderson, San Jose Mercury, 7-7-73.
40. Warren Burger, New Constitution. No trial by jury: 9-8-70, New York Times.
41. General Haig: Given number two Army Post over 243 Senior Generals, Wash. Post, NY Times, 9-8-72
42. Maj. Bennett, White House staff: Wash. Post 6-17-73.
43. J. Fred Buzhardt, Pentagon Lawyer into White House: San Francisco Chronicle, May 14, 1973.
44. Raymond Procunier: “If we have political prisoners we lock them up” – S.F. Chronicle, 2-10-72.
45. Books on Prisons: A few suggested readings – there are many more. Gerald Leinwand, Prisons, Problems of American Society,
Pocket Books, 1972; Maximum Security, Letters from California’s Prisons, Edited by Eve Pell, Bantam Books, 1972; Ain’t Nobody Gonna
Hear You Scream, Grossman Publishers, NY; Voices from the Big House, Harlo Press, Detroit; Cynthia Owen Philip, Imprisoned in
America, Prison Communications; 1776 to Attica, Harper & Row; Charles Goodell, Political Prisoners of America; George Jackson, Blood
in My Eye, Random House.
46. Elmer Davis, P.O. B-3677, Represa, Calif. 95671, U.S. District Court – Elmer Davis, Plaintiff, Complaint for Civil Damages,
“defamation of character, violation of right to privacy with wanton, malicious and evil intent and design to cause the false arrest and
imprisonment of the plaintiff,” filed June 23, 1973.
47. Plans to kill Eldridge Cleaver and Cesar Chavez: Treasury Dept. ATF, Larry Shears, Dec. 17, 1971, 5:50 p.m., Channel 23, Los
Angeles; New York Times, January 2, 1972; San Francisco Chronicle, 12-20-72, Trial of Sonny Barger: “He had been approached by law
enforcement officers asking him to kill someone.” He entered into deals with authorities in exchange for dismissal of charges against gang
members.
“Ex-Convict ‘Recruited’ for Rioting”: UPI, San Francisco Chronicle, 7-26-73.
49. San Quentin Six, grand jury walkouts: San Quentin Six Legal Defense Fund, 558 Capp St., San Francisco 94110.
50. Louis Tackwood, Glass House Tapes: “Younger’s links to Washington, Squad 19, martial law plans …” Evelle Younger, attorney general
of California, is named as part of the national Gestapo intelligence operations of which Watergate is one aspect.”links to Washington, Squad 19, martial law plans …” Evelle Younger, attorney general
of California, is named as part of the national Gestapo intelligence operations of which Watergate is one aspect.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---, Squad 19, martial law plans …” Evelle Younger, attorney general
of California, is named as part of the national Gestapo intelligence operations of which Watergate is one aspect.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER SEVEN
THIRTY WATERGATE WITNESSES HAVE MET
VIOLENT DEATHS
(MIDNIGHT, JULY 12, 1976)
What are the odds of 30 people—all involved in the same horrible scandal—dying within four years?
Because that’s what happened with Watergate.
Since the break-in at the Democratic National Headquarters on June 17, 1972, there have been 30
deaths—many of them violent—all of people involved in one way or another.
By Malcolm Abrams
The CIA is behind it all. That’s the conclusion of Mae Brussell—one of America’s foremost
assassination experts—a researcher who has collected every pertinent newspaper story, every book,
every document since the Watergate break-in four years ago on the night of June 17, 1972.
Mae Brussell is the only person in America who perceived the gruesome string of deaths that stretches
from Watergate to now. She believes that a faction within the Central Intelligence Agency is responsible
not only for Watergate, but for the assassinations of John and Robert Kennedy.
She believes, as President Nixon stated on the Watergate tapes, that everything horrible that’s happened
in American politics is connected, starting with the Bay of Pigs.
Some of the 30 people who died, she says, knew only about CIA involvement in Watergate. Some of
them knew much, much more.
A few of the dead, like Martha Mitchell, Lyndon Johnson, Congressman Hale Boggs and Mafia
hoodlum Sam Giancana, are well-known. Others might have been—if they had lived and told their stories.
But 30 are dead. And there’s no reason to believe that there won’t be more.
1. Beverly Kaye, 42, died of a “massive stroke” in December, 1973, while riding in the White House
elevator. She was Secret Service Agent John Bull’s secretary, and her job included the storing and
preservation of the White House tapes.
It is almost without question, says Mae Brussell, that she knew what was on those tapes, including the
18 minutes of recorded conversations that were mysteriously erased.
As reported by the West Coast news service Earth News, on June 5, 1974, from the stories she told her
friends and neighbors, she was convinced that the president and his aides were involved in the Watergate
bugging and cover-up.
2. Murray Chotiner, a long-time friend of Nixon’s, was killed when a government truck ran into his
car on January 23, 1974. At first it was reported that Chotiner suffered only a broken leg, but he died a
week later.er, a long-time friend of Nixon’s, was killed when a government truck ran into his
car on January 23, 1974. At first it was reported that Chotiner suffered only a broken leg, but he died a
week later.

--- PAGE BREAK ---According to a March 31, 1973 article in the Los Angeles Times, Chotiner may have been one of the
people who received the tape recordings made inside the Democratic campaign headquarters in the
Watergate building.

3.

William Mills, a Congressman from Maryland, was found shot to death—an apparent suicide—one
day after it was disclosed that he failed to report a $25,000 campaign contribution given to him by
President Nixon’s re-election finance committee.

Mills, 48, was discovered with a 12-gauge shotgun by
his feet and an “alleged suicide note” pinned to his body.

In all, seven such notes were found, apparently
written by Mills although this was never verified.

According to Brussell, the $25,000 came from the $1.7
million secret fund for “dirty tricks” held by the Committee to Re-Elect the President.

4.

and 5.

James Webster and James Glover, key men in Congressman Mills’ campaign, were killed
in a car accident in February, 1972.

Another campaign worker stated in the Washington Post on May 23,
1973 that the illegal $25,000 contribution was delivered to Mills’ campaign manager James Webster.

6.

Hale Boggs, Congressman from Louisiana and a member of the Warren Commission, died in July,
1972, one month after the Watergate arrests.

Boggs and two other men disappeared when the light aircraft
in which they were flying crashed in Alaska.

The Los Angeles Star reported on November 22, 1973 that “Boggs had startling revelations on
Watergate and the assassination of President Kennedy.”
Richard Nixon made unintelligible remarks about Congressman Boggs, recorded on the White House
tapes, just seven days after the Watergate break-in.

7.

Dorothy Hunt, the wife of convicted White House “Plumber” E.

Howard Hunt, was killed along
with 41 other people when United Airlines Flight 553 crashed near Chicago’s Midway Airport on Dec.

8,
1972.

Mrs.--- PAGE BREAK ---

8,
1972. Mrs. Hunt, who like her husband had worked for the CIA, was allegedly carrying $100,000 in “hush”
money so her husband would not implicate White House officials in Watergate. The day after the crash, White House aide Egil (Bud) Krogh was appointed undersecretary of
transportation, supervising the National Transportation Safety Board and the Federal Aviation
Association—the two agencies charged with investigating the airline crash. A week later, Nixon’s deputy
assistant Alexander Butterfield was made the new head of the FAA, and five weeks later Dwight Chapin,
the president’s appointment secretary, was dispatched to Chicago to become a top executive with United
Airlines. The airplane crash was blamed on equipment malfunctions. 8. and 9. Ralph Blodgett and James Krueger, attorneys for Northern Natural Gas Co., were killed in
the same airplane as Mrs. Hunt. The two men, Brussell contends, had documents linking Attorney General John Mitchell to Watergate,
and a secret transfer of El Paso Natural Gas Co. stock to Mitchell after the Justice Department dropped a
$300 million antitrust suit against the company. The money from these stocks may have been used for political espionage. Blodgett told friends before boarding the plane in Washington that he would “never live to get to
Chicago.”
10. and 11. Dr. and Mrs. Gary Morris died in March, 1972 when their boat mysteriously disappeared
off the Caribbean Island of St. Lucia. Their bodies were never found. But their names were on the dead
body of Mrs. Dorothy Hunt, according to an article in the Oct. 3, 1975 Washington Post. “The plane crash

--- PAGE BREAK ---that killed Mrs.

Hunt in Chicago has now been officially ruled an accident,” the story stated.

“But there’s
one bizarre coincidence that may never be explained.

Her red wallet at the time of her death had a slip of
paper with the name of a Washington psychiatrist, Dr.

Gary Morris, on it.”
Neither Howard Hunt nor his wife were patients of the doctor, who [had already disappeared by] the
time of the plane crash.

It is interesting to note, Mae Brussell says, that Dr.

Morris was an expert in hypnosis and that Mr.

Hunt
used mind control in his espionage work.

12.

J.

Edgar Hoover, head of the FBI, died on May 1, 1972, a month before Watergate.

There is
considerable evidence that he may have known about the White House “dirty tricks.” An article in the
Harvard Crimson quotes Felipe De Diego, a Cuban exile who took part in the break-in at psychiatrist
Daniel Ellsberg’s office: “Two burglaries took place at Hoover’s Washington home.

The first was in the
winter of 1972 to retrieve documents that might be used for blackmail against the White House.

“After the first burglary,” according to Diego, “a second burglary was carried out; this time, whether by
design or misunderstanding, a poison, thyonphosphate genre, was placed in Hoover’s personal toilet
articles.

Hoover died shortly after that.”
“Thyonphosphate genre” is a drug that induces heart seizures.

Its presence in a corpse is undetectable
without an autopsy.

No autopsy was ever performed on the body of J.

Edgar Hoover.

13.

Sam Giancana, the Mafia chief, was murdered on June 22, 1975 as he was about to testify before
Sen.

Frank Church’s Senate Committee investigating the use of underworld figures by the CIA, for the
purpose of assassinating foreign leaders.

Giancana had ties to E.

Howard Hunt and the CIA.

His murder is unsolved, although police say “it didn’t look like a Mafia hit.” His former girlfriend,
Judith Campbell Exner, recently revealed her secret romance with JFK.

14.--- PAGE BREAK ---

His murder is unsolved, although police say “it didn’t look like a Mafia hit.” His former girlfriend,
Judith Campbell Exner, recently revealed her secret romance with JFK. 14. Lyndon Baines Johnson, the former president, died on January 20, 1973 in a helicopter ambulance
en route to San Antonio, Tex. Three months before his death, Johnson was quoted in the San Francisco Chronicle: “We’ve been
running a damn Murder Inc. in the Caribbean.” This was two years before Sen. Church’s committee
revealed the plots to assassinate foreign leaders. “Coincidentally,” Mae Brussell says, “Johnson died in the arms of a secret service agent, Mike
Howard, who in 1963 had been assigned to protect Marina Oswald after her husband was killed.”
15. George Bell, assistant to Charles Colson, special counsel to the White House, died of unreported
causes on June 30, 1973. When questioned about President Nixon’s infamous “enemies list,” Colson told
the subcommittee investigating Watergate that the “late George Bell” was responsible for the list of 200
celebrities and politicians whom the President considered dangerous. 16. Lee Pennington, Jr., a CIA agent, died of an apparent heart attack in October, 1974. Immediately
after the Watergate arrests two years earlier, he had been sent to ransack James McCord’s home. Richard
Helms, the CIA chief at the time, did not reveal this fact to investigators. It was not until June 28, 1974, four months before Pennington’s death, that the new CIA director,
William Colby, reported to Sen. Howard Baker: “The results of our investigation clearly show that the
CIA had in its possession, as early as June, 1972, information that one of its paid operatives, Lee R. Pennington, Jr., had entered the James McCord residence shortly after the Watergate break-in and
destroyed documents which might show a link between McCord and the CIA.”
17. J. Clifford Dieterich, a 28-year-old secret service agent assigned to Nixon, was killed when thethe Watergate break-in and
destroyed documents which might show a link between McCord and the CIA.”
17. J. Clifford Dieterich, a 28-year-old secret service agent assigned to Nixon, was killed when the

--- PAGE BREAK ---president’s helicopter crashed off the Bahamas in May of 1973.

Dieterich was one of seven men in the helicopter, but the only one to die.

Ms.

Brussell believes that in
guarding Richard Nixon, he may have come to know too much.

18.

Clay Shaw, who years earlier had been acquitted of conspiracy to kill John F.

Kennedy, died of a
heart attack on August 16, 1974.

His death came just weeks after Victor Marchetti, author of The Cult of Intelligence, revealed that
Shaw had worked for the CIA.

He had been on assignment in Mexico in 1963 at the same time as CIA
agent E.

Howard Hunt and Lee Harvey Oswald.

Shaw was cremated.

There was no autopsy.

19.

Merle D.

Baumgart, an aide to Rep.

Peter Rodino of the House Judiciary Committee on
Impeachment, was killed in a traffic accident on May 20, 1975.

Washington police described his death as
“a routine traffic accident”—until they received an anonymous call to “look into it.” According to the
Portland Oregonian of June 30, 1975, U.S.

agents joined the probe but kept it secret because of the
“stature of some individuals who might be involved.”
Ms.

Brussell speculates that in his work to impeach Nixon, Baumgart may have come across some
dangerous information.

20.

Nikos J.

Vardinoyiannis, a Greek shipowner who contributed funds to Nixon’s presidential
campaign, died of undisclosed causes in 1973.

Watergate prosecutor Leon Jaworski was investigating
Vardinoyiannis when the Justice Department declared that the Greek’s contribution of $27,000 was not
illegal.

The Department reached this conclusion, Mae Brussell says, even though the contribution was made
after one of Vardinoyiannis’ companies was contracted to supply fuel for the U.S.

6th Fleet, and even
though federal law bars foreign contractors from contributing to U.S.

political campaigns.

21.

Joseph Tomassi, the 24-year-old head of the American Nazi Party in California was shot to death
on the front steps of his Los Angeles headquarters, on August 15, 1975.--- PAGE BREAK ---

21. Joseph Tomassi, the 24-year-old head of the American Nazi Party in California was shot to death
on the front steps of his Los Angeles headquarters, on August 15, 1975. Two years earlier, the Los Angeles Times reported, “the Committee to Re-Elect the President gave
$10,000 in undisclosed funds to finance a surreptitious campaign to remove George Wallace’s American
Independent Party from the 1972 California ballot.”
The Times went on to say, “$1,200 of the fund found its way to Joe Tomassi, head of the Nazi Party in
California.”
22. Mrs. Louise Boyer, Nelson Rockefeller’s assistant for 30 years, fell to her death from a 10th story
New York apartment on July 3, 1974. At the time, as a consequence of Watergate, Rockefeller was being considered for the vice-presidency. Accusations had been made that he had been involved in the illegal removal of gold from Ft. Knox. It’s
believed that Mrs. Boyer supplied the investigators with this information. 23. Jose Joaquin Sangenis Perdimo, a Cuban exile who worked with the CIA at the Bay of Pigs, died
mysteriously in 1974. Code-named “Felix,” he had worked with Watergate plumbers Hunt and Barker. In
1972 he was awarded a secret merit medal by the CIA. 24. Rolando Masferrer, another Cuban exile employed by the CIA, was blown to bits when his car
exploded on October 5, 1975. Masferrer had worked with plumbers Hunt, Sturgis and Barker. According to Miss Brussell, “He would have been investigated for his activities in connection with

--- PAGE BREAK ---on October 5, 1975. Masferrer had worked with plumbers Hunt, Sturgis and Barker. According to Miss Brussell, “He would have been investigated for his activities in connection with

--- PAGE BREAK ---

assassination attempts on foreign leaders, had he not been killed.”
25. Lou Russell, an old friend of Nixon’s from the “Red Scare” days, died of natural causes on July 31,
1973.
In testimony before the Senate Select Committee on Presidential Campaign Activities, Nixon’s
secretary Rosemary Wood stated: “I met Lou Russell once when he came to the office. He said he worked
on the old House Un-American Activity Committee and that he needed a job.”
Russell found a job alright, with “McCord Associates,” a CIA front run by Watergater James McCord.
26. Jack Cleveland, a partner of the president’s brother Donald Nixon, died in Canada in November of
1973. At the time he was wanted for questioning in connection with a possible government pay-off to
Howard Hughes.
Cleveland was suspected of being a go-between in a deal whereby Nixon’s brother gained an interest
in a large Nevada ranch in exchange for the president’s clearing the way for the billionaire’s takeover of
Air West.
“When Watergate came apart,” Ms. Brussell says, “this deal came under investigation.”
27. Richard Lavoie, chief of security for International Telegraph and Telephone, died of a heart attack
on December 27, 1972.
At the time, Lavoie was guarding Dita Beard, an ITT secretary who claimed she had a memo that her
company had contributed $400,000 to Nixon’s campaign fund so John Mitchell would not bust up some of
ITT’s holdings.
When columnist Jack Anderson broke this story, Miss Beard was moved from Washington to Denver,
Colo., where she was hospitalized for an apparent heart attack. She was whisked away, Anderson
claimed, so that she couldn’t testify.
Mae Brussell suspects that Lavoie may have heard too much from Dita Beard.
28. Mrs. Andrew Topping, the wife of a man arrested for plotting to kill Nixon, died of gunshot
wounds on April 6, 1972, two weeks after the Watergate break-in. Her death was declared a suicide.
Andrew Topping told police that “pro-rightist forces” beyond his control caused his wife’s death.
29. James Morton was President Gerald Ford’s campaign treasurer. According to a New York Times
report of November 2, 1973, Ford was being questioned by a senate committee prior to his appointment
as vice president, and was asked about a secret sum of $38,000 used in his campaign for the House of
Representatives.
The Times story stated: “Ford confirmed under questioning that a committee organized in Washington
raised $38,216 for his re-election in 1972 … but Ford said he did not know the names of the donors
because the committee treasurer, James G. Morton, is now dead.”
Like so much of the Watergate money, Ms. Brussell notes, no records were kept.
30. Martha Mitchell, estranged wife of the former attorney general, died on Memorial Day, 1976. A
constant “pain in the side” of the Watergate conspirators, she was the first person to point the finger at
Richard Nixon and suggest he resign.e former attorney general, died on Memorial Day, 1976. A
constant “pain in the side” of the Watergate conspirators, she was the first person to point the finger at
Richard Nixon and suggest he resign.

--- PAGE BREAK ---neral, died on Memorial Day, 1976. A
constant “pain in the side” of the Watergate conspirators, she was the first person to point the finger at
Richard Nixon and suggest he resign.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER EIGHT
LETTER TO PRESIDENT RICHARD M. NIXON
MAY 20, 1973
Dear President Nixon:
My name is Mae Brussell.
I have a radio program in Carmel, California called “Dialogue: Conspiracy.” On this weekly show I
illustrate government conspiracies, how they operate, who is behind them.
My background is nine years research into political assassinations and espionage operations.
The purpose of my work was never a negative one, to hurt any particular people or to tear the country
apart. The sad situation today was inevitable because truth will come out. To cure a sickness, you have to
first diagnose it.
In addition to seeking a diagnosis to America’s problems, I spend many hours thinking about the
alternatives. That is why I write to you now.
You are sitting almost alone at this point as the head of a great country you loved which needs your
help.
I have studied the causes for this tragedy.
I have also studied the cures.
Half or ¾ of the problems were created by errors on your part.
But you were also the victim and were going to be the victim of a tragedy worse than what took place
so far.
While I am pleased to see truths exposed, and all my messages are proven to be correct, I would still
like to help you.
I understand the history of the Cold War, the 1960s, the 1970s and have given a great deal of thought to
all these complexities.
I will tell you what I want to do for you, if you would allow me.
What I want is to go with you, away some place, like San Clemente preferably, only because I live in
California.
Alone, only with your wife and children, I would give you a complete blueprint of alternatives at this
point.
As I stated, my work and research is very positive in many, many ways.
I could take you out of the mess in Washington, present a carefully thought-out plan based upon some
evidence, to make you the hero you wanted to be. You could finish off your office with dignity. You would
not be asked to resign but could establish yourself as the great person you always wanted to be.
The things I would offer you, if you would listen very carefully, would lift you above all this.
Even if there was an espionage squad inside the White House, even if they did everything to assure
your election, the problem was they intended to kill you after the nominations. And you could prove, in aif there was an espionage squad inside the White House, even if they did everything to assure
your election, the problem was they intended to kill you after the nominations. And you could prove, in a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

hurry, that their necessity to sabotage the government agencies, the CIA, FBI, Justice Department, was to
gain control after you are dead.
Now I am a serious researcher, not some person making jokes or scares. I have tapes of all my radio
shows, and I speak week after week about the plans they had for you later.
As I say, I have alternatives for you to present to Americans on the streets, minorities, Blacks,
Chicanos, political prisoners for you to be able to announce drastic changes, make 180 degree changes in
your plans and posture, so all would forgive you after the Watergate. They would all realize that you are a
victim, as much as us, of deceit and unlawful plans.
My father is a friend of yours. He has blessed you in the White House.
We don’t agree about many political things because I identify with the underdog and he protects the
status quo. But you, President Nixon, are the underdog today, and I can help heal this nation while the
investigations proceed, and you can face the public with a new determination, based upon facts and plans
I hold are important for you and all of us at the same time.
Sincerely,
Mae Brussell

--- PAGE BREAK ---CHAPTER NINE
THE EVIL FEEDBACK LOOP & EMERSON’S LAW OF
CONSERVATION
MAE BRUSSELL INTERVIEW (1978)
(ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED IN THE WINTER 1978 NUMBER OF CONSPIRACY DIGEST, VOL.

III, NO.

1.)
C.D.: Personally, I no longer have any firm prescriptions for social betterment.

The study of
conspiracy seems to indicate that the laws of reality give the dedicated conspirators the upper hand
against anyone with any version of social reform in mind.

Another way of looking at it is that evil has
a better feedback loop than good.

The loot gained by conspiracy puts power in the hands of a few
conspirators who then can undertake even vaster conspiracies to further enhance their power.

The
fruits of “good” movements, on the other hand, are widely dispersed among the people rather than
being concentrated and available for further success.

Perhaps this would be a good question.

Do you
have any reaction?

M.B.: There are also philosophical, literary and historical examples where evil does not have a better
feedback loop than good.

The laws of reality do not guarantee that power gained from force and
monopoly will be lasting or of any long range value to those who have struggled to obtain that power.

“Compensation,” Ralph Waldo Emerson’s essay, describes my views on evil, power and the attempted
manipulations of mankind and nature: the farmer imagines power and place are fine things.

But the
President has paid dearly for his White House.

It has commonly cost him all his peace and the best of his
manly attributes.

To preserve for a short time so conspicuous an appearance before the world, he is
CONTENT TO EAT DUST BEFORE THE REAL MASTERS WHO STAND ERECT BEHIND THE
THRONE.

This law (of compensation) writes the laws of the cities and nations.

It is in vain to build or
plot or combine against it.

Things refuse to be mismanaged for long.

Though no checks to a new evil
appear, the checks exist and will appear.

If the government is cruel, the governor’s life is not safe.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Though no checks to a new evil
appear, the checks exist and will appear. If the government is cruel, the governor’s life is not safe. If you
tax too high, the revenue will yield nothing. The dice of God are always loaded. Every secret is told, every crime punished, every virtue rewarded,
every wrong redressed in silence and certainty. David, the poet, was able to halt Goliath, the giant. Remember Achilles’ heel? Children love Popeye and instant spinach. Power comes from many sources to
counteract evil. Evil has never had a better feedback loop than good. The popularity of Star Wars today has to do with
the longing for heroes, the triumph of good over evil, the forces of good winning. The CIA spent $26
million in tax revenue over a 25-year period with the express purpose of altering human behavior, starting
as early as 1947. This budget was not only for defensive purposes, but to erase memories and to create
apathy at home. Dr. Jose Delgado at Yale University, funded by Naval Intelligence (our tax money again),
specialized in electronically controlling human beings. We are preparing for future warfare robots. If
power and evil provide such a good feedback, why the necessity to worry about emotions such as anxiety,

--- PAGE BREAK ---guilt, or conscience?

Power is temporary and illusive.

It can be shattered by one leak or scrap of
evidence.

One slip of scotch tape placed on the door-latch at the Watergate Hotel in Washington, D.C.

was responsible for removing the president, vice-president, attorney general, secretary of commerce, top
presidential aides and attorneys.

No one has yet admitted who put the second piece of tape back on the
door.

The kinds of conspiracies I am talking about pertain to political assassinations and their cover-ups.

The fruits of good movements are too widely dispersed.

They receive no assistance from the federal
government.

The FBI COINTELPRO and the CIA’s Operation Chaos have been breaking up leftist
organizations and social-cultural activities with a purposeful vengeance (again with our tax dollars).

Divide and conquer is the rule, whether inside the prisons or at charitable meetings.

Anywhere people
get together, they are infiltrated.

The ratio of agents and informants has been about one provocateur to five
members of any given group.

There has been a systematic effort to kill all leaders whose awareness or activities interfere with
international oil interests or narcotics traffic.

It has been alleged that the CIA-FBI combine, in conjunction with the Defense Industrial Security
Command, has supported a school in Oaxaca, Mexico, for professional assassins.

This religious academy,
disguised as a missionary, was exposed in 1970.

Albert Osborne, alias John Howard Bowan, director
and head “missionary,” accompanied Lee Harvey Oswald on his trip to Mexico in September, 1962.

Oswald, not an assassin, was a patsy for the men who killed President John F.

Kennedy.

The killing of Kennedy was only one of dozens or possibly hundreds of murders of leaders around the
world, or potential future leaders.

With this kind of worldwide organization in operation, how can any movement or leader ever serve the
people?The killing of Kennedy was only one of dozens or possibly hundreds of murders of leaders around the
world, or potential future leaders.

With this kind of worldwide organization in operation, how can any movement or leader ever serve the
people?

C.D.: Do you think, then, that centralization of power can be a good thing as long as the power is
held by persons selected by the people and dedicated to what you consider to be a valid program of
social reform?

Doesn’t power always corrupt?

Aren’t the worst always attracted by the prospect of
centralized power?

Wouldn’t extreme decentralized power be the solution to conspiracy?

M.B.: Centralization of power is always dangerous.

What is valid social reform to one group, such as
Hitler’s Germany, is genocide for others.

I have to agree with Thomas Jefferson’s thoughts about power: “I have never been able to conceive
how any rational being could bring happiness to himself from the exercise of power over others.” You
have to understand that my views about power and happiness are not realistic or even possible.

Utopian
dreams of a world without fear, killings and unnecessary pain is only a goal that makes every day a
challenge and every hour worthwhile.

Yes, power corrupts.

The worst are attracted by centralized power.

The solution is for parents and
educators to avoid subjecting children to power trips, the church to avoid the lure of power, the
government to halt dividing economic and ethnic groups against each other.

Conspiracies are possible
when people have been conspired against from birth.

If parents, schools, church and government divested
themselves of the games that increase their power, new sources of energy and production would take their
place and do a much better job of it.

C.D.: What is your attitude on the right-left dichotomy?

From your writing, I would presume that
you have a “left-wing” background and probably are favorably disposed to socialism or “true”
communism.--- PAGE BREAK ---

C.D.: What is your attitude on the right-left dichotomy? From your writing, I would presume that
you have a “left-wing” background and probably are favorably disposed to socialism or “true”
communism. Could you describe your social-political ideals? Everyone knows what Mae Brussell is
against—your positive philosophy, on the other hand, would be news to many of our readers.

--- PAGE BREAK ---M.B.: My attitude on the right-left dichotomy should not enter into or affect my research.

When a
biologist looks at cancer cells in a microscope, they are not Republican or Democratic or Socialist cells.

There is no right-left distinction in diseases.

I examine autopsy reports, sworn testimony under oath,
Congressional Hearings, FBI, CIA and other government documents, witness testimony, police reports,
books, articles and unpublished manuscripts along with newsletters.

My conclusions about assassinations and their cover-ups are cross-referenced and constantly checked
for changes or new information.

The FBI and Los Angeles Police Department have photographs labeled
that prove ten or more bullets were fired in the Ambassador Hotel the night Sen.

Robert Kennedy was
killed.

Sirhan Sirhan’s weapon only fired eight shots.

There is no indication that any of Sirhan’s bullets went into Kennedy.

The fatal shot came from behind
the Senator, into his head.

A guard from Lockheed, Thane Cesar, fired his gun that night.

Kennedy’s coat sleeve was cut off and is missing.

The bullet-ridden ceiling panels are gone.

Sirhan Sirhan’s weapon was “sold” and is out of the state, probably destroyed.

If the Republicans and the right-wing did the killing and cover up, we should know.

If the Democrats or Communists did the killing or cover-up, we should know.

L.A.

Chief of Police Ed Davis, and former District Attorney Evelle Younger, were both running for
governor of California at the time of the cover-up.

The voters should be informed if Davis and Younger
were engaged in a conspiracy to cover up the murder of a senator and presidential candidate.

The voters must be informed.

This has nothing really to do with right-left.

Documents exist to prove that the CIA and FBI planned the murder of Richard Nixon in 1972.

Conservative George Wallace was eliminated from the 1972 election due to a near assassination.Documents exist to prove that the CIA and FBI planned the murder of Richard Nixon in 1972.

Conservative George Wallace was eliminated from the 1972 election due to a near assassination.

I want to know who is killing Republicans or Conservatives as much as I want to know who is killing
President John F.

Kennedy, Sen.

Robert Kennedy, Malcolm X, Reverend Martin Luther King or hundreds
of others less known.

Everyone doesn’t know what Mae Brussell is against.

If I tell you what I am against, you can deduce or
know what I am for.

I am against planned political assassinations by our intelligence and defense agents.

The CIA, FBI, DIA and DISC (Defense Industry Security Command), were set up originally to protect
citizens of the USA.

They became their own judges and juries, private servants of corporations with
investments at home and abroad.

I am against the constant destruction of evidence in criminal cases and political assassinations.

Prime
witnesses are murdered before or after testifying.

Diaries are forged and planted in obvious places.

Doubles are created to confuse.

Police departments manipulate facts in cooperation with conspirators.

I am outraged that our judicial system since 1947 has been patterned after Nazi Germany.

Patsies are
dead or locked away.

The assassins walk the streets or leave the country, “home free.” I am against using
Earl Warren, chief justice of the Supreme Court, to cover up the assassination of President Kennedy.

When the highest court is corrupt, there is no hope at local levels.

I am against allowing the CIA to spend $25 million since 1947 for the express purpose, as stated
before, to alter our behavior.

Is the State supreme over individuals?

Who owns or controls our minds?

Why was CIA Director Allen Dulles allowed to order 100 million LSD tablets?

Were half the U.S.

population going to receive their doses?

What gives the CIA and Pentagon the right to define normal, or to
determine what is national security?--- PAGE BREAK ---

population going to receive their doses? What gives the CIA and Pentagon the right to define normal, or to
determine what is national security? Are we being drugged through food, water, and supplied with
chemicals so we become slaves and robots? Where is all the cancer coming from? Why the preoccupation
with death? Why is the government in the business of creating a “psycho-civilized” world? Who is ordering the

--- PAGE BREAK ---ultrasonic waves to lower brain waves of cities’ populations to an alpha state, leaving citizens
susceptible to mass propaganda and hypnotic suggestion?

These facts have been confirmed by researcher
Walter Bowart in 1977.

I learned about the project years ago.

I am against the using of CBS, ABC, NBC, UPI and AP by Washington D.C.

since WWI, and by the CIA
since WWII as propaganda tools.

The so-called “liberal” New York Times and Washington Post would
make Adolf Hitler proud.

Notice that in all the Washington Post accolades concerning Watergate
exposures, the newspaper never delved into the massive evidence surrounding the murder of Mary Jo
Kopechne, the shooting of George Wallace, the Howard Hughes connections, the murder of J.

Edgar
Hoover, the planned riots for Miami in 1972, the assassination plans for Richard Nixon through both the
San Diego Secret Army Organization and the Andrew Topping arrest in New York.

The media are cover-
up artists.

They allow assassins or would-be-assassins to fade away.

One thing is certain about all these matters.

The laws of nature are such that certain truths are going to
come out.

It is only a matter of time.

There is no den in the wide world to hide a rogue.

Commit a crime.

You cannot recall the spoken word, you cannot wipe out the foot track, you cannot draw up the ladder as
to leave no inlet or clue.

SOME DAMNING CIRCUMSTANCE ALWAYS TRANSPIRES.

The laws and
substances of nature become penalties to the thief.

My positive philosophy is very simple.

I believe there is in each of us a potential for peace and
harmony.

A few power-mad perverts dictate orders that must be challenged.

They are in violation of the
laws of nature.

A society that does not care for its infants with love and affection will create mad bombers.

The source
of this peace and harmony is within the family unit, not government agents or law enforcement.

Without
love in the home, there is never quiet in the community, cities or around the world.The source
of this peace and harmony is within the family unit, not government agents or law enforcement.

Without
love in the home, there is never quiet in the community, cities or around the world.

There are ways to counteract the evil being purposely planned.

Study history.

Separate fears and
prejudices from facts.

Recognize facts from propaganda.

Invest energy in fighting for what you believe in.

Analyze harder where we are going and what you are doing about it.

What do you really believe in?

How
much do we care?

C.D.: Where can our readers get information on Walter Bowart’s research on the mind control uses
of ultrasonics and microwaves?

M.B.: Walter Bowart’s book, “Operation Mind Control,” will be published in the Spring, 1978.

Bowart’s allegations about the CIA using ultrasonic waves on the human brain to control the behavior
pattern of entire cities confirm information I received in 1974 about the same project.

A reliable source of information told me that a radio tower and a tall bank tower in San Francisco were
going to extend a beam to have virtual radio control of that entire city.

He informed me that the radio
frequencies would make meditation impossible.

The radio towers were being utilized for future control of
our minds.

The same week that I received this information, an article in the Los Angeles Times appeared
mentioning the use of radio beams over large cities to control the population.

C.D.: Conspiracy Digest has often propounded the theory that the right-left political-economic
spectrum is an artificial concoction of the ruling class that creates a “heads I win, tails you lose”
situation for the ruled class.

Isn’t the choice between communism and fascism only a choice in style of
tyranny?--- PAGE BREAK ---

C.D.: Conspiracy Digest has often propounded the theory that the right-left political-economic
spectrum is an artificial concoction of the ruling class that creates a “heads I win, tails you lose”
situation for the ruled class. Isn’t the choice between communism and fascism only a choice in style of
tyranny? Are you familiar with Antony Sutton’s Wall Street series of books that documents that both
Nazism and Soviet Communism were financed largely by the same Wall Street cabal whose interest was
in creating conditions for big government favoritism as opposed to laissez-faire competition? M.B.: The choices between fascism and communism are not our ONLY alternatives. Tyranny, by any

--- PAGE BREAK ---name, isn’t the only solution.

I am familiar with Antony Sutton’s books and own a few.

Nazism and Soviet Communism were
financed by Wall Street cabals.

They were NOT FUNDED TO SUPPORT COMMUNISM.

Money was poured into the USSR and behind the Iron Curtain for the purpose of funding future
uprisings and encouraging dissidents.

Nazi agents are behind part of the KGB and MKD.

Just as Wall
Street poured money in Russia after WWI, Allen Dulles, attorney for the Wall Street cabal, then Director
of the CIA, funded Adolf Hitler’s chief of Nazi-Eastern Intelligence with $200 million (our tax revenue
again).

Gehlen was paid for placing agents behind the Iron Curtain, and for cold war/hot war purposes.

This money does not support communism, but anti-communism.

Marina Oswald’s background was White Russian aristocracy.

Marina has overwhelming links to the
CIA, defense industry and General Reinhard Gehlen’s agents through the CIA/Greek Orthodox Church.

Her membership in the communist Komsomolsk organization, a leftist front, didn’t bother the State
Department or violently Anti-Communist Rescue Commission that met Lee and Marina in New York City.

The right-left political and economic spectrum is a farce.

Howard Hughes’ Summa Company, the South
Korean KCIA, Hughes Medical Institute and other funding front operations have bought our Congress,
Republicans as well as Democrats.

Those that can’t be bought are blackmailed.

C.D.: On numerous occasions you have mentioned that the Buckley school of conservatives and his
youth wing, Young Americans for Freedom (YAF), are connected to CIA/ruling-class dirty tricks and
even the Kennedy Assassination.

Few conspiracy buffs would dispute the CIA-Buckley-Establishment
connection.

Of course, Buckley is death on conspiracy theory.

His favorite target is “paranoids.”
What do you think of the conspiracy-minded conservatives, such as the Liberty Lobby and the John
Birch Society?Of course, Buckley is death on conspiracy theory.

His favorite target is “paranoids.”
What do you think of the conspiracy-minded conservatives, such as the Liberty Lobby and the John
Birch Society?

No doubt you disagree with their theories, but do you think they are largely sincere?

Or
are they black propaganda outlets for the Establishment?

Or like many other organizations are they
simply infiltrated and used from time to time in specific black propaganda campaigns?

In one of your
tapes you seemed to imply that George Schuler’s American Opinion attack on Malcolm X contained
outright lies and was timed to coincide with Malcolm’s assassination.

Comments?

M.B.: Paranoia is a psychological diagnosis applied to a disease of the mind.

Buckley is hardly a
psychiatrist.

He is a useful media showcase and propaganda machine.

When Buckley states his opinions in writing or on the air, he never prefaces remarks or articles by
providing facts about his CIA days with E.

Howard Hunt.

Few people know that Buckley’s family fortune
came from Pantipec Oil Company.

E.

Howard Hunt and George DeMohrenschildt, Oswald’s CIA baby-
sitter, both worked under Warren Smith.

Smith was President of Buckley’s Pantipec Oil.

Buckley not only worked with E.

Howard Hunt in the CIA, but formed the notorious YAF with Douglas
Caddy, co-worker in the CIA office of Mullen and Co.

of Watergate fame.

Members of the YAF were brought from U.S.

Military Intelligence in Germany to the Dallas-Ft.

Worth
area in the fall of 1962.

Their object was to infiltrate and take over this conveniently formed new
organization.

Orders went from Larry Schmidt, first to arrive, that all members had to be in Dallas before
JFK arrived … for their briefings and roles to be played.

There is more to the Buckley-CIA-YAF-Caddy
connections than time allows here.

Liberty Lobby and the John Birch Society accumulate interesting facts.

Their numbers are correct, but
the conclusions can’t be proven and are in error.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Liberty Lobby and the John Birch Society accumulate interesting facts. Their numbers are correct, but
the conclusions can’t be proven and are in error. Jimmy Carter sent a message into the new spacecraft. He wrote that “we human beings are still divided
into nation states, but these states are rapidly becoming a single global civilization.”
The Birch Society and Liberty Lobby would claim this is proof of “one world” conspiracy of

--- PAGE BREAK ---communism and the communists are winning their goals.

On the other hand, my assessment forces me to
believe the Bormann Brotherhood exists.

Hitler’s goal to rule the world through satellites and weapons is
working.

We are moving into the Nazification of planet earth.

Carter’s Human Rights issue is a sham.

He
scolds the USSR.

We support and fund South Africa, Argentina, Chile, Brazil, South Korea, Nicaragua,
Iran, feudal Middle-East countries with no trials and much torture.

George Schuler’s attack upon Malcolm X, published in American Opinion, Feb.

1973, argues that it
would be better to memorialize Benedict Arnold, a known traitor, than Malcolm X.

Malcolm X was never
a traitor to the USA.

Schuler’s put down on Malcolm begins by stating Malcolm X was once a pimp, dope peddler, an ex-
convict who served ten years for robbery.

He fails to mention the murder of Malcolm’s father, the causes of his hatred and poverty, the reasons
blacks get into crime.

Schuler doesn’t praise Malcolm X for changing his ways, for his eloquent self-
education, for his published lectures and writings, for his ability to raise himself above the gutter to
become an inspiration for many people.

White racists use Black fools and Jewish apologists for much of their dirty work.

The anti-Semitic YAF—John Birch Society wanted to place an ad, “Wanted for Treason,” with a black
border, in the newspapers the day JFK was assassinated in Dallas, Texas.

Birch Society members paid
for the ad.

Neo-Nazi Christians wrote the ad.

Whose name was at the bottom, in the newspaper Nov.

22,
1963?

Jew boy Bernard Weissman.

Why his name?

Weissman testified before the Warren Commission
that they wanted his name “because he was Jewish.” Why did they need a Jewish name identified with the
death of JFK?

Because another Jew, Jack Rubenstein (Ruby), who worked with oil millionaire anti-
Semites and wanted their approval, was going to silence the patsy.Weissman testified before the Warren Commission
that they wanted his name “because he was Jewish.” Why did they need a Jewish name identified with the
death of JFK?

Because another Jew, Jack Rubenstein (Ruby), who worked with oil millionaire anti-
Semites and wanted their approval, was going to silence the patsy.

No other members of the YAF were
asked to come before the Warren Commission.

Why not?

CD: A number of conspiracy researchers are suspicious of the U.S.

Labor Party and NCLC, funded
by powerful governments or private interests.

They seem to promote some of your conspiracy theories,
such as your interpretation of the Symbionese Liberation Army kidnapping of Patty Hearst.

What do
you think, is Lyndon LaRouche for real?

We find it suspicious that a new world Central Bank is the
linchpin of his program.

Central Banks and their power to create money (power) by slapping ink on
paper have always been the primary tool of ruling classes.

What is your opinion of the money
question?

M.B.: The U.S.

Labor Party always blames the CIA and Rockefeller for everything that is wrong.

Maybe they are hitting the top dogs.

It is hard to argue that one.

However, the CIA and the Rockefellers can’t do it alone.

The USLP praises Gerald Ford as a fine man.

Ford was a cover-up artist for the Warren Commission.

His crime of lies about Oswald in his book and
the cover-up of hard evidence make him guilty of crimes worse than Nixon was charged with.

Ford
covered up the killings of Kennedy, Officer J.

D.

Tippit, and the murder of Lee Harvey Oswald.

Ford
brought neo-Nazi G.

Gordon Liddy to Washington, D.C.

to work in the Treasury Dept.

Ford pardoned
Nixon because he was guilty of the same charges, cover-up of conspiracies.

The NCLC never uses documents that prove the Defense Industry Security Command, Division V of the
FBI and other agencies had a part in the assassinations and conspiracies.

They were and are not interested in assassinations inside the USA.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The NCLC never uses documents that prove the Defense Industry Security Command, Division V of the
FBI and other agencies had a part in the assassinations and conspiracies. They were and are not interested in assassinations inside the USA. Political murders determine who will become head of the Pentagon, Marines, Airforce, Navy, FBI,
CIA, Treasury Dept., etc. Financial policies, national and international, are controlled by corporations and individuals to make
up multinational nation-state empires. It is the systematic and always planned murders that control their

--- PAGE BREAK ---financial investments.

I want to know who is murdering.

The NCLC speak of the condition.

They can’t
make a proper diagnosis without examining the deaths.

I agree with the NCLC that terrorism is funded by
the right.

This has been a historical truth, a technique used by the Czar then brought to Germany for the
Nazis.

The SLA was formed by the CIA to infiltrate Bay Area left-wing movements and test mind control
drugs.

Lyndon LaRouche never writes about Ronald Reagan, Robert Maheu, Howard Hughes, Paul Laxault,
the Summa Company, the Hughes Medical Institute in Florida or others who are the opposite side of the
Rockefeller coin.

There is a battle going on between the warfare industries and war machine and the
Eastern Wall Street gang.

The NCLC knows the names of some of the players.

They conspicuously omit
others.

Chase Manhattan Bank is named.

Bank of America is never fingered.

My opinion on the money question could fill your entire issue.

Profits are obtained by monopolizing
what we need; oil, coal, water, transportation, minerals, gas, food, health, homes, entertainment, and
communications (phones).

Profits are made from what we don’t need; drugs, chemicals, tobacco, narcotics, gambling, prostitution,
kidnapping, bank robberies, white collar crimes, hijacking, weapons, overcosts, guns, warfare machinery.

Murders and assassinations that I study pertain to those killings that served a purpose involving future
financial gains that would not have occurred without those deaths.

If the electoral system were REALLY
FREE to allow people to vote for those representatives who could alter their lives and pocketbooks, the
profits in the hands of a few would be considerably reduced.

If the Judicial system really worked, there would be fewer crimes and payoffs for murdering.

Is money the root of all evil?

It comes pretty close.

For a given salary, the head and fingers of SLA leader Donald DeFreeze were cut off before his body
was sent to Ohio.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It comes pretty close. For a given salary, the head and fingers of SLA leader Donald DeFreeze were cut off before his body
was sent to Ohio. Who paid for the injections that Jack Ruby and Martha Mitchell received? What laboratory
manufactured the substance? What profits were made from the LSD given to Patty Hearst while locked in a closet for 45 days? How
were the car accidents of Murray Chotiner and Clay Shaw financed? What did it cost to cover up the fatal plane crash of CIA money bagwoman Dorothy Hunt at the height
of Watergate? How much was the telephone bill from New York City to Chicago when CBS ordered the cremation of
Michelle Clark, victim on Dorothy Hunt’s plane along with 45 others? Were Jack Ruby’s debts of $40,000 to the IRS before the Kennedy assassination automatically paid
when he obliged and shot Lee Harvey Oswald? How much tax money went to fund doubles for Lee Harvey Oswald, Sirhan Sirhan, Donald DeFreeze
and James Earl Ray? Where are the bankers who are funding violence? Are we paying for all this, the murders, the
expensive, lengthy trials and hush money? Who paid the hospital bills in Colorado for Dita Beard, ITT secretary, when she embarrassed
President Richard Nixon? The important crises in America are what we are doing and what we are allowing to happen. Fascism isn’t found in bank names or bank titles. It is what they are doing to people in front of our eyes. According to New York City Health Department figures during 1976, murder was the number one cause
of death for ages between 15-24. MURDER IS WINNING OVER DRUG ABUSE, CANCER, DISEASES
OR ANY OTHER CAUSE. I don’t care as much about the banking houses as I do about where money is abused and wasted. If we
were ever to solve these crimes, we could locate which banking houses were funding the plans.

--- PAGE BREAK ---CD: From listening to your tapes, I detect that you believe that the Bildeberger-CIA-CFR “free
world” Establishment ruling class is Anglo-Saxon/White Racist.

How do you square this theory with
the apparent pro-minority attitude of the Establishment’s kept liberals and think tank/foundations?

Left-cover?

Incitement to backlash?

How do so many of Jewish descent become prominent in
government and finance if the ruling class is still White Racist?

How do you account for the
Rothschilds, Warburgs, Schiffs, Kissingers, etc.?

M.B.: The Bildebergers, CIA, CFR establishment ruling class is basically Anglo-Saxon White Racist.

There are a few Jewish showpieces allowed on the fringe for entertainment or media coverage.

Racism in the USA is everywhere, in every prison, police department, and so-called peacemaking
organizations.

The Control of Candy Jones by Donald Bain tells how a New York model was taken by the CIA,
injected with sodium pentothal, and hypnotized.

Candy was then taught to hate Blacks, Jews and Italians.

Why?

Why were our tax dollars (I keep repeating this because it makes me furious that we are funding
these crimes) used to further hatred?

How many more Candy Joneses were taught to hate?

Candy joined
the CIA to deliver messages and ended up with two personalities inside her head.

There is no pro-minority attitude on the part of the Establishment.

That is so foolish that I wonder what
kind of vacuum you are coming from.

Blacks, Mexicans, Jews and Indians are not part of the mainstream
of white USA.

They are on the lowest fringes.

A few Jews such as the Rothschilds, Warburgs and Schiffs are always the token names for a gentile
society.

They do not represent assimilation or a symbol of Jewish-Christian solidarity.

Henry Kissinger is a different story.

Kissinger was developed by U.S.

Army Intelligence following
World War II.

Kissinger worked in counter-intelligence.

Many Christian agents were assuming names of
Jews killed in the concentration camps.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kissinger worked in counter-intelligence. Many Christian agents were assuming names of
Jews killed in the concentration camps. How is it possible that Jewish Henry Kissinger became the darling protégé of Rockefeller, Exxon,
Standard Oil? Kissinger has been photographed kissing Anwar Sadat in Egypt. Sadat was in league with
Hitler’s Nazi brotherhood. Would oil magnates with their anti-Semitic clubs and multi-million dollar investments allow Jewish
Kissinger to make deals and sign contracts with oil giants in the Middle-East? Why does the Shah of Iran,
a Moslem, work with Kissinger so well? Kissinger put Nazis into power in Greece, Brazil, Chile—they love him. When Hitler’s $400-million
in cash went to Argentina, did they know that Kissinger would be heading our State Department and
National Security Council? No Jew would be in charge of the Pentagon. The CIA is a racist organization. All of this is impossible!!! Kissinger’s Jewish cover conceals the Rockefeller and Wall Street bankers
directing him. C.D.: Isn’t it possible that all racial-ethnic issues are simply manipulated to keep the ruled class
fighting among themselves? It seems incredible to me that men (or women) with the intelligence (if evil
intelligence) to conspiratorially rule nations (and maybe even the world) would be so petty-minded as
to be racists. What is your reaction? M.B.: Racism is taught from an early age. White men and women fear they will lose their jobs, and
also lose their possessions in a competitive market with minorities. There must have been a lot of black anger after slavery, a rage that the white man feared. The way to
control this situation was and is by nurturing hatreds, hiring more police, rigging the courts to keep
minorities locked up, sending narcotics to the ghetto, exclusion from labor unions and labor market, and
many other techniques. You know what they are.

--- PAGE BREAK ---C.D.: I agree that race prejudice exists to one degree or another at most levels of U.S.

society.

However, it seems to me that the majority working classes are the most racist because they fear
competition for jobs from Blacks and Mexicans.

The ruling class, especially the Eastern Wall Street
gang that controls the “liberal” CBS/ABC/NBC/New York Times/Washington Post, really seems to take
the side of minorities.

Is this just fake propaganda to rake in minority votes?

M.B.: Competition for jobs between Indians, Blacks and Chicanos is caused by a racist power
structure in this country that refuses to allow jobs in the first place.

Labor Unions exclude minorities.

Medical schools and law schools could be increased by the hundreds instead of bickering over a
particular student’s grades.

IQ tests have been proven to be racist, thereby dropping off otherwise qualified students.

By keeping
minorities out of the professions, except entertainment and athletics, the white community can keep their
residential areas white, their schools white, their churches white, perpetuate the racism.

There is no need
for fences or ID cards.

Law enforcement and government agencies, such as the FBI, CIA, NSA, DIA, DISC, are predominantly
white.

We could write an entire issue of Conspiracy Digest about our differences regarding CBS, ABC, NBC,
New York Times and Washington Post.

Where do you ever get the label “liberal” for these people?

How can you possibly say they take the side of minorities?

When?

Where?

How?

I subscribe to these newspapers and want to puke.

I have boycotted major network news coverage
since I studied political assassinations because of their lies, distortions, half truths, insinuations and
massive cover-ups.

The United States press doesn’t fake propaganda.

They don’t even appeal to minorities.

To hell with
minority votes.

These maniacs support military dictatorships and fascism, instituted by the USA since
World War II.--- PAGE BREAK ---

To hell with
minority votes. These maniacs support military dictatorships and fascism, instituted by the USA since
World War II. They treat the CIA and heads of state as if they were some kind of royalty, not the war
criminals they really are. C.D.: Several right-wing authors have theorized that the main conflict in the world is or was the
battle between Wasp and Jewish financiers. Or, more simply, that the history of the 20th Century is
primarily the Rockefeller (Standard Oil) vs. Rothschild (Royal Dutch Shell) battle to control
governments and resources. Do you think there is anything to these theories? What do you think about
the Cowboy-Yankee War, by Carl Oglesby? Your research would seem to support the theory that Nixon
was an agent of new wealth, the “Cowboy” capitalist faction (Hughes?), finally done in by the old
wealth, “Yankee” capitalist faction (Rockefeller-Rothschild) at Watergate? M.B.: The main conflict in the world is not between Wasp and Jewish financiers. The battle of Cowboy vs. Yankee, Carl Oglesby’s theories, are oversimplified. There is no way to
mark off geographical boundaries or to separate fighting factions into such categories. What we are
experiencing is a series of revolutions taking place at the same time. Some of them are political. Others
are cultural and social. While these changes have been occurring in the 20th century, the old feudal monopolies, economically
dependent upon empires, have been grasping for control of sources of power and wealth (listed earlier as
sources of profit). Three good books that describe the origins for our current moral and financial bankruptcy are The
Great Conspiracy by Michael Sayers and Albert E. Kahn, Merchants of Death by H. C. Egglebrecht, and
Weimar Republic, Clandestine Rearmament, by E. J. Gumbel.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Following World War I, the allied armies were afraid to disarm German militarism, fearing that
Bolshevism would spread throughout Europe.

The solution was secret, clandestine armies, the secret SS, a series of over 400 murders that altered the
face of Germany.

U.S.

Corporations and Wall Street, along with France and England, armed Germany.

World War I mobilized 66,103,164 men.

37,494,186 were killed.

Indirect costs were $151 million.

Direct costs were $208 billion.

The propaganda myth of the “menace of Bolshevism” put Nazis in power.

Adolf Hitler, hypnotized
front man for the warfare industries and corporations, was to rid Europe of Bolshevism.

When World War II was over, and the communists were still very much alive, THE SAME
CORPORATIONS AND MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES THAT ARMED GERMANY AFTER WWI
sent the Nazis and war criminals with their loot, counterfeit or otherwise, to the USA, Middle East, Asia,
Africa and South America.

Allen Dulles, Wall Street attorney, made arrangements for the Nazis’ exit.

He became the first director
of the CIA in 1947.

The divisions and decoys we fall into, all the categories of conflict, never follow history or documents
day-by-day to understand why we have so many assassinations and cover-ups.

Over 600 Nazis were
brought to our defense industries, universities and hospitals from 1945-1952 under Project Paperclip.

World War II cost 80 million lives.

The cost went up.

The rearming for World War III began as early as
1945, when the decision was made to protect doctors and scientists under Hitler to continue their human
experimentations and weapons systems research in the United States.

The real battle now is whether or
not it is too late to stop this country from going fascist.

If Arab investors, funded by the Nazis, withdraw
their savings from U.S.

banks, the country will be instantly bankrupt.

Nazi General Reinhard Gehlen had the solution for conquered USSR territory.--- PAGE BREAK ---

banks, the country will be instantly bankrupt. Nazi General Reinhard Gehlen had the solution for conquered USSR territory. Gehlen was going to turn 50 million Russians into slaves “in accordance with Aryan racial principals,
to become sub humans.”
Some “forty million Soviet Citizens would be eliminated by natural means, namely famine.” This is the
same Gehlen that Allen Dulles provided $200,000,000 of our tax dollars. Yes! Add it up. Are we getting
our money’s worth? (See Reinhard Gehlen, Spy of the Century, E. H. Cookridge)
It is easier to understand droughts, famines, terrorism, new kinds of diseases, rare cancers, mind
control experiments, stock manipulations, labor strikes and other unpleasant “accidents” of nature in the
USA after studying the history of Nazism. C.D.: How much conflict do you see in the ruling class? Some conspiriologists think it is all fake, a
diversion. M.B.: The conflict in the ruling class is between those who are elected and appointed to rule, and those
who are acting illegally to condition us for the next war or series of wars. We are identical to Germany in
1932. Salvadore Allendé had to put up with strikes and the raging of the Chilean citizens who turned out
to be paid by the CIA (over $8 million was spent to disrupt his country). Nothing is natural today. Billions are going into creating divisions, terror, to make headlines, to spread
confusion and fear. If any officials come along with independence or suggestions, they are killed, blackmailed, ignored,
surreptitiously drugged, paid off or bugged. To make change today is to enter into an obstacle course. The intelligence community and the people doing all this manipulating to enhance power and wealth are
moving against the laws of nature. Something must give. Our institutions should be re-examined. Individuals must come forward with enough courage to support investigators like myself, who are armed

--- PAGE BREAK ---with facts and information.

As Emerson said, “That form of government which prevails is the expression of what civilization exists
in the population which permits it.”
C.D.: Many conspiriologists point the finger at David Rockefeller as the most powerful financial
conspirator in America and possibly the world.

Do you agree?

What about Hughes, H.L.

Hunt?

Others?

Is Chase-Manhattan really going broke?

M.B.: David Rockefeller might be the most powerful financial conspirator in America.

Howard
Hughes and H.

L.

Hunt are dead.

Daniel Ludwig is hiding.

Rockefeller managed to keep their boy Kissinger running all our foreign policies in every country
while their Exxon stayed on top, the ranking corporation for profits.

Nice arrangement!!

That is power.

The Bildebergers select our presidents.

Is Ronald Reagan a member of the Bildeberger and Tri-Laterals?

If Ronald Reagan were to become President because of Carter’s death, would the Rockefellers be still
be powerful?

Where would the power be transferred?

To the Pentagon and away from Wall Street.

The power is in a silencer, secret weapons.

It comes in many forms.

This is a battle royal between two
kings, the Rockefeller Dynasty and the weapons-warfare, clandestine government the Rockefellers
created originally for their own power.

CIA agent John Connally, one of the most powerful men in the world, named as part of the DISC, FBI
combine that covered up the JFK assassination, is opening funding offices for Reagan in D.C.

Can the Rockefellers survive?

Are they part of a dying era, identical to Kaiser Wilhelm?

IS THE
AMMUNITION INDUSTRY READY TO TAKE OVER THE USA?

That is where the power struggle is
taking place.

The Wall Street-based international banks created spies to march in protection of their profits.

The
armies turned against their masters.

They decided they could create their own wealth and power.

New
York is crumbling.

The Pentagon is stronger than ever.--- PAGE BREAK ---

New
York is crumbling. The Pentagon is stronger than ever. Yale, Harvard, Princeton and the top eastern
universities haven’t produced a new idea or a constructive change for all their classical education. They
have been swallowed by the Pentagon and spy contracts. The USA looks like a dance of death in every major city. C.D.: Unless I am misreading you, you seem to have deep respect for John F. Kennedy. Is there any
reason to believe that his idealistic line was for real? Wasn’t he just another glib gangster who lost? Do you agree with Oglesby that he was an agent of the old Wall Street establishment (as was his Nazi-
leaning father), and that his assassination was plotted by Southern Rim upstarts? M.B.: Yes, I do have a respect for John F. Kennedy. If you don’t believe his idealistic line was for real, just add up what he was doing when he was killed. JFK asked his brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, to break up organized crime. Nobody high-
up in government has tangled the Mafia. J. E. Hoover, the hired hands of FBI and CIA, ran the
assassination teams. They have been used since World War II. JFK was attempting to end the oil-tax depletion rip-offs, to get tax money from oil companies. JFK instituted the nuclear test ban treaty, often called “the kiss of death,” to oppose the Pentagon. JFK called off the Invasion of Cuba. He allowed Castro to live, antagonized narcotics and gambling,
oil and sugar interests, formerly in Cuba. JFK asked his brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, to break up the CIA, the “hidden government

--- PAGE BREAK ---, antagonized narcotics and gambling,
oil and sugar interests, formerly in Cuba. JFK asked his brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, to break up the CIA, the “hidden government

--- PAGE BREAK ---

behind my back.” Allen Dulles was fired. Dulles, the attorney for international multinationals, was angry.
JFK planned to withdraw troops from Vietnam after the 1964 elections. Nov. 24, 1963, two days after
JFK’s burial, the Pentagon escalated the Vietnam war … with no known provocations, after JFK was
gone.
There was no chance Kennedy could survive antagonizing the CIA, oil companies, Pentagon, organized
crime.
He was not their man.
The assassination of JFK employed people from the Texas-Southwest. It was not a Southern plot.
Upstarts could not have controlled the northern CIA, FBI, Kennedy family connections. This was a more
detailed, sophisticated conspiracy that was to set the pattern for future murders to take place.
The murder was funded by Permindex, with headquarters in Montreal and Switzerland. Their stated
purpose was to encourage trade between nations in the Western world. Their actual purpose was fourfold:
1) To fund and direct assassinations of European, Mid-East and world leaders considered threats to the
western world, and to Petroleum Interests of their backers.
2) Provide couriers, agents for transporting and depositing funds through Swiss Banks for Vegas,
Miami and the international gambling syndicate.
3) Coordinate the espionage activities of White Russian Solidarists and Division V of the FBI, headed
by William Sullivan.
4) Build, acquire and operate hotels and gambling casinos. See: Nomenclature of an Assassination
Cabal, by William Torbitt.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s and Division V of the FBI, headed
by William Sullivan.
4) Build, acquire and operate hotels and gambling casinos. See: Nomenclature of an Assassination
Cabal, by William Torbitt.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER TEN
WHY WAS PATRICIA HEARST KIDNAPPED?
(ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED IN THE REALIST, JULY 1974)
CONTENTS
I. WHY WAS PATRICIA HEARST KIDNAPPED?
II. CAST OF CHARACTERS
III. CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS
IV. WHY WAS THE SLA CREATED – THE MOTIVES?
V. THE TELL-TALE REVOLUTIONARIES: CONSPICUOUS BANDITOS OR PROVOCATEURS?
VI. TACTICAL SUPPORT – WHERE DID IT COME FROM?
VII. HOW DANGEROUS WAS THE SLA?
VIII. WHY THE CHARGES AGAINST PATTY?
IX. THE DEATH TRAP – HOW DO YOU TELL A CIA ESPIONAGE PLOT FROM A REVOLUTIONARY,
RADICAL, TERRORIST GUERRILLA ARMY?
1. COVER STORY
2. COINCIDENCE?
3. DUMMY FRONTS
4. USE OF MEDIA AND PROPAGANDA
5. CIA COLLUSION
6. FBI COLLUSION
7. TOM CHARLES HUSTON PLAN, COMBINED MILITARY, JUSTICE DEPARTMENT, CIA, FBI, POLICE
DEPARTMENTS, DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS, STANFORD RESEARCH INSTITUTE, PRESIDENT RICHARD
NIXON, VICE-PRESIDENT GERALD FORD
XI. INDICATIONS THE SLA WAS PART OF A LARGER NATIONAL CONSPIRACY
XII. WAS THIS PLAN NECESSARY?

--- PAGE BREAK ---INTRODUCTION
“You only need to have a tape recorder to set up a revolutionary movement today.”
—FBI Director Charles Bates, San Francisco
There are three Symbionese Liberation Armies.

This article is about SLA-BC …
SLA-BC (Before Cremation)
A small band of people brought together in the San Francisco Bay Area, California through various
manipulations: military intelligence infiltrated radical groups, specifically the prison’s Black Guerrilla
Family, Vietnam Veterans Against the War, United Farm Workers, Chino Defense Fund, Venceremos and
the Women’s Movement.

These targets of the FBI and police were to be associated with the importation of
persons from out of state.

Some local women were brought into the group to lend it authenticity.

SLA-AC (After Cremation)
Radicals or concerned citizens who responded with sympathy and horror at the public cremation of six
SLA members by the military SWAT team.

Continuous government murders—the Orangeburg massacre,
Jackson State, Kent State, Attica and San Quentin, police murders of Black Panthers, Black Muslims and
hundreds of others—necessarily provoke a genuine response.

Silence in the face of these acts escalates
genocide.

Public disapproval escalates police armies.

SLA-CIA
More “liberation armies” surface, fictitious messages, forged documents, infiltrators and spies.

Legitimate reform groups will continue to be discredited by acts of violence committed in their names.

Peaceful rallies will be destroyed by intelligence agents.

The organized disruption of the anti-war
movement and rock concerts that took place during the ’60s will escalate.

The kidnappings and bombings
will be blamed on the SLA, or “dedicated to the memory of the six slain SLA members.” These planned
acts of violence will include chemical warfare.

I.

WHY WAS PATRICIA HEARST KIDNAPPED?--- PAGE BREAK ---

I. WHY WAS PATRICIA HEARST KIDNAPPED? The kidnapping of Patricia Campbell Hearst was as vital to the creation of the Symbionese Liberation
Army as the murder of Austrian Archduke Franz Ferdinand was to the beginning of World War I. Both the
kidnapping and the murder were excuses to declare war. The ensuing battles were carefully prepared and
anticipated by the merchants of death. The goal of the SLA—World War III—is to plunge the Third World masses into starvation and slavery. The CIA has accomplished this in 77 countries. The Third World inside the United States is the next
selected victim. The SLA was nurtured inside the American prison system. This will provide the excuse to isolate
prisons from future visitors, creating private Dachaus and another Auschwitz. The SLA was created to spread terror and fear across the country. There will be a forced response upon existing radicals. Domestic chaos will escalate. Carefully
synchronized with the Hearst kidnapping in Berkeley were a series of provocateur kidnappings. Fictitious
“armies” surfaced. As far away as England, well-dressed and well-financed Ian Ball pretended to kidnap
Princess Anne to “feed the poor.” After his brief moment in history, Ball was taken away to a mental
hospital.

--- PAGE BREAK ---An admitted kidnapping hoax involved Jean Paul Litt, son of a Belgian diplomat, in Florence, Italy.

The timing of international with national kidnappings could easily be planned to instill fear of an
epidemic of abductions across continents.

In the meantime, and not by coincidence, only the poor suffer the kidnappings and shootings.

America’s first political kidnapping was necessary to justify the creation of laws and police SWAT
teams.

They can later be used against guerrilla or terrorist activities.

Increased repression, genocide, starvation, widespread unemployment, inadequate health care and
housing must necessarily provoke anger.

Washington is preparing its defenses, punishments and armies in
the streets.

A series of staged exploits by the SLA created fear, suspicion and mistrust of genuine avenues of
political change.

Radical movements can be discredited and associated with kidnapping, terror, murder,
bank robbery and violence.

Under the guise of “reforms,” the door is now open for increased infiltration and disruption of
progressive movements.

The Watergate affair provides only a small glimpse of how the White House, Pentagon, CIA, FBI, local
police departments and intelligence agencies rig elections, manipulate candidates and violate the rights of
citizens.

Wiretapping, smear campaigns, illegal entry, forgery, interception and opening of mail,
provocation, planned kidnaps, blackmail, leaks, poisoning and assassination are acceptable tactics to the
“team members.”
The Justice Department, attorney generals, government prosecutors and investigators are used to
protect these domestic espionage operations and cover up the serious crimes committed.

Intelligence agents don’t only work against us at election time.

They work every year, in every city, to
help the power structure maintain control.

They work against leftists, radicals and ordinary citizens
assembling to inquire how their freedoms are being taken away.They work every year, in every city, to
help the power structure maintain control.

They work against leftists, radicals and ordinary citizens
assembling to inquire how their freedoms are being taken away.

Government-funded studies are conducted at Rand and other think tanks on how to manipulate the
population for maximum effectiveness and profit.

The armies put these plans into action.

The agencies that control our elections, and indeed the selection of candidates, by bullets and smear
tactics also control domestic productivity and investments.

Starvation and unemployment will inevitably
lead to violent objections, so provisions must be made to handle the mob.

That is what the SLA was
about.

Members of radical groups in the Bay Area were taunted and baited to join the revolution to determine
how many were ready for the next stage and would accept violence.

All of these groups turned the SLA
down, suspecting that they were police provocateurs.

The “People In Need” Program (the Hearst food giveaway plan) and the SLA communiqués identified
radical or leftist organizations.

Their strength and numbers were added up.

Leaders were identified.

Public sensitivities were tested by well-placed cameras, which invited us to witness the SLA
cremation in Los Angeles.

How will we respond the next time troops are deployed to control the people?

What did you think of the first military operation inside the U.S., based upon the feeble creation of the
mythical SLA., and our “first political kidnapping”?

The 1960’s saw the systematic murder of politicians, civil rights leaders, minority spokesmen,
educators, Black Panthers, prisoners and many other concerned citizens.

In the 1970’s, large masses of the population, now leaderless, can be controlled and exterminated.

We
have allowed this situation to develop by not exposing each conspiracy as it came along, pretending the
facts and evidence would disappear.

Dr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

We
have allowed this situation to develop by not exposing each conspiracy as it came along, pretending the
facts and evidence would disappear. Dr. Marcus Foster, Oakland School Superintendent, was murdered by the same kind of people, and for
the same reasons, as Martin Luther King. Patricia Hearst was kidnapped by the same kind of people, and for the same reasons, as Martha

--- PAGE BREAK ---Mitchell.

Our lives are manipulated by specific individuals who can be identified and exposed.

Conspiracy
theories only remain “theories” when there is no court, no lawyer, no judge, no Congress with the courage
to expose the evidence.

In every case in which evidence is pursued, the “theory” becomes a clear-cut case
of criminal conspiracy.

It took ten years for Emile Zola to reveal that Captain Alfred Dreyfus did not betray the French Army.

“Wherever and whenever dissension about social harmony, political expediency and national defense
obscures the rights of minorities, the corruption of institutions and the aberrations of patriotism, there
is a Dreyfus Affair.”
—David L.

Lewis, Prisoners of Honor
America has hundreds of Dreyfus Affairs going.

Latest on the list was the creation of the SLA.

Congress gives the CIA and other intelligence agencies all the money they desire.

No questions are
asked about how much they receive, much less how it is used.

CIA Director William Colby wants to
tighten secrecy—with the threat of a $10,000 fine and ten years in jail—for any Paul Reveres shouting in
the dark to wake us up.

Until the present time, the CIA was carefully inconspicuous on the domestic scene.

Creation of the SLA
provides an excuse for the CIA and special police forces resembling the German Gestapo to step forth
publicly and assume control of all law enforcement agencies.

The covert operations and psychological warfare techniques that were used to form the SLA were
perfected in Britain and Germany during World War II.

After the war, our OSS was converted to the CIA
by English and German spymasters.

Right-wing groups such as the American Nazi Party, the Ku Klux Klan, the Minutemen and National
States Rights Party are used as fronts for CIA and FBI operations.

The military-intelligence teams give
approval, funding, tactical support and protection from arrest.Right-wing groups such as the American Nazi Party, the Ku Klux Klan, the Minutemen and National
States Rights Party are used as fronts for CIA and FBI operations.

The military-intelligence teams give
approval, funding, tactical support and protection from arrest.

Mass education, political organization and the attempt to solve economic and social problems are
perceived as threats to the status quo.

Recommendations for constructive alternatives to unemployment,
sickness, hunger and poverty are answered by chaos, violence and racism.

It is because the solutions to
many problems exist today that armies and propaganda machines must step lip their domestic warfare.

Police, prison guards, and intelligence agents flex their muscles and take aim at their victims.

Motive for Creation of the SLA
This elaborate conspiracy had fifteen goals, and a careful observer can see them implemented in
current news stories.

1.

Inflame national fear of terrorist organizations and future kidnappings, accompanied by increased bombings.

2.

Link U.S.

terrorists to international guerrilla groups.

3.

Discredit communes.

4.

Escalate domestic fear of Mao Tse Tung, brainwashing and indoctrination.

5.

Create the apparent justification for UCLA’s Institute to Study the Causes and Prevention of Violence, now temporarily shelved and
suspect.

6.

Discredit the poor and test food distribution programs.

7.

Isolate prisoners from genuine reform organizations.

8.

Escalate domestic race war between blacks and whites.

9.

Discredit radical and/or leftist organizations, particularly the Black Guerrilla Family, Los Venceremos, United Farm Workers, women’s
movement groups and Vietnam Veterans Against the War.

10.

Increase public and private police forces and security agents.

11.

Turn the population into informers.

12.

Prompt new legislation against future kidnappings.

13.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Prompt new legislation against future kidnappings. 13. Link demons and the Devil to communists, radicals, leftists and other “deviants” from the official Government line, virtuous right-thinking
Christianity.

--- PAGE BREAK ---14.

Discredit the FBI; make the military, international police and CIA appear necessary to control terrorism in the U.S.

15.

Set up conditions for martial law, prevent free election choices in 1976 and escalate fear to keep power in the hands of the military and
intelligence agencies.

What was Patricia Hearst’s state of mind during these various manipulations?

None of us was there, so
we can only speculate.

Did she undergo a change to think and feel with the “radicals” when she was their
captive?

The rank-and-file of the SLA consisted predominantly of CIA agents and police informants.

For
this reason, Patty could be cleverly controlled to give the appearance that she had joined them of her own
free will.

Sophisticated radicals of the Bay Area rejected the SLA, but Patty Hearst had no choice; she was their
captive.

Each day we were invited to witness the purposeful manipulation of an individual who had been
captured, and subsequently altered drastically over a four-month period of time.

Patty lived with fear, was
taught terror, became hunted and oppressed, was given a new name, a new family and new “loves.”
Was Patty Hearst brainwashed?

What did Vacaville Medical Facility promise Donald DeFreeze in exchange for the use of his head?

What favor did he do for them?

Why was CIA agent Colston Westbrook—educated in psychological warfare and the training of
assassination and terrorist cadres—chosen to select and train the group that became the SLA?

Joseph Remiro and Nancy Ling Perry, critical to the SLA for military tactics and cover story rhetoric,
were dependent on drugs.

Both were political conservatives with a “kill-a-commie-for-Christ”
background.

Their transition into “radicals” could have been assisted by the same chemical and
psychological controls our intelligence agencies are using and experimenting with daily.

Bill and Emily Harris, and Angela Atwood, worked together as a “mod squad” narc team for the
Indiana State Police.Their transition into “radicals” could have been assisted by the same chemical and
psychological controls our intelligence agencies are using and experimenting with daily.

Bill and Emily Harris, and Angela Atwood, worked together as a “mod squad” narc team for the
Indiana State Police.

What brought them all scurrying to the Bay Area in the summer of 1972?

Russell Little and Robyn Steiner, college chums from the University of Florida, drove out together from
Florida to Oakland in the summer of ’72.

Though neither had shown previous interest in blacks or
prisoners, both immediately began working with Colston Westbrook and Donald DeFreeze at Vacaville
Medical Facility.

Camilla Hall and Patricia Soltysik were at least authentic residents of the Berkeley community.

What
controls were used to draw them into the SLA and ultimately to their deaths in Log Angeles?

Donald DeFreeze and Patty Hearst are not the only ones who were brainwashed.

The same mass media that told us Lee Harvey Oswald killed John F.

Kennedy—and that James Earl
Ray killed Martin Luther King, Sirhan Sirhan killed Robert F.

Kennedy, Arthur Bremer was the lone
gunman when George Wallace was shot, and Ted Kennedy was responsible for the death of Mary Jo
Kopechne—brainwash this society every single day.

The creation of the SLA is only one more
propaganda lie.

We can’t discuss Patty’s brainwashing without looking at our own.

Our sensitivities and emotions were tested over the same period of time as Patty Hearst’s and Donald
DeFreeze’s.

Patty was taken to a building near the death trap on 54th Street to witness six of her close
associates and intimates for the last four months shot and burned to death.

We watched the event in living
color over Friday’s TV Dinner.

All of us took part.

The only ones to gain from the maneuvers of the SLA were the military and police agencies.

They have
already spent between $5 and $10 million “pursuing” the SLA.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The only ones to gain from the maneuvers of the SLA were the military and police agencies. They have
already spent between $5 and $10 million “pursuing” the SLA. Ten thousand young adults were stopped,
searched or arrested within a three-week period. SWAT police teams are now located in every major city. Police helicopter contracts are escalating. Computerized police information systems will increase. And
the CIA will openly take over local police departments, no longer hide behind public relations doors. The creation of the fictitious Symbionese Liberation Army was a cruel hoax perpetrated on the

--- PAGE BREAK ---American public.

Years of planning went into this operation.

It may have started taking shape after the Chicago
convention in 1968, when protestors were moving into the streets, displeased with Washington’s policies.

The intelligence community was determined that large riots such as those in Watts and Detroit would
never happen again.

The next stage of “political protest” will be planned terrorist activities.

To speed things along, police and the military have distributed weaponry selectively, knowing that
dissidents will be outnumbered, outgunned and handled with brutality.

America will become like
Vietnam, a battleground of burnings, killings and provocations.

Military provocateurs will be used to
control blacks, Chicanos, Indians and radicals.

The public cremation in Los Angeles on May 17, 1974 was not the end of the SLA.

It was only Stage
One.

Vietnam arrived in California.

The families of the deceased SLA members wish they understood what the SLA was about, aside from
the empty rhetoric.

The SLA’s printed analysis of fascism in America was accurate enough, but their
actions did not point the way to constructive programs for altering society.

The SLA provocateurs simply
illustrated how easy it is to be wiped out once the issues are declared.

Police have made it perfectly clear
what can happen to you if you don’t like what you are getting.

A 15-member team of psychiatrists, criminologists and suicide specialists has assembled to piece
together what they call “psychological autopsies” to answer “puzzling question” remaining after the SLA
members “chose to die.”
Nancy Ling Perry was gunned down after she fled from the flaming house.

What does that tell the so-
called experts?

Why wasn’t a psychological profile of the police who did not allow her to surrender
prepared?

The “psychological autopsies” of the SLA are a CIA technique for culling irrelevant facts from a
person’s life.Why wasn’t a psychological profile of the police who did not allow her to surrender
prepared?

The “psychological autopsies” of the SLA are a CIA technique for culling irrelevant facts from a
person’s life.

They will dangle these facts before us as “motives” for violence, but the analysis will make
no reference to how the victims were led and tricked into dying.

Donald DeFreeze may have had fantasies of becoming a great black leader.

The systematic
assassination of black leaders left a genuine void.

The same agencies that murdered George Jackson,
Malcolm X, Fred Hampton, Martin Luther King, Che Guevara and Jonathan Jackson were not about to
provide Field Marshal General Cinque with his own personal army, without having some purpose of their
own.

Was Cinque’s vision of freeing society’s slaves born at Vacaville Medical Facility, known and
dreaded for experimentation on the human mind?

DeFreeze didn’t outsmart the law enforcement agencies from the time of his “escape,” as the SLA
communiqué would have us believe.

These agencies permitted him his freedom only until the time came
when they wanted him dead.

The street was choked with Los Angeles police agents and DeFreeze was an escaped convict, wanted
for murder, kidnapping, bank robbery and assault.

He never managed to persuade a single black person to
join the SLA.

The only support given to the SLA by blacks came from police agents, informers and
collaborators who conspired to lure him to his death trap.

The man was mechanized and robotized by the CIA and other agencies.

He was a pathetic example of
the way our society uses black males in its sadistic, imperialistic greed.

Legitimate dreams are perverted
by the military intelligence system.

One black male surrounded by whites, and all of them led step-by-step
to their deaths, was presented as a serious army, a threat to all.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Legitimate dreams are perverted
by the military intelligence system. One black male surrounded by whites, and all of them led step-by-step
to their deaths, was presented as a serious army, a threat to all. And the nation responded like a
hypnotized, robotized zombie, like Camilla Hall, Donald DeFreeze or Patricia Hearst, drawn slowly, step
by programmed step, toward destruction. Are there really such vicious and immoral people making long-range plans and conspiring against us? Of course there are. And the more carefully they plan, the more difficult it is to detect and unravel the
master plan.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ral people making long-range plans and conspiring against us? Of course there are. And the more carefully they plan, the more difficult it is to detect and unravel the
master plan.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Politica was a game plan devised by Abt Associates in Cambridge, Massachusetts. The Pentagon and
CIA wanted a course of action against developing Third World countries, including Chile. Politica was
funded by the Defense Department’s Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA). The aim was to
devise methods for anticipating social groups and personality characteristics that might emerge in
response to given military actions. Politica became a reality when Salvadore Allendé was murdered, and
Chile delivered into the hands of ITT and other investors.
The Phoenix Program was applied to Vietnam the way Politica was used in Chile. CIA Director
William Colby was in charge of the Phoenix Program. It included a continuous policy of political
assassinations, rigged elections, political imprisonment in American-made tiger cages, torture and slanted
misinformation spread by uncontrollable CIA agents. Colby promised at his Senate confirmation hearings
in July, 1973 that he would curb the CIA’s activities at home and abroad. Instead, he has imported the
Phoenix Program to the United States.
The SLA script was to America what Politica was to Chile, or the Phoenix Program to Vietnam.
Methods of political control through manipulation and terror have been perfected. Our response to
America’s “first political kidnapping” will determine how well these machinations succeed.
II. CAST OF CHARACTERS
THE CALIFORNIA CONNECTIONS
Donald DeFreeze, Camilla Hall, Nancy Ling Perry, Patricia Soltysik, Joseph Remiro.
IMPORTATIONS—MIGRATORY BIRDS
Angela Atwood, Gary Atwood, Emily Harris, William Harris, Russell Little, Robyn Steiner, William
Wolfe.
PATSIES
Donald DeFreeze, Patricia Hearst.
VICTIMS
Dr. Marcus Foster, Donald DeFreeze, William Wolfe, Camilla Hall, Angela Atwood, Nancy Ling Perry,
Patricia Soltysik.
MILITARY AGENTS, INTELLIGENCE AGENTS AND POLICE
Wes Davis, Dr. Frederick Hacker, William Harris, Ron Karenga, Ludlow Kramer, Joseph Remiro, Chris
Thompson, Colston Westbrook, Attorney General Evelle Younger, six migratory birds from the East.
ALLOWED TO VANISH
Peter Benenson, Jean Chan, JoAnn Little DeVito and Joseph DeVito, Amanda De Normanville, Dave
Gunnell, Bernard Keaton, Tom Mathews, Mary Alice Siem, There Wheeler, three unnamed black agents
of the LAPD.
Angela Atwood, alias Deborah Key Crus, General Gelina, Angela DeAngelis
Graduate, University of Indiana.
Trained by CIA think tank, College of Foreign Affairs, University of Indiana, Bloomington.
Worked in a “mod squad,” setting up narcotics arrests for the Indiana State Police Intelligence Division.
Angela’s father a Teamsters’ Union Official, in New Jersey.
Never discussed with best friend how she met Gary, her husband, or why she married him. “Nobody
could get near him.”Intelligence Division.
Angela’s father a Teamsters’ Union Official, in New Jersey.
Never discussed with best friend how she met Gary, her husband, or why she married him. “Nobody
could get near him.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---on.
Angela’s father a Teamsters’ Union Official, in New Jersey.
Never discussed with best friend how she met Gary, her husband, or why she married him. “Nobody
could get near him.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Moved to Oakland, California with husband Gary Atwood, Emily and William Harris, summer, 1972.
Upon arriving in Oakland, Angela immediately volunteered to work for the United Farm Workers and Los
Venceremos, both highly infiltrated by the Federal Government at the time.
Visited Vacaville Medical Facility and prisoners in the Black Cultural Association (BCA).
Described as warm, sensitive, wanted to be an actress.
Not politically sophisticated upon arrival in California.
Employed as a waitress at Great Electric Underground at the Bank of America Building, San Francisco.
A close friend feared Gary might kill Angela. He had beaten her.
Gary and Angela maintained separate sets of friends. Their husband-wife relationship was similar to that
of known espionage agents.
Gary moved back to Indiana in the summer of 1973. In the fall, Angela severed other friendships,
proclaiming, “I am into my own trip now,” and moved in with Emily and William Harris.
November 7, 1973, one day before arrest of Remiro and Little, Angela Atwood bought a .380 caliber
automatic Mauser pistol and registered it in her name. Gary Atwood’s library card was found at the
Sutherland Court address after Remiro and Little were arrested.
Surfaced as “General Gelina” after the Hearst kidnapping.
Found dead in the house on 54th Street in Los Angeles 24 hours after the five other bodies were
discovered.
Gary Atwood
Married to Angela Atwood, who trained with Emily and Bill Harris, set up narcotics arrests for the
Indiana State Police.
Moved to West Coast in the summer of 1972 with Angela, William and Emily Harris.
Occupation in Bay Area not explained. Taught in Chinatown for awhile.
Political involvement “all talk,” described as “indoor entertainment, like an intellectual exercise.”
Threatened to “blow off the head” of a friend who didn’t join his revolution. Spoke of Nietzsche,
Superman, revolution, Palestinian guerrillas. No evidence of political activism. Not identified with
prison or radical groups.
Mean disposition. Angela told a friend, “Nobody could get next to him. He didn’t like to be touched.”
Summer, 1973: Gary went back to Indiana and library school.
Angela’s body remained unclaimed for three days after her death. Friends called Gary, and he signed the
release for her burial in New Jersey.
Peter Benenson
Mathematician at Lawrence Laboratory, Berkeley, a sensitive government agency.
He was tied up in the floor of his car while five persons kidnapped Patricia Hearst. He heard the shoot-
out as they exited the apartment.
Benenson’s car was used to drive to a waiting white station wagon, and he was left tied up inside the car.five persons kidnapped Patricia Hearst. He heard the shoot-
out as they exited the apartment.
Benenson’s car was used to drive to a waiting white station wagon, and he was left tied up inside the car.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed Patricia Hearst. He heard the shoot-
out as they exited the apartment.
Benenson’s car was used to drive to a waiting white station wagon, and he was left tied up inside the car.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

He released himself and walked one mile to his sister’s home, where he spent the night. The FBI and
police were not notified for 24 hours about the use of his car for the kidnapping.
He later refused to testify, claiming that he “didn’t see faces” when he was tied up.
A letter to the Berkeley Barb, February 22, 1974, stated: “The manipulators are brother and sister both by
blood and in mind. The male is a mathematician with the U.C. Radiation Lab. His was the car
‘commandeered in the kidnapping.’”
The SLA had in their possession books that might have belonged to Benenson: Chemical and Biological
Warfare; The Science of Public Death, and The Genetic Effects of Radioactivity.
Jean Chan
Asian girlfriend of David Gunnell, owner of “Peking House” where SLA members lived.
Visited Vacaville Medical Facility, tutored in Black Culture.
No information on her background or training that would qualify her to tutor in the prison system.
Sold Chinese food from a stand on Bancroft Way with Gunnell.
Police stopped a 1965 station wagon in connection with Dr. Marcus Foster’s murder, and questioned an
Asian woman. Firearms were found in the vehicle. This was three weeks before Patty Hearst was
kidnapped. If Jean Chan was the woman questioned then, she was never identified.
Wes Davis
Freelance photographer for Empire News Service (a CIA front) in Vietnam and Asia.
Surfaced after the Hearst kidnapping an expert on Maoist brainwashing.
His sanctimonious speeches ignore the billion-dollar investment in American prisons and hospitals that
funds research on behavior modification techniques, including psychosurgery, chemosurgery, use of mind-
altering drugs, electric shock and electrode implants. The Vacaville Medical Facility where SLA was
nurtured is notorious for such experimentation.
Davis heads an organization called World Humanity Against Totalitarianism. This group assisted in
setting up speaking engagements for Reverend Sun Myung Moon, defender of Richard Nixon against
impeachment.
Reverend Moon is an agent of General Parks’ South Korean Intelligence, KCIA. Genuine Christians in
South Korea are suspicious of him.
Donald DeFreeze, alias Donald David DeFreeze, Don Cinque DeFreeze, David Thomas, David
Kennedy Robinson, Donald John DeFreeze, Donald DeFrez, John DeFriele, Steven Robinson, Gin,
Cinque, General Field Marshal Cin, SLA
Born in Cleveland, Ohio, the oldest of eight children; beaten by father, forced to leave home at age 14.
Lived with Reverend W. Foster in Buffalo, N.Y., became deeply religious.
Arrested for robbing a parking meter, later for stealing a car and a weapon.
Spent two years in a reformatory, surrounded by “hell,” loneliness, fear, hatred.n Buffalo, N.Y., became deeply religious.
Arrested for robbing a parking meter, later for stealing a car and a weapon.
Spent two years in a reformatory, surrounded by “hell,” loneliness, fear, hatred.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Tried to keep out of fights and avoid homosexual advances.

Married Glory Thomas, 23, mother of three children.

[Dawn Defreeze Cabot, Donald Defreeze’s
daughter, is today a born-again Christian who gives speeches on the Northeast Ohio church circuit.

- ed.]
They had three more children.

Marriage filled with rejection, disappointment.

Tried to work and support
Glory, but differences drove him to California.

Began drinking, taking drugs, collecting weapons.

Arrested on nine separate occasions.

Charges involved possession of bombs and explosives, knifes,
sawed-off shotguns—robbery, assault, possession of 200 firearms, grand larceny, kidnapping and
escaping arrest.

From 1967 to 1969, worked as an informant for the Los Angeles Police Department under Detective R.

G.

Farwell, Public Disorder Intelligence Division (PDID).

At the time, the LAPD was supplying weapons to
black agents and hiring them to kill Black Panthers.

DeFreeze worked with police agent provocateur Ron
Karenga, head of the US Organization.

Later, other members of Karenga’s group were at Vacaville
Medical Facility with DeFreeze.

US used the seven-headed cobra later adopted by the SLA for its
symbol.

Nothing in DeFreeze’s background indicated a political consciousness while he worked as a
police intelligence informer.

In December 1967, DeFreeze led police to an apartment where a cache of 200 stolen weapons was found.

On November 11, 1969, DeFreeze exchanged gunshots with a bank guard and wounded him—with a .32
caliber Beretta automatic pistol, one of the 200 stolen guns that the police had apparently allowed him to
keep.

In 1968, Glory DeFreeze wrote to authorities, following an arrest of her husband, reminding them that
they had promised him protection from arrest while he worked for them.

In 1969, DeFreeze subpoenaed District Attorney Evelle Younger to testify on his behalf.

Younger has
always maintained close contact with LAPD’s Criminal Conspiracy Section (CCS).--- PAGE BREAK ---

In 1969, DeFreeze subpoenaed District Attorney Evelle Younger to testify on his behalf. Younger has
always maintained close contact with LAPD’s Criminal Conspiracy Section (CCS). In 1969, DeFreeze maintained a house a few blocks from the Los Angeles Airport, close to his death trap. He was in the business of pimping for black judges and airport officials. DeFreeze drove around in a city
truck during the day, giving the impression to one of his women that he was employed by the city. Late in 1969, DeFreeze’s religious conscience began to bother him. Detective Farwell found that he was
no longer useful to the LAPD and “cut him loose.” In December, 1969, DeFreeze was sent to Chino for
“psychiatric testing.” From there, he was sent to Vacaville Medical Facility for a term of 6-14 years. He
was to undergo a drastic and ultimately fatal personality change. Dr. Frederick Hacker, an “expert on terrorism,” was assigned to Donald DeFreeze for “psychiatric
evaluation.” He later became a consultant to Randolph Hearst after Patty was kidnapped. In 1970, DeFreeze wrote Judge William L. Ritzi to say that he wanted to tell everything. “I want to let you
know what really happened and why. I am going to talk to you truthfully like I am talking to God. I will
tell you things no one has ever known before.” Judge Ritzi wasn’t interested. In 1970, Colston Westbrook, trained in the psychological warfare unit of the CIA, became the CIA control
officer for DeFreeze and the group that was to become the SLA. Westbrook headed an experimental
behavior modification unit, the Black Cultural Association (BCA), at Vacaville. DeFreeze assumed a militant anti-white cover while meeting with white agents who were brought into the
prison system. While in prison, DeFreeze worked as a double agent for Westbrook, the CIA, the California Department
of Corrections and Bureau of Criminal Intelligence and Investigation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---He was responsible to Attorney General Evelle Younger.

Westbrook, supervising DeFreeze for two years, bragged about how he brought beautiful women into the
groups: “They accused me of taking sexy-looking black women wearing high miniskirts into the prison.

Sure, I took some foxes, some of my prime stock in there.

Because if you want to dangle a carrot in front
of the inmates to get them to learn and come to meetings, you don’t dangle communism.

You dangle fine-
looking chicks.

The SLA women say I tortured the inmates by taking in chicks they couldn’t do anything to.

That’s why those lesbians were mad at me.”
Vacaville Medical Facility was not a political science institute.

Colston Westbrook was not instructing
inmates in “communism” for the CIA and the Department of Corrections.

For what purpose did Westbrook
bait DeFreeze with his carrot-stick technique and his “prime stock?”
In November, 1972, DeFreeze met Thero Wheeler, inmate.

A month later, DeFreeze was transferred to Soledad Prison.

He was placed in South Facility, a holding
section for informers and trusted inmates.

One prisoner described DeFreeze’s departure from Soledad:
While Donald DeFreeze was here, I had a few conversations with him.

I have always questioned his departure as being a simple
walk-away.

I didn’t come into contact with him personally until his last couple of weeks here.

There weren’t many who would
associate with him.

He tried to give the impression of being super-cool, and he came across as cold.

When I met him, he was
working in the maintenance shop.

I asked him if he was happy on his job, because if not, I might be able to find him something
else.

He replied that within a few days, he was going to be assigned to work in the boiler room at the South Facility.

I questioned that,
because he didn’t have enough time here to be given that trust.

I know cons that have been turned down for that position.

He
wouldn’t comment; he only gave me a big smile.I know cons that have been turned down for that position.

He
wouldn’t comment; he only gave me a big smile.

I should explain that no prisoners were kept at the South Facility at that time,
because it had no security.

No gun towers were in operation, and there were no guards posted.

A few prisoners with proven records of trust were taken
from Central Facility to South Facility to perform certain duties; then they would be returned to Central after their shift.

A few
days later, DeFreeze did get that job.

Midnight to 8 a.m.

shift, in the boiler room, South Facility.

On his first night, he was dropped
off at midnight, and given a few instructions.

His job was automatic; it only required an overseer.

He was left to himself, and
when an officer returned an hour later to check on him, he was gone.

A few months after leaving Vacaville, DeFreeze was given a special privilege at Soledad prison.

He was
allowed to use the marital trailers for visits with women, a privilege normally reserved for married men.

Did Westbrook provide women for DeFreeze even though he was not meeting him with prison visits?

Donald DeFreeze walked out of Soledad prison in March, 1973.

His transportation to the Bay area was
allegedly arranged by Deputy Superintendent James Nelson.

Another former employee from Soledad,
currently owner of a liquor store in Sacramento, assisted in the departure, later classified as an “escape.”
His name will be turned over to a grand jury when there is a proper investigation of the case.

In the Spring of 1973, Bernard Keaton, a double for Donald DeFreeze, visited the Foster family in
Buffalo, New York.

He passed himself off as DeFreeze, who had lived with the family 15 years ago, and
he knew intimate details of their life.

In August, 1973, Thero Wheeler walked away from Vacaville Medical Facility.

From August to October, 1973, DeFreeze and Wheeler met “at least twenty times” with the SLA in
Oakland.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In August, 1973, Thero Wheeler walked away from Vacaville Medical Facility. From August to October, 1973, DeFreeze and Wheeler met “at least twenty times” with the SLA in
Oakland. DeFreeze made his public appearance as General Field Marshal Cinque of the SLA following the
kidnapping of Patricia Hearst. In March, 1974, DeFreeze publicly named Colston Westbrook, Chris Thompson and Robyn Steiner as

--- PAGE BREAK ---General Field Marshal Cinque of the SLA following the
kidnapping of Patricia Hearst. In March, 1974, DeFreeze publicly named Colston Westbrook, Chris Thompson and Robyn Steiner as

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CIA and FBI informants.
On May 4, 1974, Donald Freed, writer, and Lake Headley, independent investigator, held a press
conference in San Francisco. They presented 400 pages of documentation on DeFreeze’s arrest records,
the work of Colston Westbrook with CCS and CII (Criminal Identification and Investigation), and
evidence of links of the CIA to metropolitan police departments.
On May 17, 1974, the New York Times carried the story of DeFreeze and the Los Angeles Police
Department. That day, he was cremated by the Los Angeles Police Department.
The LAPD did not notify DeFreeze’s family of his death for three days. His remains were sent to
Cleveland, Ohio with the head and the fingers missing.
Billions of dollars are spent confining, arresting, judging, punishing, altering and experimenting upon men
like DeFreeze. If the same attention and money were spent on understanding and helping them, events like
the SLA saga would never happen.
Amanda De Normanville
Former student at Berkeley School of Criminology. Said to have housed Donald DeFreeze after he left
Soledad prison.
Again: DeFreeze was allowed special visits with women in marital trailers while in prison, a privilege
only allowed to married men. Amanda visited DeFreeze in prison and was reported to have been
romantically involved with him.
Prisons keep detailed records of visitors, but the police never went to Amanda’s house in the Bay Area to
search for DeFreeze after his “escape.”
JoAnn DeVito, and Ex-Husband Joseph DeVito
JoAnn was Russell Little’s sister. She was interested in prisons and Donald DeFreeze.
The SLA house in Concord was rented by Mr. and Mrs. J. DeVoto, aliases for Russell Little and Nancy
Ling Perry.
Joseph DeVito was questioned by FBI agents in Isla Vista, California on March 26, 1974. Held for
interstate flight from prosecution of a prior crime in Florida. The nature of the crime was not stated.
Dr. Marcus Foster, Supt. Oakland Unified School District
Fatally wounded on November 6, 1973. Robert Blackburn, deputy superintendent, was also critically
wounded.
Both men had moved from Philadelphia together in 1970.
Oakland put police in the schools as part of the federal government’s push to solve social problems with
“law and order” government. This and other measures became the excuse for Foster’s murder.
Willie Wolfe, who had no children, attended Oakland School Board meetings and told prisoners in
Vacaville that “something had to be done to prevent Foster from implementing student identification
programs.” Colston Westbrook and other prison visitors aroused the anger of black inmates against
Foster.ille that “something had to be done to prevent Foster from implementing student identification
programs.” Colston Westbrook and other prison visitors aroused the anger of black inmates against
Foster.

--- PAGE BREAK ---had to be done to prevent Foster from implementing student identification
programs.” Colston Westbrook and other prison visitors aroused the anger of black inmates against
Foster.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Two weeks before the killing, the American Nazi Party handed out leaflets in nearby San Leandro
predicting the murder of a “Mixmaster school superintendent” and his white friend.
Foster was shot with cyanide bullets and didn’t stand a chance. Blackburn, the white man, was shot with
ordinary bullets and lived. The quantity of cyanide in the bullets was not as important as the selective
methods of kill vs. survival.
Foster’s death was a blow to the black community, where he was needed and well liked.
The SLA surfaced immediately after the murder to take “credit” for the assassination in the name of the
“Symbionese Liberation Army, Western Regional Youth Unit.”
Two “black” people were seen leaving the scene of the Foster murder. When Remiro and Little were
indicted for the crime, black make-up was found in their house. This make-up can be worn by whites
emulating blacks.
How many other whites in blackface are killing and kidnapping?
Blaming “blacks” for white murders is consistent with a fascistic escalation of terror to speed up
genocide.
Dave Gunnell
In his late thirties, older than the other SLA members. Lived with Jean Chan in the house on Chabot Road,
Berkeley, called “Peking House,” an SLA meeting place—played up by CIA agent Wes Davis as “proof”
that Mao was behind the SLA.
Gunnell sold Chinese food from a stand on Bancroft Way, adjacent to the U.C. Berkeley campus, next to
Fruity Rudy’s stand, where Nancy Ling Perry worked. Gunnell claimed he did not know Nancy. He was a
jazz musician, like Nancy’s husband and Rudolph “Fruity Rudy” Henderson.
Chris Thompson, ID’d as a CIA agent by DeFreeze, was a frequent visitor at Peking House, also a source
of contact with Nancy Ling Perry, Camilla Hall and Patricia Soltysik.
Willie Wolfe, Russell Little and Robyn Steiner lived at Peking House. The FBI and police would have
been well aware of the SLA members before Patty Hearst was kidnapped if the place was indeed a haven
for radicals, if the SLA was visiting California prisons and if Maoist doctrine was taught at the house.
Yet in spite of the SLA’s attempted infiltration of every radical group in the area, their weekend target
practice at gun clubs and the assortment of guns registered in their names, the residents of Peking House
were quite inconspicuous as far as the police were concerned.
Gunnell was “not into politics.”
Camilla Hall, alias “Gabi”
Daughter of Lutheran Minister, Reverend D.G. Hall.
Graduate of University of Minnesota; excelled in English and art.
Social worker for three years before moving to California.
Shared apartment with Patricia Soltysik, wrote poetry for her, named her “Mizmoon.”
Authentic Berkeley artist: sensitive, gentle, into ecology and the women’s movement, not radical politics.
Drawn into SLA with Patricia Soltysik to lend authenticity to the cover story that SLA was a group ofc Berkeley artist: sensitive, gentle, into ecology and the women’s movement, not radical politics.
Drawn into SLA with Patricia Soltysik to lend authenticity to the cover story that SLA was a group of

--- PAGE BREAK ---ensitive, gentle, into ecology and the women’s movement, not radical politics.
Drawn into SLA with Patricia Soltysik to lend authenticity to the cover story that SLA was a group of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Berkeley hippie-radicals.
Travelled to Spain in 1972. What other countries?
Worked as a groundkeeper for the regional parks. Fired in Fall, 1973.
Disappeared in December, 1973, a month after SLA claimed credit for murder of Dr. Foster.
Blue VW, similar to Camilla’s, seen scouting Steven Weed’s apartment before Patty’s kidnapping.
Jan. 2, 1974: purchased .380-caliber automatic Mauser pistol and registered it under her name.
Feb. 4, 1974: Patricia Hearst kidnapped.
Feb. 14, 1974: Camilla moved out of her apartment, taking only her pet cat.
Photographed at Hibernia Bank robbery in San Francisco as a gun-toting radical terrorist. This act was
inconsistent with Camilla’s hatred of war and violence.
Christine Johnson, the last person to see Camilla Hall alive, said she was holding two bottles in her
hands, with “something white around the bottles. She was walking around, looked like a zombie or
something, halfway smiling.”
Emily Harris, alias Anna Lindenberg, Yolanda
From the Illinois suburbs, daughter of a wealthy consulting engineer. B.A., University of Indiana, language
arts.
Training: CIA think tank, College of Foreign Affairs, University of Indiana, Bloomington.
Worked with William Harris and Angela Atwood in “mod squad,” setting up narcotics arrests for the
Intelligence Division, Indiana State Police.
When the Harris apartment was vacated, among the names left in an address book was Tim Casey, from
Orange County. Emily and Tim dated during the summers of 1967 and ’68 while she was working in
California at Disneyland Hotel. Were there any links between two clients of J. Walter Thompson
Advertising Agency—Disneyland Hotel and the San Francisco Police Department?
Was Emily in touch with espionage agents from Orange County?
Described as “cold, intelligent, the strength of the family, had leadership ability.”
Moved to Oakland in late 1972 with the Atwoods.
Employed as clerk-typist, Survey Research Center, a “polling office” at University of California.
Not in politics in Indiana, never involved in radical movements.
On moving to California, immediately joined Chino Defense Committee, an offshoot of Marxist-Leninist
Venceremos organization. Worked to aid members accused of a prison break, wrote letters on their behalf.
Visited prison inmates Doc Holiday and Barren Broadnax, who had long been targets of the prison
system, and Attorney General Evelle Younger. She travelled several hundred miles from Oakland to San
Luis Obispo each week to make these prison visits. At the time, the Black Guerrilla Family and the Chino
Defense Fund were filled with infiltrators and agents provocateurs.
Emily’s last prison visit was January 10, 1974, the day Remiro and Little were arrested.
It is not clear why the Harrises left Bloomington. They had “toyed” with politics and posed in the school
annual with Bill jokingly holding a book entitled About Communism, but they were not into radical
politics.ar why the Harrises left Bloomington. They had “toyed” with politics and posed in the school
annual with Bill jokingly holding a book entitled About Communism, but they were not into radical
politics.

--- PAGE BREAK ---The cover story that “underemployment radicalized middle-class America” has no basis in fact.

Underemployment is consistent with clandestine assignments.

Through her work, Emily Harris allegedly had access to Patty Hearst’s school schedule.

Denials merely
indicate that investigation should proceed on this matter.

Remember the Watergate denials?

The Harris’ apartment in Oakland was modern, well-furnished, with a color TV, waterbed, imported
kitchenware and fine china.

They read the straight press: Time, the Oakland Tribune.

A Maoist poster and a picture of a starving child hung over their dining table.

Donald Segretti, White
House spy, had a “Free Huey Newton” poster over his desk, and wore a peace emblem and long hair for
espionage cover.

William and Emily Harris were verbally and visually “radical.”
Emily owned a gun registered in her name, and practiced shooting twice a week at Chabot Gun Club in
Oakland.

Emily’s father, Mr.

Schwartz, said on TV that in her last letter, she explained a change in her life-style,
saying she had been “pretending for some time.” Her other life—the straight life, with material
possessions, non-radical experiences, formal education and employment at the UCB polling office—might
indicate that the SLA experience did not reflect her true self.

Suddenly abandoning her husband for a
“black lover,” and disappearing with Randolph Hearst’s daughter might have been her next assignment.

William Harris, alias Rip Kimberley, Richard Frank Dennis, Jonathan Mark Salamone, Teko
B.A., University of Indiana, studied Speech and English.

Enlisted in U.S.

Marines, served at the supply
depot at DaNang.

Joseph Remiro and Colston Westbrook were in Vietnam at the same time.

Returned to Indiana.

Joined fraternity, competed in golf and cross-country running.

Member of “mod squad” with Emily and Angela Atwood.

Set up narcotics arrests for the intelligence
division, Indiana State Police.

Studied at College of Foreign Affairs, University of Indiana.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Set up narcotics arrests for the intelligence
division, Indiana State Police. Studied at College of Foreign Affairs, University of Indiana. Taught at Bloomington Junior High School before coming to California. Received a Master’s Degree in “Urban Education” at Indiana. CIA agent Colston Westbrook, leader of the
group that became the SLA, taught “Black Lexicon” at the Department of Urban Affairs, UC Berkeley. Not a campus radical, but he kept posters of Black Panthers Huey Newton and Bobby Seale in a trailer in
Indiana following his return from Vietnam. Later, the SLA headquarters had a map of Huey Newton’s
apartment, and his name was listed as a possible death target. In California, worked as truck driver for the post office. Postal helmet discovered November 10, 1973,
following the arrest of Remiro and Little, at Sutherland Courthouse in Concord. Harris could have been
identified by police at that time, before the Hearst kidnapping. November, 1973: Purchased 9mm Mauser pistol, registered in his own name. Joined Chabot Gun Club, in
Oakland, and practiced twice a week. Associated with but not active in Vietnam Veterans Against the
War, a heavily infiltrated organization. Rented the SLA safe house in December, 1973 that would be filled with propaganda materials, used later
by Attorney General William Saxbe for future political terrorism and repression. Driver’s license from Rhode Island. Never explained when or why Harris was in Rhode Island. Mayor Alioto claimed Emily and William Harris intended to kidnap his grandchildren. Considering the
Harrises’ provocateur role, and Alioto’s campaign for Governor, it is possible that they obliged him by
making themselves conspicuous in his neighborhood without being arrested by police.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Caused an altercation at Mel’s Sporting Goods Store, Inglewood, that would be the signal for the pre-
arranged murder of six SLA members.

Set Patty up at the “shooting scene.” Purposely introduced and
identified “Tania” to Tom Matthews during an unnecessary 12-hour captivity, supervised her so-called
“confession” to Matthews, framing her so that 22 charges would be brought against her.

Harris’ military I.D.

was found in the death house on 54th Street in Los Angeles.

It was not explained why
a radical revolutionary terrorist was still using his military I.D.

Set Patty Hearst up so that she could witness the massacre of the other SLA members.

June 7, 1974: Released another “SLA Communiqué,” hardly the rhetoric of George Jackson, Malcolm X,
Chairman Mao or Martin Luther King.

The man with a B.A.

in English and a Master’s Degree produced a
provocative, foul-mouthed public display that can only harm legitimate protest.

Harris is probably currently hiding at a CIA safe house, preparing for his next outrageous action.

While the Harrises acted as provocateurs and set Patty Hearst up, they themselves are not wanted for
anything.

“The Harrises are less militant than their six SLA comrades….

So far, the Harrises were not overtly
involved in any of these incidents….” So says Charles Bates, Chief of FBI, San Francisco.

“I feel that Bill and Emily Harris have lost touch with the masses.

They have become isolated.

The SLA is
not an organized group that plans its actions as far as I can see.

My political friends and comrades think
the SLA has a superfly mentality.

They lined their pockets with the bank robbery money and accomplished
nothing but spreading of fear.”—Bill Brennan, former roommate of Joseph Remiro
Were Emily or William Harris ever in touch with the masses?

Or was their role as police agents to do
exactly as they were told?

Black leader of the US Organization.

In December, 1967, Detective Sergeant R.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Black leader of the US Organization. In December, 1967, Detective Sergeant R. Farwell recruited Donald
DeFreeze to work for the LAPD Criminal Conspiracy Section’s political intelligence unit. Its purpose
was to monitor black political activities in California. Karenga schemed with DeFreeze and the LAPD in a “fuck-fuck unit,” running guns to various black
militant groups, hoping to set off a gang war between the Black Panthers and the US Organization. US member Melvin Cotton Smith helped set up Black Panther busts for the police. The Steiner brothers,
working with Karenga and the LAPD, killed Panther leaders John Huggins and Alpretnice “Bunchy”
Carter at UCLA. Members of Karenga’s group were at Vacaville with DeFreeze. In April, 1974, the Steiner brothers were allowed to walk away from San Quentin, just as Thero Wheeler
walked away from Vacaville and DeFreeze walked out of Soledad a year earlier. The Steiner brothers seem to have disappeared without a trace. Where are they now? Did they play any
role in setting up comrade-informer DeFreeze back home in Los Angeles? Bernard Keaton
Double for Donald DeFreeze. Surfaced in Spring, 1973, after DeFreeze walked away from Soledad. Claimed to be Donald DeFreeze, moved in with Reverend W. Foster and family in Buffalo, New York. Familiar with intimate details of the family history that only DeFreeze would have known about. The FBI stated that they were not concerned or curious about DeFreeze’s double, because it “isn’t

--- PAGE BREAK ---intimate details of the family history that only DeFreeze would have known about. The FBI stated that they were not concerned or curious about DeFreeze’s double, because it “isn’t

--- PAGE BREAK ---

illegal.”
The only reason for having a double would be that in case DeFreeze had been accidentally picked up by
law enforcement officers in the Bay area during the time between his “departure” from Soledad and the
kidnapping of Patricia Hearst, his double could have taken his place in prison. Three long years went into
training DeFreeze for his mission at Vacaville Medical Facility. It couldn’t be thrown away.
Secretary of State, Washington State. Director of P.I.N. (People In Need), the Hearst food give-away rip-
off.
Hired by Randolph Hearst to distribute $2,000,000 worth of food to the poor.
Previous experience handing out food during NASA and military job lay-offs in Washington. Quality of
that food was good, and provoked violence was not a part of this previous assignment.
P.I.N. food program was a disaster. It was a catalytic provocateur action to hasten Patty’s conversion to
the SLA.
Meat was bought for Hearst’s program from “the nation’s major meat packer,” at triple the normal cost - it
contained up to 75% fat. Some of the food was contaminated.
Governor Ronald Reagan hoped the people who took the food would get botulism.
His mission accomplished, Kramer returned to Washington in time to run for Congress on the Republican
ticket—with substantial financial backing.
Kramer pushed for “vote by voice print” by 1984—identification of every adult by voice and social
security number.
During this time, March, 1974, Congress passed a bill to pay $10 million to five chicken growers from
the South. Their chicken feed was poisoned, somehow, with Dieldrin, a cancer-inducing insecticide.
Nobody knows how it got into the chicken feed. Millions of poisoned chickens had already been
delivered to poor school lunch programs in Chicago and Detroit.
Question: Did any of those poisoned chickens make their way into the P.I.N. food distribution program?
Russell Little, alias George DeVoto, Robert James Scalise, Osceola
Father a mechanic at Naval Air Station, Pensacola, Florida.
Little also stated that his father was a retired labor relations specialist.
Graduated from University of Florida, Gainesville, 1967.
Allegedly took a course on Revolution, where he was introduced to communist writers, such as Marx,
Lenin, Mao, Cleaver and Malcolm X.
Studied engineering, electronics.
Questioned by police in Philadelphia when Dr. Marcus Foster was leading an anti-drug campaign in that
city. Why was Little there? Was Dr. Foster marked earlier for identification and death?
Traveled in U.S., locations not identified, before arriving in Oakland.
Summer of 1972: Made contact with Willie Wolfe through Peking House in Berkeley, started to visit
California prisons, joined BCA at Vacaville with Donald DeFreeze.
No previous radical experiences with prisoners or blacks.
It is strange how migratory birds like Little, Steiner, the Atwoods and the Harrises entered immediatelyCA at Vacaville with Donald DeFreeze.
No previous radical experiences with prisoners or blacks.
It is strange how migratory birds like Little, Steiner, the Atwoods and the Harrises entered immediately

--- PAGE BREAK ---into California prison “reform” groups—their “reforms” would set prison movements back a hundred
years.

Little joined Westbrook, DeFreeze and SLA members in a small prison group, “Unisight,” with a Maoist
cover.

All took African names.

Little brought controversial discussions and hatred of Dr.

Foster into the prisons.

Visited Death Row Jefferson, supposedly “founder” of BCA.

Taught at Peralta Junior College, Oakland.

Bought a .380 caliber Brazilian-made Rossi revolver from Chris Thompson.

This kind of weapon could
be used with cyanide bullets.

October 8, 1973: Rented a house on Sutherland Court, alias George DeVoto, with Nancy Ling Perry.

It
became an SLA “Liberated Zone.”
November 6, 1973: Dr.

Marcus Foster murdered, allegedly by two black men.

Little and Remiro arrested
for this crime, possessed black make-up and the murder weapons.

January 19, 1974: Little and Joseph Remiro taken to San Quentin, charged with the murder of Foster,
resisting arrest and assaulting a policeman.

While in San Quentin, Little apparently read an interview with me in the Berkeley Barb on April 19,
1974, titled “Is SLA’s Cinque the First Black Lee Harvey Oswald?” Little was furious at my suggestion
that the SLA was a CIA operation.

He wrote a letter, stating in part, “That dizzy bitch can kiss my ass!

That pompous bitch has a nerve to call Jonathan Jackson a ‘patsy.’ I hope she drops dead tomorrow.”
Louis Tackwood, in Glass House Tapes, describes in detail how the LAPD knew in advance of the
George Jackson “escape” plans and the Marin County Courthouse shootout.

Jonathan Jackson was double-
crossed and abandoned without a promised backup.

He was murdered by members of the LAPD.

Risking
his life to tell the truth, Tackwood is the real freedom fighter.

Little and Remiro are the mouthpieces that
Congressmen will quote to “prove” that a violent revolution is taking place.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Risking
his life to tell the truth, Tackwood is the real freedom fighter. Little and Remiro are the mouthpieces that
Congressmen will quote to “prove” that a violent revolution is taking place. Anyone involved in radical politics is aware that most if not all radical groups are heavily infiltrated by
espionage agents and provocateurs. What angered Little was exposure of the methods and contacts that
created the SLA. Nancy Ling Perry, alias Nancy DeVoto, Fahizah, Lynn Sedworth
Family background: Political conservative, well-off, Goldwater supporter. Attended Santa Rosa High School; cheerleader, Sunday school teacher. B.A., Whittier College. Graduate work, UC Berkeley, specializing in chemistry. Married for six years to black jazz musician Gilbert Perry. They met when he worked for the State
Employment office. Described as a “love-hate affair.”
Topless blackjack dealer in San Francisco, underwent a period of heavy use of psychedelic drugs and
amphetamines. Her politics always “vague.” Remained apart from groups in Berkeley; maintained her older friends from
high school. She seemed to like the appearance of having no past at all. People who knew her sensed a
curious intellectual loneliness. Into dope and she knew where to find it. No indication as to where or when radical political indoctrination took place. Trained in behavior

--- PAGE BREAK ---modification.

Sold juice at Fruity Rudy’s stand on Bancroft Way near U.C.

Berkeley campus.

Dated Chris Thompson, the link between “Peking House” and Nancy, Camilla Hall and Patricia Soltysik.

Began visiting prisoners.

Her cover story was “an interest in prison reform.” She and Emily Harris
appear to have been given special privileges—they were permitted to visit more than one prisoner at a
time.

Were SLA members given special treatment?

Nancy wrote “Death to the Pigs” inside Fruity Rudy’s stand, the same slogan written on the walls of
Sharon Tate’s home to lead police to think that blacks committed the murders.

Nancy paid $553 in cash to rent the house at 1560 Sutherland Court in Concord, under the alias “Nancy
DeVoto.” The house was used as an SLA hideout and filled with ammunition, weapons and literature.

On January 10, 1974, the day Remiro and Little were arrested for the murder of Dr.

Foster, Nancy set fire
to the bungalow.

She did a remarkably poor job of destroying the evidence, but an excellent job of calling
attention to the house and its contents.

There was no personal oppression, no experience in the past that would explain participation in the
murder of Foster, or acceptance of a fiery martyrdom in Los Angeles.

She was apparently shot by police
while trying to escape from the house.

Joseph Remiro, alias George DeVoto, “B,” Charles Robert Peterson
Remiro, in San Quentin, didn’t cry when he heard that six SLA members had been cremated.

He went on
playing gin rummy.

“Joe was a political heavy.”
Devout Catholic family, raised in San Francisco, trained as a “stone reactionary.”
Member of 101st Airborne Division.

Volunteered twice for duty in Vietnam.

Signed up to “kill a commie
for Christ.” Participated willingly in numerous search and destroy missions, said they were like Calley’s
massacre at My Lai.

Declared himself to be a pacifist when he came home.

This would be inconsistent with his alleged murder
of Dr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Declared himself to be a pacifist when he came home. This would be inconsistent with his alleged murder
of Dr. Foster, and the subsequent death warrants issued by the SLA. By January, 1969, Remiro allegedly started to take quantities of drugs. He claimed he “couldn’t get
outside my house without being completely drugged out of my head.” Remiro and Perry, both dependent
upon drugs, could be manipulated by CIA agents to form the nucleus of the SLA. Perry was the theoretical
“brains” behind the organization. Remiro provided military and tactical support. Chemistry, weapons and
radical rhetoric were all they needed to start their “army.”
Carlos Marighella’s Minimanual of the Urban Guerrilla was to the SLA cover story what Marx’s Das
Kapital was to The Warren Report and Lee Harvey Oswald. (The myth that Marx influenced Oswald was
pure fabrication, a “cover story.”)
Remiro was a “mechanic,” divorced with one child. July 19, 1973: Purchased a .380 caliber Walther automatic, found in his possession when he was arrested
on November 10, 1973. October, 1973: Went underground with Little and Willie Wolfe. Rented 7th Street apartment in Oakland
with Emily and William Harris for Foster ambush. A racist, wanted Vietnam Veterans Against the War and Winter Soldier Organization to take the position

--- PAGE BREAK ---Street apartment in Oakland
with Emily and William Harris for Foster ambush. A racist, wanted Vietnam Veterans Against the War and Winter Soldier Organization to take the position

--- PAGE BREAK ---

that U.S. minorities should each have their own territory.
Helped race war along by owning black make-up. Did he put on blackface to escalate violence in the
Oakland-Berkeley area?
Devised plans to kill Black Panther leaders Huey Newton and Bobby Seale.
Remiro and Little were placed in San Quentin without trial immediately after indictments for the murder
of Dr. Foster were handed down. They were given maximum media coverage to mouth radical violence.
Lee Harvey Oswald’s public radio broadcast in New Orleans, with Ed Butler of Army intelligence, was
to create a cover for U.S. agents operating behind a Communist front.
Colston Westbrook, William Harris and Joseph Remiro supplied the SLA’s intelligence and military
tactics.
“I believe the SLA actions have had and are having such an inhibiting effect on political works in the
Bay Area that I feel the time to speak out has come.”
– Bill Brennan, former roommate of Joseph Remiro
Mary Alice Siem
Twenty-four years old, mother of a small child, friend of Thero Wheeler.
Frequent visitor to Wheeler at Vacaville Medical Facility.
August, 1973: Wheeler “escaped” from Vacaville and lived with Mary Alice in the Bay area.
August-October, 1973: Mary Alice and Thero made at least 20 visits to DeFreeze and the SLA in
Oakland.
DeFreeze wanted to kill both of them but was “discouraged.”
Mary Alice gave $600 to DeFreeze and the SLA, claimed she’d been “robbed.” Difficult to visualize
prison escapee Wheeler and Mary Alice carrying $600 in cash to a meeting in Oakland with the SLA.
Possible source of funding for DeFreeze before the kidnapping?
Visitors to prisons are carefully identified, yet police didn’t seek or locate Wheeler at Mary’s home in the
Bay areas or hold her for harboring an escapee.
Born in Goleta, Santa Barbara County, daughter of a pharmacist.
Outstanding student, came to Berkeley in 1968, attended U.C. Berkeley. Worked as a part-time janitor at
the Berkeley Public Library.
Involved in radical politics, women’s movement, gay liberation.
Seen frequently with Chris Thompson, the connecting link between Camilla Hall, Patricia Soltysik, Nancy
Perry, Chabot House and the out-of-state imports. These three women lent authenticity to the Berkeley
image of the SLA.
Mizmoon and Camilla were sensitive poets, artists and sometime lesbians.
Mizmoon participated in the BCA at Vacaville Medical Facility. She worked with Donald DeFreeze.
After DeFreeze walked out of Soledad, he lived with Mizmoon.
Mizmoon had access to the Berkeley library, where Cinque found source material for SLA rhetoric. SLA
tapes and written messages sound more like E. Howard Hunt than George Jackson or “Cinque,” the
historical slave leader.
July 27, 1973: Purchased .12 gauge sawed-off Mosberg shotgun under the name Mizmoon Moniqueritten messages sound more like E. Howard Hunt than George Jackson or “Cinque,” the
historical slave leader.
July 27, 1973: Purchased .12 gauge sawed-off Mosberg shotgun under the name Mizmoon Monique

--- PAGE BREAK ---d more like E. Howard Hunt than George Jackson or “Cinque,” the
historical slave leader.
July 27, 1973: Purchased .12 gauge sawed-off Mosberg shotgun under the name Mizmoon Monique

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Erlich.
Changed housing from September to December, 1973. Missing during time Dr. Foster was murdered.
Identification and library books checked out in her name found at SLA house on Sutherland Court, January
10, 1974, three weeks before Hearst kidnapping.
Vanished from the apartment by January, 1974.
Photographed in Hibernia Bank Robbery, San Francisco.
Cremated in Los Angeles, May 17, 1974.
Robyn Steiner
1970: Met Russell Little at the University of Florida.
No political awareness, interest in blacks or prisoners. Not an activist.
Drove to California with Little in July, 1972.
Steiner and Little moved into the “Peking House” commune, where Little met William Wolfe and would
join Westbrook and DeFreeze at the Vacaville Medical Facility.
Entered the prison as a tutor to blacks; previous training nonexistent.
Worked at Lucky’s Market, Oakland.
Broke up with Little, left California, returned to Florida in December, 1973 and went back to school.
Named by DeFreeze as an FBI informer.
Protected from questioning by U.S. Attorney and the grand jury. San Francisco police interviewed her in
Florida. Lives in constant fear, “doesn’t know who her friends are,” so the tables are turned.
Chris Thompson
ID’d by DeFreeze as a CIA agent. Black, not a political radical or activist, described as a “curious man.”
Moved freely in and out of “Peking House.”
“Dated” Nancy Ling Perry, Patricia Soltysik and Camilla Hall. Served as the connection between the
three Berkeley females and the seven who moved west and infiltrated radical groups (Wolfe, Angela and
Gary Atwood, Emily and William Harris, Robyn Steiner and Russell Little).
March, 1973: Sold a .38 caliber Rossi to Russell Little—bullets fired from this pistol allegedly killed Dr.
Foster.
Drove to Vacaville Medical Facility with a member of BCA, but didn’t attend meetings.
January, 1974: Rented an apartment on 2069 Hillegass Street, Berkeley, half a block from Steven Weed’s
and Patricia Hearst’s apartment at 2602 Benvenue Avenue. His apartment opened on a small alleyway.
You can walk through the alleyway and be on Benvenue, directly across the street from the apartment.
Occupation: Sold soul food from a stand on Bancroft Way, Berkeley, near the food stands where Dave
Gunnell and Nancy Ling Perry worked.
After the Foster murder and Hearst kidnapping, Chris was “around now but missing.”
He appeared as a secret and protected grand jury witness. (Typically, in trials of radical groups someone
in the know remains under protection, while the others get roasted.)“around now but missing.”
He appeared as a secret and protected grand jury witness. (Typically, in trials of radical groups someone
in the know remains under protection, while the others get roasted.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ing.”
He appeared as a secret and protected grand jury witness. (Typically, in trials of radical groups someone
in the know remains under protection, while the others get roasted.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Not wanted by police or FBI, allowed to “vanish,” or possibly to testify against the deceased.
Thompson offered to prove he was not CIA by submitting the facts to a jury that would include Ron
Dellums, Bobby Seale, Angela Davis and Mrs. Foster. If he waits another year, they might take him up on
the offer.
Steven Weed
Graduate of Princeton University, home in Santa Rosa, California. Taught school where Patricia Hearst
was a student.
Patty and Steven were living together in Berkeley when she was kidnapped.
Black Abductor, a novel published in 1972, described the plans for the Hearst kidnapping, including the
“boyfriend who is beaten unconscious.” Its publication date indicates how far in advance the plans were
made.
Weed’s role in the kidnapping can only be clarified by a proper investigation of the author and publisher
of this book. His behavior since the kidnapping indicates the need to delve further.
Colston Westbrook, alias Big Daddy, Yajiuma
1962: CIA advisor to the South Korean Central Intelligence Agency. Cover: U.S. Army, U.S. Air Force
linguistics training.
1962: Enrolled at Inter-Christian University, Tokyo. Special training in latest psychological warfare
techniques.
1962-1966: Worked illegally under cover of AID, the Agency for International Development. Handled
undercover assignments in Cambodia, Thailand, India, Japan, Hong Kong, Philippines, Okinawa and
Soviet Union.
Claimed to have personal line of communication with the Premier of Cambodia.
William Harris’ passport indicates a visit to USSR. Was he there at the same time as Westbrook? Willie
Wolfe was in Europe for nine months. Was it at the same time, same places?
Feb. 5, 1966, to Sept. 10, 1969: Westbrook listed his employment, “Administrator, Pacific Architects and
Engineers,” a CIA cover.
Provided logistical support for CIA’s Phoenix Program. His job was the indoctrination of assassination
and terrorist cadres.
William Harris, Marine volunteer, was stationed in Vietnam. Joseph Remiro served two voluntary tours in
Vietnam. Did Remiro and Harris know Westbrook in Asia?
1969: Plans for the Black Cultural Association were formed.
1970: Donald DeFreeze sent by LAPD to Vacaville Medical Facility. Colston Westbrook, home after
seven years in Asia with the CIA, was assigned to visit Vacaville Medical Facility two times a week.
Westbrook ran the BCA classes and decided who would be in the program.
The “cultural” meetings between DeFreeze and his white tutors were infiltrated, under the cover of
teaching black male identity. The tri-colored flag of New Africa was paraded on stage, celebrated with
music and black power salutes. Everyone in attendance adopted an African name. DeFreeze becameof
teaching black male identity. The tri-colored flag of New Africa was paraded on stage, celebrated with
music and black power salutes. Everyone in attendance adopted an African name. DeFreeze became

--- PAGE BREAK ---le identity. The tri-colored flag of New Africa was paraded on stage, celebrated with
music and black power salutes. Everyone in attendance adopted an African name. DeFreeze became

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“Cinque.”
Westbrook brought women and pornography to induce prisoners to attend meetings.
The Black Cultural Association was the nucleus of the SLA after two black prisoners, DeFreeze and
Wheeler, were allowed to “escape” and join the group in Oakland-Berkeley.
The BCA was a behavior modification and psychological experimentation unit. Illegal funding and
direction for the BCA came from the CIA, via the Stanford Research Institute (SRI).
The cover story was “development of black pride.”
Black prisoners were prepared and primed to murder black leaders on the outside. (Dr. Marcus Foster,
Huey Newton, Bobby Seale and Richard Foster were on the SLA “hit list.”)
Westbrook’s CIA spymaster can be linked to another counter-insurgency expert, William Herrman, an
advisor to Governor Ronald Reagan. Herrman was in contact with both SRI, the Hoover Center on
Violence and the Rand Corporation in his development for Reagan of a plan to win the hearts and minds
of the people of California. This was the proposed UCLA Center for the Study and Prevention of
Violence, a front for massive psychosurgical and psychological experimentation on radicals, Third World
people, women, children and prisoners.
SRI and CIA R&D programs experimented with drugs such as Librium, administered illegally to certain
BCA members.
Westbrook’s assignment in the BCA behavior modification unit was to recruit future agents for CIA
domestic programs. The “zombie” killings and the Zebra murders in San Francisco were linked to prison
control and training, employing drugs and other forms of mind control.
Donald DeFreeze identified Westbrook as a CIA agent, one who had betrayed him.
Westbrook must now live in fear for his life. David Ferrie, Lee Harvey Oswald, Jack Ruby and nearly
100 others who served as government agents in past political intelligence operations have been murdered.
They were killed by their own team, not by the “enemy.”
Thero Wheeler
Described as a “hell of a mind, close to genius.”
Brother Bill with San Francisco police force.
“Did not relate ideologically with Donald DeFreeze,” a polite way of saying that his association with
DeFreeze was to entrap him, perhaps.
Allegedly interested in Venceremos. Actually, only mailed them one letter.
November, 1972: Met with DeFreeze in Vacaville Medical Facility for one month.
December, 1972: DeFreeze sent to Soledad from Vacaville. He “escaped” in March, 1973.
August, 1973: Wheeler “escaped” from Vacaville.
Stayed with Mary Alice Siem, a frequent visitor to Wheeler while he was in Vacaville, in the Bay Area.
He was never sought there.
August-October, 1973: Met with DeFreeze and SLA members in Oakland at least 20 times. Provided the
SLA with $600.
DeFreeze wanted to kill Wheeler and Mary, indicating his probable mistrust of them as provocateurs or1973: Met with DeFreeze and SLA members in Oakland at least 20 times. Provided the
SLA with $600.
DeFreeze wanted to kill Wheeler and Mary, indicating his probable mistrust of them as provocateurs or

--- PAGE BREAK ---eeze and SLA members in Oakland at least 20 times. Provided the
SLA with $600.
DeFreeze wanted to kill Wheeler and Mary, indicating his probable mistrust of them as provocateurs or

--- PAGE BREAK ---

agents.
Description of Wheeler fits that of the second black man, who with DeFreeze kidnapped Patricia Hearst.
After cremation of six SLA members in Los Angeles on May 17, 1974, the FBI and police claimed that
only William Harris, Emily Harris and Patricia Hearst were still being sought. The SLA thus was
reduced.
Why did the police forget about the man who helped kidnap Patty and assault Steven Weed?
Was Wheeler one of the black men who lured DeFreeze to his death trap—and in exchange, will not be
sought or prosecuted?
William Wolfe, alias Charles William Morgan, Cujo
Born in Pennsylvania, son of Dr. L.S. Wolfe, anesthesiologist.
Hobbies, interests not described.
Studies, education unclear.
Travelled for nine months in Europe before arriving in Berkeley, “not yet decided on his goals.”
The only Berkeley class mentioned was a course in “Black Lexicon,” under Professor Colston Westbrook,
who would later bring William to Vacaville Medical Facility.
Westbrook described himself on San Francisco radio station KGO as the product of an all-white
Pennsylvania town. He knew few blacks. Wolfe had no experience with prisoners or radical movements.
This team taught “black identity” to a prison study group. They created the pathetic “Field Marshal
General Cinque of the SLA.”
Wolfe lived at Peking House, the common meeting ground from which “prison reformers” would spread
into Vacaville Medical Facility, San Quentin, Folsom, Soledad and San Luis Obispo prisons.
Wolfe brought Russell Little and Robyn Steiner into the prison group.
Wolfe, though childless, attended Oakland School Board meetings, and brought arguments against Dr.
Marcus Foster into BCA prison discussions at Vacaville. The prisoners were remote from Oakland’s
school problems. The incitement of black prisoners against Dr. Marcus Foster was consistent with police
policies. Ultimately, it was two whites in blackface who allegedly shot Dr. Foster.
Wolfe was last seen in Pennsylvania visiting his father in January, 1974, when Remiro and Little were
arrested for the Foster murder. Wolfe then went underground, “disappeared.”
Burned alive on 54th Street in Los Angeles, May 17, 1974. Not charged with a crime.
III. CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS
1945 – IMPORTATION OF BRITISH AND NAZI INTELLIGENCE INTO THE UNITED STATES AFTER WORLD WAR II
William Stephenson, head of British Intelligence, combined with U.S. and Nazi intelligence to form
covert operations and psychological warfare units against the free world. Their purpose was to control
labor, energy, oil and minerals. Capitalism was transformed into a disguised imperialism conducted by
subversion.
The CIA was formed to infiltrate and overthrow legitimate governments. It is now taking over the
United States. The SLA is domestic internal warfare. World headquarters for American-Nazi operationsn.
The CIA was formed to infiltrate and overthrow legitimate governments. It is now taking over the
United States. The SLA is domestic internal warfare. World headquarters for American-Nazi operations

--- PAGE BREAK ---d to infiltrate and overthrow legitimate governments. It is now taking over the
United States. The SLA is domestic internal warfare. World headquarters for American-Nazi operations

--- PAGE BREAK ---

were set up at the Tryall Club, Montego Bay, Jamaica.
The anti-humanist events taking place in America against youth, experimentation on the brain, robot
armies of humans without choices and segregated tiger cage prisons must be blamed upon the courting of
Nazi doctors and technicians.
1965 – CAMBRIDGE, MASS., POLITICA, CAMELOT
Defense Department plans were drawn to use against Third World countries. They were applied to
Chile. U.S. think tanks produce the mentalities and methods to manipulate mass populations through terror
and chaos.
1962-PRESENT TIME – THE PHOENIX PROGRAM
Directed by the CIA’s William Colby. Control of the Vietnamese population through terrorism, murder,
imprisonment, torture, rigged elections and falsified statistics. Fear of communism from North Vietnam
caused our soldiers to commit illegal and immoral acts, believing the end justified the means. The same
rationalizations are taking place in the U.S.
MAY 1, 1968 – COINTELPRO, FBI “COVERT INTELLIGENCE ON THE NEW LEFT”
Clandestine intelligence operation designed to incite antagonism between and among the anti-war and
black movements, and fear in the minds of the populace. The program was designed to threaten and
undermine activities of any organization that fell into the category of the New Left: All black student
unions and similar organizations mustered to project the demands of black students. Full-scale
surveillance and intelligence of the anti-war movement, women’s liberation, anything with the name
“Black.” Denounce, leak fabrications to the press, warn of violence, link to communists, scare away the
committed, reduce memberships.
JUNE, 1968 – LOS ANGELES POLICE DEPARTMENT, CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY SECTION
Formed after SUS, Special Unit Senator, the team that concealed Robert Kennedy’s assassin and swept
the conspiracy under the rug.
Secret funding from the CIA, connected directly to White House intelligence and Huston (emergency
preparedness) Plan.
Detective R. Farwell, Commander in Public Disorder Intelligence Division, assigned to monitor black
political activity in California.
Donald DeFreeze worked from this office as a police informant, 1967-1969. Black agents infiltrated
the prisons and Black Panther Party.
Ron Karenga, an agent who worked with provocateur Louis Tackwood and Donald DeFreeze, used the
SLA seven-headed cobra insignia at the US Organization.
Evelle Younger, former L.A. district attorney when CCS was formed, moved on to the position of
attorney general. Younger is an Air Force Major General in counter-intelligence and an agent of the FBI.
1962-1969 – COLSTON WESTBROOK, VIETNAM AND SERVICE ABROAD
Westbrook served in Asia with the CIA’s Phoenix Program.
While he was away, President John Kennedy, Senator Robert Kennedy and Reverend Martin Luther
King were assassinated.
The FBI had targeted all left, radical and black movements to be broken apart.ram.
While he was away, President John Kennedy, Senator Robert Kennedy and Reverend Martin Luther
King were assassinated.
The FBI had targeted all left, radical and black movements to be broken apart.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ay, President John Kennedy, Senator Robert Kennedy and Reverend Martin Luther
King were assassinated.
The FBI had targeted all left, radical and black movements to be broken apart.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

When Westbrook returned to America, the military and intelligence agencies were to escalate the war
at home.
Important to that domestic war were closed prisons, with radical prisoners killed or locked up forever.
JULY 23, 1970, “THE HUSTON PLAN” – ARMY, NAVY AND AIR FORCE IN LEAGUE WITH INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES AND LOCAL POLICE DEPARTMENTS
The “Huston Plan” was approved by President Nixon.
Senator Sam Ervin stated in May, 1974 that it is still operating.
This document gave permission for widespread political surveillance by burglary, wiretapping,
eavesdropping, mail covers and spying inside the U.S. by the CIA.
The methods were employed against all dissenters, political opponents, news reporters and selected
government employees.
Congress continues to give full support to these operations by appointing known war criminals to head
our agencies and to finance their operations without controls.
1970 – CALIFORNIA PRISONS
War against political prisoners began overtly on January 14, 1970, at Soledad Prison. Black leaders
William Nolan, Cleveland Edwards and Alvin Miller were murdered by a guard. Continued killings of
prisoners and guards have escalated since that date.
Segregation, racism, torture, provocations, threats and fear are rampant in the prisons. This is state
policy. Gang wars are encouraged and narcotics distributed to pit groups against each other, hoping they
never get out alive.
Eldridge Cleaver, well-known Black Panther leader and writer, fled to Algeria from California.
The orders throughout the prison system were: “No more Cleavers.”
Westbrook came home after seven years in Asia with the CIA to lecture twice weekly inside the
politically-explosive California prison system.
LATE 1969-1970 – BLACK CULTURE ASSOCIATION, VACAVILLE MEDICAL FACILITY
The meeting place of Westbrook and DeFreeze.
BCA was an extension of psychological experimentation projects connected to Stanford Research
Institute, Menlo Park, and the CIA in Langley, Virginia. The Symbionese Liberation Army was incubated
here.
If the SLA was not meant to happen, DeFreeze, his teacher and their constant associates would have
been identified when Wheeler and DeFreeze left their prisons.
1970 – DONALD DEFREEZE CONFESSES TO JUDGE RITZI: WANTS TO COME CLEAN
DeFreeze wrote to Superior Court Judge W. Ritzi: “I will tell what really happened and why. I will tell
you things that no one has ever known before.” Judge Ritzi turned down DeFreeze’s appeal to confess his
crimes and his work for the LAPD. DeFreeze was packed off immediately to Chino Prison, then to
Vacaville Medical Center for 6-14 years. This is when his personality change began. He would meet
Colston Westbrook, director of the new BCA.
1970 – JOSEPH REMIRO IN CALIFORNIA
Remiro returns to California after two tours in Vietnam.
1970-1972 – COLSTON WESTBROOK, CIA AND DONALD DEFREEZE, LAPD, MEETlston Westbrook, director of the new BCA.
1970 – JOSEPH REMIRO IN CALIFORNIA
Remiro returns to California after two tours in Vietnam.
1970-1972 – COLSTON WESTBROOK, CIA AND DONALD DEFREEZE, LAPD, MEET

--- PAGE BREAK ---ector of the new BCA.
1970 – JOSEPH REMIRO IN CALIFORNIA
Remiro returns to California after two tours in Vietnam.
1970-1972 – COLSTON WESTBROOK, CIA AND DONALD DEFREEZE, LAPD, MEET

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Westbrook taught two days a week at BCA, Vacaville. He also controlled all visitors to the group.
Future SLA members began to meet with DeFreeze. Their “Maoist” revolutionary discussions included
designing their own flag, adopting African names, hostile discussions against black leader Dr. Marcus
Foster. Many of the “tutors” were police informants.
1971 – SUMMER MEETINGS OF WHITE HOUSE AGENT DONALD SEGRETTI, FBI, MINUTEMEN AND SECRET ARMY ORGANIZATION IN SAN DIEGO
Donald Segretti, funded by secret intelligence money, met with paramilitary right-wing organizations.
They planned kidnappings of radicals during the Republican conventions in 1972. Members of the SAO
had been shooting, burning and attempting murder, using federal “anti-poverty” money. The Minutemen
have publicly anticipated a race war in the U.S. They are well-armed and infiltrated by police and law
enforcement agents.
1971 – CAMILLA HALL IN CALIFORNIA
Moves to Bay Area from St. Paul, Minnesota.
1971 – WILLIAM WOLFE IN CALIFORNIA
Moves from Pennsylvania to the Bay Area.
1971-1972 – JOHN MITCHELL, JOHN ERLICHMAN, G. GORDON LIDDY AND THE AMERICAN NAZI PARTY
The history of the SLA has roots in the American Nazi Party. Secret White House money was sent down
the line to Lyn Nofziger in California and Joseph Tommassi, Nazi Storm Trooper. Additional funds for
California Nazis were promised at known meetings in the Hilton Hotel, L.A., and the Mayflower Hotel,
Washington, D.C.
Robert Mardian, Assistant AG in charge of Internal Security, maintained lists of radicals to be
kidnapped in Florida when the Republican convention was moved there from San Diego. Open interest
(Liddy and Mardian) in German Nazis indicates that more than election results of the Wallace campaign
were the topic these secret meetings and fundings.
The Nazi Party was involved in the murder of Dr. Foster and Bay Area violence, with the approval of
the Justice Department and military intelligence.
1970-1974 – CALIFORNIA’S EXPLOSIVE YEARS OF PRISON VIOLENCE, CONSPIRACIES, ENTRAPMENTS, GENOCIDE, SEGREGATION AND TERRORISM
The California Department of Corrections instituted a reign of terror in collaboration with Attorney
General Evelle Younger, simultaneous with the murder of leaders on the outside and genocidal policies
becoming law.
1972 – MIGRATION TO CALIFORNIA; THIS GROUP TO CHANGE THE PRISONS?
Robyn Steiner, Russell Little, Emily Harris, William Harris, Angela Atwood and Gary Atwood would
make frequent visits to Vacaville Medical Facility, the men’s colony at San Luis Obispo, San Quentin,
Folsom.
The Department of Corrections has letters written by members of the SLA on behalf of Donald
DeFreeze. The DoC wanted his early parole from Soledad.
They immediately infiltrated the Black Guerrilla Family, Vietnam Veterans Against the War, Chino
Defense Fund, United Farm Workers, women’s organizations and Los Venceremos.early parole from Soledad.
They immediately infiltrated the Black Guerrilla Family, Vietnam Veterans Against the War, Chino
Defense Fund, United Farm Workers, women’s organizations and Los Venceremos.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ledad.
They immediately infiltrated the Black Guerrilla Family, Vietnam Veterans Against the War, Chino
Defense Fund, United Farm Workers, women’s organizations and Los Venceremos.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

NOVEMBER, 1972 – THERO WHEELER AND DEFREEZE TOGETHER FOR ONE MONTH
Thero Wheeler, the silent mystery man, met DeFreeze in Vacaville. In December, 1972, DeFreeze was
moved from Vacaville to Soledad Prison.
MARCH, 1973 – THE GREAT ESCAPE: DONALD DEFREEZE
DeFreeze, assisted by Soledad Prison superintendents, working for the Attorney General’s office,
walked away. A change of clothing and transportation were waiting for him. One officer who assisted in
DeFreeze’s escape still works at Soledad. The other now works in Sacramento.
AUGUST, 1973 – THE GREAT ESCAPE: THERO WHEELER
Wheeler walked out of Vacaville.
AUGUST-OCTOBER, 1973 – NOBODY LOOKS FOR WHEELER AND DEFREEZE
Two black escapees from California prisons, both “associated” with radical groups, Venceremos and
Maoists, were not sought by the law. Wheeler and DeFreeze met at least 20 times during this three-month
period. Both were living with women they met through prison visits, so they were easily traceable … if
anyone had been searching for them.
SUMMER, 1973 – DEFREEZE’S “DOUBLE,” BERNARD KEATON
A second DeFreeze was trained and prepared to stand in for “Cinque.” In case the psychologically
well-programmed DeFreeze was accidentally picked up in Oakland or Berkeley, Keaton could go to
prison for him. Doubles are used in every major conspiracy. It is a standard CIA operating procedure.
James Earl Ray and Lee Harvey Oswald each had a double. The FBI loses track of them deliberately.
AUGUST 21, 1973 – SLA DECLARATION OF WAR
Enter American domestic intelligence warfare.
The SLA “Declaration of War,” dated August 21, 1973, was not openly distributed until November 7,
1973, the day after the murder of Dr. Marcus Foster.
AUGUST 26, 1973 – THE COBRA APPEARS
An Egyptian cobra, “long, mean, ill-tempered, very deadly,” was released in Chicago. This symbolic
gesture was picked up immediately by the KKK, American Nazi Party and the White Aryan Knights. A
signal?
“We hope the cobra has nationalistic tendencies and bites a few kikes. The cobras have niggers beat all
to hell so far as danger is concerned. All power to the cobra.”
SEPTEMBER 1973-FEBRUARY 1974: RACE WAR LAUNCHED IN THE BAY AREA
Ex-cons, some armed by police, have been trained and allowed to conduct planned “vengeance
killings.” White men wearing blackface commit murder; black patsies are encouraged to escalate killings
and terrorism. A series of murders in the San Francisco area, termed “Operation Zebra” by police,
occurred immediately prior to the Hearst kidnapping on February 4, 1974.
Mayor Alioto linked them feebly to the SLA.A series of murders in the San Francisco area, termed “Operation Zebra” by police,
occurred immediately prior to the Hearst kidnapping on February 4, 1974.
Mayor Alioto linked them feebly to the SLA.

--- PAGE BREAK ---OCTOBER 2, 1973 – RACE WAR ESCALATION
Two policemen died in a helicopter crash in Oakland.

Somebody wanted blacks blamed for it.

The
unknown “August 7th Guerrilla Movement” claimed credit for the deaths.

Both the coroner and the
National Transportation Safety Board stated the deaths were caused by “engine failure.” August 7th
Guerrilla Movement literature was found at SLA headquarters.

Blackface make-up (for whites) was also
found.

The message claiming “credit” for the policemen’s deaths also referred to the “San Quentin Six.” Prior
to every major political trial in California, provocateurs create violence to associate the defendants with
terror on the streets.

The trial of the San Quentin Six was almost ready for jury selection.

They have been
continuous targets of California “law enforcement” authorities.

The indictments were later dropped.

OCTOBER 8, 1973 – THE RACE WAR CONTINUES
Murphy Anderson, a black man, and Faith Trumpour, a white woman, were found murdered gangland
style by the side of a highway in Monterey County.

A week after their bodies were discovered, the usual
pattern of planted evidence occurred.

A message from the “August 7th Guerrilla Movement” was
delivered, claiming “credit” for these killings.

The message once more mentioned the “San Quentin Six.”
This is a convenient way of murdering two people and arousing racist fears at the same time.

The cover
story was narcotic-related death.

Kidnapping involved here.

Was it an SLA run-through?

OCTOBER, 1973 – AMERICAN NAZI PARTY WARNS THAT DR.

MARCUS FOSTER WILL BE ASSASSINATED – TWO WEEKS BEFORE THE MURDER TOOK PLACE
At a San Leandro shopping center near Oakland, members of the Nazi Party handed out pamphlets
warning: “There might be shotgun blasts into the guts of mixmaster principals and superintendents.”
OCTOBER, 1973 – BLACK CULTURAL ASSOCIATION, VACAVILLE MEDICAL FACILITY, LECTURES DENOUNCING DR.

FOSTER
Director Westbrook and tutor Willie Wolfe spread hate stories about Dr.

Foster.--- PAGE BREAK ---

FOSTER
Director Westbrook and tutor Willie Wolfe spread hate stories about Dr. Foster. Inmates were jubilant
weeks later when they learned the educator was dead. But another black leader had been assassinated. Violence is nurtured in the prisons by selected agents. NOVEMBER 6, 1973 – DR. MARCUS FOSTER ASSASSINATED, OAKLAND
Dr. Foster was black. He was shot with deadly cyanide bullets. His co-worker, Robert Blackburn, is
white. He was shot with regular bullets and survived. The men were close associates, often referred to as
“salt and pepper.” Both had moved to California together from Pennsylvania a few years earlier. “Blacks” fleeing the murder scene were observed by witnesses after the shooting. Nazis wanted him murdered. Nazis are active in education issues in California. White men possessing black make-up were later arrested for his murder. NOVEMBER 7, 1973 – SYMBIONESE LIBERATION ARMY, FIRST COMMUNIQUÉ
The SLA claimed credit for killing Dr. Foster, inspired by “love for the people.” “Death warrants”
were issued against other School Board Members. JANUARY 10, 1974 – JOSEPH REMIRO AND RUSSELL LITTLE, TWO WHITE MEN, ARRESTED AND CHARGED WITH THE MURDER OF DR. FOSTER
Both men deliberately created the condition for arrest by driving around in a van for several hours
early in the morning in a quiet residential area, a few blocks away from their “safe house” in Concord.

--- PAGE BREAK ---reated the condition for arrest by driving around in a van for several hours
early in the morning in a quiet residential area, a few blocks away from their “safe house” in Concord.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Remiro surrendered four hours after Little was captured. He brought the murder weapon with him.
On the same evening, Nancy Ling Perry set fire to the SLA “safe house” at Sutherland Court. This
“Liberated Zone” contained a goldmine of evidence and information that the law enforcement officials
could reveal or conceal to their advantage.
Written plans to kidnap Patricia Hearst were found in the house, three weeks prior to her abduction.
Police ignored this information.
NOVEMBER 27, 1973 – MURDER OF A GUARD AT TRACY PRISON
August 7th Guerrilla Movement again took “credit.” The murder of the guard would signal escalation of
war against prisoners by the California Department of Corrections.
Prisoners were reclassified; packages limited, visiting days reduced and further repressions were
inaugurated.
Some 85% of all eligible paroles were denied in January and February of 1974. Guards brought in
weapons, encouraged narcotics traffic and imposed impossible living conditions. The emergence of the
SLA, nurtured within the prison system, would set back any hopes for prison reform.
JANUARY 17, 1974 – SECOND COMMUNIQUÉ: THE SLA EXPLAIN THEIR “PHILOSOPHY,” NANCY LING PERRY, “FAHIZAH,” SPEAKS
“The SLA were ‘freedom fighters.’”
“The USA had been overthrown since 1963.”
“Their ‘information and intelligence unit’ was fighting oppression.”
“The SLA was made up of blacks, browns, yellow, red and white people. ‘We would never wear
make-up or disguise ourself by race.’”
When “confronted with oppression, starvation and the death of their freedom, they will fight.” (None of
the SLA had ever endured these conditions.)
“The SLA is not the August 7th Guerrilla Movement.” (That “group” was never heard from again.)
“The fire in Concord, California was only to melt fingerprints.” (It didn’t.)
“Death to the fascist insect that preys upon the life of the people.”
FEBRUARY 4, 1974 – PATRICIA HEARST IS KIDNAPPED
Two black males and one white female kidnapped Patty Hearst.
Her boyfriend, Steven Weed, was beaten.
This was America’s first political kidnapping.
FEBRUARY 7, 1974 – THIRD SLA COMMUNIQUÉ
Patricia Campbell Hearst is a “prisoner of war”
FEBRUARY 12, 1974 – FIELD MARSHAL GENERAL CINQUE, DONALD DEFREEZE, MAKES HIS FIRST (TAPED) PUBLIC APPEARANCE
Cinque explains that Randolph Hearst was to set up a food program for the poor.
Patty speaks to her parents and fiancé Steven Weed in a taped message: “Mom, Dad, I am OK. I had a
few scrapes and stuff, but they washed them up and they’re getting OK. I caught a cold, but they gave me
some pills. I am in a combat unit that is armed with automatic weapons. There is also a medical team
here.”
Her voice was drowsy and she appeared anxious to get home. This was a period of sympathy for Patty,
and conditions for her return would be met, she hoped.weapons. There is also a medical team
here.”
Her voice was drowsy and she appeared anxious to get home. This was a period of sympathy for Patty,
and conditions for her return would be met, she hoped.

--- PAGE BREAK ---lso a medical team
here.”
Her voice was drowsy and she appeared anxious to get home. This was a period of sympathy for Patty,
and conditions for her return would be met, she hoped.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Cinque asked for “food of the best quality” to be delivered.
One giveaway of the SLA was the suggestion that the food be distributed from “Safeway or Mayfair”
stores. Radicals in California are aware of the boycott of Safeway stores because of Cesar Chavez’s
strikes relating to non-union lettuce, grapes and wine. It seemed strange for volunteers for the United Farm
Workers to ask that Safeway participate in the food giveaway plan.
There were many indications in the third communiqué that the SLA was a right-wing conspiracy.
FEBRUARY 12-APRIL 1, 1974 – THE GREAT FOOD RIP-OFF
Randolph Hearst spent $2 million on the People In Need Program.
“Best quality” food was to be delivered. That was a clear stipulation of the conditions for returning
Patricia Hearst.
Ludlow Kramer, Secretary of State, Washington State, Republican candidate for Congress and former
employee of NASA, helped distribute food during defense industry personnel layoffs and was imported to
California to oversee the program.
“Top quality” companies sold Kramer meat with “75% slop” at triple the normal price. Cabbages
replaced meat in some bags of food.
Food was thrown at the people. Some threw it back.
Food trucks were hijacked.
Conveniently placed cameras photographed violence at food distribution centers.
Some food was “contaminated.”
Randolph Hearst was publicly embarrassed and forced to apologize. What food companies, allegedly
the nation’s best major meatpackers, sell contaminated food? Do they usually stock meat with 75% fat
content in Washington? Did they throw food at the unemployed in Washington? Were the recipients
photographed?
SLA members Remiro and Little, now in San Quentin, called the food “hog feed.”
Patty’s captors could demonstrate to her that “her father didn’t care about her safe return,” while Hearst
was ripped off and made to look responsible for the violence and the slop. Patty’s kidnappers could claim
they cared more about her than her own father did.
CIA agent William Buckley wrote with authority, from 3,000 miles away, that Cadillacs pulled up for
food handouts. Hearst put up $4 million to feed the poor if Patty would come home safe before the first of
May.
APRIL 2, 1974 – SLA MESSAGE: TIME AND PLACE OF PATTY’S RELEASE TO BE REVEALED IN 72 HOURS
There was a “pray for Patty” weekend.
Her 20th birthday was spent in captivity.
Romantic roses were delivered to the Phoenix, a Bay Area underground newspaper, with a message
promising Patty’s return.
Family hopes were high.
APRIL 3, 1974 – PATTY JOINS THE SLA
Patricia Hearst was disappointed with the $2 million food distribution program. Her father had “not
done everything in his power” to get her back.
The rip-off of Hearst could easily give Patty that impression if most of the news was kept from her
except the negative and purposeful manipulation of the food distribution program.
Patty became “Tania,” a name she said she chose, but one month later said it “was given to her.” (Theas kept from her
except the negative and purposeful manipulation of the food distribution program.
Patty became “Tania,” a name she said she chose, but one month later said it “was given to her.” (The

--- PAGE BREAK ---ept the negative and purposeful manipulation of the food distribution program.
Patty became “Tania,” a name she said she chose, but one month later said it “was given to her.” (The

--- PAGE BREAK ---

original Tania was an associate of revolutionary leader Che Guevara in Bolivia. Tania and Che were both
killed by the CIA working with Bolivian police.)
Her father was now a “corporate liar.”
Nobody worried about Patricia any more.
The SLA didn’t keep their word. Hearst seemed shocked. He should have known better.
Bad guy Randolph Hearst, supporter of fascism, militant dictatorships, napalm, Nazis and news
censorship, became a sympathetic figure in the manipulated media. From that point on, it didn’t matter
whether Patricia was found alive or dead.
We’d been led through a series of episodes along with the Hearst family, anxiously awaiting Patty’s
safe return. After April 3rd, things went from bad to worse.
The SLA issued “death warrants” for Colston Westbrook, Chris Thompson and Robyn Steiner, who
were termed FBI and CIA informers.
Patty said, on tape, “I am not brainwashed, drugged, tortured or hypnotized in any way.”
APRIL 15, 1974 – PATTY STAGES A BANK ROBBERY AND MAKES THE “TEN MOST WANTED” LIST
Four alleged members of the SLA posed for 1,200 pictures at the bank. They didn’t shoot at the
cameras.
“My comrades and I have expropriated $10,660.20 from the Sunset Branch of the Hibernia Bank.
Casualties could have been avoided had the persons involved kept out of the way and cooperated with the
people’s forces until after our departure,” said Patty on a new tape cassette.
Arrest warrants were issued.
FBI posters went up across the country.
Patty, gun in hand, made the cover of Time and Newsweek.
Her good father was a “liar.” Bad daughter was a bank robber.
Get the picture? Patty was toughing it out. What a revolution!
MAY 1, 1974 – SLA MOVES TO LOS ANGELES
Christine Johnson, a resident of the house on 54th Street that burned down two weeks later, had come to
the Bay Area and met with the SLA before their migration south. Their plans were made in advance.
Question: How could she find them so easily, when the FBI and San Francisco police were looking for
them with added forces?
MAY 2, 1974 – PATTY LIVING IN FILTH, “TANIA” AND GRAFFITI ON THE WALLS
An empty apartment was found. What next? Cockroaches were coming down the walls.
Chemicals in the tub. “Tania” was obviously here—it said so on the walls!
No fingerprints to prove Patty Hearst lived there.
A downstairs neighbor heard “money clicking on the floors.”
May 1, 1974 – Ricky Delgado (an Alias) purchases a van to transport the SLA to Los Angeles
One of three vans was bought for $1,800 cash. A non-existent address—a parking lot on Fillmore St.—
and false name were given for identification. A black man with a woman and child left their green car
behind and drove away in the van. They were never sought or seen again. (Did anyone track down the
green car?)
MAY 16, 1974 – SHOOT-OUT AT MEL’S SPORTING GOODS STORE, INGLEWOOD
William Harris stuffed a pair of socks up his sleeve.an. They were never sought or seen again. (Did anyone track down the
green car?)
MAY 16, 1974 – SHOOT-OUT AT MEL’S SPORTING GOODS STORE, INGLEWOOD
William Harris stuffed a pair of socks up his sleeve.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Employee Tony Shepard, a police science major, just happened to have his handcuffs with him and
handcuffed William Harris on one wrist.

An altercation occurred outside the building in full view of Patty.

The Los Angeles scene was staged—to prove Patty was capable of firing an automatic weapon.

Nobody saw Patty fire the weapon.

William Harris dropped a gun registered in Emily Harris’ name, and announced that the SLA was in
town.

The red and white van was unnecessarily abandoned, conveniently leaving the SLA’s address on 834
West 84th Street.

Emily, William and Patty took a two-block ride in a Pontiac.

That car broke down, so they helped themselves to a Chevrolet.

The Chevrolet took them to Tom Mathews’ house.

They borrowed his van for the next 12 hours, and
took Tom along for the ride.

William Harris introduced “Tania” to Tom Mathews, and “Tania” told the
latter the whole story about what an enthusiastic member of the SLA she was.

Then they all went to a
drive-in movie and saw The New Centurions.

Tom Mathews’ account of that 12-hour “kidnapping” gave the D.A.

the excuse they needed to file 19
charges against Patty Hearst by the next Monday morning.

MAY 17, 1974 – STATE OF SIEGE, PATTY OBSERVES A PUBLIC CREMATION
6:00 a.m.: Tom Mathews is allowed to drive away in his van, leaving Emily, Patty and William on foot
in the Hollywood Hills.

6:00 a.m.: An assault task force of police, FBI and U.S.

Treasury agents surround the house on West
84th Street.

At 9 a.m., ten canisters of tear gas are fired into the house.

Minutes later, members of the
LAPD Special Weapons and Tactics Team (SWAT) charged the house.

Nobody was inside.

There was a
two-hour wait before they attacked the empty residence.

8:00 a.m.: The three SLA members—Emily, William, Patty—turn up in Griffith Park and drive off in a
Lincoln Continental.

Two women with a gun say, “We need your car for a couple of hours.” Frank Sutter
obligingly gives them $250.--- PAGE BREAK ---

8:00 a.m.: The three SLA members—Emily, William, Patty—turn up in Griffith Park and drive off in a
Lincoln Continental. Two women with a gun say, “We need your car for a couple of hours.” Frank Sutter
obligingly gives them $250. 9:00 a.m.: Donald DeFreeze and an unidentified black man look at a vacant apartment on 54th St. with
the idea of renting it. The house at 1466 East 54th Street was filled with activity. On Thursday night there was wine and grass, guests, traffic in and out, weapons delivered, packed
under the floorboards, food brought in on request. The SLA was trying to recruit new members for their army. 11:00 a.m.: One black man left, promising to return with transportation. Police are gathering in the streets. 3:30 p.m.: Two black men depart, taking Patricia Hearst with them. Where are the Harrises? One
whispers in DeFreeze’s ear. 5:00 p.m.: One black man departs from the front door, just before the shooting. 5:00 p.m.: Lawmen, who claim they used a bullhorn that no one heard, said, “Come out with your hands
up. The house is surrounded.” Five minutes elapsed between the first and second warnings. Why not two
hours this time? Two minutes later, a policeman fired a tear gas shell into the house. Heavy gunfire followed. Incendiary bombs were thrown into the house by the FBI. The house went up in flames. A fire chief who wanted to go in and put out the flames was threatened with arrest by an FBI agent if he
crossed the police line.

--- PAGE BREAK ---By 6:45 p.m.

the fire burned the house to the ground.

Donald DeFreeze, Nancy Ling Perry, William Wolfe, Patricia Soltysik, Angela Atwood and Camilla
Hall were burned beyond recognition.

Patty Hearst witnessed the cremation of her friends from a nearby apartment.

Sadism and cruelty were employed at every carefully-staged scene of this dreadful conspiracy.

MAY 19, 1974 – IN HOLLYWOOD, PATTY HEARST ASSAULTS MRS.

ALCALA
Anita Alcala, manager of an apartment house, turned down an offer of $500 rental for one night.

Two
black men and “Patty Hearst” said they needed a room.

“Do you want to die?” asked Patty (with blue eyes this time).

One of the men stepped forward and slashed at Mrs.

Alcala’s dress.

The house dress was cut at least
six inches.

The picture of the dress resembled LBJ showing his scar following surgery.

This unverified
episode, with descriptions that didn’t match Patty, could give her life in prison if she is found alive.

MAY 19, 1974 – “ONLY THREE SLA MEMBERS LEFT: EMILY AND WILLIAM HARRIS, AND PATTY HEARST”
Stage one of the SLA was over.

Randolph Hearst assumed his daughter could now “vanish.”
The scenario included murder, kidnapping, bank robbery and cremation.

Now the hunt begins.

The word “terrorist” has become as American as apple pie.

IV.

WHY WAS THE SLA CREATED?

(MOTIVES AND GOALS; HOW THE GOALS ARE MET; SUGGESTIONS FOR INVESTIGATING AND CONTROLLING INTELLIGENCE OPERATIONS)
1.

Create Widespread Fear of Kidnapping & Suspicion of Terrorist Organizations
The CIA uses kidnapping as a diversion from other conspiracies, and to escalate public fears.

The kidnapping of Frank Sinatra, Jr., immediately after the John Kennedy assassination diverted news
and attention from political events.

Jack Zangetty, the man who exposed this kidnapping and other matters
about the JFK-Oswald murders, was found dead two weeks after he revealed a few facts.

Kidnapping scares are all around us now.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Jack Zangetty, the man who exposed this kidnapping and other matters
about the JFK-Oswald murders, was found dead two weeks after he revealed a few facts. Kidnapping scares are all around us now. “Lethal postcards,” bombings of oil company offices, chemical poisoning and threats of “radical”
terrorism will escalate. The protection industry is growing rapidly. When citizens are led to believe their lives are in danger, they support more police weapons and
harsher laws. Every kidnapping since February 4, 1974 should be carefully investigated. The kidnappings may be
real, but the circumstances surrounding them are questionable. Some are obvious hoaxes. The kidnappers,
their funding, secrecy, protection and concealment by the FBI and police should be exposed. The
kidnappings and bomb scares make the headlines. The half-hearted, superficial “investigations” and lack
of convictions go unnoticed. The Secret Service, for the first time in U.S. history, presented an award outside the United States. It is
no surprise this was delivered to Inspector James Beaten, the man who was wounded March 30 when Ian
Ball was supposed to “kidnap” Princess Anne. Was there any relationship between this altercation and the prior abduction of Patricia Hearst? The
Secret Service knows the answer. Were they acting accordingly, apologizing for a near victim in a
provocateur-inspired event?

--- PAGE BREAK ---2.

Link U.S.

Terrorists to International Guerrilla Groups
If there were international links to radical movements in the U.S., military intelligence encouraged this
interaction.

They need to prove that Communism is coming to America.

Many police agents would welcome the emergence of a police state.

They are creating the “necessity”
to crack down on workers, the unemployed and the hungry.

International money is donated to right-wing radical groups.

The CIA can also send unlimited funds
abroad, to be returned through “radical” connections.

Roy Ash at the Office of Management Budget reduces opportunities and hope instead of striving to
improve the quality of life in the United States.

As a result, the finger will be pointed at “communists” and
“international influences” when a segment of the population is radicalized—as though intolerable
domestic conditions were not cause enough.

Rather than face the realistic challenge, the usual pattern is to blame outside forces for unrest.

If all the
hungry and oppressed people in the world were to band together, it would not necessarily be a
conspiracy.

It would come with common knowledge of who is depriving them of life.

3.

Discredit Communes
Why did a Supreme Court ruling recently come down against communes?

Why have intelligence agencies supported Rand Corporation studies and tried to smear communal
living?

Economics is always behind such laws.

By the media’s association of the SLA with communal living, with its constant references to the
communal “Peking House,” the suggestion is planted that group housing breeds violence.

Communes are bad for business.

Twelve people living together can get along with one dishwasher,
instead of six.

Many young people have left their empty, sterile “nuclear family” homes and created a new
kind of extended family that provides them with friendship and support.

This is seen as a threat to the
status quo with its inbred isolation and suspicions.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Many young people have left their empty, sterile “nuclear family” homes and created a new
kind of extended family that provides them with friendship and support. This is seen as a threat to the
status quo with its inbred isolation and suspicions. The Sharon Tate-La Bianca massacres were the first organized assault by the military on the hippie
generation. The SLA fits that pattern. 4. Escalate Domestic Fear of Mao Tse Tung, Brainwashing and Communist-Style Indoctrination
Books by Chairman Mao were given to DeFreeze and the BCA. The “Peking House” commune diverted attention from the way clandestine agents were actually
meeting. The presence of a few books about China would link residents of the commune to communism. “Symbionese,” like “Viet Cong,” is an army-coined term. “Criticism and self-criticism,” words mouthed by Joseph Remiro while in prison, would be linked to
brainwashing techniques of the Far East. “Leninism-Marxism-Stalinism” are whipping boys of the radical right. Détente does not exist for them. Gunnell’s Chinese food stand suggested Asian influence at Peking House. Every association of the SLA
with China, no matter how weak, forced or trivial, was exaggerated by the media. The Minimanual from Brazil exacerbated suspicions of Maoist influence over the SLA. With this
scanty ammunition, the Sacramento hearings on Civil Disorder and the Washington Internal Security
Committee stepped up the communism scare. The best solution to this massive propaganda effort is to look very closely at the so-called “experts”

--- PAGE BREAK ---now writing articles and appearing on radio and TV talk shows.

They are frequently connected to CIA-
front organizations.

Check their occupations, their military service, credentials and funding, and expose
them for what they are: packagers of scare tactics and government propaganda.

5.

Drum Up Support for the UCLA Center for the Study and Reduction of Violence
The proposed UCLA center to find causes of violence in the brain, and the Behavior Research Center
in Butner, North Carolina, are the two potentially most dangerous institutions in the U.S.

Massive funding from the federal government, NASA and intelligence agencies will escalate the
transformation of human beings into zombies.

Nazi doctors and well-trained American psychiatrists are already using electrode implants,
transponders, powerful drugs and similar devices on prisoners.

Many of the current rash of “senseless killings,” “massacres” and “zombie type murders” are
committed by individuals who have been in Army hospitals, mental institutions or prisons, where their
heads have been literally taken over surgically to create terror in the community.

Sirhan Sirhan was hypnotized to forget the persons who controlled him before he became the patsy in
the Robert Kennedy murder.

The solution to these charges is not to shake your head and say, “impossible.” Ask prison inmates.

They
know it is true.

Study the medical, military and prison history of every alleged murderer during the past five years.

Investigate every hospital and psychiatrist who treated them.

A good starting point would be the case of Lawrence Kwong, programmed to murder a KGO radio
broadcaster and then kill himself, in September, 1973, in San Francisco.

The day after a Marine-trained LAPD SWAT team murdered six SLA members in Los Angeles, the L.A.

Times printed a letter to the editor.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The day after a Marine-trained LAPD SWAT team murdered six SLA members in Los Angeles, the L.A. Times printed a letter to the editor. Someone disguised as a concerned citizen begged UCLA to start
“finding the cause of violence.” Letters to the editor are common CIA public relations plants to influence
public opinion. Police did the killings but they won’t be studied. The victims of violence all their lives
will be. 6. Discredit the Poor, Rehearse for Massive Food Hand-Outs, Distribute Contaminated Food
The food handouts demanded by the SLA could serve several purposes. The poor were ridiculed, provoked to violence and made to appear ungrateful. Cameras were on hand to photograph the violence on the first day of food distribution. Even worse than
the image of violence and greed projected on the poor, was the possibility that they were poisoned. John F. Kennedy was outraged in 1962 when the CIA used chemical toxins to contaminate the sugar
crop sent from Cuba to the USSR. He said, “This could be the beginning of chemical espionage.” Controls
over CIA activities died with John Kennedy. More sophisticated chemicals have been developed since
then. At the time the “feed the poor” program was underway in California, it was revealed that five major
chicken farmers in Mississippi had 22 million poisoned birds. The chickens had been fed chicken feed
contaminated “mysteriously” with Dieldrin, a deadly insecticide that can cause cancer. Some of those
poisoned chickens were sent to school lunch programs for needy children in Detroit and Chicago. The five chicken growers asked for $10 million from Congress as compensation for slaughtering the
remaining chickens. (The New York Times suggested the payment was in exchange for anti-impeachment
votes from five Southern senators.)
Lost in the controversy was the question: Were the poor given poisoned food?

--- PAGE BREAK ---One solution is to give annual check-ups to all recipients of the “free food” in Detroit, Chicago and the
San Francisco Bay Area.

Governor Ronald Reagan publicly hoped that they would suffer an “epidemic of
botulism.” In future years, will there be an epidemic of cancer among those who ate this food?

Time will
tell.

7.

Creation of the SLA Was Intended to Halt Prison Reform Movements
Prison conspiracies are directly related to national conspiracies.

Many political leaders have spent years in prison—the price they paid for understanding the causes of
slavery and oppression.

Potential leaders are trained inside the prison system.

When the national policy-makers gave orders to destroy future black political leaders, violent assaults
began to take place inside the prisons and on the streets.

With the determination to transform prisoners into helpless zombies without will, the fewer living
witnesses, the better.

If prison interviews and visitors are carefully controlled, the truth can never be told.

That is why select CIA and police agents were allowed to form the BCA inside Vacaville Medical
Facility.

Every legitimate prison study group is infiltrated by “the Man,” CIA informers and agents.

Prisoners are turned into snitches by the California Department of Corrections, FBI and CIA.

All
politically aware inmates must struggle for survival on a day-to-day basis.

The solution is to demand that objective ombudsmen have free access to investigate prison conditions
and keep the public aware of what is happening inside prison walls.

The taxpayer provides the funds to
maintain these institutions.

But prison authorities attack the society that supports them.

Many prisoners
have been offered parole or freedom by prison guards in return for murdering selected political prisoners
and civil rights leaders on the outside.

The prison system is breeding the violence in the streets, not the prisoners themselves.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Many prisoners
have been offered parole or freedom by prison guards in return for murdering selected political prisoners
and civil rights leaders on the outside. The prison system is breeding the violence in the streets, not the prisoners themselves. The recent Nixon-appointed Supreme Court ruling that news media may not interview specific
prisoners excludes the public from crimes taking place away from public scrutiny. To make sure that prisoners are not coerced surgically into committing violent acts, the medical records
of every inmate should be available to a doctor of his choice. These records should also be available for
inspection by independent doctors chosen by the prisoner’s lawyer or objective investigators. 8. Escalation of the Race War
SLA members used black make-up. Why were blacks blamed for crimes they didn’t commit? Were the “Zebra murders” in San Francisco, preceding the Hearst kidnapping, conducted by many
white men with black faces? “Hit lists” of Black Panthers and civil rights leaders among SLA possessions proved there is a
determination to kill black activists across the country. The cover story is that “black militants want to kill false black leaders.” But it is not the blacks who
want their leaders dead; it is right-wing conspirators who wish to destroy black leadership. The Nazi Party, KKK, States Rights Party and Minutemen seek a race war. Howard Hughes, ITT and other equally racist conglomerates send orders down the chain of command. Republican leaders, including the attorney general, assure the assassins that they will never be discovered
or prosecuted. The White House and the National Security Council collaborated with these extremist groups in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---ey general, assure the assassins that they will never be discovered
or prosecuted. The White House and the National Security Council collaborated with these extremist groups in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

assassinations of John Kennedy, Robert Kennedy and Martin Luther King.
They are also behind the Symbionese Liberation Army.
It is one thing to hate blacks and want a race war. It is quite another to receive funding and legal
protection from the White House to promote genocide.
The stopping of black males in San Francisco during the recent hunt for the “Zebra” killers could lead
to future card identification and apartheid. The “Zebra” murders and Hearst kidnapping were
synchronized and timed in an exact order.
The solution is to investigate and prosecute upper-level agents. Make sure they are sentenced to life in
prison for their crimes. When they are convicted, like the killers of labor leader Joseph Yablonski, they
will reveal who paid for the murders, then the masterminds can be prosecuted.
9. SLA Links Would Discredit All Radical Movements
During the 1960s, agents infiltrated the anti-war movement. They also broke up rock concerts that were
not “political.”
Twenty-eight or more Black Panthers were murdered.
Students were shot by National Guardsmen and local police following orders. The murderers were
legally protected by grand juries and the Justice Department.
SLA members infiltrated radical groups that happened to be targets of the attorney general and the FBI.
These target groups include the United Farm Workers, the feminist movement, the prisons’ Black Guerrilla
Family, Venceremos, Vietnam Veterans Against the War, Winter Soldiers Organization and Chino Defense
Fund.
The leadership of a wide variety of organizations—the Indian Movement, gay liberation, Nairobi
College in East Palo Alto, Glide Memorial Church, the Black Teachers Caucus, the National Welfare
Rights Organization, Third World Women’s Alliance, United Prisoners Union—were all named by the
SLA. In effect, they were targeted.
FM radio stations, the underground press and alternative news services were specifically asked to
observe and participate in the food distribution programs and relay messages. They will feel repression
soon.
Every communiqué sent out by the SLA revealed that this was an intelligence operation. The
communiqués also listed the groups targeted for the infiltration and hassling.
Roadblocks have been set up to stop and search hippies across the country. Ten thousand young people
were stopped in the three weeks following the shoot-out in Los Angeles.
SLA sightings, like UFOs, can continue indefinitely. The Harrises can keep Patty in a CIA safe-house
for the summer, grooming her for her next hair-raising escapade, while long-haired males and females
with hair, eyes and skin of all colors are stopped, searched, questioned, harassed and busted.
10. Increase Public and Private Security Guards and Police Forces
On February 22, 1974, private security forces protected golfers at the Jackie Gleason Classic
Tournament as a reaction to the recent wave of kidnappings.
Some typical headlines:
EXECUTIVES RUSH FOR PROTECTION, KIDNAP SCARE
THE BODYGUARD BUSINESS IS BOOMINGgolfers at the Jackie Gleason Classic
Tournament as a reaction to the recent wave of kidnappings.
Some typical headlines:
EXECUTIVES RUSH FOR PROTECTION, KIDNAP SCARE
THE BODYGUARD BUSINESS IS BOOMING

--- PAGE BREAK ---

COLLEGES STEP UP CAMPUS SECURITY
BODYGUARDS ORDERED FOR LEGISLATORS
FIRMS BUYING KIDNAP INSURANCE
MRS. CLARK GABLE TELLS HOW HER SON WAS ALMOST KIDNAPPED [fourteen years
ago]
ONASSIS FAMILY INCREASES SECURITY
After Patty Hearst’s kidnap and a few other abductions, the media escalated the hysteria and created
entire new industries.
There is profit in creating kidnap scares.
There is also profit in offering “protection.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---11.

You Too Can Become an Informer: Watch For Patty, Turn the SLA In
The FBI appeared to be inept.

They asked us to help them find Patty and the SLA.

That’s not the way
they did it on the old Jack Webb TV show.

Doctors were officially requested to notify the FBI if any of their patients fit medical descriptions of
SLA members.

Neighbors were asked to sharpen their eyes, play detective and report any of their neighbors living in
groups who might be the SLA.

Some “suspicious” signs would be that the group was quiet, inconspicuous
and inoffensive.

How suspicious can you get?

We were supposed to be involved in the numerous reported
SLA sightings, just as the Nazis noisily hunted the Jews.

The policies initiated in this domestic warfare campaign are far more dangerous to society than the six
SLA members cremated in Los Angeles.

12.

Instigate New Laws and Harsh Legislation Against Kidnapping
Kidnapping is a terrifying experience.

It can’t be justified.

Starvation and unemployment are also terrifying to people with no opportunity to provide for their
basic needs.

Legal punishment, isolated dungeons and more prisons will not solve social and economic problems;
tremendous inequalities in the distribution of wealth.

Kidnapping laws will not serve as effective controls, any more than death penalty laws have served to
prevent murder.

Corporations want to protect their employees, and CEOs want to protect their lives.

Lawmakers oblige.

New laws will be passed.

It is a pitiful commentary on how inadequate our solutions are to the obvious
problems around us.

13.

Christ and Christians vs.

Radicals and Terrorists
Christianity, the family and God are “fighting for survival.” Social change and radical politics are
always associated with the Anti-Christ.

Colston Westbrook received his CIA training at the Inter-Christian University in Tokyo.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Radicals and Terrorists
Christianity, the family and God are “fighting for survival.” Social change and radical politics are
always associated with the Anti-Christ. Colston Westbrook received his CIA training at the Inter-Christian University in Tokyo. Wes Davis, the
“authority” on communism and the evils of Asian Anti-Christ politics, is linked to World Humanity
Against Totalitarianism—a Christian organization that could be another CIA front. Senator J. Harmer, candidate for Lt. Governor in California, described the SLA terrorists as “directed
in their scheme against the will of God and the plan of Christ for the salvation of mankind.”
CIA agent William Buckley criticized Randolph Hearst’s attempts to communicate with the terrorists. He felt that Patty should be sacrificed “in the name of Christ,” rather than placate the degenerate
Commies. Remnants of Germany’s Nazi Party emerged openly in Chile after Allendé was murdered. They blamed
Jews for radical politics in Chile. Obvious economic inequalities in Chile are ignored. The Nazi Party is visible and rampant in the San Francisco Bay Area. They were involved in the Dr. Foster murder. There are Nazi Party members working for the San Francisco Police Department. One keeps his Nazi
uniform stored in a locker between meetings. Following the scare tactics of kidnappings and bombings by police provocateurs, radical right-wing
Christians will emerge to compare this violence to the Godlessness of the Russians and Chinese. The bad
guys will be labeled “Anti-Christ,” and the good guys will be “Christians.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---14.

Discredit the FBI, Make Military Intelligence Agencies and the CIA Seem Necessary for
Routine Police-End Investigative Work
The public embarrassment of the FBI began the last few years in the life of J.

Edgar Hoover.

The reason the FBI was made to appear so inept in the Hearst kidnapping is that CIA and military
intelligence agents wanted them to appear lost and bumbling.

When the SLA was lured to Los Angeles, they were murdered by a Marine-trained SWAT team.

The
FBI contributed the incendiary bombs to set the house on fire, but the “weakness” of the FBI provided the
CIA with an excuse for domestic police support.

The Tom Charles Huston plan revealed how the military and federal intelligence agents would work
with local police departments.

For all practical purposes, the FBI is now combined with U.S.

intelligence
networks.

15.

Set Up Martial Law and a Police State: Maintain Power in the Hands of the Military &
Intelligence Agents
There are provisions to cancel future elections or rig national elections.

The 1968 election required a
murder to eliminate a candidate.

The selection of candidates for 1972 was manipulated.

Special
Prosecutor Leon Jaworski’s Watergate Hearings were not about to expose the depth of political
corruption, or the CIA-military hold over the White House and themselves.

The military controls clandestine agents, political assassins and potential kidnappers necessary to
escalate violence.

Massive uses of nerve gas or other planned tragedies can occur, disguised as natural catastrophes.

Vice President Gerald Ford’s move into a Naval compound is consistent with a military takeover.

Ford
was a secret team member of the Warren Commission.

This is a visible reminder of our monarchy, his
enclosure surrounded by Naval Intelligence.

CIA Director Colby rigged elections in Vietnam.

He did well with these tricks while he was away.

Imagine how much easier it will be to deceive given his experience as chief of all U.S.

intelligence.

V.--- PAGE BREAK ---

intelligence. V. THE TELL-TALE REVOLUTIONARIES: CONSPICUOUS BANDITOS OR PROVOCATEURS? Were documents planted in specific SLA safe-houses for political use? Why did California Senator
John Harmer and U.S. Attorney General William Saxbe use the flimsy SLA evidence for red scare tactics? We are aware that the CIA faked and planted the “diaries” of Lee Harvey Oswald, Sirhan Sirhan and
Arthur Bremer. The same methods of falsifying evidence to back up a conspiratorial cover story were
used with the SLA. William Saxbe referred to the Minimanual of the Urban Guerrilla, stating the “food program and the
Hearst kidnapping came right out of the book.” He intimated that this document proved the SLA was an
arm of an international terrorist group. “When you think that the Symbionese and others are taking this right out of some Maoist doctrinal
textbooks on how to operate in terrorism and other forms of civil disturbance, you realize it is not just
a coincidental thing. There is evidence of a worldwide conspiracy, but it cannot be discussed further.”
– Attorney General William Saxbe
Marighella, a Brazilian revolutionary, published the book. It is popular in Latin America, Asia and
Africa. He was killed by the Brazilian police in 1969.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Every important suggestion about urban guerrilla warfare—quoted by the newspapers to “prove” that
the SLA had followed this manual—was in fact completely ignored by the SLA.

Indeed, if they had gone
by the book, they might still be alive.

They did not, in fact, follow the Marighella manual.

The book served but one purpose, identical to the planted diaries: it supplied the match for the political
fires of lawmakers and politicians.

It was false “evidence” that served to prove a lie.

To cite one of many examples, a basic Minimanual injunction that was ignored: “Never leave a track
or trail.” Why then, did the SLA leave not one, but three safe houses full of incriminating evidence?

Why did Russell Little allow himself to be arrested on January 10, 1974, and booked for the murder of
Dr.

Marcus Foster?

And why did Joseph Remiro surrender to police four hours later sporting one of the murder weapons?

He had spent the last four hours inside an SLA safe house two blocks away, discussing the situation with
his SLA comrades.

It was decided to “sacrifice” Remiro—but why did he surrender wearing evidence
that linked him to the Foster murder?

His comrades could have thrown the gun away for him.

Why were Remiro and Little placed immediately, upon their arrest, on Death Row in San Quentin—
without trial?

How many other persons receive this special treatment?

Were they placed inside the prison to link the SLA to “new recruits,” and give the impression that the
“army” numbered more than nine persons?

In March, 1974, a prisoner in Soledad was offered a chance to “escape” by three prison officials if he
would “join the SLA army.” How did the police and prison personnel know where the SLA was?

Why
would they want to “help” them recruit more troops—unless the idea was to link the “terrorists” to prison
escapees?

The house at 1560 Sutherland Court, Concord, the SLA hideout and “liberated zone,” was rented by
Nancy Ling Perry and Russell Little, alias Nancy and George DeVoto.Why
would they want to “help” them recruit more troops—unless the idea was to link the “terrorists” to prison
escapees?

The house at 1560 Sutherland Court, Concord, the SLA hideout and “liberated zone,” was rented by
Nancy Ling Perry and Russell Little, alias Nancy and George DeVoto.

Concord police did not associate
the name DeVoto with the SLA when Little and Remiro were arrested.

Why didn’t Nancy and her male companion, who had a van and Willie Wolfe’s car, and all the time they
needed, remove incriminating evidence from the house when they vacated the premises?

They could have
quietly loaded their vehicles and driven off.

Instead, Nancy lit a fire in the house and split hours after Remiro and Little were arrested.

The sight of the flames aroused the neighbors and brought the police.

The fire was quickly extinguished,
and the police were left with a treasure trove containing the SLA’s weapons, ammunition, posters,
revolutionary documents, blackface make-up, gas masks, maps, typewriters, cyanide bullets and
communiqué.

The police found lists of prison officials and their wives and families marked for assassination.

Records indicate that the FBI immediately placed them under protective watch.

Sacramento authorities
immediately rushed through legislation for protecting prison guards’ families.

The California Senate Hearings immediately received information about the SLA and its involvement
with California prisoners.

Senator Harmer talked up the kidnapping scare at Mormon lunches.

SLA death
warrants for executives of California industries were also noted.

But the police said nothing about SLA members, who could have been arrested and locked up 24 days
before Patty Hearst was kidnapped.

And for nearly three months, they did not reveal that they’d found
notes concerning “Patty Campbell Hearst, Ambush, Art student,” and other clues that she might be
kidnapped.

And they did not warn the Hearsts, either.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And for nearly three months, they did not reveal that they’d found
notes concerning “Patty Campbell Hearst, Ambush, Art student,” and other clues that she might be
kidnapped. And they did not warn the Hearsts, either. The information found in the Concord safe-house was used to link a rash of scare kidnappings around
the country to the SLA. An apartment at 627 15th Street in Oakland was another SLA safe house. This one was referred to by
the police as “SLA intelligence information headquarters.”
William Harris rented that apartment on December 15, 1973; one month after Dr. Foster was murdered.

--- PAGE BREAK ---He and Emily lived in a lush, comfortable apartment nearby.

What purpose did this “intelligence information headquarters” serve?

Nobody lived there.

It was
hardly used, except by Harris, who stocked it carefully with “incriminating evidence.”
Police “stumbled” on this location several weeks after Patty Hearst was kidnapped.

At the time, Emily and William Harris were not suspects in the Foster murder or Hearst kidnapping.

They had several weeks to vacate this totally useless apartment, chock-a-block with radical books and
weapons, before the police “found” it.

Inside the apartment was the famous Minimanual of the Urban Guerrilla that Saxbe would quote.

Right wing extremists quickly picked up the line, and booklets were printed and sold over the air: HOW
TO PREVENT YOUR CHILD FROM BEING RECRUITED BY RADICALS, WHY TERRORISTS BEHAVE
AS THEY DO and HOW OUR PRISON GROUNDS ARE BECOMING BREEDING GROUNDS FOR
REVOLUTION were written and published by W.

S.

McBirnie, the same author who hurriedly wrote A
COMMUNIST KILLED OUR PRESIDENT a decade earlier.

Specific planted evidence is seized upon and dispatched by the wire services as proof of subversion.

In the same apartment was William Harris’ U.S.

Army manual from Pennsylvania.

The official
explanation for this book was that it had been “stolen.”
There was more reason to believe the SLA followed that army manual than the Brazilian text.

Colston Westbrook served in the military for seven years before heading a group that would become the
SLA.

Westbrook and Willie Wolfe were natives of Pennsylvania.

Dr.

Marcus Foster and Robert
Blackburn also lived there before they were targeted for assault.

Russell Little visited Pennsylvania in the
vicinity of Dr.

Foster on his way to California.

The Pennsylvania Army manual was significant evidence, but was passed off as if it served no purpose.

No one mentioned the possible influence of military intelligence directing the SLA.The Pennsylvania Army manual was significant evidence, but was passed off as if it served no purpose.

No one mentioned the possible influence of military intelligence directing the SLA.

The apartment at 1827 Golden Gate Avenue in San Francisco was another CIA-SLA safe house; the
third dwelling abandoned by the SLA that contained handpicked “incriminating evidence.”
In each instance, the SLA had plenty of time to remove everything from the premises.

Authorities did
not know about these locations, and were not close to finding their inhabitants.

Yet the Golden Gate
apartment contained enough clothing and other objects to fill four FBI vans.

They even left a bicycle.

“Tania,” “Patria o Muerte”, “Venceremos”, a seven-headed cobra and other quaint graffiti were
painted on the walls.

There were cockroaches, dirty female underwear, empty wine bottles, wigs and stale bread.

The SLA
left a tub full of chemicals and insulting notes to the police.

Marighella, the tracks-coverer, would have
turned over in his grave.

Patty Hearst and other SLA members supposedly lived in this apartment from mid-March until May 1,
1974.

The famous kidnap victim had already undergone agonizing transitions, from pleading with her
parents to do everything for her safe return to turning against her father, family, and fiancé, and finally to
her transformation into a bank robber with an automatic weapon tucked under one arm.

The next stage of
shock—the utter filth and disarray found in the SLA safe-house—would graphically illustrate her social
and psychological degradation.

The apartment was only 14 blocks from the FBI office.

It even had a telephone.

Photographs taken at the bank robbery were published conspicuously in every newspaper and magazine
—yet none of their neighbors paid the slightest heed to nine oddly assorted “new tenants.”
The Golden Gate apartment was meant to horrify us and hasten Patty’s “conversion” to the SLA.

In each case, the SLA had ample time to remove and destroy evidence.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Photographs taken at the bank robbery were published conspicuously in every newspaper and magazine
—yet none of their neighbors paid the slightest heed to nine oddly assorted “new tenants.”
The Golden Gate apartment was meant to horrify us and hasten Patty’s “conversion” to the SLA. In each case, the SLA had ample time to remove and destroy evidence. Instead, the provocateurs left
loads of useful propaganda: kidnapping lists, the Minimanual and their bug-infested garbage. The police
and FBI would use it all to feed the anxious news media with a steady diet of lies. Filth and the Minimanual did exist. Evidence of military intelligence to support conspiracies is

--- PAGE BREAK ---ignored.

VI.

TACTICAL SUPPORT
The SLA received many types of tactical support.

Unnamed and unsought agents provided housing,
transportation, weapons, supplies, food, rented cars and information about the Hibernia Bank.

If this had been a genuine terrorist group, rather than a police-intelligence operation, there would be
many more arrests and more searches for specific suspects.

Compare the treatment of supporters of Black Panthers, Muslims or members of Venceremos.

Morton
Newman was sentenced to five years in jail for simply acting as a lookout against police after Ronald
Beaty escaped from Chino.

Christine Johnson met the SLA members on a previous trip to San Francisco.

She was expecting them
when they arrived in two vans at the death house on 54th Street in Los Angeles, late on the evening of
May 16.

She is not charged with a crime.

Florence Lishey, owner of the burnt-out house in which Christine sheltered the SLA, has just received
an advance payment from the City of Los Angeles.

“God bless his honor, the mayor, the city attorney, bless them all,” she said, waving a check for $489.

She had been promised another $80,000 to follow soon.

Three SLA “safe houses” were found, more incriminating and provocative evidence.

But there were
other safe houses that we are not supposed to know about.

Numerous so-called “blunders” by police and the FBI were examples of police collusion.

Some
visible evidence of tactical support can’t be written off as “errors.”
Two SLA members were sent to prison.

Six more were cremated.

The FBI and police searched for “the
last three,” the Harrises and Patty Hearst.

But how do they explain the tactical support the “last of the
SLA” received?

It’s simple—they just don’t mention it.

1.

Safe House at 1476 7th Avenue, Oakland
This apartment was the staging area for the murder of Dr.

Foster.

Early in October, Joseph Remiro rented a top-floor apartment, one of 14 units.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Foster. Early in October, Joseph Remiro rented a top-floor apartment, one of 14 units. The building was within
walking distance (3/5 of a mile) from the Oakland School District Building where Foster was murdered
and Robert Blackburn wounded. Clayton Mosely, manager of the building, was a private security guard. According to Mosely, six
members of the SLA used the apartment from October 1 until the end of November. Emily Harris, alias Anna Lindenberg, obtained a driver’s license on September 26, 1973, using this
address. William Harris, alias Jonathan Mark Salamone, also gave out this address on September 26,
1973. How far in advance did the Harrises know this safe house would be available for them? No one in the 13 other units, including manager Mosely, knew the six SLA members moved out. “No one actually lived in the apartment at all, but several people came and went at all hours,” said
Mosely. He added, “This group of young people didn’t seem like the others here.”
On December 6, 1973, when the rent was due, Mosely “discovered” no one was living in the
apartment. Where were the police after the Foster murder, five blocks away? A safe-house is exactly what is
implied in the name: safe from discovery. 2. Safe House From January 10 to Mid-March, 1974

--- PAGE BREAK ---The SLA went underground after the January 10 arrest of Remiro and Little.

They gave up their
apartments, jobs and outside contacts.

There was enough evidence in the abandoned house on Sutherland Court in Concord to identify Gary
Atwood, William Harris, Nancy Ling Perry, Patricia Soltysik and William Wolfe.

Why weren’t they
found?

Where did they live after January 10?

Who arranged for the “combat headquarters” where Patty Hearst was taken on February 4, after her
kidnapping?

Who rented it and when did they give it up?

If the SLA moved to the Golden Gate Avenue apartment in San Francisco in mid-March, where did they
live from January 10 to the time they relocated to this address?

Is the rent on that safe house still paid?

And if so, by whom?

Would the Venceremos receive that kind of
protection if they had murdered one man, shot another and kidnapped Patty Hearst?

3.

Two black men and a third party, a small man or possibly a woman, participated in the ambush
that killed Dr.

Marcus Foster and wounded Robert Blackburn.

Who was this third suspect?

Some news accounts speculate that it was Nancy Ling Perry.

Other news
stories describe the third person as Asian, possibly female.

Why has no effort been made to identify or locate the third party?

An Oriental woman was picked up and questioned by police on the day of the murder.

She had
weapons in her car.

Could this woman have been Jean Chan, Dave Gunnell’s friend and a BCA tutor at Vacaville?

4.

Two black men and a white woman kidnapped Patricia Hearst.

If Cinque was one of them, who
was the second black man?

Thero Wheeler, an escapee from Vacaville Medical Facility, was a suspect in the Hearst kidnapping.

The authorities maintain that only three SLA members are still at large: the Harrises and Patty Hearst.

Why are they ignoring the second man who allegedly assaulted Steven Weed and kidnapped Patty Hearst?

5.

Telephone service for the SLA: Who put it in?

Who took it out?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Telephone service for the SLA: Who put it in? Who took it out? Lola Evans, partially blind, listened to the noises of the SLA in the apartment upstairs on Golden Gate
Avenue in San Francisco. She said they made a lot of phone calls. We all know the telephone company
has records of every number dialed—who did the SLA call? Telephone company employees could have recognized the faces of the SLA, following the well-
publicized bank robbery pictures and massive search. Between the time the SLA rented the apartment in mid-March, and the time the FBI arrived, a new
manager took over at the apartment house, one who conveniently had no knowledge of the apartment’s
residents. Why the change in managers? And how did the SLA manage to stumble on a location with a blind lady living below them and no
other witnesses? 6. Who rented the two green cars used for the Hibernia Bank robbery? Two rental cars used by the SLA were abandoned nine blocks from FBI offices. Who rented them to the SLA? Car rentals require the presentation of a valid driver’s license and handwriting, possibly fingerprints
on an application form. Some employee, somewhere, might remember a face.

--- PAGE BREAK ---7.

Why the confusion and contradictions regarding the time getaway cars were found after the
bank robbery?

Some reports stated that two green cars were found one day after the robbery, other reports say it was
three days.

Which was it?

Three days later, police in Monterey, California were still searching for the two green cars.

If they had
already been located, why were police still searching 100 miles south of San Francisco?

8.

Familiarity with the San Francisco Hibernia Bank
Bank Manager James Smith said he watched the SLA robbery from a spyhole in his upstairs office.

“It was done in such a precision-like manner,” he said.

“They seemed to have a knowledge of the bank,
knew where to go and what to do.

How did the bandits know that the two tellers’ drawers looted were the
only ones open before 10 a.m.?

The hold-up gang entered at 9:50 a.m.

The bandits also seemed to be
aware that while the top drawers in the two cages that were robbed contained about $2000 each, there
was more money, about $3000, in each of the two lower drawers, and they got that too.”
Bank employees apparently did not recognize any members of the SLA hold-up team from previous
visits to the bank.

Strangely enough, the SLA get-away car was parked in front of 2330 Lawton Street, the former home of
San Francisco Chief of Police D.

Scott.

When Scott lived in that house, did he do his banking early at the
Hibernia Bank?

Does he still maintain an account there?

Thero Wheeler, suspiciously missing and “protected,” has a brother on the San Francisco Police Force.

Was Wheeler a provocateur?

Did he brief DeFreeze on details of the bank’s operations?

If the mention of these possible connections seems shocking, remember that U.S.

Attorney General John
Mitchell planned to kidnap radicals … anything is possible.

9.

How did Mrs.

Christine Johnson find the SLA in San Francisco?

Mrs.

Johnson visited the SLA in San Francisco before they migrated to her little bungalow in Los
Angeles.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mrs. Johnson visited the SLA in San Francisco before they migrated to her little bungalow in Los
Angeles. With the police, FBI and everyone else looking high and low for the SLA, and if there are no more SLA
members and no conspirators, how in the world did Christine Johnson find the SLA in April? Mrs. Johnson almost didn’t live through the Los Angeles shoot-out. For some strange reason, she woke
up in the middle of the shoot-out at 5:30 p.m. from a “drugged sleep.”
If she had died with the others, her silence would have been ensured. 10. Who purchased the three vans used to transport the SLA to Los Angeles? Two vans have been found and identified. Where is the third? One black man, with a black woman and
a child in tow, bought one red and white van. He used the alias “Ricky Delgado,” paid $1,800 in cash and
gave a phony address on Fillmore Street. When he drove off in the new van, he left an old green car
behind. Under whose name was the green car registered? The new van was registered to 833 West 84th Street, Los Angeles. This address was found on a
parking ticket in the van, and the L.A. police said that the parking ticket led them to the 84th Street
address. How far in advance did the SLA lease this apartment? Two females from the SLA rented it from
May 9 to May 17. Who is “Mr. Delgado”? Does he work for the LAPD? Were the safe houses and transportation lined up far in advance, pre-arranged to lure the SLA to their
deaths?

--- PAGE BREAK ---rom
May 9 to May 17. Who is “Mr. Delgado”? Does he work for the LAPD? Were the safe houses and transportation lined up far in advance, pre-arranged to lure the SLA to their
deaths?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This red and white van was abandoned by Emily and William Harris outside Mel’s Sporting Goods
Store in Inglewood.
11. Two black men took Patty away
On the afternoon of May 17, 1974, a blue and white van pulled up behind the SLA bungalow on 54th
Street.
Who purchased or owned this van?
Where is it now?
Two black men took Patty Hearst from the SLA hideout and drove away. “Two brothers tipped them off
and got Patty out of here, for love of her. Miss Hearst walked to the van with them and drove off.”
As they left, one of the men whispered a final word to Donald DeFreeze at around 3:30 p.m.
After they drove off with Patty, they were never mentioned again. Who were they—and why don’t the
police care? Why was no description of them released?
12. Who purchased the third van?
Authorities said: “Three vans brought the SLA to Los Angeles.” Where is the third? Why is there no
description of the van, the persons who purchased it or the two men with Patty?
13. Who owns the house at 833 West 84th Street, Los Angeles?
Van number one was abandoned at the shoot-out at Mel’s Sporting Goods Store. The police said they
knew the SLA was in town because they found a parking ticket inside the van with the 84th Street address.
It takes many weeks for the Department of Motor Vehicles in Sacramento to process a change of
address. How could they have traced the abandoned van, bought by “Ricky Delgado” using a false San
Francisco address, to the two SLA girls who lived on 84th Street in Los Angeles for seven days?
14. Which safe house did the SLA live in from May 1 to May 17?
Two white females rented and lived in the bungalow on 84th Street in Los Angeles from May 9 until
May 16. If the SLA left San Francisco on May 1, where did they live until May 9?
15. Where did the rest of the SLA live from May 1 until midnight, May 16, 1974?
Two women were housed in a “safe location” for nine days until they moved to 84th Street. But eight
other SLA members needed secure housing from May 1 until May 16.
A second black man was with DeFreeze a few hours before his death. Tactical support in Los Angeles
came from LAPD agents. If these blacks had indeed been radicals, they would be sought and arrested for
housing and abetting persons charged with murder, kidnapping and bank robbery. Instead, their existence
has been ignored.
16. Who is the black man who looked for a vacant apartment with DeFreeze on May 17, 1974?
At 9 a.m. on the morning of the fatal shoot-out, Mrs. F. Lishey, the owner of the house that burned down
when the SLA were killed, showed DeFreeze and another black man a vacant apartment nearby.
17. One black man was with DeFreeze and the others inside the house on 54th Street on the nightt burned down
when the SLA were killed, showed DeFreeze and another black man a vacant apartment nearby.
17. One black man was with DeFreeze and the others inside the house on 54th Street on the night

--- PAGE BREAK ---he SLA were killed, showed DeFreeze and another black man a vacant apartment nearby.
17. One black man was with DeFreeze and the others inside the house on 54th Street on the night

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of May 16, 1974
Brenda, 17, spent the night of May 16 in the house with the SLA. She saw guns and ammunition all
around. They said they were “getting ready to get out Friday night. It was getting heavy.”
“There was another black man with DeFreeze.” Was he the same man who looked at the vacant
apartment in the morning? Why haven’t the FBI and the police released a description of this man?
18. One black man left at 11 a.m., May 17, and never returned
Another black man, not described as the person who slept at the house on Thursday night, visited
Donald DeFreeze on Friday morning and left at 11 a.m. Neighbors said they’d seen him before. Who was
he? He drove a “green LeMans.” He didn’t return.
“Ricky Delgado,” who purchased the red and white van in San Francisco, was described as 5’11” tall,
weighing about 175 pounds. This other “friend” was tall and did not fit the same description.
The “friend” departed at 11 a.m., promising that he “would return later,” but he never came back.
Were DeFreeze and his army abandoned?
19. One black man walked out the door of the bungalow on 54th Street just before the shooting
began
Was this the signal to begin the attack? The murders at Kent State followed a single shot. Did the SWAT
team know who was inside the cottage? Were they told Patty Hearst had been removed?
20. Transportation from Mulholland Drive in the Hollywood Hills to Griffith Park, on the morning
of May 17, 1974
On Friday morning, 6 a.m., Emily and William Harris, Patty Hearst and the “kidnapped” Tom Mathews
parted company. Mathews was allowed to drive off in his car, leaving the remnants of the SLA near
Mulholland Drive in the Hollywood Hills.
Authorities have no description of the vehicle used to get the trio from Mulholland Drive to Griffith
Park. Did they walk? If they needed a car, why didn’t they leave Tom behind and use his?
21. Transportation from Griffith Park to 54th Street, Inglewood
The Harrises and Patty commandeered a Lincoln Continental from a Mr. Sutter at 8 a.m. Where did they
drive it to?
Did Mr. Sutter drop them off to travel on foot, as Tom Mathews did two hours earlier?
Did they drive his car to Inglewood and abandon it?
Who found the car? And where?
Who found Emily, William and Patty? What kind of support did they receive?
22. Patty watched six members of the SLA burn to death from a safe house near 54th Street
Donald DeFreeze and a black male located a vacant apartment nearby a few hours before the shooting
erupted.
Was Patty taken to this vacant apartment by the same man who accompanied DeFreeze in the morning?
She stated she had watched her comrades burn to death. She observed the fire but was not seen and
recognized.ty taken to this vacant apartment by the same man who accompanied DeFreeze in the morning?
She stated she had watched her comrades burn to death. She observed the fire but was not seen and
recognized.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Was she placed there to further influence her thinking and her determination to stay with the SLA?

23.

Two black men with Patty Hearst on Sunday night in Hollywood
L.A.

District Attorney Joseph Busch accepted the testimony of Anita Alcala as sufficient evidence to
indict Patty Hearst on charges that could mean life in prison.

Two black men and a woman who did not match Patty’s physical description knocked on a door in
Hollywood, and asked to rent a room for the night.

When Mrs.

Alcala refused them, they offered her $500 for the night.

When the $500 was turned down, the woman identified by Mrs.

Alcala as “Patty” said, “Do you want
to die?”
A black man slashed Anita’s house dress with a knife.

The trio departed hurriedly in a “red car with a
black top.” Anita Alcala described the woman she identified as Patty Hearst as “blue-eyed, with long,
light-brown hair and wearing a long flowered dress with a brown coat.” This description does not match
previous descriptions of Patty, who has brown eyes and had recently been described as having her hair
cropped short.

L.A.

police at first said that they did not have sufficient evidence that this was indeed Patty.

But the next
day, L.A.

District Attorney Busch accepted Mrs.

Alcala’s testimony and indicted Patricia Hearst.

This “Patty” was officially last seen in Hollywood on May 19, 1974, with two black men.

Yet the FBI
and police insist that she is now with the Harrises.

On what evidence?

The FBI and police are only
seeking the Harrises and their convert, Patricia Hearst.

What about the two black men?

24.

Will tactical support come from a CIA safe-house in the Mojave Desert?

Charles Manson and his “family” were moved from the Spahn Ranch in Topanga Canyon to the Barker
Ranch in the Mojave Desert following their “arrest,” and after the Sharon Tate-La Bianca murders.

The SLA reportedly had maps of deserts, parks, wilderness areas and abandoned mines.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Charles Manson and his “family” were moved from the Spahn Ranch in Topanga Canyon to the Barker
Ranch in the Mojave Desert following their “arrest,” and after the Sharon Tate-La Bianca murders. The SLA reportedly had maps of deserts, parks, wilderness areas and abandoned mines. At the time of the incident at Mel’s Sporting Goods Store, the Harrises were buying thermal underwear,
sleeping bags and other outdoor items. Over twelve million acres of California desert have suddenly been closed to off-road traffic. Dic Emily, William and Patty hole up in government safe-houses while law enforcement officers spent
the entire summer searching vans, campers, communes, airports and highways? Law enforcement officials in Ozona, Texas set up roadblocks—24 persons were busted on pot charges,
20 others were arrested, while “looking for Patty.”
Many “SLA suspects” have been stopped. Driving down U.S. 101, Linda Lipsett, her husband and a female friend were tailed by police. “We
thought they were going to shoot us.” They were forced to lie face down on the pavement, and seven
officers held pistols and rifles to their heads. VII. HOW DANGEROUS WAS THE SLA? The reason given for the SLA’s deaths in Los Angeles was that they were “armed and extremely
dangerous.”
The Los Angeles police had records indicating that Donald DeFreeze was dangerous. Yet they gave
him considerable freedom when he was in prison. He was allowed to “escape” and there was no attempt
to retrieve him. Dr. Foster had been murdered, Robert Blackburn had been shot. Yet when the SLA surfaced, police

--- PAGE BREAK ---didn’t believe its members were dangerous enough to be sought.

The SLA safe houses and the abandoned
apartments in Oakland and Berkeley contained weapons, ammunition and lists of possible kidnapping
victims.

Still, law enforcement agencies didn’t bother to identify or search for this “army,” with the
exception of Joseph Remiro and Russell Little.

Seven of the SLA had weapons registered in their names.

All SLA members except Donald DeFreeze
did their target practice at the Chabot Gun Club in Oakland.

Police haven’t bothered to locate the third person who participated in the murder of Dr.

Foster, or the
third person who kidnapped Patricia Hearst.

Willie Wolfe and Angela Atwood, cremated in Los Angeles, were not named as suspects in any crime.

Did the SLA intend to kill?

Were the police violent in not alerting the neighborhood that their lives might be in danger, that homes
might burn down?

One neighbor’s three dogs were burned alive.

The LAPD called in its public relations firm to witness the assault on the 54th Street house.

Advertising men would later collaborate with their client, the LAPD, to justify the extermination of lives
and whip up public approval for police actions.

Did the police hope the SLA would accidentally wound or kill persons in the neighborhood during the
shoot-out?

This could have provided the SWAT team with the excuse that they were “protecting lives.”
If the SLA and similar groups are dangerous, why do the police supply them with arms?

Donald
DeFreeze had previously received weapons from the LAPD that were used by him during an armed
robbery and shoot-out.

Two men were shot when the SLA fled the Hibernia Bank.

How serious were their wounds?

Were the
men hospitalized?

How come we never heard about them again?

Were these shootings sufficient
justification to murder six persons later?

California law enforcement paid three men to stage a prison “escape” in San Jose at the time of the
Angela Davis trial.

One of the men was killed.--- PAGE BREAK ---

California law enforcement paid three men to stage a prison “escape” in San Jose at the time of the
Angela Davis trial. One of the men was killed. Were the Hibernia Bank shoot-out and the shooting in front
of Mel’s Sporting Goods Store staged by the same culprits? Would this prove to the public that the SLA
could handle weapons? When the same cast of characters stage continuous conspiracy productions, it is important to consider
the similarities. The worst violence committed by the SLA was the murder of Dr. Foster and the kidnapping of Patricia
Hearst. Two men charged with the murder are in jail. If the other SLA members were dangerous, they
should have been indicted for Dr. Foster’s death. If they were not involved, their “dangerous” description
has to be challenged. Most of the “violence” of the SLA is contained in their tapes, messages and writing on the walls. The
planted rhetoric may inflame, but it doesn’t hurt, kill or even influence a thinking person. The SLA had many opportunities to commit serious bodily harm in order to protect their own lives or
promote their stated aims. In almost every instance, the violence was more a matter of threat than action. 1. The Assault on Steven Weed
Hearst was kidnapped from an apartment she shared with Steven Weed. Weed was treated for assault
wounds. Compare the media coverage of Weed’s bandages injuries to Martha Mitchell’s. Martha was also a
kidnapped prisoner. She required hospital care and stitches on her finger. Stephen King, the man who
inflicted the injuries, was later promoted. He became Chief of Security for CREEP, and went on to an
appointment as chief of recruitment for the Department of Agriculture. Martha wondered why no arrests
were made.

--- PAGE BREAK ---promoted. He became Chief of Security for CREEP, and went on to an
appointment as chief of recruitment for the Department of Agriculture. Martha wondered why no arrests
were made.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

If assaults by the SLA are dangerous, why are assaults not dangerous when committed by security
guards? Law enforcement and selective media coverage make some crimes more “criminal” than others.
2. The “shoot-out” between Joseph Remiro, Russell Little and Police Sergeant Duge
Remiro and Little cruised around in their own neighborhood in a suspicious manner. They opened fire
on Officer Duge—but didn’t hit him. It was two armed and dangerous men against one. If the SLA team
was dangerous, and if they wanted to protect their comrades, they could have either gone directly home or
silenced Officer Duge forever. Yet no one was hurt badly. What was this unnecessary street scene about?
3. Why did Remiro turn over his weapon to the police?
If the SLA members are “armed and dangerous,” why do they give their weapons away and leave them
lying around in vacant buildings and apartments when there is more than sufficient time to pick them up?
Remiro walked out of the Concord “safe-house” with his weapon. He told the arresting officer which
pocket it was in.
4. Why didn’t the SLA follow the Minimanual and barter for their comrades?
Were Remiro and Little really the SLA’s political comrades, or is this all talk?
The Minimanual advised the exchange of kidnap victims for comrades in prison. But the SLA never
mentioned trading Patty Hearst for Remiro and Little.
5. How bad was the shoot-out at Mel’s Sporting Goods Store in Inglewood, California?
Was Patricia Hearst instructed to shoot if she saw a member of the team threatened with arrest?
Was the William Harris-Tony Shephard episode intended to cause Patty to shoot in response?
How many witnesses positively identified Patricia Hearst as the woman who fired a weapon in front of
Mel’s? I haven’t read of a single one in the newspapers. (I subscribe to eight.) Was Patty Hearst in the
van? Again, no witnesses have made any such statement.
The automatic weapon was fired, the bullets plowed harmlessly into the storefront.
Lee Harvey Oswald, intelligence and FBI agent, staged a phony altercation with Carlos Bringuier in
front of the International Trade Mart in New Orleans. The incident was created for the benefit of TV news
cameras. The scene was contrived to portray Oswald as a pro-Cuban sympathizer. Did the same people
who planned that event also plan the Los Angeles spree that provided the excuse to move in and attack
DeFreeze and the others?
Whoever fired the shots did not intend to injure anyone.
6. How do you borrow a Pontiac?
The Harrises and “Tania” abandoned their red and white $1,800 van. Instead of asking for a short ride,
they projected an unnecessarily violent image in the presence of an unsuspecting woman. “We are the
SLA. We need your car. I have to kill someone, but I don’t want to kill you.”
Two blocks and much talk later, the car was abandoned.
7. Do you need a submachine gun to borrow a Chevrolet?
The Pontiac “malfunctioned” within a few minutes. A man “believed to be William Harris”.”
Two blocks and much talk later, the car was abandoned.
7. Do you need a submachine gun to borrow a Chevrolet?
The Pontiac “malfunctioned” within a few minutes. A man “believed to be William Harris”

--- PAGE BREAK ---ch talk later, the car was abandoned.
7. Do you need a submachine gun to borrow a Chevrolet?
The Pontiac “malfunctioned” within a few minutes. A man “believed to be William Harris”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(unverified) ran up to a man “with his submachine gun” and commandeered the use of a Chevrolet.
Was the SLA dangerous, or merely showing off their weapons?
If they needed this car badly enough, they could have kidnapped the owner, tied him up or murdered
him, and kept the car.
8. Why didn’t the SLA tie up Tom Mathews and keep his van?
The Harrises and Patty drove Tom Mathews around Hollywood Hills for twelve hours.
One stop was at a hardware store. They bought a hacksaw to remove one handcuff still on William
Harris’ wrist. Why didn’t they buy rope as well, tie up Mathews, take his van, warn the others that
Emily’s gun and the van were lost at Mel’s?
The SLA was so non-violent and polite that after taking in The New Centurions at a drive-in movie and
joy-riding all night, they let Mathews drive off in his own van, walked the Hollywood Hills on foot at
6:00 am.
9. Mr. Sutter wasn’t hurt by the SLA
At 8 a.m., May 17, the SLA was still walking around in Griffith Park. They borrowed a Lincoln
Continental, drove around for a few hours, and took $250 from a Mr. Sutter.
It isn’t clear whether Sutter went along for the ride, or was left off when they took his car.
Did Mr. Sutter, like Tom Mathews, leave the SLA on foot again?
The pacifist yet violent SLA got around in Los Angeles without hurting anyone.
10. Why didn’t the six SLA, so soon to die, stave off the assault with hostages?
Were the SLA even capable of harming people? When the police arrived to encircle them, they didn’t
hold Christine Johnson, Brenda or the children in the cottage.
There was no indication that they would have harmed anyone to save their own lives.
11. Who fired the first shot?
There has to be a reason for the massive gunfire and firebomb siege.
Would careful examination of the building, if not burned, show that the SLA fired the first shot? Is it
possible that the first bullet came from behind and through the building, as a signal to begin the massive
and deadly assault?
Police claim that a bullhorn was used to issue a warning. No neighbor or nearby witness heard it.
Remember the Gulf of Tonkin “raid?” The illegal bombing of Cambodia? The one-shot signal that set
off the Kent State murders? The umbrella that went down just before John Kennedy was hit with a deadly
crossfire?
Did Cinque fire at the police? Or were the SLA surrounded on every side, with no chance to live after
police sent out the first shot?
If Cinque was prepared for a battle with the LAPD, might he not have aimed to take at least one “pig”
with him?
Even in death, the SLA weren’t violent. Counting the ammo on hand is no proof of their capacity to kill.
Not a single officer or passerby was injured by the SLA.
12. Why did the SLA cut Mrs. Alcala’s dress and not use her room if they needed a place to stay?on hand is no proof of their capacity to kill.
Not a single officer or passerby was injured by the SLA.
12. Why did the SLA cut Mrs. Alcala’s dress and not use her room if they needed a place to stay?

--- PAGE BREAK ---Violence isn’t cutting a six-inch slice in someone’s housedress and threatening, “do you want to die?”
There is no proof that Patty Hearst ever went near Mrs.

Alcala’s motel.

If the SLA needed a place to stay, there was an empty room and they were short of money, all they had
to do was walk into Mrs.

Alcala’s apartment, silence her, use the place for the night, keep the $500 and
leave.

The charge against Patty was “assault with a deadly weapon” anyway, although the gun she
allegedly pointed at Anita Alcala didn’t even go off.

VIII.

WHY THE CHARGES AGAINST PATTY?

“I no longer seem to have any importance as a human being.

However, I have become all-important as
a political pivot point for certain right-wing elements and I can only be used successfully by these
people if I am killed.”
– Patty Hearst, March, 1974
Why was it necessary to introduce the conversion of Tania with writing all over the walls in the
Golden Gate apartment?

Why was it necessary to introduce Tania to the tellers at the Hibernia Bank while
the SLA was taking the money?

“This is Tania,” they said.

William or Emily Harris dropped a weapon registered in Emily’s name at Mel’s Sporting Goods Store.

This action announced that the SLA was in town.

They had used aliases at other times.

Why not with the
weapon purchase?

Why did William Harris think it necessary to introduce Patty Hearst to Tom Mathews?

Bill, Emily and
Patty “kidnapped” Tom on the pretense that they needed transportation.

Instead of using his van for any
rational purpose, they created the circumstances by which Patty Hearst would be indicted on 19 charges
the next Monday morning.

The ride with Mathews had to have a purpose.

Who arranged the “For Sale” sign on the van that belonged to Mathews?

Was he a police provocateur
who willingly went for the ride—and cooperated with D.A.

Joseph Busch?

During the ride, William Harris made a point of introducing his partner in crime.

“Do you know who
this is?

This is Tania,” William told Tom.--- PAGE BREAK ---

“Do you know who
this is? This is Tania,” William told Tom. Why did Patty bother to wear a wig or disguise if her friends were always introducing her by name? Why build a kidnapping case on a 12-hour ride, killing time at a drive-in movie, when they didn’t use
the van for any specific purpose? During the 12-hour ride, Patty explained how she robbed the bank. Then she confessed to shooting it
out at Mel’s Sporting Goods Store. Patricia demonstrated the loading of an automatic weapon. By the time the 12 hours were over, 19 charges could be filed against Patricia Hearst. And they were. At 6 a.m., May 17, Tom Mathews drove off in his own van, leaving William, Emily and Patty on foot in
the Hollywood Hills. Twelve hours later, their six SLA comrades would be dead. Why was there a classified ad in the L.A. Free Press the week the Harrises arrived in L.A., with
references to their “attempt to destroy the potential of a human mind?”
The Harrises led Patty Hearst through numerous confessions that led to the indictments against her. Yet
the provocateur Harrises can come out clean. FBI Director Charles Bates stated publicly on May 10, 1974 that “the Harrises are less militant than
their six SLA comrades. So far, the Harrises were not overtly involved in any of these incidences.”
On Sunday night, May 19, Patty acted out an assault scene … that is, if you accept the description of a
“blue eyed” Patty.

--- PAGE BREAK ---es were not overtly involved in any of these incidences.”
On Sunday night, May 19, Patty acted out an assault scene … that is, if you accept the description of a
“blue eyed” Patty.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

For the Alcala episode, Patty Hearst was charged with “assault with a deadly weapon.” If convicted,
the penalty could be life in prison.
The black men with her were never wanted by police.
Patty was framed and led through all the actions that led to her 22 indictments.
District Attorney Busch and U.S. Attorney Browning charged her with five counts of assault with intent
to commit murder; four counts of assault with a deadly weapon, three counts of unlawfully taking a
vehicle, kidnapping and kidnapping for the purpose of robbery.
The last charge carries a life sentence on conviction.
How would Tom Mathews know the woman in his van was Patty Hearst? He never saw her before. If
Donald DeFreeze has a double, was there a double for Patty as well?
The FBI admitted they didn’t have Patty’s fingerprints. Yet the basis for indicting her after the 12-hour
ride with Mathews was “fingerprints” the LAPD never had.
Why was D.A. Joseph Busch in such a hurry to press indictments based on the testimony of such flimsy
witnesses?
Why was U.S. Attorney James Browning so anxious to press immediate charges against Patty after the
SLA deaths in Los Angeles?
Patty knew the FBI wanted her dead.
She was no longer important to the SLA charade.
By reducing her alternatives, a shoot-out could be encouraged, thereby assuring her death.
Only by analyzing how she was charged, and determining who set her up, is it possible to know that
Patty and the SLA were not the dangerous ones. As usual, the military and police have a monopoly in that
department.
IX. THE DEATH TRAP
Before:
“If you see him, nail him.”
– LAPD
After:
“Our mission is accomplished.”
– SWAT Team, LAPD
“In all my years as a coroner, I’ve never seen this kind of behavior in the face of living flames.”
—Dr. Noguchi, L.A. County Coroner
Were the six members of the SLA willing to die?
Was the SLA deliberately massacred?
The SLA tapes made frequent references to accepting death as a condition of their struggle. The
passages about death could have been written by agents. Did they mean death after service, not realizing
they would be killed as patsies? It is noble to die for your beliefs. It is pitiful to lose your life without
having accomplished any of your goals.
The SLA murdered Dr. Foster, wounded Robert Blackburn, robbed a bank and kidnapped Patricia
Hearst. This was the sum total of their revolutionary contributions.
They left behind a heritage of death lists, including black leaders Huey Newton and Bobby Seale.
Six comrades were killed.Patricia
Hearst. This was the sum total of their revolutionary contributions.
They left behind a heritage of death lists, including black leaders Huey Newton and Bobby Seale.
Six comrades were killed.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Notice that the military-CIA agents who gathered this group together and framed Patty Hearst are still
alive?

They are not even suspects.

Donald DeFreeze named Colston Westbrook, Chris Thompson and Robyn Steiner as espionage agents.

They are alive.

DeFreeze is dead.

Cinque had to be murdered.

He was talking too much.

For the cover stories concerning the purposes of the SLA to hold, the group had to be lured to their
death trap—and they all had to die.

Sam Williams, president of the Board of Police Commissioners, said
their “most important task” was to “neutralize” the SLA.

Their strange behavior “in the face of living flames” is only unusual if they had a choice.

What were the alternatives?

1.

Self-immolation, burning alive.

2.

Expectation of escape support, which
didn’t arrive.

3.

Out of contact with reality, drugged; medically or electronically controlled.

4.

Escape
attempts thwarted by the police.

5.

They never had a chance to live.

Were they murdered before the flames consumed the building?

1.

Self-Immolation
Was the SLA as dedicated to its tiny army as Buddhist monks who set fire to their bodies?

If they wanted to die, why would they wear gas masks, cartridge belts and load their guns?

Were they dedicated to that point?

How could these college graduates from the Bay Area know enough about oppression to choose to
make this sacrifice?

The FBI’s incendiary bombs gave them little choice, much less a religious dedication.

They didn’t set
fire to themselves.

2.

Expecting back-up support?

On Thursday night, Donald DeFreeze told a neighbor: “We are getting out on Friday.

Things are getting
heavy.”
Friday morning, 9:00 a.m.: DeFreeze was looking for another location, an apartment in the
neighborhood.

Friday morning, 11:00 a.m.: A tall black man left the house on 54th Street, promising, “I will be back
as soon as I get a car.” He never returned.

3:30 p.m.: Another black man whispered into DeFreeze’s ear and departed.

Did he make a promise to
return?--- PAGE BREAK ---

3:30 p.m.: Another black man whispered into DeFreeze’s ear and departed. Did he make a promise to
return? Was DeFreeze programmed, post-hypnotically instructed to “remain in this building and don’t
leave”? The same LAPD that lured DeFreeze to his death trap in Los Angeles had advance notice of the prison
escape in Marin County a few years earlier, when Jonathan Jackson was murdered. Jackson was
expecting vans to follow behind. When he got outside the court with Judge Haley and other hostages,
Jackson was left stranded and alone. LAPD officers Mahoney and Sherritt were up there at the shooting. They told Louis Tackwood to “get his ass out of there” and he was put on a bus. 3. Out of contact with reality: Were the SLA controlled by drugs, electrodes or hypnosis? What “favors” did DeFreeze do for Vacaville Medical Facility? Massive experiments in mind control are performed on prisoners’ brains today. Were electrodes or transponders inserted into DeFreeze’s brain? The wires are no thicker than a hair, the insertion point no larger than a grain of wheat. The effect of tranquilizers that alter the brain can persist for a month after withdrawal from the drugs.

--- PAGE BREAK ---There is no way to detect their presence, because all traces disappear from the bloodstream within a few
hours.

Joseph Remiro and Nancy Ling Perry, two SLA members, were dependent on drugs.

A druggist was mentioned as the brains behind the entire SLA operation.

Christine Johnson, the last person to see the SLA alive, woke up from a “drugged sleep” in the middle
of the gun battle.

That is unusual, considering the excitement in her home.

Her houseguests were storing
ammunition under the floor on Thursday evening.

Was Ms.

Johnson bored?

It was 5 p.m.

and all this
activity going on … Why was Christine Johnson asleep?

Camilla Hall, according to Christine, was walking around “like a zombie.

She was carrying some
bottles in her hands.”
If the six SLA members were dependent upon outside suppliers for wine and LSD, grass or cigarettes,
would it not be possible to control their emotions and reduce their anxiety in the face of death?

The CIA
and intelligence agencies have an unlimited capacity to subdue persons through additives to their food and
drink.

Black FBI agent William O’Neill, Panther leader Fred Hampton’s “bodyguard,” drugged Hampton and
Mark Clark the night of the police shootout in Chicago, in 1969.

Hampton and Clark died.

San Francisco
FBI Director Charles Bates, who is now in charge of the SLA affair, was director of the Chicago FBI at
that time.

There were two messages in the underground press that referred to the SLA and thought control.

Who
put them there and why?

What was their meaning?

“Two are cowards who are fascinated with their own talent, that being to manipulate others to their
own destruction without those others even being aware of their own manipulation.”
– Berkeley Barb, Feb.

22.

1974
“Angela A., Emily H., and Bill H., your silent support for the attempt to destroy the potential of a
human mind, and anti-humanist philosophy that teaches impossible purism is unbelievable.”
– L.A.--- PAGE BREAK ---

22. 1974
“Angela A., Emily H., and Bill H., your silent support for the attempt to destroy the potential of a
human mind, and anti-humanist philosophy that teaches impossible purism is unbelievable.”
– L.A. Free Press, May 4, 1974
One of the 15 motives for creating the SLA was revival of plans for the UCLA Institute for the Study
and Prevention of Violence. The proposed Institute is anxious to experiment with transponders, electrodes and reduction of
prisoners’ reasoning abilities. The experimental subjects would be blacks, Chicanos, Indians, women,
children and radicals. A carefully guarded secret has been the massive brain experimentation and hypnosis programs taking
place in prisons and mental hospitals during the past 15 years. An inmate from Vacaville Medical Facility wrote that he was employed holding down prisoners
against their will while Actine and Rudall were administered. Double doses were given for no reason,
bringing about “distinct changes in personalities.”
Over the past year, I have been accumulating evidence of mind-altering methods and how they pertain
to past political assassinations. The U.S. has financed psychosurgical experiments in Boston by Drs. Mark, Ervin and Sweet that are
now spreading around the country. Plans exist that could turn large masses of the population into zombies
to be used for future slave labor and kamikaze war troops. Prisoners are the experimental scapegoats. Dr. Jose Delgado, funded by NASA and Naval Intelligence, is an expert in controlling behavior with
implanted electrodes. Because this is done at Vacaville Medical Facility and Atascadero Hospital in
California, it is important to relate Delgado’s underlying philosophy, the justification for this radical

--- PAGE BREAK ---procedure:
“We need a program of psychosurgery for political control of our society.

The purpose is physical
control of the mind.

Everyone who deviates from the given norm can be surgically mutilated.

The
individual may think that the most important reality is his own existence, but this is only his personal
point of view.

This lacks historical perspective.

Man does not have the right to develop his own mind.

This kind of liberal orientation has great appeal.

We must electrically control the brain.

Some day
armies and generals will be controlled by electric stimulation of the brain.”
—Dr.

José Delgado, Congressional Record,
No.

26, Vol.

118, February 24, 1974
Destroying “the potential of a human mind” is exactly what Delgado and California prison doctors are
working on.

Is it a coincidence that the red and white van that brought the SLA to Los Angeles was purchased under
the fictitious name of “Ricky Delgado”?

Delgado is a man who destroys the mind before the others destroy the flesh.

All of the men registered at the Watergate Hotel on June 17, 1972 used false names taken from E.

Howard Hunt’s spy novels.

The use of aliases with special meanings to “insiders” is common practice in
CIA operations.

What appeared as irrational behavior by the SLA in the face of the flames could have been explained
by examining the medical records of DeFreeze at Vacaville—if they hadn’t been destroyed.

The behavior of the six SLA members on the day of their deaths, from all available accounts, seems to
have been out of contact with reality.

In some way, they were drugged, hypnotized or controlled.

When the
flames grew hot enough for a few to try to escape, they were shot and killed by the police.

All six were well educated and aware that they were fugitives.

They were connected with the death of
Dr.

Marcus Foster, a bank robbery and the kidnap of Patty Hearst.

They were surrounded by police, yet they showed no anxiety.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Marcus Foster, a bank robbery and the kidnap of Patty Hearst. They were surrounded by police, yet they showed no anxiety. They loudly announced their presence—“We are the SLA”—instead of hiding while they tried to
muster a larger “army.”
They were dependent on others for food, drinks, cigarettes and other supplies, allowing themselves to
be boxed in. They sent strangers in and out of the building on errands, exhibiting no anxiety or fear of betrayal. They showed no tension while the streets filled with more police agents. Recruitment went on “as usual,” even though the SLA had not added one new member in a year’s time. White women wore Afro wigs, a pathetic identification that hardly went unnoticed. They strapped on ammunition belts while they asked a young neighbor: “Please join the army. We need
more blacks.”
Pathetic “guerrilla” outfits were worn—shades of Che Guevara in a Hollywood Bolivian jungle set. Donald DeFreeze casually walked out of the front door and came back in. Willie Wolfe lay on the bed,
turning his pistol toward the ceiling. There was no transportation available if they wanted to leave. Guns were strewn on the floor. Stephanie Reed, a casual visitor, was asked if she had “any bullets or
knives.”
Christine Johnson fell asleep, drugged. The shooting woke her up in time to flee before the flames burst
out. If the SLA intended war with the LAPD, nobody on the other side was injured.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ine Johnson fell asleep, drugged. The shooting woke her up in time to flee before the flames burst
out. If the SLA intended war with the LAPD, nobody on the other side was injured.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

This was a group of six persons cut off from the world, calm, detached, going through a few last
pathetic motions before they died.
4. Escape attempts thwarted
Did the SLA make any effort to escape before the heat of the flames consumed them?
There are indications that some would have left the building—if they had been allowed.
Nancy Ling Perry’s burned body was found outside the house.
Camilla Hall came left the house and was slain.
Police radio logs reveal that some would have departed.
“There’s one down and one’s firing. He came out and went back in, possibly hit. He’s still firing. Three
females are shooting.”
—LAPD radio
Who came out? Was he hit?
5. They never had a chance to live—were they murdered before the flames consumed the
building?
First accounts said, “Bullets that killed the victims came from a considerable distance.”
Twenty-four hours later, DeFreeze must have grown a long arm—on second thought, he was a
“suicide,” shot through the temple at very close range. Did the revision prevent lawsuits and
investigations?
One of the SLA had “an unidentifiable severe head injury.” The investigators were puzzled about how
she got that. Have they come up with an answer yet?
Camilla Hall and Nancy Ling Perry died instantly.
Camilla was shot through “the center of her forehead.” That was a fine shot … considering the SWAT
team was far away, the SLA wore gas masks and the walls of the house were plaster with no view from
the front.
It was later announced that she had been killed outside the house.
Nancy Ling Perry died from a “gunshot wound through the back that severed the spinal cord.” The
window to the back alley was open. Were they killed at close range from the back of the house?
The fire in the front of the house created a wall of flames that prevented escape, and they were pushed
toward the back. Were they murdered from behind?
The police radio picked up a conversation between two officers during the siege. At the height of the
shooting, a barefoot man in shorts and T-shirt, with a police badge, was seen trotting past the rear of the
besieged house. “What is he, a jogger?” asked the FBI.
There was a window in back of the bungalow. It gave a clear view through the alley to 56th Street and
Compton Boulevard. DeFreeze sent Brenda Daniels to Sam’s corner store on 56th Street for food and
cigarettes. “He told me he was going to watch me through the alley.”
Was this the same alley where an off-duty sheriff was seen running before the flames consumed the
building?
Police units described a man running down from 56th Street behind the house. “There’s a man moving
on you north on 56th, a hundred yards, that could be an off-duty sheriff in plain clothes. I just saw him a
while ago. There’s one down and one firing.”
Were shots fired at close range?s a man moving
on you north on 56th, a hundred yards, that could be an off-duty sheriff in plain clothes. I just saw him a
while ago. There’s one down and one firing.”
Were shots fired at close range?

--- PAGE BREAK ---u north on 56th, a hundred yards, that could be an off-duty sheriff in plain clothes. I just saw him a
while ago. There’s one down and one firing.”
Were shots fired at close range?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It is impossible to tell, because Nancy Ling Perry’s body and William Wolfe’s body were cremated. Dr.
Wolfe couldn’t locate his son’s body. By the time he arrived in Los Angeles, he was informed that Willie
had already been cremated with his “mother’s consent.” Would a medical doctor have hurried to destroy
possible criminal evidence?
Donald DeFreeze’s body was sent back to Ohio three days after his death for burial, minus head and
fingers. Why the delay in forwarding his remains? Why was the only black member of the SLA singled out
for decapitation?
Witnesses saw gasoline poured along the back of the building. Both sides of the house were in flames.
The bodies were burned beyond recognition. Black men had assisted DeFreeze into the house. The
LAPD knew exactly who they had to murder. Long before the dental charts arrived for identification, the
media announced: “Donald DeFreeze is dead.” And the SWAT team retired, radioed: “Our mission is
accomplished.”
If Patty Hearst was no longer of importance to any group but the right wing, neither was the original
SLA.
The motives for creating this first army had been accomplished.
The most reason for murdering them was to bury any evidence that would explain how such an
unlikely assembly ever came together in the first place.
Donald DeFreeze, Nancy Ling Perry, Camilla Hall, Barbara Soltysik, Angela Atwood and Willie
Wolfe were slain.
The agents who directed this episode are preparing for their next assignments.
X. HOW DO YOU TELL A CIA ESPIONAGE PLOT FROM A REVOLUTIONARY, RADICAL, TERRORIST,
GUERRILLA ARMY?
1. COVER STORY
2. COINCIDENCE?
3. DUMMY FRONTS
4. MEDIA AND PROPAGANDA
5. INDICATIONS OF CIA CONSPIRACY
6. INDICATIONS OF FBI COLLUSION
7. THE TOM CHARLES HUSTON PLAN: COMBINED EFFORTS OF THE WHITE HOUSE, VICE-PRESIDENT, JUSTICE DEPARTMENT, INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES, MILITARY, POLICE DEPARTMENTS,
AND PRISON SYSTEMS.
1. The Cover Story
Secret intelligence operations do more than gather information. Espionage agents overthrow
governments, select leaders and do everything possible to prevent Third World change from taking place.
The cover story is the official version of what clandestine operatives are doing. These lies conceal
multiple crimes.
A. The SLA was “influenced” by “Maoist” teachings and the Minimanual of the Urban Guerrilla
This “blueprint for terrorism” is an excuse for government escalation of a red hunt.
There is nothing Asian or Brazilian about SLA tactics.
Every action they took violated the book’s instructions, including kidnapping, feeding the poor and
failing to protect themselves.of a red hunt.
There is nothing Asian or Brazilian about SLA tactics.
Every action they took violated the book’s instructions, including kidnapping, feeding the poor and
failing to protect themselves.

--- PAGE BREAK ---A ring of high-level public officials, assisted by intelligence agents from Florida to California, have
sought to break the University of California for seven years.

They centered their conspiracy on Berkeley
assisted hijackers to gain complete control over airport entrances.

The same agencies are creating a series of kidnappings.

They began to escalate immediately after
“America’s first political kidnapping,” Patty Hearst.

Vice Consul John S.

Patterson’s kidnap and subsequent murder in Mexico were arranged by the CIA.

The agent, Bobby Keesee, was arrested at his San Diego home on May 29, 1974.

The facts behind Reg Murphy’s kidnapping in Atlanta were hushed up because it was a step in a wider
conspiracy.

Albert Dantzler’s escapade in Florida was first called a kidnapping, but turned out to be a hoax.

There are about 27 of these recent kidnappings, each of which must be carefully studied and exposed
before “kidnap” gets out of hand.

The Argentine police have been calling them “self-introduced
kidnappings.”
B.

The Black Cultural Association gave birth to the SLA.

Officials at Vacaville and Soledad prisons
may have been asleep
Conspiracies against radical prisoners have existed for years.

The public had just begun to wake up
and become involved, seeking better legal aid for prisoners and questioning prison policies.

Allowing CIA agents and police informers to create the SLA inside the prison system provided the
excuse for tighter control over visitors.

Genuine reform movements can be kept outside.

C.

The Black Cultural Association was formed to teach black history and identity
Black studies programs were permitted for black inmates.

But BCA “tutors” at Vacaville had no
training or familiarity with blacks and the prison system.

Colston Westbrook, the black leader of the group, grew up in an all-white community in Pennsylvania.

D.

Donald DeFreeze was consumed by fantasies
DeFreeze couldn’t have survived one year outside of prison sans police support.--- PAGE BREAK ---

D. Donald DeFreeze was consumed by fantasies
DeFreeze couldn’t have survived one year outside of prison sans police support. The Prison
Superintendent didn’t provide transport for DeFreeze’s departure because he loved Maoist-trained black
radicals giving revolutionary raised-fist salutes. E. The group of young people going into the prisons regularly were interested in prison reform
Why would out-of-state police agents—with no known relationship with one black or prisoner
anywhere—arrive to reform the California prisons? How did these people manage to single out some of the most wanted targets of the California
Department of Corrections for their visits, such as Doc Holiday and members of the Black Guerrilla
Family? Where did they get the names of these particular prisoners? Why were future members of the SLA permitted to visit more than one prisoner at a time? No one else
can. Why did Emily Harris drive 200 miles to San Luis Obispo and back, twice a week, to visit Doc
Holiday? He had been held back from parole by the Department of Corrections. The Senate Hearings on
Civil Disorder may now link him with the SLA and keep him in jail to prevent “violence” on the streets. What reforms did the SLA suggest or initiate?

--- PAGE BREAK ---ctions. The Senate Hearings on
Civil Disorder may now link him with the SLA and keep him in jail to prevent “violence” on the streets. What reforms did the SLA suggest or initiate?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

What political trials of prisoners in the Bay area did the SLA attend?
2. Coincidence?
A. Knowing too much can be bad for your health
1. William A.H. Williams, charged with kidnapping publisher Reg Murphy in Atlanta, said: “if we’re
caught, you tell them we know all about the Symbionese Liberation Army.”
Immediately, a notation was whisked from the federal marshal to the police blotter, stating Williams
had “suicidal tendencies.” This information came from Williams’ Naval discharge file.
2. Three men kidnapped Eunice Kronholm in Minneapolis, March, 1974. The FBI, under the Hobbs
Act, immunized them from kidnapping charge. Instead, they were booked on a lighter count of extortion.
James Johnson, one of the three men charged, pled innocent in the case, claiming “the hoodlum element
downtown was involved in the abduction.” He was mysteriously shot in the head in May, and was taken to
the neurological intensive care unit for possible brain damage.
B. San Diego espionage?
Black Abductor, published in 1972, was a short novel that anticipated much of the Hearst kidnapping
two years in advance. The unknown author, using a non-existent publisher, was identified only as a San
Diego resident.
San Diego was the city designated for the kidnapping of radicals in 1972. This plan was drawn up by
Attorney General John Mitchell, White House intelligence teams and the same agencies involved with the
SLA two years later. Attorney General Evelle Younger, Los Angeles Police Department, and the CCS
were to crack down on hippies and anti-war protestors.
C. Is selling the Zebra murders like selling 7-Up?
The J. Walter Thompson Advertising Agency, a well-known supplier of White House staffers, took on a
new client in the fall of 1973. San Francisco Chief of Police D. Scott announced at a press conference that
San Francisco law enforcement required the services of an advertising and public relations firm. In
August, the “Zebra” killings and Hearst kidnapping were about to break. Was the San Francisco Police
Department preparing to protect its image in the media?
D. “Victim” candidates
Election years and criminal conspiracies often seem to coincide. California State Senator John Harmer,
Evelle Younger, and Joseph Alioto were running for office in the summer of 1974. The men who exploited
the racist, radical-scare tactics the hardest, tried to identify themselves as victims of SLA-type violence.
Alioto and Younger, by coincidence, were victims of what I believe were provocateur bombings. Senator
Harmer spread totally unfounded fears of kidnapping and future terrorism.
E. The use of the dead for identity—a common espionage tactic
Russell Little also went by the name “Robert James Scalise.” Robert Scalise died of leukemia in
Oakland in 1963.
Frank Sturgis, defendant in the Watergate break-in, was granted IRS tax-exempt status for his Miami
Church three days before he was arrested. One of the three people listed on the board of directors of thisSturgis, defendant in the Watergate break-in, was granted IRS tax-exempt status for his Miami
Church three days before he was arrested. One of the three people listed on the board of directors of this

--- PAGE BREAK ---fictitious church was a Mrs.

Doris Hunt.

Mrs.

Hunt died of cancer in a nursing home on March 22, 1952.

Eugen Wrangell was sent to San Quentin for the purpose of murdering Sirhan Sirhan.

$25,000 cash is in
an account, deposited by one of the White House Plumber teams from the CIA.

Wrangell has asked for
help and wants assistance to get out.

They now have him confined on an altercation with the San Quentin
priest.

Vladimir Alexander Zatco is the espionage name he uses in prison.

The name is from a man who
died in an automobile accident in Italy in 1968.

He was given orders to assume his identity.

F.

Visible deception
A “Free Huey Newton” poster hung on the walls of Donald Segretti’s office when he was a military
intelligence spy at Fort Ord.

Segretti wore his hair long, and a peace symbol dangled from a chain around
his neck.

At the time, Segretti was flying to the White House, preparing for espionage assignments.

A “Free Huey Newton” poster hung in the trailer of William Harris, recently returned from Vietnam,
while he was a student at the University of Indiana.

The burned-out SLA safe house on Sutherland Court was decorated with Huey Newton’s name and the
floor plan of his apartment, suggesting that the SLA planned to murder the Black Panther leader.

Posters of
political subjects or personalities often conceal motives.

3.

Dummy Fronts
A dummy front may be a legitimate business or a fictitious operation.

The purpose of creating or using
the organization is to conceal espionage activities.

A.

Department of Urban Affairs
Is the University of California Extension a cover for CIA agent Colston Westbrook?

SLA member
Willie Wolfe became a student in Westbrook’s class immediately after he arrived in California.

Wolfe recently returned from nine months in Europe.

Westbrook had also been to Europe.

There were no indications that Wolfe took classes apart from Westbrook’s.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Westbrook had also been to Europe. There were no indications that Wolfe took classes apart from Westbrook’s. Colston Westbrook, after serving in the CIA in Asia for seven years, returned to the University of
California to teach under the Department of Urban Affairs. William Harris, police agent in Indiana, had just received his master’s degree in Urban Affairs. Westbrook was teaching Black Lexicon, a language course. Harris was driving a postal truck. B. Survey Research Center, Polling Offices
White House tapes and recent Watergate exposures illustrate how many hundreds of thousands of
dollars went into secret “polling offices.”
Emily Harris, teacher and college graduate, moved to California and was hired as a typist at the Survey
Research Center. In her free time—or while employed—she visited black radical prisoners. Did the Survey Research Center have access to Patty Hearst’s schedule? They denied it. But then, John
Mitchell denied employing James McCord for the Watergate burglary. C. College of Foreign Affairs, University of Indiana
Georgetown University in Washington, D.C. and the University of Indiana have similar think-tank study
groups. Future SLA members Emily and William Harris and Angela Atwood all studied at the think-tank
together. There has been no explanation of their move to California. Upon arrival there, they were employed as

--- PAGE BREAK ---waitress, typist, postal delivery truck driver and part time teacher.

Gary Atwood’s employment for over a
year was never stated.

D.

“Architects and Engineers”
This Los Angeles-based firm provided logistical support for the CIA Phoenix Program in Vietnam.

Colston Westbrook used it as his cover.

He worked for the firm from February 5, 1966, to September,
1969, and traveled to Cambodia, India, Japan, Hong Kong, the Philippines, Okinawa and the USSR.

E.

Black Cultural Association, Vacaville Medical Facility
The BCA was approved by prison officials because it would soon be infiltrated.

Westbrook, home after
seven years in the CIA, “volunteered” his services twice a week to lead the group.

Out of the BCA was born the SLA.

This controlled manipulation of agents was nurtured inside the
prisons to hurt inmates later.

4.

Use of Media and Propaganda
San Francisco FBI Director Charles Bates knew that it took more than a tape recorder to start a
revolution.

Newspapers had to print the messages.

Radio stations had to play the tapes.

Just before the SLA was launched, after Patty was kidnapped, there was a series of murders and
kidnappings of media persons to ensure extra media attention.

9-73: Shooting at San Francisco’s KGO radio station while Jim Dunbar was on the air.

Ben Munson, a
station employee, was killed.

Lawrence Kwong, the gunman, shot himself.

The circumstances surrounding
this shooting episode are wide open for investigation.

It was quickly buried.

2-74: Robert Shethen, film editor for KBHK-TV, San Francisco, was murdered in the Tiki Bar.

2-74: Patricia Hearst, heiress of the famous newspaper chain, was kidnapped.

2-74: Reg Murphy, editor of the Atlanta Constitution, was kidnapped.

Radio and TV were played his
tapes.

3-74: Ben Maidenberg, publisher, and his son, from Akron, Ohio, were the objects of a $2 million
“feed the poor” kidnapping threat.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Radio and TV were played his
tapes. 3-74: Ben Maidenberg, publisher, and his son, from Akron, Ohio, were the objects of a $2 million
“feed the poor” kidnapping threat. Radio stations in the Bay Area were manipulated into playing the SLA communiqués “to save Patty’s
life.”
Newspapers were ordered to print all SLA communiqués. The media were put in the position of advertising a “revolution.” If they failed to cooperate, Patty
Hearst might be killed. TV and radio time worth hundreds of thousands of dollars was donated free for
the SLA’s public appearance. William Knowland, editor and publisher of the Oakland Tribune, died mysteriously on February 24,
1974. The Tribune had refused to continue printing SLA communiqués. Knowland had refused to hold up
the story of Patty’s kidnapping. The cover story for Knowland’s “suicide” was his concern over the shooting of Dr. Marcus Foster, and
a “fear of being kidnapped.” Can this be the first time a man shot himself because he was afraid he might
be murdered? There is much more to this story. The J. Walter Thompson Advertising Agency told us the Cold War and the Marshall Plan, conceived of
the War Advertising Council to promote World War II. Is it any wonder that their new clients, the San
Francisco Police, felt they were ready to undertake domestic U.S. warfare with media support behind
them? The LAPD wouldn’t murder the six SLA members until their public relations men were in position to
observe. Commander Peter Hagan, LAPD’s PR chief, was told: “An operation is coming down that will

--- PAGE BREAK ---require a public relations spokesman.” TV cameramen and reporters were given more time to get to the
SLA house on 54th Street than the occupants were given to leave the building.

Immediately after the Marine-trained SWAT team burned a few houses and cremated six individuals,
media praise began to ring out.

Members of Congress, L.A.’s Mayor Tom Bradley and Randolph Hearst
were interviewed.

All defended the police action.

The media forced us to participate in the destruction of lives and homes.

They were on the spot with
cameras, tape recorders and pencils.

The media called in people to acclaim the historic actions of the brave SWAT team, and praise them for
“saving lives.”
Media conventions didn’t waste time, either.

Their guest speakers were persons directly involved in
the SLA conspiracy.

FBI Director Clarence Kelley warned of the dangers of “kidnapping” at a newspaper editors’
convention in March, 1974.

There is nothing admirable about kidnappings.

But why do law enforcement
officials talk only about certain kinds of kidnapping?

What about the kidnapping of Dita Beard?

Or
Martha Mitchell?

Raymond Procunier, director of the California Department of Corrections, lectured at the 28th Annual
Convention of the AP and Television and Radio Associations.

Kelley and Procunier should have fired
some of their agents for bungling, collusion with the SLA and obvious conspiratorial involvement.

Instead, these men spoke to the media as honored guests, continuing the propaganda about the fictitious
army.

The media are still using COINTELPRO orders to “leak fabrications” and “warn of violence.” FBI
Director Kelley foresaw future terrorist acts.

The CIA, in conjunction with the warning, can bring about
the violence.

They work together.

5.

Indications the SLA is a CIA Operation
A.

Victor Marchetti, former CIA agent, author of The CIA and the Cult of Intelligence, warned of CIA
plans to target subversives
“Upheaval is what prompts the CIA to begin planning clandestine activities.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Indications the SLA is a CIA Operation
A. Victor Marchetti, former CIA agent, author of The CIA and the Cult of Intelligence, warned of CIA
plans to target subversives
“Upheaval is what prompts the CIA to begin planning clandestine activities. The CIA conducts semi-
legal operations around the world. It might begin to conduct them in the United States. “The men of the Agency are superpatriots. It is only natural for them to view violent protest and
dissidence as a major threat to the nation. The inbred CIA reaction would be to launch a clandestine
operation to infiltrate dissident groups. The U.S. intelligence community is already targeting on groups in this country they feel to be
subversive.”
Radical groups and movements infiltrated by the SLA were precise targets of the CIA and FBI. The
White House moves on these groups after special moneyed interests invest huge sums to buy political
officials, including the President. B. Phony letters like the SLA communiqués are standard CIA policy
The U.S. Embassy admitted that a CIA agent sent the Thai government a phony letter in January, 1974. It
was signed with the name of an insurgent leader, and proposed a cease-fire. The SLA claimed credit for bombings and airplane crashes, and threatened that poisoned gas would be
released over Los Angeles. These, too, can be CIA creations. C. Louis Tackwood, agent provocateur for the LAPD, exposed CIA links to police agencies in 1971

--- PAGE BREAK ---The Glass House Tapes, Tackwood’s account of prison, police, FBI and CIA conspiracies against
radicals and black prisoners, is vital reading to understand the concept of the SLA “army.”
D.

SLA weapons and ammunition were partly supplied by police and the military
Only a few guns were traced to purchases in the local area.

The CIA keeps a stockpile of unidentifiable
weapons in the Midwest.

“They have all kinds of military equipment, all kinds of unmarked weapons.

Over the years they have
bought everything they could get their hands on from all over the world that is untraceable.

The CIA
even used to send weapons buyers around to buy arms from the Soviet bloc countries.”
– Victor Marchetti
William Harris, Willie Wolfe and Colston Westbrook travelled a great deal.

It is possible that they met
earlier, purchased weapons or tapped military intelligence for SLA caches.

E.

Louis Tackwood described and illustrated CIA infiltration inside the prisons starting late in 1969
Colston Westbrook returned from his CIA Asian assignment after seven years.

In January, 1970, he
began his “tour” at Vacaville Medical Facility.

He “volunteered” his time as a teacher, twice a week for
two years.

On January 14, 1970, William Nolan, Cleveland Edwards and Alvin Miller were murdered in the yard
at Soledad Prison.

This date marked the beginning of internal domestic warfare by the rigged courts,
police departments, FBI, CIA and prison officials against radical prisoners.

Creation of the SLA is an
escalation of the policy that began in 1970.

6.

Indications that the SLA is an FBI Operation
After Patty was kidnapped, Randolph Hearst was completely surrounded by the FBI.

It was impossible
to reach him by telephone or letter to suggest a federal conspiracy.

All messages were screened by the
FBI.

The FBI controlled the media coverage.

KGO radio wouldn’t broadcast talk shows that didn’t follow
the radical-terrorist story line.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The FBI controlled the media coverage. KGO radio wouldn’t broadcast talk shows that didn’t follow
the radical-terrorist story line. The San Francisco Chronicle kept from its pages all evidence of police
collusion. The FBI was responsible for reducing the charges against the three suspects in the Eunice Kronholm
kidnapping in Minneapolis. The FBI quickly closed the investigation of the Reg Murphy kidnapping in Atlanta. The Bureau
protected the right-wing para-military group that worked with the CIA. The FBI taunted Joseph Remiro and Russell Little in San Quentin. Before a meeting with them
regarding Patty Hearst, they took Remiro and Little, in chains, past the gas chamber. On March 1, 1974, Camilla Hall withdrew $1,565 from the Bank of America’s Central Branch, 2187
Shattuck Avenue, in Berkeley. FBI offices are across the street from the bank. The Bureau could not spare
a man to stake out the bank, though a spokesman admitted it was known that Camilla Hall maintained an
account there. The FBI had some 300 agents assigned to the Hearst case at the time. They did not even
arrange for the bank to notify them if Camilla Hall made a withdrawal. Camilla could continue to use her
account, safe from FBI or police interference. This is a safe way to fund an espionage operation. The FBI was quick to place the children of Folsom Prison guards under protection. At the same time,
the names of others listed as potential targets of SLA assassination or kidnapping attempts were withheld. Black educator Richard Foster and Black Panther Huey Newton were not notified that they might be in

--- PAGE BREAK ---danger.

Neither was Patty Hearst.

Selected senators and assemblymen—the very ones who campaign the hardest for the death penalty and
harsh legal punishment—jump on the bandwagon for more laws against terrorists, but only civil rights
leaders or workers for the less privileged are ever murdered.

The FBI throws its protection to the
extreme right wing.

The FBI rushed out a new “Ten Most Wanted” SLA poster.

They did not include the third person who
kidnapped Patty, or the third person who murdered Dr.

Marcus Foster.

There was the usual selective
urgency in dramatizing their story.

Robyn Steiner, Russell Little’s friend from Florida, was protected by the FBI and police.

She moved
west in the summer of 1972 with the others, went into the prisons, and stayed with the group until
December, 1973.

Robyn didn’t have to come west to testify before the grand jury.

A police intelligence
officer quietly went to Florida to assure Robyn that things were cool for her.

Robyn was named as an FBI informant by Donald DeFreeze.

The special treatment some SLA members
received proves that this FBI-CIA conspiracy is no different from Watergate or other affairs.

The San Francisco law offices of attorney Vincent Hallinan were broken into to retrieve SLA
messages.

The FBI wanted them so they broke in and took them.

The SLA warned that Patty Hearst’s life depended on fair treatment for Remiro and Little in San
Quentin.

Guards beat the men in custody and forced them to conclude “U.S.

Attorney General William
Saxbe and FBI Director Clarence Kelley want Patricia Hearst to die to discredit the SLA.” Deputies
spread rumors throughout the jail where Remiro and Little were taken that they had attacked a black
prisoner at San Quentin.

It was hoped that this would lead to the assassination of Remiro and Little by
fellow prisoners.

The FBI participated in what appears to be a phony provocateur bombing scare at Shell Oil Company
in Fresno.

A pipe, 6 to 8 inches long, with a dynamite cap, was found.The FBI participated in what appears to be a phony provocateur bombing scare at Shell Oil Company
in Fresno.

A pipe, 6 to 8 inches long, with a dynamite cap, was found.

The FBI said they came into the
case “because it might be a national conspiracy.” The intelligence agencies want to link worldwide
terrorist organizations to the SLA.

But when evidence surfaced that Arab money was donated to the CIA-
SLA to bomb American oil companies, the FBI shut up.

Right-wing Arab oil money was involved in the
Reg Murphy kidnapping.

Every witness at the Hibernia Bank in San Francisco was ordered not to talk by the FBI.

This is
standard procedure.

Silence protects conspirators, not suspects.

If the wall of silence were lifted, it might
expose who arranged the bank robbery.

No members of the SLA had accounts in the bank.

The FBI was involved in the kidnapping of Aris Graham, another banker’s wife in Minneapolis.

Local
police didn’t learn of the kidnapping or the ransom.

Only the FBI knew the details—but the media and the
Justice Department could add one more to their list of kidnappings.

A “prowler” was discovered one mile from the home of Mrs.

Kronholm in Minneapolis.

Danny
Callendo, 20, from Chicago, was shot by the FBI.

James Johnson, a suspect in the Kronholm abduction,
said the case involved “hoodlums from downtown.” Did “downtown” mean Chicago?

Johnson was shot
in the head a month later.

The FBI actively participated in the Los Angeles killing of the SLA.

Los Angeles police called
headquarters asking permission to use incendiary bombs on the 54th Street house.

Chief of Police Ed
Davis said “No.” But the FBI had already used them, and the house caught fire moments later.

In the
official story, the use of incendiary bombs was overruled and police blamed the fire on “Molotov
cocktails” they claimed the SLA kept in the house.

The use of a double is an old FBI stunt.

Lee Harvey Oswald, FBI agent, had several doubles.

Sirhan
Sirhan’s look-alike was Michael Wayne.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Lee Harvey Oswald, FBI agent, had several doubles. Sirhan
Sirhan’s look-alike was Michael Wayne. James Earl Ray had three aliases and three doubles. The FBI
claims it was “not illegal” for Keaton to impersonate Donald DeFreeze. But it might be illegal if you
consider that these doubles are used in conspiracies that result in murders.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Robert Hyde, a prisoner at Soledad, notified the FBI of conspiracies inside the prison and asked for
their help.

His troubles began.

Hyde was blinded in one eye by acid in a medicine bottle that he was told
contained eye drops.

Then he was scheduled for psychosurgery at Vacaville Medical Facility.

When that
plan was halted due to public exposure, the prison guards put out a contract for his murder by another
prisoner.

And it all started when he confided to the FBI that he knew of illegal prison conspiracies.

The FBI knew in advance where Patricia Hearst was before the SLA deaths in Los Angeles.

7.

The Tom Charles Huston Plan
The White House intelligence army was given that name to conceal the involvement of high military
brass and intelligence agencies in domestic operations.

Huston no longer works in Washington, D.C., but
Senator Sam Ervin announced that the Huston Plan is still in operation.

It is impossible to define exactly where collusion between the various agencies starts or ends.

A prison guard may allow Donald DeFreeze to escape from Soledad.

It is the responsibility of the
police to see that he remains free.

The SLA was born, functioned and died with the cooperation of the San Francisco-Oakland-Berkeley
Police Departments, Vacaville Medical Facility, Soledad Prison, Stanford Medical Research Institute at
Menlo Park, the CIA, FBI, Criminal Investigation and Intelligence, the Justice Department, U.S.

Attorney
James Browning, District Attorney Joseph Busch, U.S.

Attorney General William Saxbe, Vice-President
Gerald Ford, President Richard Nixon and well-paid public relations firms.

An image of terrorism is going to be forced upon the public.

This will allow the Gestapo-like CIA to control local police agencies.

In order to escalate fear over the next few years, we were taken on a trip with Patricia Hearst.

If she is
killed or is never seen again, the scenario will still be the same.

Listed below are several examples of collusion between various agencies.--- PAGE BREAK ---

If she is
killed or is never seen again, the scenario will still be the same. Listed below are several examples of collusion between various agencies. What appears to be
“bumbling” or “blunders” are not errors at all. (1) DeFreeze did a favor for the prisons
DeFreeze “did a favor” that made him eligible for parole earlier than usual. He had been sent to prison
for 6-14 years on conviction for armed robbery. His had a record of continuous arrests involving bombs,
weapons, assaults, kidnapping and forgery. A “favor” at Vacaville Medical Facility usually means submitting to medical research on the brain. SLA members were asking for DeFreeze’s parole after he had spent only two years in prison. DeFreeze
was given “Unisight,” his own prison group, to lead, and a score of white CIA-police agents to keep him
company. Several legitimate, warm, friendly persons held the group together. One of them was Patricia
Soltysik. After DeFreeze’s “escape,” he lived with her, and probably felt secure during those months in
Berkeley. (2) William Harris and James Douglas Garske
In 1970, Garske was at Vacaville Medical Facility serving time for armed robbery and forgery
committed in Los Angeles. Harris made numerous visits to Garske in the summer of 1973, while the latter
was in San Quentin. What did Harris have in common with Garske? Consider Harris’ military and police background, his
interest in sports and fraternities, his master’s degree in urban affairs. Why did he meet with this
particular prisoner? His motive was more than prison reform. Subsequent events indicate that Harris’s “friendship” with prisoner Garske had other factors. Garske

--- PAGE BREAK ---“failed to return” to San Quentin from a “work furlough,” from which he was due back on May 19, 1974,
two days after the SLA massacre on Los Angeles.

How many convicts for armed robbery are allowed out
of San Quentin on “work furloughs”?

Garske remained free for a month, and was then arrested at a remote
cabin in Calaveras County, in the Sierra Mountains of California.

“There was immediate speculation that he may have helped the Harrises and Patricia Hearst escape to
the Sierras.

However, FBI agents … found no indication that the SLA members had been there.” Did
Garske help the SLA?

Did William Harris enlist Garske’s aid in return for Harris’ “helping” Garske to
get out of San Quentin?

(3) SLA members had guns registered in their names—police had 24 days to find them before
Patty Hearst was kidnapped.

Camilla Hall, Angela Atwood, William Harris and Joseph Remiro all had bought weapons under their
own names.

There is a five-day wait between the purchase and delivery of handguns in California.

The
State Criminal Identification Bureau and the police cleared the names.

The same people were all identified with the house on Sutherland Court abandoned on January 10,
1974.

The SLA had already released their first communiqué with the “Declaration of War,” and the
second by Nancy Ling Perry.

Police had over two weeks to find these people.

They were all living in the Oakland-Berkeley area.

(4) Patricia Hearst was not warned of the kidnapping danger
“Patricia Campbell Hearst,” “art student,” “Secure van,” “ambush” and related messages found in the
Sutherland Court House suggested that Patty Hearst might be kidnapped.

Books on kidnapping were found
with the lists.

Why did it take three months for the police to admit they had in their possession information received
on January 10, 1974, indicating that Patricia Hearst might be kidnapped?

The Hearsts, after all, are a famous California family.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Why did it take three months for the police to admit they had in their possession information received
on January 10, 1974, indicating that Patricia Hearst might be kidnapped? The Hearsts, after all, are a famous California family. Patty’s mother is on the Board of Regents of the
University of California, and could easily have been located. Patricia Hearst attended classes regularly at U.C. Berkeley, and should have been notified. Other businessmen on the SLA “list” were warned of possible danger. (5) Department of Motor Vehicles: transportation used in the Hearst kidnapping could have been
identified
Registered weapons should have led to immediate identification of SLA members. Library cards, a postal helmet, Parks uniforms and lists identified the SLA members who used the safe
house at Sutherland Court. Why didn’t the police locate automobiles registered to persons identified by existing evidence? The
SLA had claimed credit for the murder of Dr. Foster, followed by a “Declaration of War.”
Imagine a situation in which two blacks are arrested for murder, their comrades set fire to a house, flee
… and the police don’t’ seek the other members of the group. A blue Volkswagen owned by Camilla Hall was seen “scouting the scene” around Patty Hearst’s
apartment for a few days. If the police wanted to, Camilla Hall’s car could have been identified before the kidnapping, due to her
association with Remiro, Little and the SLA safe-house. A station wagon was used in the kidnap of Patty Hearst. Nancy Ling Ferry had an automobile. What
about the others?

--- PAGE BREAK ---ue to her
association with Remiro, Little and the SLA safe-house. A station wagon was used in the kidnap of Patty Hearst. Nancy Ling Ferry had an automobile. What
about the others?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(6) Police didn’t search the area where Dr. Foster was murdered and Robert Blackburn wounded
The SLA rented an apartment less than one mile from where the shooting occurred.
The manager of the apartment building knew that the residents the were not using it as a permanent
residence.
Thirteen other tenants in the building might have noticed there was an unusual commotion on the
evening of November 6, 1973.
(7) Polite made no effort to solve the murder of Dr. Foster and the shooting of Blackburn
Did the police know that if the Foster murder was solved, there would be no Patricia Hearst
kidnapping?
Sheriff Preston Guillary left the L.A. Sheriff’s Department following the arrest of Charles Manson and
his “family” at the Spahn Ranch. Guillary stated that there had been numerous complaints from neighbors
of the ranch. There were reports of automatic weapons, drugs, young females and questionable activities.
The orders at the Sheriffs office were “Don’t touch Manson.”
“They” were setting the Manson Family up for a killing of some kind. The Sheriffs office believed the
Manson family was going to murder Black Panthers, and that was acceptable to the officers. The surprise
set-up against Manson was the Sharon Tate-La Bianca massacres, where seven persons were murdered,
including an unborn child. Manson, like DeFreeze, was a patsy of our society. Patsies are used by law
enforcement for their own purposes, to spread terror.
(8) SLA “headquarters” was not sealed off after the arson, following the arrest of Joseph Remiro
and Russell Little
Shades of the Texas School Book Depository. Identical to the apartment of Arthur Bremer.
What about the removal of boxes from the garage of Mrs. Ruth Paine, following the arrest of Lee
Harvey Oswald, without warrants?
The safe house at Sutherland Court in Concord was a nest of revolutionary documents, addresses,
weapons, ammunition and evidence. Bayonets and pistols were taken away. The building was open to the
public. Anything could have been removed—or planted.
(9) Police could have located Willie Wolfe’s car and searched for him after January 10, 1974
Wolfe was in California when Dr. Foster was murdered.
Unmarried, no children, he had attended Oakland School Board meetings where Dr. Foster’s policies
were discussed.
Willie’s version of these meetings incited hatred against Dr. Foster at the Vacaville Medical Facility.
Wolfe’s car was used by Nancy Ling Perry and another male to vacate the Concord house after it was
set on fire.
The car was abandoned in a residential section of North Berkeley. Police did not look for Willie
Wolfe, and he was without transportation upon his return to the West Coast.
Why did it take 13 days to find his car?
(10) Police didn’t locate the house at 1560 Sutherland Court, Concord, rented by “Nancy end
George DeVoto,” for 17 hours after the arrest of Remiro and Little
When Little was arrested, Remiro ran from police and hid two blocks away in the SLA “safe-house.”ourt, Concord, rented by “Nancy end
George DeVoto,” for 17 hours after the arrest of Remiro and Little
When Little was arrested, Remiro ran from police and hid two blocks away in the SLA “safe-house.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---d by “Nancy end
George DeVoto,” for 17 hours after the arrest of Remiro and Little
When Little was arrested, Remiro ran from police and hid two blocks away in the SLA “safe-house.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

If Remiro and Little shot at Sergeant Duge, why didn’t other officers search the neighborhood? They
knew Little’s companion escaped on foot.
Four hours later, when Remiro decided to “surrender himself,” the police were still hanging around the
neighborhood. This was at about 5 a.m.
Yet police did not locate the building until 17 hours later, and then only because Nancy Ling Perry’s
arson fire called it to their attention.
(11) Why burn a house “to melt fingerprints,” when the SLA had plenty of time to remove more
incriminating evidence before the house was discovered?
Identification of the SLA members was left in the house.
References to the kidnapping of Patty Hearst were also left behind.
Was the SLA sure the police would not halt their plans, or could even be a part of them? Whatever they
left behind, the police and the FBI didn’t use this information to find them.
(12) Why did the police stop looking for an “Oriental woman?” Is there a record of her stopped
car on the day of the Foster murder?
An “Oriental” woman, driving a white 1965 station wagon, was stopped by police the day of the Foster
murder. Her vehicle contained a “number of firearms.”
A third person, small, possibly female, possibly Asian, was seen leaving the Foster ambush.
A small female, possibly Asian, accompanied the SLA when Patty Hearst was kidnapped.
Jean Chan, a friend of Dave Gunnell, attended BCA meetings at Vacaville with the SLA. She lived at
Peking House, the meeting place of Wolfe, Little and Steiner.
Was the female stopped with the weapons the same female “prison reformer” who attended Colston
Westbrook’s classes at Vacaville?
(13) Two White Station Wagons? Links of Foster Murder to Hearst Kidnapping—Why Are the
Police Protecting Conspirators?
The woman driving a white 1965 station wagon, stopped at the time of the Foster murder, had a vehicle
containing firearms. She was released, never a suspect.
A woman driving a white station wagon followed the convertible used when Patty Hearst was
kidnapped. The authorities believed Patty was transferred to the station wagon, which became the
eventual getaway car.
If it wasn’t Jean Chan, who was driving the white station wagon in both incidences?
The police stopped one white station wagon and could have records of the owner. After a second
wagon was described as being used for the Hearst kidnapping, and the SLA claimed credit for the Foster
murder as well as having Patty, why wasn’t this evidence used to locate a possible member of the
“army”?
Tim Findley, reporter for the San Francisco Chronicle, left his job over the coverage of the SLA. He
claimed the media wanted the appearance of a “much larger army” than there was. The law-enforcement
agencies were using the possible size of membership for scare tactics. At the same time, their own backup
support was ignored.
(14) Why did Colston Westbrook delay informing police he knew Joseph Remiro and Russell
Little?e possible size of membership for scare tactics. At the same time, their own backup
support was ignored.
(14) Why did Colston Westbrook delay informing police he knew Joseph Remiro and Russell
Little?

--- PAGE BREAK ---embership for scare tactics. At the same time, their own backup
support was ignored.
(14) Why did Colston Westbrook delay informing police he knew Joseph Remiro and Russell
Little?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Westbrook was teaching at UC Berkeley.
Two members of his former group at Vacaville were arrested for murdering Dr. Foster.
There were pictures taken of the SLA group at Vacaville that Westbrook could have produced
immediately.
It was reported that Westbrook himself spoke against Dr. Foster at Vacaville.
When Remiro and Little were arrested, the SLA issued their “death warrants” and “Declaration of
War.” did Westbrook go immediately to police and tell them how well he knew these men and women?
Did the police inform Westbrook that the “leader” of his prison group, Donald DeFreeze, had escaped
almost a year earlier?
Did the police tell Westbrook that Thero Wheeler, another group member, escaped from Vacaville in
August, 1973? Two prison escapees, two alleged murderers … and there was silence?
Given the evidence at Sutherland Court and the four men involved, the kidnapping of Patty Hearst could
have been prevented.
(15) The police department supplies weapons for terrorism
Beginning in August, 1973, money and weapons were supplied to the SLA on a regular basis. The
supplier attempted to involve Chicano, American Indian and black prison reformers with the SLA.
Unguarded U.S. Army arsenals supply left- and right-wing radicals. In an eventual shootout, the army
will back up the right wing.
(16) Did Dr. Hacker tell Randolph Hearst he had known Donald DeFreeze?
The official CIA psychiatrist-in-residence, Dr. Frederick Hacker, author and “expert” on provocateur
violence, acted as an advisor to Randolph Hearst.
Hacker’s claim to fame was a book about the Olympic Games massacre of Israeli athletes. Germans
and Americans killed the Israeli men. Hacker’s book did not analyze the violence of Germans and
Americans. Instead, it analyzed the violence of the Arab “terrorists” who took the Israelis as hostages.
Dr. Hacker was the psychiatrist assigned to Donald DeFreeze on November 21, 1968, while the future
“Cinque” was an LAPD informant.
(17) Why have the FBI and police conceal evidence of Arab oil money offered to the SLA to
provoke bombings?
The LAPD knows $1-million in Arab funding was offered to the SLA. The purpose? Bombings. The
result? To crack down on terrorists and link the culprits to international guerrilla movements.
William Williams, arrested for kidnapping Reg Murphy, had an address book in his pocket. The name
of the Saudi Arabian Embassy was in the book. A diary indicated that Williams had communicated with
both the Saudi Arabian Embassy and a right-wing political leader, J. B. Stoner, leader of the ultra-
conservative States Rights Party.
(18) Are other police connections with the SLA part of the conspiracy?
Amanda de Normanville was the woman Donald DeFreeze lived with when he left Soledad prison. A
former student at U.C. Berkeley, Amanda studied at the School of Criminology. Why didn’t police seek
her?
Compare the favoritism shown to certain SLA contacts to the San Bernardino trials after Ronald
Beaty’s escape from prison.ley, Amanda studied at the School of Criminology. Why didn’t police seek
her?
Compare the favoritism shown to certain SLA contacts to the San Bernardino trials after Ronald
Beaty’s escape from prison.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Four persons who assisted in Beaty’s escape were found guilty of a wide range of charges, including
the murder of a guard.

But the killing of Dr.

Marcus Foster, a black man, did not result in the filing of
charges against the SLA.

And harboring a prison escapee is not a crime if you are working with the SLA.

Police agents lured the SLA to their death trap.

The Mel’s Sporting Goods scene was meant to provide a convincing dramatic sequence; one that we
might accept provided we did not think about it too carefully.

When William Harris allegedly stole a pair of socks, the salesman took him outside the building and
put a handcuff on one of his wrists.

Emily (or William) left her registered gun in the store.

The salesman was a student in police science, and he just happened to have a pair of handcuffs with
him.

Bill Harris shoplifted a $.45 pair of white socks.

Was this scene pre-arranged between the LAPD and Harris?

Thero Wheeler, the missing black man in the Hearst kidnapping, has a brother who works on the San
Francisco Police Force.

DeFreeze suspected Wheeler and almost killed him.

Wheeler is “not politically like DeFreeze,” which means that Wheeler is the opposite of “radical,” if
you accept the premise that DeFreeze was radicalized.

Wheeler is not charged with Patty Hearst’s kidnapping, and his name is barely mentioned.

Did he work
with the police and against DeFreeze?

(19) How could the police not search for escaped convict Donald DeFreeze for eleven months?

DeFreeze had an elite group of tutors at Vacaville for two years.

White college graduates, teachers and
“friends” were employed in the Berkeley-Oakland-San Francisco area.

Each prison visitor must present complete identification, including driver’s license, address and social
security number.

Russell Little, Robyn Steiner and other SLA members corresponded with Soledad Prison on
DeFreeze’s behalf, asking for his early parole.

DeFreeze was allowed to use marital trailers with visiting women at Soledad Prison.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Russell Little, Robyn Steiner and other SLA members corresponded with Soledad Prison on
DeFreeze’s behalf, asking for his early parole. DeFreeze was allowed to use marital trailers with visiting women at Soledad Prison. In March, 1973, Donald DeFreeze walked out of Soledad. Clothing and transportation were waiting for
him. He didn’t go back to Los Angeles. He didn’t go back to Ohio, to his wife and family. DeFreeze went directly to the Bay Area, where he lived for 11 months with his former friends. The
police never looked for him. Black men living with white women are still conspicuous to the racist police. Black men joining Venceremos, offering his services as a “hit man” and suggesting murders are highly
conspicuous. (20) Did the San Francisco police ever look for Thero Wheeler after he left Vacaville Medical
Facility? Donald DeFreeze walked out of Soledad in March, 1973. Thero Wheeler, the second prisoner who knew members of the SLA, walked out of Vacaville in August,
1973. Didn’t law enforcement think these men might meet again on the outside? Wheeler and DeFreeze both stayed with former friends and visitors from their prison days, and also
met each other frequently. (21) Why does the repressive California Department of Corrections encourage the study of

--- PAGE BREAK ---ith former friends and visitors from their prison days, and also
met each other frequently. (21) Why does the repressive California Department of Corrections encourage the study of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Maoist books, revolutionary hand-fist salutes and radical dialogue?
Colston Westbrook bragged that he brought “chicks” to BCA classes to bait the men; their appeal was
greater than “communism.” Since when is communism a subject taught in prison -- and by a career CIA
man, at that?
At the present time, the Department of Corrections is encouraging the study of Maoist literature in
prison. If violence is committed after these men “escape” or are paroled, “foreign influence” will be
blamed.
(22) Donald DeFreeze had assistance when he left Soledad Prison
DeFreeze was stationed alone in the boiler room at the unguarded South Facility, late at night. An hour
later, he was gone.
Another inmate at Soledad was told that his classification would be changed to minimum if he would
work in the boiler room with DeFreeze.
A custody reduction chrono was given to me to have my boss sign so I could move to South where I
would be allowed to escape and join Don DeFreeze and members. I went for reduction in August, ’73,
but I refused to do this for the fact I realized I was being set up along with DeFreeze. Classification
results are in my central file to prove I refused to let my custody be dropped to minimum.
On April 18th, 1973, a letter changing this prisoner’s records was completed referring to five months
previous work inside the boiler room.
That date coincides with the entry of DeFreeze at Soledad from Vacaville Medical Facility in
December, 1972.
James Earl Ray, another famous inmate, was allowed to leave a Missouri prison. A “safe-house”
prison trailer was waiting for him nearby. Eleven months later, James Earl Ray was named as the assassin
of Dr. Martin Luther King. James Earl Ray was carefully set up as a patsy.
So was Donald DeFreeze.
(23) Did the police and the California Department of Corrections know where the SLA members
were? How hard did they push to recruit for the SLA?
On March 26, 1974, an inmate at Soledad was offered a chance to “escape” if he would kill convict
Jerry Lee Johnson, join an outside organization—the SLA—and “inform” for the state. The prison
committee consisted of a Mr. Martel, a Mr. Dobuff and a Mr. Mac Endrec. Their orders came down from
either Deputy Superintendent Morris or Associate Superintendent Marquez.
The prison officials wanted prisoner “collaboration with officials,” to “instigate tactics used to stir up
racial disruptions, promote ‘tips’ and control the population to instill a constant sense of fear and
apprehension.”
Did the FBI and the police know where Patty Hearst was in March, 1974—if they were asking
prisoners to join the SLA?
Did they want a “larger army” for future propaganda?
(24) Donald DeFreeze worked with Ron Karenga and the Criminal Conspiracy Section of the
LAPD. Isn’t it more than a coincidence that two of their co-workers walked out of San Quentin in
March, 1974?a?
(24) Donald DeFreeze worked with Ron Karenga and the Criminal Conspiracy Section of the
LAPD. Isn’t it more than a coincidence that two of their co-workers walked out of San Quentin in
March, 1974?

--- PAGE BREAK ---“Dear Mom and Dad, The prison system is going through a strong repressive stage and we know
for certain that we will do another five years or more.

We love you more than you can ever
imagine.”—George Steiner (age 27) & Larry Steiner (age 26)
The Steiner brothers served time in San Quentin for murdering two Black Panthers on the UCLA
campus.

Ron Karenga, Donald DeFreeze and the Steiner brothers had all worked for the LAPD.

A lengthy note was left by the bed in a visitors’ cottage outside the walls of San Quentin, where
convicted murderers George and Larry were kindly allowed to stay overnight with their parents, in
March, 1974.

It is possible that their “escape” was arranged to send them on their way to set up an old
co-worker—Donald DeFreeze back in Los Angeles.

No one is looking for the Steiner brothers, either.

(25) Why the discrepancy in the diagnosis of Donald DeFreeze?

In 1970, Donald DeFreeze wanted to “confess,” end a life of running from the police—or working with
them.

The LAPD’s CCS “cut him loose,” and sent him to Chino Men’s Facility for a diagnosis.

Medical reports at Chino described DeFreeze as “disorganized … impaired social adjustment … a
schizoid personality, passive-aggressive, needs 24-hour program of treatment.”
DeFreeze was sent on to Vacaville Medical Facility.

For two years at Vacaville, DeFreeze was befriended by a highly educated, socially elite group of
visitors and tutors: college graduates, two “professors” and graduate students.

They met with him twice a
week.

There was no mention of unusual behavior, depression or lack of organization when DeFreeze
participated in the BCA, or later when he led his own group, “Unisight.”
How did he make this miraculous recovery?

DeFreeze spent four months at Soledad.

He was not considered dangerous.

He was allowed to work
unguarded, and he showed no aggressive behavior or disorganization.

DeFreeze’s prison and medical records have probably all been removed and been destroyed by now.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He was allowed to work
unguarded, and he showed no aggressive behavior or disorganization. DeFreeze’s prison and medical records have probably all been removed and been destroyed by now. For eleven months, DeFreeze lived with members of the SLA in the Berkeley area. Emily Harris was
“in love” with him. Mizmoon was “in love” with him. His depression and his “schizoid personality”
seem to have vanished. Was the original diagnosis exaggerated to provide the excuse to send him to Vacaville, where his mind
could be altered and programmed? (26) Why are CIA and police intelligence agents stationed inside the prisons? Was the purpose to
promote stiffer legislation? British and U.S. Intelligence share the same agents and the same techniques. British agent Kenneth
Littlejohn surfaced recently and explained how and why British Intelligence come down upon the Irish. (Kenneth Littlejohn infiltrated the Irish Republican Army in 1973, and pulled off the biggest bank robbery
in Irish history. During the trial, he and a brother accomplice testified that they worked for British
intelligence, were told to stage the robbery to discredit the IRA.)
The CIA uses the same strategy in the U.S. Lady Onslow, an English countess, visited prisoners often as part of her espionage assignment. She was
the link between prison inmates, military intelligence and the British “dirty tricks” department. Kenneth
Littlejohn was hired to commit a bank robbery and a murder. He worked with Lady Onslow. The purpose
of his assignments was to provoke stiffer legislation by the British against the Irish. The espionage agents

--- PAGE BREAK ---it a bank robbery and a murder. He worked with Lady Onslow. The purpose
of his assignments was to provoke stiffer legislation by the British against the Irish. The espionage agents

--- PAGE BREAK ---

were disguised to make their attacks appear to come from the “enemy.”
(27) The House Internal Security Committee of the U.S. Congress becomes expert on the SLA
In February, 1974, the Committee had already linked the SLA with every radical group on the West
Coast, including prisoners.
How can they maintain these lies in the face of overwhelming evidence that the U.S. military worked
with police to create the SLA?
(28) Harris’ U.S. Army identification
Harris served with the Marines in Vietnam before he finished college. Would he still be carrying and
his military ID card five years later?
When was the last time he used this card? Were the supplies to sustain Patricia Hearst and the SLA
obtained at Marine bases?
(29) Proximity to the FBI
Camilla Hall withdrew $1,565 from a bank located across the street from the FBI. Twenty-five days
after the Hearst kidnapping, Camilla felt safe enough to do that. The FBI knew she had an account at the
bank. The Central Bank at 2187 Shattuck Ave. failed to notify the FBI of the withdrawal. The FBI didn’t
ask bank officials for help.
They asked doctors. Money for SLA tactical support was more important. It allowed the “army” to
continue their escalation of episodes as directed.
The two rented getaway cars used in the Hibernia Bank robbery were left nine blocks from the FBI
offices.
The red and white van purchased for the SLA getaway to Los Angeles was bought a few blocks from
the FBI offices.
The SLA safe house, decorated for our benefit with the Cobra mural, graffiti and filth, was 14 blocks
from the FBI offices. Six of nine of the SLA lived there, rode a bicycle and did their marketing at local
stores for six weeks.
The SLA safe house that produced the famous planted urban guerrilla Minimanual was conveniently
located one block from the Oakland police and FBI offices.
(30) Is the creation of the SLA by the CIA part of a plan for future genocide? How closely does
the SLA script follow the King Alfred Plan?
John Williams, in The Man Who Cried I Am, included a plan purportedly drawn up by the National
Security Council to exterminate all black people. It was called “The King Alfred Plan.” The creation and
activities of the SLA appear to follow the King Alfred Plan.
In “The King Alfred Plan,” the United States was divided into districts. Joseph Remiro wanted the
Vietnam veterans to assist toward legislation separating non-whites into their own geographical areas.
Both the King Alfred Plan and the SLA wanted to eliminate black leaders.
The SLA list of assassinations to follow the murder of Dr. Foster included Huey Newton, Bobby Seale
and Richard Foster, an educator instrumental in ending segregation in the Bay Area. Does the Marcus
Wayne Chenault death list have links to the King Alfred Plan and the SLA?
In June, 1974, Chenault, a black college graduate, flew from Ohio to Georgia and murdered Mrs.
Martin Luther King, Sr. in an Atlanta Church. The papers said Chenault “had a list of people to murder.?
In June, 1974, Chenault, a black college graduate, flew from Ohio to Georgia and murdered Mrs.
Martin Luther King, Sr. in an Atlanta Church. The papers said Chenault “had a list of people to murder.

--- PAGE BREAK ---The list included Rev.

Ralph Abernathy, Hosea Williams, head of the Southern Christian Leadership
Conference, Rev.

Jesse Jackson, head of the Chicago-based Operation Push, and singer Aretha Franklin,
who had contributed to the Angela Davis Defense Fund.”
The FBI is purposely concealing five other names on the death list.

The SLA wanted to kill black leaders.

Marcus Chenault told Martin Luther King, Sr.

of a “whole army”
dedicated to killing black leaders.

The cover story is that they want to kill “false black leaders.” If every
prominent black leader in civil rights is slated for extinction, who then are the “true” leaders—police
informers like Donald DeFreeze?

When Martin Luther King was murdered, Howard Hughes said, “I know this is not a very praiseworthy
point of view, but I feel the Negroes have already made enough progress to last the next one hundred
years, and there is such a thing as overdoing it.”
Charles Colson and other witnesses have revealed that Howard Hughes “is the CIA.” Colson said that
Hughes was the largest private contractor for the CIA.

As such, he controlled the White House and the
National Security Council.

Is it the plan of ITT and the Hughes empire to employ espionage agents, directed by the CIA, to
exterminate blacks across the country?

Whites are painting their faces black to commit acts of violence.

How many blacks are being taught,
compelled or programmed to frame or murder blacks?

The FBI’s William O’Neal framed and set up Fred
Hampton.

Chris Thompson, Thero Wheeler and Colston Westbrook.

They helped lead DeFreeze to his death.

One of the reasons Louis Tackwood left the LAPD was
because he was aware of their racism and desire for a police state.

Tackwood knew that after he had
served them, they would murder him.--- PAGE BREAK ---

One of the reasons Louis Tackwood left the LAPD was
because he was aware of their racism and desire for a police state. Tackwood knew that after he had
served them, they would murder him. (31) California Attorney General Evelle Younger: Military and FBI Connections – Links with
Donald DeFreeze and a National Conspiracy
Evelle Younger is an Air Force major general, trained in counter-intelligence and a member of the FBI. The LAPD’s Criminal Conspiracy Section was under Younger’s direction. As Los Angles District Attorney, Younger was directly responsible for concealing the identity of the
real assassin of Robert Kennedy. Sirhan Sirhan was the chosen patsy and did not commit the murder. Every major conspiracy in the California Police Departments and prison system is directly linked to
Younger and the National Security Council in Washington. D.C. Their murders would conceal larger conspiracies, so Younger has pushed so hard for the death penalty
and the execution of political radicals. Evelle Younger was called as a witness for Donald De Freeze in 1970. Did the Attorney General tell Randolph Hearst of his working relationship with DeFreeze earlier? (32) Comparison of the treatment received by selected agents & genuine radicals in the prisons
Ruchell Magee was charged with armed kidnapping in 1963. Evelle Younger keeps after Magee with a
vengeance. The prison system wants to keep Magee ineligible for parole. But the Steiner brothers, DeFreeze, James Garske and other police agents are eligible for parole. Shooting police officers, murdering, kidnapping and armed robbery are not considered obstacles to
parole … if the right people are behind you. (33) Why do police supply weapons to black radicals? On December 6, 1967, Donald DeFreeze turned Ronald Coleman, his partner, over to the LAPD.

--- PAGE BREAK ---DeFreeze and Coleman had a cache of 200 weapons, stolen goods from a surplus store.

Police knew the
guns were intended for the U.S.

Organization, a Black Nationalist group.

Two years later, DeFreeze exchanged gunshots with a bank guard and was wounded.

The gun he used in
the shootout was a .32 caliber Berretta automatic pistol.

There is evidence that this gun was one of 200
stolen guns turned in to the police in ’67.

With all the editorials about the causes of violence and terrorism, the basic cause is always omitted:
the police and prison guards supplying the weapons.

(34) U.S.

Attorney General William Saxbe
The Justice Department has been covering up criminal conspiracies for the past fifteen years.

AG William Saxbe of Ohio said he would close the Kent State investigation if he were appointed
Attorney General.

There is no safety in ending wire-tapping and electronic surveillance alone.

Agents provocateurs
should be illegal.

As long as the top U.S.

law enforcement official attempts to cover up a national
conspiracy like the SLA, then he must be considered part of the plan.

Saxbe stirs the fires of fear with quotations from planted documents.

He has inherited John Mitchell’s
role.

The Attorney General should be confronted with evidence of the SLA conspiracy.

He should be
removed from office if he continues to cover it up.

(35) Admiral Ford?

Or Vice President Ford?

Gerald Ford, a member of the infamous Warren Commission, condemned “crime by revolutionaries in
California.”
Ford praised the L.A.

police for their excellent response to a “murderous group of self-proclaimed
revolutionaries.”
This is the same man who signed his name to a fictitious document called The Warren Report.

Lee
Harvey Oswald was described in The Warren Report as a “self-proclaimed” communist.

Gerald Ford
knew from the very first meeting of the Warren Commission that Lee Harvey Oswald was an espionage
agent of the U.S.

government, and an FBI informer as well.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Gerald Ford
knew from the very first meeting of the Warren Commission that Lee Harvey Oswald was an espionage
agent of the U.S. government, and an FBI informer as well. Portrait of The Assassin, Gerald Ford’s own
book, opens with the important information about Oswald’s background. (36) President Richard M. Nixon
At a time Patty Hearst’s life was in danger and she was in the hands of her kidnappers, Richard Nixon
got into the act. He asked for “death to the kidnappers.” With limited alternatives, the SLA might have
murdered. The police, the FBI and the president egged the abductors on, letting them know that they might as well
go through with the murder, they would not live anyway. Remember that this is the same president who said “Charles Manson is guilty” while the trial was
taking place. Manson never entered the Sharon Tate home on the night of the murders. Police intelligence
agents did. Charles Watson wrote “Death to the pigs” in blood on the door, hoping Black Panthers would
be blamed for the murder. Who moved the bodies after the Manson Family departed? (37) FBI bait for the provocateurs
FBI Director Charles Bates offered what amounted to immunity if William and Emily Harris wanted to

--- PAGE BREAK ---surface.

“So far, the Harrises were not overtly involved in any of these incidents.”
– Charles Bates, 6-10-74
The favoritism that police, prison guards and federal law enforcement show espionage agents is
identical to the special treatment Watergate defendants are receiving.

If any one thing proves that the CIA
is behind the SLA operation, it is the way the law is handling their agents.

They murdered six SLA
members.

The others can surface now and go on to their next assignments.

House keys for the 7th Avenue Oakland apartment, found on Remiro and Little, linked them with the
murder of Dr.

Foster.

This apartment was used as the hideout for a murder and an attempted murder.

William and Emily Harris each obtained drivers’ licenses using false names and the address of this
apartment in September, 1973, a few days before the SLA moved in.

Why doesn’t this act link them to the murder of Dr.

Foster?

Why haven’t they been charged with murder
and conspiracy?

As intelligence agents or agents provocateurs on a higher and more sophisticated level,
they are safe from prosecution.

Selected patsies take the rap once again.

(38) Accessories after the Fact
The Warren Commission was provided “delayed evidence” by the FBI to back up its finding that Lee
Harvey Oswald assassinated President Kennedy.

Oswald’s famous planted diary, the camera that took his
superimposed portrait and famous bullet #399 are examples of delayed props.

Investigators of the SLA, working with the police, are coming out with delayed evidence reminiscent of
other conspiracies.

Police associated Patty Hearst’s name with the SLA three weeks before she was kidnapped.

It was
revealed months later.

It was reported that cyanide bullets were found in Patty’s apartment, behind a bookshelf.

A “more
thorough search the next day” produced this evidence.

The Hearst family and news media were not told of
these findings for two months.--- PAGE BREAK ---

A “more
thorough search the next day” produced this evidence. The Hearst family and news media were not told of
these findings for two months. Bullet #399 that allegedly traveled through John Kennedy and John
Connally, the subject of two books, was “found on a stretcher” in the hall of Parkland Hospital. Photographs allegedly of the SLA were located a week after their deaths in the burned-out house. The
use of Polaroid negatives from the SLA location could link the group to negatives found near a dead
police officer in Compton one week earlier. Piles of maps, dozens, were found at the SLA house on Jan. 10, 1974. Some included the Hillsborough
area, home of Patty Hearst. A map marked “Graton Road, Sonoma County, led to a federally-licensed
demolition contractor [given] a permit to possess, use and sell high explosives and detonation
equipment. Investigators found three bunkers of dynamite at the site.” July 23, 1974, the police revealed
the presence of maps. They had three weeks to use them before Patty Hearst was kidnapped. Who was the
government contractor? An un-mailed letter was supposedly found under Camilla Hall’s burned body. It took one month for
police to reveal this fact, if it is a fact and not a forged document. The death message complements the
violent language of the SLA. The purpose was to coax radicals to take to the gun and denounce “so-called
radical leaders” for lack of support. (39) The SLA and the CIA—Spanish Connections? Paul Halverson, friend of Camilla Hall, was called before the S.F. Grand Jury. He didn’t understand
why they wanted a postcard mailed by Camilla from “Spain two years ago.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---Howard Hunt was associated with the Spanish Embassy.

Dorothy Hunt, his wife and CIA partner,
worked for the U.S.

Spanish Embassy.

William Harris had been to Spain recently.

Willie Wolfe and
Colston Westbrook traveled extensively in Europe.

Did any of the SLA know each other or meet in Spain?

Did the U.S.

Attorney General want to cover up these “innocent” pieces of evidence—proving that the
SLA members had mobility and funding of some kind?

Joyce Halverson, Paul’s wife, went to jail for refusing to give information about Camilla Hall.

They
had known each other for a long time.

Joyce added: “I hope the grand jury will look into the charges that the CIA was behind the SLA.”
XI.

INDICATIONS THAT THE SLA IS PART OF A LARGE-SCALE NATIONAL CONSPIRACY
“We had to keep the lid on all the other things that were going on here that would have been worse, I
think, than the Watergate business.”
—Former Attorney General John Mitchell, phone call to John Ehrlichman, April 14, 1973
June 17, 1972, the day of the Watergate arrests, was an important date in American history.

The CIA
was caught altering the electoral process one more time.

This event provided us with the opportunity to
expose methods of clandestine agents working on domestic terrain.

Two years after the arrests, Congress and the Justice Department are still protecting the conspirators.

The top directors and agents of espionage will not be asked to reveal how many horrors were and are
being planned for us, and what they have been doing to destroy our Constitution.

The SLA and the violence that will follow it in years to come would never occur if the secret military
intelligence army were smashed and exposed once and for all.

We are more afraid of progressive social
change than we are of a murderous dictatorship.

There are many reasons for believing that the SLA is only part of a larger national conspiracy.

Listed below are a few reasons for this conclusion.

1.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Listed below are a few reasons for this conclusion. 1. FBI Director Charles Bates’s Role
In 1969, Bates was a special agent in charge of the Chicago FBI offices. In 1971, he moved to the
General Investigative Division of the Washington, D.C. FBI. He is currently Director of the San Francisco
FBI, in charge of the SLA investigation. There are startling parallels between the FBI-police murder of Black Panther leaders Fred Hampton
and Mark Clark in Chicago in 1969, and the deaths of Donald DeFreeze and the SLA in 1974. In each case, black police-FBI informers took an active part in their deaths. Hampton and Clark were
drugged before the police broke in and killed them; Christine Johnson, who almost died inside the SLA
house, said she awoke from a “drugged sleep.”
In Chicago, the police were deliberately misinformed that the Panthers had killed police officers. The
LAPD was told that the SLA had murdered a police officer a few days earlier. In each case, the FBI was responsible for both the killings and subsequent cover-up of the facts. 2. The Cobra as the SLA insignia
The cobra is used as an anti-Semitic and racist point of reference by the Ku Klux Klan, White Aryan
Knights and Christian militants in Brazil. The U.S. Organization, part of Ron Karenga’s LAPD-infiltrated
group that killed Black Panthers, used the same 7-headed cobra (the “Kawaida”) that DeFreeze and the

--- PAGE BREAK ---itants in Brazil. The U.S. Organization, part of Ron Karenga’s LAPD-infiltrated
group that killed Black Panthers, used the same 7-headed cobra (the “Kawaida”) that DeFreeze and the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

SLA adopted. The “Kawaida” is a concept developed by the OSS and CIA. It is a set of indoctrination
precepts used in brainwashing technology, imposed upon the victim.
3. SLA “help” was rejected by every radical group in the Bay Area
The services of the SLA were turned down by Bay Area radical groups. Their offers to provide “hit
men” for violence were rejected. They were suspected of being provocateurs.
4. Prison escapes as national policy
James Earl Ray was allowed to leave a Missouri prison 11 months before he became the patsy in the
Martin Luther King murder. California prisoners were offered a chance to leave the prisons if they would
join the SLA. This was not the decision of individual prison guards, but is part of a national conspiracy.
5. Intelligence agencies or law enforcement had never heard of the SLA before the Foster
murder
The FBI has informers planted in every legitimate radical group.
Unless the SLA were police agents themselves, they would have been known to police as radicals,
either in the prisons they visited or in the Berkeley-Oakland area.
6. SLA communiqués were pathetic imitations of radical thinking
The SLA’s messages were hardly inspired or written in the style or spirit of other radical leaders like
George Jackson, Malcolm X or Martin Luther King. William Harris, a teacher with an M.A. in urban
affairs, revealed his “advanced political thinking” in the message he taped in May, 1974. He referred to
the “jive-assed pig agent school superintendent, sick-assed racists, mindless cunts and gigantic black
penises.”
7. Breakup of Black Leadership
The purpose of FBI orders issued in 1969 was to break up all radical and leftist groups.
Organizations with the word “black” in their names were particular targets.
Then what about the Black Cultural Association inside Vacaville Prison?
Black leaders were to be “neutralized” by FBI provocateurs, and that included assassination when
necessary.
DeFreeze’s army was so “neutralized” that he was its only black member.
8. More kidnappings, assassinations and violence will follow the Hearst kidnapping
FBI Director Clarence Kelley warned that there’d be more kidnappings in the future. He should have
known. The early rush of kidnappings will be followed by a steadily escalating stream of bombings, scare
tactics, murders, arson, robberies and assorted violence blamed on terrorists. The facts behind these
incidents are protected on a national level, and never fully exposed in the courts. They are concealed by
careful selection of evidence and witnesses.
9. National brain-altering policies
Medical experimentation on prisoners’ brains in California is directly related to national conspiracies.e concealed by
careful selection of evidence and witnesses.
9. National brain-altering policies
Medical experimentation on prisoners’ brains in California is directly related to national conspiracies.

--- PAGE BREAK ---The work on prisoners’ brains was developed at Massachusetts General Hospital, where federal money
funded a team working on electrode implants and psychosurgery.

The punishment and experimentation—with drugs, electroshock, behavior modification programs and
surgical techniques to alter behavior—prominent at Vacaville are also taking place in other prisons and
hospitals around the country.

10.

Links between California Governor Ronald Reagan, former Florida Governor Claude Kirk
and the planned destruction of the University of California.

Former Governor Kirk of Florida ran his gubernatorial campaign with promises to “break the
University of California” … over 3,000 miles away.

The day after Kirk and Reagan were elected in 1967, they met in Los Angeles.

On the following day,
University of California’s President Clark Kerr was fired, without a day’s notice.

This was the beginning of many changes at the University of California, now moving rapidly
backwards.

Kerr had dreamed of a college education for every high school graduate.

The University of California
had a flowering humanities program.

Today, the hopes of a college education for every child are gone.

Courses on social justice and the
humanities are disappearing.

The location of the SLA at the doorstep of U.C.

Berkeley was a purposeful act, designed to link the
radical-hippie movement with violence.

Shana Alexander wrote a book on the SLA, “explaining” how it was nurtured in the permissive radical
community.

The California climate did not breed violence.

The military-industrial police agents
deliberately created violence to discredit necessary and legitimate organizations against genocide and
fascism.

H.R.

Haldeman, who has always represented Richard Nixon, took an active role in the firing of Kerr
from the presidency of the University of California.

11.

The Olympic Games massacre of Israeli athletes in Munich, Dr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

11. The Olympic Games massacre of Israeli athletes in Munich, Dr. Hacker and the SLA
The Massacre in Munich was wide open for the investigation of a larger conspiracy involving U.S. and
German military police. “Arab terrorists” kidnapped the Israelis after the German police watched them climb the fence. Dr. Frederick Hacker, an “expert” on terrorism, wrote a book deploring violence and guerrilla
movements. But he never mentioned the secret funding behind the Arabs, or elaborated on the fact that it
was the Germans and Americans who murdered the Jewish athletes, not Arabs. Hacker, as a consultant to the LAPD, became Donald DeFreeze’s psychiatrist when he was working as
a police informant. When Patty Hearst was kidnapped, Dr. Hacker moved on to become Randolph
Hearst’s advisor. 12. Links of Saudi Arabian and Iranian oil money to the Reg Murphy kidnapping, Watergate
plumbers, dirty tricks and SLA bombings
Saudi Arabian money was involved in the Murphy kidnapping and was linked to J.B. Stoner’s States
Rights Party. Funds from the Middle East went into CIA accounts in Mexico for White House dirty tricks. Stoner’s States Rights Party employs the brother of James Early Ray. There is a link here between conspiracies and provocations in the U.S., funds from right wing oil

--- PAGE BREAK ---dirty tricks. Stoner’s States Rights Party employs the brother of James Early Ray. There is a link here between conspiracies and provocations in the U.S., funds from right wing oil

--- PAGE BREAK ---

companies and the SLA kidnapping and related bombings in 1974.
13. U.S. military assistance to the SLA
The media and Congressional hearings emphasize the influence of Mao, the Brazilian Minimanual and
international terrorists on the SLA.
But what about William Harris’ U.S. Military I.D.? The SLA also had a copy of The Rise and Fall of
the Third Reich. Nazi influence was prevalent in the Justice Department in the persons of G. Gordon
Liddy and Robert Mardian, visible in San Leandro with the Nazi prediction of Dr. Foster’s death.
14. The true story behind California’s epidemic of violence has not yet been told
Juan Corona, Herbert Mullen, Edmund Kemper, Charles Manson, Charles Watson and Sirhan Sirhan
might have interesting stories to tell, confirming their involvement in larger conspiracies.
These men are isolated, not allowed to be interviewed and not permitted to have fair trials.
The Zodiac killings and the Zebra murders are part of the same pattern of pre-arranged terrorism.
Judges, prosecutors and defense attorneys make a mockery of court proceedings, and refuse to examine
the evidence properly. The SLA and Zebra scare are a continuation of a sequence of events that have
common law enforcement links.
15. The CCS is linked to the White House secret intelligence army, the Huston Plan and operates
throughout the state of California.
Louis Tackwood, in The Glass House Tapes, illustrated the interlocking of national and state police
agencies. Since his book appeared, the CIA has admitted placing agents in local police departments.
Donald DeFreeze worked for the Criminal Conspiracy Section.
16. Future germ warfare, the American Nazi Party, SLA threats and the U.S. military.
An alleged SLA memo published in Los Angeles June 1974 threatened future radiation and chemical
poisonings.
American Nazis stationed at Ford Ord, California, engaged in a national project called “Operation
Blue,” were studying how to spread botulism to murder large sectors of the population.
The SLA had books on Chemical and Biological Warfare, The Science of Public Death, by Dr. Marc
Lappe, and The Generic Effects of Radioactivity. The U.S. Army could use chemical warfare—and
blame terrorists and radicals.
17. U.S. Attorneys Branden Alvey and Robert Merckle were flown from Washington, D.C., to Los
Angeles, to prosecute the SLA Case
These imported Government prosecutors also had their assignments.
Legitimate radicals are imprisoned and harassed.
Police, CIA and FBI informants are protected and not charged with crimes. Did Alvey and Merckle
work with Bates in Washington, D.C.?
If this had been a legitimate radical group, the supporting cast would have been rounded up and
imprisoned.
18. Were 12.6 million acres of California desert land closed to off-road traffic in November, 1973s had been a legitimate radical group, the supporting cast would have been rounded up and
imprisoned.
18. Were 12.6 million acres of California desert land closed to off-road traffic in November, 1973

--- PAGE BREAK ---for future military operations?

The SLA had maps of abandoned mines and desert locations.

The Manson-Watson family was protected at Barker Ranch, safe house on the Mojave Desert, until they
were arrested for stealing dune-buggy parts.

The Harrises purchased camping gear and clothing at Mel’s Sporting Goods Store - where they
departed in a hurry.

Was this a clue to where they might be found?

Can Patty and the Harrises be hidden
somewhere in this large area for the summer, while hippies in vans and communes are harassed?

19.

Black Abductor, San Diego, the FBI, Minutemen, kidnapping of radicals and White House
intelligence
Black Abductor, the 1972 “novel” containing a blueprint for the Hearst kidnapping, came from an
unknown writer, Harrison James, published by Regency.

Is this a CIA dummy front?

San Diego is the area where radicals were going to be kidnapped during the 1972 Republican
Convention.

San Diego is where Donald Segretti, emissary of White House military intelligence, met with FBI
agents in the Minutemen.

The Minutemen have created provocateur situations to hasten the arrival of a police state and race war.

The SLA marks the beginning of the implementation of this plan.

XII.

WERE THESE GAME PLANS AGAINST HUMANITY NECESSARY?

The Phoenix is a mythical bird of great beauty that rose from the ashes and represented immortality.

The CIA’s Phoenix Program in Vietnam represented sadism, greed, hypocrisy, lying, torture, false
imprisonment, terror and assassinations.

Every decent human being should have rejected these actions
from the beginning.

Instead, we promoted William Colby, who presided over the Phoenix Program, to the
position of director of all U.S.

intelligence.

The seven-headed cobra symbol originated in Asia.

It represented unity, self-determination, collective
work and responsibility, cooperative production, purpose, creativity and faith.

The CIA and military intelligence once more perverted a symbol.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It represented unity, self-determination, collective
work and responsibility, cooperative production, purpose, creativity and faith. The CIA and military intelligence once more perverted a symbol. They utilized the cobra for the
Symbionese Liberation Army. The purpose was to associate symbols of hope and progress with murder,
kidnapping, suicide, bombings, bank robberies and terror. From the ashes of Vietnam the Phoenix rose. American youth marched in the streets or left the country
in preference to murdering. A body of citizens met and publicly protested the killings and warfare. Those individuals became
enemies of the state, and had to be infiltrated and discredited. From the ashes of the SLA, another group of persons may arise. They may resent the military SWAT
teams, intelligence infiltration, assassination squads, false imprisonments, torture and all the other horrors
brought from Vietnam to the United States. If we can see the parallels between our military operations at
home and abroad, perhaps clandestine operations of this kind will be halted. If we don’t see the
comparisons, they will escalate. The truth about the SLA—and future acts by provocateurs posing as “spin-offs from the SLA”—can be
scrutinized. Crimes do not remain unsolved for long once participating agents are identified by name. The wide
discrepancies between the SLA cover stories and the hard evidence will emerge if we ask the correct

--- PAGE BREAK ---ain unsolved for long once participating agents are identified by name. The wide
discrepancies between the SLA cover stories and the hard evidence will emerge if we ask the correct

--- PAGE BREAK ---

questions and pursue every lead.
Public relations offices serving as fronts for the CIA and military give their versions of U.S. history.
These accounts are false. The SLA requires the same scrutiny applied to other political conspiracies.
America is a nation groping for culture and art. Whenever an opportunity appears, those in control
divert public money into a few private pockets, wage war, increase profits and industrial productivity.
Every time a political or civil rights leader emerges to effect necessary change, the military kills him.
When youth begins to awaken and ask the proper questions, their culture has to be crushed.
For ten years, military intelligence has made a profession of destroying lives and dreams.
They pervert idealism.
They pump the poor full of drugs and TV images of murder, rape, violence.
They turn masses, organizations and individuals against each other.
We must protect our feelings and separate them from these contradictions—between what is imminent
death and what might become creative life. Our only hope is to become aware of how we are
manipulated, and by whom.
– July 11, 1974
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Donald Freed, of Citizens’ Research and Investigation Committee (CRIC); Author and researcher, Executive Action, Agony in New Haven,
Inquest; Editor, The Glass House Tapes.
Lake Headley, Independent Investigator; Chief investigator in Billy Dean Smith Case, Wounded Knee.
Stephanie Caruana, writer.
The Fifth Estate, CARIC, Counter-Spy Campaign Organizing Committee. P.O. Box 647, Ben Franklin Station, Washington, D.C., 20044.
Sherman Skolnick, Citizens’ Committee to Clean Up the Courts.
Prisoners from Vacaville Medical Facility and Soledad Prison, who have risked their lives to assist in exposing Donald DeFreeze’s contacts
while in prison.Citizens’ Committee to Clean Up the Courts.
Prisoners from Vacaville Medical Facility and Soledad Prison, who have risked their lives to assist in exposing Donald DeFreeze’s contacts
while in prison.

--- PAGE BREAK ---to Clean Up the Courts.
Prisoners from Vacaville Medical Facility and Soledad Prison, who have risked their lives to assist in exposing Donald DeFreeze’s contacts
while in prison.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER ELEVEN
OPERATION CHAOS: FROM MONTEREY POP TO
ALTAMONT
THE CIA’S WAR AGAINST THE SIXTIES COUNTER-CULTURE (1976)
I. DEATH, DRUGS AND DEPRESSION
II. THE BEAUTIFUL PEOPLE
III. THE ENEMY
IV. THE BATTLEGROUND
V. THE FINALE … HELTER SKELTER, GIMME SHELTER
I. DEATH, DRUGS AND DEPRESSION
American and British pop/rock music during the ’60’s advanced an art form that has been described as
one of the most important cultural revolutions in history. Within a few years, between 1968 and 1976,
many of the most famous names associated with this early movement were dead. Mama Cass Elliott, Jimi
Hendrix, Otis Redding, Brian Jones (formed the Rolling Stones with Mick Jagger and Keith Richards)
and Janis Joplin were all at the Monterey Pop celebration, summer 1967. Duane Allman, Berry Oakley
(helped form Allman group with Duane and Gregg Allman), Tim Buckley, Jim Croce, Richard Farina,
Donald Rex Jackson (road manager for Grateful Dead), Michael Jeffery (Jimi Hendrix’ manager), Brian
Epstein (Beatles manager), Al Jackson (drummer for Wilson Pickett, back-up drummer for Otis Redding),
Vinnie Taylor (Sha-Na-Na), Paul T. Williams (an original Temptation), Clarence White (Byrds), Robbie
McIntosh (drummer Average White Band), Jim Morrison (Doors), Pamela Morrison (Jim’s wife), Rod
McKernan “Pig Pen” (Grateful Dead), Phil Ochs, Gram Parsons (Byrds, Flying Burritos, International
Submarine Band, sang with Emmylou Harris), Sal Mineo, Meredith Hunter (victim of ritual killing at
Altamont Festival), Steve Perron (lead singer of Children, wrote hit songs for ZZ TOP) and Jimmy Reed
(influenced many groups, combined harmonica with guitar) were a few possible victims.
Family and friends accepted the musicians’ depressions or accidents as having to do with alcohol, drug
usage or both. Was anything added to their beverages or drugs to cause personality changes and eventual
suicides? Almost every death was shrouded with unanswered questions and mystery. Persons around
these musicians had strange backgrounds and were often suspect. All of these musicians were at the peak
of a creative period and success at the time they were offered LSD. Their personalities altered
drastically. Optimism and gratification were followed by doubt and misery. Why would young people
with so much talent and influence as Phil Ochs, Janis Joplin, Gram Parsons or Brian Jones wallow in
suffering, self-doubt and despondency? They were all loved; making important contributions, cutting new
records and were recognized for their talent. Jimi Hendrix, Mama Cass Elliott, Steve Perron choking from
their vomit? I doubt it. Phil Ochs just happened to be touring Africa when native “robbers” jumped himand were recognized for their talent. Jimi Hendrix, Mama Cass Elliott, Steve Perron choking from
their vomit? I doubt it. Phil Ochs just happened to be touring Africa when native “robbers” jumped him

--- PAGE BREAK ---and cut his throat, severing his vocal chords?

Way back in 1966, the American Broadcasting Co.

was
planning to merge with International Telephone and Telegraph Co.

(ITT).

ABC had put aside $100,000
advance for the first television special by writer-poet Bob Dylan.

The production was to climax the
season.

On Saturday, July 30, 1966, Bob Dylan had a motorcycle accident.

Dylan never made it on the air
and ABC never merged with ITT.

The merger required a lack of protest from the Antitrust Division of the
Justice Department.

No comment.

In addition to Dylan, Stevie Wonder, Eric Clapton and the Dave Mason band, many others suffered near
fatal accidents.

The nine years in which the musicians allegedly overdosed, drank themselves to death,
drove over cliffs, hung themselves, choked, crashed their motorcycles, went insane or freaked out without
any reasonable explanation, were the same years that the FBI and CIA waged a domestic war against any
kind of dissent.

Was Lenny Bruce the first victim?

How about Jack Kerouac?

Did Bruce pay his dues for
comparing United States police to Hitler’s Gestapo?

Was all the fuss about dirty words only a cover
story?

An important part of neutralizing any group is to kill or discredit its leaders.

Monterey Pop set the
combined government agencies in motion.

Never again was there a festival such as the one that took place that weekend of 1967.

Never was there
another event where over thirty rock groups were inflated by no more than the joy of an enraptured
audience and the gorgeous pleasure of performance itself.

There were eight, nine, ten times as many
people running rock festivals taking place only two years later.

There was never another Monterey!

The weekend was too intoxicating, too radiant, and too pure.There was never another Monterey!

The weekend was too intoxicating, too radiant, and too pure.

– Myra Friedman, Buried Alive, The Biography of Janis Joplin
By 1968, the FBI’s COINTELPRO and the CIA’s Operation Chaos included among their long list of
domestic enemies “Advocates of New Lifestyles,” “New Left,” “Apostles of Non-Violence and Racial
Harmony” and “Restless Youth.” Justification for indexing 300,000 law abiding citizens into files, and
wire-tapping, bugging or burglarizing offices was rationalized on the basis that violence was prevalent,
the cities were burning.

Now we find out that “non-violent” protest and “racial harmony,” according to
recent Congressional investigations, also became crimes in the 1960s.

The meeting places for this social,
economic and soon-to-become political revolution were the folk festivals, rock concerts, free park love-
ins, FM radio stations—or home with favorite records.

In the music there were many messages.

American
youth were provided with a wide variety of radio stations to manage, alternative news sources and new
ways to learn what was going on in the world.

For the first time, young Americans found themselves with
enough space and time to communicate—an entire continent, then the globe.

They wandered.

Many left
homes in large numbers, seeking contacts with strangers in distant communities.

They dropped out from
established institutions.

Clocks disappeared.

Musicians were bringing these young people together from
far away places.

I see a great deal of danger in the air.

Teenagers are not screaming over pop music anymore, they’re
screaming for much deeper reasons.

We’re only serving as a means of giving them an outlet.

Pop music
is just the superficial tissue.

When I’m on the stage I sense that the teenagers are trying to
communicate to me, like by telepathy, a message of some urgency.

Not about me or my music, but about
the world and the way they live.--- PAGE BREAK ---

When I’m on the stage I sense that the teenagers are trying to
communicate to me, like by telepathy, a message of some urgency. Not about me or my music, but about
the world and the way they live. I interpret it as their demonstration against society and its sick
attitudes. Teenagers the world over are weary of being pushed around by half-witted politicians who
attempt to dominate their way of thinking and set a code for their living. This is a protest against the
system. And I see a lot of trouble coming in the dawn. – Mick Jagger, 1967

--- PAGE BREAK ---Everything was beautiful until the insanity began.

The CIA got into the business of altering human
behavior in 1947.

Project Paperclip, an arrangement made by CIA Director Allen Dulles and Richard
Helms, brought 1,000 Nazi specialists and their families to the United States.

They were employed by
military and civilian institutions.

Some Nazi doctors were brought to our hospitals and colleges to
continue further experimentation on the brain.

American and German scientists, working with the CIA,
then the military, started developing every possible method of controlling the mind.

Lysergic Acid
Diethylmide, LSD, was discovered at the Sandoz Laboratories, Basel, Switzerland, in 1939 by Albert
Hoffman.

This LSD was pure.

No other ingredients were added.

The U.S.

Army became interested in LSD
for interrogation purposes in 1950.

After May 1956 until 1975, the U.S.

Army Intelligence and the U.S.

Chemical Corps experimented with hallucinogenic drugs.

The CIA and Army spent $26,501,446 “testing”
LSD, code-named EA 1729, and other chemical agents.

Contracts went out to 48 different institutions for
testing.

The CIA was part of these projects.

They concealed their participation by contracting to various
colleges, hospitals, prisons, mental hospitals and private foundations.

The LSD I will refer to is the same
type that the CIA tested.

We shall be speaking of CIA-LSD, not pure LSD.

Government agents had the
ability to induce permanent insanity, identical to schizophrenia, without physician or family knowing what
happened to the victim.

No physical examination of the subject is required prior to the administration of LSD.

A physician
need not be present.

Physicians might be called for the hope they would make a diagnosis of mental
breakdown which would be useful in discrediting the individual who was the subject of CIA interest.A physician
need not be present.

Physicians might be called for the hope they would make a diagnosis of mental
breakdown which would be useful in discrediting the individual who was the subject of CIA interest.

– Senate Report to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities, April
1976
All existing CIA records were destroyed with the first reports that the CIA could administer a tasteless
substance to the beverage of one of their most responsible co-workers, and drive that man into a mental
institution, or cause him to jump out of a window to his death.

Hippies and musicians, previously normal
and creative, with families and loved ones identical to Dr.

Frank Olson, responded in the same manner
after their introduction to the same drugs.

Damning documentation of LSD experimentation should not
have been left in the hands of CIA Director Richard Helms.

On January 31, 1973, one day before retiring
from the CIA, Helms destroyed files on the fates of minds shattered over the previous ten years.

Helms
supported the mind-altering projects—Operation Chatter, Operation Bluebird/Artichoke, Operations
Mknaomi, Mkultra and Mkdelta.

By 1963, four years before Monterey Pop, the combined efforts of the
CIA’s Directorate of Science and Technology, Army Intelligence and U.S.

Chemical Corps launched
covert operations that seemed necessary.

U.S.

agents were able to destroy any reputation by inducing
hysteria or excessive emotional response, temporary or permanent insanity, encouraging suicide, erasing
memory, inventing double or triple personalities inside one mind, prolonging lapses of memory, teaching
racism and hatred against specific groups, causing subjects to obey instructions on the telephone or in
person, hypnotically assuring that no memory remains of their assignments.

The CIA has poison dart guns
to kill from a distance, tranquilizers for pets so the household or neighborhood is not alerted by entry or
exit.--- PAGE BREAK ---

agents were able to destroy any reputation by inducing
hysteria or excessive emotional response, temporary or permanent insanity, encouraging suicide, erasing
memory, inventing double or triple personalities inside one mind, prolonging lapses of memory, teaching
racism and hatred against specific groups, causing subjects to obey instructions on the telephone or in
person, hypnotically assuring that no memory remains of their assignments. The CIA has poison dart guns
to kill from a distance, tranquilizers for pets so the household or neighborhood is not alerted by entry or
exit. While pure LSD is typically 160 micrograms, the CIA issued 1,600 micrograms. Some of the LSD
was administered to patients at Tulane University, who already had wired electrodes in their brain. Was
insanity an occupational disease in the music industry? Or does this LSD, tested and described in Army
documents, explain how a cultural happening that took place place in 1967-68 could be altered radically
and halted? Janis used to say that her amphetamine experience was induced by a man. He was the cause of it. He
brought her lower than she had ever been in her life. Her involvement with the young man started in the
spring of ‘65.

--- PAGE BREAK ---He had a very sharp brain and questionable character.

Neither his history nor his name was his own.

He set up a fraudulent international pharmaceutical company in Canada to obtain drugs.

He was also
a methedrine addict.

Janis was an exceptionally vulnerable girl.

It had taken her about seven months
from the moment she returned from New York to degenerate into a vegetable, an 80-pound spastic
speed-freak.

– Myra Friedman, Buried Alive, The Biography of Janis Joplin
Chrissie Shrimpton described how Mick Jagger’s mind was affected after he started taking acid.

In
June 1966, Jagger had a nervous breakdown in the United States, some months after he started taking LSD.

His collapse came just weeks before the start of a concert tour.

Several friends from America visited
Jagger and Chrissie and surreptitiously slipped acid in her drink.

She was literally out of her mind.

A
short while later, Chrissie attempted to kill herself.

Henry Schneiderman, a sinister American, or Canadian … he had so many passports no one was
certain of his origin, brought to Keith Richard’s home a suitcase … which contained several pounds of
heroin, cannabis, pills, acid, DMT, every herb and chemical to stab or stroke the mind … along with
choice LSD from San Francisco.

Schneiderman had let believe he was really bending the law all over
the world.

He was on a James Bond thing, the CIA or something.

– Tony Scaduto, Mick Jagger
Brian Jones underwent a complete personality change after taking LSD.

Janis Joplin’s first LSD trip
was administered surreptitiously.

When she discovered what happened, she ran to spit it out.

Before
Watergate, long before our understanding of government agents interfering with our privacy or right to
assemble, many autopsies and descriptions of mental conditions were never challenged.

Today there is
healthy suspicion.

When Tim Buckley died, following a successful concert in Dallas; his death was first
attributed to a heart attack.Today there is
healthy suspicion.

When Tim Buckley died, following a successful concert in Dallas; his death was first
attributed to a heart attack.

Ten days later, Buckley’s cause of death was discovered to have been brought
on by a drug overdose.

UCLA graduate student Richard Keeling was finally charged with murder after it
was discovered that Buckley had sniffed heroin-morphine-ethanol.

A police eyewitness saw Buckley
ingest the powder.

Robbie McIntosh sniffed cocaine at a party.

The cocaine was laced with heroin and
strychnine.

Host Kenneth Moss was charged with murder.

In the cases of rock musicians becoming ill or
passing away, there were many possibilities that could have been narrowed down if the doctors had been
aware of all circumstances.

Jimi Hendrix was given a tab of acid just before his show at Madison Square
Garden, where he performed with Buddy Miles and Bill Cox.

The audience, and Hendrix as well, were
completely freaked out by his irrational behavior.

The result was that Hendrix was discredited.

The effect
of one LSD dose could cause permanent brain injury.

Anything Hendrix did after this experience, up to
and including the time of his death, could be attributed to that earlier event.

Government-manufactured
LSD was tainted by countless combinations of chemicals.

The New York State Psychiatric Institute was
granted the first known contract for research into psychochemical drugs.

The purpose was to determine
the effects of psychological chemical agents on human subjects.

These subjects were given derivatives of
LSD and mescaline.

Other chemicals tested and distributed at a later date included: morphine, demerol,
seconal, scopolamine, ditan, atrophine, psilocybin, BZ (benzilate), glycolate, atrophine substitutes,
dimethyl, tryptamine, chlorpromazine, LSD with Dibenzyline (blocking agents), LSM (Lysergic acid
morpholide), LSD-like compounds, psilocybin and various chemical glycolate agents.

It is no easy feat to
alter society’s consciousness.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Other chemicals tested and distributed at a later date included: morphine, demerol,
seconal, scopolamine, ditan, atrophine, psilocybin, BZ (benzilate), glycolate, atrophine substitutes,
dimethyl, tryptamine, chlorpromazine, LSD with Dibenzyline (blocking agents), LSM (Lysergic acid
morpholide), LSD-like compounds, psilocybin and various chemical glycolate agents. It is no easy feat to
alter society’s consciousness. An arsenal of weapons was available. Mixed with these chemicals were
choking agents, nerve agents, blood agents, blister agents, vomiting agents, incapacitating agents and
toxins.

--- PAGE BREAK ---The glycolates cause incapacitation by interfering with muscle, gland functions and the central
nervous system; they depress or inhibit nervous activity.

In addition to delirium there is physical
incoordination, blurred vision inhibition of sweating and salivation, rapid heart rate, elevated blood
pressure, increased body temperature and, at high doses, vomiting, prostration, and stupor or coma.

The onset may be minutes, hours, or days.

– “Use of Volunteers in Chemical Agent Research,” document released by the Pentagon, March
1976
II.

THE BEAUTIFUL PEOPLE
How does it feel to be One of the Beautiful people?

– The Beatles
Robert Hall, a private detective in Hollywood, was killed by a single bullet on July 22, 1976.

So far,
there has been a wire service news blackout on the implications of Hall’s murder, for obvious reasons.

The facts in this case should expose more than the tip of Watergate.

What was going on in Los Angeles is
part and parcel of the Washington, D.C.

scandals.

If one Army report alone exposes that millions of
dollars were spent using and testing chemical combinations for operational purposes, then somebody has
to be around to distribute the poison.

Managers of seven rock groups hired private eye Hall to find out
how their stars were getting “stoned.” Turning on doesn’t warrant hiring of a detective.

They were
obviously complaining that the musicians were altered in such a way that it hampered public appearances,
credibility, personal lives and recordings.

Hall’s inquiry revealed the drugs were coming from two
pharmacies where he had been employed—Hall once owned a drug store in Hollywood with co-partner
Jack Ginsburg, an admitted pornographer, who was charged with Hall’s murder.

Gene LeBell, 44,
arrested along with Ginsburg, was referee at the Muhammed Ali bout with a Japanese wrestler in July
’76.

LeBell, a professional wrestler, is the son of Aileen Eaton, a well-known boxing promoter who owns
and operates the Olympic Auditorium in Los Angeles.Gene LeBell, 44,
arrested along with Ginsburg, was referee at the Muhammed Ali bout with a Japanese wrestler in July
’76.

LeBell, a professional wrestler, is the son of Aileen Eaton, a well-known boxing promoter who owns
and operates the Olympic Auditorium in Los Angeles.

Hall’s report included the names of two physicians
and a dentist writing false prescriptions.

The cause of apparent freaking-out was centered in a small area
of operation.

This information was turned over to the proper authorities for arrests before Hall was
murdered.

No action was taken by police.

The same frustrations that plagued Robert Hall also preyed on
Phoenix, Arizona reporter Don Bolles.

The higher-ups get police and law protection.

Investigators get
killed.

Don Bolles and Robert Hall were investigating some of the same people, an actual Who’s Who of
the Cold War.

Hall’s contacts were important because they touched the prime movers of our politics,
movies, electoral processes, entertainment and taste in music.

Within moments of Hall’s murder, his name
was linked with possible murder-for-hire kidnap plans involving millionaire-financier Robert Vesco’s
son, gun-running to Vesco in Costa Rica, the stabbing of actor Sal Mineo, blackmail, the lost safe-deposit
box of Howard Hughes that could contain his original will, Beverly Hills financier Thomas P.

Richardson
(convicted of a $25 million stock fraud), Hollywood’s most famous celebrities in drug-and-sex scandals,
exposures of televisions stars and high Washington officials, drug traffic from Los Angeles to Malibu,
international sporting events, the LAPD (one of their former agents is now retired, heads the Police
Science Department at L.A.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Within moments of Hall’s murder, his name
was linked with possible murder-for-hire kidnap plans involving millionaire-financier Robert Vesco’s
son, gun-running to Vesco in Costa Rica, the stabbing of actor Sal Mineo, blackmail, the lost safe-deposit
box of Howard Hughes that could contain his original will, Beverly Hills financier Thomas P. Richardson
(convicted of a $25 million stock fraud), Hollywood’s most famous celebrities in drug-and-sex scandals,
exposures of televisions stars and high Washington officials, drug traffic from Los Angeles to Malibu,
international sporting events, the LAPD (one of their former agents is now retired, heads the Police
Science Department at L.A. Valley College and supplied the fatal weapon used to kill Hall), LAPD Chief
Ed Davis (links to the FBI and CIA), a possible plot to kidnap Bernard Cornfeld (associate of Robert
Vesco), past contacts with Mickey Cohen, the long drug addiction of singer Eddie Fisher, contract
employment of Hall by Howard Hughes’ Summa Corp., the two burglaries of Hughes headquarters in Van
Nuys and on Romaine Street. The Romaine burglary set off the Glomar Explorer scandal that had Hughes
fronting the contract for the CIA. Hall sent his pals to New York. Dr. Max Jacobson, titled Dr. Feelgood,

--- PAGE BREAK ---the source of John F.

Kennedy’s happy-time vitamins.

Roy B.

Loftin, contractor for NASA, Texan, with a
long association and friendship with Bobby Baker.

Baker, Lyndon Johnson’s protegé, knew Hall.

Investigations into the slain Burbank private detective prompted Beverly Hills Police Captain Jack
Eggers, on the force 17 years, to resign.

Hall worked as a double agent for Beverly Hills police and the
LAPD.

The relationship between law enforcement, drug traffic and politicians and musicians makes it
sometimes impossible to get an impartial investigation of certain deaths.

What appears as suicide can be
murder.

At the time of Hall’s murder, his possessions included tranquilizer guns, drug-loaded darts that
fire gas canisters, electronic bugging equipment of all kinds and a wide variety of chemical formulas.

The
chemicals were possibly a combination of many tested by the U.S.

government from 1953 to 1963.

III.

THE ENEMY
Why were hippies such a threat, from the President on down to local levels, objects for surveillance
and disruptions?

Many of the musicians had the potential to become political.

There were racial
overtones to the black-white sounds, harmony between Janis Joplin, Otis Redding and Jimi Hendrix.

Black music was the impetus that drove the Rolling Stones into composing and performing.

The war in
Vietnam we escalated.

What if they stopped protesting the war in Southeast Asia and turned to expose
domestic policies at home with the same energy?

One of the Byrds stopped singing at Monterey Pop to
question the official Warren Report conclusion that Lee Harvey Oswald was a “lone assassin.” Bob
Dylan’s Bringing it All Back Home album features a picture of Lyndon Johnson on the cover of Time.

By
1966, LBJ had ordered writers and critics of his commission report on the JFK murder under
surveillance.

That research was hurting him.

Rock concerts and Oswald.

What next?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Rock concerts and Oswald. What next? While preacher preach of evil fates teachers teach that knowledge waits Can lead to hundred dollar
plates Goodness hides behind its gates But even the president of the United States Sometimes must
have to stand naked. – Bob Dylan, “It’s Alright Ma”
John and Yoko Lennon protested the Vietnam War. The State Department wrote documents that
described them as “highly political and unfavorable to the administration.” It was recommended their
citizenship be denied and they be put under surveillance. Mick Jagger, before he was offered
Hollywood’s choicest women and heavy drugs, was concerned about the youth protests in Paris, 1968,
and the anti-war demonstrations at the London Embassy. War stems from power-mad politicians and patriots. Some new master plan would end all these
mindless men from seats of power and replace them with real people, people of compassion. —Mick Jagger
Woodstock, summer of 1969, was the turning point of rock festivals. Time magazine described this
happening as “one of the most significant political and sociological events of the age.” One half-million
American youth assembled for a three-day rock concert. They were non-violent, fun-loving hippies who
resembled the large followings of Mahatma Gandhi in India and Rev. Martin Luther King in the USA, both
strong advocates of non-violence. Both assassinated. It is important to understand the kinds of drugs and
chemical agents available to stifle dissent, the mentality of people hell-bent on changing the course of
history, to comprehend that cultures and tastes can be moved in directions according to game plans in the
hands of a few people. Adolf Hitler’s first targets in Nazi Germany were Gypsies and the students. LSD
was a youth-oriented drug perfected in the laboratory. When it was combined with other chemicals and

--- PAGE BREAK ---given wide distribution, all that remained were marching orders to go to war.

IV.

THE BATTLEGROUND
In July 1968, COINTELPRO attacked law-abiding individuals and groups.

The purpose of these
assaults was to disrupt large gatherings, expose and discredit the enemy and neutralize their selected
targets.

Neutralization included killing leaders if necessary.

Preferably, by turning opposing segments of
society against one another.

Remember that among these dangers to the security of the United States were
persons with “different lifestyles” and “apostles of non-violence and racial harmony.” CIA Director
Richard Helms warned National Security Advisor Henry Kissinger, February 18, 1969, that the study on
“restless youth” was “extremely sensitive,” and “would prove most embarrassing for all concerned if
word got out the CIA was involved in domestic matters.” The FBI sent out a list of suggestions on how to
achieve its goals.

They can all be applied to what happened to musicians, youngsters at folk festivals and
hippies along the highway.

Gather information on their immorality.

Show them as scurrilous and depraved.

Call attention to their
habits and living conditions.

Explore every possible embarrassment.

Send in women and sex, break up
marriages.

Have members arrested on marijuana charges.

Investigate personal conflicts or
animosities between them.

Send articles to the newspapers showing their depravity.

Use narcotics and
free sex to entrap.

Use misinformation to confuse and disrupt.

Get records of their bank accounts.

Obtain specimens of handwriting.

Provoke target groups into rivalries that may result in death.

– Senate Committee Study with Respect to Intelligence, Intelligence Activities and Rights of
Americans, Book II, April 26, 1976
The IRS admitted, “people who attend rock concert festivals” were listed among targets for
investigation by its special staff.Provoke target groups into rivalries that may result in death.

– Senate Committee Study with Respect to Intelligence, Intelligence Activities and Rights of
Americans, Book II, April 26, 1976
The IRS admitted, “people who attend rock concert festivals” were listed among targets for
investigation by its special staff.

Agent Leon Levine said, “Ideological groups such as rock festival
patrons were to be watched.” A San Diego police officer was penalized for throwing rocks at a concert
that injured a 17 year-old girl.

She was treated for a fractured nose and facial lacerations.

John and
Yoko’s legal problems began when marijuana was planted in a pair of binoculars.

Schneiderman left town after he showed British police his suitcase full of drugs at the Jagger-Richards
bust.

Jagger was then put on the International Red List as a possible narcotics smuggler every time he
passed through customs.

Cable Splicer III martial law plans, set to control civil disturbances, May 1970,
described as dangerous “love-in type gatherings in the parks where large numbers freak out, peace
marches, rock festivals where violence is commonplace and sex is unrestrained.” Chicago Police Chief
Rockford, commander during the police clashes at 1968 demonstrations, was also in charge of the police
who fired a volley of shots that wounded one youth in a riot at the 1970 rock festival in Grant Park.

Louis
Tackwood, agent provocateur with the Los Angeles Police Department, exposed CREEP and the
Republicans who were going to turn San Diego into a scene of violence during the conventions in 1972.

Part of the plan was to seal off and bomb a hundred thousand demonstrators attending a rock concert on
Fiesta Island in Mission Bay, San Diego.

Employees at the CIA’s Langley, Virginia headquarters don’t
have to stand in line to purchase tickets to these events.

They have a top-secret Ticketron outlet for rock
concert appearances.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Employees at the CIA’s Langley, Virginia headquarters don’t
have to stand in line to purchase tickets to these events. They have a top-secret Ticketron outlet for rock
concert appearances. A similar top-secret Ticketron outlet is administered by the National Security
Agency at George Meade, Md. The Howard Hughes organization ordered “all rock concerts prohibited in
Las Vegas.” Fortune (January, 1969) described the movement as encompassing “hippies and doctrinaire
Leninists, anarchists and populists, revolutionaries whose domain is the human mind, rock bands and
cultural guerrillas.” During the 1968 riots in Washington, D.C., group singing was outlawed by the police
department. They were aware that people “get high” singing together. Records of Led Zeppelin, Cat

--- PAGE BREAK ---Stevens, Alice Cooper, Simon and Garfunkel, Jethro Tull and others were burned at the Hollywood
Christian Academy in Hollywood, Fla.

Rock music was described as work “of the devil, having no place
in a Christian life.” The rock group Black Cat won a $570,000 slander suit against a minister in Arkansas.

Their concert had been cancelled with the claim that they were a “mongrel group” with “Satanic origins.”
Following the slaying of two Americans in South Korea in August, the government issued tighter controls
on long hair and “decadent music.” Korea has a list of 260 decadent folk-rock and protest songs.

Among
them, “I Shot the Sheriff” and “We Shall Overcome.” A survey of Quebec policemen showed that more of
them were more hostile to hippies or beatniks than criminals.

Art Linkletter, a television personality, told
a Congressional committee investigating drug abuse, “the Beatles were the leading advocates of an acid
society.” This is an example of turning one hostile group against another.

There is every reason to believe
that the LSD that caused Dr.

Frank Olson and Diane Linkletter to leap from tall buildings to their death
could be manufactured from the same laboratories.

With justifiable anger, Linkletter became a
mouthpiece.

Meanwhile, the so-called straight society Linkletter defended spent 16 years and millions of dollars
perfecting LSD as an operational weapon.

Los Angeles Police arrested 511 persons attending the Pink
Floyd concert.

There were no mass arrests at Elton John’s performance in the same city.

Somebody is
selecting their targets, because there is plenty of grass at Elton’s concert.

“Peace Pills” were distributed
at the Santa Clara Fairgrounds for a folk-rock festival.

A strange drug was handed out freely and poured
into drinks.

Youngsters were hospitalized.

All of those who took the drug were treated but sent home
without any knowledge of the psychological damage.

This pill was blamed for the death of Mrs.All of those who took the drug were treated but sent home
without any knowledge of the psychological damage.

This pill was blamed for the death of Mrs.

Lois
Dodd de Lattre, wife of a beatnik priest.

Mrs.

de Lattre’s heart burst under the stimulation of the drug.

Under its influence, she tore out her hair and threw herself on the floor.

A man jumped on the musician’s
platform and announced they had 4,000 pills to hand out.

The pills caused “marked disorientation as to
time and space, inability to sustain directed thought, presence of a trance-like state.” This kind of scene
was so common that large groups were discouraged from performing in the manner they had before these
assaults took place.

The irreplaceable loss of lives and talent has been noticed by persons sensitive to
folk-rock music.

We can’t bring them back to life.

We might take time to examine their deaths if only to
stop the attacks on certain artists and musicians.

Some of my information on the details of these deaths is
incomplete.

The circumstances surrounding them caused me to ask some hard questions:
JOHN CARPENTER: 45 yrs., Sept.

18, 1976, killed by hit and run driver in Ben Lomond, Calif.

Part
of the earliest rock scene, once managed Grace Slick, wrote for Rolling Stone from issue one through
eight, disc jockey at KPFK, music critic for the Los Angeles Free Press.

He was “totally crazed,” and
committed himself to a mental institution for treatment.

TIM BUCKLEY: 28 yrs., June 29, 1975, Los Angeles.

Just returned from a concert in Dallas, Texas,
and was about to make a movie of Woody Guthrie’s “Bound for Glory.” Death caused by heroin-
morphine-pentothal.

Joe Falsia, Buckely’s manager, “never knew Tim used drugs.” Richard Keeling
charged with his murder.

THE CHASE: August 11, 1974.

Four in rock group killed, airplane crash.

Bill Chase, Jazz trumpeter
with Woody Herman, Walt Clark, drummer, John Emma, guitarist, and Wallace Wouhne, organist.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Four in rock group killed, airplane crash. Bill Chase, Jazz trumpeter
with Woody Herman, Walt Clark, drummer, John Emma, guitarist, and Wallace Wouhne, organist. Three
years ago The Chase had a single, “Get It On,” that became a hit. Popular with radio stations. Played often
in Las Vegas, Japan, Africa, released three albums. JIM CROCE: 30 yrs. old, Sept. 20, 1973. Airplane crash in Louisiana. Recorded hit albums,
including “Bad, Bad Leroy Brown.” Degree in psychology from Villanova University, sang at small

--- PAGE BREAK ---colleges.

Croce’s widow filed a $2.5 million suit against the Federal Aviation Administration.

Allegations that maps of the airport runway were faulty, leaving unmarked a tree the fatal plane struck.

BRIAN JONES: July 1969, London.

One of the original members of the Rolling Stones.

Unique
musician, under control of drugs by 1966, took LSD that caused personality changes and depression.

Seemed to have brain damage and disintegrated.

Compare his arrests and planted grass to the treatment
Lenny Bruce received, forced to drop from the group.

Keith Richards said,
Some very weird things happened the night Brian died.

We had these chauffeurs working for us, and we
tried to find out.

Some of them had a weird hold over Brian.

I got straight into it and wanted to know
who was there and couldn’t find out.

The only cat I could ask was the one I think who got rid of
everybody, and did a whole disappearing thing so that when the cops arrived, it was just an accident.

Maybe it was.

I don’t know.

I don’t even know who was there that night, and finding out is impossible.

It’s the same feeling with who killed Kennedy.

You can’t get to the bottom of it.

– Tony Scaduto, Mick Jagger
MAMA CASS ELLIOT: 33, former member of Mamas and Papas, London.

Found dead in her
apartment.

“Probably choked to death on a ham sandwich,” or “possibly of heart attack.” The coroner
said it “appears the singer had not died of natural causes.” She was propped up in bed, and had been dead
for a considerable time before her body was found.

Had just completed two weeks at the London
Palladium, and was preparing to tour Britain.

In excellent mental spirits.

Performed at Monterey Pop.

JANIS JOPLIN: 27 yrs., Oct.

3, 1970, Los Angeles.

Cause of death listed as “drug overdose,
accidental.” A lawsuit in 1974 noted, “it was possible that something unknown triggered a fatal reaction.”
Fought alcohol and drug usage most of her adult life.

Body at autopsy didn’t show large amounts of
morphine.Cause of death listed as “drug overdose,
accidental.” A lawsuit in 1974 noted, “it was possible that something unknown triggered a fatal reaction.”
Fought alcohol and drug usage most of her adult life.

Body at autopsy didn’t show large amounts of
morphine.

The night she died, Janis was with a mysterious character who accompanied her to the
Landmark Hotel, L.A.

She made three calls to her drug “connection” on the hotel switchboard.

No arrests
or effort to locate this party.

Went to the lobby, bought cigarettes, talked, walked back to her room and fell
on the floor inside the door.

Was taking pills to stop drug habit?

Engaged to be married, slim, tan,
recording Pearl, an album expected to be a tremendous success; happy with her band, climbing out of
darker days when she dropped dead.

Sang at Monterey Pop with Big Brother and the Holding Company.

One of the top blues-acid rock stars.

DONALD REX JACKSON: 31, Sept.

28, 1976.

Automobile accident.

Manager for the Grateful Dead;
just arranged for a national tour.

Car swerved off the road, killed instantly.

AL JACKSON: 39 yrs., October 1975.

Former drummer with Booker T.

and the MG’s.

Shot to death
five times, Memphis, Tenn.

Cause of death, “apparent robbery.” Produced Stax Records.

JIMI HENDRIX: 27 yrs., Sept.

18, 1970.

Cause of death clouded.

Suggestions of drug plants, mafia
connections, murder.

Kidnapped a year before he died.

Surrounded by groupie females, one of whom
boasted giving him his first acid trip.

Affected by acid, depression interfered with performances.

One of
top stars at Monterey Pop.

Into rock-blues, jazz.

Media assumption of “suicide” or “drug overdose” like
Joplin.

Earned millions.

Freaked out and couldn’t do his serious music.

JIM MORRISON: 27 yrs., July 3, 1971.

Paris, France.

Lead singer for the Doors.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Paris, France. Lead singer for the Doors. Cause of death:
“heart attack,” “pneumonia” or “died peacefully of natural causes.” Best-known hit was “Light My Fire.”
Author of “The Lords,” “The New Creatures.” Poet, UCLA graduate, writer, musician, politically

--- PAGE BREAK ---controversial.

Completed tour of Europe, South Africa, writing a movie script in Paris.

Sometimes
engaged in irrational behavior on stage.

Harassed by police, false arrests, some charges later dropped.

Described as “appearing to be in a hypnotic trance.” Found guilty of “lewd and lascivious conduct” in
Miami, Florida, March 1969.

His arrest was the excuse for a “rally for decency” by singers, television
personalities.

Deeply affected by the death of Brian Jones.

(Janis Joplin died a month after Jimi Hendrix.

Jim Croce died a day after Gram Parsons.) Group broke up after Morrison’s death.

PAMELA MORRISON: April 27, 1974, Hollywood, California.

Wife of Jim Morrison.

Cause:
“apparent drug overdose.” A hypodermic syringe discovered in the apartment.

No mention of drugs in her
system, or if there were needle marks.

RICHARD FARINA: Carmel Valley, California motorcycle crash.

Author, musician, just completed a
book, attended autographing party, drove down the road, met fatal crash.

Brother-in-law of Joan Baez,
married to Mimi.

Recorded a new album, The Falcon.

“Celebrations for a Gray Day,” as described on
the jacket, “Goldwater was about to win the California primary, and the skies were somewhat uneasy.”
ROBBIE McINTOSH: 28 yrs., Sept.

23, 1974, Los Angeles, Died from heroin and strychnine that he
believed was cocaine.

Host Kenneth Moss, Freelandia Airlines, might have been singled as the target.

Moss formed a new low-cost charter airline.

Cher Bono was at the party, saved the life of Alan Gorrie.

Gregg Allman working for Jimmy Carter’s nomination at the time.

Allman’s drug arrests just before
elections, Cher’s attending a party where drugs with poison administered, might have caught McIntosh as
innocent victim.

Moss was charged with murder.

(Janis Joplin’s known drug connection was not held for
her death.)
SAL MINEO: 1975, Los Angeles.

Stabbed in back.--- PAGE BREAK ---

(Janis Joplin’s known drug connection was not held for
her death.)
SAL MINEO: 1975, Los Angeles. Stabbed in back. One time singer, actor whose next role was to play
Sirhan Sirhan in a controversial movie about the hypnotic state of Sirhan, and LAPD suppression of
evidence in the Robert Kennedy assassination. Robert Hall was allegedly following Mineo the night he
was killed. ROD McKERNAN: “PIG PEN,” 27 yrs. old, March 1973, Corte Madera, Calif. Member of Grateful
Dead, organist, singer. Body found in an apartment by neighbor who hadn’t seen him for a few days. Coroner’s office reports, first accounts probably natural causes, liver disease. Had been suffering from
cirrhosis of the liver, swelling of blood vessels in his throat. Hadn’t touched alcohol for two years. PHIL OCHS: 35 yrs. old, April 1976, New Jersey. “Death by hanging.” No suicide notes, nobody sure
why Ochs died. Active during Vietnam War, depressed in 1971, using alcohol. Sang at Madison Square
Garden, with Bob Dylan, “An evening with Salvadore Allendé” in 1974, obsessed with JFK
assassination. Developed two personalities, “John Train” and his nemesis, Phil Ochs. Spoke of death,
exhibited erratic behavior. “Band of robbers” in Africa one of the reasons for his depression. Ochs was
attacked, his vocal chords severed. Known as the “troubadour of the New Left,” among the FBI’s target
groups. STEVE PERRON: 28 yrs., Aug. 8, 1973. San Antonio, Texas. Died from inhaling vomit fumes during
sleep. Composer, writer, lead singer for The Children. Was off drugs, preparing to cut a new album for
Ode Records. Wrote “Francine” for ZZ TOP, hit records. Composed over 100 songs. Married with child,
happy, productive composing when he died. GRAM PARSONS: 26 yrs., Sept. 19, 1974, Calif. Cause of death shrouded in mystery. Autopsy report

--- PAGE BREAK ---“inconclusive.” Body taken off airplane on way to Louisiana, cremated 200 miles away from L.A.

Composer, singer, musician.

Former theology student from Harvard, took up country-western music, sang
with the Byrds, Flying Burritos, Submarine Blues and Emmylou Harris.

Made some informal recordings
with actor Brandon DeWilde, child star of “Shane.” DeWilde died in a July, 1972 car crash in Denver,
Colorado.

He was driving to a performance of “Butterflies Are Free,” the stage play he starred in.

Once happy family life, conventional, turned on to LSD, drugs, alcohol, became depressed.

Phil
Kaufman—he lived with Charles Manson for two months, an ex-convict charged with drug smuggling—
managed Parsons.

Coffin removed to the desert, the body cremated.

OTIS REDDING: 26 yrs., December 1967.

Airplane crash over Wisconsin.

First star of Monterey
Pop to die.

Brought soul to every American city.

Best known hit record: “By the Dock of the Bay.” A poll
before his death claimed Redding was the most popular musical star in Europe.

JIMMY REED: 50 yrs., Aug.

29, 1976.

Natural causes the night before he was to set off on a
California tour.

Blues writer, harmonica player, influenced Dylan, Steve Miller, Grateful Dead.

VINNIE TAYLOR (CHRIS DONALD): 25 yrs., April 1974, Virginia.

Lead guitarist for Sha-Na-Na.

Found by the National Guard in a motel room following a concert in Virginia.

On his way to appear in
Pittsburgh, Pa.

for a sell-out concert.

CLARENCE WHITE: Car crash, Los Angeles, Calif.

One of the Byrds, close friend of Gram Parsons.

PAUL WILLIAMS: 34 yrs., Aug.

23, 1973, Detroit, Michigan.

Found dead in a car, gun on his lap.

One of the original Temptations.

Did choreography for the group.

Had solved drinking problems,
emotional crisis.

Dead only a few blocks from Motown where his first records were made.

V.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Dead only a few blocks from Motown where his first records were made. V. FINALÉ – HELTER SKELTER & GIMME SHELTER
War, Children It’s just a shot a-way, It’s just a shot a-way, See the fire sweeping our very street today,
Barns like a red coal carpet, ma Mad bull lost its way Rape! Murder! It’s just a shot away Gimme
Gimme Shelter or I’m gonna fade away Love sister, It’s just a kiss away. – Rolling Stones, “Gimme Shelter”
By the end of 1969, the folk music festival was killed in spirit and was over as a cultural happening. It
was never the same again. There are musical performances, but it isn’t the same feeling. The two most
popular groups, The Beatles and the Rolling Stones, would be identified through media distortions with
cold-blooded murder and violence. “Helter Skelter,” a Beatles song, would become the title of Manson
Family prosecutor Vincent Bugliosi’s book. What a strange twist of fate. Gimme Shelter, the name of a
movie depicting the ritualistic murder of a black man attending the Rolling Stones concert at Altamont, is
from a song by the Rolling Stones. How did this happen? Coincidence or conspiracy? There are so many
published government documents, and minutes of congressional hearings exposing illegal CIA and FBI
domestic operations, that it is impossible to ride the coincidence coat tails much longer. Just as pocket
calculators add numbers faster, history’s dates also put pieces of the puzzle into better perspective. FACT 1 – Social structures are rearranged. Politica, the game plan for overthrowing Salvador
Allendé’s elected government in Chile, was conceived by Abt Associates, Cambridge, Mass., in 1965. Abt was a front for the Pentagon and CIA. They had another plan titled Camelot. Was Camelot the military

--- PAGE BREAK ---answer to future dissent in America?

The war in Vietnam escalated Nov.

24, 1963, with no known
provocation from North Vietnam.

It was only a matter of time before the natives at home would find out,
before Norman Mailer would be writing Why are We in Vietnam?

FACT 2 – In 1972, at the time of Watergate, E.

Howard Hunt was employed by the White House to
forge secret State Department papers.

The sole purpose of the forgeries was to distort history, and make
the late President Kennedy responsible for the assassination of Ngo Dinh Diem, president of South
Vietnam.

There would be attempts to blame Kennedy for the assassination plot against Fidel Castro, in
spite of massive evidence to the contrary.

For all who remembered Kennedy kindly, who complained
about his assassination, history was revised with a scissors and scotch tape.

Kennedy would come out a
scummy killer himself.

This didn’t take place in some strange office or dark cellar, but in the same White
House offices where Nixon was screaming, “Manson is guilty.” If President Nixon went to so much
trouble to identify murder with an innocent man like Kennedy, there is every reason to believe his hatred
of anti-war hippies and their folk-rock musicians could also be identified with murder.

Make them all
look violent.

Bring it all down.

FACT 3 – In 1969, the combined agencies of the CIA, Army and FBI were put into full operational use.

The Sharon Tate-La Bianca murders were committed in August 1969.

The Altamont violence occurred
four months later.

CIA
The CIA prepared for defense against domestic unrest in 1965, coinciding with Camelot and Politica.

The CIA joined forces with the FBI and the Army.

By August 1967, a special operations group went after
the youth.

By July 1968, Operation Chaos, identical to the Chilean “Chaos,” clamped down on “restless
youth.” This wasn’t a study.

It was an attack.

Mid-summer of 1969, one month before the Manson Family
massacres, Operation Chaos entered a phase of tight security.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It was an attack. Mid-summer of 1969, one month before the Manson Family
massacres, Operation Chaos entered a phase of tight security. From 1956-63, the Agency had produced
enough LSD to incite every violent act associated with the chaos in Los Angeles or at Altamont. It was
identical to handing out poison candy at Halloween. LSD was the moving force, the cause for the Sharon
Tate-La Bianca slaughters. It was a steady diet at the Spahn ranch. LSD was the catalyst of the Altamont
killing. Thousands of tablets were distributed to the Hell’s Angels, who then went totally berserk and
started cracking skulls. FBI
May 1964, after the JFK assassination, the FBI instituted COINTELPRO. July 1968, explicit orders
went out to proceed, accompanied with instructions, to neutralize segments of American society, including
those “restless youth.” By 1969, the Special Services Staff (SSS) of the FBI teamed up with the Justice
Department and the CIA’s Operation Chaos. ARMY
Began testing LSD, the youth drug, in 1965, the same year Politica and Camelot were planned in
Cambridge, Mass. Contracts for testing LSD and scores of psychoactive chemical agents continued
through 1975. January 21, 1969, the army reported, “the LSD tests are rewarding. It is recommended that
the actual application of LSD be utilized in real situations on an experimental basis.” Acid was
distributed surreptitiously to large masses of the population. It was the chemical that linked Helter Skelter
and Gimme Shelter with blood and gore. FACT 4 – There is more to the creation of the Manson Family and their direction than has yet been
exposed. There is more to the making of the movie Gimme Shelter than has been explained. This saga has

--- PAGE BREAK ---interlocking links to all the beautiful people Robert Hall knew.

The Manson Family and the Hell’s Angels
were instruments to turn on enemy forces.

They attacked and discredited politically active American
youth who had dropped out of the establishment.

The violence came down from neo-Nazis, adorned with
Swastikas both in L.A.

and in the Bay Area at Altamont.

The blame was placed on persons not even
associated with the violence.

When it was all over, the Beatles and the Rolling Stones were the icing on
this cake, famed musicians associated with a racist, neo-Nazi murder.

By rearranging the facts, cutting
here and there, distorting evidence, neighbors and family feared their own youth.

Charles Manson made
the cover of Life with those wide eyes, like Rasputin.

Charles Watson didn’t make the cover.

Why not?

He
participated in all the killings.

Manson wasn’t inside the house.

Manson played a guitar and made
records.

Watson didn’t.

He was too busy taking care of matters at the lawyer’s office prior to the killings,
or with officials of Young Republicans.

Who were Watson’s sponsors in Texas, where he remained until
his trial, separate from the Manson Family’s to psychologically distance him from the linking of Watson to
the murders he actually committed.

“Pigs” was scrawled in Sharon Tate’s house in blood.

Was this to
make blacks the suspects?

Credit cards of the La Bianca family were dropped intentionally in the ghetto
after the massacre.

The purpose was to stir racial fears and hatred.

Who wrote the article, “Did Hate Kill
Tate?”—blaming Black Panthers for the murders?

Lee Harvey Oswald was passed off as a Marxist.

Another deception.

A pair of glasses was left on the floor of Sharon Tate’s home the day of the murder.

They were never identified.

Who moved the bodies after the killers left, before the police arrived?

The
Spahn ranch wasn’t a hippie commune.

It bordered the Krupp ranch, and has been incorporated into a
German Bavarian beer garden.The
Spahn ranch wasn’t a hippie commune.

It bordered the Krupp ranch, and has been incorporated into a
German Bavarian beer garden.

Howard Hughes knew George Spahn.

He visited this ranch daily while
filming The Outlaw.

Howard Hughes bought the 516 acres of Krupp property in Nevada after he moved
into that territory.

What about Altamont?

What distortions and untruths are displayed in that movie?

Why did Mick Jagger
insist, “the concert must go on?” There was a demand that filmmakers be allowed to catch this concert.

It
couldn’t have happened the same in any other state.

The Hell’s Angels had a long working relationship
with law enforcement, particularly in the Oakland area.

They were considered heroes by the San
Francisco Chronicle and other newspapers when they physically assaulted the dirty anti-war hippies
protesting the shipment of arms to Vietnam.

The laboratory for choice LSD, the kind sent to England for
the Stones, came from the Bay Area and would be consumed readily by this crowd.

Attendees of the
concert said there was “a compulsiveness to the event.” It had to take place.

Melvin Belli, Jack Ruby’s
lawyer, made the legal arrangements.

Ruby had complained that Belli prohibited him from telling the full
story of Lee Harvey Oswald’s murder (another media event).

There were many layers of cover-up, and
many names have reappeared in subsequent scripts.

Sen.

Philip Hart, a member of the committee
investigating illegal intelligence operations inside the US, confessed that his own children told him these
things were happening.

He had refused to believe them.

On November 18, 1975, Sen.

Hart realized
matters were not only out of hand, but crimes of the past had to be exposed to prevent future outrages.

How shall we ensure that it will never happen again?

It will happen repeatedly unless we can bring
ourselves to understand and accept that it did go on.

Flo and Eddie, the musical group formed after The Turtles, had to cancel a fully booked, one-year tour
of the U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It will happen repeatedly unless we can bring
ourselves to understand and accept that it did go on. Flo and Eddie, the musical group formed after The Turtles, had to cancel a fully booked, one-year tour
of the U.S. and Britain. Their lead guitarist either fell or was pushed from a ninth-floor hotel room at the
Salt Lake City Hilton. The first notice of this murder appeared in the San Francisco Chronicle on
November 9, 1976, in a small column. John Austin wrote “the accident has not yet been reported, as the
gendarmes are trying to keep the lid on it.” A few days before, their manager, Jim Taylor, was threatened. There were hints the syndicate might be taking over the pop music business. Was that the next phase once
the counter-culture was decimated?

--- PAGE BREAK ---BIBLIOGRAPHY
I
“Use of Volunteers in Chemical Agent Research,” Chapter IX, Intelligence Corps Experimentation with Hallucinogenic Drugs, pp.

135-
147.

“Use of Volunteers in Chemical Agent Research,” Contracts with Civilian Institutions, Chapter X, pp.

152-166.

U.S.

Army, Contracts for Testing Chemical Agent Research, Attachment “C,” “Contract Costs 1950-1975,” Section III, pp.

212-247.

II
“Intelligence Activities,” 1976 Foreign and Military Intelligence, Book I, April 26.

III
“Intelligence Activities and the Rights of Americans,” Senate Committee to Study Government Operations with Respect to Intelligence
Activities, Book II, April 26, 1976.

IV
“Report to the President by the Commission on CIA Activities Within the United States,” Rockefeller Report, June 1975.

Tony Scaduto, Mick Jagger, David McKay, New York, 1974.

Friedman, Myra, Buried Alive, The Biography of Janis Joplin, Bantam, New York, 1973.

“Department of Army Report on the Use of Chemical Agent Research, Intelligence Corps Experimentation with Hallucinogenic Drugs” –
Dept.

of the Army, Office of the Inspector General and Auditor General, released March 1976.

Chronology of U.S.

Army Intelligence, U.S.

Chemical Corps Experiments with LSD, Codename EA 1729
1950 – LSD considered by Army as method of interrogation and possible defense against enemy interrogation.

May 1956 – CHEMICAL WARFARE LABORATORIES, EDGEWOOD ARSENAL, MD.

Tests on human volunteers.

Page 136, Army
Report: “All beverages served to volunteers had included sufficient LSD, EA 1729, for effective dosage, or additional dosage [administered]
before volunteering.”
1956-1957 – Army Intelligence, Fr.

Holabird with Army Chemical Corps, Edgewood Arsenal, for LSD tests.

These included many other
chemicals.

Also included LSD in conjunction with electrode implants.

Doses as high as 1,600 micrograms; normal LSD, street level, 160
micrograms.

THE HEIGHT OF LSD TESTING
March, 1958 – Used for memory impairment, motor reactions, stress under LSD.Doses as high as 1,600 micrograms; normal LSD, street level, 160
micrograms.

THE HEIGHT OF LSD TESTING
March, 1958 – Used for memory impairment, motor reactions, stress under LSD.

READY TO BE USED FOR “OPERATIONAL
ADVANTAGE.”
Jan.

21, 1959 – CONCLUSION: LSD TESTS REWARDING – “IT IS RECOMMENDED THAT ACTUAL APPLICATION OF LSD BE
UTILIZED IN REAL SITUATIONS ON AN EXPERIMENTAL BASIS.”
Jan.

8, 1960 – ARMY FIELD INSTRUCTIONS FOR G-2, ADMINISTRATION OF LSD.

TOLD TO COORDINATE WITH FBI, CIA.

Dec.

1960 – CIA, ARMY INTELLIGENCE, U.S.

CHEMICAL CORPS WORKING TOGETHER on LSD TESTS.

April 28, 1961 – OPERATION THIRD CHANCE.

Overseas “testing,” LSD.

Causing mental diseases not recognized by physicians—any
diagnosis tended to discredit.

July, 1961 – LSD READY FOR OPERATIONAL PURPOSES.

Feb., 1962 – OPERATION DERBY HAT, Hawaii military bases, LSD experiments.

April 19, 1963 – LSD TESTING CONTINUED.

No records of “volunteers.”
Existing records “incomplete.” Most records “totally inadequate.” THE SENATE OBTAINED THIS REPORT AND MINIMIZED THE
FINDINGS.

U.S.

ARMY, U.S.

CHEMICAL CORPS.

SPENT $26,501,446.

TESTS WERE CONDUCTED FROM 1951-1971.

SOME 48
INSTITUTIONS WERE USED AS COVER: HOSPITAL, PRISONS, COLLEGES, MENTAL HOSPITALS, ARMY PERSONNEL.

SUMMARY OF THE CIA’S LSD TESTS, CHEMICALS FOR ALTERING HUMAN BEHAVIOR
Senate Committee to Study Governmental Operations With Respect to Intelligence Activities, Foreign and Military Intelligence, Book I,
April 26, 1976.

1947 – Same year Nazi doctors brought to USA, continued their tests and experiments.

1947 – CIA EXPERIMENTS BEGIN FOR ALTERING HUMAN BEHAVIOR.

1947-1953 – OPERATION CHATTER (for the purpose of interrogation).

1953-57 – OPERATION BLUEBIRD/ARTICHOKE: Sodium pentathol injections, hypnosis.

Purpose: erase memory, create double and triple
personalities, resist torture, conduct covert operations without memory later.

1/8/53 – Death of Dr.

Harold Blauer by injections of synthetic mescaline derivative.

U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Harold Blauer by injections of synthetic mescaline derivative. U.S. Chemical Corp., New York State Psychiatric

--- PAGE BREAK ------ PAGE BREAK ---

Harold Blauer by injections of synthetic mescaline derivative. U.S. Chemical Corp., New York State Psychiatric

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Institute (cf. Barrett v. U.S., 660 F Supp. 1291, S.D.N.Y. 1987, awarding $702,044 to Blauer’s daughter).
1967-70 – OPERATION MKNAOMI: The CIA stockpiled incapacitating, lethal materials to be used by the Technical Services Division.
Make sure complete predictability of results. Toxins, shellfish, poison darts, pills, biological weapons. Drugs to silence animals. Worked with the
Army from 1952.
1953-1963 –MKULTRA, CHEMICAL, BIOLOGICAL AGENTS. Radiation, electrode implants. Electroshock, LSD + electrodes. “Ten
years of tests,” then operational. Tested all levels of society. Native Americans, wide variety of persons used. Army Hospitals, Vacaville
Prison, National Institute of Mental Health.
1961-1971 – MKULTRA BECAME MKDELTA: OPERATIONAL USE. Allen Dulles, 100-million LSD tablets. Millions of dollars.
Universities, pharmaceutical houses, hospitals. State, Federal institutions. Special and unique items for dissemination. Combined MKULTRA
with Army, Projects Derby Hat, Project Third Chance. Purpose: TO CONTROL BODIES, WILLING OR NOT. DRUGS COULD BE
USED TO HARASS, DISABLE, OR KILL.
Dec. 1963 – MKULTRA, MKDELTA. Used as an OPERATIONAL WEAPON. PRESIDENT, CONGRESS NEVER KNEW. Purpose:
DISCREDIT, IMPLANT SUGGESTIONS, MENTAL CONTROL, ELICIT INFORMATION. CAN PRODUCE PSYCHOSIS IN
CHRONIC FORM PARTICULARLY IN LATENT SCHIZOPHRENIA. CAN CAUSE PERMANENT CONDITION OF INSANITY.
Senate Committee to Study Governmental Operations With Respect to Intelligence Activities, Intelligence Activities and the Rights of
Americans, Book II, April 26, 1976: SUMMARY OF FBI COUNTER INTELLIGENCE OPERATIONS AS APPLIED TO STATED
“APOSTLES OF NON-VIOLENCE,” “NEW LEFT,” “ADVOCATES OF NEW LIFESTYLES.”
1964-1970 – THE FBI JOINED WITH THE CIA, NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY IN ILLEGAL, DOMESTIC ACTIVITIES.
May, 1964 – COUNTER-INTELLIGENCE PROGRAM STARTED.
July, 1968 – ORDERS FROM FBI HEADQUARTERS: INSTRUCTIONS FOR OPERATIONS. Selected “enemy” were to be, exposed,
disrupted, neutralized.
1969 – SSS, SPECIAL SERVICES STAFF. Started targeting groups, individuals (After Woodstock, just prior to Manson Family and
Altamont.) FBI, NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY, JUSTICE DEPARTMENT, COMBINED INTO A LARGER OPERATION, INTER-
DIVISIONAL INFORMATION UNIT, IDIU, JUSTICE DEPT.
Aug., 1969 – FBI, PLUS JUSTICE DEPARTMENT, PLUS NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY COMBINED WITH CIA’S
OPERATIONAL CHAOS.
FBI and Justice Department knew CIA operations in USA were illegal. They agreed to work together, keep it highly secret, not put CIA
names on meeting memos and give concealed names to shield CIA FROM OBSERVATION.ice Department knew CIA operations in USA were illegal. They agreed to work together, keep it highly secret, not put CIA
names on meeting memos and give concealed names to shield CIA FROM OBSERVATION.

--- PAGE BREAK ---CIA operations in USA were illegal. They agreed to work together, keep it highly secret, not put CIA
names on meeting memos and give concealed names to shield CIA FROM OBSERVATION.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER TWELVE
INTERVIEW: THE ASSASSINATION OF JOHN ONO
LENNON
(RECORDED IN DECEMBER, 1980, AT HER HOME IN CARMEL, CONDUCTED BY TOM DAVIS, A NORTHERN
CALIFORNIA BOOKSELLER.)
TD: What would be the motive to kill John Lennon on December 8, 1980? Lennon had been in
seclusion for many years and had not yet released his new album.
MB: Both the date of Lennon’s murder and the careful selection of this particular victim are very
important. Six weeks after Lennon’s death, Ronald Reagan would become President. Reagan and his
soon-to-be appointed cabinet were prepared to build up the Pentagon war machine and increase the
potential for war against the USSR. The first strike would fall on small countries like El Salvador and
Guatemala. Lennon, alone, was the only man (even without his fellow Beatles) who had the ability to
draw out one million anti-war protestors in any given city within 24 hours if he opposed those war
policies.
John Lennon was a spiritual force. He was a giant, like Gandhi, a man who wrote about peace and
brotherly love. He taught an entire generation to think for themselves and challenge authority. Lennon and
the Beatles’ songs shout out the inequalities of American life and the messages of change. Change is a
threat to the longtime status quo that Reagan’s team exemplified.
On my weekly radio broadcast of December 7, 1980, I stated, “The old assassination teams are coming
back into power.” The very people responsible for covering up the murders of President John F. Kennedy,
Senator Robert Kennedy, Reverend Martin Luther King, for Watergate and Koreagate, and the kidnapping
and murder of Howard Hughes, and for hundreds of other deaths, had only six weeks before they would
again be removing or silencing those voices of opposition to their policies.
Lennon was coming out once more. His album was cut. He was preparing to be part of the world, a
world which was a worse place since the time he had withdrawn with his family. It was a sure bet Lennon
would react and become a social activist again. That was the threat. Lennon realized that there was
danger in coming back into public view. He took that dangerous chance and we all lost!
TD: The common assumption is that Mark David Chapman, arrested the moment he killed John
Lennon, was acting out his personal love-hate relationship with Lennon. Why do you have to look for a
larger conspiracy than the conflicts in Chapman’s own head?
MB: Single crimes of passion are easy to explain and solve. When someone is gunned down who is
controversial, has political enemies, is hated by wealthy and well-organized religious movements, and is
an open opponent of government policies at home and abroad, that kind of murder requires much more
inquiry into the background of the assassin. The conclusions about the murder motive may turn out to beopen opponent of government policies at home and abroad, that kind of murder requires much more
inquiry into the background of the assassin. The conclusions about the murder motive may turn out to be

--- PAGE BREAK ---simple.

Yet, in every political assassination since 1963, there were always more unanswered questions
that led to a broader supposition of intention to kill by a group of people rather than one single individual.

TD: What is the first clue you look for if you are suspicious of a larger conspiracy to assassinate,
whether it is John Lennon, President John F.

Kennedy, or the recent attempts on President Reagan and
Pope John Paul II?

MB: There are necessary connecting links in every assassination conspiracy.

If any link of that chain
falls apart and becomes exposed, the larger plot is more visible.

When every element of that chain holds
together and is present in the evidence and testimony regarding any particular murder, there has to be a
larger conspiracy.

The most important link in that chain is the selected decoy or patsy.

Whoever is arrested at the scene of
the crime, to the exclusion of other suspicious persons, becomes the “assassin.” This single person must
serve a purpose, namely, to divert all attention away from those people who have armed him and placed
him at the scene of the crime.

Letters and diaries are always present and easily found to support the predetermined cover story.

They
provide a “motive,” and are the glue that cements (we are told) the “loner” to his single purpose.

In preparation for his “act,” the decoy or patsy is moved across countries or overseas, traveling and
staying at safe houses.

He has no friends, no jobs, no means of support while staying at fancy hotels,
spending money, receiving phone messages and meeting lots of people.

Very few people have the money
to spend years in transit like these patsies, whose chances of being in selected locations at the precise
moment their victim is murdered are minute without assistance.

TD: Who was Mark David Chapman?

What was there in his background that made you suspicious
that he had been selected for a “decoy” or “patsy” by other persons who wanted Lennon dead?TD: Who was Mark David Chapman?

What was there in his background that made you suspicious
that he had been selected for a “decoy” or “patsy” by other persons who wanted Lennon dead?

MB: Chapman came from a conservative military family who had moved from Fort Worth, Texas to
Florida.

He had become a “Jesus Freak” at the time Lennon and the Beatles were receiving death threats,
during the anti-war period.

Joining the religious movement while supposedly loving and admiring Lennon
was a gross contradiction—the fundamentalists were furious that Lennon considered himself better known
and loved than Jesus.

DeKalb County, Georgia, just to the east of Atlanta, figures prominently in Chapman’s life, as it had
some years earlier in that of Martin Luther King.

In a 1977 court affidavit, Robert Byron Watson, a former
employee of Magellan’s Art Gallery in Atlanta, named several citizens who planned and boasted of the
pending “murder of Reverend Martin Luther King.” King’s death came just one week after the plans were
discussed.

These same people also talked about murdering Senator Robert Kennedy.

Chapman attended DeKalb Junior College.

From DeKalb County, Chapman was sent to Beirut,
Lebanon.

He was handed the funds both ways.

Beirut was the center for George Habash and CIA
assassination teams also identified in the Watson testimony before the House Select Committee on
Assassinations in 1977-78.

On March 31, 1981, United Press International exposed “military training in a guerrilla camp” in
Beirut, Lebanon with “worldwide Nazi ties.”
After six months in Lebanon, Chapman went to Fort Chaffee, Arkansas to work with Vietnam refugees
recently arrived from Southeast Asia.

Agents of the CIA were with him at this military base.--- PAGE BREAK ---

On March 31, 1981, United Press International exposed “military training in a guerrilla camp” in
Beirut, Lebanon with “worldwide Nazi ties.”
After six months in Lebanon, Chapman went to Fort Chaffee, Arkansas to work with Vietnam refugees
recently arrived from Southeast Asia. Agents of the CIA were with him at this military base. William Colby’s Phoenix program in Vietnam, staffed by agents who intensely hated anti-war social
activists like John Lennon, had both the intent and the means to move persons like Chapman to their
training camps and specific locales planned as sites for future assassinations. Colby came back to the U.S.

--- PAGE BREAK ---to become Director of the C.I.A.

(1973) when “Operation Chaos” was in full swing against hippies, rock
musicians and anti-war protestors.

Many of them were killed or otherwise neutralized.

From Fort Chaffee, Arkansas, Chapman moved to Lookout Mountain, Tennessee to attend Presbyterian
College.

Martin Luther King, a victim of plans laid in DeKalb County, Georgia, was murdered in Memphis,
Tennessee.

Senator Howard Baker from Tennessee and CIA Director William Colby were making deals
to cover up Watergate crimes in 1974-75, a year before Chapman moved to Tennessee.

According to news reports, Chapman “fled” Tennessee for Hawaii in 1976.

His earliest arrest records
indicated he had committed crimes in Florida, but the authorities later blamed them on someone else,
excusing the mix-up as a “computer mistake.” Many patsies and decoys have earlier arrest records that
are used to keep them silent and actively cooperative for fear of going to jail.

Was there any connection
between the Florida identification and Chapman’s flight to Hawaii?

Hawaii has been the scene of many clandestine operations.

A host of CIA Vietnamese and members of
the Special Forces, now safely removed from Vietnam, were assembled in Hawaii.

The Nugan Hand
Bank, an Australian conduit for CIA “black money,” assassination funds, kept a branch in Hawaii.

Herbert
Mullen, convicted of mass murders in California, appeared perfectly normal until he was sent to a
military hospital in Hawaii.

It was in Maui that he evolved in his “religious thinking” and emerged as a
killer.

Ed Sanders, author of The Family, a book about the Manson Family, obtained documents regarding
a mysterious trip Mullen took to Hawaii before he became a programmed killer.

The years 1976-78 in Chapman’s biography are still vague and murky: two years of limited
employment and “mental treatment.” Allegedly, he was in the hospital for a mental breakdown.Ed Sanders, author of The Family, a book about the Manson Family, obtained documents regarding
a mysterious trip Mullen took to Hawaii before he became a programmed killer.

The years 1976-78 in Chapman’s biography are still vague and murky: two years of limited
employment and “mental treatment.” Allegedly, he was in the hospital for a mental breakdown.

On the
other hand, if there were any evidence of mental instability, would not his gun purchase permit have been
denied?

There were many years, months, days when Chapman could have been mentally programmed to become
a “Manchurian Candidate,” specifically to murder John Lennon if and when he re-entered public life.

Lennon was not a threat until the U.S.

was approaching another war.

Subsequently, Chapman took a long “vacation,” including a trip around the world.

On this voyage, he
stopped in Switzerland to visit a pal from DeKalb County, Georgia, the same man who had arranged the
trip to Lebanon.

The journey culminated in London with a visit to a rare live Lennon concert.

Chapman’s wife worked for a travel agency and “arranged his itinerary.” The financing for his fare,
hotels, food and concerts has never been identified, although Pacific Holding Ltd., a “tourism” company
formed by the CIA and Special Forces, may be implicated.

Both groups had funds to hire assassination
teams.

When Chapman left his job in Hawaii, October 23, 1980, he flew to Atlanta.

From Georgia, he went to
New York City with the intention of killing John Lennon, but was apparently able to resist the “master
inside himself,” a conflict he describes, and returned to Hawaii.

Before long, however, Hawaii was again
behind him, and Chapman arrived in New York on December 5, 1980 with the specific plan to kill John
Lennon, which he did three days later.

TD: What you are talking about is only circumstantial.

There is no proof that the CIA or any
government agency manipulated Chapman for their purposes.--- PAGE BREAK ---

TD: What you are talking about is only circumstantial. There is no proof that the CIA or any
government agency manipulated Chapman for their purposes. When does the proof of a conspiracy
ever become apparent? MB: The burden of proof is placed on the private investigator, but there are links in the conspiracy
chain that reveal the relevant questions to ask: Did Chapman have armed accomplices to ensure that
Lennon was dead? Who fled the scene in a hurry, never sought again by law enforcement agencies? Why
did the New York police adamantly refuse to accept photos of Lennon signing an album for Chapman

--- PAGE BREAK ---earlier on the evening of the murder?

Why were they donated to a newspaper after police refused to
accept them?

When Chapman’s wife was called by New York police, why did they instruct her: “Don’t
release any pictures of him?” Why did Miami Police issue an erroneous description of a criminal with the
same last name, date of birth, race and approximate height as the slaying suspect?

Can we ever see the
picture of the Florida suspect?

If Chapman was treated for mental illness in Hawaii, how did he procure
the gun in that state?

How did Chapman transport the gun from the island to the mainland?

(This question
was dismissed by Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms agents, who said, “No investigation
was in progress.”)
Money was never a problem for this wanderer.

He and his wife lived in a $400 per month apartment
and were able to support his hobby of collecting expensive works of art.

Owning original Norman
Rockwell lithographs worth $7,500, and traveling around the world aren’t impossible if there is some
kind of occupation that provides the money for these luxuries.

If Chapman wrote “John Lennon” on his
work sheet on October 23, 1980, it would seem impossible for someone not to notice this message until
the day after Lennon was murdered.

Employment log sheets are tallied regularly to determine hours
worked and amount of pay.

It is more probable that Chapman recorded the name at that time so his cover
story, his defense after the murder, would be his mental identification with John Lennon.

Chapman’s intention to find Lennon, the adoring Beatle fan, must be separated from the question
concerning who transported him from Hawaii to Georgia to New York, back to Hawaii, back again to
New York, with lots of cash and the sole purpose of killing Lennon.

Jimmy Breslin, the New York columnist, was impressed that Mark David Chapman could be such a
“good shot” with “no military background at all.” But Chapman had been trained.Chapman’s intention to find Lennon, the adoring Beatle fan, must be separated from the question
concerning who transported him from Hawaii to Georgia to New York, back to Hawaii, back again to
New York, with lots of cash and the sole purpose of killing Lennon.

Jimmy Breslin, the New York columnist, was impressed that Mark David Chapman could be such a
“good shot” with “no military background at all.” But Chapman had been trained.

He had learned to
become a security guard in Georgia before his trips to Lebanon and the many countries where he could
have been instructed in killing.

What about Ft.

Chaffee?

Why not shooting practice in Tennessee?

What
about military bases in Hawaii?

What gives Breslin and the New York Daily News the right to make such
statements without an inkling of Chapman’s background?

Like all the other “lone” drifters, Chapman stayed at expensive hotels.

His last evening before killing
Lennon was spent at the Sheraton Centre Hotel in New York.

He was carrying more than $2,000 in cash
along with his credit cards.

Where did he get these cards, and on what basis was the money earned and
saved to establish credit to qualify for these cards?

TD: You apparently believe there was a government conspiracy to assassinate and silence John
Lennon conceived and executed by the same people who murdered other political figures and
musicians over the past 18 years?

MB: Absolutely!

The federal government has maintained active programs to eliminate rock musicians
and disrupt rock concerts.

Senator Frank Church’s committee hearings in 1975, and the FBI’s
COINTELPRO clearly document the intent to break up any gatherings of the “new left.” Nothing brought
anti-war demonstrators into contact with political messages more effectively than music festivals.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The federal government has maintained active programs to eliminate rock musicians
and disrupt rock concerts. Senator Frank Church’s committee hearings in 1975, and the FBI’s
COINTELPRO clearly document the intent to break up any gatherings of the “new left.” Nothing brought
anti-war demonstrators into contact with political messages more effectively than music festivals. There is hard evidence that the CIA assigned agents to “investigate the music industry.” After the
murders of Tim Buckley, Jim Croce, and Mama Cass Elliot, more information surfaced about the prior
mysterious deaths of Jimi Hendrix, Jim Morrison and Janis Joplin. Listed below, but not updated this past
year, are some of the rock musicians who have died since the Huston Plan and FBI counter-intelligence
program were activated. If these people were taking drugs, there is the distinct possibility that poisons
were introduced in lethal quantities, to make it appear that they had died from simple “overdoses.”
The murder of John Lennon is the tragic finale to an era, a reminder that once an artist becomes as
popular and as political as he, enemies will be waiting to ensure that the artists fails to awaken
slumbering youth.

--- PAGE BREAK ---gic finale to an era, a reminder that once an artist becomes as
popular and as political as he, enemies will be waiting to ensure that the artists fails to awaken
slumbering youth.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER THIRTEEN
ABOUT WOMEN …
(PLAYGIRL MAGAZINE INTERVIEW)
(PLAYGIRL MAGAZINE, AUGUST 1974)
At a time when many writers and thinkers are seriously questioning the official accounts of the political
assassinations, kidnappings and “dirty tricks,” a housewife-turned-social-theorist offers her own
frightening, but well-researched, explanation.
By Stephanie Caruana
Mae Brussell is a researcher who has spent ten years studying political assassinations and conspiracies
in the United States. On July 11, 1972, she wrote the first article to give a reasonable explanation for the
break-in and arrests at the Watergate—three weeks after the event. The article, “Why Was Martha
Mitchell Kidnapped?” was published in The Realist.
Meanwhile, the establishment press was sweeping the Watergate story under the rug, to the
accompaniment of the “Third-rate Burglary Chorus.” But the story—and Mae Brussell—wouldn’t go
away. In December, 1972, she published a second long article in The Realist. But Watergate was still, in
the words of President Nixon’s tape transcript, “an unpricked boil,” and this story, too, was left to the
alternative press.
For three years, Mae Brussell’s weekly hour-long live radio news analysis show,
Dialogue:Conspiracy, has been broadcast over KLRB-FM, in Carmel, California. The show is also
currently heard in Sacramento, Boston, Syracuse, and San Francisco. She also teaches the first accredited
university course entitled “Conspiracies and Assassinations” at Monterey Peninsula College.
In April, 1974, I asked her: “Who or what is the SLA, and why did they kidnap Patricia Hearst?” Her
answer, “Is SLA’s Cinque the First Black Lee Harvey Oswald?” appeared in the Berkeley Barb. Her
theory is that the SLA is a conspiracy involving top intelligence agencies. Mae Brussell believes she
knows who is manipulating the course of American history by means of “bullets and blackmail”—and
why. She believes that plans for the military takeover of the United States and the imposition of martial
law sit on governmental desks like time bombs, waiting to go off when the time is right—and that only
immediate public awareness can avert a national disaster with echoes of Nazi Germany, Greece and the
Philippines.
Of course—she could be wrong. In spite of her painstaking analysis of hundreds of books and
thousands of articles, letters and other documents; in spite of her staggering perception of a Gestalt, a
pattern, in which puzzling, wearying daily news stories emerge as expected details to be slipped into the
overall framework—she could be wrong. She could be simply a modern Sherlock Holmes exercising a
brilliant capacity for deductive logic on events which in reality have no interconnection. Even so, how
happy I would be to sit at her feet like a modern Dr. Watson, with no pipe to chew on to hide my comic
consternation at having missed the point again. Sometimes I become so involved with the exhilaration ofI would be to sit at her feet like a modern Dr. Watson, with no pipe to chew on to hide my comic
consternation at having missed the point again. Sometimes I become so involved with the exhilaration of

--- PAGE BREAK ---the chase, the mental process of tracking down the game, that I almost forget this is real life we are talking
about.

Real people are being murdered while other real people are framed and railroaded into real
prisons.

The “arch enemy” in this game isn’t Professor Moriarty, “the most fiendish criminal mind the
world has ever known,” after all, a fictional character safely on the wrong side of society’s pale—it is the
intelligence agency complex of the United States.

Oh yes, Baker Street Irregulars, I know how you feel—you with your Inverness capes, sleuth caps, and
meerschaum pipes, as you slouch through a world of fantasy.

But can you guess how I feel?

With a whole
new unwritten library of mystery stories before me in the person of a lively, charming, lovable mother of
four who currently shares a rambling, casual, suburban home with two daughters, two kittens, a rabbit and
a blond cocker spaniel?

A potential shelf of contemporary history books that I myself may help to write?

I
feel lucky.

*  *  *
Mae thinks back to her life before she began her research, and laughs.

“Did you ever see a movie
called The Garden of the Finzi-Continis?

It’s about a wealthy Jewish family living in Italy during the
emergence of fascism.

We weren’t quite that wealthy.

Let’s say we were ‘comfortable.’ My activities
were centered around my husband, our children, and our home.

I was also reading the newspapers,
watching the cold war: the Rosenberg case, and the Alger Hiss case.

“I was watching Nixon.

I had a strong philosophy about raising children before I began studying
political assassinations.

The two are related.

You can’t make the world safe while you are raising a bunch
of mad bombers.

“I went to Stanford University and got married a few weeks before graduation.

I majored in philosophy.

We studied Plato, Nietzsche, Emerson and Thoreau—yet the professors didn’t seem to understand
anything about real life.

Those were the war years, 1940 to 1943.We studied Plato, Nietzsche, Emerson and Thoreau—yet the professors didn’t seem to understand
anything about real life.

Those were the war years, 1940 to 1943.

Hitler was raising a Holocaust all over
Europe—but we were upper middle-class children, so we studied medieval history.

We spent a lot of
time learning to distinguish between Rembrandt, Degas and Picasso.

It was as if the world outside didn’t
exist.

“Before that?

I grew up in Beverly Hills and went to Beverly High.

We sat around swimming pools
with movie stars’ kids, played backgammon, went to polo games.

All of a sudden, there was Hitler killing
Jews.

My father is a rabbi, but we never discussed Jewishness until after Hitler was gone.

Like most
cultural groups in the United States, we were never encouraged to respect our own cultural heritage.

Yet
the Jews have made many important contributions.

“People sometimes wonder how an ordinary housewife like me could get so interested in the John F.

Kennedy assassination.

But nothing just happens.

There has to be a time when you begin to think and feel
an emotional climate of caring about people, a nurturing place where you give a damn.

If you repress your
children, slap them, ignore them, dump them in front of the TV, go away and leave them with strangers,
you are not nurturing them to be sympathetic to other people.

That’s where my head was when Kennedy
was assassinated.

I was worried about my children and what sort of society we were living in where this
murder could take place.

“I didn’t believe the official reports because there were too many discrepancies.

I was taking the
morning and evening papers then.

I also had a number of magazine subscriptions.

I clipped and saved
articles from the day Kennedy died.

Gradually, I increased my newspaper subscriptions to include the
New York Times and the Washington Post.

Now I take eight newspapers a day.

I get a better perspective
on what is happening all over the country.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Now I take eight newspapers a day. I get a better perspective
on what is happening all over the country. Stories that are left out of one paper often get into another one. “In September, 1964, the Warren Commission Report came out, and I read it very carefully. Lee
Harvey Oswald interested me. Twenty-three adjectives were used to describe him in the Warren Report.

--- PAGE BREAK ---They said he had no friends, no meaningful relationships, couldn’t hold a job, and so on.

But the evidence
all pointed in the opposite direction.

So I bought the 26 volumes of the Warren Commission hearings and
began studying them.

“My husband never tried to discourage me.

In many ways, he helped me.

I could have any book or
magazine subscription that I wanted.

But my new interest in political assassinations definitely drove a
wedge into our marriage.

He couldn’t see why it was so important to know who murdered John F.

Kennedy.

And I think most men would begin to resent the time I withdrew from entertaining our friends
and devoted instead to what became serious, full-time research.

We were divorced four years ago.

“I had gone through a drastic role change.

But people do change partners today, when their interests
change.

If your mind leads you to follow a new belief, and your mate goes with you, that is beautiful.

Otherwise, you need the courage to go it alone, or you will meet someone who is on the same trip, and so
you continue on that trip with him.

“The people I admired most were Frank Lloyd Wright, Carl Sandburg, Henry Miller, Bertrand Russell,
Emerson and Thoreau.

They cared about people—how they live and relate to each other.

They were calm
and placid.

They served humanity and tried to turn people on to the truth.”
“It seems like a long jump from philosophy to the Warren Commission hearings,” I said.

Mae nodded.

“Yes, but it’s a question of survival.

I studied the hearings for two years.

And I perceived a certain way of
questioning witnesses, so that they never got to the point.

It is the same technique that was used in the
Watergate hearings: you don’t push too hard because you might elicit something that you don’t want others
to know.

“Albert Jenner was on the Warren Commission, and he is now busy helping as Nixon’s counsel on
impeachment procedures.It is the same technique that was used in the
Watergate hearings: you don’t push too hard because you might elicit something that you don’t want others
to know.

“Albert Jenner was on the Warren Commission, and he is now busy helping as Nixon’s counsel on
impeachment procedures.

Other members of the Warren Commission team that covered up the JFK
assassination conspiracy ten years ago are in power now.

“I developed a cross-filing system, which grew as I went through the 26 volumes of testimony.

I
personally believe the JFK assassination was an intelligence operation and that Oswald was a
government agent.

I’d like to do a book on Oswald, showing how our society can take a person into
military service, train him, set him loose and use him—then turn its back, lock him up, or kill him when he
has done his work.

Oswald was expendable, a ‘throw-away person.’ If you care for my view, he was
framed, defamed and then murdered.

“I will do another book called Decoy into Patsy about Oswald and Arthur Bremer, the alleged would-
be assassin of George Wallace—and Sirhan Sirhan, James Earl Ray, Charles Manson, Juan Corona.

All
of these are political assassinations, conspiracies.

Would you accept the supposition that they all follow
similar patterns?

Once you have solved the first one, it is easy to figure out the others.

The most difficult
thing for people to understand is the use of the prison system to bury living human evidence of political
conspiracies.

Yet once the concept is understood, it provides the key to unlock every case.

“Even though there is a wide pattern of conspiracies, it doesn’t involve a large number of people.

Fewer than one-half of one percent of the population is involved.

The biggest problem for the researcher
is that the average person can’t even conceive of the possibility of conspiracies.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Fewer than one-half of one percent of the population is involved. The biggest problem for the researcher
is that the average person can’t even conceive of the possibility of conspiracies. But if enough people
realized the truth, they could end the devastating process that has kept us constantly at war to protect the
financial interests of a small group of people. It has driven 50,000 of our young men into permanent exile,
and killed another 50,000 American soldiers, as well as countless thousands of innocent people in other
countries. It has ruined our economy and is now leading inevitably to a bloodbath in our own country.”
I asked whether she thought Nixon’s tape transcripts would have some effect on people’s thinking. “Of course. They follow the same pattern as the Warren Commission hearings. Evidence has been
chopped up, destroyed, deleted, shredded or deep-sixed. This is what they did with JFK’s autopsy. X-
rays were never developed, the original autopsy papers were burned, the car interior was destroyed
immediately, and JFK’s brain was hidden away so researchers couldn’t find out about the bullets.

--- PAGE BREAK ---developed, the original autopsy papers were burned, the car interior was destroyed
immediately, and JFK’s brain was hidden away so researchers couldn’t find out about the bullets.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Remember Sally Harmony and her shredding machine, L. Patrick Gray destroying the contents of Howard
Hunt’s desk, Mrs. James McCord burning typewriter ribbons from the White House while a C.I.A. agent
stood ‘innocently’ by? The only reason you destroy these things is to hide the fact that you have done
something illegal. For the guilty, the crime of destroying evidence is less serious than the crime you are
hiding.”
“It seems difficult for many people to take what you are saying seriously,” I ventured.
She laughed again. “There are many reasons why people won’t examine these questions. Some people
feel they lack the capacity to understand what is happening. Others believe they are just doing their job
and don’t want to get involved. Another group fear they would be in danger. They don’t realize that
whether they like it or not, America could be like Vietnam for the next ten years. An elite group feels that
changing the system might be bad for their profits.
“But while there may be little profit in investigative work, there is no poverty in it. I can go out and
lecture on what I have learned about conspiracies. Woodward and Bernstein won a Pulitzer Prize for
taking a position against the whole administration. There is money in truth these days, although for years
you couldn’t give it away. I think people are hungry for truth and bored with lies.”
I asked whether she had any suggestions for women who might want to get more involved themselves,
but didn’t know where to start.
“A woman could start with her morning paper, like I did. She has to throw away the programmed
assumption that because she is a woman, she can’t figure things out. She could learn more about the things
that interest her, write to her congressmen and correspond with prisoners. It is up to women to force
society to change, because the men aren’t doing it.
“I began with one book and gradually built up a collection of information so comprehensive that people
come from all over the world to see it. And I am not endowed with special brains. I just sat back and
asked myself, ‘What is life about? And what do I want out of my life?’ What I want is to know the truth
about the world I and my children live in.”not endowed with special brains. I just sat back and
asked myself, ‘What is life about? And what do I want out of my life?’ What I want is to know the truth
about the world I and my children live in.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---cial brains. I just sat back and
asked myself, ‘What is life about? And what do I want out of my life?’ What I want is to know the truth
about the world I and my children live in.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER FOURTEEN
WORLD WATCHERS PROGRAM OUTLINE,
OCTOBER 4, 1982
NAZIS, SS. OSS, DULLES SINCE WORLD WAR II, THE WEB AROUND GRACE KELLY, MONTEREY TAX
COLLECTOR – WELLS FARGO, “CONTENT ANALYSIS OF NEWS,” HOW TO EXTRACT, “REAGAN, NANCY
DECLARE WAR ON DOPE DEALERS,” SF EXAMINER, 10/3/82
(PROGRAM OUTLINE FOR WORLD WATCHERS INTERNATIONAL BROADCAST, OCT. 4, 1982)
SIDE ONE
1. Release Bobby Hall tapes, LA, on GOP, Hollywood drug users.
2. Fire Sen. Paul Laxalt, Nevada, as GOP fund raiser, Vegas mob, crooks.
3. Take away key to White House from Frank Sinatra, your best pal.
4. Remove George Bush, CIA, Task Force 157, Nugan Hand, heroin, cocaine.
5. Grant immunity to CIA dope assassins, T. Shackley, Edwin Wilson, Frank Terpil, Michael Sindona,
Robert Vesco in exchange for their telling us who killed JFK, Nov. 22, 1963. JM/Wave, CIA.
6. Release Michael Sindona from 25 yr. sentence if he tells MAFIA dope connections to Ronald
Reagan and Jimmy Carter, Richard Nixon.
7. Reveal how much money was made selling heroin, cocaine in USA the past three years, and in what
cities. How many prosecuted?
DUTCH PRINCE “DEPRESSED,” SF Chronicle, 10/2/82. Prince Claus, Nazi husband of Queen
Beatrix, Basel, mental hospital.
TREND WATCHER, JOHN NAISBITT, READING NEWSPAPERS. W.S. Journal, 9/30/82.
“Avoid the big event, news hole, content analysis of smaller papers.”
THOMAS C. WHITE III, MONTEREY COUNTY TREASURER-TAX COLLECTOR.CHECK
HIM OUT!!
“Insurance Executives Vanish, County Again Escapes Financial Misfortune.” Monterey Herald,
9/29/82. WELLS FARGO BANK, Monterey. “Insurance Exec. Vanishes Along with $3000,000 – Plus
Another $100,010.” LAT, 9/28/82. Sleazy outfit, alias, death threats, secret operations. Workman’s
compensation funds, Monterey funds with two who are gone.
THE NAZI CONNECTIONS: WHY KRAEMER VS. KRAEMER IS IMPORTANT..” LAT, 9/28/82. Sleazy outfit, alias, death threats, secret operations. Workman’s
compensation funds, Monterey funds with two who are gone.
THE NAZI CONNECTIONS: WHY KRAEMER VS. KRAEMER IS IMPORTANT.

--- PAGE BREAK ---azy outfit, alias, death threats, secret operations. Workman’s
compensation funds, Monterey funds with two who are gone.
THE NAZI CONNECTIONS: WHY KRAEMER VS. KRAEMER IS IMPORTANT.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1. “SECRET REPORT ON HOW NAZIS AIDED U.S. SPIES,” S.F. Examiner, 9/29/82, 7/27/47,
Allen Dulles on forming CIA, testimony on sharing Nazi spies with USA while WWII fighting. Adm.
Wilhelm Canaris, others. “TIFF OVER A DOCUMENT, COPS CALLED TO CAPITOL HILL,” SF
Chronicle, 9/30/82 Ira Goldman tried to stop Reuters newsman from reading about Allen (Warren
Commission) Dulles, OSS-SS co-workers.
2. “U.S. PLANNING NUCLEAR WAR,” SFC, AP, 10/2/82. Sov. For. Minister Andrei Gromyko,
“cold blooded composure of gravediggers” – Reagan administration.
3. “LABOR PARTY GROUP URGES NEW PEACE EFFORT,” NY Times, 10/10/48. Accused
USA of breaking peace with Russia, working with Nazis, and setting a policy for war, that looms larger
every day. ONE YEAR AFTER CIA FORMED, ASSIST FROM HITLER’S TOP NAZIS.
4. “DEMANDS FOR ‘ARGENTINE NUREMBERG’ TRIALS,” L.A. Times, 9/27/82. 20,000
KILLED, ARMED FORCES SINCE 1970’S. “We DID WHAT WAS NECESSARY,” Argentine admirals,
generals. “YOUR COMMANDERS WERE NOT TRIED FOR VIETNAM AND WE SHOULDN’T BE
EITHER.” “CATCH 22 – NAZIS, FRITZ KRAEMER, KISSINGER SET UP VIETNAM AND
ARGENTINE DEATH SQUADS.”
SIDE 2
THE WEB AROUND GRACE KELLY, WHY DID SHE LEAVE HOME ALONE?
Part II – More next week on the connections listed below. DANGEROUS TIMES, SHE TOUCHED
ALL BASES.
1. VATICAN CONNECTIONS, when murders, exposes explosive possibilities.
2. NUGAN HAND CONNECTIONS, Monte Carlo, Samuel Cummings, CIA, Mafia.
3. ARCTIC CIRCLE CONNECTIONS, Robert Vesco vs. Bernie Cornfield, Oil, energy war,
deciding votes for natural resources in Monte Carlo.
4. HOLLYWOOD CONNECTIONS. Twentieth Century Fox, MGM, Columbia, politics mixed with
CIA, assassination teams, Mafia, and church. THE SPIDERWEB, J. Persico, Crown, NY. “Operation
Bernhard,” counterfeit for Nazis, for after war, what Vatican doing now with Mafia, Nazis.
GRACE KELLY’S SPIDERWEB
1. CATHOLIC RELIGION PRIMARY when CIA, GEHLEN, TOP USA SPIES HAD BEEN
SWORN INTO Sovereign Military Order of Malta (SMOM). Would need a CATHOLIC FOR PRINCE
RAINIER. If no heirs, Monte Carlo goes back to FRANCE. Spies, the Spiderweb needs Monte Carlo,
Hong Kong, international weapons, narcotics, intrigue, Nazis, not accountable to countries.
2. ROCKEFELLER CONNECTIONS – NY Daily News, 9/15/82. In 1935, father borrowed $7,000.
Construction loan. 15 years later, $18 million. Helped build Rockefeller Center.
3. MODEL, NYC, TWO PLAYS SHORT RUNS – Three months. Three weeks. TV spots. Gerald/82. In 1935, father borrowed $7,000.
Construction loan. 15 years later, $18 million. Helped build Rockefeller Center.
3. MODEL, NYC, TWO PLAYS SHORT RUNS – Three months. Three weeks. TV spots. Gerald

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Ford, model, NYC, to Warren Commission, Twentieth-Century Fox board with Grace. Candy Jones,
Model, NYC, CIA, Jimmy Hoffa, international trips.
4. MGM CONNECTIONS – Ida Koverman, Herbert Hoover secy., with Louis Mayer, Randolph
Hearst, Catholic Hitler lover. Hoover, Mayer combine.
5. OLEG, IGOR CASSINI, JOSEPH KENNEDY – Nazi, SMOM, Allen Dulles, Louis Nizer
(Warren Commission Introduction), Jackie O., Wrightmans, Rubiroso, Trujillo, Nixon, Monte Carlo,
Grace Kelly.
6. CASSINI CONNECTIONS, CZARIST RUSSIA, RANDOLPH HEARST, ONASSIS, GRACE.
7. FRANK SINATRA CONNECTIONS, “HIGH SOCIETY.” – Alfred Bloomingdale, Vicki
Morgan, Bernie Cornfield, Roy Cohn, Monte Carlo. Sam Giancana, Robert Maheu.
8. MONTE CARLO CONNECTIONS – The Lodge, Kissinger, Alex Haig, Licio Gelli, Middle East
narcotics.
9. VATICAN CONNECTIONS – Arranged her contract marriage, ten day engagement, took Rainier to
her door, question asked THAT SAME NIGHT, second meeting, directed by CHURCH, VATICAN FOR
RAINIER, MONTE CARLO CASINO, KEEP OUT OF FRANCE! ! !

--- PAGE BREAK ---CHAPTER FIFTEEN
THE MURDER OF JOHN BELUSHI
(WORLD WATCHERS INTERNATIONAL BROADCAST, MARCH 21, 1982.)
When John Belushi died, there was a wave of confusion in Los Angeles for the first week or so from
the coroner’s office and police officials concerning the cause of death.

A week later, the headlines
delivered a fait accompli—that he was always drunk, a slob, took drugs all the time.

He had this
expensive drug habit.

I didn’t know John Belushi, but he was very successful, just as many rock musicians died at the peak of
their success, at the crest when they were about to do better things.

This death follows the same pattern.

He was about to make, with partners, two very important and highly political movies.

One was to be
called Blue Moon Over Miami, and it was to be directed by Louis Malle, the fellow who directed
Atlantic City, nominated for an Academy Award—and also My Dinner with André; it’s been suggested
this was the best picture of the year.

Malle is a serious director.

The script was written by highly
successful and well-known writer, John Guare.

So one of the movies that Belushi was about to make was a comedy about the FBI and drug smuggling
from Colombia to Miami.

And he would play the role of the drug dealer, an informer for the FBI, and then
the FBI agent becomes the drug dealer.

That is, you must admit, a very controversial movie because the
state of Florida depends upon the drug market.

It is probably the biggest going industry in Florida, and
also the United States.

And these people don’t appreciate comedy.

And the network of assassination teams and drug dealers selling poison drugs comes from headquarters
in Hollywood and Miami.

Belushi was also in Hollywood to make a movie called Noble Rot, and he was to be with his good
friend Don Novello, Father Sarducci.

Now, Father Sarducci and John Belushi were making a movie about
the wineries in California, dominated by the mob.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Belushi was also in Hollywood to make a movie called Noble Rot, and he was to be with his good
friend Don Novello, Father Sarducci. Now, Father Sarducci and John Belushi were making a movie about
the wineries in California, dominated by the mob. They are trying to establish social acceptance, and this
was to be a comedy about the Italian Mafia. Noble Rot, you can imagine what that is by the title alone. So if you think that Belushi was not overly-political, forget it. In the past, he made fun of the
Establishment. And to make fun of the Establishment is lethal. Incidentally, Belushi had bought a $400,000 home up at Martha’s Vineyard—he had 2,000 feet of
ocean-front land and eight-and-a-half acres. He bought it in 1979 from former Defense Secretary Robert
McNamara. When you read that a man had $2 million in life insurance, and has a $400,000 home that
belonged to Robert McNamara, he wasn’t just drugging and goofing off, his lazy, sloppy, sleazy image. After he was dead, the articles came out, the mess he lived in, the dirt. To get into productions, you have a
commitment to be on time. Millions of dollars are invested in you. You have a schedule you keep, and
while it looks like fun and games on the screen, and I’m sure there is plenty of goofing off, there were also
a lot of brilliant laughs—and plans and commitments to schedules and sense of timing. The image given
after he was dead was the big slob who almost deserved to die in his own vomit. But that wasn’t John
Belushi. His success, what he earned and what he was saying speak loud and clear. All the rest is

--- PAGE BREAK ---garbage.

You don’t have to believe the cover stories once the fellow is dead.

Three nights before he died he was on LaCienega Blvd.

near Wilshire, just bordering Beverly Hills.

He
was with a cab driver who gave an interview.

It was late at night.

They were sitting at a counter at a
sandwich shop, and there was a newspaper there.

They both were looking at it, and he asked Belushi,
“Which part do you want, ‘Sports,’ ‘Entertainment,” or ‘El Salvador’.” And Belushi said: “I want El
Salvador.” He went on to say that he hated what he read in the news, that he hated Hollywood, that they’re
a “bunch of pricks.

I want to get back to New York City.” And he said that he wanted to stay there.

They went to Belushi’s car, where he had a lot of cocaine in the glove compartment.

But the driver said
Belushi was unhappy, fearful of his environment, that he wanted to get back [to New York].

I think that
about describes it.

There was another article published about him, that he didn’t want to stay in
Hollywood.

The last night before he died, Belushi said to somebody, “I’m going home to Judy
tomorrow”—that’s his wife in New York—“I want to get out of here.”
I’m sure that he sensed some danger, just as Elvis Presley was poisoned until he died.

Or John Lennon
was kept secluded and isolated in an apartment, and the minute he emerged, he died.

Belushi, when he was in Hollywood, was bounced around the drug scenes and a lot of hard people, a
very sleazy element that could entrap him later.

He expressed the idea that he would leave the next day,
evidently drop the movie and go back to New York.

But that next day never came.

He’d hired bodyguards.

The studios wanted to keep him from using cocaine.

If he did indeed have it,
they wanted to keep him clean.

Well, Nelson Rockefeller, vice president of the United States, had bodyguards who weren’t around
when he died.If he did indeed have it,
they wanted to keep him clean.

Well, Nelson Rockefeller, vice president of the United States, had bodyguards who weren’t around
when he died.

Robert Kennedy had a bodyguard, Thane Cesar from Lockheed, who was behind him when
the fatal bullets were delivered to the back of his head.

Bodyguards often let people through the door who
shouldn’t be there.

It’s a question of the agencies that employ them.

Who was looking after Belushi?

Two nights before, someone came to his home - Evelyn Smith—the
same woman who would be with him when he died.

She was kicked out.

She reappears … and she’s one of the major suppliers of drugs to the Hollywood stars.

Her behavior at
the death scene was questionable—not only was supplying narcotics a crime, but not calling 9/11 or the
police or the hotel desk is irresponsible; she was there when he died, went away for a couple of hours,
returned.

Smith didn’t call anyone.

She let the bodyguard, who appeared at 12:30 p.m., find the body,
even though Belushi was dead when she walked out.

So, again, who were the security guards?

Another article in the paper: “John Belushi Felt Tragically Alone.” He was paranoid that he was being
used.

It’s probable that ever since he appeared on Saturday Night Live and did impersonations of famous
people, he was placed on an enemies list.

He was that political.

The last performance of Saturday
Night’s original group was [so radical], a friend asked me how they got away with it.

The next day, the
whole group was fired, and it was reported that they were “too political.” The whole group was broken
up.

Sure, he was followed and used by people.

I’m sure that he was prepared by this milieu around him to
be done in if he continued to be political.

And the two movies that he was going to make were so highly
political that it would be imperative to see that he didn’t gather any further fame and notoriety.

Noble Rot means the “noble” priest, Sarducci, and the rottenness of the winery people.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And the two movies that he was going to make were so highly
political that it would be imperative to see that he didn’t gather any further fame and notoriety. Noble Rot means the “noble” priest, Sarducci, and the rottenness of the winery people. You can
imagine how popular he was with the wine people behind the Hollywood studios and the drug scene. And, again, the movie Blue Moon Over Miami. I must repeat, these are not popular subjects to make
movies about. The papers reported that John Belushi died alone in bed, nude, in a fetal position. Lieutenant Dan Cook
of the LAPD said, “it appears to be natural causes. There were dark blotches on his arms caused when
blood starts to settle, and not by needles.” That was the first report. Then the police said it appeared he

--- PAGE BREAK ---choked on his tongue.

John Belushi died on Friday.

On Saturday there were more articles about food, choking, natural causes.

Heart attack was a possibility.

No sign of drug usage.

The hotel clerk said his heart evidently failed him.

The room was neat, the actor in bed, his clothes neatly folded as though he had gone to sleep for the night.

There was nothing out of order, “no reason to suspect foul play.”
He was in good health the night before, according to witnesses.

By Sunday, Los Angeles coroner Thomas Naguchi—the controversial Naguchi who was fired after this
case—was telling reporters, “the cause of death has not yet been determined.”
“Discounting his lifestyle, he seems to have choked on food.”—that was the San Francisco Examiner
(March 7).

He was at the Roxy nightclub the night before he died, and the owner of the club said that he
hadn’t taken any drugs.

On Monday, the newspapers reported: “More Tests Needed to Determine Cause of Death.”
The Houston Post reported that Belushi was under examination, they were inspecting his heart.

They said he ordered breakfast: “whole wheat toast, jelly, a pot of coffee and freshly squeezed orange
juice.” He had breakfast on the terrace.

Now, Evelyn Smith ordered the breakfast, and at 10:30, when
Belushi was nice and dead, she went out for breakfast, she said.

But it’s obvious that from 6:30 to 8:00,
when it was ordered, he was not in any condition to eat.

On Monday the cause of death was still undetermined.

Slides of tissue had to be taken, more pathology
of the body.

Dr.

John Holloway—a doctor who worked on the autopsy of Senator Robert Kennedy—
entered the case and insisted that parts of the body would have to be removed and internal organs
examined to determine if the cause of death was a heart attack.Dr.

John Holloway—a doctor who worked on the autopsy of Senator Robert Kennedy—
entered the case and insisted that parts of the body would have to be removed and internal organs
examined to determine if the cause of death was a heart attack.

Now, if Belushi overdosed on narcotics, and there was a mess of needles, cocaine and heroin littering
the place as reported 10 days later—the first five days it was reported that there were “no drugs”
involved—then the search for a heart attack was superfluous.

The doctor from the Robert Kennedy
autopsy said that the evidence “may not be so visible,” so the tissue “must be tested, and full anatomic
evidence presented.”
“It may be myocardial infarction, or a coronary attack,” Dr.

Holloway said.

So they weren’t so sure.

Tuesday: No comment on Belushi, a second round of tests for toxic substances and evidence of disease
on samples of tissue taken.

On the sixth day, March 10, they still didn’t know what killed him.

There were interviews.

The police
said there was a powder resembling cocaine on the nightstand; his body had needle marks likely to be
from intravenous injection of cocaine.

Seven days after his death, it was an “overdose of drugs.” Chief of Police Gates in Los Angeles said he
didn’t know about an overdose; he had been informed that the musician-actor died of “natural causes.” On
this day, “Signs of Drug Usage on Belushi’s Body” were reported.

He had been stuck with “a needle.”
One report stated that there were numerous needle marks, another reported only one—and yet another said
the dark spots were from blood clots.

And then the official autopsy report came out—and that was the shocker, because it contained very
little information related to questions that should have been asked.

The L.A.

Examiner: “Official Report on Belushi Death”—“At 1:00 am, he went to a private bar.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The L.A. Examiner: “Official Report on Belushi Death”—“At 1:00 am, he went to a private bar. He
stayed there and was driven back to his room, where he vomited, and was pale and sweaty.”
He was immediately sick—and then indulged in wine and cocaine. There was no evidence of sickness
when the police first entered the room. They thought he had a heart attack. At 3:00 till 3:30 am, friends arrived; people came, according to the report. We don’t know how many,
and they are not named. We don’t know how many there were. They arrived at the hotel and stayed about
30 minutes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---That would be the time when he was injected with the “cocaine or heroin.”
By 6:30, he was having hot and cold flashes, took a shower.

At 8:00 a.m., he fell asleep shaking and wheezing.

Evelyn Smith entered the hotel room, and at 9:30 she
heard him struggling for breath.

He was terrified and very sick.

She hears a terrible noise, and he pleads: “please don’t leave me.”
At 10:15, he falls asleep, so she walks out, leaves him “to get something to eat.”
He knew that he was dying, but she walks out.

At 12:30, Belushi’s physical therapist come in, the body was still warm.

He was pronounced dead.

Belushi had “congestion of the lungs, liver and spleen, swelling of the brain and heart, arteriosclerosis,
distended bladder,” and they threw in “obesity”; he weighed 220 pounds.

All of this should have showed
up in the first autopsy.

It doesn’t take 7-10 days to find all of this, and the enlarged brain (the weight was
given in the autopsy report) would have been tremendously painful.

He was writhing in pain.

When Ms.

Smith left the hotel room, he was covered with a blanket and there
was foam coming out of his mouth.

He swallowed his tongue.

And the eyes rolling—in fact, a friend who
entered the room said, “I closed his eyes, because I couldn’t stand to see them open.”
So she would have seen easily that he was dying, the terrible set of symptoms.

And she walks out and
leaves.

Then she comes back, the police hand-cuffed and took her away.

Then they released her, and she
becomes a super-star, goes to New York City for an interview at ABC, does an article for Rolling Stone.

Cathy Evelyn Smith was not charged with any role in Belushi’s death.

There was no mention of
collusion, but the unidentified guests who arrived at 3:00-3:30 a.m.

were a clue that something was amiss.

The first reports that he was taking drugs—the police chief and coroner didn’t mention it—came from
the ABC network.

A lawyer for ABC is Gregson E.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The first reports that he was taking drugs—the police chief and coroner didn’t mention it—came from
the ABC network. A lawyer for ABC is Gregson E. Bautzer, one of the attorneys retained by Howard
Hughes (at the time that HE was drugged, silenced and possibly murdered. Greg Bautzer is the law
partner of Frank Rothman at MGM, the domain of Kirk Kerkorian and Fred Benninger, chairman of MGM
Mirage.)
ABC had “inside information” and worked closely with teams involved in other mysterious, drug-
related deaths. The coroner came along after the ABC reports and stated that Belushi overdosed by
“intravenous injections of heroin and cocaine.” The report stated that Cathy Evelyn Smith was with him
when he died. Is she responsible for his death if she sees him writhing in pain, obviously dying, foaming at the mouth,
choking? She didn’t call 9/11, didn’t run to the front desk. The article in the Los Angeles Herald-Examiner reported: “Belushi may have died before the woman
left him.”
Where does murder begin and leave off? What was her responsibility? Who were the people in the room? This was a very political, highly successful person offed in Hollywood. Smith left him to die. There
were fresh multiple injection marks on both arms. There was no evidence of scarred veins in either arm. He’d been only recently injected. The body was still warm. She ordered breakfast at 8:00, went out for breakfast again at 10:30. He turns up dead. She doesn’t call
anyone, lets him be found. Tom Gerald flies her to the Essex Hotel in New York City with her attorney, and puts her on ABC-TV’s
20/20. The “Mystery Woman” is described as a known “drug dealer” in Hollywood, supplies big
celebrities with narcotics. When they die, shouldn’t she be questioned? John Belushi didn’t trust her. His bodyguard kicked her out two nights before he died. “I don’t believe the story,” Belushi’s wife said.

--- PAGE BREAK ---The night after he kicked Smith out, Belushi told friends he wanted to get out of town because he didn’t
feel safe.

He felt he was in danger.

She suddenly appeared at the “unnamed club” above Roxy’s in the autopsy report.

Belushi is visited by
unnamed people.

There are anonymous sources of drugs.

The LAPD only made a cursory search for the
source and announced that no charges would be filed.

An unnamed rock star was with him shortly before he died—not mentioned in the autopsy report—and
said: “there wasn’t a needle present anywhere.”
His doctor said there were no needle marks on him prior to the fatal injection.

(Belushi had recently
been to the doctor for treatment of ear, nose and throat problems.)
There were no “multiple” needle punctures, no scarring of the veins, no proof that he had been a junkie.

He may have taken cocaine and marijuana—they are all over Hollywood—but certain segments of society
are dying.

His wife said immediately, in an article printed by the Chicago Sun-Times: “Something weird
happened.

That woman was thrown out two days ago.

John told Bill to throw her out.

John wasn’t a
junkie.”
Evelyn Smith was with Gordon Lightfoot for a short while in Toronto.

She moved to L.A.

in 1978 for
the drug scene.

And Judith Jacqueline Belushi wanted to know “where she came from, who is this woman,
what was she doing there, and how does she appear the night that he dies?”
Smith was with Belushi until he was dead—and, of course, the obvious move was to not call the
police.

(When Nelson Rockefeller died, Megan Marshack, his staff assistant, was present and didn’t call
the guard or chauffeur outside the door, or 9/11 or the hospital—she called Poncitta Pierce, who lives
down the street, and she comes over, and the two of them talk it over and decide to call police … when
he’s good and dead.)
The newspapers reported later that police were searching for the source of the drugs—how far did they
have to go.And Judith Jacqueline Belushi wanted to know “where she came from, who is this woman,
what was she doing there, and how does she appear the night that he dies?”
Smith was with Belushi until he was dead—and, of course, the obvious move was to not call the
police.

(When Nelson Rockefeller died, Megan Marshack, his staff assistant, was present and didn’t call
the guard or chauffeur outside the door, or 9/11 or the hospital—she called Poncitta Pierce, who lives
down the street, and she comes over, and the two of them talk it over and decide to call police … when
he’s good and dead.)
The newspapers reported later that police were searching for the source of the drugs—how far did they
have to go.

All they had to do was ask the “Mystery Woman.”
He begged her not to leave.

She left Belushi … who was supposedly so heavily into drugs that they
there all over the place.

But the police didn’t find drugs and powder and needle marks at that time.

She reappeared two hours later and brought the drugs with her—then she could spread the cover story
that she took them with her when she left.

And she did confess: “I didn’t want to leave [a drug stash
behind] because the maid might find it.”
If a woman is a drug dealer, and the police are coming because a man is dead, the last thing she would
do is incriminate herself by walking in with a stash of cocaine and drug paraphernalia.

Why did she bring it all back and lay it in front of them—unless she knew that she wouldn’t be held for
the murder?

Was she so mindless (after fearing the maid might find the drugs) that she returned to the death
scene with cocaine on her for police to confiscate?

Then the stories came along: “John Belushi’s Reckless Race to the Grave,” the “drug-soaked sex
orgies,” a one-way ticket to Hell.

But it would be awfully hard, as I say, to make a multi-million dollar
movie with a “$25,000 a month cocaine habit,” or work with the finest directors and writers going in
Hollywood.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Then the stories came along: “John Belushi’s Reckless Race to the Grave,” the “drug-soaked sex
orgies,” a one-way ticket to Hell. But it would be awfully hard, as I say, to make a multi-million dollar
movie with a “$25,000 a month cocaine habit,” or work with the finest directors and writers going in
Hollywood. I am sure that he was not the crazy, reckless pig that he was made out to be after he was dead. The worst article came from Kate Braverman, staff reporter at the Los Angeles Times: “A harsh final
look at Belushi, the patron saint of pigs.” So he “hits Los Angeles and goes berserk. … What else is Los
Angeles good for? It’s the last frontier for desperate men, rock stars, exiled tyrants. Los Angeles is a
Disneyland for the decadent, a top ticket all the way, the best ride to Hell.” Belushi was “the belly of this
century,” with “an endless appetite for novelty and the rot that began with manifest destiny.” She tears him
apart, a twentieth-century “nightmare.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---Belushi was “the belly of this
century,” with “an endless appetite for novelty and the rot that began with manifest destiny.” She tears him
apart, a twentieth-century “nightmare.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

“Much Ado About Nothing,” opined the San Francisco Chronicle. “Saturday Night Live was designed
to attract the sleepy and the sloppy.” John Belushi will be “totally forgotten in a few years.”
But he will be remembered for the programs he did with Lampoon and Saturday Night Live. His
particular brand of political humor was genius—and that was his fatal mistake.
POSTSCRIPT
(EXCERPT FROM UNTOUCHABLE: A BIOGRAPHY OF ROBERT DE NIRO, BY ANDY DOUGAN, THUNDER’S
MOUTH PRESS, 1996, PP. 156-57.)
De Niro was one of those who did not like Cathy Smith. He thought she was a low-life, and he seemed
to resent the hold she had over his friend Belushi. When he arrived at On the Rox shortly after midnight on
5 March, Belushi called him over. De Niro had been trying to get hold of him earlier in the evening and
had left a number of messages. Possibly because Smith was there, De Niro did not stay for long. Belushi,
however, was keen to talk further about the heroin script, perhaps fearing that he might be losing ground in
the argument with Insana and the studio. He asked De Niro to visit him in his bungalow after the club had
closed for the night and the actor agreed. Also at On the Rox later that night was another acquaintance of
Belushi, comedian Robin Williams. A superb improviser, Williams was at this stage undoubtedly
America’s finest stand-up comedian. He was also a household name after becoming an overnight
sensation in the smash-hit television series Mork and Mindy. He had been performing at the nearby
Comedy Store on Sunset Boulevard and headed for On the Rox when he had finished his set. Messages
had been left at the club telling Williams that both Belushi and De Niro, an old friend, had been looking
for him and had gone back to Chateau Marmont.
To this day Williams, who first met Belushi in New York some years previously, believes that there
was an attempt to set him up that night, and possibly De Niro along with him.
“I was only in Belushi’s room for five or ten minutes then I split,” he told Rolling Stone magazine in
1988. “I saw him and split. He didn’t want me there; really, he obviously had other things he was doing. I
do think I was set up in some way to go over there. A guy at the Roxy told me that John wanted me to stop
by his bungalow. But when I went by, he wasn’t looking for me. He wasn’t even there. When he arrived,
he said, ‘What are you doing here?’ He offered me a line of cocaine, I took it and then I drove home. If I
had known what was going on, I would have stayed and tried to help. It wasn’t like he was shooting up in
front of me.”
The following afternoon, on the set of Mork and Mindy, Williams was stunned to be told by co-star
Pam Dawber that his friend was dead.tried to help. It wasn’t like he was shooting up in
front of me.”
The following afternoon, on the set of Mork and Mindy, Williams was stunned to be told by co-star
Pam Dawber that his friend was dead.

--- PAGE BREAK ---CHAPTER SIXTEEN
WHO KILLED CONGRESSMAN LARRY MCDONALD?

RONALD REAGAN, THE WESTERN GOALS FOUNDATION & THE DOWNING OF KAL FLIGHT 007
(HUSTLER MAGAZINE, FEBRUARY 1984)
In the aftermath of the Korean Air Lines disaster that shocked the world on September 1, 1983, the
editors of the Los Angeles Herald-Examiner contended with a series of nagging questions.

Prominent
among them was the following:
Q: Is there reason to believe that Rep.

Lawrence McDonald of Georgia, an admittedly ultra-right U.S.

congressman traveling on 007, may have been deliberately assassinated aboard the flight?

A: “While the [U.S.] government has made no such charge, McDonald’s widow claims that her
husband, the national chairman of the John Birch Society, was ‘murdered.’ She holds that it was no
accident that ‘the leading anti-Communist in the American government’ had been on a plane that was
‘forced into Soviet territory’ and shot down.”
Another question to be addressed is: Why would the Soviet Union wish to make a martyr of Larry
McDonald?

If the Russians are the experts at terrorism they’re supposed to be, it would seem obvious that
they could find an easier way to get rid of the congressman than chasing his airplane over Soviet territory
for 2 1/2 hours.

They could have easily blown him away anywhere in the world.

Furthermore, it is hard to believe that KAL Flight 007 was forced into Soviet airspace, as if a giant
mechanism had sucked McDonald toward his mortal enemy.

During the strange 2 1/2 hours that 007
ventured as far as 226 miles inside Soviet airspace, the Russians were testing new missiles directly
below.

They didn’t need any more problems.

And I doubt that McDonald, fanatic as he was, deserves the label of “leading anti-Communist in the
American government.” He has pretty stiff competition from A.G.

“Fritz” Kraemer, Sven Kraemer, John
Lenczowski, Paula Dobriansky, William Clark, Jeanne Kirkpatrick, William Casey, Henry Kissinger, Dr.

Ernest Lefevre, William F.--- PAGE BREAK ---

“Fritz” Kraemer, Sven Kraemer, John
Lenczowski, Paula Dobriansky, William Clark, Jeanne Kirkpatrick, William Casey, Henry Kissinger, Dr. Ernest Lefevre, William F. Buckley, James Buckley, Richard Pipes, General Daniel O. Graham, and a cast
of thousands. An article that appeared immediately after the shooting down of 007 accused Secretary of the Navy
John Lehman of responsibility for “the deaths of 269 over Sakhalin Island.” Lehman’s strategic design,
known as “Horizontal Escalation” in defense circles, outlines a series of provocations against the USSR. Lehman: “He who gets the signal to fire first in the North Pacific will enjoy a tremendous tactical
advantage. This region … is most probably where we shall witness confrontation with the Soviet Union.”
Thus, while Europe and the U.S. divert the public with NATO missile debates, plans are formulated for
a first strike in the Pacific. South Korea, Japan and the U.S. are at collectively at work on these plans. Sending spy planes over the Soviet Union serves the purpose of provocation. Five days after the 007 incident, former CIA spy Ralph McGehee told a college audience that the
Korean airliner was indeed on a spy mission. He also believes that the Russians thought 007 was an RC-
135 intelligence plane. It was Senator Jesse Helms (R-North Carolina)—another archconservative ideologue; anti-union, anti-

--- PAGE BREAK ---government, anti-Communist and an opponent of an international treaty on genocide—who arranged
McDonald’s invitation to attend the celebration commemorating the 30th anniversary of the official U.S.

entry into the Korean War.

Instead of traveling together, however, Helms and McDonald arrived in Anchorage, Alaska—the first
stop of the journey to South Korea—on separate planes.

The fact that McDonald was the only person in
the 36-member American delegation to fly alone seems strange.

After refueling, the Boeing 747 carrying
Helms arrived at its destination safely.

But McDonald—and his fellow passengers on Flight 007—were
not so fortunate.

As depicted in the books by Ian Fleming, 007 was James Bond’s “license to kill.” In this case, who had
the license to kill?

Was it the CIA and its Korean counterpart, the KCIA?

They were formed at
approximately the same time and work together closely.

The fact that McDonald and Helms flew on separate planes brings up several more unanswered
questions.

Who sat next to McDonald?

Korean Air Lines must have a boarding pass for that passenger.

If
nobody used the seat, and if McDonald was accompanied by others in the American delegation, why
didn’t one of them occupy the seat?

Where were the staff or advisory members of McDonald’s Western
Goals Foundation, a data bank in Alexandria, Virginia, that serves as a national right-wing clearinghouse
for negative information about leftists?

Why was McDonald left to die alone?

Who actually gained by Flight 007’s violation of Soviet territory?

Not the Russians.

They were in
preparation for the next week’s meeting in Madrid, Spain, between U.S.

Secretary of State George Schultz
and Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko, also the resumption of arms-reduction talks and the annual
United Nations meeting.

An incident of any kind would—and did—set world opinion against them at a
critical time.

On the other hand, the U.S.An incident of any kind would—and did—set world opinion against them at a
critical time.

On the other hand, the U.S.

government benefited by gathering valuable military information about
Soviet radar and defensive capabilities in the hours preceding the crash.

Other benefits to the State
Department and Pentagon included favorable MX-missile and binary nerve-gas votes from a knee-jerk
Congress.

Clearly, Larry McDonald did not die at the hands of Soviet planners.

The most important explanation
for his demise relates to recent revelations about his clandestine activities.

A prior relationship between
McDonald and President Reagan started to surface before the crash.

Illicit espionage concealed behind a
cloak of righteous Americanism at any price was about to be exposed.

The media, along with many other institutions and individuals, had purposely withheld the darker side
of Reagan’s years as California governor from the 1980 presidential campaign.

Now the dirty laundry of
the past was starting to leak out.

Key backers, financiers and appointees of Ronald Reagan have always been involved in political
spying—and worse.

California was rife with intrigue.

Nixon and Reagan were from California.

And
California is where the bubble burst.

The trail leading to the connection between Reagan and McDonald
is long and winding.

But the facts prove collusion between informers hired by Reagan when he was
governor and McDonald’s Western Goals Foundation.

The methods—and even the persons involved—
were the same in both cases.

The first indication that something was even more rotten than usual in California came on August 15,
1980, when Warren Hinckle—the former editor of Ramparts magazine—noted that the snooping of Jerry
Ducote appeared to involve members of Ronald Reagan’s gubernatorial staff.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The methods—and even the persons involved—
were the same in both cases. The first indication that something was even more rotten than usual in California came on August 15,
1980, when Warren Hinckle—the former editor of Ramparts magazine—noted that the snooping of Jerry
Ducote appeared to involve members of Ronald Reagan’s gubernatorial staff. (Ducote was a former
sheriff’s deputy employed by Reagan’s backers to infiltrate suspected subversive groups.)
“What is happening in Santa Clara County today is the germ of the biggest scandal of the next 1 1/2
years,” Hinckle said. “People thought that with Watergate it was all over. But this is the next layer of
Watergate.”
On January 4, 1983, nearly 2 1/2 years after Hinckle’s prediction, Detective Jay Paul of the Los

--- PAGE BREAK ---Angeles Police Department supplied a weary team of investigators with the connection between Larry
McDonald and Ronald Reagan.

That day marked the end of McDonald’s usefulness to the larger network
he served.

He had become a liability to some very important people.

A carefully constructed web of deceit was brought down by the massive volumes of files illegally
assembled on law-abiding citizens by the L.A.

Police Department’s Public Disorder Intelligence Division
(PDID).

The files were ordered destroyed in 1975, but it was later discovered that LAPD officers kept
the data-bank information.

Enraged by this disobedience, the Los Angeles Police Commission officially requested the files.

But by
then, Lieutenant Thomas Scheidecker had stolen at least 10,000 pages of documents, and PDID Detective
Jay Paul had moved a huge batch of files to his garage in Long Beach.

Attorney Ann Love, his wife, was
paid $30,000 a year to feed a sophisticated $100,000 computer data that had been ordered destroyed.

The information eventually wound up in the computer of the Western Goals Foundation.

And, lo and
behold, the man who paid Ann Love was Representative Larry McDonald, chairman of Western Goals.

Also caught up in the web was John Rees, an editor at the Western Goals Foundation, and a longtime
associate of Jerry Ducote by way of their common employers and similar methods of accumulating data.

Both acted as agents provocateurs.

“An agent provocateur is a police agent who is introduced into any political organization with
instructions to foment discontent .

.

.

or to take a case in order to give his employers the right to act against
the organization in question,” according to Colonel Victor Kaledin of Imperial Russian Military
Intelligence.

Ducote was employed by key Reagan supporters and the John Birch Society.

Rees collaborated with
the Birch Society and a host of other right-wing groups, feeding them information to harass and embarrass
those who opposed their point of view.Ducote was employed by key Reagan supporters and the John Birch Society.

Rees collaborated with
the Birch Society and a host of other right-wing groups, feeding them information to harass and embarrass
those who opposed their point of view.

Reagan’s man, Ducote, and Larry McDonald’s crony, John Rees, worked together at the San Francisco-
based Western Research, also known as Research West.

Ducote secluded himself behind unmarked doors,
running a blacklisting service for industry.

The results of his spying were added to a repository of
information used by Governor Reagan to screen out potential state employees with leftist political
tendencies contrary to his own beliefs.

At the same time, photographs of rallies and demonstrations—along with copies of underground
newspapers—were supplied to Western Research by agents of the Los Angeles Police Department.

In
turn, Western Research sold background information on employees and advised corporations about
possible risks.

Research West, an incarnation, maintained close ties with law enforcement and corporate data banks,
employing spies to feed information to utility companies anxious to identify anti-nuclear activists.

Clearly,
blacklisting didn’t end with the death of Senator Joseph McCarthy.

The witch hunt never ceased.

Last January in Los Angeles, the American Civil Liberties Union filed a lawsuit on behalf of 131 law-
abiding groups and individuals who were illegally spied upon.

Among the defendants in this case were 54
police officers from the LAPD’s Public Disorder Intelligence Division.

The law firm representing the defendants was Gibson, Dunn and Crutcher.

Curiously enough, Attorney
General William French Smith was a partner in that firm.

And none other than President Ronald Reagan is
a client of Gibson, Dunn and Crutcher in all personal legal matters.

Time was running out for Larry McDonald after many years of stealing, bugging and compiling.

He was
about to be subpoenaed by a Los Angeles County grand jury.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Time was running out for Larry McDonald after many years of stealing, bugging and compiling. He was
about to be subpoenaed by a Los Angeles County grand jury. His testimony—particularly the parts
relating to the feeding of illegal police intelligence files to his Long Beach computer—could embarrass
and even damage a great number of powerful people. *  *  *

--- PAGE BREAK ---Several weeks after the downing of Flight 007, Soviet President Yuri Andropov blamed the United
States for a “sophisticated provocation, masterminded by U.S.

special services, an example of extreme
adventurism in politics.”
How could the United States have written such a script?

Larry McDonald was going to embarrass
President Reagan if too many of the documents from California were exposed.

They shared common spies
and common enemies.

So let’s assume that the CIA, FBI and all federal agencies that worked with
McDonald—particularly the Pentagon—wanted him silenced immediately.

At the same time, because
McDonald was so violently anti-Communist, why not make the Soviets responsible for his murder?

A
New Right martyr could be created in the struggle against communism.

Remember the Pueblo?

The scenario might have continued in the following way:
• There would be a celebration in South Korea early in September.

McDonald had strong ties to
Korean-born Reverend Sun Myung Moon, leader of the Unification Church (the Moonies) and the South
Korean military.

Arrange for McDonald to attend that celebration in South Korea.

(Dorothy Hunt, CIA officer and wife of Watergate defendant E.

Howard Hunt, was blown up in a
commercial airliner over Chicago, and nobody seemed to care.

Undoubtedly, her murder scared into
silence the primary witnesses who could have embarrassed President Nixon at the time he was paying
them to “plead guilty” before sinking his presidency.

Incidentally, the espionage activities of both E.

Howard Hunt and Congressman McDonald were entangled with the Los Angeles Police Department.)
• Send spy planes over the USSR continuously.

The Soviet Union does not appreciate such flights
violating its territory.

By putting McDonald on a commercial airliner and timing its incursion inside
Soviet airspace with spy-plane operations at the same time, an attack by Soviet missiles would be
assured.The Soviet Union does not appreciate such flights
violating its territory.

By putting McDonald on a commercial airliner and timing its incursion inside
Soviet airspace with spy-plane operations at the same time, an attack by Soviet missiles would be
assured.

One of the many mysteries of Flight 007 is the total lack of communication between its pilots and U.S.,
Korean and Japanese listening posts.

This is known as maintaining radio silence.

Furthermore, 007 left
Kennedy Airport in New York with a defective radio and navigational system.

When the pilot on the first
leg of the flight disembarked in Anchorage, he assumed the plane’s malfunctioning parts would be
repaired.

But this didn’t happen.

It is common knowledge to all pilots flying over Soviet territory that aircraft going beyond a certain
point inside Russian borders will be forced to land or shot down.

If the CIA and the National Security
Agency wanted Larry McDonald dead, thereby assuring an international incident, isolating the pilots from
instructions or warnings would be essential.

The way to accomplish this is either to tamper with radio
transmissions or the pilots’ minds—or both.

Chun Byung In, the pilot in command of 007, held the rank of colonel in the South Korean Air Force.

He was considered reliable enough to have flown the Korean president to the U.S.

in 1982, and fly
overseas routes linking Southeast Asia to the Middle East, Paris to Los Angeles, and New York to Seoul.

The co-pilot on 007 was Lieutenant Colonel Sohn Dong Hui.

According to news reports, Chun boasted
to close friends that he was carrying out special tasks for American intelligence, and he even showed
them some of the plane’s spying equipment or surveying Soviet military installations.

Spying was
sometimes the covert mission of regularly-scheduled commercial flights that began in New York City and
ended in Seoul.

After the 007 disaster, it was reported that Koreans often flew over Soviet airspace to reduce fuel
expenses.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Spying was
sometimes the covert mission of regularly-scheduled commercial flights that began in New York City and
ended in Seoul. After the 007 disaster, it was reported that Koreans often flew over Soviet airspace to reduce fuel
expenses. But spy cameras with the ability to photograph Soviet military bases are a more plausible
reason for Korean jets losing their way so often. Reports indicate that Korean Air Lines concluded a secret agreement with the CIA in the early 1970s to

--- PAGE BREAK ---carry out intelligence surveys of Soviet territory.

These reports further suggest that when Flight 007 was
shot down, the U.S.

intelligence mission utilized a reconnaissance satellite programmed to pass overhead
at the same time.

This allowed the U.S.

to record electronic traffic denoting the whereabouts of Soviet
air-defense systems as they were activated to meet a presumed threat.

After triggering the radar warning of a threat to the USSR, the pilot of a U.S.

RC-135 reconnaissance
plane used maneuvers typical of American spy planes to frustrate Soviet air defenses.

Eventually, he dove
below the radar cover off the Kamchatka Peninsula to distract air-defense crews and allow Flight 007 to
enter Soviet airspace undetected.

Meanwhile, attempting to dodge Soviet fighter planes 226 miles inside the USSR, pilot Chun requested
permission to elevate to 35,000 feet.

Moments later, he shouted, “Rapid … a rapid decompression.”
Flight 007 was hit by a missile.

Chun’s last words –”one-zero, one-zero-delta”– left everyone confused, as did the plane’s final radio
transmissions.

Neither Matsumi Suzuki, head of Japan’s Sound Research Institute, nor the Japanese
broadcast network NHK, could explain what “delta” meant.

Was that Chun’s “Rosebud”?

Early reports following the tragedy, noting the apparent loss of contact with 007’s pilots, suggested that
the plane had been hijacked.

A second report said that the two pilots and the navigator may have been
asleep—a dubious theory considering the crew’s unblemished record.

A more likely possibility is that the crew had been the victim of hypnosis and mind control—receiving
instructions in advance, before they left Anchorage, that could not be picked up and recorded later.

If this seems farfetched, consider the experience of Candy Jones—a famous model and radio
personality—who described in her biography how the CIA programmed her mind for spying and activities
related to espionage.A more likely possibility is that the crew had been the victim of hypnosis and mind control—receiving
instructions in advance, before they left Anchorage, that could not be picked up and recorded later.

If this seems farfetched, consider the experience of Candy Jones—a famous model and radio
personality—who described in her biography how the CIA programmed her mind for spying and activities
related to espionage.

A single phone call from an unseen person would have been enough to implement
previously implanted instructions to kill herself.

These revelations came to light at the height of the Watergate scandal, along with evidence that she had
previously done errands for the CIA.

Only the intervention of her husband saved Candy Jones from certain
death.

The issue of 007’s defective navigational system came under close scrutiny following the disaster.

Reports filed with NASA revealed that at least 25 times during the past five years, U.S.

airline pilots
relying on the same navigational equipment used by 007 had strayed off course—once as much as 250
miles.

Cited among the cause were computer malfunctions and human errors.

“It’s easy to become complacent [on long flights],” said Pan American World Airways pilot Thomas
Foxworth.

“It’s a human failing.

The record is replete with numerous incidents of a guy just falling
asleep.”
What if the “human failing” cited by Foxworth was actually mind-controlled planning?

Two of the 007
crew might have been asleep—or even dead.

But the one who cried “delta” was obviously awake until
the end.

His response to what was going to happen, given his years of experience and expertise, was that
of a programmed zombie instructed to fly continuously—disregarding any external sights or sounds on the
flight equipment.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But the one who cried “delta” was obviously awake until
the end. His response to what was going to happen, given his years of experience and expertise, was that
of a programmed zombie instructed to fly continuously—disregarding any external sights or sounds on the
flight equipment. As long ago as November 1974, the Subcommittee on Constitutional Rights—headed by then-Senator
Sam Ervin of North Carolina—issued a 645-page report titled, Individual Rights and the Federal Role
in Behavior Modification, which plotted the advanced state of CIA mind work and testing. Three years later, the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence and the Sub-committee on Health and
Scientific Research published another report, Project Mkultra: The CIA’s Program in Behavior
Modification. The upshot of these reports is that the Pentagon had the capability, if it so desired, to link mind control
with satellite defense systems. And a logical use of mind control, of course, would be to program a pilot
—perhaps even turning a normal flight into a kamikaze mission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Dr.

Jose Delgado, the father of military-and-defense mind experimentation who worked with the CIA
and Navy Intelligence, perfected such procedures as early as 1971.

In one instance, he surgically
implanted a receiver in the brain of a Spanish fighting bull.

Later in a Madrid arena, when a tiny radio-
controlled electrode delivered a minute surge of current to the enraged beast’s mind, the bull braked to an
abrupt halt.

Delgado also pioneered a method of shooting mood drugs into the brain, calming the subject by a
remote computer that sensed oncoming anxiety, depression or rage, and flashed back inhibitor signals by
radio.

“The [programmed] individual may think that the most important fact of reality is his own existence,”
Delgado wrote.

“But that is only his personal point of view, a relative frame of reference which is not
shared by the rest of the living world.”
The justification for perfecting physical control of the mind was to enable outside forces to determine
how to use a person’s body by activating his brain and directing it beyond the subject’s control—in spite
of any conscious efforts he might make.

KAL Flight 007 was equipped with the latest navigational technology.

Three computer-driven, inertial-
navigational systems installed a year earlier told the airplane seven times per second where it is
supposed to go.

Only the following elements could have coordinated the death of Representative Larry McDonald with
the Soviet missile response: (1) human factors; (2) altered instruments in New York City or Anchorage; or
(3) mind control over the Korean Air Force pilots.

*  *  *
Exactly who was Larry McDonald, the strange and complex individual who wore so many robes?

At
first he was a doctor specializing in urology who prescribed the discredited drug laetrile to cancer
patients.

He was also a man who concealed the ownership of 200 guns.

In 1974, he was elected to the
U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He was also a man who concealed the ownership of 200 guns. In 1974, he was elected to the
U.S. House of Representatives, later chairman of both the tax-free Western Goals Foundation and the John
Birch Society. The best way to describe most people is to understand who their heroes are. McDonald reportedly kept
two photographs on the walls of his Congressional office that give some clues to his mental state. One picture was of Senator Joseph McCarthy. The other was of Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet. Senator McCarthy began his Senate career after World War II with financial assistance from two known
Nazi sympathizers in Wisconsin—Frank Seusenbrenner and Walter Harnischfeger. Fred J. Cook’s The
Nightmare Decade details the pro-Nazi backers of McCarthy, and how the senator knew of their
“passionate ultra-rightism and admiration for Hitler.” Harnischfeger’s nephew, in fact, often displayed an
autographed copy of Hitler’s Mein Kampf. He also flaunted a watch-chain swastika. In December 1946, 43 of Hitler’s top military officers received death sentences or long prison terms at
the Dachau Trials for the bloody massacre of American soldiers at Malmedy, France. One of McCarthy’s
primary objectives as he entered the Senate was to facilitate their release. By 1949, thanks to
Congressional hearings, he directed another maneuvering. McCarthy’s efforts paid off. The 43 Nazis were
freed. When McCarthy conducted his House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) hearings in 1953
and accumulated data on law-abiding citizens for future fascist purposes, most of his information came
from combined United States intelligence and Nazi war criminals. He also drew upon the extensive files
of a spy network known as ODDESSA, an association of former SS officers formed between 1943 and
1945, when it became obvious the Third Reich could not win the war against the Soviet Union.

--- PAGE BREAK ---After McCarthy died in 1957, it is reasonable to assume that Larry McDonaid—by way of Louise Rees
—took over the massive computerized files that now contain millions of names worldwide.

Louise Rees, the wife of John Rees, an editor at McDonald’s Western Goals Foundation, worked for
McCarthy and Roy M.

Cohn, counsel for the senator’s 1953 Permanent Investigations Subcommittee of the
Government Operations Committee.

Western Goals lists Roy M.

Cohn, now a New York lawyer, on its
advisory board.

And when McDonald went to Washington as a representative from Georgia in 1974,
Louise Rees was his paid staff aide.

McDonald’s admiration for his other major hero, Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet, can be explained
in part by the fact that both of their careers benefited from the support of international fascist
organizations.

And there is evidence that Nazis in Chile funded McDonald’s Congressional campaigns
since 1974, at Pinochet’s direction—just as Nazis were the source of funds for McCarthy in Wisconsin.

Ironically, the very night that McDonald was killed, Pinochet, his CIA-supported hero—was taunted by
rioters in Chile.

The Chilean people also want their nightmare decade to end.

Pinochet is responsible for
DINA, Nazi-like death-squad terrorist teams that are an arm of the Chilean police, necessary to maintain
his repressive regime.

Without DINA’s methods of fear and torture, the U.S.

puppet government in Chile
would not last another day.

Pinochet also does nothing to interfere with Colonia Dignidad, a haven for Nazi war criminals located
on the border between Argentina and Chile.

Colonia Dignidad serves as a torture center where dissenters
who oppose Pinochet are mutilated and fed to dogs while still alive.

Armed guards discourage snoopers.

Amnesty International is currently investigating this deplorable situation.Armed guards discourage snoopers.

Amnesty International is currently investigating this deplorable situation.

Larry McDonald’s unsavory Chilean connection was further exposed when Robert Byron Watson
presented attorneys from the House Select Committee on Assassinations with an affidavit reportedly
detailing McDonald’s dealings with Fuad Habash Ansare in Santiago de Chile; Watson claimed that Fuad
Habash is the brother of Arab terrorist leader Dr.

George Habash of the Popular Front for the Liberation
of Palestine.

This organization is said to work with our CIA to arrange Arab terrorist murders around the
globe.

*  *  *
Larry McDonald’s Western Goals Foundation, another sinister organization, was formed in 1979.

Members of its advisory board are listed in brochures and newspaper advertisements, and include the
following: Jean Ashbrook, Mrs.

Walter Brennan, Taylor Caldwell, Roy M.

Cohn, Congressman Philip M.

Crane (R-Illinois), General Raymond Davis, Henry Hazlitt, Dr.

Mildred F.

Jefferson, Dr.

Anthony Kubek,
Robert Milliken, Admiral Thomas H.

Moorer, E.

A.

Morris, Vice-Admiral Lloyd M.

Mustin, Mrs.

John C.

Newington, General George S.

Patton III, Dr.

Hans Sennholz, General John Singlaub, Dan Smoot, Robert
Stoddard, Congressman Bob Stump (D-Arizona), Mrs.

Helen Marie Taylor, Dr.

Edward Teller, General
Lewis Walt and Dr.

Eugene Wigner.

The executive staff of Western Goals consists of Linda Guell, director; John Rees, editor; and Julia
Ferguson, research associate.

Two members of Western Goals bear special mention.

According to Seymour Hersh’s recent book The
Price of Power in the Nixon White House, Admiral Thomas Moorer masterminded the surreptitious
removal of sensitive data from President Nixon’s office.

Working through Yeoman Charles Radford,
Moorer stole papers clearly marked “President’s Eyes Only” and had them delivered to the Pentagon.

His reward for stealing these top-secret documents was a promotion to the prestigious Joint Chiefs of
Staff.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Working through Yeoman Charles Radford,
Moorer stole papers clearly marked “President’s Eyes Only” and had them delivered to the Pentagon. His reward for stealing these top-secret documents was a promotion to the prestigious Joint Chiefs of
Staff. Merry Christmas, Cambodia! Bypassing every member of Congress, Henry Kissinger and Admiral
Moorer conducted their own private war against that country—one that has not fought the United States at
any time—gleefully selecting bombing targets that cost the lives of millions of innocent people.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It later developed that Los Angeles Police Department files on two million Californians were assessed
by Moorer’s and McDonald’s Western Goals computer.
So it comes to pass that the criminals keep track of the innocent. Information about you is probably
already filed and computerized in their secret data banks. Would you trust people like this with your good
name?
A second Western Goals advisory board member worth noting is Edward Teller, Hungarian-born father
of the hydrogen bomb. The same day that McDonald made the front page of the Washington Post—when
Western Goals was ordered to answer the stolen-documents subpoena in Los Angeles—Teller was
attending a European seminar on nuclear warfare critical to America’s future foreign policy.
*  *  *
There is no beginning or end to the Larry McDonald tragedy. His right-wing fanaticism drew him to the
crueler side of blackmailers, burglars, assassins, terrorists, wiretappers, and people dedicated to waging
a future war with the Soviet Union.
And there he was, last August 31 and September 1, apparently sitting all alone on Flight 007. If that
was by Soviet design, then all in his entourage were communists who knew in advance.
But since the American delegation was screened and cleared for travel with a congressman, then the
CIA and U.S. agents knew something they wouldn’t share with him—even to save his life.
So what’s it all about, Alfie?erican delegation was screened and cleared for travel with a congressman, then the
CIA and U.S. agents knew something they wouldn’t share with him—even to save his life.
So what’s it all about, Alfie?

--- PAGE BREAK ---s screened and cleared for travel with a congressman, then the
CIA and U.S. agents knew something they wouldn’t share with him—even to save his life.
So what’s it all about, Alfie?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
NASA’S CHALLENGER, R.I.P.
(JANUARY 28, 1986)
William Rogers, chairman of the commission appointed by President Ronald Reagan to investigate the
causes of the January 18, 1986 Challenger shuttle explosion, stated for the record, “a serious deficiency in
the flawed decision-making process was responsible” for the tragic event that occurred on Tuesday
morning, January 28, 1986.”
That makes a good cover story. Human error did it.
But what if the demise of the Challenger with its seven-member crew wasn’t an error?
Mike Royko, columnist for the Chicago Tribune, wrote: “Somebody should check the laws of Florida
and the federal laws for criminal liability. There could be a manslaughter case here.”
Senator Donald W. Riegle, D. Michigan, suggested, “one can only assume they, the President’s
commission, are hitting upon things that are so disturbing they feel they can’t share them with the public.”
A NASA official said, “it’s like an artichoke. Everyday they peel something else. The Commission has
begun pointing the finger at the individuals and the procedures involved in the catastrophe and the
resulting picture isn’t pretty.”
Every major military operation and shift in Defense Department policy occurs as a result of long
planning.
The problems surrounding the Challenger explosion, with the disastrous ripple effect on the entire
shuttle program, suggest that the Pentagon and NASA’s Star Wars operation will assure the friendly skies
for their Warfare State. Control of all space projects for the future will be in the hands of the military.
Commercial and exploratory projects are shelved or put on a long waiting list.
The transfer of NASA shuttle programs to the Defense Department was detailed in an article in
Spaceflight [No. 24, May, 1982, pp. 226-29], “The Military Role in the Shuttle,” by Gerald L.
Borrowman. The United State Department of Defense has a major role in the utilization of the space
shuttle.
The participation of the shuttle Challenger in new Pentagon ambitions became obvious in September,
1983.
The Challenger “accident” may go down in history along with the Reichstag fire, the assassination of
Austrian Archduke Ferdinand, the Gulf of Tonkin incident or the downing of the Korean Airliner 007 as a
provocateur action implemented by the military to gain tighter control of war machinery.
Some estimated costs to activate the shuttle projects are $2–$10 billion. It will take four to five years.
It is impossible to believe that such a system—huge in terms of money, plans and contracts for military
purposes and spy satellites—didn’t have some kind of backup with less expensive alternatives in the
event of a single accident.
Making matters worse, the accident was obviously preventable. Time and money are not thrown away
unless there are other major plans waiting to execute. NASA had already ordered the shuttle program’s
extinction as early as 1983. The terms were an impossible situation: “Pull yourself out of the red andss there are other major plans waiting to execute. NASA had already ordered the shuttle program’s
extinction as early as 1983. The terms were an impossible situation: “Pull yourself out of the red and

--- PAGE BREAK ---produce revenue of at least $2 billion.” Get going or get out of the way.

Problems related to the controversial O-ring, caused by freezing in cold weather, were a concern to
NASA back in December 19, 1982.

By February, 1983, NASA was warned, then chose to ignore, specific
problems created by lack of protection with the secondary back-up seals.

Why did the shuttle program
have no interest in the survival of passengers and equipment?

Memoranda detailing a “catastrophic” disaster if the shuttle was launched in less than 50 degrees
Fahrenheit was presented to NASA in July 1985, and again in August 1985 by two scientists.

Did NASA and the Pentagon choose the timing?

They demanded a launch on the coldest day in shuttle
history.

The shuttle Challenger, unlike any previous launch, waited outside in rain and cold for 38 days.

Television cameras focused upon the ice coating and huge icicles at the time of the launch.

Ice teams
were sent out the “check.” It was not always cold at Cape Canaveral.

The Rogers Commission limited the public inquiry into launching decisions to the evening of January
27th and the morning of the 28th of January, 1986.

Plans for an earlier launch on Saturday, January 25th, 1986 were postponed due to “dust storms in
Africa and Morocco.”
It is interesting that weather so far away was conveyed to the launch team at the top of the their
pyramid.

The same decision-makers couldn’t see ice or feel the freezing temperature at Cape Canaveral.

It was not a matter of seeing or feeling the cold.

NASA experts from Huntsville, Alabama at Marshall Space Center literally ordered management from
Morton Thiokol and Rockwell to approve the launch, and ignored what they did not choose to hear.

Challenger would leave on the morning of January 28, 1986.

Weather was not a factor considered.Challenger would leave on the morning of January 28, 1986.

Weather was not a factor considered.

Robert Lund, vice president for engineering at Morton Thiokol, the company that made the
controversial solid fuel boosters, was told, “don’t make an engineering decision.” He was expected to
quick-change from engineer into a manager.

Lund wore the two hats.

He had to be a manager because
Marshall teams at Huntsville were dangling a renewal contract in front of the compay involving $300-
$400 million a year … and was forced to make an about-face and disregard the safety of seven astronauts.

The other hat was military.

Lund changed directions and took orders.

Life is cheap at the Pentagon.

Sunday turned out to be a fine day for a launch.

Was there too much media competition with Super
Bowl Sunday, with Reagan’s “teacher in space” production, after two years of publicity?

The hundreds of press, teachers and students waiting at Cape Canaveral could have seen a fine launch
on Sunday, Monday afternoon or even Tuesday afternoon when it was much warmer.

NASA officials had
been alerted by Sunday that a cold front was coming in Monday night or Tuesday, for sure.

Indications
were always that weather was a factor in safely launching a shuttle.

The orders to launch coincided with President Reagan’s State of the Union speech before Congress.

Christa McAuliffe, Reagan’s pet teacher, was the superstar of this event.

Rumors spread through Washington, D.C.

that Chief of Staff Donald Regan called Marshall Space
Flight Center and ordered the “ship to fly” on the morning of January 28, 1986.

Regan, a Wall Street broker from Merrill Lynch, does not know the mechanics of space travel.

He
knows business.

Billions of dollars, not lives, have a way of altering judgment.

So [does] national
security.

Only the National Security Council and the Pentagon put words into Regan’s mouth on shuttle
matters.--- PAGE BREAK ---

So [does] national
security. Only the National Security Council and the Pentagon put words into Regan’s mouth on shuttle
matters. A shuttle disaster would not embarrass the “Teflon president.”
A shuttle catastrophe would be, and was, an advantage for Star Wars, SDI and the militarization of
space. Reagan’s primary goal is to dole out funding to SDI. If he has his way, no matter who is President,

--- PAGE BREAK ---Republican or Democrat, the first-strike offensive and space weapon system will be in place.

Background for SDI, and the recent announcement of laser weapons that can scorch the earth, came
from the importation of 642 Nazi specialists to the United States between May, 1945 and December,
1952.

The importees’ expertise was in rockets, atomic bombs and missiles.

The United States benefited
greatly from Nazi engineering.

Project Paperclip by Clarence Lansby describes how Dr.

Werner von Braun, Walter Dornberger and
640 partners manufactured weapons at Peenemunde and Camp Dora, “with the benefit of 10,000 slave
laborers under [the] control of the Waffen SS, the Gestapo.”
Those Nazis quietly resettling in Huntsville, Alabama arrived with the idea of using space to “rule the
world” by building a reflector that would kill human targets immediately.

It could instantly kindle forests
or turn the ocean water into steam.

It was no coincidence that the pressure to launch came from four top officials at Marshall Flight Center
in Huntsville: William Lucas, Stanley Reinartz, Lawrence Mulloy and George Hardy still arrogantly
defend the launch massacre despite ignoring all warnings.

Konrad Dannenberg, part of the Paperclip-Von Braun team, and George von Tiesenhousen, Nazi rocket
scientists, described in the Wall Street Journal the “hazards of rocketry,” clearly implying that death goes
with the territory.

Remember, however, the seven murders were avoidable.

Why couldn’t they wait to launch?

Tuesday
afternoon was warm.

Star Wars/SDI has been in the minds of both the Germans and the United States Pentagon for over 30
years, but was not formally presented to the world until March 23, 1983.

President Reagan, with Edward Teller, the father of the Hydrogen bomb, by his side coaching this
event, pulled out the Paperclip plans and labeled them “SDI,” the Strategic Defense Initiative.Star Wars/SDI has been in the minds of both the Germans and the United States Pentagon for over 30
years, but was not formally presented to the world until March 23, 1983.

President Reagan, with Edward Teller, the father of the Hydrogen bomb, by his side coaching this
event, pulled out the Paperclip plans and labeled them “SDI,” the Strategic Defense Initiative.

August 30, 1983, five months after the SDI presentation, the shuttle Challenger was launched in the dark
of night.

Challenger would start its twenty-fourth and twenty-fifth orbit, making a close approach the Korean
Airliner 007.

While a satellite could monitor the KAL-007 activation of Soviet defense systems, the shuttle was on
one of its designated military functions.

Challenger’s role “extended intelligence operations with sea,
land, air and space involvement.”
Representative Larry McDonald, chairman of the John Birch Society and Western Goals, was [a
passenger on] Korean KLA 007, a civilian plane used for military purposes.

When KAL-007 was shot down by the Soviets, the arms race escalated as never before.

Reagan used
the deaths of 268 passengers for pushing production of MX missiles, deployment of Pershing 11 and
cruise missiles in Europe, and to escalate funds for his new Star Wars, High Frontier, SDI projects.

Edward Teller sat on the Board of Western Goals, the illicit espionage data bank, with the late Larry
McDonald.

The pilot of the Challenger [August 30–September 5, 1983] was Rear Admiral Richard Truly.

Truly
became head of the Naval Space Command.

Following the Challenger destruction on January 28, 1986,
Truly has been appointed to replace Jesse Moore as associate director for space flight.

Jesse Moore was offered a promotion to director of Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, just five
days before the tragedy.

Those were the sunny days when Challenger rested before the soon-to-be-
freezing launch.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Jesse Moore was offered a promotion to director of Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, just five
days before the tragedy. Those were the sunny days when Challenger rested before the soon-to-be-
freezing launch. Remember, Moore had the final decision for a “go or no go.”
[And] 1983 was the year that Lockheed got their contract for maintenance of the shuttle system at Cape
Canaveral. Lockheed’s $1.2 billion, three-year job included readying the shuttle for each launch. Lockheed was the contractor that built and assembled the suspect rocket booster. Recent news accounts describe patchwork repairs on the shuttles as “Mickey Mouse” operations.

--- PAGE BREAK ---The history of Lockheed is one that hardly recommends such a sensitive position with the politicized,
overzealous and assured NASA-wired Star Wars project that is in the pocket.

The company hired to service the shuttle program, Lockheed, is best described by author Jim Hougan in
his book, Spooks:
“Lockheed’s chairman, Daniel J.

Haughton, masterminded and raped the treasures of a dozen countries, corrupted the
political processes of both hemispheres, jeopardized national security, screwed the taxpayer, destabilized the governments of
three allies, undermined NATO, subverted the marketplace, boosted inflation, and stimulated suicides as far apart as Tokyo and
Los Angeles.”
Would Lockheed employees with past cozy relationships with former Nazis, fascists, members of the
Waffen SS, assist the SDI and militarization of space, or have any part of dismantling the civilian space
program?

One Lockheed employee working on the Challenger nearly went out of his mind upon seeing the
explosion.

“It was my fault.

I killed seven people,” he screamed.

Lockheed had an unprecedented series of accidents.

The most recent was a derrick hitting the
Challenger, possibly weakening the side for raging fuel to [escape].

There are two obvious changes in NASA and the military space program since January 28, 1986.

NASA is getting exposure of their bitter in-fighting, mismanagement, near accidents and horror stories
on inefficiency.

The Rogers Commission, along with leaks and Congressional pressures, will uncover scandals inside
the shuttle program and NASA itself.

At the same time, funding for Star Wars has escalated.

SDI is the only Pentagon project not open for any cuts at all by the Gramm-Rudman amendment.

National security’s sacred cow, Reagan and Teller’s baby, is untouchable.

Congress has been asked to spend $4.8 billion for Star Wars in 1987.

The Energy Department wants $603 million for nuclear weapons in space.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Congress has been asked to spend $4.8 billion for Star Wars in 1987. The Energy Department wants $603 million for nuclear weapons in space. That will include the
Paperclip goals: microwave heat, nuclear pellets and projects related to SDI, in case they cannot pull in
enough cash over the table on their own. $50 million more has been requested for nuclear weapons research. NASA and the Pentagon want a
“third generation weapon, beyond the atomic and hydrogen bomb. Edward Teller is to give birth again. Ronald Reagan is the mid-wife.”
Teller and Reagan have teamed up since Governor Reagan visited Lawrence Livermore Laboratory, in
Berkeley, California in 1966. NASA, rocket and missile experts, scientists, specialists in future possible nightmares, now are
assured monopoly and control of space projects. Atomic bombs, Star Wars lasers, reflectors can be
activated without some civilian teacher trying to explain the “humanization of space”. When one shuttle exploded, the other three were doomed for anything but military purposes. Almost a perfect James Watt “Rainbow Coalition” went to their graves – one black, a classmate of
Jesse Jackson, one Buddhist-Japanese, one Jew and two women. If the launch explosion was no accident and could have been prevented, was the crew handpicked for
this specific voyage? Given the mentality and logic of the Reagan team, if not Reagan himself, combined
with the imported Nazi space scientists still ordering when to launch, nothing is impossible or should be
overlooked. (Transcript by Virginia McCullough)
* * *

--- PAGE BREAK ---an himself, combined
with the imported Nazi space scientists still ordering when to launch, nothing is impossible or should be
overlooked. (Transcript by Virginia McCullough)
* * *

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHALLENGER TIMELINE
Was the shuttle Challenger sabotaged by the Defense Department and Air Force for the militarization
and control of Space?
CHRONOLOGY
3/23/83
President Ronald Reagan and Edward Teller present Star Wars and SDI.
8/30/83
KAL-007 downed. Space Shuttle Challenger. McDonald sinks down.
9/18/83
New York Times “NASA’s Next Mission—Big Business in Space.” Challenger. NASA moving away from
“exploration” to commercial and military uses.
1/28/86
Challenger goes down. Vandenberg, military Star Wars take over.
EVIDENCE OF INTERNAL WARFARE: NASA VS. MILITARY, PENTAGON, SDI ELEVATION
1. NASA knew of hazards, “could be catastrophic,” New York Times, 2/10/86. Warning, 8/85 –
“Failure of seals to prevent flames next to solid-fuel booster rockets.” “O-ring defective.” Double
jeopardy, sub-freezing weather.
2. Purpose of appointed commission to divert weather hazards—AP, UPI, CNN, NBC, CBS, ABC
2/6/86 and 2/7/86: “Weather not a factor.” San Jose Mercury, 2/7/86: Freezing temperatures.
3. Shuttle could have taken off on Sunday—“weather perfect.” Washington Post, 1/27/86.
4. “Another Shuttle Chance Bolts Away,” Washington Post, 1/28/86. Why delay necessary? Comedy of
errors.
5. “Challenger Was a Disaster Anyway,” Wall Street Journal, 1/28/86. List of “problems,” defects.
6. “With Shortage of Shuttle, Military now has Priority” New York Times, 1/31/86.
7. Unload James Watt’s Rainbow Coalition: Buddhist-Japanese, one Jew, two women and one Black.
No cripples this time, just corpses. Ellison Onizuka, “secret military spy satellite mission,” January,
1985. Judith Resnick, National Institute of Health, Bethesda, 1974–77. AIDS experiments.
8. Feud between James M. Beggs, NASA’S administrator, and Daniel O. Graham. San Jose Mercury
News, 1/30/86. Graham joined NASA three months ago. Begg’s “space colony” vs. SDI.
9. Infighting at the White House. Star Wars, détente. State vs. Pentagon. “Administration at War with
Itself,” Washington Post, 1/28/86. Assistant Secretary of Defense Richard Perle: “There hasn’t been a
disaster, so maybe system works.”r Wars, détente. State vs. Pentagon. “Administration at War with
Itself,” Washington Post, 1/28/86. Assistant Secretary of Defense Richard Perle: “There hasn’t been a
disaster, so maybe system works.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---te vs. Pentagon. “Administration at War with
Itself,” Washington Post, 1/28/86. Assistant Secretary of Defense Richard Perle: “There hasn’t been a
disaster, so maybe system works.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10. “Arms control Rasputin, Prince of Darkness, Richard Perle,” San Jose Mercury News, 12/11/84.
11. Rockwell, Lockheed, Thiokol will make Star Wars, if not a new shuttle. “50% increase for Star
Wars,” Los Angeles Times. “Air Force asks for $104.5 billion,” San Francisco Examiner. All after the
explosion.
12. NASA Admiral William Graham with Representative Manuel Luian, Jr., New Mexico. Los Angeles
Times, 1/29/86. When Challenger went down, Graham with ranking GOP of House Committee on
Science, Technology.
13. “Space Invaders: Military Cowboys Seek Setting for Star Wars,” San Francisco Examiner,
1/27/86. How SDI, Air Force blow up Navy, NASA Solwind satellite. “Anti-satellite tests open
Pandora’s box,” Los Angeles Times, 9/22/86.
14. Destruction of booster rockets—and lies—followed. Los Angeles Times, 1/30/86. “Going into
population…” Time Magazine, 2/10/86, “… wasn’t a danger.” San Jose Mercury News, 1/30/86—
boosters important to determine what happened.
15. News groups protesting NASA’S seizure of film. New York Times, 1/31/86: “NASA knew that
impounding film was illegal.”
16. Reagan’s reaction. Did “‘Rasputin’ Drug our King?” Washington Post, 1/28/86. Buchanan: “Shuttle
blown up.” President: “The one with the teacher on it?” Reluctance to accept the deaths. Information from
TV, not White House communication lines.
17. “NASA Held Up Information of Leak, Solid Fuel Three Days,” San Francisco Examiner, 2/4/86.
This story links to “sub-freezing temperature, that is why boosters were destroyed.”
18. “NASA Failure to Communicate for Five Hours,” William Safire, Los Angeles Herald, 1/30/86.
March 20, 1984, NASA directive: “No longer than 20 minute elapses, then tell.”
19. “Air Force Blew Up Remote Control, Solid Rocket Booster,” Newsweek, 2/18/86.
20. Reagan’s Challenger commission—Chairman William Rogers is a member of Kissinger
Associates. Sundance, 11/1972, Jeff Gerth, Peter Dale Scott, William Rogers and organized crime, Mafia
links to Nixon, Rebozo, Bahamas drug traffickers.
21. “Day of Minor Pre-launch Flaws,” Washington Post, 1/29/86. Day of launch. Delayed 6.38 a.m.,
freezing weather. Second hours, “fire-detection system”.
22. Accidental damage from derrick, didn’t bother to x-ray fuel tank, Newsweek, 2/10/86. They didn’t
really care about this old shuttle.
23. Shift of authority to life from Jesse Moore to “others involved.” Wall Street Journal, 2/4/86.
Rockwell said, “Don’t go, too cold.” Who are the “others?”
24. “Weather has NASA Concerned, Cracks From Cold Feared,” San Jose Mercury News, 2/7/86.
Morton Thiokol: “withstands temperature down to 40 degrees, solid rocket boosters.” The night before
launch, January 27, all temperatures in the 20s.From Cold Feared,” San Jose Mercury News, 2/7/86.
Morton Thiokol: “withstands temperature down to 40 degrees, solid rocket boosters.” The night before
launch, January 27, all temperatures in the 20s.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

25. “Shuttle Ready to Launch Again, Air Force Knows Cause of Explosion,” San Jose Mercury News,
2/8/86. Mid-July date, after “cause isolated by defense department.”
26. Shuttle Contingency Plans, New York Times, 1/31/86. Shifting to military space. Dr. Hans Mark,
former deputy administrator of space agency, former secretary of Air Force: “military missions have
priority,” Three shuttles “could do the job.”
27. “Solid Rocket Temperature Not Checked by NASA,” Chicago Tribune, San Francisco Examiner,
February 5, 1986. NASA admitted temperature inside booster rockets not checked before launch. “Never
considered monitoring the cold fuel package.” “Solid fuel deteriorates in sub-freezing weather, allows
flames, 6,000 degrees.”—“A burn through believed most likely cause of explosion.”—“NASA REFUSED
TO RELEASE TEMPERATURE AT LAUNCH SITE BEFORE LAUNCH.”—“Weather service reported
low of 23 degrees early morning, 28 degrees at launch-pad 39-B”—“No sensors to monitor, measure fuel
temperature.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---PERATURE AT LAUNCH SITE BEFORE LAUNCH.”—“Weather service reported
low of 23 degrees early morning, 28 degrees at launch-pad 39-B”—“No sensors to monitor, measure fuel
temperature.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
MAE BRUSSELL ON THE AIR
TRANSCRIPTS
THE CORPSE OF LEE HARVEY OSWALD
URANIUM AND THE MORMON CHURCH
NIXON’S RECRUITMENT
“ANTI-TERRORISM” & GOVERNMENT SURVEILLANCE
CONGRESSIONAL INVESTIGATION OF NAZIS IN AMERICA SABOTAGED
POLITICAL MURDERS, THE MOB, A MISSING SHIPLOAD OF HEROIN & THE ATTEMPTED MURDER OF BERNADETTE DEVLIN
THE WORST KIND OF ILLEGAL ALIEN
JOSEPH MENGELE & “THE BOYS FROM GUYANA”
RONALD REAGAN, BITBURG SANDWICH
HUNT FAMILY UPDATE
THE CORPSE OF LEE HARVEY OSWALD
(WORLD WATCHERS INTERNATIONAL, KLRB-FM, CARMEL, CALIF., JULY 26, 1978)
The Washington Post recently reported: “The CIA Tried to Have Oswald Exhumed.” The Post reports
newly released files show that the CIA, suspicious the Soviet Union may have brainwashed Lee Harvey
Oswald, sought unsuccessfully to exhume his corpse to see if his reported 1959 suicide attempt was a
Russian cover-up…
The above facts stated in the Washington Post report are a prime example of disinformation. E.
Howard Hunt was forging documents that could be released later after Nixon’s election in 1972 to show
how Kennedy was not only sleeping with various women, but had also ordered the murder of a man three
weeks before he was killed.
Neither the Warren Commission nor the Justice Department were deprived of information to find the
killers of Kennedy or King.
E. Howard Hunt, a CIA agent, along with other persons would be called to testify at the assassination
hearings, and Hunt was caught [forging documents]. The White House, Pentagon, the press, FBI and CIA
were part of a combined effort to deceive the American public. Top State Department papers trusted to
the military were delivered to Mr. Hunt along with scissors, razor and typewriter to blame John Kennedy
for the murder of Diem. It is the admission of new evidence during the hearings into the Kennedy killings
that should be suspect. If FBI agent James Hosty threw Oswald’s letter in the toilet after the assassination
of JFK, he should be indicted for destruction of evidence and perjury.
The UPI memo above is signed by W. David Slauson … the same CIA lawyer on the Warren
Commission who took two weeks before the report was published, and stated they should go ahead withce and perjury.
The UPI memo above is signed by W. David Slauson … the same CIA lawyer on the Warren
Commission who took two weeks before the report was published, and stated they should go ahead with

--- PAGE BREAK ---the allegation of Oswald in Mexico, his quote being: “I have fudged the text sufficiently to put in phantom
exhibits.”
This is a crime of falsification of documents.

Arlen Spector is running for Governor of Pennsylvania.

He was the attorney who hid the [number of]
bullets and the possibility of silencers.

Spector did not ask to see the car that Kennedy was in at the time
of the assassination, now sequestered in Dearborn, Michigan at the Ford Motor Company.

Arlen Spector
created the Bullet #399 story—the fabrication of the number of bullets that went through JFK.

This recently released CIA document is false—the CIA did not ask to have Oswald’s corpse dug up.

In
fact, they ordered it cremated.

And if the Warren Commission had the body of Oswald cremated, then a
body was substituted and not the same Oswald that was in Russia.

If anyone challenged the Commission
or the hearing officials to exhume that body, now, it would be the story of the century.

David Lifton documents an addendum to the Warren Report about a January 21 meeting, regarding
Marina Oswald, called as a witness before any of the other witnesses were called.

In reference to this
meeting, Chairman Earl Warren said, “We will go to the next item ‘H’ under Roman Numeral II—‘The
Remains of Lee Harvey Oswald’—and a letter we received from Nicholas Katzenbaum, attorney
general.”
Now the situation is this: this man is buried in a cemetery and it takes officers around the clock to
watch him and [assure] that “they” don’t come in and exhume him, and do something that would further
“injure the country.” No one ever asked Warren who “they” were.

Jerry Ford is still a survivor of that
meeting.

He might know.

So it has been suggested that we should save expenses, we should exhume him
AND cremate him.

[Oswald’s] mother says she didn’t care how much it costs or what it is, she just won’t
consent to his cremation.

But if anyone took credit for cremating this man, we would be in trouble.[Oswald’s] mother says she didn’t care how much it costs or what it is, she just won’t
consent to his cremation.

But if anyone took credit for cremating this man, we would be in trouble.

Senator Russell said: “Do we have jurisdiction in that?

It seems to me it would be in the court down
there in Texas.

I don’t see that we would have any right to pass that on.”
Warren, the same Warren, who ordered the concentration camps for the Japanese in World War II, said,
“well, the question might arise as to something on that body.

Now, I don’t know what it is, it could be in
the course of the bullet, or it might be something else.

But I don’t think we would want that disposed of
until the report had been made.”
There was some question about how Oswald died, that perhaps he had to be helped to the death state
and didn’t die from the shot by Ruby.

The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, Warren, has been told
something about the corpse, otherwise why would he make such overtures?

“We can’t injure the country.

The country can’t stand another shock.”
“We wouldn’t want to do something until the reports are made,” Senator Boggs said.

“Absolutely not,” said Senator Russell, “because then they would make a case of “if.” I thought we
might do this.

I thought we might get a mausoleum to take the body, and we seal it up and put it in the
mausoleum and it would be unknown to anybody else.” At the Warren Commission, every secretary and
every stenographer and custodian of the minutes of the report worked for the CIA.

Senator Russell
continued: “Now the wife would consent to that, and the mother hasn’t anything to say about it, if the wife
consents.

I would have that rather than cremate it or dig it right now.

We might get into a religious
controversy.”
John McCloy, head of the World Bank, chairman of Chase Manhattan, on the Warren Commission,
released the bulk of the prisoners from the Nuremburg trials … two million Nazi files were found by the
U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I would have that rather than cremate it or dig it right now. We might get into a religious
controversy.”
John McCloy, head of the World Bank, chairman of Chase Manhattan, on the Warren Commission,
released the bulk of the prisoners from the Nuremburg trials … two million Nazi files were found by the
U.S. government in World War II and kept secret. Here it is 1964, and he’s continuing the cover-ups. “I
don’t think we ought to have it on the record that we’re moving him on this thing. We’re not saying
anything about it.” The steno took it down and it was found in the Archives. Senator Boggs said that even if you move that corpse 20 feet, somebody is going to say that the body
has been switched, that it’s not Oswald, and you’re going to have to drag that body out and take pictures

--- PAGE BREAK ---and x-rays.

It may take a little extra money to pay a few cops to watch it, but in this case, it’s worth it.

Quite possibly the real Oswald was flown out of Dallas to Baton Rouge and then to Brazil, to the Nazi
colony of Daniel Ludwick, described as a missionary of the Latter Day Saints.

Relatives who visited L.H.

Oswald in Helsinki before he went to Russia arrived on a military plane.

A former Mormon is trying to
expose the conspiratorial assassination links to Mullen Associates, a public relations firm who
represented the Free Cuba Committee.

Mr.

Riley, who was receiving money from Mullen and Associates of Washington, D.C., hired L.H.

Oswald at the Riley Coffee Company in New Orleans.

A helicopter was left for Oswald’s escape from Dallas.

The escape route is not documented yet.

Joe
Cooper, National Tattler, was doing a big story on the Baton Rouge connections to the JFK assassinations
and the Navy Intelligence connections when he was blown to smithereens and killed.

National Tattler
went out of publication after that.

This is a very secret story.

The fact that certain witnesses are dead means that Marina Oswald can successfully lie.

DeMorenschildt is dead.

If his wife Jean DeMohrenschildt testifies under oath, it will be taken as truth
because the man is dead.

She put him into Parkland Hospital, where the teacher was given multiple shock
treatments to ruin his memory and induce suicide.

And he was given drug treatments, then “became
suicidal” and “crazy.”
There’s no accountability of the car that was sent to Michigan or the clothes of JFK or Connally.

The
evidence is destroyed.

The witnesses were murdered.

The destruction of evidence and murder of
witnesses should have been investigated before new evidence was pondered.

A list of witnesses who have been put in prison or the mental hospital as a result of what they know
about the assassination needs to be pursued.

Like Mrs.

Stevens, or Abraham Bolden or DeMohrenschildt.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Like Mrs. Stevens, or Abraham Bolden or DeMohrenschildt. A list of witnesses who worked for the House Select Committee, and lawyers who have been blackmailed
or are stopping the investigation, should be examined. URANIUM AND THE MORMON CHURCH
(MAE BRUSSELL BROADCAST, KLRB-FM, CARMEL, CALIFORNIA, AUGUST 4, 1978.)
On the morning of July 20, 1878, a press conference was held at the scene of the ordination of Larry
Lester, the Black minister admitted to the Mormon priesthood two years ago. The subject of the
conference was “Mormon Church Infiltration of Government Agencies Suspected of Sequestering
Uranium Ore Outside the United States.” This press conference was held by the Latter Day Saints
Freedom Foundation in connection with the development of Melody Mountain Ranch, Inc.—an intended
boy’s vocational training school to be located at Cornelius, Oregon, in 1958. Charles A. Bean became
involved in the acquisition of certain surplus government property. This led to the dismantling of some
buildings for resale at the tri-city area in Washington. During September of 1958, volunteer men were working to assist in guaranteeing the supply of iron ore
alleged to be needed in the connection of nuclear cooling processes at Hanford. As a result of these
efforts several samples of the ore indicated that hard rock uranium ore was located in Washington state
and yellow uranium in Utah. Through subsequent arrangements, the interests of 20 volunteers who had
contributed to the National Association of Evangelicals—which became involved in backing the Melody
Mountain Ranch project, later called Pacific Youth Institute—were exchanged for stock in the Yellow Cat
Uranium Co., a Utah-based corporation, which later changed its name to Trans Pacific Enterprises in
1957. Simultaneously, Lyndon B. Johnson (then a senator) became involved in the uranium discovery through

--- PAGE BREAK ---one J.J.

McCoy, a fund-raiser who had affiliations with Johnson.

Johnson was also a member of the
Teamsters Trust Fund Committee at Lubbock, Texas, utilized to move money to the number one endeavors
of the Association of Evangelicals, made of 30,000 American churches.

The Internal Revenue Service
eventually became involved because some of the $4-million intended for use by the Pacific Youth Institute
was backed by the Evangelicals.

A bond of ten percent (10%) was deposited against claims, which might
arise from the non-tax-exempt status of the corporation.

This bond, deposited with the Justice Department,
was made up of $20,000, some parcels of land held by individual owners and subsequently was funded
by the Teamsters’ Fund.

Teamster funding of many other projects was guaranteed by the anticipated
proceeds from the uranium production.

The Treasury Department and the Securities Exchange Commission were to monitor the activities of all
concerned.

Ralph Grandquist, an Oregon IRS director, recommended to Mr.

Bean that he file a
Government “Conveniency” Bankruptcy to secure and preserve for future Americans the file which was
developed concerning the uranium.

This occurred in late 1958 after the discovery.

The file was lost and is
not now part of the bankruptcy files.

A subsequent file was developed by Mr.

Bean, and it also was stolen
later!

It began to appear that the CIA was involved, for in 1960, some 15 months before the Bay of Pigs
Invasion, the request was made that Mr.

Bean, who had the authority, sign off on 60 mothball Liberty
Ships stored at a California port, ostensibly for use in the Bay of Pigs.

Later these ships were used to
transport the mined uranium to Australia for refining although it was described as manure and fertilizer.Bean, who had the authority, sign off on 60 mothball Liberty
Ships stored at a California port, ostensibly for use in the Bay of Pigs.

Later these ships were used to
transport the mined uranium to Australia for refining although it was described as manure and fertilizer.

Since virtually all the ore shipped was mined in Utah under the eyes of the Mormon Church, which
controls everything that goes on in that state, it may be safely stated that the Church was involved directly
or indirectly in the affair.

It is of no small moment that the LDS church is infiltrated the CIA and the FBI,
and that the special interests of the church have been handled by those church members who had the
agencies of government to assist them in the conspiracy.

It is also interesting to note that the Utah Corporation is also the largest mining and refining
organization in Australia.

This corporation, affiliated with the Mormon Church, was the alleged
destination of the shipped uranium.

The objective of the Mormon conspiracy was to transport the ore
beyond the control of the federal government.

The avowed purpose of the church in its secret political
conquest council of fifty, was to obtain nuclear capability for future use when it would attempt to obtain
world conquest and single world government.

It appears as though president Lyndon Johnson assisted the Mormon Church in this conspiracy by
promoting such projects as “Atoms for Peace,” “Food for Peace,” and “Water for Peace.” By executive
order, Johnson ordered the movement into an international treaty of one million tons of the mined uranium,
which was subsequently shipped to Australia.

This order issued in 1966 was violated, in that during three
years (1966, 1967 and 1968) all ten million tons of the ore were shipped off to Australia aboard those
ships registered to Lady Bird Johnson.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It appears as though president Lyndon Johnson assisted the Mormon Church in this conspiracy by
promoting such projects as “Atoms for Peace,” “Food for Peace,” and “Water for Peace.” By executive
order, Johnson ordered the movement into an international treaty of one million tons of the mined uranium,
which was subsequently shipped to Australia. This order issued in 1966 was violated, in that during three
years (1966, 1967 and 1968) all ten million tons of the ore were shipped off to Australia aboard those
ships registered to Lady Bird Johnson. It is a well-known fact to researchers at the LDS Freedom Foundation, that Lyndon Johnson had placed
in the limousine two pillows on the floor upon which the Secret Service agents could push him at the
moment President Kennedy was to be shot in 1963. It is also known that the pathologist who conducted
the pathology on Kennedy has denounced the official pathology report as not being his report, which
indicated that several shots penetrated the president’s head from different angles. The Warren
Commission, appointed by Johnson, has been accused of whitewashing the entire episode. It is also of no small significance that Lady Bird Johnson acquired numerous FCC licenses beyond
normal regulations during this period of time, and further that the chairman of the FCC has always been a
Mormon since its inception. The nuclear capability of Israel has resulted from this conspiracy, which provided for the hijacking of
200 tons of ore in 1968. The rumor was widespread in the knowledgeable circles of Salt Lake City that

--- PAGE BREAK ---the Mormon Church had arranged to assist Israel in bringing off Armageddon.

Upon hearing of the ore shipments, Lyndon Johnson made a hurried four-day world trip after which he
abandoned plans to run for reelection.

His death shortly after retiring appears to be part of the cover-up of
the conspiracy along with numerous others involved.

Twenty notes for 1.5 million dollars each are acknowledged to be in a Swiss bank to repay the value of
part of the one million tons of ore authorized for shipment.

Mr.

Bean and an associate, Mr.

Robert J.

Wright, have filed suit in a federal court in Oregon seeking to make the Treasury Department responsible
and accountable for the loss to themselves and the National Association of Evangelicals.

Lyndon Johnson was the head of NASA, and Werner von Braun, the Nazi war criminal, was brought to
this country.

The atomic bomb and nuclear capabilities were moved with the assistance of Lyndon
Johnson and the Mormon Church.

Mullen Associates in Washington, D.C., a public relations firm, had
been a non-Mormon account for the Tabernacle tours overseas, yet all Mormons give their business to
other Mormons.

But the LDS used this Washington firm, Mullen Associates, which carried the Latter Day Saints
Tabernacle around the world—a good method of disseminating agents from the tours.

The LDS also
funded the Free Cuba Committee (which again is Mormon) and the ships for the Bay of Pigs.

The LDS
funded Mr.

Riley of Riley Coffee Co., where Lee Harvey Oswald worked.

E.

Howard Hunt was the vice
president of Mullen Associates.

Lyndon Johnson, atomic weaponry and the Nazi-Mormon-CIA, had
obvious connections.

Australia had one-fifth of the world’s non-Communist uranium, making it a major
supplier.

The ore was shipped from the US to Australia and from there to other nations.

This is thanks to
the Mormons.

This all started having steam in 1957, a very important year.

That’s when Admiral Byrd died.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This all started having steam in 1957, a very important year. That’s when Admiral Byrd died. His
documents and the truth of his visits to the Antarctic were never published. That was the year of the
International Geophysical Year. This was the year that Candy Jones was put into her mind control
experiments, without her even knowing it for so many years. It was the year that Lyndon Johnson made
great strides for the Mormon cause. Satellites, launched by NASA, were organizing the earth for the
industrialists who use the uranium. Please note that some parts of the above information were taken from a press conference by attorney
Doug Wallace. NIXON’S RECRUITMENT
In the Memoirs of Richard Nixon, page 33, Nixon discusses his run for Congress in 1966. He tells
about his letter from Hermann Perry, the manager of a Bank of America in Whittier. Dear Dick,
Do you want to run on a Republican ticket? Air mail me your reply. H. L. Perry
The date 1966 is important because Nixon was then taken to see Mr. Perry and then was taken to the
bungalow of Howard Hughes. And they decided, yes, this is our man. Nixon had already written to the
law offices of Allen Dulles, asking to be in intelligence work. When Nixon was in the Navy, he had
written to the FBI asking to be in the FBI. The fact that Nixon didn’t get a response from them doesn’t mean that he wasn’t hired. His answer
came in the form of Perry and Howard Hughes, who contacted him, and he was brought to California to
run against Jerry Vorhees. In the book Wanted, the Search for the Nazis in America, this same Mr. Perry

--- PAGE BREAK ---was instrumental in bringing war criminals to the United Sates, such as the Nazi Nicholai Moloxa, who
was brought to Nixon’s office.

Moloxa, of Odessa, then went down to Argentina.

Nixon’s first visit to the
White House in 1947 was a meeting with Truman who discussed helping restore Europe and especially
German industry.

German industry included I.G.

Farben and munitions makers.

This class of “1946-1947” was very important—it included Mr.

Smathers from Florida, Gerald Ford
from Michigan, and Nixon from California.

These men elected in 1946, worked along with the Nazi war
criminals and the OSS-CIA officials to form the National Security Council.

Then foreigners like Kissinger
and Brezinski came in and ran our country.

It’s no longer run by Americans.

This group looked at the globe and smacked their lips and decided how it would be divided.

The importance of bringing the German space scientists to this country (written up very carefully in the
book Operation Paperclip), is that the satellites tell you where the oil is or the minerals, water, oil,
vegetation and population are.

Then, from this vantage point, you can displace people from where the oil
is or from where the minerals you want are located.

Control is either bought or obtained by force.

The war was over in May 1945, and in August 1945, the
United States dropped the A-bombs made by Hitler and Oppenheimer (a “basket of pineapples”) on Japan
to keep Russia from going into those oil fields of Asia any further.

Russia had already gone west and the
United States wanted to stop her from going east.

“ANTI-TERRORISM” & GOVERNMENT SURVEILLANCE
The following is information supplied by Jim Horowitz, of Los Angeles, who works with Mark Lane
and Don Freed.

They apparently suppressed information on several issues at conspiracy conferences.

Jim
Horowitz has a newsletter, Vol.

4, No.

6, about Evelle Younger.4, No.

6, about Evelle Younger.

Younger’s “Organized Crime Collector
School (he advertises himself as a “spy czar”) is actually an anti-terrorist Red school.

Our country is no
longer chasing communists.

We’re doing trade with Russia and China.

They are looking for “terrorists,”
and they will become the excuse to open our mail and break into newspaper offices, keep people under
surveillance and do anything they want under the cover of “terrorism.”
Anacapa Sciences, Inc.

is a mystery firm hired for politically and paramilitary-motivated campaigns to
get dissidents.

In Zaire, it is General Motors which is sending in troops.

Private corporations work with
the Department of Defense and the CIA so we don’t have to declare war, and the FBI doesn’t have to half
its underground work.

Mr.

FBI Webster sent 80 informers to monitor the terrorists’ work.

Then the private
corporations get money from the government, and the FBI can look at you and say, “We only have 80
agents on this subject.” But Anacapa, whose cover is organized crime, is setting up national—as in
“Gestapo” – national training schools.

They will work with local police.

Hitler worked with Interpol.

Hitler had the best police system.

It was not only national, but included Vienna, Poland, Hungary and
Romania, and then it became international.

SWAT teams are formed under all this and they want more SWAT teams for urban counter-insurgencies
and for the militarization of the police forces, with headquarters to be in Los Angeles, California.

Daryl Gates, chief of the Los Angeles Police Department, was under the influence of Ed Davis.

In San
Francisco, Charles Gain is the chief of police.

Gain ran the FBI counter-intelligence program in Oakland
against the Black Panthers, before he was made chief of police in San Francisco.

Oakland is the third
police center in America.

Anacapa is linked with the CIA.

It shares with them anti-terrorist money.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Anacapa is linked with the CIA. It shares with them anti-terrorist money. Anacapa’s project director is
Jack Kinney of Air Force Intelligence, who is also a top secret National Security Agency executive. Anacapa is also tied to officers of Naval Intelligence, the Defense Intelligence Agency, and has reciprocal
relations with the CIA. Evelle Younger’s influence reaches through the Organized Crime Collectors

--- PAGE BREAK ---School.

The unemployed, especially black persons who are unemployed, Chicanos who are unemployed—there
are no jobs from them.

Stealing to get food?

Those who are forced to become criminals—these are your
“terrorists.” There’s going to be unemployment, riots, food-riots and so on in this country.

There are no
“terrorists.” There’s going to be self-defense.

That’s the reason the Panthers started.

Younger works with the Organized Crime Collectors School and Anacapa, and also with a group in
Washington D.C.

called the “Psychological Assessment Associates (PAA).” PAA is a deep cover CIA’s
proprietary that worked with behavior modification-like experiments.

You get a Donald DeFreeze
working in Vacaville prison in California.

DeFreeze was working under the Defense Department’s mind
control program established by Westbrook of the CIA.

Westbrook formed the Symbionese Liberation
Army (SLA) which became the excuse to burn those people—SLA members caught in the burning house in
Los Angeles, on prime time TV.

The burning of these six SLA members became the inaugural of the SWAT
teams’ burning of “terrorists.” Boy, it’s really great that they saved us in time from those terrorists—
which, had they been merely arrested, would have required utilizing the courts to hear their cases.

United
Sates prosecuting attorney Browning, who prosecuted the Patty Hearst case, still hasn’t prosecuted Emily
William Harris (four years now) for kidnapping Patty Hearst.

Browning is running for Attorney General
of California while Evelle Younger runs for Governor.

Browning and Younger have links to the mind control programs.

One of Younger’s liaisons in
Washington, the firm Psychological Assessment Associates, works under cover with a John Gettinger.

J.W.

Gettinger is an agent who works under the cover of the Human Ecology Fund, known to be a CIA
conduit.J.W.

Gettinger is an agent who works under the cover of the Human Ecology Fund, known to be a CIA
conduit.

…
Hitler’s idea of ecology was the “pure white Aryan race.” The Nazis will work with the Arabs and the
Asians to a degree until they have control, and then will utilize sterilization.

An example of this type of
sterilization was the American Indian misfortune.

Another example was the mass programs of germs and
genocide, conducted by white people in South Africa—which was an experiment after WWII regarding a
handful of whites handling a bunch of blacks.

It works.

People may object to Steve Bilko being killed.

33
other men were killed in those South African prisons last year.

There will be no leaders, a parasol will remain.

It’s a test case.

And it works.

And there’s no reason
why these people can’t continue their genocide policy and that is the reason for the Human Ecology Fund.

All this is from Jim Horowitz’s newsletter on Evelle Younger’s spy network in Los Angeles (rather, some
of it is.)
CONGRESSIONAL INVESTIGATION OF NAZIS IN AMERICA SABOTAGED
(WORLD WATCHERS INTERNATIONAL BROADCAST, KLRB-FM, APRIL 13, 1979)
There’s an article in the Washington Post (April 1, 1979) on Simon Weisenthal.

They call him the
Holocaust “Avenging Angel.” He’s the gentleman who was rescued from a concentration camp during
WW II, and has spent his life trying to find Nazis still at large.

He claims that there are 150,000 Germans
who committed war crimes and that 96 percent survived the war.

Weisenthal estimates now that there are
between 15-20,000 of these murderers still free in South America, Spain, the Near East, Germany and
other countries.

There was a photograph of Gustav Franz Wagner interviewed in Brazil in 1978.

There was a birthday
party April 20 for Adolf Hitler, and Wagner was seen at that time.

And he helped organize Treblinka.--- PAGE BREAK ---

There was a birthday
party April 20 for Adolf Hitler, and Wagner was seen at that time. And he helped organize Treblinka. But
in the whole year that has passed, there hasn’t been any mention by Simon Weisenthal about Wagner … the
name is hardly mentioned in the article, and I think it’s interesting because they have his picture. Vice President Mondale has been down to Brazil, and Jimmy Carter has been to Brazil, but there is

--- PAGE BREAK ---never any effort to get these Nazi war criminals.

… Another article about Argentina making fake U.S.

visas, this was in the Washington Post —“at least 3,000 illegal aliens, some from North Korea, South
Korea, and other countries” which are not named, get passports into the United States from the U.S.

consulate.

A ring may have been involved in $5 million, payments for giving false travel papers.

This is
April of 1979, but the Vatican was writing passports for Nazi agents after WWII to go down to South
America, and Argentina was writing passports for people like Martin Bormann and other agents to travel.

… So it comes out this week that this is 20 or 30 years of false papers [so] people can come from all over
the world to the United States and stir up some more trouble here.

Another article in the New York Times (March 25), a dispute over releasing funds for investigating
175,000 Nazi war criminals in the United States.

Congressman Elizabeth Holtzman, a Democrat from
Brooklyn, has been working with the House Subcommittee on Immigration, Refugees and International
Law for several years.

There was a $2 million fund to investigate a special litigation unit on Nazi war
crimes.

No one can figure out why there is a delay in investigating it.

The Justice Department hasn’t been
serious about prosecution; not a single attorney has been hired since May, 1978 despite repeated requests
for the Nazi task force.

Congress allocated $2,052,000 for direct use by the unit, and it hasn’t been used.

There is no staff, no attorneys, and they are not looking for the Nazis.

…
There are some powerful forces trying to [run] Elizabeth Holtzman out of congress, the way Bella
Abzug was pushed out in New York City.

[Holtzman] has been working on this for two years, trying to get
this investigation going.

She’s had no cooperation from the Justice Department.[Holtzman] has been working on this for two years, trying to get
this investigation going.

She’s had no cooperation from the Justice Department.

POLITICAL MURDERS, THE MOB, A MISSING SHIPLOAD OF HEROIN & THE ATTEMPTED MURDER OF
BERNADETTE DEVLIN
(WORLD WATCHERS INTERNATIONAL, KLRB-FM, CARMEL VALLEY, CALIF., FEBRUARY 1, 1981)
Our federal agencies—the CIA, the FBI, the Defense Intelligence Agency, the NSA and so forth—have
all been pressed together to put down labor unions [and] social programs, kill “radical” [and] liberal
leaders, cultural leaders, social leaders—and musicians and artists and writers and entertainers while
they develop their police and armed forces around the world.

They use the mob for killing and wiping out counter-forces—and in exchange, the mob was promised,
if they would use their goon squads as killer teams, that the mob would not be prosecuted for their
narcotic imports.

And that brings in Air America and Flying Tigers, and books on the war in Vietnam, and
China, and the United States and military planes going into the narcotic business, culminating in large
amounts of money stolen from banks every single week, unaccounted money that ends up in the hands of
mobs, and gun-running, experimentation and fascism.

So the huge profits today are not $1 million or $2 million exposed changing hands, but it will be $55
million at the Nugan Hand Bank missing from Australia, and $22 million from another city in Florida, and
$50 million from Minneapolis, and $23 million from Houston.

And a truck with $27 million was shipped
to Louisiana this week, and the mob didn’t pick it up because it was marked.

And an entire ship disappeared that was supposed to have corn to be transferred for heroin coming in
from the Middle East.

The ship, “The Poet,” is missing from Scotland Yard, and the CIA linked it to the
Gambino Family, so you don’t get a plane-load or a paper bag filled with seven pounds of heroin any
longer—you get the entire ship.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And an entire ship disappeared that was supposed to have corn to be transferred for heroin coming in
from the Middle East. The ship, “The Poet,” is missing from Scotland Yard, and the CIA linked it to the
Gambino Family, so you don’t get a plane-load or a paper bag filled with seven pounds of heroin any
longer—you get the entire ship. …
The reason to study these assassinations is to keep track of how many heads of state have power today
because they are directly linked to murders that preceded them. Ronald Reagan has worked closely with
people from the team of Alpha 66, anti-Castro Cubans. And Richard Nixon’s team—the people who
killed John Kennedy, those he has protected and worked with—[assured that] he came into office not

--- PAGE BREAK ---having to compete with the power of Nelson Rockefeller, who was done in about two years before the
elections.

Nelson Rockefeller was quickly cremated on the orders of a doctor from South Africa working
at the hospital.

They didn’t examine the body to see if he was poisoned, and no questions about the Secret
Service [agents] who were supposed to be with him….

There was an article in the Los Angeles Times this week—it’s the anniversary of the death of Mahatma
Ghandi, a symbol to the British to get out of India.

The article has a tragic tone to it, “Ghandi: His Image
Fades for the Indians,” and it tells how the upper-classes have no interest in him, that they thought he was
too austere, and they were uncomfortable with his turning away material possessions.

And 97 percent of
the students in India know very little about Mahatma Ghandi.

He’s now actually almost in obscurity, the
universities don’t teach courses about him, and they want to forget that he existed.

Another leader who was shot this week—that we haven’t heard a thing about—is [Irish activist and
former Parliamentarian] Bernadette Devlin.

A group of three people broke into her home in Ireland, and
they hit her seven times in the chest, hip, leg.

Three gunmen.

And they used sledge hammers.

She was in a
cottage with her husband, she had three children and she was getting them ready for school.

She said when
she went to the hospital: “Now they think that they’ve got me and I’m not dead yet.” She and her husband
are still alive—he also was gunned down, three times, in serious condition.

But there will be this continuous slaughter of people who speak up, our world leaders, unless there is a
positive effort to change this society.

THE WORST KIND OF ILLEGAL ALIEN
(WORLD WATCHERS INTERNATIONAL BROADCAST, KLRB-FM, APRIL 13, 1979)
The New York Times (April 5) has a story, “Paraguay Alien Tied to Murders in Native Lands.” They
found in Brooklyn a man living with a woman, a nephew and a child who [came] from Paraguay.But there will be this continuous slaughter of people who speak up, our world leaders, unless there is a
positive effort to change this society.

THE WORST KIND OF ILLEGAL ALIEN
(WORLD WATCHERS INTERNATIONAL BROADCAST, KLRB-FM, APRIL 13, 1979)
The New York Times (April 5) has a story, “Paraguay Alien Tied to Murders in Native Lands.” They
found in Brooklyn a man living with a woman, a nephew and a child who [came] from Paraguay.

His
name is Mr.

Pena, and federal agents have been looking for him.

He’s been living in a Shephardic
neighborhood in Paraguay.

He’s been involved in the killing and torture of the opponent of Alfred
Stroessner and the military government down in Paraguay.

And the opponent’s son was a 17-year-old,
picked up, tortured and killed.

The boy died, was beaten and received high-voltage electric shock.

… Mr.

Pena was charged with murder, but he left Paraguay, came to New York City.

People wanted for murder and torture, linked to the Nazis, have no trouble getting into this country.

JOSEPH MENGELE & “THE BOYS FROM GUYANA”
(MAE BRUSSELL’S WORLD WATCHERS INTERNATIONAL, KLRB-FM, MAY 31, 1981)
… I do want to mention, again, a very quiet story that didn’t make the headlines everywhere.

A New
York newspaper had a large story this week that said Joseph Mengele, the notorious “Angel of Death”
from Auschwitz, has been very much alive in New Jersey and Westchester, New York.

He has a relative
living in New Jersey who has a farm manufacturing company, and he also worked for the firm.

It was
well-known in Germany.

When he left Auschwitz, he was never wanted as a war criminal.

He was never wanted at the
Nuremberg trials.

And when he was recognized in Germany, he went on down to South America.

I’ve
alleged for a long time that Mengele has been in and out of this country, and that the FBI has documents
that he has in fact been an American citizen since the 1930s.

I’ve had information from people that he’s
been in Nevada City not too long ago.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I’ve
alleged for a long time that Mengele has been in and out of this country, and that the FBI has documents
that he has in fact been an American citizen since the 1930s. I’ve had information from people that he’s
been in Nevada City not too long ago. Now it turns out that he was very much seen in Westchester County,
the headquarters of narcotics and organized crime. And his crew from Uruguay, Paraguay, Chile and

--- PAGE BREAK ---Argentina have a lot of activity up in Westchester County and in New Jersey where he was.

Mengele does
travel in the United States.

He has lived here and goes in and out of the United States.

That was confirmed
by another series of articles that just came out this week.

Those of you who are familiar with this program
know that I’ve been saying this has been happening for a long time.

There are a lot of people who are outraged by the experiments he did at Auschwitz, his extermination
policies, his treacherous experimentations on people, all kinds of body experiments.

But there are many
other people that consider him a fine, reputable citizen, and they look upon those victims at Auschwitz as
animals or beasts, and they don’t think of him as torturing.

And I believe that if we look further, we’ll find
The Boys From Brazil—the movie that was made about Mengele—will in fact be The Boys From
Guyana.

I said that also at the time of the Jonestown massacre.

Joe Holsinger, the aid to [Congressman] Leo Ryan who was murdered down in Jonestown, had given
me the phone number of a doctor in Westchester County who allegedly supplied the bulk of the drugs for
Jonestown.

I never called him and I kept the number, but that’s an interesting point now because of
Mengele’s association there in Westchester, and experimentation with electrodes, the surgery without
anesthetics, the mistreatment, and the narcotic or mind experimental drugs that were down in Jonestown.

As I said before, the book The Children of Jonestown tells about enough drugs in the laboratory for a
population of 60,000.

And there were, at the most, 900–1,000 people there.

But there were different
accounts, as you know, when [the bodies] were first counted.

[At first it was] over 400, and then that
number was greater the next day.

I was told the bulk of the drugs for their experimentation or treatment
came from Westchester.[At first it was] over 400, and then that
number was greater the next day.

I was told the bulk of the drugs for their experimentation or treatment
came from Westchester.

It would be interesting now to see if Mengele and this pharmacist who sent them
to Jim Jones had any connection, and if The Boys From Guyana are The Boys From Brazil.

I’ve had a
deep feeling for a long time that there were connecting links between the Jonestown experimentations and
Joseph Mengele from Auschwitz.

RONALD REAGAN, BITBURG SANDWICH
(MAE BRUSSELL, WORLD WATCHERS INTERNATIONAL, KAZU-FM, PACIFIC GROVE, CALIF., APRIL 29, 1985.)
The president of the United States, Ronald Reagan, is a sandwich.

He’s a sausage between two pieces
of bread, squeezed at both ends.

One is Fritz Kraemer and Henry Kissinger, representing the Fourth
Reich.

The other is Richard von Weizsäcker and Helmut Kohl—representing the Fourth Reich.

Germany
and America, with the president of the United States in between—and the relish on the bun is, of course,
Richard Nixon with his contacts to Germans in America.

There was an article about Helmut Kohl, who said that he had reassured Ronald Reagan that he would
not back out of the demand that he visit Bitburg, and that there was no way to change that commitment.

A Kohl advisor added—and this was in the San Francisco Chronicle on April 23—“if one tries to act
symbolically, one has to choose the symbols carefully.” Well, the symbol of this particular Bitburg piece
of geography is [its history as] the staging area for the Battle of the Bulge; it had already been decided by
that time that the real project was to take on the Soviet Union.--- PAGE BREAK ---

There was an article about Helmut Kohl, who said that he had reassured Ronald Reagan that he would
not back out of the demand that he visit Bitburg, and that there was no way to change that commitment. A Kohl advisor added—and this was in the San Francisco Chronicle on April 23—“if one tries to act
symbolically, one has to choose the symbols carefully.” Well, the symbol of this particular Bitburg piece
of geography is [its history as] the staging area for the Battle of the Bulge; it had already been decided by
that time that the real project was to take on the Soviet Union. [Reagan’s Bitburg trip] involved a cast of characters that I have been talking about for the past years:
Prince Bernhard of the SS, he worked for IG Farben and married Queen Juliana in Holland; Henry
Kissinger, an advisor to all media networks at the present time, former secretary of state and national
security advisor, the roving ambassador for the Germans; William Casey, the CIA director; Fritz Kraemer. Senator Howard Metzenbaum urged Chancellor Kohl to back down on the demand [upon] our president
of the United States: “Please take our president off the hook.” And Helmut Kohl said: “No.”
Another quotation in the newspaper was: “I don’t think the president of the United States should go to a
German cemetery to honor German soldiers who died killing American soldiers in the service of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---he newspaper was: “I don’t think the president of the United States should go to a
German cemetery to honor German soldiers who died killing American soldiers in the service of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

greatest tyrant of our time, Adolf Hitler.” That was from Senator Cranston. He said, “there are graves of
SS troops in the cemetary that make it unsavory and intolerable.” At one point, Cranston said, “are
Germany’s ties to the United States so weak, so tenuous and so insecure and uncertain that Germany’s
price for reassurance is the humiliation of our president?”
What they don’t understand—the news media, Senator Cranston, Senator Metzenbaum and these well-
meaning people—is that the relationship, Germany and Ronald Reagan, is so secure that they don’t care
who screams and yells, they are going to meet anyways. …
The symbolism, as I say—they said it, and I’m quoting again—“is very important.” What is the
symbolism of Bitburg? The “symbolism” is that the American president and Americans and veterans and
others living in this country will forget the Bulge.
You get help in forgetting the Battle of the Bulge. Many times I’ve referred to congressional hearings on
the Dachau Trials. There were the Nuremberg Trials and the Dachau Trials. And do you know, there are
NOT entire books on the defendants in the Dachau Trials. The builders, the SS, the choice elite were
separated. The bankers were released by John J. McCloy, and the multinational weapons-makers were
released by the Nuremberg group. The Dachau [Nazis] were the Waffen SS—and they are making
tomorrow’s Waffen possible!
HUNT FAMILY UPDATE
(WORLD WATCHERS INTERNATIONAL, KAZU-FM, PACIFIC GROVE, CALIF., JULY 8, 1985)
Another member of the Hunt family’s name came into the news just this week—Ward Hunt [and] his
association with Princess Michel of Kent. Her name surfaced when Ronald Reagan was going to Bitburg,
because her father was (he passed away) SS officer Gunther von Reibnitz. He played an important role
with Richard von Weizsäcker’s father, the current president of Germany, in the overthrow of
Czechoslovakia.
So it came out this week that she was allegedly having an affair or meeting with Mr. Ward Hunt, and it
may be very political. It doesn’t even have to be sexual, but the British monarchy, the daughter of the SS
family, is meeting in Texas and other places with Ward Hunt.
Herbert Hunt is linked in the Italian news this week to Pro Deo, Father Morlion and the CIA. And Ward
Hunt is linked to Princess Michel of Kent.y, is meeting in Texas and other places with Ward Hunt.
Herbert Hunt is linked in the Italian news this week to Pro Deo, Father Morlion and the CIA. And Ward
Hunt is linked to Princess Michel of Kent.

--- PAGE BREAK ---CHAPTER NINETEEN
CIA-MAFIA CONSPIRATORS CAN REST EASIER
BY WARREN HINCKLE
(SAN FRANCISCO EXAMINER, OCTOBER 6, 1988)
Mae Brussell died this week.

The question is, who killed her?

Mae was the grandest conspiracy theorist of them all, the Madame Defarge of paranoia.

Her last
passion before she slipped through the narrow door was investigating satanic cults in the military.

She found conspiratorial links in events large and small, from the Kennedy assassinations to Watergate
to Contragate, and anytime anyone of note died, she was at the ready with a fascinating theory of why the
death fit The Pattern.

Not one of her many friends, which included this writer, would doubt she would come up with a
compelling conspiracy theory of her own death at a vibrant 66.

Among the many enemies she was
constantly exposing on her weekly radio show that was gospel to conspiracy buffs were Nazi scientists in
the U.S., the Mafia, the CIA and the oil cartels—and that’s a mean lot of enemies.

The doctors say she
died of cancer, but that was what they said about Jack Ruby, and Mae knew better than that.

“Mae was
multi-motivated,” her old friend, publisher and co-conspiratorialist Paul Krassner said, admiringly, “but
her specialty was Lee Harvey Oswald.”
Mae was a complacent Carmel housewife raising a bunch of kids until the John F.

Kennedy
assassination.

The horror of having her kids watch Jack Ruby bump off Lee Harvey Oswald right on
daytime TV in what was obviously a set piece of work made her a conspiratorial crusader.

If at times
Mae was short on theory, she was always long on facts—at the time of her death Monday, she had
amassed more than 80,000 pages of research material amassed from a compulsive clipping of 15
newspapers a day and a couple of hundred magazines a month.

She was the first researcher to come up
with the facts of Richard Nixon’s career links—unquestionably earlier, more speculatively later—to the
mob.--- PAGE BREAK ---

If at times
Mae was short on theory, she was always long on facts—at the time of her death Monday, she had
amassed more than 80,000 pages of research material amassed from a compulsive clipping of 15
newspapers a day and a couple of hundred magazines a month. She was the first researcher to come up
with the facts of Richard Nixon’s career links—unquestionably earlier, more speculatively later—to the
mob. Krassner said Mae called him after he published a famously crude piece of fiction in The Realist about
an alleged act of necrophilia between Lyndon Johnson and the corpse of John Kennedy aboard Air Force
One returning from Dallas to Washington, D.C. on Nov. 22, 1963, and told him things even he hadn’t
imagined about the Kennedy assassination. Mae remained in the pack of Kennedy assassination researchers but came into her own with Watergate. “Three weeks after Watergate, when the press was still treating it like a third-rate burglary, Mae sent me a
piece that had the goods on the entire cast of characters—Hunt, McCord, Martinez and the rest—and
linking them back to CIA-Mafia ties to the Kennedy assassination,” Krassner said. The main Brussell thesis, if I dare risk committing the sin of summary on her complex work, was that an
ex-Nazi scientist-Old Boy OSS clique in the CIA using Mafia hit men changed the course of American
history this past quarter-century by bumping off one and all, high and low, who became an irritant to them. She believed the Manson Family was set up by counterintelligence types to blacken the image of anti-war
music-and-youth longhairs who were becoming a threat to the dominant culture and that Jonestown was a

--- PAGE BREAK ---amily was set up by counterintelligence types to blacken the image of anti-war
music-and-youth longhairs who were becoming a threat to the dominant culture and that Jonestown was a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

medical and mind-control experiment in getting rid of undesirables.
Mae never had a theory she couldn’t back up with a bewildering mass of news clippings and assorted
facts. The question that must in all respect and sobriety be asked about Mae Brussell is the one Tom
Wolfe asked about Marshall McLuhan: “Whaaaaat if she was right?”
“Way back then in the ’60s, way back before Watergate even happened, Mae told me that all the crazy
and violent things going on in the country were part of a plan to get Ronald Reagan in office,” said
Krassner.

--- PAGE BREAK ---y back before Watergate even happened, Mae told me that all the crazy
and violent things going on in the country were part of a plan to get Ronald Reagan in office,” said
Krassner.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

INDEX
A
Abt Associates 151, 281
activist(s) 84, 171, 194, 288, 290, 319, 349
aerospace 6, 61, 62, 78
agent provocateur (see provocateur)
Agnew, Spiro 2, 74, 78, 79, 83, 85, 89, 91, 99, 100
Air Force
United States 51, 55, 89, 172, 177, 251, 333-36, 345
Korean 320, 323
Allendé, Salvadore 78, 107n9, 140, 151, 198, 280, 281
Altamont 265, 266, 281, 282-86
American Bunge Corporation (see also “Octopus”) 47
American Council of Christian Churches 42, 91
American Nazi Party 116, 147, 159, 179, 181, 182, 260
Anacapa Sciences, Inc. 345-46
Angleton, James Jesus 25, 31, 34, 45
anti-war 79, 84, 97, 98, 100, 104, 144, 176, 195, 229, 273, 282, 284, 287, 289, 290, 292, 356
Argentina 30-32, 34, 44-47, 56, 132, 136, 324, 344, 347, 350
atomic bomb 330, 332, 343
Atsugi Air Base (Japan) 23, 71
Atwood, Angela and Gary 149-53, 161-63, 166, 171, 180, 189, 204, 212, 226, 231, 239
“August 7th Guerrilla Movement” 181-84
Auschwitz 7, 96, 102, 145, 350, 351
Australia 29, 290, 342, 343, 348
B
Bank of America 6, 63, 134, 153, 235, 344
Bannister, Guy 9, 42, 45,
Barbie, Klaus 26, 30, 35
Barger, Sonny 102, 110n47
Battle of the Bulge 31, 37, 352
Bay of Pigs 5, 27, 33, 41, 47, 71, 111, 116, 341-43
Beard, Dita 72, 80, 86, 88, 106n2, 117, 135, 233
Beatles 265, 271, 276, 281, 283, 287, 289
behavior modification 95-98, 155, 156, 168, 173, 258, 322, 346
Bell, George 115
Bell Aircraft/Helicopter 40, 41, 61
Belli, Melvin 24, 50, 284
Belushi, John 305-13
Benenson, Peter 152, 154
Bildeberger 135, 136, 140
Bitburg 337, 351-53
Black Abductor (novel) 172, 228, 261
Black Cultural Association (BCA) 153, 156, 166, 170-78, 182, 191, 194, 205, 227, 231, 242, 246, 248, 257
Black Guerrilla Family 144, 148, 162, 180, 195, 228
Black Panthers (Black Panther Party) 12, 82, 87, 102, 103, 106n3, 144, 146, 156, 163, 165, 169, 177, 178, 194, 195, 203, 230, 235,
247, 253, 256, 284, 345
blackmail 13, 86, 98, 99, 106, 114, 131, 140, 146, 272, 296, 326, 340
Blodgett, Ralph 113
Boggs, Hale (Senator) 112, 113, 339
Borghesé, Prince Justo Valerio, “Black Prince” 31, 34, 45
Bormann, Martin 30, 45-48, 132, 347,
Bormann Society 5
Bowart, Walter 129-30
Bowen, John Howard (see Osborne, Albert)(Senator) 112, 113, 339
Borghesé, Prince Justo Valerio, “Black Prince” 31, 34, 45
Bormann, Martin 30, 45-48, 132, 347,
Bormann Society 5
Bowart, Walter 129-30
Bowen, John Howard (see Osborne, Albert)

--- PAGE BREAK ---339
Borghesé, Prince Justo Valerio, “Black Prince” 31, 34, 45
Bormann, Martin 30, 45-48, 132, 347,
Bormann Society 5
Bowart, Walter 129-30
Bowen, John Howard (see Osborne, Albert)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Brainwashed, brainwashing 148, 149, 155, 186, 191, 256, 337
Buckley, Tim 9, 265, 270, 276, 292
Buckley,
William F., Jr. 35-37, 43, 49, 57, 131, 132, 185, 198, 316
William F., Sr. 54, 56
burglary 2, 3, 7, 78, 106n4, 114, 177, 231, 267, 272, 295, 326, 356
Byrd, Admiral 343
Byrds, The (rock group) 266, 273, 280, 281
C
cabal 131
Caddy, Douglas 36, 57, 90, 91, 132
Camelot 176, 281-83
Cape Canaveral 329, 331
Carpenter, John 276
Carter, Jimmy (President) 7, 132, 140, 279, 301, 347
anti-Castro (movement) 4, 32, 42, 91, 349
Castro, Fidel 34, 35, 43, 47, 91, 92, 141, 282
Challenger (shuttle) 327-35
Chambers, Whittaker 32, 44, 45, 63-67, 104
Chan, Jean 152, 154, 160, 205, 242, 243
Chapman, Mark David 13, 288-92
Chappaquiddick 2, 3, 106n2
Chase Manhattan Bank 25, 26, 32, 134, 140, 339
Chavez, Cesar 9, 102, 110n47, 184
Chicano 2, 9, 10, 12, 73, 87, 120, 137, 150, 222, 243, 346
Chile 31, 72, 78, 93, 107n9, 132, 136, 140, 151, 152, 176, 198, 281, 282, 323, 324, 350
Chino Defense Fund 144, 162, 180, 195
Chotiner, Murray 6, 112, 135
Christian, Christianity 10, 133, 136, 148, 155, 197, 198, 250, 256, 275
Christian Defense League (CDL) 32
Chun, Byung In (KAL 007 pilot) 320, 321
Church, Frank 114, 292
CIA 1-3, 7-11, 13, 22-52, 53, 55, 60-66, 77-103, 105, 111-17, 120, 126-42, 144-52, 156-86, 189-202, 211, 219, 221, 223, 226-38,
244, 246, 248, 250, 253-62, 265-70, 272, 274, 275, 281-83, 289, 290-92, 301-04, 316, 319-26, 337-53, 355-56
civil rights 7, 100, 146, 194, 235, 250, 262
clandestine 14, 23, 59, 60, 61, 63, 66, 70, 71, 74, 77, 80, 84, 85, 93, 107, 138, 140, 162, 176, 191, 199, 226, 233, 255, 262, 290,
317
Cleaver, Eldridge 102, 110n47, 166, 178
CMC (Centro Mondiale Commerciale) 33, 34, 42, 45
cobra (symbol) 156, 177, 181, 202, 249, 256, 261
cocaine 270, 279, 301, 306-13
coincidence 65, 114, 143, 145, 223, 228, 229, 247, 281, 330
COINTELPRO 126, 176, 233, 267, 274, 283, 292
Colby, William (Director of CIA) 8, 100, 115, 147, 151, 176, 199, 261, 290
Cold War 22, 61, 62, 66, 67n12, 71, 78, 98, 99, 120, 131, 232, 272, 297
collusion 7, 143, 203, 226, 233, 235, 237, 238, 310, 317
commune(s) 148, 171, 191, 211, 261, 284
computer 10, 12, 16, 24, 53, 100, 150, 290, 318, 319, 322-25
Computer and Automation (magazine) 16, 67
corporation(s) 10, 14, 26, 32, 55, 63, 78, 79, 129, 134, 138-40, 197, 319, 341, 342, 345
counter-culture 265, 285
coup d’état 3, 11, 13, 16, 17, 23, 66, 70, 81, 93, 99
cover story 94, 98, 104, 105, 143, 149, 161, 162, 168, 169, 173, 182, 194, 199, 226, 232, 250, 267, 289, 292, 312, 327
covert (operations) 23, 45, 59, 64, 65, 70, 71, 94, 107, 147, 175, 176, 269, 321
Croce, Jim 9, 265, 277, 279, 292
Cuba 43, 83, 91, 92, 102, 105, 141, 193, 340
Cuban 4, 7, 9, 32, 34, 42, 43, 47, 71, 72, 92, 102, 114, 116, 214, 349
D
Dallas 2, 4, 16, 18-20, 21-27, 33-40, 45, 48-51, 60, 72, 76, 90, 91, 132, 133, 270, 276, 340, 356
Das Kapital 169141, 193, 340
Cuban 4, 7, 9, 32, 34, 42, 43, 47, 71, 72, 92, 102, 114, 116, 214, 349
D
Dallas 2, 4, 16, 18-20, 21-27, 33-40, 45, 48-51, 60, 72, 76, 90, 91, 132, 133, 270, 276, 340, 356
Das Kapital 169

--- PAGE BREAK ---4, 7, 9, 32, 34, 42, 43, 47, 71, 72, 92, 102, 114, 116, 214, 349
D
Dallas 2, 4, 16, 18-20, 21-27, 33-40, 45, 48-51, 60, 72, 76, 90, 91, 132, 133, 270, 276, 340, 356
Das Kapital 169

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Davis, Angela 172, 213, 250
Davis, Ed (L.A. Chief of Police) 128, 237, 272, 345
Davis, Wes 152, 155, 160, 197
defense industry 13, 14, 131, 185
Defense Department 9, 24, 33, 40, 43, 48, 50, 52, 71, 151, 176, 327, 328, 333, 335, 346
DeFreeze, Donald 8, 135, 149-52, 155-60, 164-66, 170-91, 206-27, 236-63, 346
Delgado, Jose (Dr.) 8, 126, 222, 223, 322, 323
Delgado, “Ricky” 187, 207-09, 223
Democrat(s) 9, 81, 84, 92, 97, 99, 128, 131, 330, 347
Democratic (political party) 18, 78, 97, 128
Democratic National Headquarters (offices) 2, 75, 77, 82-85, 106, 111, 112
de Mohrenschildt, George 4, 27, 28, 35, 36, 40, 43, 45, 56, 57, 132, 340
DeVito, Joann Little and Joseph 152, 159
Devlin, Bernadette 337, 348, 349
Dialogue: Conspiracy (radio show) 2, 11, 119, 295
dictator 6, 28, 56, 323, 324
dictatorship 3, 56, 78, 85, 94, 101, 108n13, 255
DISC (Defense Industry Security Command) 129, 137, 141
Dodd de Lattre, Lois 276
Donovan, William (Bill, “Wild Bill”) 24, 25
Dornberger, Walter (General) 40-41, 330
double(s) 42, 129, 135, 158, 165, 180, 181, 218, 237
Ducote, Jerry 317-19
Dulles, Allen 10, 22-25, 27, 32, 41, 44, 46, 50, 55, 60, 61, 65, 71, 129, 131, 139, 141, 268, 302, 304, 344
Dulles, John Foster 23, 60, 63, 65
dummy front 23, 32, 79, 107n6, 143, 226, 230, 261
Dylan, Bob 266, 273, 280
E
Eisenhower, Dwight D. (President) 23, 36, 44, 59, 60
Elliot, Mama Cass 9, 265, 266, 277, 292
entrap (-ment) 73, 174, 179, 274, 307
espionage 1, 22, 23, 26, 34, 59, 61, 65, 70, 75, 76, 79, 84-87, 89-106, 113, 114, 119, 120, 142-46, 153, 162, 167, 193, 219, 226-30,
235, 249-53, 255, 317, 320, 321, 331
Exner, Judith 34, 114
F
Farben, I. G. 26, 35, 344, 352
Fascism 6, 10, 15, 17, 22, 28, 57, 59, 70, 85, 131, 135, 138, 150, 186, 258, 297, 348
fascist 11, 22, 29, 31, 33, 34, 56, 61, 70, 139, 184, 324
FBI 2-6, 14, 27, 28, 34, 42, 43, 48-50, 55, 61, 64, 65, 72, 74, 81-92, 97, 100-07, 114, 120, 126-29, 134, 137, 141, 142, 143-48, 154,
158-60, 164, 165, 171, 174-81, 186-90, 194-98, 201-11, 214, 218, 221, 225-28, 231-61, 266, 272, 274, 281-86, 293, 305, 319,
338, 342, 344, 345, 348, 350
FCC 342
Flynn, Errol 25, 27
Ford Foundation 57, 109n38
Ford, Gerald (VP, President) 50, 118, 133, 134, 143, 238, 252, 304, 338, 344
Foster, Dr. Marcus 146, 152, 159, 160, 161, 166-83, 198-205, 212, 213, 219, 223, 232, 236, 240-44, 250, 253
Fourth Reich 5, 12, 351
Franco, Francisco (Generalissimo) 28, 29, 46
Free Cuba Committee 92, 340, 343
G
Garrison, James (Jim) (New Orleans DA) 14, 31-33, 86
Gehlen, Reinhard 10, 21-33, 36, 42-52, 55, 61, 131, 139, 303
genocide 10, 95, 127, 144, 145, 160, 179, 195, 250, 258, 316, 346, 347
germ warfare 10, 29, 260
Germany 4, 6, 7, 10, 18, 23, 26, 29, 30, 35-57, 59-67, 82, 90, 94, 95, 101, 127, 129, 132, 134, 138-40, 147, 274, 296, 347, 350-53
Gestapo 24, 25, 27, 31, 36, 46, 56, 83, 85, 89, 95, 110n50, 147, 238, 266, 330, 345
Ghandi, Mahatma 349
Giancana, Sam 9, 34, 57, 112, 114, 304
Glass House Tapes 106n2, 110n50, 167, 234, 26047, 350-53
Gestapo 24, 25, 27, 31, 36, 46, 56, 83, 85, 89, 95, 110n50, 147, 238, 266, 330, 345
Ghandi, Mahatma 349
Giancana, Sam 9, 34, 57, 112, 114, 304
Glass House Tapes 106n2, 110n50, 167, 234, 260

--- PAGE BREAK ---4, 25, 27, 31, 36, 46, 56, 83, 85, 89, 95, 110n50, 147, 238, 266, 330, 345
Ghandi, Mahatma 349
Giancana, Sam 9, 34, 57, 112, 114, 304
Glass House Tapes 106n2, 110n50, 167, 234, 260

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Glover, James 112
glycolate(s) 271
Goebbels, Joseph 30, 48, 49, 56
Gray, L. Patrick 2, 3, 72, 81, 83, 86, 88, 100, 106n5, 299
guerrilla 102, 143, 145, 148, 190, 223, 226, 244, 249, 259, 289
guerrilla warfare 102, 106n3, 199
Gumbel, E.J. 5, 56, 138
Gunnell, David 152, 154, 160, 171, 242
H
Hall, Camilla 149-52, 160, 161, 168, 170, 171, 179, 189, 221, 224, 226, 235, 239, 240, 249, 254, 255
Hall, Robert 271, 272, 279, 283
Harris, William (Bill) and Emily 149-53, 161-64, 168-74, 180, 187-89, 201, 204, 207, 209, 214-17, 228, 230, 231, 238-59, 346
Hearst, Patricia (Patty) 3, 13, 133, 135, 143-263, 296, 346
Hearst, Randolph 156, 165, 184-86, 189, 233, 235, 244, 251, 259, 304
heart attack 3, 115, 117, 270, 277, 278, 308, 309
Hell’s Angels 102, 282-84
Helms, Jesse (Senator) 316, 317
Helms, Richard (CIA Director) 7, 61, 82, 83, 115, 268, 269, 274
Hendrix, Jimi 9, 13, 265, 266, 270, 273, 278, 279, 293
heroin 270, 276, 279, 301, 308-10, 313, 347-49
Himmler, Heinrich 24, 27, 35, 56
hippie(s) 9, 12, 107n6, 161, 191, 196, 229, 258, 261, 268, 273-76, 282, 284, 290
Hiss, Alger 13, 32, 36, 44, 45, 63-67, 104, 297
Hiss, Priscilla 64
hoax 145, 150, 190, 227
Hoffa, Jimmy 9, 13, 25, 57, 304
Holiday, Doc 162, 228
Holloway, John (Dr.) 308, 309
Hoover, J. Edgar 6, 13, 27, 28, 32, 33, 42, 46, 50, 56, 57, 61, 81-83, 87, 89-91, 107, 114, 129, 141, 198
Horowitz, Jim 345, 347
Hughes, Howard 6, 13, 14, 25, 34-37, 56, 78, 88, 93, 117, 129, 131, 134, 140, 195, 250, 272, 275, 284, 288, 310, 344
Humphrey, Senator Hubert 16, 81, 101
Hunt,
Dorothy 76, 80, 85, 98, 108, 135, 254, 320
E. Howard 2, 7, 36, 71-76, 80-88, 102, 107-110, 113-15, 132, 170, 223, 254, 282, 299, 320, 337, 338, 343, 356
H.L. 4, 38, 39, 140
Lamar 4, 39
Ward 353
Huston Plan (Tom Charles Huston plan) 143, 177, 198, 226, 237, 260, 293
hypnosis 13, 114, 220, 222, 286, 321
I
informant 50, 127, 148, 155, 158, 177, 178, 236, 244, 259, 260
intelligence community 11, 140, 150, 233
International Fascista 30, 31
Interpol 27, 28, 56, 57, 345
Iran 7, 23, 132, 136, 259
Iron Curtain 131
Israel 33, 46, 244, 258, 259, 342, 343
ITT (International Telephone and Telegraph Co.) 72, 78, 80, 81, 88, 89, 107, 117, 135, 151, 195, 250, 266
J
J. Walter Thompson Advertising Agency 57, 98, 109n38, 162, 229, 232
Jackson, George 102-10, 150, 164, 167, 170, 257
Jagger, Mick 265-70, 273, 275, 277, 284
Jew 4, 38, 39, 133, 136, 333, 334
Jewish 4, 8, 10, 26, 38, 56, 133, 135, 136, 138, 259, 297
John Birch Society 4, 38, 56, 57, 132, 133, 315, 318, 323, 331
John, Elton 276
Johnson, Lady Bird 342
Johnson, Lyndon (President) 25, 31, 50, 112, 273, 342, 343, 356, 56, 133, 135, 136, 138, 259, 297
John Birch Society 4, 38, 56, 57, 132, 133, 315, 318, 323, 331
John, Elton 276
Johnson, Lady Bird 342
Johnson, Lyndon (President) 25, 31, 50, 112, 273, 342, 343, 356

--- PAGE BREAK ---138, 259, 297
John Birch Society 4, 38, 56, 57, 132, 133, 315, 318, 323, 331
John, Elton 276
Johnson, Lady Bird 342
Johnson, Lyndon (President) 25, 31, 50, 112, 273, 342, 343, 356

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Jones, Brian 9, 265, 266, 270, 277, 279
Jones, Jim 13, 351
Jonestown 351, 356
Joplin, Janis 9, 265-69, 273, 278, 279, 293
Justice Department 3, 70, 81, 86, 87, 97, 113, 116, 120, 143, 146, 179, 195, 226, 236, 237, 252, 255, 259, 266, 283, 286, 337, 341,
348
K
KCIA (South Korean Intelligence Agency) 131, 155, 172
Korean Air Lines, KAL (Flight 007) 315-23, 328, 331
Karenga, Ron 152, 156, 164, 165, 177, 247
Kaye, Beverly 112
Keaton, Bernard 152, 158, 165, 180, 181, 237
Keeling, Richard 270, 277
Kelly, Grace 301-04
Kennedy
John Fitzgerald (John F., JFK) 2, 14, 27, 31, 34, 38, 41, 49, 50, 55, 57, 72, 114, 132, 133, 141-42, 190, 273, 280, 283, 298-99,
301, 338, 340
Robert 3, 7, 17, 27, 36, 38, 60, 64, 65, 77, 99, 105, 111, 128, 129, 141, 176, 177, 192, 195, 251, 279, 288, 289, 307, 308
Rose 3
Ted 3, 81, 106, 149
King Alfred Plan 250
King, Martin Luther 7, 8, 12, 13, 14, 74, 105, 129, 146, 149, 150, 164, 177, 195, 247, 250, 256, 257, 274, 288-90, 338
King, Steve (Stephen) 85, 86, 213
Kissinger, Henry 26, 81-83, 100, 136, 140, 274, 303, 304, 316, 325, 335, 344, 351, 352
KLRB-FM 2, 14, 15, 295, 337, 340, 347-50
Kohl, Helmut 351, 352
Kopechne, Mary Jo 3, 7, 77, 81, 95, 129, 149
Korea
North 347
South 132, 155, 275, 316, 320, 347
Kramer, A. Ludlow 152, 166, 185
Kronholm, Eunice 228, 235-37
Krueger, James 113
L
LAPD (Los Angeles Police Department) 84, 85, 94, 102-05, 152, 155, 156, 158, 164-67, 173, 178, 188, 192, 207, 208, 212, 216,
218-25, 232, 234, 244-59, 272, 279, 308, 311, 318
LaRouche, Lyndon 133, 134
Latin America 10, 71, 199
Latter Day Saints (LDS) 340-43
left-wing 128, 134
Lenin 56, 166
Lennon, John (John Ono) 13, 95, 273, 287-93, 307
Lester, Larry 340
Levine, Isaac Don 43, 44, 65
Liberty Lobby 132
liberal 8, 16, 38, 70, 129, 137, 222, 348
Liddy, G. Gordon 70, 72, 75, 76, 82-89, 102, 107, 134, 179, 259
Linkletter, Art 276
Little, Russell 149, 152, 159, 160, 166, 170, 175, 180, 183, 200, 202, 212, 213, 229, 235, 241, 243, 245
Lockheed 128, 307, 331-34
Love, Ann 318
LSD 8, 98, 129, 135, 221, 266, 268-71, 274, 276, 277, 280-86
M
MacArthur, Douglas 29, 49
Mafia, see also Mob
Magnin, I. 5, 14
Maheu, Robert 9, 34, 134, 304
Malaxa, Nicolae 30-32, 44
Manson, Charles 2, 8, 13, 211, 240, 241, 253, 259, 280-83, 299276, 277, 280-86
M
MacArthur, Douglas 29, 49
Mafia, see also Mob
Magnin, I. 5, 14
Maheu, Robert 9, 34, 134, 304
Malaxa, Nicolae 30-32, 44
Manson, Charles 2, 8, 13, 211, 240, 241, 253, 259, 280-83, 299

--- PAGE BREAK ---acArthur, Douglas 29, 49
Mafia, see also Mob
Magnin, I. 5, 14
Maheu, Robert 9, 34, 134, 304
Malaxa, Nicolae 30-32, 44
Manson, Charles 2, 8, 13, 211, 240, 241, 253, 259, 280-83, 299

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Manson Family 240, 253, 261, 281, 282, 283, 286, 290, 356
Mao, Tse-tung 148, 160, 164, 166, 191, 259
Marighella, Carlos 169, 199, 202
marijuana (pot) 95, 211, 274, 275, 311
Marshall Space Flight Center 329, 330
martial law 76, 82-93, 101, 109n19, 148, 198, 275, 296
Marx, Karl 166, 169
Marxist (ism) 19, 30, 48, 104, 162, 166, 191, 284
Mayhew, Audrey 19, 20
McAuliffe, Christa 329
McCarthy, Joe 29, 36, 37, 49, 64, 319, 323, 324
McCloy, John J. 25-27, 35, 37, 41, 44, 46, 50, 65, 339, 352, 356
McCord, James 2, 71-88, 94, 107-09, 115, 117, 231
McDonald, Larry 315-26, 331, 333
McKernan, Rod (“Pig Pen”) 266, 279
McIntosh, Robbie 266, 270, 279
Melody Mountain Ranch, Inc. 341
Mengele, Joseph 350, 351
Meyer, Robert 2, 81
Middle East 46, 47, 74, 78, 79, 132, 136, 139, 259, 304, 320, 349
militant 60, 156, 164, 165, 186, 218
military-industrial 36, 258
Mills, William 112
mind control 7, 8, 13, 55, 98, 114, 130, 134, 139, 173, 221, 321-23, 343, 346, 356
Mineo, Sal 266, 272, 279
Minimanual of the Urban Guerrilla 169, 191, 199-203, 214, 226, 249, 259
minorities 94, 98, 105, 120, 137, 138, 147, 169
Minutemen 4, 10, 32, 147, 179, 195, 261
Mitchell, John 3, 77, 81, 86, 87, 100, 105-108, 113, 117, 179, 206, 229, 231, 255
Mitchell, Martha 3, 13, 80, 85-87, 112, 118, 135, 147, 233, 295
“Mizmoon” (see Soltysik, Patricia)
“mod squad” 149, 152, 161, 163
Moloxa, Nicholai 344
monopoly (-ies) 26, 60, 125, 138, 218, 332
Monterey Pop 265-73, 278, 280
Moon, Sun Myung (Reverend) 155, 320
“Moonies” (Unification Church) 320
Moore, Jesse 331, 335
Moorer, Thomas (Admiral) 325
Morlion, Father Felix 25, 353
Mormon Church 53, 56, 201, 337, 340-43
Morris, Robert 37, 39, 45, 49
Morrison, Jim 9, 13, 266, 278, 279, 293
Morrison, Pamela 266, 279
Morton Thiokol, Inc. 329, 335
Mullen Associates 74, 88, 132, 340, 343
Mullen, Herbert 259, 290
Murphy, Reg 228, 232, 235, 236, 244, 259
Muskie, Edmund S. (Senator) 16, 74, 81, 98, 101
N
narcotics 72, 78, 94, 95, 127, 134, 137, 141, 152, 153, 161, 163, 178, 182, 183, 274, 275, 303, 304, 307, 308, 311, 348, 350, 351
NASA 91, 92, 95, 165, 185, 192, 222, 272, 322, 327-36, 343
National Archives 1, 60, 72, 107n6
National Association of Evangelicals 341, 343
National Security Council 10, 82, 92, 99, 136, 195, 250, 251, 330, 344
Navy Bureau of Aeronautics 6, 61, 62
Nazi 4-7, 10, 14, 18, 21-52, 55-57, 60-62, 65, 92, 94, 95, 99, 104, 129, 131, 134, 136, 139, 141, 175, 176, 179, 182, 186, 192, 197,
198, 259, 268, 274, 289, 296, 302-04, 323, 324, 330-333, 337-52, 355-56
Nazism 11, 22, 46, 131, 139
neo-Nazi 4, 5, 133, 134, 283
New York Times 118, 129, 137, 158, 193, 297, 333, 334, 335, 347, 350
Newton, Huey 162, 163, 169, 173, 219, 230, 235, 25030-333, 337-52, 355-56
Nazism 11, 22, 46, 131, 139
neo-Nazi 4, 5, 133, 134, 283
New York Times 118, 129, 137, 158, 193, 297, 333, 334, 335, 347, 350
Newton, Huey 162, 163, 169, 173, 219, 230, 235, 250

--- PAGE BREAK ---56
Nazism 11, 22, 46, 131, 139
neo-Nazi 4, 5, 133, 134, 283
New York Times 118, 129, 137, 158, 193, 297, 333, 334, 335, 347, 350
Newton, Huey 162, 163, 169, 173, 219, 230, 235, 250

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Nixon, Richard Milhous 2, 3, 6, 7, 22, 25, 32-37, 44-50, 57, 59-67, 71, 74, 77-80, 83-86, 89-92, 98-110, 111-18, 119-20, 128, 129,
133-38, 155, 177, 194, 238, 253, 258, 282, 295-99, 301, 304, 317, 320, 325, 335, 337, 344, 349, 351, 356
Nomenclature of an Assassination Cabal (see also Torbitt Document) 45, 109n28, 142
Novello, Don (Father Sarducci) 306
Nuremberg 24, 35, 96, 302, 350, 352
O
O-ring (Challenger shuttle) 328, 333
Ochs, Phil 266, 280
Octopus, The (see also the Bunge Corporation) 47
Onassis, Aristotle 25, 26, 31, 56, 57, 196, 304
Ono, Yoko 95, 273
Operation Chaos 126, 265, 267, 282, 283, 290
Operation Condor 31
Operation Greif 31
Operation Sunrise 24, 25
Osborne, Albert (John Bowen, Bowen-Osborne) 40, 42-45, 82, 127
Oswald, Lee Harvey 2-9, 13-52, 56, 65, 71, 72, 82, 91, 115, 127, 133-35, 149, 167, 169, 174, 181, 190, 199, 214, 237, 241, 252,
254, 273, 284, 296, 298, 337-43, 355
Oswald, Marina 23, 35, 43-45, 48, 51, 65, 80, 115, 338, 340
OSS 24, 25, 33, 41, 46, 51, 55, 60, 61, 147, 256, 301, 302, 356
P
Paine, Michael 40, 41
Paine, Ruth 36, 40, 41, 48, 241
Palestine 24, 325
Papandreou, Andreas 3
paranoia, paranoid 1, 131, 307, 355
Parkland Hospital 4, 254, 340
Parsons, Gram 266, 279, 280, 281
patsy (-ies) 4, 36, 95, 127, 129, 133, 152,167, 181, 192, 219, 241, 247, 251, 253, 256, 289, 290, 298
Paul, Jay 318
Peking House 154, 160, 166, 168, 171, 175, 191, 242
Pentagon 7, 27, 29, 35, 36, 51, 61, 92, 94, 98, 100, 129, 134, 136, 140-42, 145, 151, 271, 281, 287, 317, 319, 322, 325, 328-34,
338
Permindex 33, 34, 142
Peron, Evita 30, 45
Peron, Juan 32
Perron, Steve 266, 280
Perry, Hermann (H.L.) 32, 63, 344
Perry, Nancy Ling 149-52, 159-60, 167-71, 183, 189, 200, 204-05, 221-26, 239-42
Phoenix program 96, 100, 151, 152, 172, 176, 177, 231, 261, 290
P.I.N. (People In Need) food program 146, 165, 166, 185
Pink Floyd 276
Pinochet, Augusto 323-4
plumbers (Watergate) 3, 74, 75, 82, 83, 89, 92, 94, 97, 116, 259
police state 2, 6, 101, 190, 198, 251, 261
political murder 134, 347, 348
political prisoners 7, 87, 96, 101-06, 120, 177, 194
Politica 151, 152, 176, 281-83
Powers, Francis Gary 2, 13, 23, 44
Presley, Elvis 13, 307
Prinze, Freddy 9, 10
prison reform 168, 175, 183, 193, 228, 238, 242, 243
prison system 7-8, 101, 145, 154, 156, 162, 178, 183, 193-94, 226-27, 247, 251, 299
Pro Deo 25, 353
Procunier, Raymond 101, 233
Project Paperclip 6, 61, 139, 268, 330
Project Paperclip (book) 41, 330, 332
propaganda 30, 37, 48, 49, 61, 62, 70, 71, 95, 129-32, 137-39, 147, 149, 163, 192, 203, 231-33, 247
provocateur(s) 70, 74, 75, 80, 84, 87-89, 94, 97-108, 127, 143-46, 150, 156, 162, 164-67, 174, 177, 182, 190, 198, 199, 203, 206,
217, 218, 229, 234, 236, 244, 252-57, 261, 262, 275, 318, 328-33, 247
provocateur(s) 70, 74, 75, 80, 84, 87-89, 94, 97-108, 127, 143-46, 150, 156, 162, 164-67, 174, 177, 182, 190, 198, 199, 203, 206,
217, 218, 229, 234, 236, 244, 252-57, 261, 262, 275, 318, 328

--- PAGE BREAK ---(s) 70, 74, 75, 80, 84, 87-89, 94, 97-108, 127, 143-46, 150, 156, 162, 164-67, 174, 177, 182, 190, 198, 199, 203, 206,
217, 218, 229, 234, 236, 244, 252-57, 261, 262, 275, 318, 328

--- PAGE BREAK ---

public relations 35, 88, 107n6, 150, 192, 212, 229, 232, 238, 262, 340, 343
R
race war 148, 169, 179, 181, 182, 194,195, 261
racism 5, 78, 136-37, 147, 178, 251, 269
racist 62, 133-37, 169, 182, 195, 229, 245, 256, 257, 283
radical(s) 2, 38, 56, 84, 88-89, 97-108, 143-53, 160-80, 184, 190, 191, 195-98, 201, 206, 208, 222, 226-35, 244-51, 254-61, 348
Ray, James Earl 74, 135, 149, 181, 237, 246, 247, 256, 259, 299
Reagan, Ronald 24-27, 32, 37, 78, 94-96, 103, 109n35, 134, 140, 141, 166, 173, 193, 258, 287-88, 301-02, 315-19, 327, 329-35,
335, 349, 351-53, 356
Redding, Otis 9, 265, 266, 273, 280
Rees, John 318, 324-25
Louise 324
Regan, Donald 329-30
Reichstag 63, 70, 106n3, 328
Remiro, Joseph 149-53, 160-64, 167-69, 172-75, 178, 183, 185, 191, 200, 204, 212-14, 221, 235, 236, 239-43, 250, 253
repression 16, 17, 66, 70, 84, 94, 97, 100, 145, 163, 183, 196
Republican(s) 18, 63, 74, 79-81, 83, 84, 88, 97, 99, 128, 131, 166, 179, 185, 195, 275, 330, 344
Republican Convention (1972) 2, 106n3, 179, 261
revolution 17, 54, 55, 101, 138, 146, 153, 166, 167, 186, 201, 231, 232, 265, 267
revolutionary (-aries) 17, 104, 144, 164, 178, 186, 199, 200, 219, 226, 227, 241, 246, 252, 275
Richards, Keith 265, 277
right-wing 30, 49, 99, 128, 138, 147, 179, 184, 190, 195, 198, 201, 217, 225, 235-36, 244, 259, 317
Riley Coffee Co. 340, 343
rock concert(s) 144, 195, 267, 273-75, 292
rock group 267, 271, 275, 277
rock musician(s) 9, 265, 270, 275, 276, 282, 290-93, 305
Rockefeller, Nelson 13, 57, 99, 104, 116, 133, 307, 311, 349
Rockefellers, the 10, 133, 140-41
Rogers Commision 329, 332
Rogers, William 327, 335
Rolling Stones, the 265, 273, 277, 281, 283
Roosevelt, Franklin D. 1, 27, 56, 57, 64
Roselli, John 9, 34, 56
Rothschilds, the 136, 138
Royal Dutch Shell 53, 138
Ruby, Jack (Rubenstein) 2-4, 13, 15, 16, 24, 39, 50, 56, 57, 75, 133, 135, 174, 284, 339, 355
Russell, Lou 108n17, 117
Russia 6, 22, 23, 27, 35, 44, 53-56, 131, 302, 304, 338, 340, 345
Russian 21-24, 28, 29, 33, 40, 41, 44, 51, 53-56, 65, 135, 198, 315-20, 337
Ryan, Leo 351
S
sabotage 23, 26, 57, 70-106, 120, 333, 337, 347
safe house 72, 86, 107n6, 163, 164, 183, 196, 199-214, 230, 240, 241, 247, 249, 261, 289
Salazar, Ruben 2, 81
satellite(s) 132, 321-22, 328, 331, 334, 343, 344
Saturday Night Live 307, 312
Saudi Arabia 244, 259
Schneiderman, Henry 270, 275
Secret Army Organization (SAO) 130, 179
Secret Service 72, 75, 82, 84, 89, 108n17, 112, 115, 190, 342, 349
Shaw, Clay 31-34, 42, 45, 115, 135
Sirhan Sirhan 13, 99, 128, 135, 149, 192, 199, 229, 237, 251, 259, 279, 299
Skorzeny, Otto 30-32, 44-46
SLA (Symbionese Liberation Army) 3, 134, 135, 143-62, 296, 346
Smith, Evelyn 307-11
Socialist 55, 102, 128
Soledad Prison 6, 105, 157-59, 165, 170, 174, 175, 177, 180, 200, 227, 235, 237, 244, 245-48
Soltysik, Patricia (“Mizmoon”) 161, 170, 248
Soviet Union 21-23, 51, 60, 62, 108n11, 172, 315, 316, 320, 324, 326, 337, 352
space shuttle (see Challenger)75, 177, 180, 200, 227, 235, 237, 244, 245-48
Soltysik, Patricia (“Mizmoon”) 161, 170, 248
Soviet Union 21-23, 51, 60, 62, 108n11, 172, 315, 316, 320, 324, 326, 337, 352
space shuttle (see Challenger)

--- PAGE BREAK ---27, 235, 237, 244, 245-48
Soltysik, Patricia (“Mizmoon”) 161, 170, 248
Soviet Union 21-23, 51, 60, 62, 108n11, 172, 315, 316, 320, 324, 326, 337, 352
space shuttle (see Challenger)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Spector, Arlen 338
Speer, Albert 41
spy (see espionage, intelligence)
Standard Oil 26, 53, 54, 136, 138
Star Wars (SDI) 328-34
State Department 37, 59, 60, 64, 65, 101, 131, 136, 273, 282, 317, 328, 338
Steiner, George and Larry 247, 251
Steiner, Robyn 149, 152, 158, 160, 165-66, 171, 175, 180, 186, 219, 236, 242, 245
Sturgis, Frank 2, 71, 91, 102, 116, 229
suicide 36, 95, 107n8, 108n17, 112, 117, 150, 224, 232, 261, 266, 269, 272, 278, 280, 332, 337, 340
Sullivan, William 27, 69, 83, 86, 87, 91, 142
Summa Company 131, 134
surveillance 10, 17, 23, 81, 95, 97, 100, 107n6, 176, 177, 252, 273, 337, 345
SWAT 10, 144, 145, 150, 188, 192, 198, 209, 212, 219, 224, 225, 233, 262, 345, 346
Swiss banks 30, 57, 142, 343
T
Tackwood, Louis 72, 76, 84, 85, 87, 89, 93, 94, 102-10, 167, 177, 220, 234, 251, 260, 275
Tate, Sharon 168, 191, 211, 241, 253, 282-84
Taub, William 25, 108n17
Teller, Edward (Dr.) 325-26, 330-33
terrorist 30, 102, 145, 148-50, 161, 164, 172, 189, 190, 197-203, 226, 233, 235, 236, 244, 257, 259, 260, 324-26, 345-46
Third Reich 22, 62, 259, 324
Thompson, Chris 152, 158, 160, 167-71, 186, 219, 251
Tippit, Officer J.D. 15, 91, 134
Tomassi, Joseph 116
Torbitt Document 45, 46, 142
treason 4, 38, 49, 70, 76-78, 106, 133
Treason for My Daily Bread 45, 46
Truman, Harry (President) 36, 64, 344
U
Ulasewicz, Tony 76-81, 85, 107n8
U-2 23, 44, 51, 71
UCLA (University of California Los Angeles) 95, 96, 148, 165, 173, 192, 222, 247, 270, 278
United Farm Workers 87, 144, 148, 153, 180, 184, 195
uranium (uranium ore) 340-43
U.S. Labor Party 133
USSR 28, 37, 41, 43, 45, 71, 131, 132, 139, 172, 193, 231, 287, 316, 320-21
Utah 341-43
Utah Corporation 342
V
Vacaville Medical Facility 149-58, 165, 169-71, 173-75, 178, 180, 194, 205, 221, 222, 231, 234, 237-38, 241, 246, 248
Vacaville Prison 8, 257, 346
Vatican, the 24, 25, 30, 36, 303-04, 347
Venceremos 144, 148, 153, 162, 174, 180, 195, 202-04, 245
Vietnam 16, 35, 79, 96, 100, 101, 141, 150-52, 155, 163, 168, 172-73, 176-78, 199, 230-31, 249, 250, 261-62, 273, 280, 282, 284,
290, 299, 303, 348
Vietnam Veterans Against the War 144, 148, 163, 169, 180, 195
Von Braun, Werner 41, 92, 330, 343
Voorhis, Jerry 6, 32, 36, 64
W
Walker, Gen. Edwin 38-52
Wall Street 25, 131, 134, 136-41, 330
Wallace, George 7, 13, 74, 76, 80-82, 89, 97, 106n2, 116, 128-29, 149, 179, 299
Warren Commission 27, 33, 35, 40-44, 49-52, 65, 75, 82, 113, 133, 199, 252, 254, 298-99, 302, 304, 337-39, 342
Warren, Earl (Chairman, Chief Justice) 50, 129, 338
Warren Report 4, 20, 43, 44, 50, 74, 169, 252, 273, 298, 338
Watergate 2, 3, 7, 25, 37, 50, 57, 69-110, 111-18, 120, 126, 129, 132, 135, 138, 145, 162, 198, 229, 231, 236, 253, 255, 259, 270,
271, 282, 288, 290, 295, 298, 318, 320, 322, 355-56
Watson, Charles 253, 259, 261, 283, 25, 37, 50, 57, 69-110, 111-18, 120, 126, 129, 132, 135, 138, 145, 162, 198, 229, 231, 236, 253, 255, 259, 270,
271, 282, 288, 290, 295, 298, 318, 320, 322, 355-56
Watson, Charles 253, 259, 261, 283

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Webster, James 112
Wehrmacht 22
Weidenbach, Adolf Charles (see Willoughby, Charles A.)
Weisenthal, Saul 347
Weissman, Bernard 4, 37-39, 133
Westbrook, Colston (alias Big Daddy, Yajiuma) 8, 149, 152, 156-59, 163, 166, 169, 171-75, 177-78, 182, 186, 197, 202, 219, 227, 230-
31, 234, 242-46, 251, 255, 346
Western Goals Foundation 315-25
Western Research (aka Research West) 318-19
Wheeler, Thero 152, 157-58, 165, 169-70, 174, 178, 180, 205-06, 243-46, 251
White Russian 23, 35, 40, 42, 57, 131, 142
Willoughby, Charles A. (Major General) 28-32, 37, 49, 51
wiretap (-pers, -ing) 37, 78, 81, 97, 99, 100, 106n4, 146, 177, 326
Wolfe, William (Willie) 152, 159, 160, 166, 169, 171, 172, 174-75, 179-82, 189, 200, 202, 204, 212, 223, 225, 226, 230, 234, 241-42,
255
Wolff, Karl 24-25
Woodstock (music festival) 9, 273
Woodstock typewriter 64-65
World Bank 339
World Watchers International 14
X
X, Malcolm 7, 8, 12, 14, 105, 129-33, 150, 164, 166, 257
Y
YAF (Young Americans for Freedom) 36-45, 49, 57, 99, 109n27, 131-33
Younger, Evelle (Attorney General) 87, 105, 110n50, 128, 152, 156-57, 162, 177, 179, 229, 251, 345-47
Z
Zapruder, Abraham 9
Zeligs, Meyer 65

--- PAGE BREAK ---edom) 36-45, 49, 57, 99, 109n27, 131-33
Younger, Evelle (Attorney General) 87, 105, 110n50, 128, 152, 156-57, 162, 177, 179, 229, 251, 345-47
Z
Zapruder, Abraham 9
Zeligs, Meyer 65

--- PAGE BREAK ---

OTHER TITLES BY ALEX CONSTANTINE
THE COVERT WAR AGAINST ROCK
WHAT YOU DON'T KNOW ABOUT THE DEATHS OF JIM MORRISON, TUPAC SHAKUR, MICHAEL HUTCHENCE, BRIAN JONES, JIMI HENDRIX, PHIL OCHS, BOB MARLEY, PETER TOSH, JOHN
LENNON, THE NORTORIOUS B.I.G.
A provocative examination of how government, organized crime and the music industry intermingle.
$14.95 178 PAGES
PSYCHIC DICTATORSHIP IN THE U.S.A.
Alex Constantine's explosive book uncovers the terrifying extent of electromagnetic and biotelemetric
mind control experimentation on involuntary human subjects in America today.
$12.95, 221 PAGES
VIRTUAL GOVERNMENT: CIA MIND CONTROL OPERATIONS IN AMERICA
Alex Constantine connects the dots on such events as the integration of Nazis into the U.S. government,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CIA experiments on children and the mysteries of the McMartin case, the rise of Timothy McVeigh from
robot to bomber, and the infestation of American media by intelligence operatives.
$14.95, 304 PAGES

--- PAGE BREAK ---

OTHER FERAL HOUSE TITLES
CAUGHT IN THE CROSSFIRE: KERRY THORNLEY, OSWALD AND THE GARRISON INVESTIGATION
BY ADAM GORIGHTLY
The strange saga of Lee Harvey Oswald's Marine Corps pal, Kerry Thornley, and his connections to the
JFK assassination conspiracy.
$18.95, 253 PAGES
CHEMTRAILS, HAARP, AND THE FULL SPECTRUM DOMINANCE OF PLANET EARTH
BY ELANA FREELAND
The skies look strange and different. Scientists are discovering heavy metals in the soil. Chemtrails tells
us why.
$21.95, 272 PAGES
THE PRESIDENT AND THE PROVOCATEUR: THE PARALLEL LIVES OF JFK AND LEE HARVEY OSWALD

--- PAGE BREAK ---. Scientists are discovering heavy metals in the soil. Chemtrails tells
us why.
$21.95, 272 PAGES
THE PRESIDENT AND THE PROVOCATEUR: THE PARALLEL LIVES OF JFK AND LEE HARVEY OSWALD

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BY ALEX COX
Famous film Director Alex Cox, like most of the American and British public, does not buy into the moth-
eaten establishment tale about the regicide. The President and the Provocateur is not the usual conspiracy
volume, and is structured almost like the film Rashomon, including varying views of the story with
different fonts and sizes.
$16.95, 316 PAGES

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FERALHOUSE.COM