TV Tv,e Trial of Janes Earl Hay," more on 7/22/92
Bill Pepper phoned me from ^ondon last evening our time.

We spoke for about an hour,
ending about 4 p.m.

here.

He said (again) that he'd like to keep in touch and when he was
in Washington to come up again.

I said OK.

He is involved - and 1 did not ask him how when he did not volunteer it - in this
coming TV show that he says has been publicized.

Jerry $ay had a3ked rae to keep it con-
fidential and I did not tell him what Jerry had told me.

He says it is ^Thames TVf
which he undertook to puff up over a Vialdhein show, with problems with HBO's US invol-
vement.

Except for getting him to confirm that meant Warner I asked liiy no tiling about
that, eitiler.

He wanted to involve me, for pay, and without asking how much M told him I would
not be connected with anything I thought might be irresponsible so the answer was no.

When he tried to say they werejiifference, without refer:ting to my experiences with them on
"The Trial of Lee Harvey Oswcdd" I told him sigpl^t that was what the last tlire^Grits had
promised me and all had not kept their words, lie Masked me who and I told him.

He said
nothing further about that.

When he asked my opinion of what he believed and some of what
Jimmy had told him I had no reluctance in offering my opinion.

Honestly.

In the course of the conversation he told me^t tliat im effort lie had made in court to
get Jimmy a trial had failed, rejected by sixth circuit without comment, cert refused by
the Supreme ^ourt.

I asked him no ques-ions about that.

Nor did I tell him tliat I'd heard years ago tliat he was working on a TV show (when he
pretended to me that he was working for Jimmy as his lawyer only) or tliat I remembered
that when he was first in touch with me decndes ago he was writing a book on the case.I asked him no ques-ions about that. Nor did I tell him tliat I'd heard years ago tliat he was working on a TV show (when he
pretended to me that he was working for Jimmy as his lawyer only) or tliat I remembered
that when he was first in touch with me decndes ago he was writing a book on the case. I did tell him thay I believe I could "walk" Jimmy, he asked me wliat it would take
to get no to use tliat, I told him that I was sitting on it rather than risk having it
misused and when he asked I said I would not for nay money give it to TV. How would I
use it? I said possibly on a book, coauthored, lie said nothing further about^that and I
did not either. I wanted him to be clear that I Wcinted no involvement with what I could
not control, that there was no possibility of doing this with TV and that despite what
he said about Thames, they would go for the sensational without regard to truth or fact
or consequences. What I remmewber about specific questions he asked is about the second
luustang and I said tliat as of the crucial time it wa3 noTrelevant, that the second one was
a white Fairlane. He asked me about Jimmy not txing at the deene at the key time and I said
I believe him. Bill mentioned two people who said his car was not there. ^h±3 leads me to
believe tliat he has no- bothered even to read the evidentiary hearing transcript to get the
and why it wnsn$t finished, in general about 75-1996 and tliat* '.'hen he mentioned ^lelanson's
book I was comtemptuous if PJJil and his book and wurnei him not to trust a word of it. I

--- PAGE BREAK ---y it wnsn$t finished, in general about 75-1996 and tliat* '.'hen he mentioned ^lelanson's
book I was comtemptuous if PJJil and his book and wurnei him not to trust a word of it. I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2
gave him as an illustration Mthe fat man" and what he did with it. I told Ilia that the name
was public, that Pd gotten it in 75-4.99b and gave tliat record to Phil when he was here^*
pretending that his only interest was for his class touching, without ever tolling ne
he was working on a book and that what 0iil built out of McDoudlton's alleged fear was
ludicrous, that among other things no spookery woulid work tliat way and that if Jinny
had been given any money by one, it would not have done it that way and he would not have
found himself in Portugal witli only about &100 lesi that required for passage to then
Hhodesia. Bill professed not to know how Jimmy liad gotten the Honey he had. I told him I
believe what he told me, that he had knocked off a whore house.
lie was interested in th£ Piedmont sundry receipts for Jimmy's laundry and dry-
cleaning and in Jimmy's inistence that he had not left it there. I told him that because
he is a lawyer he did not tliink of any explanation for that7. He had none, ^o I told liik
that someone else could have taken the ^1undry there that day when Jimmy said he was on
his trip that ended in A'iemphis. He did seem not to have thought of that.
He asked me if I would "teatify'^/and I told him I would not and that I would not
even be driven to DC to be an any show, again telling him why I've been refusing this,
including of the hazard to me of a simple accident.
I have the impression that like so many others he begins with ax theory and works on
that instead of seeking fac't* and proceeding from that basis but - not go into tliat
with him. But from what he ©Aid, for the tine he has been working on tliia he ^ems to ne
Juju****
to h$ve come up with little or nothing. He ned not have; ll he developed it but he said
nothing that loads to the belief that he has developed anything at all that ifc new and
he did reflect ignorctnee of some of what is available.
7/23s "control" on previous page does not refer to my control over program. It refers to my
inability to control what was used of what was taped of me find that ini the past these inter-
views of no were used in support bf what I do not support, as my cedi ting them.