iisc.N.0.llotes,11/23/71
Ed Planer confirms ("absolutely") that Jesse Core was in the original Johann Rush
footagethat was preserved and viewedafter the assssination.iiy earlier notes refer to
Jesse's tellingmeabout it.
I had bumped into *onk Zelden on the street vithim Brown, saw him at.least one:
other tine before today and had another brief chat, and wao with him three tines today.
Ihada 1:CO p.in.luich date with Garrison at the Plantation Room of the Roosevelt,for
which im was late, so I sat vith konk uitil Jim came.Then, when he left, he cane over to
outtableandinvited nvtohisoffice.whenIfinished,andwhenihadtoleave hhere
for another appointaunt, he gave me his houe numbur, and I went there after supper. Host
of our convcrsation dtaltvith the pinball cases.Hiowever，at lunch he told ne these thingd
of interest: that when Dean Andrews phoned hiiu fron the hospital to ask hin to represent
Oswald,he gave onk the mother's phone.ionk does not know if he preserved that note,but
also got a tip th.t Ruby was at the Ochsner clinic during the suuer of 1963 for a cancer
checkup which revealed that.he did have one.when I told Jim this he said they also h.d
necessarily.neanthat it had existedand had been destroyed,butthat is not inpossible
atall,he foun:i itunimpressive.Zelden,and experienced criminal lawyer whohaspsent8
lifetine dealingvith the mostwretched types,inists the one thing that can't make sense
isa Ruby killing Oswald outof compassion for thebereaved,and he aerees the'only purpose
served was to shut ilio's mouth.e dealingvith the mostwretched types,inists the one thing that can't make sense
isa Ruby killing Oswald outof compassion for thebereaved,and he aerees the'only purpose
served was to shut ilio's mouth.

themotion&i3madestrangeinthatitwasmadebyMwgDymondalone，withoutsiuilar motions
by the others.or their signing that one.They did agree and join in open court."onk
feelsthisindicatesthattheotherdefendantsandtheircounsellearnedabouttiis ihthe
last minuteonlyand actedwithout consideredjudgement.Ican'tunderstand the changeof
denial,one prospect+ didn't discuss withonk.It.is not difficult to vonder about Dymond.
"onk had this account of his representation of andrews in the perjury case: Andrews.
askedi hia torepresent,he did a lengthylegalmenoranduafter research and concluded that
ofthetwoposs.bilitiesunderlocallaw，thewrongonehadbeenusedtoindict Andrews
and that, despite .ndrews' wC testinony, he had not waived one of the thrce.absolute
while Dean rambled on.If this was not too much,the next thing he kmew was when he turned.
theTVnews on athoneandhoardthatDean'slawyerwassubpenaeing asI recall 37witmess es,
beginningwith thegovernor(who was soon on the horn,Zelden knowinghim well-andrionk
feelsthattothisdayHckeithen doesn'tbelievelckbelievesonk'sassurances'thathe
hadhad nothiny todo'with itand didn'tkmow of ituntil afterithappened.However,tiis
the judge to court if not relieved.In court, the judgu announced Zelden's vithdrawal,asked
Dean if he had new counsel and was assured "I have the best lawyer in New Orleans". The
judge instructedthe clerkto make it amutter of record and asked Dean to identify his
new coumsel for the record. "Dean A. Andrews, Jr.", Andrews said!when I discusscd the
personal afiars of the client of another lawyer he knows and we discussed that lawyer, I
wondered how it cauie to pass that one lawyer represented so many of those in whor Garrison
was intorested, suggosting that there uight have been federal lelp.ronk said that Le Coeur
had assured hia to the contrary and I repliedthathad it becn done，the oneperson not to
be informed had to be the fedieral uttomey.He didn't dispute this.have been federal lelp.ronk said that Le Coeur
had assured hia to the contrary and I repliedthathad it becn done，the oneperson not to
be informed had to be the fedieral uttomey.He didn't dispute this.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

NO notcgi1/23/71-2
Monk hes done 8 chapters of a book on his life in court,the status of justice
One chapter has this title with the ? xed out.
Por a reason not clear he asked me if I had seen a story out of Denver in the IYTines
had been to sec hin. He said there had been a series of such stories in that venver paper,
the nane of which he doesn't know.
I was late leaving his ofrice, for that had been inprovised and Jin had been late.
Dr had phoned and said she was coming. She waited in the notel ofrice, thero being no
lobby.She said as soon as she left it that they had sort of pumped her about ne,giting
her the inpression they consider me some lind of private investigator.I suspect that if this
a single day, on several days, and once,I think, when I was in, when the calling party
hunguy.
Jin sve me an Offense Report of the Dallas police, of a disturbance at the Bledaoe
home..He did not include the covering letter,whichwas one signing himself a former
Dallas.policeman.
John,
Jim's prusent jenitot,withhon I had a long chat before anyone got in the office
this a., cold me he had been h ndyman at the Bourbon House for close to 20 years. He
had.beon questioned closely about.seeing Oswald thereby soceone.on the staff,butdid not.
B.H.,a sort of home away from hone where nessages were accepted and passed,and where
Itwas at700Bourbon