47
ANNALS OF GOVERNMENT
POLICINGAMERICA'SWRITERS
VORa great part of the twentieth former F.B.I.

source,with a code confront the Guild follow the Com-
century, the United States gov- designation of his own—Confidential munist Party line."
ernment has policed a number of Informant T-10.

Reagan has not
Reagan was particularly active as an
well—and apparently the practice is under a Freedom of Information re- “Reagan said that he had been made
continuing.American writers were quest-—that originally appeared in the a member of a committee headed by
watched for supposed crimes as serious
sSan Jose Mercury News on August 25,L.B.Mayer[Louis B.Mayer,the head
as espionage and as vague as subver- 1985.

The documents revealed that at of M-G-M] for the purpose of purg-
sion,butfew
wereawareofbeing
gthe time Reagan was active in the ing the motion picture industry of
watched at all.Documents I have ob-Screen Actors Guild-he served as theCommunists." That committee was an
tained in the last several years under Guild’s president for several years—he outgrowth of the Thomas committee
the Freedom of Information Act,and also worked as an informer for the hearings in Washington and subse-
through other sources in Washington,F.B.I.Reagan’s name first appears on quent meetings of motion-picture pro-
reveal that these authors often came an F.B.1.document from 1941,when ducers in New York City.Represen-
writers’ organizations they belonged had become“intimately acquainted.House Committee on Un-American
to or writers’meetings they attended;Another document mentions that in Activities in1947.Thereport contin-
because of petitions they signed or 1947 Reagan and his wife, the actress ues,“T-10 stated it is his firm convic-
publications they subscribed to;or JaneWyman,were interviewed by the tion that Congress should declare,first
because of the places where they
F.B.I.about the HollywoodIndepen-of all,by statute, that the Communist
travelled.Reagan has not
Reagan was particularly active as an
well—and apparently the practice is under a Freedom of Information re- “Reagan said that he had been made
continuing.American writers were quest-—that originally appeared in the a member of a committee headed by
watched for supposed crimes as serious
sSan Jose Mercury News on August 25,L.B.Mayer[Louis B.Mayer,the head
as espionage and as vague as subver- 1985.

The documents revealed that at of M-G-M] for the purpose of purg-
sion,butfew
wereawareofbeing
gthe time Reagan was active in the ing the motion picture industry of
watched at all.Documents I have ob-Screen Actors Guild-he served as theCommunists." That committee was an
tained in the last several years under Guild’s president for several years—he outgrowth of the Thomas committee
the Freedom of Information Act,and also worked as an informer for the hearings in Washington and subse-
through other sources in Washington,F.B.I.Reagan’s name first appears on quent meetings of motion-picture pro-
reveal that these authors often came an F.B.1.document from 1941,when ducers in New York City.Represen-
writers’ organizations they belonged had become“intimately acquainted.House Committee on Un-American
to or writers’meetings they attended;Another document mentions that in Activities in1947.Thereport contin-
because of petitions they signed or 1947 Reagan and his wife, the actress ues,“T-10 stated it is his firm convic-
publications they subscribed to;or JaneWyman,were interviewed by the tion that Congress should declare,first
because of the places where they
F.B.I.about the HollywoodIndepen-of all,by statute, that the Communist
travelled.

Among the writers who dent Citizens Committee of the Arts,
Party is not a legal Party,but is a
foreign-inspired conspiracy.

Secondly,
Federal Bureau of Investigation andquit that organization the year before,
Congress should define what organi-
other agencies are Nelson Algren,
because its leadership was alleged to be
W.

H.Secondly,
Federal Bureau of Investigation andquit that organization the year before,
Congress should define what organi-
other agencies are Nelson Algren,
because its leadership was alleged to be
W.

H.

Auden, Pearl Buck, Truman Communist.

The Reagans provided that membership therein could be con-
ezationsareCommunist-controlledso
Capote,John Dos Passos, Theodore the F.B.I.with “information regard- strued as an indication of disloyalty.

Dreiser,William Faulkner, Ernest ing the activities of some members of He felt that lacking such a definite
Hemingway, Sinclair Lewis,Robert the[Screen Actors] Guild who they stand on the part of the government,it
Lowell, Archibald MacLeish,John suspected were carrying on Commu- would be very difficult for any commit-
O'Hara, Carl Sandburg,Robert Sher-nistParty work.TheF.B.I.memoran- tee of motion picture people to conduct
wood, John Steinbeck, Thornton dum says,“REAGAN and JANE WYMAN any type of cleansing of their own
Wilder,Tennessee Williams,Edmund advised for the past several monthsh
Wilson,and Thomas Wolfe.Files they have observed during Guild
household."
The dossiers show that some writers
on these writers contain informa-meetings there are two‘cliques”of were kept under scrutiny for years.

tion compiled by the F.B.I.and, in ad- members, one headed by[name delet- One thing the files do not disclose is
from the Central Intelligence Agency,which on all questions of policy that c
t
that in some cases these records caused
careers to be hobbled by studios and
the Immigration and Naturaliza-
tion Service, the State Department,
networks, and military service to be
hampered.

Since most of the authors
and the intelligence branches of the
did not know they were under surveil-
military services.

Raw, and accusato-
lance, they could not challenge their
ry, files have frequently been made
available to other government agen-
accusers.In any event, despite the mil-
lions of dollars spent on investigative
cies, too.Since most of the authors
and the intelligence branches of the
did not know they were under surveil-
military services. Raw, and accusato-
lance, they could not challenge their
ry, files have frequently been made
available to other government agen-
accusers.In any event, despite the mil-
lions of dollars spent on investigative
cies, too. man-hours and record-keeping,none
Although there is no oficial stamp
of the writersmore than fifty men
onwhat is written or printed in the
United States, a censorious, anti-liber-
and women—whose dossiers Ilooked
intowere ever convictedof any crime
tarian toneat times emanates from
the White House and reverberates
attributed to them by the F.B.1.or
other federal agencies. Some were ac-
through the federal government.It
cused publicly and “tried” by news-
has been particularly evident lately,in
paper columnists and editorial writers
the Department of Justiceunder At-
considered friendly to the F.B.I., who
torney General Edwin Meese,whose
jurisdiction includes the F.B.1. The at-
were given tidbits from the secret files,
but the F.B.I. prevailed only in the
titude of theReagan Administration
press, not in the courts. toward the use of F.B.I.and other files
In nearly all the documents I ob-
can be measured by the fact that
tained under the Freedom of Informa-
Ronald Reagan himself surfaced as a
DLG
tion Act, material—not only names

--- PAGE BREAK ---48
What went wRong?

year after the F.B.1.

acknowledged
that such fles did exist.

Executive Order 12356,signed by
President Reagan on April 2, 1982,
slowed down the declassification pro-
Never owned dog?

Had strange
cess and placed new limits on access to
information.

It superseded a 1978 Ex-
ipp!u
name
ecutive Order by President.

Carter.

The Reagan order eliminated a Carter
JohnnyXerxes
requirementthatmostdocumentsbe
declassified within a specific period.

Miller
It also eliminated a ban on the
reclassification of documents and in-
formation already released; reversed
a Carter provision that forbade the
classification of a document after a
request for it had been made; reversed
a willingness to resolve doubts in
favor of declassification; and curtailed
declassification-review practices in the
National Archives and other executive
agencies and departments.

In Octoberof1986,theFreedom of
Information Act was further tightened
by President Reagan and his Attorney
General.A revision of the act gave
Did not learn 
Too much fruit salad
law-enforcement agencies new author-
ity to withhold documents that,in their
.ay
musica
Iife?

view,might compromise certaininves-
car
tigations.In one of the key provisions,
agencieswere given authorityfor the
first time torefuse either toconfirm or
to deny that certain records existed.at
all.

Fortunately, most of my requests
under the act were made before this
revision;even in cases where material
was withheld or blacked out,I was at
least informed whether a file did.or did
not exist.In effect, these changes have
also caused a partial gutting of the
1974 Privacy Act, which came into
existence in the wake of revelations
about domestic surveillance and law-
breaking during the Nixon Adminis-
tration.Domestic spying did not origi-
n.Cemf
nate with Nixon, of course.It became
professionalized under J.

Edgar Hoo-
ver,who was the director of theF.B.I.

but sometimes whole pages—is
sThe degree of compliance with my
from 1924 until his death,in 1972.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Edgar Hoo-
ver,who was the director of theF.B.I. but sometimes whole pages—is
sThe degree of compliance with my
from 1924 until his death,in 1972. blacked out. The usual reason given
1requestsvariedgreatlyboth in respect
Hoover started his career in the Justice
for such censorship-or for denial of to time and in respect to what was
Department in 1917; two years later,
he began providing Attorney General
contained in a clause concerning the
emore delay and denial during the Rea-
A.Mitchell Palmer with research and
release of documents in Title5of theg
ganPresidency than at any other time
eanalysisfor theinfamousanti-radi-
United States Code,Section 552(b)since 1966,when Congress enacted
1cal raids. The structure that Hoover
(1). The exemption reads, “Informa-
the Freedom of Information statute. .built up, first in the Alien Enemy Bu-
tion which is currently and properly
Sometimes the F.B.I. has been more
ereau and later in the DomesticIntelli-
classified pursuant toExecutive Order. helpful than the C.I.A.or the State
gence Division, has never been disman-
12356 in the interest of the national
Department. For instance, the State
tled. defense or foreign policy,for example,
Department waited almost two and a
information involving intelligence
half years before releasing a thirty-
HE F.B.I.'s dossier on Sinclair
sources or methods. But there are a five-year-old document concerning
Lewis(1885-1951) runs to a
dozen other exemptions that can be Peari Buck.In some cases,I am still
hundred and fifty pages; it had been
used to censor material in a dossier.waiting to receive records more than a heavily censored before Igot a copy of

--- PAGE BREAK ---51
it.Lewis, the first American to win
the Nobel Prize in Literature,in 1930,
was born in Sauk Centre,Minnesota,
and frequently found his themes in
small-town hypocrisy and puritanism.

Then, in the nineteen-thirties, Lewis
warned against homegrown Fascism
in his novel “It Can't Happen Here."
At least one memorandumin.the
Lewis fle reveals Director Hoover's
political predilections: the author was
among thosewho were being watched
by the F.B.I.

because they supported
President Franklin D.Roosevelt when
he was running for a fourth term, in
1944.

The F.B.I.

also took a peripheral
interest in a book club becauseLewis
was involved with it.When the Read-
ers Club was started,by the publisher
George Macy, an F.B.I.

report noted
that on March 5,1941, prospective
members received an open letter on the
stationery of “Clifton Fadiman, Sin-
clair Lewis, Carl Van Doren,Alexan-
der Woollcott," along with a four-
page circular.

Over a year later, on
July 17, 1942, the F.B.I.

was still
keeping tabs on the club.

The docu-
ments reveal that under a number
of false names the F.B.I.

subscribed
to the club to find out what was be-
ing distributed and by whom.The
F.B.I.'s Birmingham office received
two letters with pamphlets enclosed
that solicited membership.Since the
letters were addressed to the fictitious
names used by the Bureau for the sub-
"I almost fell off the treadmill"
scriptions,it appeared that the publica-
tion‘InFact'furnished a mailinglist
to‘The Readers Club,” the report
says.The docu-
ments reveal that under a number
of false names the F.B.I.

subscribed
to the club to find out what was be-
ing distributed and by whom.The
F.B.I.'s Birmingham office received
two letters with pamphlets enclosed
that solicited membership.Since the
letters were addressed to the fictitious
names used by the Bureau for the sub-
"I almost fell off the treadmill"
scriptions,it appeared that the publica-
tion‘InFact'furnished a mailinglist
to‘The Readers Club,” the report
says.

In Fact was a newsletter, ed- dom House,was deemed “incendiary”ence should be made to the McCar-
ited and published by the muckraking
by an informant because “Lewis dis- ran Committee, nor should there be
journalist George Seldes, that started cusses the Negro question in a manner any indication that the documents
in 1940 and regularly criticized the which, according to [name deleted], is emanated from G-2"—Army Intelli-
shortcomings of the American press;itintended to inflame Negroes againstg
gence.

on the book club continues,“From a stated to be ‘propaganda for the white F.B.I.

fle reveal that G-2 had been
The documents included in the
review of these pamphlets,it appearedman’s acceptance of the Negro as a carrying on a detailed investigation
that‘The Readers Club’ would be social equal.

into Lewis's affliations and writings
similarin operation to the well-known
In 1951,the Senate Internal Secu- for a long time—possibly even longer
Book of the Month Club.'The Com-rity Subcommittee, then headed by than theF.B.I.had.

One reference
mittee designated to select the books Senator Patrick McCarran, Democrat stamped “SecRET”goes back to 1928.

that were to be made available to the of Nevada,was given material It shows that Lewis was a member of
members of the club included Sinclair stamped “SEcRET”and labelled“Re: an international committee that en-
Lewis."
Sinclair Lewis Security Matter-C” dorsed an announcement sent out by
In 1947, according to the F.B.I.--- PAGE BREAK ---

One reference
mittee designated to select the books Senator Patrick McCarran, Democrat stamped “SecRET”goes back to 1928. that were to be made available to the of Nevada,was given material It shows that Lewis was a member of
members of the club included Sinclair stamped “SEcRET”and labelled“Re: an international committee that en-
Lewis."
Sinclair Lewis Security Matter-C” dorsed an announcement sent out by
In 1947, according to the F.B.I. Senator McCarran was co-author of the Viking Press concerning the publi-
files, the bureau received a letter from the McCarran-Walter Act,which is cation ofThe Letters of Sacco and
a correspondent in Madera, Califor- still used to bar foreign writers from Vanzetti." In 1929, a censored source
nia, calling Hoover's attention to the United States because of their in Philadelphia reported to the F.B.I. Lewis’s novel “Kingsblood Royal"
political beliefs andwritings.Thethat Lewis's name appeared in a list of
and branding it“the most incendiary
Lewis paragraphs thatmight explainmembers of a book committee of the
book" since "Uncle Tom’s Cabin.”
why he was a “C”(F.B.I. short- American Society for Cultural Rela-
An F.B.I. memorandum to Assistant hand for “Communist")
security
tions with Russia. A 1941 Los Ange-
Attorney General Theron L. Caudle
ecase are blacked out.The material
les report to the F.B.I. names him as a
says that the novel, published by Ran- in the Lewis fle says that “no refer-
memberofvarious other committees

--- PAGE BREAK ---54
OCTOBER5,1987
for cultural exchange with Russia.lance by the Office of Special Investi- Earth." The file does not reveal
The F.B.I.

dossier includes a sum- gations, the Inspector General, De- whether she ever took up his offer.

mary of a 1929 pamphlet, entitled
partment of the Air Force.In a report Mrs.Buck aroused the F.B.I.

in
“Cheap and Contented Labor,” that stamped“SecRET” the Directorate of 1941 and 1942,after the Bureau dis-
was written by Lewis and was pub- Intelligence,Headquarters U.S.A.F.,
,covered that she had written a pam-
lished by the United Textile Workers notes,
“The fles of several reliable phlet, called“Freedom for All,”for
of America and theWomen’s Trade
egovernment agencies refect SINCLAIR the Post War World Council—an or-
Union League of Philadelphia.

In the LEwis to be a member and sponsor of ganization based in New York that
pamphlet Lewis wrote, “There could many Communist-Front organiza- advocated racial justice and democ-
only be one answer on the part of tions, including The American Soci-
workers—a militant and universal or- ety for Cultural Relations with Russia, her F.B.I.dossier.

In one section she
-racy.

The pamphlet found its way into
ganization of trade unions.” In the Motion Picture Artists Committee,
wrote,“The discriminations of the
same year that Lewis received the North American Committee to Aid
Nobel’Prize,his name turned up be-
American army and navy and the air
Spanish Democracy and The Medical
fore a House Special Committee toF
forces against colored soldiers and
Bureau to Aid Spanish Democracy."
sailors, the exclusion of colored labor
Investigate Communist Activities,be-
By the middle of 1951, the Lewis in our defense industries and trade
correspondent of the Federated Press, F.B.I.recommended that the material are of the greatest aid today to our
a news service that published Labor about him be placed in a“Correlation
News.

The committe also identified Summary.The pamphlet found its way into
ganization of trade unions.” In the Motion Picture Artists Committee,
wrote,“The discriminations of the
same year that Lewis received the North American Committee to Aid
Nobel’Prize,his name turned up be-
American army and navy and the air
Spanish Democracy and The Medical
fore a House Special Committee toF
forces against colored soldiers and
Bureau to Aid Spanish Democracy."
sailors, the exclusion of colored labor
Investigate Communist Activities,be-
By the middle of 1951, the Lewis in our defense industries and trade
correspondent of the Federated Press, F.B.I.recommended that the material are of the greatest aid today to our
a news service that published Labor about him be placed in a“Correlation
News.

The committe also identified Summary.

This summary showed remarks about race prejudice-she also
1enemy in Asia,Japan.”Mrs.Buck’s
him as a member of the American “no information indicating that Sin-
Birth Control League, which pub- clair Lewis has been involved in espio- War ended, colonialism would also
wrotethatafterthe'SecondWorld
lished Birth Control Review.Four of nage activities or that any current es-have to end,because “"the deep patience
pionage investigation is warranted.” of colored peoples is at an end’
“Main Street,”Babbitt,” and “Ar-After tracking him for nearly a quar-
—caused the person who sent the
cause they were distributed by the in Europe, the F.B.I., the Army， and otage”and “Lies”over her words.

pamphlet to the F.B.I.to scrawl“Sab-
WorkersLibrary,an organization that the Air Force had failed to catch their
Hoover and his associates seem to
put out cheap paperback editions for man doing anything illegal.

workers.In its catalogue theWorkers
have equated Mrs.Buck's views on
Library was described as a means of
HE file on Pearl Buck (1892- der the heading “Communist Aflia-
racial equality with Communism.Un-
1973), whose name appears intion” in her fle, an F.B.I.pamphlet to the F.B.I.to scrawl“Sab-
WorkersLibrary,an organization that the Air Force had failed to catch their
Hoover and his associates seem to
put out cheap paperback editions for man doing anything illegal.

workers.In its catalogue theWorkers
have equated Mrs.Buck's views on
Library was described as a means of
HE file on Pearl Buck (1892- der the heading “Communist Aflia-
racial equality with Communism.Un-
1973), whose name appears intion” in her fle, an F.B.I.

memoran-
the bosses,against the misleaders of State Department,the Army, and the lieved from the information available
labor,and against the system that is at Navy,is even thicker than that on that Mrs.Buck is a Communist,her
the root of exploitation, oppression,Lewis.

Two hundred and three pages active support of all programs advocat-
and war.”It seems unlikely that any- were released to me, and I was denied ing racial equality has led her to asso-
one associated with the House com- seventy-seven pages.

Mrs.

Buck's file ciate with many known Communists
mitte had read the Lewis novels to see begins in 1938the year that she won and other individuals of varying
how their themes matched the aims of the Nobel Prize—when, that Septem- shades of political opinions.More-
the Workers Library.

ber,Hoover invited her to take a spe- over,her membership in the American
Lewis's name is fiagged as a member
cial tour of F.B.I.facilities in Wash-Civil Liberties Union was listed under
of the North American Commite to ington.

In his invitation he mentioned “Communist Front Organizations.

Aid Spanish Democracy and is also
thathe admired her novelTheGood
mentioned in a 1951 list of sponsors of
Mrs.

Buck's mail was monitored.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Aid Spanish Democracy and is also
thathe admired her novelTheGood
mentioned in a 1951 list of sponsors of
Mrs. Buck's mail was monitored. Her file reads, “On May 25 and
the Motion Picture Artists (Spanish
July 4,1944,the Offce of Censorship
Aid)for medical help to the Loyalists
advised the Bureau that Pearl Buck
inthe Spanish Civil War.His file
shows that in 1937 his name appeared
hadreceived copies of the publication
Voks’ through the mail from Soviet
inan advertisementin theNewYork
Russia." A comic strip, too, was stud-
Times appealing for contributions to
ied by the F.B.I. and became a suspi-
buymedical supplies for the American
cious fact in her dossier:“The East
Base Hospital outside Madrid. To the Lewis file in 1939 was added
and West Association,of which Pearl
Buck is President, cooperates in the
an article from PeoplesWorld in
which he praised his wife,the journal-
preparation ofa comic sheet entitled
The Twain Shall Meet.'This copy-
ist Dorothy Thompson,for a written
righted feature has for its purpose the
slap against the German-American
featuring of understanding between
Bund and its leader, Fritz Kuhn, who
peoples of the world. While no infor-
had conducted a pro-Nazi meeting in
New York.Lewis is quoted: "These
mation has been received that this
comic strip is Communist propaganda,
gangsters are trying to corrupt
it is definitely the type ofmaterial the
America.It is astounding that such
Communist Party would capitalize on
meetings are permitted in this country. What will happen next?'s
and use if possible. The F.B.I. notes, in a memoran-
In 1950, Lewis came under surveil-
get
dum dated February 27,1952, from

--- PAGE BREAK ---THENEWYORKER
55
thePhiladelphiaoffice toHoover in
The censored pages in her fle con- has been conducted” of “William
Washington，“No interview is con- tinued right up to her death.

After I Faulkner, born Sept.24, 1897, New
templated at this time since it is felt appealed to the Army for the denied Albany, Miss.” The document then
that such an interview of a person of
material,the Army
Intelligence and
quotes this information from the bu-
Mrs.

Buck's prominence might result S
Security Command at Fort Meade, reau’s Faulkner file:
in repercussions and adverse publicityMaryland,released a copy of an anti-
“A confidential informant who has
for the Bureau."However,theF.B.I.draft letter Mrs.Buck had written inf
furnished reliable information in the
refused to give up its opinions, as if to
o1952 on behalf of the Women's Inter-
past advised in March, 1951, that the
prove that the years spent in pursuing
nationalLeagueforPeace andFree-
Civil Rights Congress headquarters in
her proved something.Lacking a case,
the file notes,“She was described as an Acting Judge Advocate General, in p
pleasure with the work of a commit-
outspoken person whose political sym- denying my appeal for access to the tee of women which included the pro-
pathies at times paralleled those of theNavy'sPearlBuck documents,in-
curing ofa statementfrom William
Communist Party."
formed me,“Even after the passage of
fFaulkner,Nobel Prize winner,in be-
Once her name was on record, the
e34 years,release of the withheld infor-
half of Willie McGee.It is tobe noted
bureau kept track of her personal life.

mation wouldjeopardize theGovern-
thatWillie McGee was convicted of
In 1958, she and her husband adopted
ment’s interest in preventing the un-
raping a woman in Laurel,Missis-
an eight-year-old child who was half
warranted invasion of personal privacy
sippi, in 1945 and sentenced to die.

Japanese, half black.

The F.B.I.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Japanese, half black. The F.B.I. saw
ofanindividualaboutwhom theGov-
Numerous appeals were fled, the last
fittoincludein her flea clippingfrom
ernmentmaintains informationin itsof which was to theUnited States
the NewYorkHerald Tribune about
tfiles."
Supreme Court in March, 1951,at
the adoption.In response to a name
which time the full Supreme Court
check of American Nobel laureates,
HEdossier onWilliamFaulkner
refused to review the case.McGee was
the F.B.I.informed the White House
(1897-1962） is comparatively
executed on May 8,1951.The Civil
about all the things it found suspicious
light—eighteen pages, part of which
Rights Congress had been designated
about Mrs.Buck’s beliefs:“"This Bu-
concerns his views on politics and civil
by the Attorney General of theUnited
reau's fles contain many allegations
rights. An F.B.I. document dated
States pursuant to Executive Order
March 12, 1957—eight years after
10450—designated,that is, as a
speeches has been against universal
Faulkner received the Nobel Prize-
Communist or Communist-front orga-
military training, militarism, racial
informs an F.B.I. aide (a copy being
nization. segregation,and has been critical of sent to the State Department) that“no
A name check was made on Faulk-
the government of Chiang Kai-shek.”investigation pertinent to your inquiry ner in 1961 for Attorney General
Ballantines
FINEST BLENDED SCOTCH WHISKY
"Aftertherecent outbreakof burglaries,
Ihad astate-of-the-art security
systeminstalled.Butwhen the
billcameIrealizedlhadbeen
robbed anyway.Luckily Ballantine's
is stillagood value
The more you know about Scotch, the more you like Ballantine's. Blended Scotch Whisk 86 Proof. Bottled in Scotand, Imported by21Brands, Inc., Nw brk, NY  1987

--- PAGE BREAK ---56
Robert F.Kennedy.No reason for the munist and a drunk.Furthermore,he
name check was given,other than that had once committed the unpardonable
the request for it originated with sin of calling the F.B.I.“the Ameri-
Richard N.

Goodwin, then a member can Gestapo.” An F.B.I.

memoran-
likely that Faulkner and other Nobelinvestigations began to show a marked
laureates were being scrutinized beforehostility to the Cuban Police and in a
being invited to the Executive Man-lesser degree to the F.B.I.

sion.

The information on Faulkner
Of necessity,Hemingway's opera-
that was supplied to Attorney Generaltion was political.His informants were
Kennedy included Faulkner's state-
recruitedfromamongLoyalist refu-
ment in behalf of WillieMcGee to thegees he knewwho had fed theFranco
Civil Rights Congress.

In addition,
dictatorship.He enlisted them to keep
the name check included a list of a an eye on the pro-Franco Spaniards in
number of other Nobel laureates in Cuba,who sided with the Axis.

various fields.Seven of them had pre-
Spruille Braden,the American Am-
viously received similar checks,and
bassador to Cuba,authorized Heming-
THENEW1987-88
their names existed in the F.B.I.

files;
way to set uphis own network,gave
STEUBEN CATALOGUE
onewomanwas singled out as a
him nearly a thousand dollars amonth
“prominent Quaker pacifist."”
to pay his men, and arranged for him
QUAIL BY PAUL SCHULZE
toreceive an allotment of fuel,which
HE F.B.I.'s file on Ernest Hem-
was scarce.In his postwar memoirs
120 pages ofbrilliant giftideas and selections
ingway (1899-1961) apparently
Braden wrote that Hemingway had
for collectors.Prices from$125.Please enclose
was opened in October of 1942,but built up an excellent network and had
check for $5.00 with this coupon.

there is evidence in the documents that
Mail toSteuben Glass,Dept.C,Fifth Avenue
done “an A-one job."
at56thStreet，NewYork，NewYork10022.files;
way to set uphis own network,gave
STEUBEN CATALOGUE
onewomanwas singled out as a
him nearly a thousand dollars amonth
“prominent Quaker pacifist."”
to pay his men, and arranged for him
QUAIL BY PAUL SCHULZE
toreceive an allotment of fuel,which
HE F.B.I.'s file on Ernest Hem-
was scarce.In his postwar memoirs
120 pages ofbrilliant giftideas and selections
ingway (1899-1961) apparently
Braden wrote that Hemingway had
for collectors.Prices from$125.Please enclose
was opened in October of 1942,but built up an excellent network and had
check for $5.00 with this coupon.

there is evidence in the documents that
Mail toSteuben Glass,Dept.C,Fifth Avenue
done “an A-one job."
at56thStreet，NewYork，NewYork10022.

the Bureau, the State Department, and
While Hemingway
ywaswatching
other agencies had been tracking his
sthe pro-Fascist elements on the island,
Name
activities when he was a correspondent
Leddy was watching Hemingway.In
Address
and Loyalist supporter during
the Hemingway file is a letter stamped
City
Spanish Civil War.

"CONFIDENTIAL"
State
from Hoover to
Zip
Q2
While Hemingway was living in
Leddy,dated December17,1942,that
STEUBEN CLASS.

Cuba, during the Second World War, says,“Any information which you
he created what he called his Crookmay haverelating to the unreliability
Factory.

This was a group of twenty-
of Ernest Hemingway as an informant
Onland,at sea,and underwater.

six informants, six working full time may be discreetly brought to the atten-
NAVIGATOR
and openly,and twenty undercover, to tion of Ambassador Braden."Another
provideintelligenceinformationforletter fromHoover toLeddy says that
WATCH
the American Ambassador in Havana Hemingway's “judgment is not of the
only
and possibly to spot German subma- best, and if his sobriety is the same as it
$49.5*
rines operating in the
was some years ago,
Caribbean.

Heming-
that is certainly ques-
*Butread the
way used his fishing
tionable."
adfor aneven
boat, the Pilar, for
In 1943,Hoover
better deal!six informants, six working full time may be discreetly brought to the atten-
NAVIGATOR
and openly,and twenty undercover, to tion of Ambassador Braden."Another
provideintelligenceinformationforletter fromHoover toLeddy says that
WATCH
the American Ambassador in Havana Hemingway's “judgment is not of the
only
and possibly to spot German subma- best, and if his sobriety is the same as it
$49.5*
rines operating in the
was some years ago,
Caribbean.

Heming-
that is certainly ques-
*Butread the
way used his fishing
tionable."
adfor aneven
boat, the Pilar, for
In 1943,Hoover
better deal!

patrolling, and he
asked D.

M.Ladd, one
Beware of similar
received some help
looking imita-
of his top aides in
tions.

There is only
Narigator" is
from the Embassy.

ponwered by a tiny
Washington, for an-
one genuine
Navigator
mercury cell.It uwill
The Crook Factory
last 18months before
othermemorandum on
Watch.

you'll need to replace it.

was dissolved in April
Hemingway.

"Mr.

teered by anultra-accurate quartzmove-
of 1943, and replaced
Hemingway, it will be
ment,Navigator shows time in12 hr./24
hr.modes.It has analog/digital display,
by military intelli-
noted,has been con-
calendareadoutlamwithabli
gence agents, but
nected with various so-
nal, and stopwatch/chronograph withinter-
rupt”andlap’modes.Light switch to
Hemingway continued
called Communist
illuminate display.With unscratchable
to patrol on the Pilar,
mineral glass crystal,adjustable-link steel
front organizations
band，and exclusive ratcheted safety bezel.

withmachine guns and
and was active in aid-
Navigator is accurate to5 sec./month and
grenades supplied by the Navy.

Such
ing the Loyalist cause in Spain,
waterproof to 150 ft.

activities apparently irritated Hoover,
Ladd’s report says.

“Despite Heming-
Navigator costs $49.95 and is available in
blackmatte and silvertone executions.Buy
and in 1942 the F.B.1.--- PAGE BREAK ---

activities apparently irritated Hoover,
Ladd’s report says. “Despite Heming-
Navigator costs $49.95 and is available in
blackmatte and silvertone executions.Buy
and in 1942 the F.B.1. began a cam- way’s activities, no information has
two (2) for S99.90 and we'll send you a third
paign to discredit Hemingway.Hoo- been receivedwhich would definitely
one withourcompliments-absolutelyFREE! Take advantage of this outstanding offer. ver,the documents disclose,considered tie him with the Communist Party or
Ordebylf013b
him not a patriot trying to help his which would indicate that he is or has
vertone.UPS/Insurance:S5.95for one,S6.95for three
country at war but a rival.The infor-
been a Party member.His actions,
watches.30-day return,1y.warranty. mation that Hemingway turnedup
however,have indicated thathis views
haverhills
was downgraded by Raymond Leddy, are ‘liberal’and that he may be in-
the legal attache in the Embassy, who
clined favorably to Communist poli-
was Hoover's man in Havana. Hem- tical philosophies. 131 Townsend, San Francisco, CA 94107. ingway was accused of being a Com-
Hoover and his aides then decided to

--- PAGE BREAK ---OCTOBER5,1987
denigrate Hemingway as an intel-
ligence rival by Red-baiting him.

Hemingway's dossier includes a four-
teen-page single-spaced and heavily
censored memorandum,dated April
27,1943, that contains the heading
“Possible Connections with Commu-
nist Party.”After calling Hemingway
a“specialty writer”for the Commu-
nist Daily Worker and a“NewYork”
writer—both descriptions were untrue
—the memorandum says, “In the fall
of 1940 Hemingway’s name was in-
cluded in a group of names of individ-
ualswhowere said tobeengaged in
Communist activities.These individu-
als were reported to occupy positions
on the‘intellectual front”and were
For more than two centuries, travellers have journeyed
said to render valuable service as prop-
to‘take thewaters’atWhiteSulphurSprings.Now a
agandists.According to the informant,
those whose names were included on
new Spa experience awaits you at The Greenbrier.

thislistloaned theireffortspolitically
as writers, artists and speakers and
traveled throughout the country sup-
Our newmultimillion dollar,25,000 square foot spa
porting and takingpartin Communist
offers the finest in contemporary programs.

front meetings and in the program of
Traditional mineral baths and sprays, herbal and
the Party generally.

They were al-
leged to be particularly active in the
European seaweed body wraps, massages and facials
then paramount Communist Party ob-
all to revitalize your body, and your spirit.

jective,namely,defeat of the prepared-
ness program.?"
The effort to link him to the Com-
Come,immerse yourself in the beauty and
munist Party continued:“Hemingway,
luxury of total pampering and enjoy all
according toaconfidential sourcewho
the legendary amenities of The Greenbrier.

furnished information on October 4,
1941,was one of the ‘heads’ of the
ForreservationsorinformationonSpaPackages
Committee for Medical Aid to the So-
call toll free,800-624-6070 or(304)536-1110.

viet Union.--- PAGE BREAK ---

furnished information on October 4,
1941,was one of the ‘heads’ of the
ForreservationsorinformationonSpaPackages
Committee for Medical Aid to the So-
call toll free,800-624-6070 or(304)536-1110. viet Union. This informant alleged
that the above-mentioned committee
was backed by the Communist Party. Again:“In January,1942, it was re-
ported that the American Russian
Cultural Association, Inc., of New
York City, put out a small pamphlet
soliciting support.The name of Ernest
Hemingway appeared therein as a
member of theBoard of Honorary Ad-
visers. This group was purportedly or-
ganized to foster better relations be-
tween the United States and Russia."
The F.B.I.'s file notes that Heming-
way took part in the Second American
Writers Congress,onJune 4,1937,in
Carnegie Hall, with Archibald Mac-
Leish presiding. The F.B.I. was
there, too.A“confidential source”re-
ported at that time that “Hemingway
was close to the Communist Party，
but said he had “no knowledge of
Deenbrier
The
Hemingway’s actual membership. Hemingway was also mentioned as a
vice-president and member of the
board of directors of the League of
WHITESULPHURSPRINGS
American Writers,Inc.,“which is re-
WESTVIRGINIA24986
ACSX Resort
portedly a Communist Front organi-
zation.” In 1941, that organization

--- PAGE BREAK ---THENEWYORKER
59
“solicited financial aid for those indi- lic opinion in matters not related to Hemingway’s attitude toward Cuba
viduals”who had fought with the writing,it is the recommendation of and theCastro government.Returning
Loyalists in the Spanish Civil War.

the Legal Attache at Havana that great to his house outside Havana in 1959
Another “confidential informant” ind
discretion be exercised in avoiding anafter a visit to Spain,Hemingway said
the same year reported that Heming-
incident with Ernest Hemingway.

that he hopedCubans would not
way had‘broken all ties with the
Tamm did not concur.“I don’t care regard him as a “Yanqui”and that he
Communists."
what his contacts are or what his
“kissed”a Cuban fag.“Hemingway’s
15
The section of the dossier which
background is—I see no reason why
remarks have been strongly played by
follows is labelled “Mexican Trip."It
we should make any effort to avoid
Prensa Latina,and given wide publici-
is totally censored—a strong indica-
exposing him for the phoney_that hetylocally,Minister-CounsellorDan-
tion that Hemingway
wasbeing
is, he states in a note, dated June 21, iel M.Braddock reports.“It is unfor-
watched by F.B.I.

informants and
1943,at the bottom of Carson’s mem- tunate that a person of his position and
probably Customs officials whenever
he crossed an American border or
travelled to Africa or Europe.

certainly if in the protection of the criticism of his Government and com-
In 1943, a dispute developed
1be-
Bureau's interest it is necessary to meet
patriots, or (2) a remarkable ignorance
tween two Hoover aides,C.H.

Carson
him head-on,I don't think we should
concerning developments
sinCuba
and E.A.

Tamm, about whether some try to avoid such an issue."
since the first of the year.”
sort of action should.be taken against
Four years after the end of the war,
In 1961, after Hemingway took his
Hemingway.Carson recommended
the F.B.I.

furnished a name check on
1own life, the F.B.I.Tamm, about whether some try to avoid such an issue."
since the first of the year.”
sort of action should.be taken against
Four years after the end of the war,
In 1961, after Hemingway took his
Hemingway.Carson recommended
the F.B.I.

furnished a name check on
1own life, the F.B.I.

found it worth-
caution.In a memorandum he notes,
Hemingway to the Secretary of De- while to add to its fle a comment by
"The Legal Attaché at Havana ex-
fense.It repeated much of thematerial
1the columnist Westbrook Pegler,a
presses his belief that Hemingway is
about his hostility to the F.B.I.——say-
Hoover favorite,from the New York
fundamentally hostile to the F.B.1.

ing that he had called the bureau
Journal-American of July 19,1961.

andmight readily endeavor at any
“anti-Liberal, pro-Fascist, and dan-
“It has been my stubborn opinion that
time to cause trouble for us.Because of
gerous of developing into an AmericanErnest Hemingway was actually one
his peculiar nature, it is the belief of
Gestapo"—and noted his affliations.of the worst writers in the English
the Legal Attache that Hemingway
his time,” Pegler
would go to greatlengths to embarrass
Spanish refugees.

wrote.It can be conceded that he
the Bureau if an incident should arise.

The F.B.l.fle also includes a 1959
invented a‘style.”But to me it was an
In view of his prestige as a literary
memorandum from the Embassy in
1ugly style,so barren of ordinary liter-
man, accepted by large sections of pub-
Havana to theStateDepartment aboutary embellishment or amenity thatit
Free Offer!

RegularApprox.5/8"Deep
Deluxe
Approx.

1” Deep Imperial
Approx.2"Deep
Receive a FREE 100%
How to Choose a Wool Mattress Pad
MerinoWoolDustingMitt
($9value)with your order.

OursoftMerinoWoolMitt
for a Better Night's Sleep.

removes dust without
scratchingyourfurniture.

OurRegularpadprovides a gentle layer of
refund (in full) or exchange.

Offer expires 12/31/87.

softness.Our Deluxe is approx.1 deep.Both
Fast Delivery:We ship within 24-48hours.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Offer expires 12/31/87. softness.Our Deluxe is approx.1 deep.Both
Fast Delivery:We ship within 24-48hours. have our exclusivefitted sheet design.Our
FREE
30 Down Comforter Styles
Imperialisthe ultimate incomfort,with easy-
Down Pillows
on,easy-off anchor bands.Machine washable. OurGuarantee:Ifyou'renot completely
TOORDERORTOREQUESTA
satisfiedwithyourwoolpad，call our tollfree
FREECATALOGCALLTOLLFREE
number.Wellsend aUPS truck-at our
1-800-356-9367,Ext.32H. 1987 The Company Store
expense — to pick it up, and we'll send you a
Call 24hours a day,7 days a week,ruse our coupon. 100%MerinoWoolMattressPads
Color:Natural
Use your credit card. OR ORDER BY MAIL:
Regular
Deluxe
M.C. VISA Am. Exp. Diners Club Check
Imperiall
Style#
Style#
Style#
Acct.#
Exp.Date
Size
Dimensions
M528
M511
M510
STYLE#
SIZE
QTY
xPRICE$
$=
STYLE#
SIZE
QTY
XPRICE$
$=
Crib
28"×52"
$29
$39
$49
Send myFREE Merino Wool
Delivery in MN-6% Tax, IL-5% Tax =$
Twin
39"×75"
$49
$69
66$
Dusting Mitt
Ship.,Hdlg.,& Ins-$5 pad/$2.50 crib =$
LongTwin
39"×80"
$79
*Federal Express Service =$
* We ship UPS Ground Service
TOTAL =$
Full
54"×75"
$69
$89
$129
For delivery in WI-5% Tax =$
Queen
60"×80"
$89
$109
$159
Total for delivery in WI $
King
Name
76"×80*
$109
$139
$199
Address. Calif.King
72"×84"
$115
$145
$209
City,State,Zip
Dimensions for Imperial are 78”x80“
Send to:The CompanyStore,Dept.32H,5oo company Store Road
La Cr0sse,W154601.Phone Toll Free 1-800-356-9367,Ext.32H.

--- PAGE BREAK ---60
Steinbeck's book “Grapes of Wrath”
was among the periodicals and books sold
from the literature table at a Communist
Party May Day meeting held on May 1,
1940,in Los Angeles, California [source
censored].

A booklet announcing the courses of the
WorkersSchoolof NewYork City,official
Communist Party school,for the winter
term,1943,stated that the works oflead
ing dramatic writers,including Steinbeck,
would be used in the discussions of history
of social institutions as they had been re-
fected by writers of all times.

The source was the California Com-
mittee on Un-American Activities,a
Red-hunting body that smeared repu-
tations with an even broader brush
than the House Committee on Un-
American Activities in Washington
C'MON,OPEN
did; it was therefore a frequently cited
MONYIian
source in the F.B.I.

files.

YOU'RE IN THERE!

During March 1945,a copy of a recom-
OH,MY GOD!

mended reading list used by the American
IT'SMY
Youth for Democracy (cited by the Attor-
HUSBAND!

ney General) indicated that listed books
wereavailable from the NewJersey State
offce of that organization at a discount.

This list included Steinbeck's“The Moon
IsDown."
[The informant's name is
blacked out,but the source is otherwise
listed as“state headquarters of the Com-
ROACH
munist Political Association,Newark,
S.GRoSs
New Jersey."]
Motele
The file does not mention that “The
Moon Is Down”is about the Norwe-
gian resistance to the Nazi occupation.

The Steinbeck file notes that the
House Un-American Activities Com-
was confused and often incomprehen-
some."Biddle forwarded the letter to
mittee was on record as saying that the
sible."
Hoover, and Hoover replied that
tNational MaritimeUnion ofAmerica
Steinbeck “is not being and has never
“"toed the Communist Party line,”and
UST as the F.B.I.applied its own
been investigated."
the F.B.I.This list included Steinbeck's“The Moon
IsDown."
[The informant's name is
blacked out,but the source is otherwise
listed as“state headquarters of the Com-
ROACH
munist Political Association,Newark,
S.GRoSs
New Jersey."]
Motele
The file does not mention that “The
Moon Is Down”is about the Norwe-
gian resistance to the Nazi occupation.

The Steinbeck file notes that the
House Un-American Activities Com-
was confused and often incomprehen-
some."Biddle forwarded the letter to
mittee was on record as saying that the
sible."
Hoover, and Hoover replied that
tNational MaritimeUnion ofAmerica
Steinbeck “is not being and has never
“"toed the Communist Party line,”and
UST as the F.B.I.applied its own
been investigated."
the F.B.I.

goes on to report, “These
idiosyncratic standards in trying to
Such covering up was usual when
ships of the American Merchant Ma-
judge Hemingway,its dossier on John
Hoover was confronted by one of his
srine are being supplied with libraries
Steinbeck (1902-68) reveals an effort
ttheoretical superiorsin theJusticeDe-for theseamen toreadwhileat
to challenge Steinbeck's Americanism
partment.The phrase“has never been sea....John Steinbeck’s‘Grapes of
and to judge him negatively because he
wrote about social and economic jus-
Steinbeck was not being watched, and would be in any
Communist selec-
writing about such subjects made the F.B.1.

had maintained a detailed made on June 2, 1953,by an admitted
Steinbeck a radical,and suspect.The record on him.It simply indicated that former
F.B.I.goes on to report, “These
idiosyncratic standards in trying to
Such covering up was usual when
ships of the American Merchant Ma-
judge Hemingway,its dossier on John
Hoover was confronted by one of his
srine are being supplied with libraries
Steinbeck (1902-68) reveals an effort
ttheoretical superiorsin theJusticeDe-for theseamen toreadwhileat
to challenge Steinbeck's Americanism
partment.The phrase“has never been sea....John Steinbeck’s‘Grapes of
and to judge him negatively because he
wrote about social and economic jus-
Steinbeck was not being watched, and would be in any
Communist selec-
writing about such subjects made the F.B.1.

had maintained a detailed made on June 2, 1953,by an admitted
Steinbeck a radical,and suspect.The record on him.It simply indicated that former
F.B.I.

provided ninety-four pages from theBureau had not rolled out its heavy who testified before the House Un-
Communist Party member,
its file on Steinbeck but withheld artillery fora full-scale investigation.American Activities Committe that
twenty-three pages; the Army gave up
In the'F.B.I.fle on Steinbeck, this “Steinbeck has done more through his
twenty-one pages; the C.I.A., which
heading, dated March 10,1954, ap- novel about the agricultural workers
had two documents,withheld them
pears:Instances Wherein America’s than anyone else for the Communist
entirely,on the ground of “national
Enemies Have Used or Attempted to
defense or foreign policy."
Use Steinbeck’sWritings and Reputa-
Steinbeck came under scrutiny even
Steinbeck was one of the few Amer-.

tion to Further Their Causes."
before he wrote “The Grapes of
ican writers who suspected that F.B.1.

A number of examples are given of
Wrath." His fle notes, “During the
sFall of 1936 a group of liberal and
no idea of the extent of the surveil- to the republic.--- PAGE BREAK ---

tion to Further Their Causes."
before he wrote “The Grapes of
ican writers who suspected that F.B.1. A number of examples are given of
Wrath." His fle notes, “During the
sFall of 1936 a group of liberal and
no idea of the extent of the surveil- to the republic. The file reads, in part:
：communistic writers issueda call for a
lance.In his file is a letter he wrote to
Bureau files refect that becausemany of
fconference to be held in San Fran-
Attorney General Francis Biddle in
Steinbeck's writings portrayed an ex-
cisco, California, on November 13,
1942 that reads, in part,“Do you
tremely sordid andpoverty-stricken side of
1936,which conference continued
suppose you could ask Edgar's boys to
American life,they were reprinted in both
German and Russian and used by the Na-
throughout the following day. This
stop stepping on my heels?They think
zis and Soviets as propaganda against
report indicated that one of the
I am an enemy alien. It's getting tire-
America.... sponsors of this Congress was John

--- PAGE BREAK ---on my heels?They think
zis and Soviets as propaganda against
report indicated that one of the
I am an enemy alien. It's getting tire-
America.... sponsors of this Congress was John

--- PAGE BREAK ---

62
OCTOBER5,1987
Steinbeck."It was customary for the
Doing the Elbow Beach
F.B.I. to make no distinction between
liberal and Communist writers, so its
report did not specify into which
group Steinbeck supposedly fell.
Like most major American writers,
Steinbeck belonged to writers’organi-
zations. The file shows that he was a
contributor--
-along with four hundred
and seventeen other American writers
toa pamphlet called Writers Take
Sides,” published by the League of
Onthebiggest,
American Writers in New York in
silkiestdancefloor
1938. These were letters in support of
inBermuda.Relax
the Loyalists during the Spanish Civil
ina34-acretropical
War.(A similar pamphlet,“Authors
gardendottedwith
Take Sides on the Spanish War,
privatelodgings,a
1937, was published by writers and
grand hoteland
poets of England, Scotland, Ireland,
achoiceof
and Wales. Among the many distin-
great
restaurants-
guished authors writing for the Span-
theonlyprivatebeach
ish Republic and against the Franco
thatcomeswitha
insurgents were W. H. Auden,
completeresort.
Samuel Beckett,Cyril Connolly,Ford
Madox Ford,Aldous Huxley, Sean
O'Casey, V. S. Pritchett,
Herbert
ForReservationsCallTollFree,DirecrtoBermuda,800-223-7434.
Read,and Stephen Spender.) Steinbeck
THE ELBOW BEACHHOTEL
was named president of one of the
anti-Franco groups in this country.
BERMUDA
He was also one of the signers of a
Eibow BeachHotelPaget,Bermuda.JohnRJefferis,VicePresident
letter urging the United States to lift
andGeneral Manager.(809)296-3535.Telex:380-32-68
its arms embargo against the besieged
Republic.The California Committee
on Un-American Activities branded
theWashingtonCommitteetoLiftthe
Our leaner wing tip.
Spanish Embargo a Communist front.
The traditional values of
How all this negative information
Alden classics are combined
affected Steinbeck personally emerged
here in this elegant
in 1943, when Army Intelligence was
wing pattern.
considering him fora commission.An
ALDEN
investigation was conducted in Los
Angeles (he was living in Sherman
Oaks), and G-2 wrote in a 1943
CustomBootmakers
memo to the Chief of MilitaryIntelli-
since1884
gence in Washington:
In view of substantial doubt as to Sub-
ject‘s loyalty and discretion, it is recom-
mendedthat Subject notbe considered
favorably for a commission in the Army of
the United States.
An earlier memo said of Steinbeck:
Subject has associated with individuals
who areknown tohave aradicalpolitical
and economic philosophy，and with some
members of the Communist Party.
Subject received large volume of Com-
munistic literature and possessed books
expressingradicalpoliticalandeconomic
views in his library.
The F.B.I. told Army Intelligence
that Steinbeck subscribed toPeople's
World.Among the sources of this in-
formation was the American Legion
Radical ResearchBureau in SanFran-
cisco; the Legion said “The Grapes of
Wrath’had been branded Red propa-
ForcomlestorelistingandilsradhurewiteCany,pMilroughM36.an-
formation was the American Legion
Radical ResearchBureau in SanFran-
cisco; the Legion said “The Grapes of
Wrath’had been branded Red propa-
ForcomlestorelistingandilsradhurewiteCany,pMilroughM36.a

--- PAGE BREAK ---THENEWYORKER
63
Steinbeck was turned down, thoughune,following a six-week tour aroundreference in the initial introduction to
his file shows that he had been em- the Soviet Union,that became the ba- the Chief when his behavior concern-
ployed in 1942, without pay, as a spe- sis for his 1948 book, “A Russian ing the indictments comes up.”
ciai consultant to theSecretaryof
fJournal." The F.B.I.

comment reads,
In 1964, the F.B.1.

passed along
War, and assigned to the Command-
It is noted that the articles criticized
1information aboutSteinbeck to the
ing General of the Army Air Forces.S
Soviet red tape and the Soviet Govern- C.I.A.It reported that Steinbeck had
Then, as an unpaid writer, he wrote ment but were favorable to the Russian visited the Soviet Union the year be-
an official book on fying and training.people” Book reviews from the Com-f
fore, and a headline in the Daily
After completing this assigiment,he munist Daily Worker and the anti- Worker in New York had read,
workedfor theOfficeofWarInfor-
Communist New Leader,both un-
“Steinbeck in Moscow Impressed by
mation as a foreign-news editor, at an
favorable, were put in his file.

Progress." Why the C.I.A.

was inter-
annual salary oft
thirty-six hundred
In 1961, the year before Steinbeck
ested in Steinbeck is not revealed.

dollars.Steinbeck told friends who
oreceived the Nobel Prize, an F.B.I.

In an internal memorandum in
were questioned about him that he was i
interofice memorandum made note of 1964,the F.B.I.reported that
not a Communist, and that he was the contents of his novel“The Winter Steinbeck had been on the mailing list
working people regardless of their dum headlined the fact that the F.B.1.

and Hydrogen Bombs, and noted that
particular political creed."
was mentioned in the book.“At the a “reliable source has described this
The writers’ groups that Steinbeck
belonged to made him suspect.In an internal memorandum in
were questioned about him that he was i
interofice memorandum made note of 1964,the F.B.I.reported that
not a Communist, and that he was the contents of his novel“The Winter Steinbeck had been on the mailing list
working people regardless of their dum headlined the fact that the F.B.1.

and Hydrogen Bombs, and noted that
particular political creed."
was mentioned in the book.“At the a “reliable source has described this
The writers’ groups that Steinbeck
belonged to made him suspect.

The
various persons of the town including trated organization in Japan."An-
F.B.I.fle listed the Western Writers one Stonewall Jackson Smith, the other “reliable source” reported that
Writers, and, most surprising of all,i
izes as being of above average intelli- McIntosh & Otis, had been paid
the widely respected National Institute gence for the town and whoeven took $188.70 on his behalf by the National
of Arts and Letters, patterned after the the F.B.1.

training at Washington Bank of Bulgaria.

And still anoth-
French Academy, and now part of the D.C.,”the memorandum reads.

The er “reliable source” reported that
American Academy and Institute of F.B.1.

finds implicit criticism of the Steinbeck “had received the sum of
Arts and Letters.

Bureau in an observation about the$420 as an author'sfee from theSoviet
The Steinbeck dossier continued to novel's plot:While Steinbeck does publication, Novyi Mir.”
expand after the war.At the beginning not belabor the fact that the Chief of In 1968,the year Steinbeck died,the
of the Cold War,Steinbeck wrote a Police is F.B.I.trained, nevertheless a F.B.I.provided a name check on him
series for the New York Herald Trib- careful reader cannot fail to recall the to the White House.Its purpose can-
"For pampering and personal
attention,theres no place
quite like Bonaventure.--- PAGE BREAK ---

finds implicit criticism of the Steinbeck “had received the sum of
Arts and Letters. Bureau in an observation about the$420 as an author'sfee from theSoviet
The Steinbeck dossier continued to novel's plot:While Steinbeck does publication, Novyi Mir.”
expand after the war.At the beginning not belabor the fact that the Chief of In 1968,the year Steinbeck died,the
of the Cold War,Steinbeck wrote a Police is F.B.I.trained, nevertheless a F.B.I.provided a name check on him
series for the New York Herald Trib- careful reader cannot fail to recall the to the White House.Its purpose can-
"For pampering and personal
attention,theres no place
quite like Bonaventure. Linda Evans
Spa Fitness Plan
4day/4night
7day/7night
$913"
$1594"
(per person, double occupancy)
SHAPEMagazinerated theBonaventure spa among thenations
topten.TOWN&COUNTRYagreed,ranking usin thetop
eight.VOGUE simply called us"theultimate spa."Your spa
rate includes:
Luxury accommodationsManicures
Pedicures
3gourmetNutrition
Steamroom
Sauna
Plan mealsper day
Whirlpool
Make-up application
Unlimited fitness classes
Medical screening
Shampoo and hair styling
Massages
Herbal wraps
(Formen: shampoo,
Loofah treatments
Facials
cut and blow dry)
You can take advantage of the Bonaventures resort facilities, too. Theresgolf,tennis,horsebackriding,and much more.Many
spa andresortpackages areavailable.So seeyour travel agent
or call1-800-327-8090. BONAVENTURE? RESORT&SPA
250 Racquet Club Road,Ft.Lauderdale,FL33326
*****
Tax and gratuity not included. Rates eective 9/27/87-1/2/88.

--- PAGE BREAK ---64
because they thought his name was
German, but his parents were of Scan-
dinavian origin.

He said that the au-
thorities had harassed Sandburg after
they learned that he had been a Social-
ist in his earlier days.Hughes also told
Secretary Baker that he would instruct
Sandburg to write exactly what he
thought, regardless of censorship.

Hughes wrote, “Isn't it fine for the
Government to treat such a man like a
dog of a traitor?" Eventually, Sand-
burg’spaperswerereturned,but neither
he nor his editor ever forgave the at-
tack on their journalistic integrity.

Army Intelligence did not forget
Sandburg.

Nearly seventy years later
--and twenty years after his death--a
fle is maintained of the suspicious
correspondence at the Army Intel-
ligence and Security Command at Fort
Meade, Maryland; and the F.B.I.

also
has a copy of this ancient dispute in its
records.While Sandburg was writing
and campaigning for causes and candi-
dates he believed in,the fle accusing
him of being a courier for revolution-
ary literature was resurrected.

Sandburg’s F.B.I.record shows that
in 1941 an interoffice memorandum
distributed among bureau officials
noted that he had“manifested an un-
friendly attitude” toward the F.B.I.at
a luncheon in Chicago.In 1947, the
bureau added to his file a clipping from
(You just keep me around to fill in the gaps in your persona."
the Daily Worker saying that a CBS
Mr.Lincolnand based on letters to
Lincoln found in the Robert Todd
Lincoln Collection in the Library of
not be determined,because,like much
The first entry in Sandburg’s file（
of the material in the Steinbeck dos-resulted from his having worked as a
Congress had been written by Alan
sier, the document is blacked out and
Lomax“with the advice of Carl Sand-
correspondent in Sweden for the burg” That same year, the Daily
stamped “SECRET."
Newspaper Enterprise Association,the Worker also reported that Sandburg
feature-news syndicate, in 1918.also
has a copy of this ancient dispute in its
records.While Sandburg was writing
and campaigning for causes and candi-
dates he believed in,the fle accusing
him of being a courier for revolution-
ary literature was resurrected.

Sandburg’s F.B.I.record shows that
in 1941 an interoffice memorandum
distributed among bureau officials
noted that he had“manifested an un-
friendly attitude” toward the F.B.I.at
a luncheon in Chicago.In 1947, the
bureau added to his file a clipping from
(You just keep me around to fill in the gaps in your persona."
the Daily Worker saying that a CBS
Mr.Lincolnand based on letters to
Lincoln found in the Robert Todd
Lincoln Collection in the Library of
not be determined,because,like much
The first entry in Sandburg’s file（
of the material in the Steinbeck dos-resulted from his having worked as a
Congress had been written by Alan
sier, the document is blacked out and
Lomax“with the advice of Carl Sand-
correspondent in Sweden for the burg” That same year, the Daily
stamped “SECRET."
Newspaper Enterprise Association,the Worker also reported that Sandburg
feature-news syndicate, in 1918.

had warned in a speech that if the
NARL SANDBURG (1878-1967) had
an Army Intelligence fle of six December of that year,all his note- would lead to“the most terrible war in
pages, dating back to 1918, and an l
books, manuscripts, and books were history,”and his warning went into
Sandburg, who received Pulitzer and military offcials.

Much of this the fle shows,Sandburg praised Secre-
Prizes for both poetry and history and
material referred to Finland and to tary of State George C.Marshall for
was given the Medal of Freedom by
Bolshevism in Russia.

Sam T.his calm patience in dealing with the
President Johnson at the White House
Hughes, Sandburg’s editor at N.E.A., Soviet Union.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Much of this the fle shows,Sandburg praised Secre-
Prizes for both poetry and history and
material referred to Finland and to tary of State George C.Marshall for
was given the Medal of Freedom by
Bolshevism in Russia. Sam T.his calm patience in dealing with the
President Johnson at the White House
Hughes, Sandburg’s editor at N.E.A., Soviet Union. in 1964, seems to have been considered
protested the confiscation of his papers
dangerously liberal or worse by some to Secretary of War NewtonD.four months later was filled with fac-
AnF.B.I. memorandum written
government offcials. In his early
Baker, calling it an act of censorship. tual errors about Sandburg.Whoever
years, he was a Social Democratic
Baker replied that Sandburg’s luggage wrote the memorandum (the name
Party organizer and a supporter of included“revolutionary literature
Eugene V. Debs; in the nineteen- and added that he had also carried ten said that Sandburg
was deleted from the flesIreceived)
thirties, he was a New Dealer; and in thousand dollars in drafts on behalf a well-known Communist in Chi-
"was reported to be
the nineteen-fifties he campaigned for of Finnish revolutionaries. Hughes cago. It also said he owned a build-
Adlai E.Stevenson, a close friend, for responded by saying that those who ing there that was used as national
President. had taken Sandburg’s property did so headquarters for the Young Workers

--- PAGE BREAK ---69
League of America.Neither statement
Dreiser's reasoning was not always
was true.

In 1952, the F.B.1.

prepared
das farsighted as his novels might sug-
a dossier on Sandburg for the State
egest.Discussing his book“America Is
Department,in which it named him as
Worth Saving
”inaradiointerview
tofind out more about what's
a sponsor of the Veterans of the Abra- ten months before Pearl Harbor, he
offeredwhereinBermuda.

ham Lincoln Brigade in 1939,and
dabsurdly equated theBritish Empire
stated that in 1942 he was listed in an and Nazi Germany.

This isolationist
Advertisers in this special
advertisement in The Nation as a rhetoric,though it was notuncommon
sectionwillbe pleasedto
speaker at a dinner sponsored by the in parts of the _country at the time,
sendyou additional literature
Joint Anti-Fascist Refugee Commit- caused the F.B.I.to watch him more
tohelp you plan your shop-
tee; that two years later he was a closely.

In a censored memorandum,
special guest at a concert in Chicago the word “Espionage” appears after
ping spree,or simply
ythe
for the same organization; that in his name.His confidentiai file card is
perfect vacation.

1945 he was listed as a sponsor of the labelled “CoMMuNisT.”After America
Midwest division of the Independent entered the war, the F.B.I.

policed
Send for further information
Citizens Committee of the Arts, Sci- what Dreiser wrote and said.A mem-
bycompletingthereader-
ences, and Professions; and that all
1 orandum in his file states,“The subject
service coupon below.Place
a check mark next tothe
General or the House Un-American
had a definitely pro-Russian angle.

names of the companies
Activities Committee.

Passages in the "CONFIDENTIAL"
whose specialty products or
In 1958, again without qualifca- F.B.1.

documents read like a Dreiser
tion, the F.B.1.

repeated all the derog-
servicesinterestyou.

novel.repeated all the derog-
servicesinterestyou.

novel.

The bureau has always relished
atory information about Sandburg in
gathering material about marital and
its filewhile providing a name check to
extramarital conduct,and it comments
Shopping
the United States Information Agency.

that Dreiser was“indicted.in 1931 in
That year, too, Sandburg was upgrad-
Bell County,Kentucky,for Criminal
ed in the F.B.I.

records, for he was in-
Syndicalism and Aduitery.

He had
volved in an “Internal Security-—C"
gone there to help striking miners and
matter involving another person:name
get material for a book.Subject left
in
and description blacked out.

This per-
State prior toindictment and it is
son had written a book and, the Sand- believed same was dismissed for lack of
burg file noted, Sandburg
“reportedly evidence,”the file continues.“Basis for
will write the introduction to[cen- adultery was the finding of DREIsER
Bermuda
sored]’s new book."Merely areport of and[name censored] in the same room
aplan towritewas consideredworthy
at hotel but immoral relations are not
of note by the F.B.I.

record-keepers.

known.

DREISER claimed impotency.

In1964,a"CONFIDENTIAL"
pageap-
.When DREIsER was still a young
peared in Sandburg’sfle,butit isalmost man of around 31 or 32 years of age,
Enclose your coupon in an
totally blacked out except for a date,he separated from his wife....

He first
envelope addressedto:
June 25,1964,and the fact that he was came into prominence when he wrote
born on January 6,1878, in Gales- ‘An American Tragedy,”on which he
THENEWYORKERMagazine
burg, Illinois.

Thus, when Sandburg
made a great deal of money.After this
PO.Box383
was eighty-six years old,living quietly
success...hiswife came to him and
Dalton,MA 01227
at home in Flat Rock,North Carolina,
demanded somemoneyfora settlement,
the F.B.I.was still watching him and
which he gave her.

[Informant]does
keeping his dossier up to date.Thus, when Sandburg
made a great deal of money.After this
PO.Box383
was eighty-six years old,living quietly
success...hiswife came to him and
Dalton,MA 01227
at home in Flat Rock,North Carolina,
demanded somemoneyfora settlement,
the F.B.I.was still watching him and
which he gave her.

[Informant]does
keeping his dossier up to date.

not know howlong[censored]hasbeen
Name
living with DREISER but believes it has
HEODORE DREISER(1871-1945)
been a period of over ten years....She
Address
has a dossier of two hundred and
has heard that[censored]is a former
City
thirty-nine pages,but the F.B.I.with- MACK sENNETT girl and has positively
State
Zip
held forty-onepages-more than forty
yno literary acumen."Ina 1943 letter
Please allow six to cight weeks for delivery.

Offer ex-
years after his death.

The documents
J.Edgar Hoover himself noted that
pires January 5,1988.

released are censored; those from the matter of Dreiser’s mistress was
The New Yorker Magazine Inc.

871005
Navy files are totally blacked out.brought before the Attorney General,
1.A.S.Cooper & Sons,Ltd.809-295-3961
2.Astwood-Dickinson Jewellers 809-292-5805
3.

Bermuda Department of Tourism
American workingman and attacking sent a proper basis for investigation
1-800-Bermuda
the excesses of big industry.

Most of under theWhite Slave Traffic Act,
4.

William Bluck & Company Ltd.

809-295-5367
his views were out in the open--on the particularly in the absence of commer-
5.

Cecile,Fashion Designers 809-295-1311
printed page and on the platform.--- PAGE BREAK ---

809-295-5367
his views were out in the open--on the particularly in the absence of commer-
5. Cecile,Fashion Designers 809-295-1311
printed page and on the platform. His cialism."Hoover's effort to have
6.H.&JE.CrissonLtd.809-295-2351
7.The English Sports Shop 809-295-2672
file shows that in 1928 he was a mem- Dreiser prosecuted for sex between
8.Cosling Brothers Linited 809-295-1123
ber of an international committee totwo unmarried consenting adults came
9.Hornburg CalypsoLtd.809-295-2112
10.The IrishLinen Shop 809-295-4089
save Sacco and Vanzetti.During the in the middle of the Second World
11.The Perfume Shop 809-295-2599
Depression, he was active in the de- War, when, presumably, the director
12. The Princess,the Southampton Princess
212-582-8100
fense of mineworkers who were strik-hadmore important matters to pursue. 13.H.A.&E.Smith 809-295-2288
ing for their safety and livelihood. Near the end of the war, Dreiser
14.Triminghams 809-295-1183

--- PAGE BREAK ---70
Spanish Democracy.

For the First
American Writers Congress,held in
New York in 1935, Dos Passos wrote
a strong essay, in which he spoke of “a
country that is organizing to build for
socialism,instead of for the growth of
the wealth and power of a few bosses."
In 1951, Dos Passos having moved
to the right politically, the F.B.1., on
a page stamped “SecRET,” summed up
its file material in a memorandum that
concluded:
Recommendation:A review of the above
information reflects that although Dos
Passos was probably a Communist [the
F.B.I.erred in this assumption] and suse-
quently a Trotskyite,he has in recent
years become definitely anti-Communist.

In view of this,it does not appear that an
investigation of Dos Passos is warranted,
and if you agree,no investigation will be
instituted.

Nevertheless, when Dos Passos
travelled outside the United States the
F.B.I.

continued to track him.A fle
on Dos Passos from the Shanghai Mu-
nicipal Police was sent to the F.B.I.in
June of 1951 and was disseminated to
"I switched.

Mint chocolate chip is my favorite now?"
agents in the bureau’s Security Divi-
sion.（The Shanghai material is
omitted from the pages I received.)
The F.B.I.

reports that “a confiden-
was still being spied upon: it is noted cades of his life; his 1961 novel tial source of known reliability fur-
that he was living in²Hollywood, at “Midcentury”extolled the free-enter-
nished the Bureau with information
1015North KingsRoad,and that he prise system.

contained in the files of the Shanghai
had a gray 1940 Plymouth sedan,Li-
The F.B.I.

fle on Dos Passos says
Municipal Police，”and that these files
cense No.

10Q334.An F.B.I.

source that at one time he sympathized withi
included a letter dating back to 1933
mation as to any writing being done by cause enlisted his interest during the (name censored) in Shanghai because
DREIsER.”Apparently, the F.B.I.10Q334.An F.B.I.

source that at one time he sympathized withi
included a letter dating back to 1933
mation as to any writing being done by cause enlisted his interest during the (name censored) in Shanghai because
DREIsER.”Apparently, the F.B.I.

had Spanish Civil War; that he champi-
Dos Passos was listed as a member of a
a source inside Dreiser's house whooned the rights of striking Kentucky
committeeformed tohelpdefend two
reported to an informant (her name coal miners during the Depression.Shanghai Communists.

blacked out) about him.

The F.B.I.“In Russia he was immensely popular
On June 3, 1952,two F.B.I.agents
agent reported that Dreiser was doing as a ‘proletarian” writer,"
the fileinterviewed DosPassos at his home,in
very little writing and what little notes.“Later his attitude became def- Spence's Point, Virginia—the file
work he does put out is not in great nitely anti-Communist.” Despite his shows that the F.B.I.

was also main-
demand by publishers." In May of changed views, a 1951 document taining a mail watch on the house-
1945, seven months before Dreiser's stamped “SEcRET” described him as a and reported their findings directly to
death, an F.B.I.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The F.B.I.“In Russia he was immensely popular
On June 3, 1952,two F.B.I.agents
agent reported that Dreiser was doing as a ‘proletarian” writer,"
the fileinterviewed DosPassos at his home,in
very little writing and what little notes.“Later his attitude became def- Spence's Point, Virginia—the file
work he does put out is not in great nitely anti-Communist.” Despite his shows that the F.B.I. was also main-
demand by publishers." In May of changed views, a 1951 document taining a mail watch on the house-
1945, seven months before Dreiser's stamped “SEcRET” described him as a and reported their findings directly to
death, an F.B.I. agent in Los Angeles
J.Edgar Hoover.Dos Passos provided
reported a critical judgment on him:noted that he had a “connection with the agents with a political autobiogra-
“A “has been’ in the literary field."
front organizations." These reached
phy,which they wrote down for his
back to 1923,when a letterhead listed
dle,noting,“DOs PAssOs informed that
oHN Dos PAssos(1896-1970),who him as a member of the American he was never a member of the
started his writing career as a re- Committee for Relief of Russian Chil- Communist Party, although he related
former and ended up as a conservative, dren,and in that 1951 document the that he had close association with the
two pages.These came heavily
“front” organizations he belonged to.Though he named names, he prefaced
blacked out; my appeal to the Depart-
These included the American Civil his remarks by saying that since he
ment of Justice's Ofice of Legal Pol- Liberties Union, the International was never a Party member the names
icy for more material and less censor-
Union of Revolutionary Writers, thewere“based entirely upon his personal
ship was denied.The proletarian Citizens National Committee for belief due to hisdealings with the
views found in Dos Passos*“Manhat- Sacco and Vanzetti, the American Communist Party.”DosPassos then
“U.S.A.” changed in the last two de- Born, and the American Friends of Earl Browder, and other obviousews found in Dos Passos*“Manhat- Sacco and Vanzetti, the American Communist Party.”DosPassos then
“U.S.A.” changed in the last two de- Born, and the American Friends of Earl Browder, and other obvious

--- PAGE BREAK ---72
HOTEL MERIDIEN
names.He said that he had accompa- blacked out by the F.B.I.Forty-five
nied Theodore Dreiser to the Harlan,additional pagesexisted in hisflebut
Kentucky,coal miners’ strike in 1931
my appeal to the Meese Department of
and had’“got the impression that the
Justice-
-nearlyfiftyyears after the
National Miners'
Union_was con- author's death—that they be released,
trolled by the Communist Party."He
eeven if theywere censored,was de-
added that the Communist Party wasnied.On thebasis ofWolfe's four
"interested in the...Group
The-
autobiographical novels-"Look
atre,”in New York.

Homeward,Angel,”Of Time and
In this interview Dos Passos also the River(The Web and the
said that during the Spanish Civil War Rock,”and You Can't Go Home
the American Friends of Spanish De-an enemy of the state.We know from
mocracy,which supported the Loyalists news reports that his prewar travels in
went to Spain with Ernest Heming- of the authorities because his writing
way to make a pro-Loyalist film,
,was admired by some Germans,and
"Spain in Flames,”
but his name did that he admired them in return.Even-
not appear in it,because,he claimed, tually, however,he wrote against
the Communists were“down”on him.Hitlerism.But none of this back-
Later, he became interested in seeking
ground can be found in his vetted files.

a refuge for Leon Trotsky, because
Strangely,in1946,ight years after
The report of the interview concluded
again in the nineteen-fties, his name
with the F.B.I.observation that Dos
turned up in censored secret files la-
Passos was“cooperative but was hazy
belled “EsPIONAGE” and “INTERNAL
concerning details," and that he
SEcuRIry." From the fragmentary
“offered further cooperation at any
words in the blacked-out documents it
time it was necessary to contact him.Homeward,Angel,”Of Time and
In this interview Dos Passos also the River(The Web and the
said that during the Spanish Civil War Rock,”and You Can't Go Home
the American Friends of Spanish De-an enemy of the state.We know from
mocracy,which supported the Loyalists news reports that his prewar travels in
went to Spain with Ernest Heming- of the authorities because his writing
way to make a pro-Loyalist film,
,was admired by some Germans,and
"Spain in Flames,”
but his name did that he admired them in return.Even-
not appear in it,because,he claimed, tually, however,he wrote against
the Communists were“down”on him.Hitlerism.But none of this back-
Later, he became interested in seeking
ground can be found in his vetted files.

a refuge for Leon Trotsky, because
Strangely,in1946,ight years after
The report of the interview concluded
again in the nineteen-fties, his name
with the F.B.I.observation that Dos
turned up in censored secret files la-
Passos was“cooperative but was hazy
belled “EsPIONAGE” and “INTERNAL
concerning details," and that he
SEcuRIry." From the fragmentary
“offered further cooperation at any
words in the blacked-out documents it
time it was necessary to contact him.

can be surmised that Wolfe's writings
In 1960, Dos Passos discovered,
were suspect because they appeared on
quiteby accident, that,regardless of his
reading lists of schools said to be under
The very soul of France.

cooperation with the F.B.I., he was
Communist control.

stili the subject of federal scrutiny.A
In the very heart of New York.

The reason that Wolfe's file was
Treasury Department agent visited themaintained after his death was that his
Discover the luxury
WashingtonDaily News and asked tonovelshad become a signalfag to the
ofa European hotelin one of
see Dos Passos’ file in the newspaper's F.B.1.

For example, in a 1945 report
the world’s greatest cities.The reason that Wolfe's file was
Treasury Department agent visited themaintained after his death was that his
Discover the luxury
WashingtonDaily News and asked tonovelshad become a signalfag to the
ofa European hotelin one of
see Dos Passos’ file in the newspaper's F.B.1.

For example, in a 1945 report
the world’s greatest cities.

morgue.An enterprising report-
by its office in Kansas City, there ap-
Thisideal Manhattan address
er,Joseph Cloud,then questioned the
pears a list of books headed “The
isjustminutes from theater,
concerts and shopping.

With4-starFrenchcuisine,
his mission was “very hush-hush,”
[name censored].” The list of suspect
and that he was trying to find out books includes John Hersey’s “A Bell
complete fitness facilities,
if Dos Passos had “recently changed
rooftoppooland jogging path
1for Adano,” Stephen Vincent Benet's
overlooking Central Park.

his political ideolo-
"Western Star,'
gy." When the reporter
LeParkerMeridien.

Howard Fast's
asked Dos Passos if he
The best of both worlds.

"Freedom Road,"
knew why the govern-
EdithWharton's"The
Reservations:
212 245-5000 800 543-4300
ment was interested in
Age of Innocence,”
his ideology, he replied,
Sinclair Lewis’s“Bab-
according toCloud's
bitt,”Ernest Heming-
story,which appeared in
way’s Short Stories
the paper on March 31,
John Steinbeck’sThe
1960,I have no idea
binSushn
Grapes of Wrath,"
why.The F.B.I.might be interested Richard Wright‘s Uncle Tom’s
in some of the many
Communists I've Children,”and Thomas Wolfe's
known, but the Treasury-
-Ijust can’t
t“YouCan'tGoHomeAgain.”In
figure it out.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Howard Fast's
asked Dos Passos if he
The best of both worlds. "Freedom Road,"
knew why the govern-
EdithWharton's"The
Reservations:
212 245-5000 800 543-4300
ment was interested in
Age of Innocence,”
his ideology, he replied,
Sinclair Lewis’s“Bab-
according toCloud's
bitt,”Ernest Heming-
story,which appeared in
way’s Short Stories
the paper on March 31,
John Steinbeck’sThe
1960,I have no idea
binSushn
Grapes of Wrath,"
why.The F.B.I.might be interested Richard Wright‘s Uncle Tom’s
in some of the many
Communists I've Children,”and Thomas Wolfe's
known, but the Treasury-
-Ijust can’t
t“YouCan'tGoHomeAgain.”In
figure it out. It does sound as if 1947,a report by the F.B.1.'s Boston
the Federal Government now has offce noted that “Communist Party,
Thought Police.'What rights does U.S.A., Pamphlets and Publications
LeParker
the Government have to investigate were sold at theProgressive Bookshop,
the political opinions of any private cit-8Beach Street,Boston.A fyer there
MERIDIEN
izen?And if they want to know mine,was entitled “GiveBooks for Christ-
why the hell don't they ask me?"
mas,” and among the books it listed
NEW YORK
which warranted suspicion were Mark
TRAVEL COMPANION OFAIRFRANCE
118 W.57th Street,New York,NY 10019
Ipages,but they were almost totallyDorothy Baker's“Young Man with a

--- PAGE BREAK ---74
Horn,”Jack London’s “South Sea
provided.Sometimes one can pick up
Tales,”Maxim Gorky’s Last
fragments of information indirectly
Plays,” and Thomas Wolfe's “Of
from different sections of the F.B.I.

In
Time and the River."
Algren’s case, I learned from my ap-
Nearly a half century after Thomas P
peal that the author is the subject of
Wolfe's death, his dossier has contin-
one F.B.I.

file in Washington and a
ued to be heavily censored,and his second in the Chicago fieldoffce; that
books, and those of other celebrated both are labelled “SEcuRITy MATTER
novelists, are listed as a “SEcURITY —CoMMUNisT,”and that Algren was
threat to the republic.

Criminal Division.

EIBLBOREDOLISES
After I had waited three years and a
LHETIPSYOLIVES
HE most curious case of censor-
month,the State Department indepen-
ship by denial which Iencoun-d
dently providedfive pages of afle that
NETWT.16A500
tered under the Freedom of Informa-it maintained on Algren.It had re-
tion Act concerned the novelist and
dceived a passport application from Al-
short-story writer John O'Hara
gren in 1965 and again in 1968.

(1905-70).A file on him exists, but it
Whenever Algren left the country,the
was denied to me in its entirety.In department informed its Embassies
One Tipsy Olive &
response to my request,I received this from Mexico City to Moscow that he
letter,in June of 1986,from Emil P.h
a little gin make
had done so and requested them “to
Moschella, chief of the Freedom of furnish the Department with any perti-
the perfect martini.EIBLBOREDOLISES
After I had waited three years and a
LHETIPSYOLIVES
HE most curious case of censor-
month,the State Department indepen-
ship by denial which Iencoun-d
dently providedfive pages of afle that
NETWT.16A500
tered under the Freedom of Informa-it maintained on Algren.It had re-
tion Act concerned the novelist and
dceived a passport application from Al-
short-story writer John O'Hara
gren in 1965 and again in 1968.

(1905-70).A file on him exists, but it
Whenever Algren left the country,the
was denied to me in its entirety.In department informed its Embassies
One Tipsy Olive &
response to my request,I received this from Mexico City to Moscow that he
letter,in June of 1986,from Emil P.h
a little gin make
had done so and requested them “to
Moschella, chief of the Freedom of furnish the Department with any perti-
the perfect martini.

Information-Privacy Acts Section,nent information coming to their
Records Management Division, of the attention regarding Algren’s activi-
Making_a good martini is a
F.B.I.:“After careful consideration,it ties."The Embassies were also warned
trueart.Everyoneknowsthe
has been determined that all material that he had a record of “Communist
secret isinhow
concerning Mr.O'Hara is exempt Party front activity” from 1941 to
much vermouth
from release pursuant to subsection(b)
1952.(It is puzzling to know how the
you use.Our
(1） of the Freedom of Information State Department concluded that he
Tipsy Olives
Act.This subsection allows for the carried on such activity in 1944 and
takethe
withholding of information which is1945,when he was serving as an Army
guesswork
currently and properly classified in ac-litter bearer in Europe.)WhenAlgren
outofjust
cordance withExecutive Order went to Asiain1968,during theViet-
how much
12356”—that is,“in the interest of nam War,the State Department noted
vermouth is
the national defense or foreign policy, that the purpose of his trip was an
"the right
Fine colossal
for example,information involving in-“assignment from Atlantic Monthly."
amount."
olivespacked
telligence sources or methods."
To the F.B.I., Algren was a “po-
Just add a
in vermouth.(1905-70).A file on him exists, but it
Whenever Algren left the country,the
was denied to me in its entirety.In department informed its Embassies
One Tipsy Olive &
response to my request,I received this from Mexico City to Moscow that he
letter,in June of 1986,from Emil P.h
a little gin make
had done so and requested them “to
Moschella, chief of the Freedom of furnish the Department with any perti-
the perfect martini.

Information-Privacy Acts Section,nent information coming to their
Records Management Division, of the attention regarding Algren’s activi-
Making_a good martini is a
F.B.I.:“After careful consideration,it ties."The Embassies were also warned
trueart.Everyoneknowsthe
has been determined that all material that he had a record of “Communist
secret isinhow
concerning Mr.O'Hara is exempt Party front activity” from 1941 to
much vermouth
from release pursuant to subsection(b)
1952.(It is puzzling to know how the
you use.Our
(1） of the Freedom of Information State Department concluded that he
Tipsy Olives
Act.This subsection allows for the carried on such activity in 1944 and
takethe
withholding of information which is1945,when he was serving as an Army
guesswork
currently and properly classified in ac-litter bearer in Europe.)WhenAlgren
outofjust
cordance withExecutive Order went to Asiain1968,during theViet-
how much
12356”—that is,“in the interest of nam War,the State Department noted
vermouth is
the national defense or foreign policy, that the purpose of his trip was an
"the right
Fine colossal
for example,information involving in-“assignment from Atlantic Monthly."
amount."
olivespacked
telligence sources or methods."
To the F.B.I., Algren was a “po-
Just add a
in vermouth.

In appealing, I pointed out that tentially dangerous American.He
Tipsy Olive toyourfavoritegin
nothing I could find’ in O'Hara’s sto- was listed in the bureau’s “Program
tocreate theperfect drymartini.Information-Privacy Acts Section,nent information coming to their
Records Management Division, of the attention regarding Algren’s activi-
Making_a good martini is a
F.B.I.:“After careful consideration,it ties."The Embassies were also warned
trueart.Everyoneknowsthe
has been determined that all material that he had a record of “Communist
secret isinhow
concerning Mr.O'Hara is exempt Party front activity” from 1941 to
much vermouth
from release pursuant to subsection(b)
1952.(It is puzzling to know how the
you use.Our
(1） of the Freedom of Information State Department concluded that he
Tipsy Olives
Act.This subsection allows for the carried on such activity in 1944 and
takethe
withholding of information which is1945,when he was serving as an Army
guesswork
currently and properly classified in ac-litter bearer in Europe.)WhenAlgren
outofjust
cordance withExecutive Order went to Asiain1968,during theViet-
how much
12356”—that is,“in the interest of nam War,the State Department noted
vermouth is
the national defense or foreign policy, that the purpose of his trip was an
"the right
Fine colossal
for example,information involving in-“assignment from Atlantic Monthly."
amount."
olivespacked
telligence sources or methods."
To the F.B.I., Algren was a “po-
Just add a
in vermouth.

In appealing, I pointed out that tentially dangerous American.He
Tipsy Olive toyourfavoritegin
nothing I could find’ in O'Hara’s sto- was listed in the bureau’s “Program
tocreate theperfect drymartini.

ries or journalism seemed to endanger for Apprehension and Detention of
Colossal olives stuffed with
“the national defense or foreign pol-
Persons Considered Potentially Dan-
pimentos &bathed in vermouth.

icy.”On September 29,1986,Richard
gerous to the NationalDefense and
Colossalgreenolivesare
L.Huff,co-director of theJusticeDe-
Public Safety of the United States.”In
flown in from Greece,stuffed
partment's Ofice of Information and 1942, J.ries or journalism seemed to endanger for Apprehension and Detention of
Colossal olives stuffed with
“the national defense or foreign pol-
Persons Considered Potentially Dan-
pimentos &bathed in vermouth.

icy.”On September 29,1986,Richard
gerous to the NationalDefense and
Colossalgreenolivesare
L.Huff,co-director of theJusticeDe-
Public Safety of the United States.”In
flown in from Greece,stuffed
partment's Ofice of Information and 1942, J.

Edgar Hoover himself wrote
withwholepimentos,and care-
Privacy, affrmed the initial decision to the president of the Polish-Ameri-
fullypacked in the finestFrench
and continued to deny me access to the can Council in Chicago(the letter is
whitevermouth.Order today.

file.He added that a Department Re-in Algren’s fle) informing him that a
Net wt.

16 oz.

$10.00 ppd.

view Committee would determineresolution the council hadadopted
whether anything could be declassi- condemning Algren’s novel Never
fied; but I have not heard further and Come Morning
Dept.01-222, P.0.

Box 3999,Portland, 0R 97208
would be made“a
doubt if I will.

matter of record in the files of this
Tipsy Olives No.

7624F
Qty_
Total $
Bureau." The council did not like
THE first NationalBookAward
Algren’s Polish characters.

pe
Exp.

for fiction,given in 1950,went
in 1949, four years after Algren
Sig.X
Phone
toNelson Algren for“The Manwith completed honorable service in the
the Golden Arm.During his life- Second World War, the Chicago
Name
time, Algren (1909-81),whose F.B.I.F.B.I.

office told the New York and
Address
file contains five hundred and forty-six St.

Louis F.B.I.

offces to check his
City.

pages, kept the F.B.I., Army Intelli- Army_record and find out where he
State
Zip
gence, Navy Intelligence, and the was.

By then, he was a well-known
0rder TOLL FREE 1-800-547-1160
StateDepartmentvery busy.From thewriter around Chicagoand New
Send FREE“ESCAPEfrom the ordinarycatalog.

F.B.I.I received four hundred and York.When he was located,his cor-
thirty-one censored pages.--- PAGE BREAK ---

By then, he was a well-known
0rder TOLL FREE 1-800-547-1160
StateDepartmentvery busy.From thewriter around Chicagoand New
Send FREE“ESCAPEfrom the ordinarycatalog. F.B.I.I received four hundred and York.When he was located,his cor-
thirty-one censored pages. My appeal
1respondence waswatched througha
Oo Norm Thompson. pages was initially turned down bythe name and address of anyone who
Mr. Huff, but later a few of them were wrote to him. Copies were made of his

--- PAGE BREAK ---76
OCTOBER5,1987
Wolermani's
signature.F.B.I.

agents in at least five
cities devoted their energies to follow-
ing his movements.

Algren was unafraid to lend his
TIINSTOLAI
name to causes he believed in and to
mmmmmmuffins
protest injustices he deplored, and, ev-
ery time he signed a petition and every
time his name appeared in the press,
clippings of what he had to say and
what was said about him went into his
file.Writ large was his defense of the
Hollywood Ten,the blacklisted
screenwriters and directors, and his
membership on a national committee
formed in behalf of Ethel and Julius
Rosenberg.

Unnamed informants
monitoredwhatever Algren wrote as a
free-lance journalist and as a novelist,
and passed the material along to the
F.B.1.“Informant reported Algren
wrote left-wing article for magazine
Holiday,”one entry reads.(Holiday, a
Wolferman's English Muffins ..

.

Oh so easy to love!

NY-10
nonpolitical
travel
magazine, intro-
Discoverthetwo-inch-thickEnglishMuffinmadealmostentrelybyhandnotpre-spltormachinepressedlke
duced many novelists to travelwrit-
others.Avallable In five flavors:Original.Light Wheat.Cinnar
never tasted anythinglike them!SATISFACTIONGUARANTEED!

Ralsin.Blueberry and Cheddar Cheese.You've
ing.)Anotherinformant describes him
FIVE-WAYSAMPLER55:4dozen assortedmuffns.all5favors.S21.00+S3.90UPS.

MINIFIVE-WAYSAMPLER35:2dozen assortedmuffins.all5flavors.S13.00+S2.90UPS.

as the“Communist author”of“The
Order Includes a free catalog.

Man with the Golden Arm” and
Name
"Chicago: City on the Make." The
Address
(No P.

O.

Boxes, please)
City
Zip
bizarre phrase “Communist tenden-
State
MCVISAAmEx
Exp.

cies" also appears in his file.

Please send catalog only.

S1 enclosed (applicable towards purchase).

Wrlte to:Wolfeman'sOneMuffnLane,NorthKansasCity,Mo.64116.

When Aigren obtained a passport in
OrCALLTOLL FREEInall50 states1-800-255-0169:inKansasCIty.call
(816)421-8300
1956,he signed a statement that he
was not a Communist.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Wrlte to:Wolfeman'sOneMuffnLane,NorthKansasCity,Mo.64116. When Aigren obtained a passport in
OrCALLTOLL FREEInall50 states1-800-255-0169:inKansasCIty.call
(816)421-8300
1956,he signed a statement that he
was not a Communist. The Justice
Department, according to his file, con-
sidered“possible prosecution of him
Beauty is more than skin deep. forexecution of non-Communist aff-
davit for State Department,”but the
matter was dropped for “insufficient
evidence”-—a phrase that is appended
to a number of the accusations by un-
named informants in the F.B.I.dos-
siers. Before Algren left for Europe in
1949, his friends gave him a farewell
party; it was noted by the F.B.I. In
1960,when he went to Spain, the
F.B.1. cabled the American Legation
in Madrid,gave it the name of his
hotel, and asked the Legation to cable
Washington and report on what he
was up to. The legal attache at the
AmericanEmbassy inParisalsofiled a
report with the F.B.1. in 1960—-at a
Althoughit‘s striking tobehold,you should neverjudge aRolfs
time when Algren was being cele-
solely byits cover Take thisRetriever Clutch.Besides a coin pocket,a check-
brated in the French press as one of
book cover and our exclusive Credit Guardcard protector,it has ahandy
America’s most important writers. zippered pocket that lets you get to your cash from the outside.You see,at
What the Embassy reported is cen-
Rolfs we think craftsmanship and function are just as important as design. Which must be the underlying reason a Rolfs lasts so long. sored. J.Edgar Hoover thought Algren
soimportant that hehimself wrote
ROLF S
a letter to the director of the State
Department's Bureau of Intelligence
and Research in 1966 telling him that
Good things last. Algren was either travelling abroad
or planning to do so.Details of
DURONT
Hoover's letter were blacked out a
West Bend. W1 53095. Available at fine stores throughout the USA and Canada. NYLON
HREAD
few years after Algren’s death and re-

--- PAGE BREAK ---THENEWYORKER
77
main soin the material provided to me.

There is a fine irony in the F.B.I.

10 Sound Reasons Wby
file on Algren: he fooled the special
agents (and kidded his friends)with
You Sbould V clipper For Your
an alias that was really an inside joke.

The Bureau was obviously ignorant
Caribbean Cruise Tbis Winter:
about anything that involved his writ-
ings or his literary friendships.After
1.

No big crowds.

Clipper's
7.

Yacht Marinas & Deserted
his affair with Simone de Beauvoir,
100-passengerluxuryyacbtsletyou
Beaches.

With Clipper, you'll discover the
the French writer and longtime com-
enjoy thetropical Caribbeanwithout the
Caribbean'sbest-kept secret...the out-of-
panion of Jean-Paul Sartre, Algren
1,000 other passengers you'llencounter
the-wayplaces the yachtsmenhave always
used the name Simon de Beauvoir as
on most cruise ships.

had to themselves;secluded ancborages and
his telephone listing.

The 1954 tele-
phone directory for Gary, Indiana,
2.Country Club Cruisingat
sbeltered coves.Norman Island...Francis
lists “de Beauvoir Simon 6228 For-
Bay...Virgin Gorda...Peter Island.The
its Best.Clipper's yachts have the intimate
est ...Gary 8-2463." It has no list-
big ships just can't go there!

friendliness andcomfortableambienceyou'd
ing for Nelson Algren.A memoran-
find at a private country club.Notbrongs.

dum in Algren's F.B.I.

fle notes that
M8.The Beauty oftheIslands
No lines.Noregimented,cornyactivities.dum in Algren's F.B.I.

fle notes that
M8.The Beauty oftheIslands
No lines.Noregimented,cornyactivities.

Nelson Algren Abraham"—the
ComesAlive.Sharetheuncrowded
name on his Army service record
3.All-AmericanCrew&
VirginIslands-themostbeautiful waters
—used several aliases, including
andbeaches in the world-with just 50
Service.Clipperseager-to-please crew
“Simon Beauvoir and Simon
discerningcouples.Our swimmingplat-
de
exemplifies a spirit and friendliness welike
Beauvoir."
formletsyouswimrigbtofftbesideoftbe
to thinkofas all-American;you'llfinda
ship...insmasks andsnorkels areyours
levelofpersonalattentiontbatisnon-
URPRISINGLY,Truman Capote
for the asking.You can't do this on big
existentonthelargesbips.

(1924-84), who was far more of a
ships wherebeach parties look like the
sociai than a political activist,has a
4.Luxurythat Means
Normandy Invasion.

hundred and eighty-five pages in his
Something.Eachofthe51cabins
F.B.I.

file; only a hundred and ten
9.Value.Compare the luxurious
aboard has an outsideview;eachis beauti
pages were released to me.The C.I.A.

fully decorated andthoughtfullyappointed
ambience,the exclusivity and intimacy of
has a fle on him consisting of one
Clipper'syachts with the carnival atmos-
foryourcomfort.You'llknowyourClipper
document, and that was denied me.

phere ofmanybig ships.Consider the
yachtlikeitwasyourown,fromspacious
The F.B.I.

said that Capote had
teakwoodsundecks,elegantdiningroom
qualitative aspectsofwhat isoffered.Then
“never been the subject of an F.B.I.

...youryuriseecaue
toglass-walled ObservationLoungeGBar.

investigation.”However, he was iden-
priceofaClippercruiseaveragesoutat
tified in numerous files relating to
5.Delightful Cuisine...

justabouttbesamelevelastbatoftbe
other individuals and to various orga-
Without the Rush.Aboard Clipper,
large ships.

nizations.--- PAGE BREAK ---

justabouttbesamelevelastbatoftbe
other individuals and to various orga-
Without the Rush.Aboard Clipper,
large ships. nizations. Despite the official state-
you'llenjoythebestfodintheVirgin
ment that he was not investigated, a
10.Satisfaction.You'll be satis-
document stamped “SECRET”(the
Islands.Our approachislighterandfresher
fiedwith the other cruises...but only until
-we callitsensibly gourmet-with an
stamp was crossed out before his file
you've experienced Clipper.Thisis astrong
emphasis onqualityoverquantity.You'llfind
was released to me in censored form)
itfar superiorto themass-produced
statement basedon our flawlessrecord of
reads,“Investigation is presently be
banquetfoodservedonthelargeships. consumersatisfaction,unmatcbedinthe
ing conducted to determine whether
cruise industry.Prove us wrongand we'll
[blacked out]present activities war-
6.Start Your Cruise in
refundyour cruise. rant his being placed on the Security
Index.” Since so many pages in his file
Paradise.Cruising with Clipper means
Joinusfor7daysvisitingTortola,Norman
were withheld,I don't know whether
you'llstartyourcruiseinthebeartoftbe
IslandPetIslandVinGorda,t.x
Capote was indeed listed as a security
Caribbean,inSt.Thomas.TheMiami-based
andSt.Jo,partingSt.TomasSunday,
cruise shipstravelforovertwodaysjustto
risk. December20 throughMarch 20.For free
Explaining the reason for some of
get this farsouth.Weflyyouwhereyou want
brochure see your travel agent or call
the censored material, the F.B.I. said
to spend yourvacation in a matter of hours. Toll Free1-800-325-0010. CLIPPER
CRUISELINE
7711 Bonhomme Ave., St. Louis, MO 63105

--- PAGE BREAK ---78
OCTOBER5,1987
in a letter to me,“Information has Newark, and New York watched him.

PURE
been deleted which originated with the The bureau was particularly con-
WOOLWORSTED
United States Senate Subcommittee to cerned with his associations and
BULKY KNIT
Investigate the Administration of the afiliations—-especially with writers
Internal Security Act and other Inter- organizations that took stands on such
nal Security Laws of the Committe issues as aid for the Spanish Loyalists
All you want in a
sweater:warmth,
comfort,good looks
Committee,January 6,1961,in Exec- He came under suspicion because he
and theperfect fit
utive Session.

This information is ex- openly supported causes that he be-
that only fine
empt from disclosure since it is consid-lieved sacred to freedom and literature.

quality,full
eredtobeoutside thepurview of the
fashioned,hand-
In 1938,Wilder was among a
Freedom of Information-Privacy
framed sweaters can
group of thirty-six American authors
give.Silver,Misty
Acts."
who petitionedPresident Roosevelt to
Blue or Natural.

An F.B.1.

memorandum on the
“"sever trade relations with Nazi Ger-
36-48.$59.00 (includes
Fair Play for Cuba Committee,dated
postage and handling).

many and declare an embargo on all
November 21, 1960, includes Capote's Nazi German goods"—an action
Subject to U.S.Duty.

name among those of Simone de noted in his F.B.I.

file.

Two years
AMEX, MC and
Beauvoir, Jean-Paul Sartre, I.

F.

later, the F.B.I.

tried,unsuccessfully,
VISA accepted.

Stone, Norman Mailer, Kenneth to link Wilder to a supposed case of
Please
Tynan, C.Wright Mills, and James espionage for Germany at a camp for
provide
Baldwin.

The memorandum notes Austrian refugees in New Hampshire.

Audxa
date.

maries”on the Fair Piay for Cuba his two cars and the fact that he
signers.

A “"CoNFIDENTIAL” docu- owned a house in Hamden, Connecti-
ment in Capote's file declares that he cut, the F.B.I.maries”on the Fair Piay for Cuba his two cars and the fact that he
signers.

A “"CoNFIDENTIAL” docu- owned a house in Hamden, Connecti-
ment in Capote's file declares that he cut, the F.B.I.

reported that he was
entry in Capote’s file is dated May 23,had “boosted forPresident Roosevelt”
1968,and originated in Los Angeles.in the 1940 election.In the end, the
Smitk's
It reveals that an informant was track-bureau had to conclude that there had
OFBERMUDA
ing someone who was known to Ca-been“no information received which
pote.

This somewhat mysterious entry
ywould link subjectWilderwith any
HAMILTONMSXERMUDA
goes, “He was advised by Capote that
tespionage or subversive activities.

[name censored]is staying in some
An article in the Washington
heis rewriting some portions of his Wilder was on the advisory council of
book [title censored].Capote could the Writers War Board—aboard
not recall the name of the street but that, the article said,“functions under
said it was some‘Circle’approximate-the direction of the Ofce of Civilian
ly one mile from downtown Palm Defense,and uses the government's
Springs.”The F.B.I.memorandum free mailing frank of the ‘Executive
mentioned the Palm Springs Spa Ho- Ofice of the President,'[and] is par-
tel.

ticipating ‘unofficially’in the cam-
Capote was gifted,but thenature of
paign of the Communists and other
his gifts hardly made him deserving of totalitarians.” Furthermore, the arti-
Wurke's
so lofty_a political tag as “Security
cle said,“Rex Stout, writer of murder
Risk."For the F.B.I.

to track him, mystery stories,” who had a record as
neerage
have his documents stamped “Se-
"aCommunistfellow traveler[and]is
CRET” and “CoNFIDENTIAL,” and
done of theprize exhibitsof theDies
study his writings is a particularly lu-
Committee on un-American Activi-
dicrous exampie of the length tot
We willtrace your
ties,”was chairman of the Writers
which its surveillance of authors has War Board.

This comprehensive
ANCESTRY
with the same diligence
gone.--- PAGE BREAK ---

to track him, mystery stories,” who had a record as
neerage
have his documents stamped “Se-
"aCommunistfellow traveler[and]is
CRET” and “CoNFIDENTIAL,” and
done of theprize exhibitsof theDies
study his writings is a particularly lu-
Committee on un-American Activi-
dicrous exampie of the length tot
We willtrace your
ties,”was chairman of the Writers
which its surveillance of authors has War Board. This comprehensive
ANCESTRY
with the same diligence
gone. smear, which found its way into Wil-
Burke's Peerage is
der's F.B.I. fle, misrepresented the
renowned forin tracing
HE F.B.I. dossier on Thornton
all the great families
WritersWarBoard-an organization
Wilder (1897-1975) consists of t
of the world. that includedmany writerswhohad
ninety-six pages, heavily censored;
Ireland, Great Britain,
；volunteered their skills to aid thewar
four pages were withheld. At various
Europe,North America,
effort. Australia, and New
times, Wilder was suspected of espio-
In 1954,a detailed report stamped
Zealand are our
nage and of being a threat to internal
""CONFIDENTIAL"
specialities. security.One of the documents reveals der's life and career but noted—as
summarized Wil-
that an“F.B.I.Watch"was kept ont
these F.B.I. reports so often did--"No
Burke's PeerageMarketing
him as a“suspect”while he was serv- investigation has been conducted by
Department 1
46Royal Avenue
ing as an Army Air Forces Intelli- the Bureau of Thornton Wilder. gence oficer in the Mediterranean The report said that Wilder was edu-
LONDON SW3
Telephone: 011 44 1385 4206
Theatre during the Second World cated at Oberlin and Yale and Prince-
War.F.B.I.offices in Boston, Detroit, ton; taught at the University of Chi-

--- PAGE BREAK ---THENEW YORKER
79
cago; served in the First World War
as a corporalandin theSecondWorld
War as a lieutenant colonel in Army
Air Forces Intelligence; was a bache-
lor and a Democrat; and had won
three Pulitzer Prizes—for “The
Bridge of San Luis Rey” “Our
Town,”and “The Skin of Our
Teeth." Service in both warswas ap-
parently insuficient as a proof of patri-
otism,for the fle,which went back to
1933, said that Wilder had been affili-
ated with “Cited Organizations.” A
number of the sources for such infor-
mation are blacked out—-an indication
that the F.B.I.

had plants inside the
relevant organizations.

(The Authors
Guild and the Dramatists Guild,I
discovered, had their own files.) One
group that Wilder was said to be a
member of was the National Commit-
tee of the American Committee for
Struggle Against War, which was
cited by the House Committee on Un-
American Activities in 1933 as a
Communist front.

The file shows that Wilder was a
participant in or sponsor of the Second
National Congress of the League of
American Writers,held in NewYork
in 1937.In the “Writers Take Sides”
pamphlet,Wilder is quoted as saying,
“I am unreservedly for the legal gov-
ernment and Loyalist Party in Spain."
The League of American Writers was
DASHING
on the Attorney General’'s list of sup-
posedly subversive organizations.

Wil-
der was also listed,in 1940 and 1941,
as a national sponsor of the American
Our silk paisley vest by Robert Talbott.Unabashedly
Committee for Protection of Foreign-
elegant.Uncommonly distinctive.Adding magic to
Born—another organization cited as
your finest evening wear.

Hand sewn in America
supposedly subversive by the Attorney
of imported silk with satin lapels.

Color as shown.

General.

One size with adjustable length and girth; 175.00.

Throughout the McCarthy years
and afterward,Wilder was the subject
To order by phone, call toll free 1-800-552-0305.--- PAGE BREAK ---

One size with adjustable length and girth; 175.00. Throughout the McCarthy years
and afterward,Wilder was the subject
To order by phone, call toll free 1-800-552-0305. of attention when he dared to sign
To orderbymail,sendto:Nordstrom c/oSally Brown,
anything at all, including statements
1501 Fifth Avenue,Seattle,WA 98101-1603. in defense of otherwritersfreedom to
Please send me
write. In 1948, according to a “CoN-
vest(s) at 175.00 each. Name
FIDENTIAL”memorandum in the file,
Wilder was one of the signers of a
Address
letter to the Speaker of the House of
City
State
Representatives which protested “"the
Zip
Phone
methods employed by the Committee
NordstromMasterCardVisa American Express
on Un-American Activities...under
Acct.no. the chairmanship of Representative
Check amt. J.Parnell Thomas, in its examination
of certain writers summoned to appear
Signature
before it." The memorandum contin-
Shipping charge on some mailphne orders. Washington state residents: plense acl
ues, “This letter was sponsored by a
appropriate sales tax. group of members of the National In-
stitute of Arts and Letters, an honor-
nordstrom
ary organization of American writers,
artists and musicians. The National
Washington/Oregon/California/Utah/Alaska
Institute of Arts and Letters has been
cited by the California Committee on

--- PAGE BREAK ---80
OCTOBER5,1987
Un-American Activities as a Commu-
nist front."
on the playwright Robert Sher-
wood (1896-1955),eighty pages, some
of them totally blacked out,had been
compiled by the F.B.I.itself, and nine
pages were attributed to the White
House.

Sherwood's file indicates that
in 1941, at a time when he was writ-
ing speeches for his friend President
Franklin D.

Roosevelt, and again dur-
ing the Second World War, while he
was serving as Director of Overseas
Operations in the Office of War In-
formation, he was under suspicion.In
those years,J.

Edgar Hoover built up
Sherwood’s file with material sug-
gesting that Sherwood’s activities in
The Four Seasons
Ina cityknownforits individuality,enterThe
civil-liberties and writers organiza-
tions showed him tobe a Communist.

servicededicated tofulflling yourevery need.

In 1942, during the early part of the
Celebrates The
Ourlgantresidentalnvironmnt
war, Sherwood was ranked as an “In-
is theplaceyouknow you belongWepro-
ternal Security-C" case.After the
where youcaneasilywork away thepressures of the day.

war, in the Truman and Eisenhower
Wealsoinviteyou toenjoy thespecialexperience of our
Four
Presidencies, and right up to the year
renownedcuisine,atAujourdhui,overlooking thefamous
Seasons
of his death,Sherwood was watched
PublicGarden.And,justafewshort minutes from our
Hotel
by the F.B.I.

He was critical of Secre-
doors，lies thecitysfnancial district.

Weinvite you tocelebrate thefinestBostonhas to offer.

BOSTON
tary of State John Foster Dulles's poli-
cies in the name of national security.

200 Boylston Street Boston,MA 02116 (617)338-4400 (800)268-6282
He also defended the rights of authors,
including the blacklisted Hollywood
Ten.--- PAGE BREAK ---

BOSTON
tary of State John Foster Dulles's poli-
cies in the name of national security. 200 Boylston Street Boston,MA 02116 (617)338-4400 (800)268-6282
He also defended the rights of authors,
including the blacklisted Hollywood
Ten. Again and again in the file,refer-
enceis made to Sherwood’s activism in
the theatre,his leadership in the Dra-
matists Guild, and the subjects and
themes of his plays.Both the man and
his writings were scrutinized.He was
a member of thePlaywrights’Com-
pany-a group of dramatists,founded
in1938, that included S.N.Behrman,
Elmer Rice, Maxwell Anderson, and
Sidney Howard.Parts of his F.B.1.fle
read iike a list of credits in Playbill. An internal memorandum that was
prepared for Hoover in 1941 lists
Sherwood’s plays, beginning with
“The Road to Rome,”and including
The Petrifed Forest”and “Abe
Lincoln in Illinois,”and notes that in
Invest in Diamonds from Raymond C.Yard
1936 he was Secretary of the Drama-
Prettier than a Municipal Bond. tists Guild. Solid as a Rock. Sherwood’s file mentions that, with
Thornton Wilder, he was one of the
thirty-six American authors who
Jewelry is alifetime investment,
RAYMONDC.YARD
signed the 1938letter calling onPres-
that's why we help you invest
JewelerstoAmerica's
identRoosevelt to sever traderelations
wisely.Because we don't just want
finest families. with Germany and to declare an em-
to sell you jewelry,wewanttobe
bargo on German goods. That same
your jewelers. year, he was reported to be a member
of the Nationai Council on Freedom
666 Fifth Avenue 23rd Floor New York, NY 10103 212.247.6222
from Censorship. This council, ac-
cording to a witness before the House
Un-American Activities Committee,

--- PAGE BREAK ---THENEWYORKER
81
was affliated with the American Civil
Liberties Union,which the committee
had identified as “a Communist-front
organization." Three years before, ac-
cording to a 1952memorandum in the
fle, Sherwood had helped to develop
the New Theatre School, “to write
and produce agitational and propa-
spring of the New Theatre League-
the mainspring of.the Agit-
prop...theatre movement," accord-
ing to the memorandum.“The New
Theatre League was cited as a Com-
munist front by theSpecial Committee
on Un-American Activities on March
29,1944."
Also in the Sherwood file is a 1941
report from the American Legion say-
ing that it was“considerably aroused”
over radio broadcasts put on by the
Free Company—a group formed by
Sherwood, Orson Welles, and others
to combat foreign propaganda in this
country.The Legion called the group,
the fle shows, “un-American, Com-
munistic,”and said that it was“oper-
"MY FATHER MAKES
ating under the guise of appearing for
EXCEPTIONALWINES.

free speech but actually was campaign-
ing for the light of Communism and
ANDISELLTHEMAT
other subversive elements.”Sherwood
is said to be chairman of the writers
EXCEPTIONAL PRICES?

division of this group.Another page
dealing with Sherwood’s theatre activ-
ities says, “On [date blacked out] in-
formation was received from a confi-
"Near Barcelona, in the mountains
1980
dential source that Robert Sherwood
above the Catalonian coast,my
was amember of theCommunist
father,Don Miguel Torres,makes
Party.

The informant further advised
fine wines thatwin awards all over
RRES
that all plays going into any of the
the world.I sell them at attractive
Army camps must be approved by the
prices all over America.division of this group.Another page
dealing with Sherwood’s theatre activ-
ities says, “On [date blacked out] in-
formation was received from a confi-
"Near Barcelona, in the mountains
1980
dential source that Robert Sherwood
above the Catalonian coast,my
was amember of theCommunist
father,Don Miguel Torres,makes
Party.

The informant further advised
fine wines thatwin awards all over
RRES
that all plays going into any of the
the world.I sell them at attractive
Army camps must be approved by the
prices all over America.

National Theatre Conference.Sher-
"Try our Vina Sol—-a fresh, crisp,
wood and one
[censored], a Commu-
nist Party member,were the two men
dry white.Sangre de Toro-a robust,
anc
who approved the plays for the Na-
mellow red.And our otherexcellent
tionalTheatre Conference....The
wines, including our famous Reservas.

informant further advised that [cen-
Torres:since the17th century,fine
sored], who was recently made presi-
wines from Spain.

Salud!

dent of theNational Theatre Confer-
ence[censored],and Sherwood were
TORRES
all tied up with the old ‘Chekov
Conference² held at Moscow, Rus-
sia,for the purpose of discussing the
THESPANISHTABLE:
use of the theatre for spreading Com-
Danish
THECUISINESANDWINESOFSPAIN
munist propaganda throughout the
Table
By Marimar Torres
world."
Over 200recipesandafascinatingtour throughoutSpain'sgastronomic and
In 1950, according to his file, Sher-
wineregions,visiting todaystop chefs andwinenakers.Published by
wood, along with a number of direc-
Doubleday,regularprice$17.95-availableforonly$14.95withthiscoupon.

tors,producers,actors,and other writ-
Mail to:TorresWines,300ValleyStret
ers, signed a telegram to Justice Rob-
Sausalito,CA 94965
ert H.

Jackson, of the Supreme Court,
Enclosed is check for $14.95(includes postage and handling).

asking the Court to reverse a 1948
Delivery: 4-6 weeks.

decision against members of the Holly-
NAME
ADDRESS
questions about possible Communist
CITY
STATE
ZIP
Party membership.--- PAGE BREAK ---

asking the Court to reverse a 1948
Delivery: 4-6 weeks. decision against members of the Holly-
NAME
ADDRESS
questions about possible Communist
CITY
STATE
ZIP
Party membership. By 1950, thel
Imported by Seagran Chateau & Estate Wines Co., New York, NY
Wines

--- PAGE BREAK ---82
OCTOBER5,1987
blacklist by studios and networks was a play.)A year later, the F.B.1.

fle
in full force.

notes,Williams sent greetings to the
In the case of Sherwood, and of Moscow Art Theatre,at a time when
other writers as well, the F.B.I.

an effort was being made to exchange
records could be contradictory and
1plays between the twocountries; the
self-protective.

Although the F.B.I.

.Moscow troupe came to New York in
maintained,in amemorandum on Sep-
1965.In 1950,the Daily Worker
SWEETESTDEAL
tember 10,1942, that no investigation
1 again mentioned Williams, noting
had been conducted on Sherwood,a
that he was among a group of c'top
IN TOWN!

memorandum from S.

S.

Alden, a sec-
show business cultural names'...who
Even Parking's Free!

tion chief, to D.

M.

Ladd, an assistant
thad been assembled to speak on a radio
$5975*
director of the F.B.I., dated January
show condemning the jailing of the
30,1942,reads,“However, there is
considerable derogatory information in
This radio show was refused by the
TaxesIncludedFrldayandSaturdaynlghLtd
not be converted
the fles relative to Robert E.

Sher- major networks.

The F.B.I.

memo-
OurNewYorkWeekend.

wood..." The F.B.I.

passed these randum that reports this also reports
Whatcouldbesweeterthanagreat
along,without qualification,to other that in 1951 a catalogue of the Dra-
weekendatDoralParkAvenue!Oneof
government branches, including the matic Workshop and Technical Insti-
themostaffordableratesever.Charming
WhiteHouse.

ambience,warmhospitality.Ourprime
tuteshowedWilliamstobeamember
locationputsyouinthecenterof itall,
In1955,Sherwood made a speech to of the institute's board of trustees.The
frommidtown shopping tothe theatre.

the Anti-Defamation League at the memorandum adds that the workshop
Thisweekend，experiencethe
Waldorf-Astoria Hotel,in New York.was cited as a Communist front by the
DoralParkAvenue difference.ambience,warmhospitality.Ourprime
tuteshowedWilliamstobeamember
locationputsyouinthecenterof itall,
In1955,Sherwood made a speech to of the institute's board of trustees.The
frommidtown shopping tothe theatre.

the Anti-Defamation League at the memorandum adds that the workshop
Thisweekend，experiencethe
Waldorf-Astoria Hotel,in New York.was cited as a Communist front by the
DoralParkAvenue difference.

*Includesa deluxeroom,continental breakfast,
Sherwood called the Eisenhower Ad-California Committee on Un-Ameri-
aboxof gourmet Lindtchocolates,2“BigApples,
ministration’s internal-security pro- can Activities.

A 1961 memorandum
a bottleofchampagne,theNewYorkTimes with
breakfast and parking.

wiretaps, a“heartless, soulless, callous a
an investigation made for the State
UORAL
tyranny,”and said,“I think that we,
Department, “the Bureau ascertained
PARKAVENUE
the American people, the taxpayers that Thomas Lanier Williams has the
NEWYORK'SEXQUISITESMALLHOTEL
who pay the salaries of[Secretary of
reputation of being a homosexual."
ParkAvenueat38thStreet·NewYork10016
State] John Foster Dulles and[State
Some of what follows has been cen-
Tel.:(212)687-7050·Telex:968872
Forreservationscallyourtravelagentr
Department security chief]ScottMc-
sored, and then the file continues,
toll-free 800-847-4135.

Leod...would like to know just
“Further, the Ofice of Naval Intelli-
when did we resolve that the rights
Sgence, in a separate inquiry, secured
of the individual American citizens s
statements from individuals who ad-
Arather swank andposhplace,
should be subordinated and indeed de- mitted participating in homosexual
a gourmet's oh-my-gosh place,
stroyed by some undocumented inter- acts with Wiliams.” The fle does
Campton Place.

pretation of what some official tells us not reveal why the F.B.I.

thought
is national security." This speech was that Williams might be a threat to
duly entered in Sherwood’'s F.B.I.

America’s security.

dossier.America’s security.

dossier.

NE writer whose F.B.I.file was
CAMPTON
HE F.B.I.file on Tennessee
ofparticular interest tomewas
PLACE
Williams (1911-83) includes
Archibald MacLeish (1892-1982),
only'seven pages,but they are telling.

because during the Roosevelt Admin-
Wherehighexpectations
arequietlymet.

mation was denied on several grounds:
：mentposts of anyAmericanwriter.He
San Francisco(415)781-5555
some of the information consisted of
was the Librarian of Congress from
“investigatory records compiled for 1939 to 1944; director of the wartime
law-enforcement purposes,”Iwas told,Office of Facts and Figures from 1941
or would involve disclosing“the iden- to 1942; assistant director of the Ofice
tities of confidential sources and con-of War Information from 1942 to
We're improving
fidential information."During the
e1943; and,in 1944 and 1945,an As-
McCarthy era, when Williamsplays sistant Secretary of State.

MacLeish,a
an Irish legend.

were being staged all over the country，friend of the President,contributed to
Ireland'slegendaryDromolandCastle
the F.B.I.

maintained a file on him his speeches, as he did to the speeches
will undergo a multi-million dollar
stamped“"SECURITY INFORMATION-—
of his friend Adlai Stevenson in Ste-
renovation this winter.Reservations
CONFIDENTIAL."Apparently,what
tvenson’s1952and1956Presidential
are now being accepted for next
made Williams a danger to the security campaigns.

MacLeish won the Pulit-
April.We look forward to seeing you
of the United States,in theview of the
ezerPrize three times for his poetry and
then.See your travel agent or call
F.B.I., was that his name had turned
his verse plays: for “Conquistador,
212-957-2700.Outside NewYork
up several times in the Daily Worker.

publishedin 1932;for “Collected
State, call 800-346-7007.

The bureau noted that “A Streetcar
Poems,”published in 1952;and for
DromolandTaste
on Broadway in 1947,was praised in a
kind of American poet laureate of
Communist Party newspaper.--- PAGE BREAK ---

publishedin 1932;for “Collected
State, call 800-346-7007. The bureau noted that “A Streetcar
Poems,”published in 1952;and for
DromolandTaste
on Broadway in 1947,was praised in a
kind of American poet laureate of
Communist Party newspaper. (The New Deal social reform, democracy,
F.B.I. mistakenly called it a book, not and anti-Fascist activism against dic-

--- PAGE BREAK ---THENEWYORKER
tatorships, from Franco's Spain to
83
Hitler'sGermany.His fle shows that
his views did not endear him to con-
gressional investigating committees or
to the F.B.I., which in a 1962 internal
memorandum called him a“liberal of
the New Deal type."
The MacLeish dossier contains
more than six hundred pages, includ-
ing a remarkable exchange of letters
and
memorandums, stamped “SE-
CRET,between MacLeish and J.Ed-
gar Hoover, which serve to expose the
differences in thinking between the
two officials—and, indeed,others in
the government-on the subject of lib-
eralism and witch-hunting.Mac-
Leish, as director of the Ofice of
Facts and Figures, could speak to
AFRICA
Hoover as a Washington equal; Hoo-
ver,knowing that he was dealing with
a friend of the President （and also
EGYPT
that he had an ace in the hole:an
LINDBLADTRAVEL,INC.

existing fle on MacLeish and his asso-
P.O.Box912,Dept.NY105
ciations with writers’and anti-Fascist
Whether camping in our exclusive
Westport,CT06881
organizations in the nineteen-thirties),
Masai Mara tented camp or cruising
Please send me your Africa/Egypt brochure.

was cordially evasive.

The exchange
aboard theM/SNeptuneflagship
reveals a good deal about Hoover's
of theNileRiver...a never-to-be-
NAME.

political maneuvering and the F.B.I.'s
forgotten delightfulexperience awaits
you.See your Travel Agent.Call or
ADDRESS
attitude toward all authors who were
under surveillance for their beliefs and
writefor ourbrochure.

CITY
writings.

*Egypt registry
LINDBLAD TRAVEL,INC.

STATE.

ZIP
The exchange began in January of
1942,a few weeks after Pearl Harbor,
with a letter from MacLeish.Someone
at the F.B.I.

put a summary headline
over this letter:
Gundto
MACLEISH'S CRITICISM OF THE
BUREAU
AND ITSINVESTIGATIVE POLICIES
newheights.--- PAGE BREAK ---

ZIP
The exchange began in January of
1942,a few weeks after Pearl Harbor,
with a letter from MacLeish.Someone
at the F.B.I. put a summary headline
over this letter:
Gundto
MACLEISH'S CRITICISM OF THE
BUREAU
AND ITSINVESTIGATIVE POLICIES
newheights. The letter reads, in part:
As reports on employees in the Office of
Facts and Figures come tome through the
Division ofInvestigation at OEMOffice
for Emergency Management], I notice the
recurrence of the phrase that the applicant
is said to be“associated with various Lib-
gests that investigators have been told to
consider Liberalism as suspicious.Know-
ing your feeling on this matter,I am sure
thatno suchinstructions ever came from
you. For the sake of our reputation in the
history books,don’t you think it would be
a good thing if all investigators could be
made to understand that Liberalism is not
onlynot a crimebutactually theattitude
of the President of the United States and
Gotta
the greater part of his Administration? In the same way, I note the frequent
Getta
recurrence ofreferences tomembershipin
organizations set up to aid the Spanish
GUND
Republic in its fight against the Fascist
Revolution of 1936.The implication is
that people who were against the Nazis
and the Fascists in'36were suspect.Here
again,and forthe sake againof therepua
Tall, tan and handsome...it's"Stilts"
tions of all of us in the history books,
wouldn't it be possible to instruct all in-
Gund,Inc.,P.O.Box H,Edison,NewJersey 08818

--- PAGE BREAK ---84
OCTOBER5,1987
vestigators that the people we are at war t
things.For example,report after report
with now are the same people who sup-
coming to me links the words“liberal”and
ported Franco in the Spanish civil war?

“Communist” as though in the opinion of
This is the new.

the F.B.1.

investigators they were the
A week later,Hoover responded
same thing.Inreport after report,support
Maui Prince Hotel
cautiously,by letter:
Mussolini is put down as one of the worst
As you know, the F.B.I.

is a fact-finding
of the black marks, and any association
organization.The Special Agents who
with Loyalist Spain is given as a basis of
conduct and report on these and allother
suspicion of loyalty to theUnited States.

investigations,are trained and instructed
Ihave already writtenHoover about
to do sowith absolute impartiality.These
this general matter and have had a very
investigations are conducted primarily for
the purpose of determining the patriotism,
pleasant but not precisely responsive an-
swer from him.My suggestion to him was
loyalty，and character of the individuals
that F.B.I.

agents ought to be given a
concerned..

course of instruction in recent history，
In the event an opinion is expressed by
American and other,to inform them of a
the person interviewed,theSpecial Agents
few basic facts, such as the fact that this
attempt to obtain the basis for the opinion.

country is now atwar with the men who
It is true that in some cases biased or
prejudicial statements may be made by
fact that President Roosevelt is a liberal
some persons interviewed and comments
such as the fact that the founders of this
by others may be objectionable or conceiv-
country believed in and practiced democ-
ably false.However，in the interest of
racy-and a few other similar simple
obtaining available data for submission to
items.course of instruction in recent history，
In the event an opinion is expressed by
American and other,to inform them of a
the person interviewed,theSpecial Agents
few basic facts, such as the fact that this
attempt to obtain the basis for the opinion.

country is now atwar with the men who
It is true that in some cases biased or
prejudicial statements may be made by
fact that President Roosevelt is a liberal
some persons interviewed and comments
such as the fact that the founders of this
by others may be objectionable or conceiv-
country believed in and practiced democ-
ably false.However，in the interest of
racy-and a few other similar simple
obtaining available data for submission to
items.

the employing agency, all information,re-
I agree with you that the present attack
gardless of its nature, is fully and accu-
upon liberals in the government is danger-
rately reported as received and in no way
ous.I think, too, that one of the most
do the individual comments refect any
dangerous aspects of that attack is to be
opinions or the policy of the F.B.I.

found in suchdocumentsas theenclosed
In March of 1942, MacLeish sent a
“investigation”of [name deleted].That
investigators of [censored] should go to a
confidentialletter to Attorney General
notorious America First leader to inquire
Francis Biddle,Hoover’s superior,and
about [censored]’s loyalty and that investi-
Biddle passed it on to Hoover.

To
gators of[censored]should turn to[cen-
Biddle, with whom he was on a first-
sored]for evidence leaves me absolutely
name basis, MacLeish could speak
breathless and fabbergasted.

Forgive this long rant.I know the whole
more openly:
thing makes you just as sick as it makes
You have a lot to worry about these
me.But can't we do something about it?To
gators of[censored]should turn to[cen-
Biddle, with whom he was on a first-
sored]for evidence leaves me absolutely
name basis, MacLeish could speak
breathless and fabbergasted.

Forgive this long rant.I know the whole
more openly:
thing makes you just as sick as it makes
You have a lot to worry about these
me.But can't we do something about it?

days and I hope Iam thelastman to add to
After Hoover was given a copy of
your worries,but the whole business of the
MacLeish's letter toAttorney General
investigation of citizens offering their ser-
Biddle,he wrote a secret memorandum
vices to thegovernment has atlast gotten
me down.Particularly in thecase ofwrit-
to Biddle stating that the F.B.I.

was a
ers and scholars and above all in the case
fact-finding agency, whose agents had
of liberal writers and scholars the investi-
an obligation to develop“a full and
gations have reached a level of humiliating
complete picture” of an individual’s
absurdity which would be laughable if it
background without“coloring”its re-
were not often sinister.

Malcolm Cowley has been driven to
ports.

Hoover denied that his bureau
resign from theOffice ofFacts andFigures
was judgmental and added, “To use
byan attack carriedon through West-
Mr.'MacLeish’s phraseology, I am
sane
left “breathless and fabbergasted’ by
the Dies Committee or of the Dies Com-
Mr.

MacLeish's disregard of the
mittee staff.Pegler very obviously had
roor
ilfacing
access to informationin the possession only
facts."
of the Dies Committee or the F.B.I.,andI
MacLeish followed up in April,
am certain the F.B.I.is not engaged in the
1942,with a letter to Biddle:What
business of trying its cases in the newspa-
is really involved is the education and
pers.

Now on top of the Cowley case come
experience of theinvestigators them-
800321MAUI
investigations of[name censored]and of
selves." In the exchange with Hoover,
[censored]'swhich takethe entire cake-
MacLeish did not prevail.

So ended
frosting, candles,and all.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Now on top of the Cowley case come
experience of theinvestigators them-
800321MAUI
investigations of[name censored]and of
selves." In the exchange with Hoover,
[censored]'swhich takethe entire cake-
MacLeish did not prevail. So ended
frosting, candles,and all. I enclose [cen-
sored] letter, in which you may wish to
that attempt to change Hoover's meth-
readthe twounderlined sentences.Ien-
ods and his long-held convictions——
close also the interim report on[censored]
goingback to the early nineteen-twen-
in which you may wish to glance at theties-in which liberalism was equated
with radicalism. flect unfavorably upon [censored]’s charac-
One of the things that Hoover knew
ter,reputation,and loyalty. I ask you--can you beat it? at the timebut MacLeish evidently did
MAKENA RESORT
[Name censored]'s statement that F.B.I. not know was that the F.B.I.had been
MAULOPRINCEHOTEL
investigators are“out of touch with intel-
keeping a file on him. One of the first
lectual currents”is a princely understate-
ment. They seem not only to be out of
entries in that file,in September of
5400MakenaAlanui/Kihei Maul
touchwithintellectual currents,they seem
1941,noted that,as the Librarian of
Hawati96753/JustbeyondWailea
tobein other currents of amost suspicious
Congress, MacLeish was on the mail-
nature-and I don't think Iam seeing
ing list of the National Federation for