fiScA ~K| guj O g~ * N f 
% 
CONTENTS * 
Introduction —  - -7 —-— 
It ay'll account of the New Orleana trip  
Ther[c*uUoUbl 11u between Cherlee Stein end Janies Earl Uej—. 
luvcittgutlou at the Provluclal Motel    
(200) 
Paragraph 
  1 
tfll jf-eJf.fi -f- /i-L*>fjv «ivft
:\JlJ 'od’uUf* .Av 'V<« t[
tfIT o f JV u-yfrjKlcV f 4t 
a.jru4,ft' .... ., 
* U. . . • 
INTRODUCTION 
(1) The FBI’s investigation, in many ways both thorough 
ccssful, .nevertheless failed to resolve several 'significant q
concerning Hoy’s preassassination activities. One such ques
the reason for Hay’s trip from I*os Angeles to New Orleans in
ber 1DG7. The task of the committee in the New Orleans inve
was to determine, first, the nature of James Eurl Hay’s activit
in New Orleans and, second, whether these activities might
the assassination or indicate & conspiracy between Hay and
individual or individuals. 
(2) Several separate sources of informal ion on Hay’s trip w
able to the committee. These included FBI investigative f
nesses in both California and New Orleans; Ray’s own state
the committee and other interviewers regarding his trip; and 
of conspiracy allegations thnt have surfaced since the assassin
fering explanations for Huy’s New Orleans activities.1 
(3) Much of the FBI’s investigation in 1908 involved inter
friends and relatives of Charles Stein,* individuals who h
into contuct with Hay during his 2-day stay in New Orlean
possible, the committee located these individuals,(1J and c
its own interviews. In some cases, the committee also intervie
agents responsible for the original investigation(#). As cou
pected, the passage of time significantly diminished the a
detail that could IKJ furnished by those interviewed. In a f
potential witnesses had died.(3) / . . . 
(1) Apart from the FBI’s investigation, the committee 
access to Hay’s own explanation for his trip. While many 
statements proved unreliable, the committee, nevertheless, a
to investigate any detail furnished by Hay that might shed
the purpose of the trip; The information provided by Ray an
statements then provided the background for the committ
Orleans investigation. 
RAYV ACCOUNT or THE NEW ORLEANS TRIP* 
(5) On Decemlier 15,'1907, James Earl Hay and Charles 
parted Bos Angeles for New Orleans. Hay’s own account of h
ties, from December 15,1967, until his return to Bos Angeles 
relatively consistent throughout his various interviews with 
mittee. Sometime subsequent to his arrival in Bos Angeles
Novcinhcr, Hay said that be called his contact [an associate o
1 See sec. ITO of Report for a detailed discussion of several New Orl
conspiracy allegations. « 
1 Charles Stein wus Ray’s traveling companion to and from New O
1A more extensive discussion’of Ray’s accounts on the New Orlean
he found In a separate stuff report entitled “Cuiiipllation of the Stuf
James Earl liny.” See, vol. Ill, HSOA-MLK hearlugs at pp. 201-200
• • * . (207) ' *scussion’of Ray’s accounts on the New Orlean
he found In a separate stuff report entitled “Cuiiipllation of the Stuf
James Earl liny.” See, vol. Ill, HSOA-MLK hearlugs at pp. 201-200
• • * . (207) ' *

--- PAGE BREAK ---268 
* in New Orleans.(4) He nindc the call, he said, because he was short 
on funds.

During the course of this phone call, Nay was instructed 
to travel to Now Orleans during the month of December to meet with 
Uuoul, although no nrccisc dale for this proposed journey was speci- 
fied.

Kay maintained that his decision to drive to New Orleans pre- 
dated his discussion on December 14 with Marie Martin at the Sultan 
Koom Bar.

It wus during this discussion that Kay mentioned to Mar- 
tin that he would be traveling to New Orleans.(5) Martin, according 
to Kay, expressed interest in Kay’s intention to make this trip and 
suggested that her cousin, Charles Stein, accompany Kay and share 
with tho driving.

0rr-tfj fltrju/f &0-A MAyckAhfM) 
^ (6) Boy has never provided extensive detail on the drive to New 
Orleans, or ulxmt Charles Stein, his driving partner.

He has stated 
thut he has no recollection of his discussions with Stein and conceded 
that he could have told him anything.

Stein and Kay drove straight 
through to New Orleans, without stopping at night; the driving was 
split.

While en route, Kay made a phone call to his brother, Jerry, the 
purpose of which, Kay claimed, was merely to check in with him and 
say hello.

(7) After arriving in New Orleans, Kay said he checked into the 
Provincial Motel on the recommendation of Charles Stein.

Since he 
and Kaoul had no prearranged meeting place, Kay called the New 
Orleans telephone nmnl>cr and was instructed by an individual to 
meet Kaoul at Lc Bunny Lounge on Canal St reset.

(6») After this phone 
call—sometime during the nfternoon of Dcccmlxu* 17—Kay met with 
Kaoul.

During this conference, which lasted for only 15 to 20 minutes, 
Kay maintained that the pros|>ect of a gunruiiiiing operation was 
first discussed.

Kay received $500 from Kaoul with the promise of 
more money in the future.During this conference, which lasted for only 15 to 20 minutes, 
Kay maintained that the pros|>ect of a gunruiiiiing operation was 
first discussed.

Kay received $500 from Kaoul with the promise of 
more money in the future.

After Kay and Kaoul concluded their busi- 
ness, Kay informed Slain that he was ready to return to Los Angeles, 
hut since Stein \vus visiting relatives mid wished to remain in New 
Orleans, they stayed 2 additional days.

5 (8) Kay’s explanation for his trip to New Orleans has not varied 
o throughout his interviews with the committee, lie was in need of 
** money und a passport from Kaoul, and because a drive hy car would 
~ not l»e overly expensive, he decided to make the trip.

The committee 
^ultimately rejected Ray’s Knoul story; nevertheless it found his trip 
s'ij.

significant for other reasons.

Kay’s need to transact whatever business 
-ho had in New Orleans must have been pressing.

A long-distance car 
^ > trip exposed Kay, a fugitive from the law, to the risk of lieing stopped 
£ -S-by police in a rundom vehicle check.

Jlis willingness to assume this 
s risk indicated the significance which lie attached to the trip.

-^(0) Charles Stein, Kay’s companion during the drive to and from 
| § New Orleans, therefore became a major focal point of the committee’s 
* efforts.

« 
; ....

CHAHI.ES JOSEPH STEIN 
I** Decern!air 1DG7, Stein was a 38-year-old, unemployed, ex-car 
c>salesman enjoying a hohcininn lifestyle centered around a personal 
cosmic philosophy of life.

Ifo resided with a sister, Rita Stein, and 
two of her four children at 5666 Franklin Avenue in Los Angeles.

% , * superficially, ttjnore improbable associate of Ray would he 
X ddhcult to imugijie.-'Nevcrtlieloss, several aspects of Stein’s buck- 
269 
'H 
£ 
».

U 
fit 
An* 
t.

, f 
ground raised logical areas of inquiry.U 
fit 
An* 
t.

, f 
ground raised logical areas of inquiry.

First; several witnesses in both 
the FBI and the committee investigations had provided evidence indi- 
cating Kay’s iiiterkst in both the use and-sales*of narcotics (amphet- 
amines at Missouri Stuto Prison and marihuana during the year of 
freedom after Ruy’s escape.) Without evaluating the credibility nnd 
weight attached to this evidence, the fact that Charles Stein’s bnck- 
V ground (7) reflected occasional involvement in narcotics suggested 
this activity as one possible explanation for the association between 
Kay and Stein and for their abrupt trip to New Orleans.

(5) 
(11) Other areas that the committee focused on during its investign- 
tions of Stein, and his association with James Karl Kay, included the 
possibility, raised by the testimony of several California witnesses, 
that Stem and Kay had known each other long before their readily 
admitted meeting on December 14 (the day before the New Orleans 
trip); Stein’s registration at American Independent Party Headquar- 
ters in Los Angeles on the morning of the New Orleans trip; nnd 
Shunjs of K^ay^a^^vitiesji^New_Orlenns.

jJJ) '^as J^Bu’viewed initially by the committee in January 
1978.

hollowing this extensive 3-day interview, a field investigation 
was undertaken in both Los Angeles and New Orleans to establish the 
reliability of statements received from Stein during the interview, mid 
to examine Stein’s background, associates, and activities in both cities, 
hollowing these investigative efforts, Stein was brought to Washing- 
ton for questioning under oath by the committee.

This substantial 
investigative commitment was considered necessary liecause of Stein's 
status as one of the few existing primary Ka/^ssoHirti7S7Hind because 
oNiis involvement in the~New Orleans^rl^r^l^l^ults of the inves- 
tigation are summarized below.

(9) .--- PAGE BREAK ---

This substantial 
investigative commitment was considered necessary liecause of Stein's 
status as one of the few existing primary Ka/^ssoHirti7S7Hind because 
oNiis involvement in the~New Orleans^rl^r^l^l^ults of the inves- 
tigation are summarized below. (9) . (13) Charles Joseph Stein was boro
1 on May 11,1929, in New Orleans 
La.; with the exception of one stay in New York in 1952 and travel 
with the merchant murine during the late 1910’s and enrly 1950’s, he 
resided in New; Orleans until 1061, when he moved to his 1978 
domicile—Los Angeles, Calif. Stein left school oftcr the sixlh grade, 
and held minor jobs shining shoes and washing dishes until he begun 
work ns a deckhand on a tugboat at the age of 13. Three years liter 
ho took out union membership in the merchant marine, and recalled 
visits to South America and Greece during his periods at sea. After 
several years with the merchant marine (at least 3 of which were 
at sea), Stein found employment ns a longshoreman on the docks of 
New Orleans. This wus followed by a brief term us a welder’s and 
pipefitter’s helper. (H) In 1952, Stein went to New York in search of a position with a 
company exporting auto parts to Brazil; the job failed to materialize 
when the company’s license to ship materials abroad was revoked, nnd 
Stein returned to New Orleans and joined tbo Army. After 5 months 
at Fort Bliss, Tex., Stein suffered an injury to his lower hack during 
a carpentry detail. Soon after (he accident he left the military. (15) After leaving tho Army, Stein returned to New Orleans nml 
during the next 10 years took positions as barker, waiter, and bartender 
with clubs in the French Quarter. Stein managed a club nnmed 
Murle s Lounge in the midfifties, and worked at the Silver Frolic in 
the enrly sixties., , #l 
* l- ... i , (,i .ilt i.i ><;,.!( e| n*) , 
jfv 
42-030—70- -18

--- PAGE BREAK ---270 
.(16) As of 1978, Stein had been married four times, lie had ft son, 
Charles Stein, Jr., by his first wife, Marie Calalana, whom ho married 
in approximately 1919 or 1950.

Marie Catalana was followed by Gloria 
Hull (no children) and, between 1900 and 1904, by Mickey Medina 
(no children).

During the 3 to 4 years prior to his departure from 
New Orleans in 1904, Stein niul Mickey Medina ran a prostitution 
business oBering the services of Mickey and several other women.(10) 
Stein lived oir the proceeds of the business.

(17) In addition to prostitution activities in New Orleans, otems 
criminal activities in that city included, by his own admission, running 
dice tables at Mario’s Txningo in 1955, and the use of a variety of nar- 
cotics.

The probability that Stein was involved, at least on a small 
scale, in the sale of narcotics in New Orleans also seems high.(77) 
(18) After leaving New Orleans in 1964, Stein moved to Los Angeles, 
homo of his sister hits and her husband Lino Rosas, lie worked as a 
car salesman for helix Chevrolet on Figucrea Street, Brand Motois 
on Crenshaw Boulevard, and Burbank Ford on Olive Street, leaving 
the last job sometime in 1967.

Stciids job with Burbank Ford was his 
last oflicial job.

Since then lie has been supported by unemployment 
and social security disability payments.

.

, 
(19) During his interview with the committee stair, Stem professed 
his belief in a cosmic philosophy of life.

In addition to a strong belief 
in God, Stein’s philosophic principles incorporated a belief in an after- 
life, in extraterrestial life, and in an ability to communicate with other 
forms of lifc.(/2) Stein began-developing his cosmic philosophy in 
1961 with his departure from New Orleans and relocation in California.

V ' Tima, In*, abided by these principles during hisVchitionshijj with James 
beliefs were cleu rl}TTm oTtlirR lox; (JWh^-Stein- 
seemed to be a highly intelligent and esscnliully rational individual.In addition to a strong belief 
in God, Stein’s philosophic principles incorporated a belief in an after- 
life, in extraterrestial life, and in an ability to communicate with other 
forms of lifc.(/2) Stein began-developing his cosmic philosophy in 
1961 with his departure from New Orleans and relocation in California.

V ' Tima, In*, abided by these principles during hisVchitionshijj with James 
beliefs were cleu rl}TTm oTtlirR lox; (JWh^-Stein- 
seemed to be a highly intelligent and esscnliully rational individual.

TUB RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CHARLES STEIN AND JAMES FARL BAY 
(20) Prior to moving to 5660 Franklin Street (his residency on 
December 15, the day Stein and Bay departed for New Orleans), Stein 
lived at 3310 Floyd Terrace, the home of Rita and Lino Rosas, Charles’ 
sister and brother-in-law.

During the FBI investigation, three indi- 
viduals living in the vicinity of 3310 Floyd Terrace staled that they 
had observeda white Mustang outside of Stein’s address, during the 
period of Thanksgiving 1967.

One neighbor, a Mr.

Raymond Murphy, 
1 identified the driver of the car us James Karl Ray.

(73).

Iff bis in fact 
f occurred, then Stein and Bay met before cither are willing to 
acknowledge.

(21) During his interview, Stein acknowledged that he lived at 3340 
Floyd Terrace in I960 and 1967, but was certain that ho and Bita left 
that address and moved to 5666 Franklin Avenue as long as 2 months 
before he met Bay.

Stein emphatically denied any contact with Bay 
at the prior address; he stated that Lino Bosas, an ex-New Orleans 
resident of Mexican heritage, used 3340 Floyd Terrace as a location to 
fix up old care for resale and worked with an unidentified Mexican 
mechanic in this business.

Lino Bosas also dealt in marihuana at 3340 
Floyd Terrace, and Stein, while denying any direct involvement in the 
operation, admitted thut on one occasion he buried u bottle of mari- 
huana in the backyard to improve its quality.Stein emphatically denied any contact with Bay 
at the prior address; he stated that Lino Bosas, an ex-New Orleans 
resident of Mexican heritage, used 3340 Floyd Terrace as a location to 
fix up old care for resale and worked with an unidentified Mexican 
mechanic in this business.

Lino Bosas also dealt in marihuana at 3340 
Floyd Terrace, and Stein, while denying any direct involvement in the 
operation, admitted thut on one occasion he buried u bottle of mari- 
huana in the backyard to improve its quality.

Stein denied knowledge 
i 
271 
of Lino’s marihuana source, but stated that it was a good one, because 
Lino was able to sell the merchandise at reasonable prices.(14) 
(22) 3340 Floyd Terruce was used us a crash pud for many of Stein’s 
friends.

Nevertheless, Stein stated thut the premises were not used for 
bust ling, that is, prostitution, und claimed thut ho would have known i f 
such a business had licen ii 0i "4“'
1 4l‘“4 T>~ ~“1'1 
have fit in at 3340 Floyd 
hippies on searching, mind- 
close-mindcd individual was not into this at the time.

Stein also as- 
serted that Bay, if questioned, could provide no information on the 
type of iieople who frequented 3340 Floyd Terrace.

Finally, Stein 
denied that Bay parked his Mustang there, and recalled no other 
Mustitngs with Alabama plates in the vicinity of the residence.(16) 
(23) During his executive session testimony, Stein ngain clearly and 
emphatically denied Bay’s presence at 3340 Floyd Terrace, and noted 
thut his sister, Bita Bosas, possessed a white Mustang while living at 
that address.

He stated that anyone suggesting Ray’s presence at 3340 
Floyd Terraco had lied to the committee.

(16) 
(24) Mr.

Stein’s denial of contact with Ray at 3340 Floyd Terrace 
was corroborated by the testimony of his Bister, Bita Bosas,(77) as 
welLas by additional field investigation performed by tlie committee?(16) 
(24) Mr.

Stein’s denial of contact with Ray at 3340 Floyd Terrace 
was corroborated by the testimony of his Bister, Bita Bosas,(77) as 
welLas by additional field investigation performed by tlie committee?

Basedon a vailnble evidence, it can he concluded that Bay and”Stem 
did not, in fact, meet prior to December 14, 1967, when they were in- 
troduced at the Sultan Boom, a lounge at the St.

Francis Hotel in 
San Francisco.

.

»» .

(25) In December of 1967, Charles Stein was living witli his sister 
Bita and two of her children at 5666 Franklin Street.

The weight of 
available evidence indicated that he met Bay on December 14, 1967, 
at the request of Bita, who had encountered Bay earlier that evening 
at the Sultan Boom lounge.

Bita had been looking for a means of 
transporting her two other children from New Orleans to California, 
and Kay had indicated his own plans to go to New Orleans.

Charles 
Stein was persuaded by his sister to drive with Bay to New Orleans 
to pick up the children.

It was Stein’s impression that Bay felt ini^I 
tially lie would l>e making the trip with Rita, and was both surprised 1 
and suspicious when Stein was substituted.

(26) The committee developed no significant evidence to contradict 
this version of Stein’s first meeting with Bay.

Beeuusc Stein was un- 
employed at the time, lie was free to leave Los Angeles on « moinont’s 
notice.

Ifts had extensive family in New Orleans and the trip provided 
an opportunity to see them again.fitf) Finally, in light of Bay’s fugi- 
tive status, it is not'unreasonable for liiin to have witnted another pas- 
senger in the ear during a long drive on the open road; the chances of 
a random slop by the police existed, and Stein’s presence provided a 
legitimate reason for making the trip to New Oi lcans—Unit is, to pick 
ill) Stein’s niece and nephew.

Bay was, however, apparently concerned 
about the possibility that he was Ixung set up for a robbery bv Bita 
Stein and her brother.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Ifts had extensive family in New Orleans and the trip provided 
an opportunity to see them again.fitf) Finally, in light of Bay’s fugi- 
tive status, it is not'unreasonable for liiin to have witnted another pas- 
senger in the ear during a long drive on the open road; the chances of 
a random slop by the police existed, and Stein’s presence provided a 
legitimate reason for making the trip to New Oi lcans—Unit is, to pick 
ill) Stein’s niece and nephew. Bay was, however, apparently concerned 
about the possibility that he was Ixung set up for a robbery bv Bita 
Stein and her brother. Ile.suggested to Bitaimd Marie Martin that he 
might bring a gun with him on the trip.(19) Stein never saw a weapon 
on Bay during the trip. . v • • 
(27) In summary, the credible evidence woiild seem to indicate that 
Stein and Bay cume together fortuitously the day before the trip to 
New Orleans, that both had separate and independent reasons for 
IAv14 
r ■ 
S 
£ 
h 
w 
t ir 
tc 
Sr \y 
( 
r)H> 
i' t. JoA 
iiVt

--- PAGE BREAK ---272 
making the trip, ami therefore that no evil purpose existed, tit least 
initially, for their joint venture.

(28) The day of their depart tire for New Orleans, Tiny took Stein, his 
Bister, Rita, and their cousin Marie Martin to Wallace campaign head- 
quarters on Lankerahira Boulevard.

Contrary to Ray’s assertions, the 
three Stein relatives were unanimous in their statements that Ray 
initiated the trip to campaign headquarters.

(£0) Charles recalled that 
Ray offered to pay for the expenses on the trip if all three would agree 
to sign up with the Wallace campaign, and added that he agreed readi- 
ly.

In light of Stein’s clearly apolitical nature, and tlie total absence 
of any other evidence linking Stein and the A IP, his denial of involve- 
ment in the original decision to visit AIP headquarters was entirely 
credible.

’ 
(29) After completing their visit to ATP headquarters, Ray drove 
Rita nml Marie hack to 566G Franklin Avenue and dropped them olF.

Ray and Stein then drove to Ray’s residence on Serrano Street and 
stopped very briefly to pick up mail.

Stein did not enter the apartment 
then or at uny other time.

, 
(30) Stein recalled that Ray was definitely going to New Orleans for 
reusons of his own and that lie was not making the trip merely to ac- 
commodate Rita.

Ray mentioned that ho was going to see more than 
one person—either engineers or contractors.

While Ray gave no s|m- 
cific address for the meeting (other thun a reference toCluirtres Street, 
which Stein cannot recall precisely), Ray’s description of the area 
brought to Stein’s mind a specific location containing warehouses mid 
railroad trncks.(£/) Stein felt that Ray’s reference to (he meeting 
place in New Orleans reflected a certain familiarity with the city.

(31) Stein thought that Ray may have told him that hu called New 
Orleans, in advunce, to |et them know when lie would arrive.

(22) This 
call was made after Ruy pulled off the 1*004!

outside of Houston, Tex.(22) This 
call was made after Ruy pulled off the 1*004!

outside of Houston, Tex.

Stein recalled a liquor store mid a camly si ore in the vicinity.

Stein 
was never close enough to Ray to observe the number he dialed, or 
the amount of money he may have used, or to hear the conversation.

He stated that lie observed Ray make phone calls on only one or two 
occasions and that the culls never lasted more than 5 or 10 minutes.

In his testimony during committee hearings, Ray admitted milking one 
call to his brother, Jerry, while en route to New Orleans.(2?J) 
(32) Stein also stated, several times during his initial interview, 
that lie recalled Ray mentioning the nnino Raoul.

Stein was con- 
fronted, during this initial interview, with an FBT interview which 
reflected his statement thut the i>erson ho [Ray] was going to see— 
[had] an Itulimi-sounding name—a well-known name in New Orleans.

(2$) Stein agreed that Raoul was not Italian sounding, and stated that 
perhaps he wus dodging the FBI’s questions.

(33) Because of the clear significance of this portion of Stein’s inter- 
view, Stein was usked uguin about this matter during his testimony 
under oath before the committee in April 1978.

At thut time lie was 
also confronted with a February 13, 1969, FBI interview in which lie 
had liecn usked specifically whether Ray had mentioned 11 Raoul at 
any time during their relationship.

Stem’s response, as summarized 
in the FBI interview: “Stein said he had never heard Ray mention 
unyonc by the nume of Raoul during his contacts with Ruy.”(2J) 
Qj (fcsM' for*-j- ^ , 
273 
Stein’s testimony on the subject, given under oath, became far less 
certain: .

»* i .1 
STAFF COUNSKI*.

This is the first time you testified about 
this matter under oath.

I am asking you, is it your testimony 
now despite what you told the Bureau, despite your explicit 
denial to the Bureau—is it your testimony today that Ray, in 
fact, mentioned the name Raoul !

* Mr.

STEIN.

I think that he did.STEIN.

I think that he did.

If I can remember, I think 
J he (lid.

I don’t know.

f * .

STAFF OUNSEU So your membry now is not as precise as it 
once was on that issue!

Mr.

STEIN.

It was not even precise back then.

(31) In several interviews with the FBI during the months immedi- 
ately after the assassination, many covering the New Orleans trip in 
great detail, Stein never indicated that Ray had mentioned Raoul.

There is a similar ubsence of this detail in his interviews with the press, 
and in all of reporter Louis Lomax* articles on the New Orleans trio 
y 
i 
3 1 
i 
initially informing the committee investigators of the incident in Jan 
miry, his recollection became notably uncertain when pressed on the 
mutter under oath.

i.

.

1 .1 1 • j .

' , 
(35) Aguinst this background, and considering the fact that Stein 
was in^cQiitact' with individuals attempting to put together a film 
dnmnncntnry on the King n«aftf»ination In January 1078, and who later 
:tttempted to sell information to the committee for a substantial sum of 
money.* Stein’s alleged recollection or Ray’s mention of Raoul on 
the New Orleans trip was prompted, it may be concluded, not by a 
Specific factual occurrence, but ml her by the passing chance of financial 
gain.

It would be difficult to credit Stein’s testimony on this matter.

(36) Ray stayed in New Orleans for 2 days.

After his early after- 
noon arrival with Stein, they made two muck stops at the homes of 
two of Stein’s relatives, to drop off some belongings that Marie Martin 
had sent east, and then to reach the residence where Stein himself 
would lie staying.

Ray then asked for suggestions on a place to stay 
in the same general area of the city.

I To gave no indication of the 
amount of money he was willing to spend..The Provincial Motel was 
suggested, to the best of Stein’s current recollection, by one of his 
relatives.

After agreeing on the Provincial, Stein and Ruy proceeded 
to the motel.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I To gave no indication of the 
amount of money he was willing to spend..The Provincial Motel was 
suggested, to the best of Stein’s current recollection, by one of his 
relatives. After agreeing on the Provincial, Stein and Ruy proceeded 
to the motel. Stem waited outside in the ulley while Ray registered. Ray then brought Stein back to his relutives, and departed with the 
Mustang. (££) 
(37) In light of the consistency between the stories of Ray and 
Stein, and the absence of countervailing evidence, the Provincial 
Motel was probably not selected by Ray prior to his arrival. Thus, 
any business that Ray may have planned prior to his arrival in Now 
  . . *1 .. . ' • < *i 
♦Tills Informutlon wns Inter turned over to the committee pursuant to n con- 
cnttslonal stihpcnn. It consisted of taped Interviews with Stein and Marie Martin 
nml wns generally a repetition of lit forum liuu already provided to tlie Fill or the 
committee. L

--- PAGE BREAK ---C** ^ 
274 
Orlcuns ili<l not involve the motel.

This tlocs not preclude the possi- 
bility that Huy met with associates at the motel at some later time.

(38) Sometime later the first day, Stein took a walk with his son.

Charles Stein, Jr.

They covered approximately 2 miles and passed 
by tlie “merchandise mart” and the Trade Atari building.

Falter that 
ufternoon, Ray told Stein that lie (Hay) hud been drinjniig beer, 
ami hud seen Stein walking on Canal Street.

fT"1 W 
(39) Hay’s failure to call Stein over to join him at the liar on Canal 
Street suggested to Stein the possibility that Hay was with someone 
at the lime.

Hay told Tluio that ho met “Raoul,” in “fxi Bunny 
Lounge,” on the day of his arrival in New Orleans; “Le Bunny 
T^ounge” is, in fact, on Canal Street, and thus could have been the 
bar where Hay was drinking his lieer.* Because Stein did not see Hay 
he could not tell the committee whether Hay was alone or with another.

Stein had no knowledge of “Le Bunny Lounge,” and Could recall no 
mention of this establishment by Hay.

(£7) 
(40) The next day (December 18) sometime during the morning, 
Ray came to Stein’s sister’s (Marie Leo’s) home.

Hay told Stein that 
he had finished his business and was ready to return to Tx>s Angeles.

The fact that Ray was prepared to return to California so quickly 
would indicate, of course, a prompt completion of his business in 
New Orleans.

Moreover, it would seem to rule out the possibility that 
Hay came to New Orleans to enjoy the French Quarter or a change 
of scenery.

Rather, he appears to have had some specific and relatively 
simple tusk to accomplish.

(41) Tn fact, Stein and Hay did not depnrt until the next day; 
Stein’s recollection is quite clear that this was his idea, not Hay’s.

Stein was apparently able to convince Hay that the weather pre- 
cluded an immediate departure; after a phone call to unidentified 
authorities for weather information, Hay agreed to postpone their 
departure by 1 day.(41) Tn fact, Stein and Hay did not depnrt until the next day; 
Stein’s recollection is quite clear that this was his idea, not Hay’s.

Stein was apparently able to convince Hay that the weather pre- 
cluded an immediate departure; after a phone call to unidentified 
authorities for weather information, Hay agreed to postpone their 
departure by 1 day.

(£8) 
(42) Stein emphatically denied two other possible reasons for Hay’s 
New Orleans trip, both of which had been received by the committee 
from Charles DcCarvolho—a close, New Orleans friend of Steiids.^/)) 
First, DeCnrvelho told the committee that Stein had told him (Pe- 
Carvelho) in 1907 that Halt came to New Orleans to campaign for 
AVallaee’s Presidential hid in Mississippi and Alnhnma, to distribute 
campaign materials, and to solicit campaign funds.

Second, DeCar- 
velho said Stein had indicated a plan to introduce Hay to some of 
his friends, including Pupa Joe Conforto.

Stein denied making either 
statement to PeOarvelho.

Stein admitted that lie knew Joe.

Conforto, 
hut stated (lint ho would never have introduced Hay to him; more- 
over, he did not recall seeing Joe Conforto himself while in New 
Orleans.

(30) 
(43) Finally, Stein specifically denied, under oath, involvement 
with Hay in “illegal or criminal activity” generally, or in the manu- 
facture, purchase or sale of narcotic or non-narcotic drugs.

Similarly, 
•While the committee rejected Hoy's "Raoul” story, It noted the high likeli- 
hood that the story wus Intended to concent contact with one or both of his 
brothers.

Huy's reference to u meeting willi “Raoul" nt “He Hiiiiny Lounge" may 
w«Ubc another lusluuce In which he Is disguising such contact .

At J ^ fl/jj ^ UMoi w^r\ Wv\ 
275 
lie denied involvement with Ray in any type
-of legitimate joint ven- 
ture during the trip.Huy's reference to u meeting willi “Raoul" nt “He Hiiiiny Lounge" may 
w«Ubc another lusluuce In which he Is disguising such contact .

At J ^ fl/jj ^ UMoi w^r\ Wv\ 
275 
lie denied involvement with Ray in any type
-of legitimate joint ven- 
ture during the trip.

• r 
(44) In light of several factors, including (n) the major differences 
between the characters and personalities of Stein and Ray; (b) the 
strong evidence that Ray and Stein met the day lieforo the New 
Orleans trip; (c) Stein’s emphatic and specific denials, under oath, 
of criminal activity with Ray; (d) an extensive field investigation in 
both New Orleans and Los Angeles which included extensive quest ion- 
/Vn °-» un,,er of associates and relatives of Charles Stein; 
',1 tx?I>I>CJAre
itmt Sfeui a involvement with James Enrl Rav both 
on the New Or cans trip, and otherwise, was innocent and unrelated 
/!*7ya'Vay11,0 ussassmation of Murtin Luther King 
, °.m s testimony did provide several indication!

of conspirncy 
or at least association, between Ray and another in New Orleans: 
(a) Ray had a “purpose” for the trip in.Stein’s mind; 
1 ( ) felkla meeting place in New Orleans where lye would 
eontact his associate(s) ; JU, \jricjf fa jfa/i 
C) °r iT° *clef>hone co»9 en route to New 
()i leans, and thinks now Ray may have been calling New Orleans 
to let Ins ussociatc(s) know when he would arrive:* 
(d) the circumstances surrounding Ray’s sighting of Stein on 
Canal Street on the first clay (December 17) indicated he 
was with someone at the lime; and A M# 
(e) Ray completed his business in New Orleans rapidly, and was 
ready to return to Los Angeles the morning of December 18.

Now Orton"7 1,0 co,1c,uded> therefore, that Ray met with someone in 
Now Orleans on prearranged business.of conspirncy 
or at least association, between Ray and another in New Orleans: 
(a) Ray had a “purpose” for the trip in.Stein’s mind; 
1 ( ) felkla meeting place in New Orleans where lye would 
eontact his associate(s) ; JU, \jricjf fa jfa/i 
C) °r iT° *clef>hone co»9 en route to New 
()i leans, and thinks now Ray may have been calling New Orleans 
to let Ins ussociatc(s) know when he would arrive:* 
(d) the circumstances surrounding Ray’s sighting of Stein on 
Canal Street on the first clay (December 17) indicated he 
was with someone at the lime; and A M# 
(e) Ray completed his business in New Orleans rapidly, and was 
ready to return to Los Angeles the morning of December 18.

Now Orton"7 1,0 co,1c,uded> therefore, that Ray met with someone in 
Now Orleans on prearranged business.

Stein, however, provided no 
tolhou^hmtiom** <h° WnS neccsaarily “"nec.ed 
‘ INVESTIGATION AT THE PHOVINCIAL MOTEL 
!£) T>?nrin*LiU *nv®stigalion in New Orleans, the FBT determined 
that Ray registered at the Provincial Motel, 1024 Chartres Street for 
of
.

s""day “'“I Monday, December 17-18, 1007.

Duo to llio 
clear indications of a meeting m New Orleans, the committee inves- 
ligiitcd tlie possibility t-liat tlie Provincial was the meeting place.

to 18 &&!'.

n- ‘r J n.ftN«w Orleans Field Olliee circulated 
f« 18 otliei field ofliccs a list of all guest9 who were registered at the 
1 rovincia Motel(Jf) between December 17-19, 1908, tho dates of 
d^ntair].25 Each fiehUfl^wns 
directed to locate and interview tho individuals for any knowledge 
W,?n rg !fc J,aveJierta,,,
.,l,ff ‘o Ray.

Of these 2ft individuals, only fo 
were located and interviewed by.

tho FBI by the end of May 1008; 
inveshgat "tervicwed 1,0,1 “formation to assist the FBI’s 
Int^te,«n 00,1,41 ,pi^v,de no speclflc detnllB or recollections to corroborate his 
Intriguing speculation on the pur|»ose of the cull.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Of these 2ft individuals, only fo 
were located and interviewed by. tho FBI by the end of May 1008; 
inveshgat "tervicwed 1,0,1 “formation to assist the FBI’s 
Int^te,«n 00,1,41 ,pi^v,de no speclflc detnllB or recollections to corroborate his 
Intriguing speculation on the pur|»ose of the cull. orate Ills 
- •*T,io conuullteo developed significant evidence Indicating a mpetlna tatween 
°-“ «■ - A-JSSfira 
Vy't l\Hdl/Vntfju (J~ \ iVi hjjth*v.t

--- PAGE BREAK ---M l MIMI4, 
w ^ Ji Ji /lA /V ' 
270 
* e 
\r 
* 
V 
■*> 
4 
.

XT Ini.

Oft 19G8 issue of Look magazine, ail Article by 
(19) In the November »,limwuQoi * {Q tl|e ttSSUSSina- 
William Bradford It»»?

^^.f^iuy'ssUy at the Provincial Motel, 
lion.

In this article, lime dcacul<-d >requested tlie New Orleans 
In resiKinse to tliia lnforinalion, , .

;a|,^„u.

(33) Pursuant to 
field office to rc.iiv^tef ^ »o((;, I0l;01.(is were incorpo- 
nitwfiSo^ report d“tfiles, tlw committee determined 
(50) In reviewing these in‘^ff^ste.ed ut Hie Provincial at Hie 
tluit there were actually 03 g .

®0a voiristrunts originally mves* 
same time ns Ray, ns ®I‘P?“|1.

- o November 1008, the 
ligated by the Bureau in Annl andl .M^ay.

aaditio..al 38 names 
l-'tll dispatched to the perlme«t field from lhese leads, 
of guests.

No positive information was .

j ,jwt j{ny using the 
(51) Records of the Provincial Motdmdujtol U ^ l7_18.

alias “Clalt” occupied ^ that only one person 
(£5^ Galt’s registration caid also mul that Galt checked 
occupied room 126 dl,rin£f^ ]9> 106Y.(36) The FBI 
out prior to 1 p.in.

on Mond y, ^ ^ p|0Viufini Motel, in 
interviewed Bryan Bui <-pc, t) Bureau that he hud no record 
April 1008.

(37\ BuRcpe ‘the dSof Ray s occupancy.

The 
of unusual activity in loom - distance phone calls from 
FBI determined that ltay ^«To ,ZL the deteroiiil«tion regard- 
room 120; the Bureau was «b , Jprior lo A,nil 4,1008 had 
ing local calls since the log for cal lai ma I .

A iVuPepe on l'eb- 
been destroyed.

(38) Hie members that room 120 was, 
runry 14, 1978.

He advised the stall min'^™ in ti,0 „,otel, since 
at the time of Ray’s occupuncy.

tlie l * ^ Qn different (loois.He advised the stall min'^™ in ti,0 „,otel, since 
at the time of Ray’s occupuncy.

tlie l * ^ Qn different (loois.

lie 
it was split-level, with the bath*l l {cA at a rote of $14 a day and 
recalled that the room probably wttwnteu would find 
that if more than one person wentown"" 
x the accommodations very imcomfo • ^ nay»s stay at the 
^ (52) The m«»tiiitn6uingw^«AntJU“^u^J^"^ Anthony Charles 
ProvinciaTWotel was^veloped m thetest^ commi„CCl wiUi evi- 
])cQiu3uilho.(4^) H,s infoimatio I Because of the importance 
donee of a meeting at the 1 statements alluding 
of such a revelation and ^ ^ ^ other accounts (including his 
r, KISS i» A ■*»"■»«* testimony « 
ST ■sfeSSf, “4Iris ASSS .».r 
employed as a cab driver in New , , , » arrived at the home of 
statement to the committee, he ^ted thuU flm, i{ay>8 arrival 
Stein’s mother, Clovma Olonzo, slio.tly jlllr0(,„<*d to Ray as 
there on Sunday, Becembei • naked Bcfiarvolho to dnve 
“Eric Galt,” ^^^.^Swuwhr.

I got to go.” 
him to the French ltav siicifically requested that he drive 
<40 BeCarvellio recallcd at Kay s ^c.n y ,Jtim0 DcCnrvelho 
k::::s - - <» - 
5SSSK S'l iSiZlS-1» «*» "*lki",!

“lon8 
277 
the balcony of the second story of the motel.{45) “lie was looking 
around for a number, you know, like—like trying to locate a number.

(H) DcCnrvelho did not see Bay knock on any doors or enter any room.

(15) lie recalled that Buy hud taken an uttuch6 case with him when lie 
left the car, which he brought back with him when he returned.

Al- 
though ho could not lie certain, DcCarvelho was under the impression 
that Bay went to the Provincial Motel to meet someone.

Mr.

DECARYEIJIO.

I believe lie told me he was meeting some- 
body.

s .

' 
STAFF COUNSEL.

1 A*'® you speculat ing I 
Mr.

DECAHVELIIO.

No, no, I have a pretty good idea that— 
that what lie told ine^ that he wanted—ho was going to l>e but 
a few minutes.

(4#)* .; I .

(55) Ruy returned to the car approximately 7 minutes later.(4#)* .; I .

(55) Ruy returned to the car approximately 7 minutes later.

DcCar- 
volho asked, “Bid you meet your friend 1” to which Ray replied, 1 can, 
yeah, everything is all right.” U7) After leaving tlie Provincial.

Ray 
and DeCurvcllio drove around New Orleans for approximately 20 
minutes.

DcCarvelho then dropped Bay oif at the home of Glovina 
Olonzo, Charles Stein’s mother   
(5C) BcCarvcllio’s testimony was unique in its suggestion of a meet- 
ing between Bay and an associate at the Provincial.

Further, ho was a 
sincere witness with no ascertainable motive to fabricate his statement.

Nevertheless, the compiittee’s investigation revealed no evidence to 
corroborate his testimony.

» ; .

J; ; • ‘ ».

....

» 
(57) According to Stein, lie drove Bay to the Provincial for Bay s 
initial registration; A ti‘ip with Stein to the Provincial did not neces- 
sarily preclude another trip by Bay and DcCarvelho, but it did make 
this secuiid trip appear less plausible.

According to Stein, the two men 
drove buck to the Olonzo home after Bay registered, and Bay departed 
only to return shortly thereafter.

(^) It is possible that in that interim 
]>criod, Bay arranged to meet an associate at the Provincial Motel, re- 
turned to the Olonzo residence and persuaded DcCarvelho to drive him 
.

I back to the motel.

What is left unexplained in this scenario is why Kay 
y' / needed DcCarvelho to drive him to the motel.

lie and Stem had been 
I | there shortly lx?fore.

The Provincial Motel and the Olonzo home are ill 
I .

the same neighborhood, and it is unlikely that Bay would have needed 
1^ ‘ /DeCarvelho’s assistance in finding the motel.

It was also improbable 
/ that Bay would delilierately involve DcCarvelho as a possible witness 
/ to a clandestine meeting at the Provincial.

I (58) It was also significant that Stein was unaware of Bay s and Dc- 
Carvolho’s t rip to the motel.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It was also improbable 
/ that Bay would delilierately involve DcCarvelho as a possible witness 
/ to a clandestine meeting at the Provincial. I (58) It was also significant that Stein was unaware of Bay s and Dc- 
Carvolho’s t rip to the motel. In his interview, Stein stated that he knew 
of no time during Bay’s first day in New Orleans that Buy and DeCnr- 
volho drove around together, (jd) Stein and DeCurvcllio saw each other 
| during the next 2 days and, according to DcCarvelho, discussed lbiy 
' and his purpose for traveling to New Orleans; it is unusual that De- 
♦ Curvellio did not tell Stein oiliis visit with Bay to the Provincial. (50) The most significant problem with DcCurvelho’s statement^ 
however, was its inconsistency with prior statements to the I* BI. b BI 
1 interviews of DeCarvelho contained no references to the Provincial 
Motel visit, a fact which would have been significant in their attempt 
\ to determine the purpose of Bay’s trip. The-couvinUi^-mil^deiJcd two 
possible explanations for this discrepancy. Either DeCaryclho did not

--- PAGE BREAK ---278 
* relute this information to the FBI or the FBI agents conducting the 
interviews failed to include these highly significant details 111 their 
reports.

(lit)) In a stall interview, Special Agent William F.

Kusch, who had 
interviewed DeCurvelho in 1D(>8, advised the committee that anything 
mentioned hy DeCurvelho concerning people or places visited liy Bay 
would have been thoroughly investigated hv the Bureau.(50) Kusch 
noted that the FBI was attempting to locate Bay at the time of the De- 
Curvelho interviews.

The possibility of a meeting by Bay with another 
at the Provincial would have been of signficant interest, and would 
have l»een documented.

A thorough review of the New Orleans investi- 
gative files reflected no mention of DeOarvollio’s information or of a 
subsequent investigation of that information.

^ .

(Cl) In view of this and other problems with DeCarvelho’s story, it ) j 
muv be concluded t hat his in format ion was unreliable.

^ 
(02) The unreliability of DeCarvelho’s testimony did not, however,'" i 
undermine the conclusion that Bay traveled to New Orleans to meet Y 
someone, and that such a meeting transpired.

Tt is also possible, of v 
course, that this meeting was at the Provincial Motel.

The committee 
was simply unable to locate concrete evidence of this possibility.

(03) It must be frankly acknowledged Unit the mystery Unit lias al- 
ways surrounded the New Orleans trip lias not been cleared up.

Several 
aspects of the trip ure clear, however: 
1.

Bay’s decision to make this.trip and bis activities in New Orleans 
were unrelated to bis association with Charles Stein.

2.

The decision to travel to New Orleuns on Friday, Deceml>er 15, 
1007, was ahrunt and without significant planning or foresight.

3.

Whatever Bay’s business was in New Orleans, it 
(u) was significant enough to travel nearly 4,000 miles to trans- 
act, and 
(b) involved a transaction which could not he as readily 
accomplished with a phone cull or letter.

4.Whatever Bay’s business was in New Orleans, it 
(u) was significant enough to travel nearly 4,000 miles to trans- 
act, and 
(b) involved a transaction which could not he as readily 
accomplished with a phone cull or letter.

4.

.Tames received money on tlie trip.

A financial unalysis of Bay’s 
spending habits during his fugitive period document a pattern of 
significant ex pend i lures after his return from New Qvleuns.

These included an immediate payment of approximately $350.00 
for dance lessons.

* jj 
5.

Bay met with someone in New Orleans.

This conclusion was hosed 
on Bay’s receipt of money, us well as Stein’s testimony to the 
committee.* 
I 
C.

Buy’s business in New Orleans was accomplished quickly.

7.

There was no evidence of a direct link uctween Bay’s activities 
in New Orleans and the assassination of Dr.

King.

Nevertheless, 
it was noted that Bay’s next significant criminal activity was the f 
assassination.

^ ^ 
•It la lilKlilr prolialile that Ray met with one or both brothers Ray mentioned to 
two Independent sources In Iroa Angeles that his trip Involved his brother.

Both 
.Tames Earl and Jerry Bay admit (list James telephoned Jerry while en route to 
New Orleans Both these references to his brother and New Orleans and this 
phone cull suggest that the two met In New Orlenna.

(See MI,K Beimrt, Section 
TIB.

for adilltlouul discussion of the possible Involvement of Bay's brother in the 
New Orleuna trill.) .

„ (| .

\n .

.

0 
^ M/d h-AMs^ 
'I 
279 
(01) Two significant questions remained open after the committee’s 
investigation: First, the commit tea wus unable to determine why New 
Orleans was chosen as the site of Bay’s business.

If, in fact.

Buy met 
bis brother(s), it is difiicult to explain why this meeting took place 
in New Orleans.

Jerry was at the time employed at the Sportsmanl 
Club in Chicago and .Tames was in Los Angeles.

A more convenient] 
meeting place could have been chosen.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Jerry was at the time employed at the Sportsmanl 
Club in Chicago and .Tames was in Los Angeles. A more convenient] 
meeting place could have been chosen. It seems reasonable to assume, 
therefore, that New Orleans itself wus connected with the purpose of 
the trip. Second, the committee was unable to determine the exact 
nature of Bay’s activities in tlie city. Submitted by:; 
i Jl /) ft\ i ,'ih LMA M. BERLOW, 
Url/Vvj (jjLf [jllJUt 'I'w* Researcher. >> 
■ i 
ft 
i 
K 
K 
..i 
. * J 
i .• 
. • * l * 
t 
t I • . ,» ... . * ;i... A J . ; 
• * T 
• t n

--- PAGE BREAK ---I 
REFERENCES 
(J) T.loyd Calloway, the liuslmnd of Lorraine Calloway, was never located or 
Interviewed by the committee.

The Calloways were the aunt und uncle of Charles 
Steiu.

The committee wus satisfied, however, that ull New Orleuus witnesses who 
would have IMMUI la a jioslthm to furnish lufornuitiou of any value were located.

(2) See, for example: Shift summary of Interview of S.A.

Put Collins, Decem- 
ber 1977, House Select Committee on Assess!

nul I mis (MLK Document No.

150170) ; stuff summary pf Interview of S.A.

Stephen Culleudar, Juu.

13, 1978, 
House Select Committee on Assassinations (MLK Document No.

170004) ; slatt 
summary of Interview of S.A.

William Kusch, Mar.

10, 1078, House Select Com- 
mittee on Assassinations (MLK Document No.

100100) ; shift summitry of Inter- 
view of S.A.

Paul llcnsel, Apr.

4.1078, House Select Committee on Assassinations 
(MLK Document No.

200025) ; stnfT suiniuary Interview of S.A.

Thomas Ootarelll.

No *30001I1)078* Uou** Seluct ^utwltlee ou Assassinations (MLK Document 
(3) The committee determined Hint three of Charles Stein's relatives were 
deceased at (lie time of its investigation These relatives were: Willie ami 
Clovlnu Olouzo and Dale Rodrigues.

(4) lu "The 20,000 Words/' Ituy elutes that soiueoue answered the phone In 
New Orleuus and asked him to come to New Orleans around Christmas, lie has 
never elaborated further about who this Individual was.

(See "Tbe 20.000 
Words," vol.

XII, IISCA-MLK Hearings.) 
(5) There are contradictory accounts ns to who Initlnted the discussion of 
Rays drive to New Orleans, llule, lu tic Sleto the Dreamer, wrote that Ray 
mentioned the proposed trip, and flint Marie Miirflu then told him of Rita Stein's 
problem.

See William Bradford llule, lie Stew the Dreamer (New York: Debt- 
corle Press, luc., 3d ed., 1070), p.

77.

Ceroid Frank wrote (lint Marie Martin first 
broached the subject, and then Ray volunteered to drive Slain.77.

Ceroid Frank wrote (lint Marie Martin first 
broached the subject, and then Ray volunteered to drive Slain.

See Ceroid Frank, 
An American Death (Garden Clly, New York: Douhluduy und Co., Inc., 1st ed., 
1072), p.

103.

(G) Ray did not have any independent recollection of the name of this bar.

After describing the lounge to llule, the author located the establishment.

Ray never disputed Hide's Identification of the Lc Diinuy Lounge us the site- 
of this New Orleans meeting with "Itaoul".

In earlier accounts, Ray bus made 
inconsistent statements concerning the arrangements for this meeting.

Ray's 
story to Hide Is that "Raoul" wrote him while ho was In I«os Angeles and told 
hliu that they would meet in n certain New Orleans hor for a conference.

See 
William Bradford Hide, "I Cot Involved Gradually, And I Didn't Know Anv- 
i»°dy Wus To Be Murdered," Look Mngiulue, Nov.

20.

1978, pi 92.

Ray also 
wrote Hide that after his iirrlvul In New Orlcnuu, he chocked Into u motel uud 
culled "Raoul." It Is during (Ills phone call that Buy claimed he was udvlscil of 
the location of the meeting, the Information apparently supplied by u third 
party.

See "The 20,000 Words," XII IISCA-MLK Hearings.

(7) FBI bleu I ideation record of Churles Joseph Sleln, FBI Report No.

8815313 (MLK Document No.

100010).

Slein's record reflects a 1001 arrest for 
of narcotics lu New Orleans, hut no conviction ou that charge; a 
1009 arrest for cultivating marihuana lu California, but no conviction; and a 
1074 conviction for the sale of heroin.

(8) Although Ray Indicated, both to author Hide and to the committee, 
that he had foreknowledge of the necessity to travel to New Orleans sometime 
in December of 1007, Ids actuiil departure from Los Angeles cun be viewed as 
abrupt ami without sigiilflcaut planning or preparation.

(Regarding the Indica- 
tions of foreknowledge, see.

e g..

"The 20,000 Words," XI!

IISCA-MLK Hear- 
ings Stuff Interview of James Earl Ray, Apr.

14, 1077.IISCA-MLK Hear- 
ings Stuff Interview of James Earl Ray, Apr.

14, 1077.

hearings before the House 
Select Committee on Assassinations, 05lh Congress, 2d session, Washington, 
DC.: U.8.

Government Printing Olfloe, 1070, Vol.

IX, pp.

105, 201-207.) Stein 
and ltuy met for the first lime on Thursday, December 14, 10(17.

Elllier Rita 
Stein or Murle Marlin Introduced the two men, uud arrangements were uuide 
(280) 
281 
for them to travel to New Orleans for the purpose of transiiortlng Rita's two 
daughters buck to Los Angeles.

These arrangements weru Impromptu and did 
iiaLinf fkursdoy evening discussion.

There Is no Indication Unit Buy 
specifically Intended to travel to New Orleans ou Friday, December 15 10U7 
Accord ng to an FBI interview with Dr.

Mark O.

Freeman, Ruy' iiaVorfginally 
srheduled an appointment for Monday, December 18, 1007, which he cunetdud 
at I ho last minute before leaving town on the 15th.

t!t) The primary source for the background Information contained In this 
iuf<irvle'1
v of
.

Charles Joseph Sleln, Jan.

23-20, 1078, House 
(MLK Doeu",0"t No' 100102> (hereinafter 
(10) Stein Interview (MI.K Document No.

100402), p 1 • see also staff i,.r„r 
^nnfloniCkey MedUm’ 17' lb78' “*“*»&«*^mildUc^oi A^ 
(/l) While Stein continuously denied personal Involvement In the sale of 
narcotics (see Stein interview, MI.K Document No.

100J02, p 2), several former 
members of the New Orleans Police Department have opined that Stein en- 
inn \iU t lC 1,nrc4,tic ‘ln,k'S while In that city.

See e.g., staff Interview of 
(A Seled Committee on AKHUSSI nit lions 
rl' ii ^ « 1 No- 180074) ; outside contact report (with John Phillips), Feb.

2, 
w Select Committee on Assassinations (MLK Document No.

180010).

iei/pi a) f?.

7f.

S " WUS COUvlctod for 8cUI,,tf 1,eru,u California In 10/4 
(12) Sleln Interview (MLK Document No.

100402), p.

15 
kill nio No «tTB74Wn0««“y
T,UOUa M M“r>'U*' Mu» 1.

1,,78.

I-os Angeles Mnr- 
khi file No.

44-1574-1 >-150.I-os Angeles Mnr- 
khi file No.

44-1574-1 >-150.

In a couunlttee Interview ou Feb.

12 1078 Mr 
Murphy remained certain that he had seen Ray, although he did not specify 
ll.e Niue See staff summary of Interview of Raymond M.

Murphy, Feb.

2 1078 
Hoinni Select Committee on Assussluutioiis (MLK Document No.

100300) 
/ !

?.

fiU ll,torvlew (MLK Documeiit No.

HMH02), pp.

4, 5.

(*5) I hid.

(tit) I minimized executive session testimony of Charles Stein Anr 4 107ft 
icurings hc^rc Ihe House Select Comiiilttee ou Assassinations pii 39-1° VJLJI 
Docinnent No 210580) (hereinafter referred to ns Stein teslhumi^ Apr.

J, 07«t 
</7) Executive session testimony of Rif,, Rosas, Apr.

0, 1078, hen rings laffore 
the House Select Coiniiiltlce on Assassluutions, pp.

15-10.

fc 
2; ilirerv,uw (MLK document No.

100102), pp.

5-0.

(19) Sleln Testimony, Apr.

4, 1078, p.

32.

?le,u testimony, Apr.

4, 1078.

pp.

83, 84.

i-fl Stein circled this areu on a map of New Orleans nrovlilnu i.« .

uilltee alufr.

A later fleld luveetlgallou of U,e7r«2 
See'stein'u'tervlew fS«" "Ud'‘'t 
K..«a °r Jf“,es ““rl nay.

Aug.

10.

11178.

lieu rings before ll.e II.Mise 
i»Lw* DounuiUee on Assnaslnations, 95Hi Cong., 2d BOSS.

Washington hr • 
I’.H.

Oorcriime.it Printing Office, 1070.

roL I.

n 00 waaiiiugMo, D.O.: 
A™ ,,,,erv,uw of Clmrlea Slelu, May a.

1008, Los Angelea, Murkln flic 
mi N!

iT-ir.7i-nt.2.

°* Char'“ 8,0,n’ Keb- 13' 10C0- ‘'-kin 
(®7) Id^ntJY,ew <WLK Document No.

190102), pp.

KMl.

(28) Ibid.

P‘ 
(29) Stuff Interview of Charles DeCarvelho, June 7, 1077 House ScWr 
Committee on A8sassluations( MLK Document No.

130070) • see also dcsl aim toil 
rm,n^| statement of Charles DeCarvelho, Feh.

10, 1078 lo^ 
,ce
#S,,,,ll0,‘8* M«>.

9-10 (MLK Document No.

100201).

/•I 2*®*11 Interview (MLK Document No.

190402) p 12 
(31) See staff summary of Interview of Raymond M.

Murphy Jnn 17 1078 
House Select Committee on Assassinations (MLK Docinnent No’ 180079)’- staff 
*uunitary of Interview of Felix Vuhiox, Feb.--- PAGE BREAK ---

190402) p 12 
(31) See staff summary of Interview of Raymond M. Murphy Jnn 17 1078 
House Select Committee on Assassinations (MLK Docinnent No’ 180079)’- staff 
*uunitary of Interview of Felix Vuhiox, Feb. 14, 1078, House Setect (SnillVe ?m 
SSS,,Zt No
« 8 -if .ulumary of hBervlew #of 
iJocimienMNn 1078 House Select Committee ou Assassinations (MLK 
I ocument No. 180387) , outside contact report (with George Pittman), Jan. 25,

--- PAGE BREAK ---No
« 8 -if .ulumary of hBervlew #of 
iJocimienMNn 1078 House Select Committee ou Assassinations (MLK 
I ocument No. 180387) , outside contact report (with George Pittman), Jan. 25,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

282 
1078 House Select Committee on A sauna nations (MI.K Document ”0315) ; 
\ss (sslnallons (MLK Document No. 18038U) ; designated counsel Btutemcn o 
Marie lee Feb. 15, 11)78, House Select Committee on AssussluaUoiia (MLK 
S.^t of liie h veal luu lion. See stuff summary of interview of U. DnvIJ Kent 
uurLraint l^umrNew Orleans Police Department. Feb0 1078 House 
Select Committee on Assnsslnatlons (MI.K Document No. 1S0388); villa(*''^”'1 
tiict reiMU-t (will. John Phillips). Feb. 2.1078. House Select Committee on Assossl- 
■““$>* Kulli^rC.NNiw8Or^M to Memphis. May 7, 1008. FBI Memphis 
^Wt2£tlSA Hoover to Now Orlenus. Nov. R 10U3. New 
NOV!
1Wr-w®, <»*vfp*? 7‘ yjtTti 
13.5) Fill report re: Records of the Provincial Mold, Apr. 15, 11)08, p. i-l 
(MIK Document No. 010051). 
(36) Ibid. 
(37) Ibid. 
<3») SU.Vf aummary^of Interview of nryoii DnPepe Feh. II, 1078, House Select 
Committee on Assassinations, p. 1 (MI.K Document No. 1MUK3)• *' ' '* '"'.w 
view with the FBI In April 1008. DnPepe u.lvlse.1 Ihot room l-« re "£fr **- 
nor .lay. See Fill report. Apr. 15. 10.08. p. 721 (MI.K Docn.ncnt No. (HOOol). 
(A0) Designated Counsel Stateimnit of An I bony Charles 
1078, House Select Committee ou Assussimilions, pp. 11-127 (MLR Document No. 
100201). 
00 Id., atp. 14. 
(J2) Ibid. 
(43) Id. atp. 21. 
(41) Ibid. 
(45) Id. atp. 22. 
(46) Ibid., p. 23. 
(4#) Slein Interview (MI.K Document No. 100102), pp. 10-11. 
(5o\ S* off* summary of Interview of William Kuscli, Nov. 80, 1978, House 
Select Committee ou AssftssluuUous (MI.K Document No. 10010(1). 
INVESTIGATION INTO THE ASSASSINATION OP 
Du. MAUTIN LUTIIKH KING, Jit. 
1311 ARLES Q. STEPHENS: CONTROVERSIAL EYEWITNESS 
TO THE ASSASSINATION 
Supplementary Stuff Report 
of the 
Select Committee on Assassinations 
U.S. House of Representatives 
Ninety-fifth Congress 
Second Session 
March 1979 
(283)ERSIAL EYEWITNESS 
TO THE ASSASSINATION 
Supplementary Stuff Report 
of the 
Select Committee on Assassinations 
U.S. House of Representatives 
Ninety-fifth Congress 
Second Session 
March 1979 
(283)

--- PAGE BREAK ---yyx&m Mih^- 
iw , i 
^ tU^afew oJtifocuijfom?

(Ij^Within moments (i) of the shot that felled Dr.

King, two wit- 
nesses in the northern wing of Bessie Brewer’s roominghousc observed 
a mun run down the hallway from the area of a common bathroom at 
the end of the lmll.

This bathroom faced to the east of the rooming, 
house* and overlooked the Lorraine Motel.

(£) William Anschutz, 
(he tenant from room 4-B saw the man briefly but could provide only 
n general description.

On the other hand, Charles Q.

Stephens, a tenant/ ]V\M j.

^ 
from 6-B, provided a detailed description, and felt that the man he q/^3 y 
saw fleeing down the hallway was the same person he had seen check- \AJYOAA , 
ing into room 5-B earlier in the afternoon.

(3) Subsequently, Stephens\ 1 
identified a profile photograph of James Karl Ray as looking very 
much like the man he had observed chocking into room 5-B.

(4) James\ W*0 X*J* 
Earl Ray has udmitted that he checked into room 6-B on the after-1 b ^ ^ 
noon of April 4,1968.

(J) 
(2) During the investigation following the assassination, authori- { 
lies wera unable to uncover an eyewitness to the assassination who 
could make a positive identification of the assassin.

Thus, Charles 
Stephens quickly became a significant witness.

(3) Questions, however, were raised as to the reliability of Stephen’s 
tentative identification.

The committee, therefore, conducted a full 
investigation into liis reliability as a witness.

(4) The committee first determined that Stephen’s significance as a 
witness may have been somewhat exaggerated during the months fol- 
lowing the assassination.

Stephens was provided with a police guard for T.JK £fi ^ 
u period of several months following the assassination and at one time 
was juiled as a material witness.(0) Lt.

R.

A.--- PAGE BREAK ---

R. A. Cochran, second in com- 
mand of the homicide squad in 1968, explained, however, that the 
protection was made necessary because of exaggerated newspaper re- / 
ports concerning Stephens’ ability to make such an identification^/) I 
Cochran added that Stephens could never really identify the assailant. (5) Phil Canale, the Shelby County Attorney General in 1968 who 
prepared the Government’s case against James Earl Ray, testified that 
Stephens had seen Ray checking into the roominghousc prior to the 
assassination, and in the hallway after the assassination. Canale added 
that ho was considered an important, but not an essential, prosecution 
witness^) { IAJJM 
(6J__ <A"Substant!ia] issue was raised concerning Stephens’ sobriety on=> 
the day of Dr. King’s assassination. One witness, a taxi driver named 
«yunes MCGJAW, told the committee that only minutes before the 
assassination, he observed Stephens lying on his bed in room 6-B in a 
drunken stupor.(9) McGraw’s assertions to the committee received 
♦A diagram of the second floor of Bessie Brewer's roomlnghouBe was Intro- 
duced Into the record durlug the committee’s public hearings. Sec, 11LK exhibit 
F-20, voL 1, IISCA-MLK hear lugs, p. 79. (285)

--- PAGE BREAK ---286 
support from Capt.

Tommy T).

Smith of the Memphis Police Depart- 
ment.

Smith, u lieutenant for the homicide sqund on April 4,,1908, re- 
ported to the crime scene following the assassination of Dr.

King.

Ilo 
observed both Charles Stephens and his common-law wife, Grace 
Walden,* after the assassination and told the committee that both 
appeared to be intoxicated.(10) Smith did not Question cither 
Stephens or Walden at the time.

(7) On the other hand, the first police officer to observe and question 
Stephens only minutes after the assassination, Lt.

James Pupia of the 
MPD intelligence section,(11) told the committee that although 
Stephens hud obviously been drinking, he was neither incoherent nor 
staggering.

(IV).

Lt.

Glenn King, who was also at the scene within 
minutes after the assassination, interviewed Stephens and found him 
coherent.(13) lie told the committccj however, that Stephens wus well 
known on South Main Street for his excessive drinking hnbits.(f4) 
(8) These judgments of Lieutenants Pupia and King were supported 
by the statement of Lloyd Jowcrs, the owner of Jim’s Grill, n bar lo- 
cated under the northern wing of the roominghouse.

According to 
Jowers, Charles Stephens was m his establishment on April 4, drink- 
ing—like alwuys.(/5) Nevertheless, Jowers stated that Stephens was 
in control of himself and knew wlmt he was saying or doing.(ftf) 
Jowers added—in u statement thut casts some question on the assertion 
of James McGraw—that although Stephens drank beer all the time by 
the quart, he never saw him passed out.(/7) 
(9) The committee ulso questioned J.

Ilurold Flannery, the uttorney 
for the U.S.

Department of Justice who prepared the Ruy extradition 
affidavit that was executed by Stephens.

(18) Flannery stated that he 
hud carefully questioned Stephens and examined the circumstances 
under which Stephens had identified Huy’s profile photograph.Department of Justice who prepared the Ruy extradition 
affidavit that was executed by Stephens.

(18) Flannery stated that he 
hud carefully questioned Stephens and examined the circumstances 
under which Stephens had identified Huy’s profile photograph.

He 
was convinced as to the genuineness of that identification.(7iJ) The 
committee was ulso told by Stephens’ attorney, Ilarvoy Gipson, that 
ho believed Stephens* April 4, 19G8 statements truthfully represented 
what Stephens had, in fact, seen on that datc.(£0) 
(10) The committee considered the possibility that Stephens’ testi- 
mony might have been influenced by the reward offered for informa- 
tion lending to the urrest and conviction of the assassin.

Stephens lost 
his judicial bid for the $100,000 reward, which had been announced 
on April 5, 19G8.

In the court’s ruling, however, the reliability of 
Stephens* identification did not liecomo an issue.(21) Father, the 
court’s ruling was based on its finding that Stephens bad no knowledge 
of the reward offer at the time he provided his initial statements on 
April 4.

The court further found thut Stephens’ information did not, 
in fact, lead to either the arrest or the conviction of James Karl 
Ray.(££) 
(11) Finally, the committee reviewed a variety of statements by 
Stephens, and noted their general consistency over the past 10 years.

(23) In addition, a similarity was noted Ixitween the description pro- 
vided by Stephens after the assussinution and thut of James Earl 
Ray.

(£4) 
•A complete discussion of Grace Walden's significance as a witness Is Included 
In tliu committee's filial report, sec.

I1A.

•4 
ui 
■?

rA 
B 
K'.

A 
287 
(12) To sum up, while it may be concluded that Churles Stephens 
did, in fact, see James Earl Ituy in the hallway immediately following 
the ussussinution, his testimony to thut effect wus vulnerable on sev- 
eral counts had Hay gone to trial.--- PAGE BREAK ---

rA 
B 
K'. A 
287 
(12) To sum up, while it may be concluded that Churles Stephens 
did, in fact, see James Earl Ituy in the hallway immediately following 
the ussussinution, his testimony to thut effect wus vulnerable on sev- 
eral counts had Hay gone to trial. First, the evidence is overwhelm- 
ing thut Charles Stephens was drinking on April 4, 1968. Only the 
extent of that drinking is at issue. Second, the liullwuy nt Bessie 
Brewer’s wus dimly lighted, and Stephens was sepuruted from the 
fleeing assussin by between 40 and 50 feet. Finally, Stephens him- 
self has declined to provide an unqualified identification of the assus- 
sin. In his June 19G8 identification of Ruy’s profile photograph for 
the FBI, he stated only that the profile photo oi Ray looked very much 
like the man he saw in the roominghouse.(25) 
(13) Stephens’ value to the prosecution’s case would, therefore, have 
been limited. His testimony thut he heard steps between room 5-B and 
the roominghouse bathroom on several occasions prior to the shot would 
have provided circumstantial evidence against Hay, since Ray has 
admitted renting und occupying room 5-B on the afternoon of April 4.* 
Beyond this, Stephens’ testimony would have contributed little. Submitted by: 
JKREUY R. AKERS, 
Senior Staff Attorney. •The assumption Ls made here that Hay would have taken the stand and re- 
peated his basic Raoul story. During interviews with the staff, Ray told the 
committee that this was his trial strategy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---REFERENCES 
(1) dairies Quitman Stephens, who lived in room G-B Immediately adjacent 
to the bathroom, stated that the time which elapsed between the shot and his 
observation of the assassin at the end of the hallway was no more than 00 eeconds.

See designated counsel statement of Charles Q.

Stephens, Apr.

1-1, 1078, House 
Select Committee on Assassinations, pp.

42-13 (MLK Document No.

210178) 
(hereinafter referred to as Stephens' statement).

(2) Ibid., pp.

38-44, 48-51, 57-58, 07-70, und 70-80; see also staff summary 
of interview of William Anschutz, House Select Committee on Assassinations 
(MLK Document No.

110000); see also Memphis Police Department supple- 
mental homicide report (MLK Document No.

140141).

(3) Stephens' statement, pp.

38-44, 48-51, 67-88, 87-70, and 78-80; see nlso 
Memphis Police Department supplemental homicide report (MLK Document No.

140141).

(4) Stephens' statement, pp.

80-81; sec also outside contact report with J.

Harold Flannery, Nov.

8, 1078, House Select Committee on Assassinations (MLK 
Document No.

280082).

(5) Testimony of James Earl Ray, Aug.

16, 1978, hearings before the House 
Select Committee on Assassinations, 05th Cong., 2d sees.

(Washington, D.C.: U.S.

Government Printing Office, 1970), vol.

I, pp.

101-102.

(6) Order of Judge Buttle, Shelby County Criminal Court, July 22, 1988 
(MLK Document No.

110115).

(7) Staff summary of interview of R.

A.

Cochran, Sept.

30, 1977, House Select 
Committee on Assassinations, p.

3 (MLK Document No.

170020).

(8) Testimony of Phil Canale, Nov.

13, 1978, hearings before the nouse Select 
Committee on Assassinations, 95th Cong., 2d sess.

(Washington, D.C.: U.S.

Gov- 
ernment Printing Office, 1979), vol.

V, p.

384.

(9) Stuff summury of Interview of Jumes McQraw, July 19, 1077, House 
Select Committee on Assassinations, pp.

4-8 (MLK Document No.

120118) ; see 
also report by professional security consultants re James McGraw, Jan.

18, 1978 
(MLK Documeut No.120118) ; see 
also report by professional security consultants re James McGraw, Jan.

18, 1978 
(MLK Documeut No.

200320) ; statement of Janies McGraw to George R.

King 
and John Getz, Feb.

19, 1989 (MLK Documeut Nos.

030187, 090071, 080052, aud 
030128).

(19) Outside contact report (witli Tommy Smith), Aug.

19, 1078, House Select 
Committee on Assassinations (MLK Documeut No.

250055) ; see ulso outside 
coutact report (with Tommy Smith), Oct.

10, 1978, House Select Committee ou 
Assassinations (MLK Document No.

270001).

(/f) Outside contuct report (with James Papla), Aug.

19, 1978, House Belect 
Committee ou Assassinations (MLK Documeut No.

250056).

(12) Ibid.

(13) Memphis Police Department homicide report, p.

1586 (MLK Document 
No.

030203).

(14) Outside contact report (with Glenn King), Dec.

19, 1978, House Select 
Committee ou Assassinations (MLK Document No.

280117).

(15) Outside contact report (with Lloyd Jowers), Aug.

19, 1978, House Select 
Committee ou Assassinations (MLK Document No.

250057).

(16) Ibid.

(17) Ibid.

(18) See affidavit of Charles Q.

Stephens, June 19, 1988 (MLK Document No.

080011).

(19) Outside contact report (with J.

Harold Flannery), Nov.

3, 1978 (MLK 
Document No.

280062).

(20) Outside contact report (with Harvey Gipson), June 19, 1878, House 
8elect Committee on Assassinations (MLK Document No.

220188).

(21) See Charles Quitman Stephen* v.

Slate of Tennessee, city of Memphis, 
Memphis PressSciiultur, et al., No.

72333-3 H.D., Shelby County, Teuu., Chancery 
Court, Apr.

19,1976 (MLK Documeut No.

260238).

(22) Ibid.

289 
(2iK!uSiS^wr
8l!nmeDt: Memphis Police Department homicide report, 1088, 
l»l».

1604-lBM (ULK Document No.

030203) ; Memphis Police Department homl- 
u.de.^L*0rA.

(,UJ,^ CM;U““lt.,No„i^H1) : ot Charles Q.

Stephens, Juno 
19, 1088 (MLK Document No.

080011); stuff memo re: statements made by 
t0 NUC Sept.

1077 journal (MLK Document 
No.

130107) ; testimony of Cliurles Quit mini Stephens In Churlea Q.--- PAGE BREAK ---

1077 journal (MLK Document 
No. 130107) ; testimony of Cliurles Quit mini Stephens In Churlea Q. Stephens V 
£*?/Co0/ Tcnneaaco» city of Memphis, Memphis Press Scimitar, et al.. No 72333-3 
by County* T<mu*» Chancery Court, Apr. 10, 1070 (MLK Document No. 2GGL38) ; statement of Cliurles Q. Stephens to J. C. Kellnm, Aug. 19 1008 (MLK 
Document No. 200147). * ' 
Po,lce DtiPai*tuient homicide report, Apr. 4, 1088, supplement 
No. 4 (M Lk Document No. 030203). nJSfL Q- Stephens, June 19, 1908 (MLK Document No. NtMOobi)BI i|»tervlew of Churles Stephens, June 19, 1008 (MLK Documeut 
* v 
i.' 
.<•