Digitized by ^ooQle


Digitized by


Digitized by t^.ooQle


Digitized by


Digitized by


THE INTERIOR CASTLE


Digitized by L.ooQle


NIHIL OBSTAT


Dom. Edmundus Kendal, D.D., O.S.B.

Censor Deputatus.


IMPRIMATUR

Dom. Aidanus Gasquet, O.S.B.

Cong. Anglia Abbas Prases.


NIHIL OBSTAT

Innocentius Apap. O.P.

Censor Deputatus.


IMPRIMATUR

Edm: Can: Surmont.

Vic. Gen.

Weslmonasterii, die 22 Januarii 1912.


Digitized by t^.ooQle


THE INTERIOR CASTLE

OR

THE MANSIONS

BY

SAINT TERESA OF JESUS

I r


TRANSLATED FROM THE AUTOGRAPH OF SAINT TERESA
BY THE

BENEDICTINES OF STANBROOK


REVISED WITH INTRODUCTION AND ADDITIONAL NOTES
BY THE VERY REVEREND

BENEDICT ZIMMERMAN, O.C.D.

prior of st. luke’s, wincanton


SECOND EDITION


New York, Cincinnati, Chicago

BENZIGER BROTHERS

PRINTERS TO THE I PUBLISHERS OF

HOLY APOSTOLIC SEE j BENZIGER’s MAGAZINE


Digitized by C.ooQle


\>*C CQ \ r '2012.


Digitized byvjOCK?lC _


8^0

I 1 \?- c \

/wuM


In compliance with current copyright
law, U. C. Library Bindery produced
this volume on paper that meets
ANSI Standard Z39.48-1992
to replace the deteriorated,
damaged, or lost original.

2011


Digitized by L^ooQle


-digitized by


FeMcateO to

THE MARTYRED DAUGHTERS OF SAINT TERESA
THE BLESSED CARMELITES OF COMPIEGNE

BY THE DESCENDANTS
OF THEIR FELLOW-PRISONERS


St Ajf brook Abbey
Day of the Beatification
May 27, 1906


285088


Digitized by t^.ooQle


The Benedictines of Stanbrook desire to express
their gratitude to the Very Reverend Benedict
Zimmerman for having kindly revised the trans-
lation of the 49 Interior Castle ” and also for the
Introductions , Notes , and Index which he has
added to the book .


vi


Digitized by t^.ooQle


NOTE.


In this new edition the wording has been revised
and condensed, chiefly with a view to rendering
the translation more pregnant. Only one passage
(VI. Mansion, ch. v. 13) has been substantially
changed, in conformity with an explanation
received from a high authority. It is admittedly
a very difficult passage which appears to have been
misunderstood by nearly all translators ; but it
is gratifying to notice that the new French trans-
lation by the Carmelite nuns of Anderlecht agrees
with our interpretation. The editor is under an
obligation to that translation for several interest-
ing facts embodied in the Introduction and in
the notes to the text.

B. Z.


WlNCANTON.

December 2 5 , 1911 .


vii


Digitized by CjOOQle


Digitized by Ljoooie


CONTENTS.

PAOB

Introduction xi

THE INTERIOR CASTLE

Preface i

THE FIRST MANSIONS

Chapter I. Description of the Castle . . 4

, , II. The Human Soul . . . .12

THE SECOND MANSIONS

Chapter I. War 27

THE THIRD MANSIONS

Chapter I. Fear of God . . . . -39

,, II. Aridity in Prayer . . . *47

THE FOURTH MANSIONS

Chapter I. Sweetness in Prayer . . .58

,, II. Divine Consolations . . .68

,, III. Prayer of Quiet . . . *76

ix


Digitized by c.ooQie


X


CONTENTS.


THE FIFTH MANSIONS


PAOB

Chapter I.

Prayer of Union .

•

9 i

}}

11.

Effects of Union .

•

102

)>

hi.

Cause of Union .

.

”3

yy

IV.

Spiritual Espousals

•

122


THE SIXTH MANSIONS


Chapter I.

Preparation for Spiritual Matrimony

130

yy

11.

The Wound of Love .

•

142


Introductory Note on Visions,

Lo-


cutions, etc.


149

yy

hi.

Locutions ....


154

yy

IV.

Raptures ....


168

yy

V.

The Flight of the Spirit


181

yy

VI.

Spiritual Jubilation


190

yy

VII.

The Humanity of our Lord .


201

yy

VIII.

Intellectual Visions


215

yy

IX.

Imaginary Visions


224

yy

X.

Intellectual Visions continued


237

yy

XI.

The Dart of Love


242


THE SEVENTH MANSIONS


Chapter I. God’s Presence Chamber . . 252

,, II. Spiritual Matrimony . . . 261

,, III. Its Effects ..... 271
,, IV. Martha and Mary . . . 281

Conclusion ..... 294

Index 297


Digitized by LjOOQle


INTRODUCTION.


Saint Teresa began to write the Interior Castle
on June 2, 1577, Trinity Sunday, and completed
it on the eve of St. Andrew, November 29, of the
same year. But there was a long interruption
of five months, 1 so that the actual time spent
in the composition of this work was reduced to
about four weeks — a fortnight for the first, and
another fortnight for the second half of the book.
The rapidity with which it was written is easily
explained by the fact that the Saint had con-
ceived its plan some time previously. On January
17, I 577 » she had written to her brother, Don
Lorenzo de Cepeda, at Avila : “ I have asked the
bishop — Don Alvaro Mendoza — for my book (the
Life), because I shall perhaps complete it by
adding those new favours our Lord has lately
granted me. With these one may even compose
a new work of considerable size, provided God
grant me the grace of explaining myself ; other-
wise the loss will be of small account.” * She
never asked for permission to write anything, but
waited until she received a command from her

1 V. Mansions, ch. iv. i.

* Letters shortly to be published,
xi


Digitized by CjOOQle


xii


INTRODUCTION.


superiors, which, in this case, came from Father
Jerome Gratian, superior of the Discalced Car-
melites of the Provinces of Andalucia and Castille,
and from Don Alonzo Velasquez, canon of Toledo,
afterwards Bishop of Osma.* The Saint was not
in good health at that time ; she repeatedly com-
plains of noises in the head and other infirmities,
but, worst of all, she was weighed down by troubles
and anxieties resulting from the action of the
superiors of the Order and of the Papal Nuncio
against the nuns and friars of the Reform. Matters
became even more serious when, in October, the
nuns of the Incarnation of Avila proceeded to
the election of a new prioress. Notwithstanding
the prohibition of the provincial, fifty-five electors
recorded their votes in favour of the Saint and
were immediately declared excommunicated.
The whole work of the Reform seemed on the
brink of ruin ; the Saint, as well as all her friends,
was in disgrace, subject to obloquy and ill-treat-
ment.

No trace of these trials is to be found in the
Interior Castle. Saint Teresa possessed the power
of concentration of thought in a marvellous
degree. The early mornings and late evenings
were devoted to the composition of the book,

* The French Carmelite nuns in their new translation, CEuvres
computes de Sainte TMse , t. vi.. Introduction, p. 5, quoting the
Ano Teresiano , t. vii. ad 7 July, and Father Gratian's Dilucidario ,
as well as his additions to Ribera, show the exact share of
Fr. Gratian and Dr. Velasquez in the preliminaries of this work.


Digitized by t^.ooQle


introduction.


xiii

while the rest of the day was taken up by the
affairs of the Order. Mother Mary of the Nativity,
a member of the community of Toledo, where the
book was begun, declared afterwards , 4 that she
often saw her writing, generally after Communion,
her face resplendent, with such rapidity and so
absorbed in her occupation that she seemed un-
disturbed by, and in fact quite unconscious of,
any noise that was made. Mother Mariana of the
Angels* reports having heard from the same
witness, that entering one day her cell to deliver
a message, the holy Mother was just beginning
a new sheet of her book. While taking off her
spectacles to listen to the message she was seized
by a trance in which she remained for several
hours. The nun, terrified at this, did not stir, but
kept her eyes steadily on the Saint. When she

4 Fuente, Obras de Santa Teresa de Jesus . Edit. 1881, vol.
vi. p. 278.

• Ibid. p. 178. A somewhat similar incident is reported by
Mother Anne of the Incarnation (Ibid. p. 213), but it appears to be
wrongly brought into connection with the composition of the
Castle . The nun in question had belonged to the convent of St.
Joseph at Segovia at an earlier period, but there is no evidence
that St. Teresa visited this place in the course of the six months
during which she composed this work. The Bollandists, indeed,
maintain that it was commenced at Toledo, continued at Segovia
and completed at Avila (n. 1541), but their sole authority for
including Segovia is the passage in question, which, however,
must refer to some other work of the Saint. The sister, passing
St. Teresa’s door, saw her writing, her face being lit up as by a
bright light. She wrote very fast without making any corrections.
After an hour, it being about midnight, she ceased and the light
disappeared. The Saint then knelt down and remained in prayer
for three hours, after which she went to sleep.


Digitized by kjOOQle


Xiv INTRODUCTION.

came to, it was seen that the paper, previously
blank, was covered with writing. Noticing that
her visitor had discovered it. Saint Teresa put
the paper quietly in a box.

Another nun, Mary of St. Francis, left the
following declaration : “I know that our holy
Mother wrote four books, the Life, the Way of
Perfection, the Foundations, and the Mansions,
which I have seen her writing. Once, while she
was composing the last-named work, I entered
to deliver a message, and found her so absorbed
that she did not notice me ; her face seemed
quite inflamed and most beautiful. After having
listened to me she said : * Sit down, my child, and
let me write what our Lord has told me ere I
forget it,’ and she went on writing with great
rapidity and without stopping.” •

Mary of St. Joseph says she heard from Mary
of the Nativity that Father Jerome Gratian
commanded the Saint to write the Mansions ;
she, however, begged to be excused, because, so
many books having been written by holy and
learned men, there remained nothing for a woman
to write. At length she yielded under obedience.
This nun (Mary of the Nativity) was frequently
in the Saint’s cell while she was writing, and
noticed her resplendent face and the almost pre-
ternatural velocity with which her hand travelled
over the paper . 7

• Fuente, l.c. p. 223. 7 Ibid. p. 255.


T


Digitized by t^.ooQle


INTRODUCTION.


XV


Writing to Mother Mary of St. Joseph, Prioress
of Seville, November 8, 1581, Saint Teresa gives
her a message for Father Rodrigo Alvarez, S. J. :
“ Our father (Jerome Gratian, then provincial)
tells me that he has handed you a book written by
me, which perhaps you do not feel inclined to read
yourself. Kindly read to Fr. Rodrigo Alvarez, at
his next visit, the last Mansion, but under the seal
of confession, as he asks this in his superior
wisdom. This is only for you two. Tell him that
the person he knows has arrived at this Mansion
and enjoys the peace there described; that she
is entirely at rest, and that some grave theologians
have assured her that she is on a safe road. In
case you could not read these pages to him do not
send him the book, for it might lead to unpleasant-
ness. Until I have his answer on this matter I
will not write to him. Give him my compliments.”

At the end of the original manuscript, before
the epilogue (marked with Ihs.) there is a notice
in Father Alvarez’ handwriting to this effect :
“The Mother Prioress of this convent of Seville
has read to me this seventh Mansion, whither a
soul may arrive in the present life. Let all the
saints praise the infinite goodness of God, Who
communicates Himself to His creatures so that
they truly seek His glory mid the salvation of
their neighbour. What I feel and judge of this
matter, is, that everything that has been read
to me is conformable to Catholic truth and in


Digitized by CjOOQle


XVI


ItftfcODUCTlOtf.


accordance with Holy Scripture and the teaching
of the Saints. Whosoever has read the doctrine
of the Saints, such as the books of St. Gertrude,
St. Catharine of Siena, or St. Bridget of Sweden,
and other saints and spiritual writers, will clearly
understand that the spirit of Mother Tireza (stc)
of Jesus is true, since it leads to the same effects
as are to be found in the saints ; and because this
is in truth my judgment and opinion, I have here-
unto set my name, this, the 22nd day of February,
1582. P. Rodrigo Alvarez.” 8
The work was copied, probably under the
supervision of the Saint, who introduced many
changes ; when completed the original was handed
to Father Jerome Gratian and to the Dominican,
Fray Diego de Yanguas, for approval. Both,
particularly the former, made numerous correc-
tions, which Fuente, not without reason, calls
impertinent, scratching out whole sentences and
adding others. The book thus revised must have
enjoyed a certain celebrity, though not to the
same extent as the Life, to which St. Teresa
herself preferred it. Scarcely a week after its
completion she wrote to Fr. Salazar, S. J. : “ If
Sefior Carillo [Salazar himself] came, the person
in question [the Saint] thinks he would find
another jewel which in her opinion is superior to
the former [the Life]. This one reflects nothing
foreign to itself, but is resplendent in its own

• Autograph, fol. cx.


Digitized by ^ooQle


introduction.


xvii


beauty. It is enriched with more delicate enamels
than the former ; the workmanship, too, is more
perfect. For, as the person in question says, the
jeweller was less experienced when he fashioned
the previous one. Moreover, the gold of the new
one is of better quality than that of the former,
though the precious stones are not so well set.
It has been done, as might be expected, according
to the designs of the Jeweller Himself.” * Later
on she wrote to Fr. Jerome Gratian : “ The book
I have written since seems to me superior [to the
Life] ; at least I had more experience when I
wrote it.” 10

One day, speaking with Mother Mary of Jesus
on spiritual matters, she said that our Lord had
communicated so much to her since she had
reached what she described in the seventh Man-
sion — the spiritual Matrimony — that she did not
consider it possible to advance further in this life,
in the way of prayer, nor even to wish to do so . 11

The book was eagerly read by those who were
able to obtain copies. At the archiepiscopal
Seminary at Salamanca it was read publicly after
dinner ; the students, contrary to custom, sacri-
ficing the recreation rather than miss so edifying
an instruction. The result was that several
entered the religious life, one becoming a Fran-
ciscan, two others, who had already taken their

• Dec. 7, 1577. " Jan. 14, 1580.

u Fuente, Obras, l.c. p. 275.

b


Digitized by LjOOQle


xvin


INTRODUCTION.


degrees, joining the Discalced Carmelites. 1 * We
also know of a lady who became a Poor Clare
through reading the Interior Castle}* The process
of Beatification contains the following evidence of
Don Francisco de Mora, architect to Philip III. :
“The same prioress (of a convent of Dominican
nuns) being concerned about my salvation gave
me a book in manuscript, called The Mansions,
by Mother Teresa, hoping I should derive some
benefit from it. I fear this was not the case, but
it made me acquainted with Teresa of Jesus, the
foundress of the Discalced Carmelite nuns, of
whom I had not yet heard, but for whom I now
felt devotion.” 14

In August 1586 it was decided to print Saint
Teresa's works, the Augustinian Fray Luis de
Leon being selected as editor, as he was uncon-
cerned in the quarrels raging round the Reform.
Accordingly, the manuscript of the Interior Castle
was handed to him. On the first leaf he wrote
the following note :

“ Many passages of this book written by the
holy Mother have been scored through, other
words being substituted or notes being added
in the margin. Most of these corrections are
badly done, the original text being much better.
It will be noticed that the holy Mother's sentences
are superior and agree with the context, which is

n Fuente, Obras, Uc. p. 217.

u Ibid . p. 227. 14 Ibid . p. 190.


Digitized by CjOOQle


INTRODUCTION.


xix


not the case with the corrections. These im-
provements and glosses may therefore be dis-
pensed with. Having myself read and considered
everything with great care, it appears to me that
the reader, too, should have before him the words
of the author who knew best what to say ; for this
reason I have left out the additions, and have
restored what has been changed, excepting only
a few corrections made by the writer herself. I
beg of the reader that he would in charity reverence
the words and even the letters traced by so holy
a hand, and strive to understand what has been
written. He will then see that there was no need
for corrections ; should he fail to understand her,
let him believe that the writer knew what she
said, and that her words cannot be tampered with
if they are not to lose their meaning ; otherwise
what was to the point will seem out of place.
This is how books become corrupted, useless, and
are finally lost.” 11

When Luis de Leon undertook the editing of
St. Teresa's writings he received a long letter
from Don Diego de Yepes, afterwards Bishop of
Tarazona, a former friend and confessor of the
Saint, in which he records his personal recollections.
I shall only insert here what he says about the
Interior Castle :

“This holy Mother desired to see the beauty
of a soul in the state of grace, a thing greatly

“ Autograph , fol. I.


Digitized by L^ooQle


XX


INTRODUCTION.


to be coveted both for the sake of seeing and
of possessing it. While this desire lasted, she
was commanded to write a treatise on prayer,
of which she had much personal experience. On
the eve of the Blessed Trinity, while considering
what subject to choose for this treatise, God,
Who disposes everything in due season, fulfilled
her wish and furnished a suitable subject. He
showed her a most beautiful globe of crystal, in
the shape of a Castle, with seven rooms, the
seventh, situated in the centre, being occupied by
the King of glory, resplendent with the most ex-
quisite brilliancy, which shone through and adorned
the remaining rooms. The nearer these lay to
the centre, the more did they partake of that
wondrous light. It did not, however, penetrate
beyond the crystal, for everything round about
was a mass of darkness and impurity, full of toads
and vipers and other Venomous animals.

“ She was still admiring this beauty which, by
the grace of God dwells in the soul, when, lo !
the light suddenly disappeared, and the crystal,
wherein the King of glory was still residing,
became opaque and as dark as coal, emitting
an intolerable odour ; the venomous animals,
formerly held in check outside, obtained admit-
tance into the Castle. The holy Mother wished
that every one should behold this vision, for
she thought that no one having seen the beauty
and splendour of grace, which is forfeited by sin


Digitized by CjOOQle


INTRODUCTION.


xxi


and replaced by such repulsive misery, would
ever dare to offend God.

“ She told me this vision on the same day, for
in this as well as in other things she was so com-
municative that on the following morning she
said to me : ‘ How I forgot myself yesterday !
I cannot think how it could have happened.
Those high aspirations of mine, and the affection
I have for you must have caused me to go
beyond all reasonable limits. God grant I may
have derived some profit therefrom.’ I promised
her to say nothing about it during her lifetime,
but since her death I should like to make it
known to all men. From this vision she learnt
four important matters.

“ First, she came to understand this axiom,
which in this form she had never heard of in
her life, 1 * that God is present in all things by
His essence, presence, and power. As she was
deeply humble and submissive and obedient to
the doctrine of the Church and the teaching of
the learned ministers of God, she never rested
until her revelations had been approved of by her
superiors and by theologians, and were shown
to be conformable to Holy Scripture. She went
so far as to say that if all the angels of heaven
said one thing, and her superiors another, though

* See Life , ch. xviii. 20. V. Mansions, ch. i. 9. The ignorance
of the priest who had told her that God was only present by His
grace, made a lasting impression on St. Teresa. She was first
undeceived by a Dominican.


r


Digitized by CjOOQle


XXII


INTRODUCTION.


she could not doubt that the former were true
angels, yet she would hold what was told her
by her superiors, because faith comes through
these and there remains no room for deceit,
whereas revelations coming from angels might be
illusionary.

“With such regard for obedience, she asked
me one day at Toledo — probably at the time
when she saw the vision of the Castle — whether
it was true that God was in all things by His
power, presence, and essence, to which I replied
in the affirmative, explaining it as best I could
on the authority of St. Paul, particularly where
he says ‘the sufferings of this time are not worthy
to be compared with the glory to come that
shall be revealed in us.’ 17 Laying stress on these
words, * shall be revealed in us,’ she was so over-
joyed that I was quite astonished. Though in a
way it seemed to me a kind of curiosity, I could
not help thinking there was some mystery about
it, for she said : * This is the very thing.’

“ Secondly, she was greatly surprised at the
malice of sin, since, notwithstanding the presence
of God in these various ways, it prevents the
soul from partaking of that powerful light.

“Thirdly, she derived such humility and self-
knowledge from this vision, that from that mo-
ment she never thought of herself in all the good
she was doing ; for she learnt that all the beauty

17 Rom. viii. 18.


Digitized by CjOOQle


INTRODUCTION.


xxiii


of the soul emanates from that resplendent light,
and that the powers of the soul and of the body
are enlivened and strengthened by the Power
established in the centre, whence comes all our
good, so that we have but a small share in our
good works. All the good she did, she from this
moment referred to God as its principal author.

“ Fourthly, she derived from it the subject of
the book she was ordered to write on prayer,
comparing the seven rooms of the Castle with
as many degrees of prayer, whereby we enter
within ourselves and draw nearer to God. So that,
penetrating to the depths of our soul and gaining
perfect self-knowledge, we reach the seventh
room where God Himself dwells, with Whom
we become united by as perfect a union as is
possible in the present life, being made partakers
of His light and love.

“ I will say no more of this vision and the
Mansions, because your Reverence must by now
have seen this admirable book, and must know
with what accuracy, with what majestic doctrine,
with what lucid examples she describes the pro-
gress of the soul from the gate to the very centre.
It is clearly seen in this treatise how she communi-
cated with our Lord, and how His Majesty vouch-
safed to place her in the centre and to unite her
with Himself, as she puts it, by the bonds of
matrimony and an inseparable union." 18

18 Fuente, l.c. pp. 131-133.


Digitized by CjOOQle


xxiv


INTRODUCTION.


After the publication of the Interior Castle, in
1588 at Salamanca, it became not only more
widely known, but also more and more appre-
ciated. Francis Suarez, the great theologian of
the Society of Jesus, says in his deposition in
the process of Beatification that he had read
some of St. Teresa’s works, particularly the
Mansions, which contain an absolutely safe doc-
trine and give proof of a wonderful spirit of prayer
and contemplation. 1 *

Thomas Hurtado, professor of theology at
Seville, speaks as follows :

“ As often as I read the books of the holy
Mother, I admire the wonderful manner in which
God instructed her in mystical theology for the
sake of souls giving themselves truly to familiar
intercourse with His divine Majesty. But where
I most regret my inability of expressing in fitting
terms my sentiments towards this excellent teacher
is when I look at, and refresh myself in, that
Castle with its seven rooms ; for there is seen
the effect of infused knowledge such as St. Denis
received from St. Hierotheus* 0 and both from
St. Paul, and which has been committed to writing
in the famous book of Mystical Theology. Hence
comes, as from a fountain-head, notwithstanding
the obscurity (to our manner of thinking) of its

“ Fuente, l.c. p. 184.

10 Allusion to the famous Mystical Theology attributed to
Dionysius the Areopagite, and long considered the chief authority
on this subject.


Digitized by CjOOQle


INTRODUCTION.


XXV


language, the doctrine of the great masters of the
spiritual life, such as Hugh of St. Victor, Bernard,
Ruysbroek, Tauler, Gerson, and many others
whom I pass by.

“ Nevertheless, I will boldly say that no one
has given us water more limpid from that Aposto-
lical and Areopagitical well than the holy Mother
Teresa, who, in her books, but chiefly in the
Mansions, has cleared up in simple language the
most difficult questions of this divine theology,
and has brought forth light from darkness, as it
is written : ‘ (He) commanded light to shine out of
darkness.’ “ Who has ever been able to show
as clearly as our Saint how God takes possession
of the soul, how He unites Himself with its sub-
stance, whence comes to the intellect the light
of faith, to the will the ardour of love, and to the
senses the jubilation over His works ? No one
has ever turned theory into practice in a more
convincing or more catholic manner. The most
profound secrets of this supernatural wisdom are
here treated with such ease, so amiably, so delight-
fully, they are illustrated by such nice and homely
examples, that instead of awe-inspiring obscurity
we find lovely flowers and the sweetness of love,
through which, as through an avenue, the soul
passes onwards. When God made known His
exalted doctrine to St. Dionysius and other
mystical writers, He made use of their own

n 2 Cor. iv. 6.


Digitized by t^.ooQle


XXVI


INTRODUCTION.


language and pen. But St. Teresa in the Man-
sions is like the light of dawn whose rays are not
intercepted by the clouds of this world ; like
a soft rain from above, whereby the soul grows
and profits by its communications with God.
Until the teaching of this great doctor became
known it seemed as though God were inaccessible,
being surrounded by darkness, through which
Moses and some other persons had to pass when
approaching Him ; w but they neither explained
the manner nor showed the way whereby they
came to the enjoyment of the sweetness of the
Spouse. Now, however, this way is clear and
patent to all, having been pointed out in the
Mansions, in language so straight and so metho-
dical, and no longer such as could not be un-
derstood or required further explanation. In
my opinion this holy writer derived not only
the substance of her teaching from infused
knowledge, but even the words with which she
explains it.” **

Likewise Don Alvaro de Villegas, canon of
Toledo, expressed his opinion that the Way of
Perfection and the Interior Castle contain “ heavenly
doctrine.” The weight of the subject-matter,
the propriety of the comparisons, the force of
expressions, the consistency of the teaching, the


“ The example of Moses is scarcely to the point (cf. Exod.
xxxiii. ii, and Num. xii. 7, 8).

” Fuente, l.c. pp. 330-332.


Dii — d by t^ooQle


INTRODUCTION.


xxvii


sweetness of her well-chosen, vivid words, the
clearness of the arguments, all this proves that
she was guided by her heavenly Spouse, in Whom
are hidden the treasures of the wisdom of God ;
and that the Holy Ghost, Who more than once
was seen resting on her head like a dove, was
dictating these works. Villegas does not believe
that any one could read them, as such books
ought to be read, without becoming himself a
master of the spiritual life. For they are like
heavenly dew, rendering the soul fruitful in the
matter of prayer .* 4

It would be a mistake to consider the Interior
Castle a complete treatise of mystical theology.
Like St. Teresa’s other works, it is intensely
personal : she describes the road by which she
has been led, being well aware that others may
be led in a different way. In the heavenly
Father’s house there are many mansions, not
only seven, and many paths lead to them. What
gives the work such high value is, that it is the
result of a most searching inquiry into the various
phases whereby a soul is gradually transformed
into the likeness of God Himself. Here St.
Teresa is always at her best. She takes nothing
for granted, even her own personal experiences
are admitted only after having been fully investi-
gated and found to be consistent one with the

14 Fuente, l.o. p. 334. These testimonies could easily be
multiplied.


Digitized by LjOOQle


xxviii


INTRODUCTION.


other, and conformable to the teaching of the
Church and the words of Holy Scripture.

Mystical theology is generally divided into
three parts, respectively called the purgative,
the illuminative, and the unitive life. In the
first, man is cleansed from sin and habitual
imperfection by the use of the sacraments and
by voluntary mortification of the passions. The
mind is purified by sedulous meditation on the
last end and on the Life and Passion of Christ,
which must ever be the great model of the Chris-
tian. This first portion of the way to heaven
can be covered by the help of the ordinary means
of grace, without any direct and extraordinary
intervention of divine power.

The second part differs in many ways from
the first. It comprises the passive purification
of the soul and the passive enlightenment of
the mind. By sending it keen interior and ex-
terior trials and sufferings, God completes the
cleansing of the soul in a manner far surpassing
any voluntary effort of man. By raising it to
the stage of contemplation He gives it fresh
light on the mysteries of our Redemption. The
mind is then no longer compelled to strain the
memory, the reason, and the will, in order to
dwell upon the great truths of religion and to
derive some personal benefit therefrom, for these
truths are now more or less permanently before
it and fill it with holy thoughts, sometimes giving


Digitized by CjOOQle


IKTRODtfCtlOtf. xxix

it consolation in trouble, at other times striking
a warning note against imperfection. Again, the
subtraction of sensible consolation, and the interior
aridity arising therefrom, leaves a terrible blank
in the soul, showing it that, without God’s help,
it is mere nothingness. This apparent estrange-
ment from God is the keenest trial that can befall
a soul, but also the most powerful means of
cleansing it from the least, the most subtle im-
perfections.

Emerging from this state of probation, the
soul enters upon the third stage, in which, though
perhaps in the midst of severe suffering and sharp
persecution, it knows itself to be a privileged
child of God, to Whom it is united by perfect
conformity of the will. Such phenomena as
revelations, visions, locutions, and even more
wonderful manifestations, like the wound of love,
spiritual betrothal and nuptials, are incidental
rather than essential to the second and third
stages. Some great contemplatives have never
experienced anything of the kind, while, on the
other hand, some of these occurrences may
sometimes have been merely the work of an
exuberant imagination, or even the result of
diabolical illusion. They should therefore never
be wished for, or cherished, but rather shunned
and ignored, in as far as that is possible. If
they are real and come from God, they will do
their work without the co-operation of the soul.


Digitized by t^.ooQle


XXX


INTRODUCTION.


The danger of self-deception is so great that a
person labouring under such phenomena should
offer every resistance, and that the spiritual
director should exercise the utmost vigilance.
St. Teresa is very eloquent on this point, and
undeceived many would-be contemplatives, while
her disciple, St. John of the Cross, is even more
thorough-going in the deprecation of spiritual
favours. Among the numerous marks whereby
the trained theologian may discriminate between
real and imaginary phenomena, there is one
about which St. Teresa speaks with wonderful
clearness. If they proceed from hysteria the
imagination alone is active and the higher powers
of the soul are torpid ; if, however, they come
from God, the intellect and the will are so in-
tensely active, that the lower powers and even
the body lose all strength for the time being.

It will be noticed that the first two Mansions
belong to the purgative life, the third and fourth
to the illuminative, and the remaining three to
the unitive life. Compared with similar works,
the treatment of the first stage must be called
meagre. True, in her Life and in the Way of
Perfection St. Teresa has dealt with this subject
somewhat more fully. Indeed, the last-named
work was designed as a treatise on Christian
Ascetics, dealing with the purgation of the soul
by mortification and the enlightenment of the
mind by meditation. There, too, appears the


— Digitized by CjOOQle


INTRODUCTION.


xxxi


first idea of the Mansions ,** and Fuente remarks
that the passage in question may be taken for
the parting of the ways between the two works.
However, this is not the only, nor, indeed, the
chief reason why Saint Teresa is so reticent
about the preliminary stage of the contemplative
life. The fact is that she herself did not pass
through these experiences. By God’s grace she
was preserved from childhood from grievous sin
and gross imperfection. Though she never grows
tired of bewailing her faults and unfaithfulness,
these avowals must be taken cum grano salts.
While yet a child, she sometimes gave way to
vanity in dress and wasted her time in reading
romances. As a young religious, she was sought
after by friends and relatives who took pleasure
in her attractive conversation. This proved fur-
ther loss of time and caused distractions. Owing
to acute suffering, she for some years left off the
practice of mental prayer, though she faithfully
performed all her religious obligations, as far as her
weak state of health allowed. This is all. The war
of the flesh against the spirit, the insubordination
of the lower parts of nature, the fickleness of the
will, which so often thwart the most noble aspira-
tions of a soul, were unknown to her. Under these
circumstances, we cannot be surprised to find her
entering upon the journey towards God at a point
which in many cases marks but the closing stage.

m Way of Perf. ch. xx. i.


Digitized by ^ooQle


INTRODUCTION.


XXXli

As to the remaining parts of this book, it
will be seen from the parallel passages that they
cover much the same ground as her Life and
the Relations. With her singular gift of intro-
spection and analysis, the Saint studied her own
case from every point of view, so as to make sure
that her extraordinary experiences were due to
no illusion, and offered no obstacle to the safety
of her soul. Although the Interior Castle contains
little that we do not already know from her other
works, it is superior to them by reason of its
logical order and the masterly treatment of the
most recondite matters of mystical theology.
While ostensibly dealing with general facts, St.
Teresa in reality records her personal experiences.
How definite these were, how little room there
remained for the freaks of the imagination, will
appear from the fact that she nearly always repeats
the very words she had used in her Life and in
the other reports of her interior progress, although
she did not have these writings before her eyes,
nor had she ever seen them since they first left
her hands. Every one of her experiences must
have produced a profound impression to be re-
membered so minutely after an interval of years.

There is that in the Interior Castle which
reminds one of Dante’s Paradiso. In the one
and the other, the soul, purified from earthly
dross, is gradually being invested with new and
glorious qualities, and is being led through regions


Digitized by t^.ooQle


INTRODUCTION.


xxxiii


unknown, until it arrives at the very threshold of
the throne of God. Not even the boldest imagina-
tion could have designed so wonderful a picture
of a soul adorned with graces at once so varied
and so true. In one case we know, the poet has
drawn abundantly from the treasury of the
Angelical Doctor, putting in verse the conclusions
of the scholastic theologian. In the other case
we can follow, chapter by chapter, the influence
of the teaching of St. Thomas Aquinas. St.
Teresa had never studied it herself, but her
directors and confessors were deeply versed in it
and solved her . doubts and perplexities on the
lines of the greatest of the schoolmen. The
Interior Castle might almost be considered a prac-
tical illustration of certain parts of the Summa
theological as it describes the progress of the
soul through every stage of perfection. When
we have reached the second chapter of the seventh
Mansion there remains but one thing : the
Beatific Vision, and this is reserved for the next
life.

After the publication of the Interior Castle by
Luis de Leon, the manuscript came into the
possession of Father Jerome Gratian, who, after
haring made a copy of it which is still extant,
presented the original, on the occasion of -a visit
to the convent of Seville, to Don Pedro Cereso
Pardo, a great friend of the Saint, and a benefactor

* S. Theol. 2da 2dae, qq. 171-184.

C


Digitized by L^ooQle


XXXIV


INTRODUCTION.


of the convent. When his only daughter took the
habit there, the precious manuscript was part of
her dowry. Doha Juana de Mendoza, Duchess of
Beguiar, a novice in the same convent, had it
bound in silver and precious stones. It is still
there,* 7 and the present writer had the privilege
of seeing it. It comprises a hundred and thirteen
leaves in folio, but orginally there must have
been some more leaves which at a later period
have been torn out. These, it is presumed,
contained the headings of the chapters. Unlike
the Life and the Foundations, the text of the
Castle is divided only by figures, without indica-
tion of the contents of each chapter, but the
arguments which have come down to us are
so entirely similar to those of the two works
named, that it is impossible to consider them
otherwise than the genuine work of the author.
In the present translation they have been in-
serted in their proper places.

On the occasion of the tercentenary of Saint
Teresa’s death, a photo-lithographic edition of
the original was published under the direction
of Cardinal Lluch, Carmelite of the old observance.
Archbishop of Seville :

El Castillo Ynterior 6 Tratado de las Moradas,
escrito por Sta. Teresa de Jesus.

Litografia de Juan Moyano (Seville) 1882.

17 Bollandists, Acta, n. 1495. See also Impressions in Spain .
By Lady Herbert. London, 1867, p. 171.


Digitized by CjOOQle


INTRODUCTION.


TUCXV


The present translation, the third in English,*®
has been made directly from this autograph
edition. It has been thought advisable that, as far
as the genius, of the language allows it, the wording
oi the author should be strictly adhered to, and
that not even a shade of her expression should be
sacrificed. For Teresa is not only a saint whose
every word is telling, but she' is a classic in her
own language who knows how to give expression
to her deepest thoughts. Having compared word
for word the translation with the original, I
am in a position to affirm that this programme
has been faithfully carried out. For the foot-
notes — with few exceptions— as well as for the
Index, I am responsible.** It seemed to me im-
portant to point out all the parallel passages
from the various works of the Saint. Only by

* The first translation is to be found in the Works of the Holy
Mother St. Teresa of Jesus (third part). Printed in the year
mdclxxv. pp. 137-286. It bears the title : The Interiour Castle :
or. Mansions. As to the authors of this translation — Abraham
Woodhead and another, whose name is not known — see my book
Carmel in England, p. 342, note. It is stated there that the third
part, containing the Way of Perfection and the Castle, has no title-
page. This is true with regard to the copy I had before me when
writing that book. The one I have now is more complete.

The second translation, by the Rev. John Dalton, appeared
in 1852 and has been repeatedly reprinted. It was dedicated to
Bishop Ullathome.

Of foreign translation^ it will be sufficient to mention the one
by Cyprien de la Nativity, in CEuvres de la Sainte Mire TMse de
JSsus , Paris, 1657, and the new one in CEuvres already mentioned.

** Page 81 was already printed when the new translation of
Saint Peter of Alcantara , edited by George Seymour Hollings,
appeared.


Digitized by ^ooQle


xxxvj


INTRODUCTION.


this means can it be seen how consistent Saint
Teresa is in all her writings. 80 It would have been
easy to multiply quotations from the works of
other writers on mystical theology. Thus, the
influence of the Imitation of Christ and of the Life
of our Lord by Ludolphus the Carthusian can be
distinctly traced in the Interior Castle. Both
these works, as well as some Spanish books,
were held in such esteem by St. Teresa, that
she ordered the prioress of her convents to keep
them at the disposal of the nuns. As there
is a limit to footnotes, I have contented myself
with such references as seemed to me conducive
to the elucidation of the doctrine laid down in
this treatise.

In conclusion I venture to express the hope,
that this new translation will be found helpful
by those who feel called to a higher life.

Benedict Zimmerman,

Prior, 0. C. D.

St. Luke's Priory,

W incanton, Somerset.

July i, 1905, and December 25, 1911.

*° The present translation ought to dispose of the reservations
expressed by an able critic in his otherwise valuable appreciation
of the works of the Saint. See Santa Teresa , by Alexander
Whyte, D.D. London, 1898, p. 32.


Digitized by CjOOQle


THE INTERIOR CASTLE

OR

THE MANSIONS

OF SAINT TERESA.

I H S.

This treatise, styled the Interior Castle, was written
by Teresa of Jesus, Nun of our Lady of Carmel,
for her Sisters and Daughters, the Discalced Car-
melite Nuns.

Rarely has obedience laid upon me so difficult a task
as this of writing about prayer ; for one reason, because
I do not feel that God has given ^me either the power
or the desire for it, besides which, during the last
three months I have suffered from noises and a great
weakness in my head that have made it painful for me
to write even on necessary business.*

However, as I know the power obedience has of
making things easy which seem impossible, my will
submits with a good grace, although nature seems greatly

1 " I am always suffering from my head." Letter of June 28, ■
* 577 -

I


Digitized by ^ooQle


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


distressed, for God has not given me such strength as
to bear, without repugnance, the constant struggle
against illness while performing many different duties.
May He, Who has helped me in other more difficult
matters, aid me with His grace in this, for I trust in
His mercy. I think I have but little to say that has
not already been put forth in my other works written
under obedience ; in fact, I fear this will be but repeti-
tion of them. I am like a parrot which has learnt to
talk ; only knowing what it has been taught or has heard,
it repeats the same thing over and over again. If God
wishes me to write anything new. He will teach it me,
or bring back to my memory what I have said elsewhere.
I should be content even with this, for as I am very
forgetful, I should be glad to be able to recall some of
the matters about which people say I have spoken well,
lest they should be altogether lost. If our Lord will
not even grant me this, still, if I weary my brains and
increase my headache by striving to obey, I shall gain
in merit, though my words should be useless to any one.
So I begin this work on the Feast of the Blessed
Trinity in the year 1577, in the Convent of St. Joseph
of Carmel at Toledo, where I am living, and I submit
all my writings to the judgment of those learned men
by whose commands I undertake them. That it will
be the fault of ignorance, not malice, if I say anything
contrary to the doctrine of the Holy Roman Catholic


Digitized by LjOOQle


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


3


Church, may be held as certain. By God’s goodness
I am, and always shall be, faithful to the Church, as
I have been in the past. May He be for ever blessed
and glorified. Amen.

He who bids me write this, tells me that the nuns of
these convents of our Lady of Carmel need some one
to solve their difficulties about prayer : he thinks that
women understand one another’s language best and that
my Sisters’ affection for me would make them pay
special attention to my words, therefore it is important
for me to explain the subject clearly to them. Thus I
am writing only to my Sisters ; the idea that any one
else could benefit by what I say would be absurd. Our
Lord will be doing me a great favour if He enables me
to help but one of the nuns to praise Him a little better ;
His Majesty knows well that I have no other aim. If
anything is to the point, they will understand that it
does; not originate from me and there is no reason to
attribute it to me, as with my scant understanding and
skill jl could write nothing of the sort, unless God, in
His ^nercy, enabled me to do so.


Digitized by t^.ooQle


THE FIRST MANSIONS.


CHAPTER I.

This chapter treats of the beauty and dignity of our souls
and makes a comparison to explain this. The
advantage of knowing and understanding this and
the favours God grants to us is shown, and how
prayer is the gate of the spiritual castle.

1. Plan of this book. 2. The Interior Castle. 3. Our culpable self-ignorance.
4. God dwells in the centre of the soul. 5. Why all souls do not receive
certain favours. 6. Reasons for speaking of these favours. 7. The
entrance of the castle. 8. Entering into oneself. 9. Prayer. 10. Those
who dwell in the first mansion. 11. Entering. 12. Difficulties of the
subfect .

I

i. While I was begging our Lord to-day to speak for
me, since I knew not what to say nor how to commence
this work which obedience has laid upon me, an idea
occurred to me which I will explain, and which will
serve as the foundation for all that I am about to wTite.

2. I thought of the soul as resembling a castle, 1 formed
of a single diamond or a very transparent crystal,* and
containing many rooms, just as in heaven there are

1 Way of Perf. ch. xxviii. 9.

* In her Life St. Teresa likened God to a diamond (ch. xl.
14) ; and elsewhere (ch. xi. 10) the soul to a garden wherein
our Lord takes His delight.

4


Digitized by t^.ooQle


CHAP. I.] FIRST MANSIONS. 5

many mansions. 1 If we reflect, Sisters, we shall see
that the soul of the just man is but a paradise, in
which, God tells us, He takes His delight. 4 What, do
you imagine, must that dwelling be in which a King so
mighty, so wise, and so pure, containing in Himself all
good, can delight to rest ? Nothing can be compared
to the great beauty and capabilities of a soul ; however
keen our intellects may be, they are as unable to
comprehend them as to comprehend God, for, as He
has told us. He created us in His own image and
likeness.*

3. As this is so, we need not tire ourselves by trying
to realise all the beauty of this castle, although, being
His creature, there is all the difference between the soul
and God that there is between the creature .and the
Creator ; the fact that it is made in God’s image teaches
us how great are its dignity and loveliness. It is no
small misfortune and disgrace that, through our own


* St. John xiv. 2; "In domo Patris mei mansiones mult*
sun! ” St. John of the Cross uses the same comparison : " If
the soul shall overcome the devil in the first combat, it shall then
pass on to the second ; and if it shall be victorious there also, it
shall then pass on to the third ; and then through the seven
mansions, the seven degrees of love, until the Bridegroom shall
bring it to the ‘ cellar of wine ’ or perfect charity ” (Ascent of
Mount Carmel, bk. ii. ch. xi. 7.)

4 Prov. viii. 31 : "Deliciae me® esse cum filiis hominum.”

* Gen. i. 26: “ Faciamus hominem ad imaginem et simili-
tudinem nostram.”


Digitized by ^ooQle


6


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. I.


fault, we neither understand our nature nor our origin.
Would it not be gross ignorance, my daughters, if, when
a man was questioned about his name, or country, or
parents, he could not answer ? Stupid as this would
be, it is unspeakably more foolish to care to learn nothing
of our nature except that we possess bodies, and only
to realise vaguely that we have souls, because people say
so and it is a doctrine of faith. Rarely do we reflect
upon what gifts our souls may possess, Who dwells
within them, or how extremely precious they are. There-
fore we do little to preserve their beauty ; all our care
is concentrated on our bodies, which are but ^the
coarse setting of the diamond, or the outer walls of
the castle. 1

4. Let us imagine, as I said, that there are many rooms
in this castle, of which some are above, some below,
others at the side ; in the centre, in the very midst of
them all, is the principal chamber in which God and the
soul hold their most secret intercourse. 7 Think over

6 Way of Perf. ch. xxviii. 5.

7 St. John of the Cross on the words in his stanza: *' Ii the
inner cellar of my Beloved have I drunk.” "Here the soul
speaks of that sovereign grace of God in taking it into the house
of His love, which is the union or transformation of love in
God. . . . The cellar is the highest degree of love to which
the soul can attain in this life, and is therefore said to be the
inner. It follows from this that there are other cellars not
so interior ; that is, the degrees of love by which souls reach to
this, the last. These cellars are seven in number, and the soul
has entered them all when it has in perfection the seven gifts


Digitized by


Google


CHAP. I.] FIRST MANSIONS. 7

this comparison very carefully ; God grant it may
enlighten you about the different kinds of graces He is
pleased to bestow upon the soul. No one can know all
about them, much less a person so ignorant as I am.
The knowledge that such things are possible will console
you greatly should our Lord ever grant you any of
these favours; people themselves deprived of them
can then at least praise Him for His great goodness in
bestowing them on others. The thought of heaven and
the happiness of the saints does us no harm, but cheers,
and urges us to win this joy for ourselves, nor will it
injure us to know that during this exile God can com-
municate Himself to us loathsome worms ; it will rather
make us love Him for such immense goodness and
infinite mercy.

5. I feel sure that vexation at thinking that during
oi?r life on earth God can bestow these graces on the souls
of others shows a want of humility and charity for one’s
neighbour, for why should we not feel glad at a brother's
receiving divine favours, which do not deprive us of
our own share ? Should we not rather rejoice at His

Majesty thus manifesting His greatness wherever He

/

I

of the Holy Ghost, so far as it is possible for it. . . . Many souls
reach and enter the first cellar, each according to the perfection
of its love, but the last and inmost cellar is entered by few in
this world, because therein is wrought the perfect union with
God, the union of the spiritual marriage ” (A Spiritual Canticle ,
stanza xxvi. 1-3).


Digitized by t^.ooQle


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


8


[CHAP. I.


chooses ? ' Sometimes our Lord acts thus solely for the
sake of showing His power, as He declared when the
Apostles questioned whether the blind man whom He
cured had been suffering for his own or his parents’ sins.*
God does not bestow these favours on certain souls because
they are more holy than others who do not receive them,
but to manifest His greatness, as in the case of St. Paul
and St. Mary Magdalen, and that we may glorify Him in
His creatures.

6. People may say such things appear impossible and
it is best not to scandalise the weak in faith by speaking
about them. But it is better that the latter should dis-
believe us, than that we should desist from enlightening
souls which receive these graces, that they may rejoice and
may endeavour to love God better for His favours, seeing
He is so mighty and so great. There is no danger here
of shocking those for whom I write by treating of such
matters, for they know and believe that God gives even
greater proofs of His love. I am certain that if any
one of you doubts the truth of this, God will never allow
her to learn it by experience, for He desires that no
limits should be set to His work : therefore never dis-
credit them because you are not thus led yourselves.


• St. Matt. xx. 15 : " Aut non licet mihi quod volo facere ? an
oculus tuus nequam est quia ego bonus sum ? ”

• St. John ix. 2: “Quis peccavit, hie aut parentes ejus, ut
caecus nasceretur ? ”


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. I.]


FIRST MANSIONS.


9


7. Now let us return to our beautiful and charming
castle and discover how to enter it. This appears incon-
gruous : if this castle is the soul, clearly no one can have
to enter it, for it is the person himself : one might as
well tell some one to go into a room he is already in !
There are, however, very different ways of being in this
castle ; many souls live in the courtyard of the building
where the sentinels stand, neither caring to enter farther,
nor to know who dwells in that most delightful place,
what is in it and what rooms it contains.

8. Certain books on prayer that you have read advise
the soul to enter into itself ,*• and this is what I mean. I
was recently told by a great theologian that souls without
prayer are like bodies, palsied and lame, having hands
and feet they cannot use. Just so, there are souls so
infirm and accustomed to think of nothing but earthly
matters, that there seems no cure for them. It appears
impossible for them to retire into their own hearts ;
accustomed as they are to be with the reptiles and other
creatures which live outside the castle, they have come
at last to imitate their habits. Though these souls are
by their nature so richly endowed, capable of communion
even with God Himself, yet their case seems hopeless.

^'limitation, bk. 11. ch. x : "Regnum Dei intra vos est.” The
Imitation is one of the books which according to St. Teresa’s
Constitutions (§ 7) every Prioress was bound to provide for her
convent.


Digitized by


Google


10


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. I.


Unless they endeavour to understand and remedy their
most miserable plight, their minds will become, as it
were, bereft of movement, just as Lot’s wife became a
pillar of salt for looking backwards in disobedience to
God’s command.”

9. As far as I can understand, the gate by which
to enter this castle is prayer and meditation. I do
not allude more to mental than to vocal prayer, for
if it is prayer at all, the mind must take part in it. If a
person neither considers to Whom he is addressing
himself, what he asks, nor what he is who ventures to
speak to God, although his lips may utter many words,
I do not call it prayer.” Sometimes, indeed* one may
pray devoutly without making all these considerations
through having practised them at other times. The
custom of speaking to God Almighty as freely as with
a slave — caring nothing whether the words are suitable
or not, but simply saying the first thing that comes
to mind from being learnt by rote by frequent repeti-
tion — cannot be called prayer : God grant that no
Christian may address Him in this manner. I trust His
Majesty will prevent any of you, Sisters, from doing so.
Our habit in this Order of conversing about spiritual
matters is a good preservative against such evil ways.

11 Gen. xix. 26: “ Respiciensque uxor ejus post se, versa est
in statuam salis.”

1a Way of Perf. ch. xxi. 6, ch. xxix. 4.


"Digitized by UjOOQle


CHAP. I.]


FIRST MANSIONS.


II


10. Let us speak no more of those crippled souls,
who are in a most miserable and dangerous state, unless
our Lord bid them rise, as He did the palsied man
who had waited more than thirty years at the pool of
Bethsaida. 1 * We will now think of the others who at
last enter the precincts of the castle ; they are still very
worldly, yet have some desire to do right, and at times,
though rarely, commend themselves to God’s care.
They think about their souls every now and then ;
although very busy, they pray a few times a month, with
minds generally filled with a thousand other matters,
for where their treasure is, there is their heart also . 11
Still, occasionally they cast aside these cares ; it is a
greit boon for them to realise to some extent the state
of their souls, and to see that they will never reach the
gate by the road they are following.

11. At length they enter the first rooms in the base-
ment of the castle, accompanied by numerous reptiles "
which disturb their peace, and prevent them seeing
the beauty of the building ; still, it is a great gain that
these persons should have found their way in at all.

u St. John v. 5 : “ Erat autem quidam homo ibi triginta et
octo an nos habens in infirmitate sua.”

14 St. Matt. vi. 21 : “ Ubi enim est thesaurus tuus ibi est et
cor tuum.”

Many an ancient castle was provided with a bear-garden
where rare animals were kept for the amusement of the inhabi-
tants. This may have supplied the material for St. Teresa’s
comparison.


Digitized by


Google


12


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. II.


12. You may think, my daughters, that all this does
not concern you, because, by God’s grace, you are farther
advanced ; still, you must be patient with me, for I
can explain myself on some spiritual matters concern-
ing prayer in no other way. May our Lord enable me
to speak to the point ; the subject is most difficult to
understand without personal experience of such graces.
Any one who has received them will know how impos-
sible it is to avoid touching on subjects which, by the
mercy of God, will never apply to us.


CHAPTER II.

Describes the hideous appearance of a soul in mortal sin
as revealed by God to some one : offers a few remarks
on self-knowledge : this chapter is useful, as it
contains some points requiring attention. An ex-
planation of the Mansions.

1. Effects of mortal sin. 2. It prevents the soul gaining merit 3. The soul
compared to a tree. 4. Disorder of the soul in mortal sin. 5. Vision of
a sinful soul. 6. Profit of realising these lessons. 7. Prayer. 8. Beauty
of the Castle. 0. Self-knowledge. 10. Gained by meditating on the
divine perfections. 11. Advantage of such meditation. 12. Christ should
be our model 13. The devil entraps beginners. 14. Our strength must
come from God. 15. Sin blinds the soul 16. Worldliness. i7. The
world in the cloister. 18. Assaults of the devil 19. Examples of the
deviVs arts. 20. Perfection consists in charity. 21. Indiscreet seal.
22. Danger of detraction.


i. Before going farther, I wish you to consider' the
state to which mortal sin 1 brings this magnificent and
beautiful castle, this pearl of the East, this tree of, life,
1 Life, ch. xxxviii. 31, ch. xl. 15.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. II.]


FIRST MANSIONS.


13


planted beside the living waters of life * which symbolise
God Himself. No night can be so dark, no gloom nor
blackness can compare to its obscurity. Suffice it to
say that the sun in the centre of the soul, which gave
it such splendour and beauty, is totally eclipsed, though
the spirit is as fitted to enjoy God’s presence as is the
crystal to reflect the sun.*

2. While the soul is in mortal sin nothing can profit
it ; none of its good works merit an eternal reward,
since they do not proceed from God as their first
principle, and by Him alone is our virtue real
virtue. The soul separated from Him is no longer
pleasing in His eyes, because by committing a mortal
sin, instead of seeking to please God, it prefers to
gratify the devil, the prince of darkness, and so comes
to share his blackness. I knew a person to whom our
Lord revealed the result of a mortal sin 4 and who said
she thought no one who realised its effects could ever
commit it, but would suffer unimaginable torments to
avoid it. This vision made her very desirous for all to
realise this truth, therefore I beg you, my daughters,
to pray fervently to God for sinners, who live in blind-
ness and do deeds of darkness.

1 Ps. i. 3 s “ Et erit tanquam lignum quod plantatum est secus
decursus aquarum."

* Way of Perf. ch. xxviii. 9.

4 In this as in most other cases when the Saint speaks of
" a person she knows,” she means herself. Life, ch. xl. 15.


Digitized by


Google


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


14


[CHAP. II.


3. In a state of grace the soul is like a well of limpid
water, from which flow only streams of clearest crystal.
Its works are pleasing both to God and man, rising from
the River of Life, beside which it is rooted like a tree.
Otherwise it would produce neither leaves nor fruit,
for the waters of grace nourish it, keep it from withering
from drought, and cause it to bring forth good fruit.
But the soul by sinning withdraws from this stream of
life, and, growing beside a black and fetid pool, can
produce nothing but disgusting and unwholesome fruit.
Notice that it is not the fountain and the brilliant sun
which lose their splendour and beauty, for they are
placed in the very centre of the soul and cannot be
deprived of their lustre. The soul is like a crystal
in the sunshine over which a thick black cloth has been
thrown, so that however brightly the sun may shine
the crystal can never reflect it.

4. O souls, redeemed by the Blood of Jesus Christ,
take these things to heart ; have mercy on yourselves !
If you realise your pitiable condition, how can you
refrain from trying to remove the darkness from the
crystal of your souls ? Remember, if death should take
you now, you would never again enjoy the light of this
Sun. O Jesus ! how sad a sight must be a soul deprived
of light ! What a terrible state the chambers of this
castle are in ! How disorderly must be the senses — the
inhabitants of the castle — the powers of the soul — its


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. II.]


FIRST MANSIONS.


15


magistrates, governors, and stewards — blind and uncon-
trolled as they are ! In short, as the soil in which the
tree is now planted is in the devil’s domain, how can its
fruit be anything but evil ? A man of great spiritual
insight once told me he was not so much surprised at
such a soul's wicked deeds as astonished that it did not
commit even worse sins. May God in His mercy keep
us from such great evil, for nothing in this life merits
the name of evil in comparison with this, which delivers
us over to evil which is eternal.

5. This is what we must dread and pray God to deliver
us from, for we are weakness itself, and unless He guards
the city, in vain shall we labour to defend it.* The
person of whom I spoke ‘ said that she had learnt two
things from the vision granted her. The first was,
a great fear of offending God ; seeing how terrible
were the consequences, she constantly begged Him to
preserve her from falling into sin. Secondly, it was a
mirror to teach her humility, for she saw that nothing
good in us springs from ourselves but comes from the
waters of grace near which the soul remains like a tree
planted beside a river, and from that Sun which gives
life to our works. She realised this so vividly that on
seeing any good deed performed by herself or by other

* Ps. cxxvi. 1 : " Nisi Dominus custodierit civitatem frustra
vigilat qui custodit earn."

• Life, ch. xxxviii. 33 ; ch. xl. 15, 16.


Digitized by LjOOQle


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


16


[chap. ii.


people she at once turned to God as to its fountain head
— without Whose help she well knew we can do nothing
— and broke out into songs of praise to Him. Generally
she forgot all about herself and only thought of God
when she did any meritorious action.

6. The time which has been spent in reading or writing
on this subject will not have been lost if it has taught
us these two truths ; for though learned, clever men
know them perfectly, women’s wits are dull and need
help in every way. Perhaps this is why our Lord has
suggested these comparisons to me ; may He give us
grace to profit by them !

7. So obscure are these spiritual matters that to explain
them an ignorant person like myself must say much
that is superfluous, and even alien to the subject, before
coming to the point. My readers must be patient with
me, as I am with myself while writing what I do not
understand ; indeed, I often take up the paper like a
dunce, not knowing what to say, nor how to begin.
Doubtless there is need for me to do my best to explain
these spiritual subjects to you, for we often hear how
beneficial prayer is for our souls ; our Constitutions oblige
us to pray so many hours a day, yet tell us nothing of
what part we ourselves can take in it and very little of
the work God does in the soul by its means.’ It will be
helpful, in setting it before you in various ways, to con-

7 Life, ch. x. 2 sqq. Constitut. 2, 6.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. II.] FIRST MANSIONS. 17

sider this heavenly edifice within us, so little understood
by men, near as they often come to it. Our Lord gave
me grace to understand something of such matters
when I wrote on them before, yet I think I have more
light now, especially on the more difficult questions.
Unfortunately I am too ignorant to treat of such subjects
without saying much that is already well known.

8. Now let us turn at last to our castle with its many
mansions. You must not think of a suite of rooms
placed in succession, but fix your eyes on the keep,
the court inhabited by the King.* Like the kernel of
the palmito,* from which several rinds must be removed
before coming to the eatable part, this principal chamber
is surrounded by many others. However large, magni-
ficent, and spacious you imagine this castle to be, you
cannot exaggerate it ; the capacity of the soul is beyond
all our understanding, and the Sun within this palace
enlightens every part of it.

9, A soul which gives itself to prayer, either much
or little, should on no account be kept within narrow
bounds. Since God has given it such great dignity,

* Way of Perf. ch. xxviii. 1.

* The palmito here referred to is not a palm, but a shrub about
four feet high and very dense with leaves, resembling palm leaves.
The poorer classes and principally children dig it up by the
roots, which they peel of its many layers until a sort of kernel is
disclosed, which is eaten, not without relish, and is somewhat
like a filbert in taste. See St. John of the Cross, Ascent of
Mount Carmel, bk. ii. ch. xiv. 3.

2


Digitized by t^ooQle


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


18


[CHAP. II.


permit it to wander at will through the rooms of the
castle, from the lowest to the highest. Let it not force
itself to remain for very long in the same mansion, even
that of self-knowledge.. Mark well, however, that self-
knowledge is indispensable, even for those whom God
takes to dwell in the same mansion with Himself.
Nothing else, however elevated, perfects the soul which
must never seek to forget its own nothingness. Let
humility be always at work, like the bee at the honey-
comb, or all will be lost. But, remember, the bee leaves
its hive to fly in search of flowers and the soul should
sometimes cease thinking of itself to rise in meditation
on the grandeur and majesty of its God. It will learn
its own baseness better thus than by self-contemplation,
and will be freer from the reptiles which enter the first
room where self-knowledge is acquired. Although it is
a great grace from God to practise self-examination, yet
“ too much is as bad as too little,” as they say ; believe
me, by God’s help, we shall advance more by contem-
plating the Divinity than by keeping our eyes fixed on
ourselves, poor creatures of earth that we are.

io. I do not know whether I have put this clearly ;
self-knowledge is of such consequence that I would not
have you careless of it, though you may be lifted to
heaven in prayer, because while on earth nothing is more
needful than humility. Therefore, I repeat, not only a
good way, but the best of all ways, is to endeavour to


Digitized by ^ooQle


CHAP. II.]


FIRST MANSIONS.


19


enter first by the room where humility is practised,
which is far better than at once rushing on to the others.
This is the right road ; — if we know how easy and safe
it is to walk by it, why ask for wings with which to fly ?
Let us rather try to learn how to advance quickly. I
believe we shall never learn to know ourselves except by
endeavouring to know God, for, beholding His greatness
we are struck by our own baseness, His purity shows our
foulness, and by meditating on His humility we find how
very far we are from being humble.

11. Two advantages are gained by this practice.
First, it is clear that white looks far whiter when placed
near something black, and on the contrary, black never
looks so dark as when seen beside something white.
Secondly, our understanding and will become more noble
and capable of good in every way when we turn from
ourselves to God : it is very injurious never to raise
our minds above the mire of our own faults. I described
how murky and fetid are the streams that spring from
the source of a soul in mortal sin. 1 * Thus (although
the case is not really the same, God forbid ! this is only
a comparison), while we are continually absorbed in
contemplating the weakness of our earthly nature, the
springs of our actions will never flow free from the mire
of timid, weak, and cowardly thoughts, such as : "I
wonder whether people are noticing me or not ! If I
“ Supra, $ 3.


Digitized by LjOOQle


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


20


[CHAP. II.


follow this course, will harm come to me ? Dare I begin
this work ? Would it not be presumptuous ? Is it
right for any one as faulty as myself to speak on sublime
spiritual subjects ? 11 Will not people think too well
of me, if I make myself singular ? Extremes are bad,
even in virtue ; sinful as I am I shall only fall the
lower. Perhaps I shall fail and be a source of scandal
to good people ; such a person as I am has no need of
peculiarities.”

12. Alas, my daughters, what loss the devil must
have caused to many a soul by such thoughts as these 1
It thinks such ideas and many others of the same sort
I could mention arise from humility. This comes from
not understanding our own nature ; self-knowledge
becomes so warped that, unless we take our thoughts
off ourselves, I am not surprised that these and many
worse fears should threaten us. Therefore I maintain,
my daughters, that we should fix our eyes on Christ
our only Good, and on His saints ; there we shall learn
true humility, and our minds will be ennobled, so that
self-knowledge will not make us base and cowardly.
Although only the first, this mansion contains great
riches and such treasures that if the soul only manages
to elude the reptiles dwelling here, it cannot fail to
advance farther. Terrible are the wiles and stratagems

11 Life, ch. viii. 6, ch. x. 4, ch. xxiii. 3-5. Way of Perf. ch.
xxxix. 1.


Digitized by CjOOQle


CHAP. II.]


FIRST MANSIONS.


21


the devil uses to hinder people from realising their weak-
ness and detecting his snares.

13. From personal experience I could give you much
information as to what happens in these first mansions.
I will only say that you must not imagine there are only
a few, but a number of rooms, for souls enter them by
many different ways, and always with a good intention.
The devil is so angry at this, that he keeps legions of
evil spirits hidden in each room to stop the progress
of Christians, whom, being ignorant of this, he entraps
in a thousand ways. He cannot so easily deceive souls
which dwell nearer to the King as he can beginners
still absorbed in the world, immersed in its pleasures,
and eager for its honours and distinctions. As the vassals
of their souls, the senses and powers bestowed on them
by God, are weak, such people are easily vanquished,
although desirous not to offend God.

14. Those conscious of being in this state must as
often as possible have recourse to His Majesty, taking
His Blessed Mother and the saints for their advocates
to do battle for them, because we creatures possess little
strength for self-defence. Indeed in every state of life
all our help must come from God ; may He in His
mercy grant it us, Amen ! What a miserable life we
lead 1 As I have spoken more fully in other writings **

» Lift, ch. xiii. 23. Way of Perf. ch. x. 4. Castle, M. iii.
ch. ii. 8. Concep. ch. ii. 20. Const. 21.


Digitized by LjOOQle


22


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. II.


on the ill that results from ignoring the need of humility
and self-knowledge, I will treat no more about it here,
my daughters, although it is of the first importance.
God grant that what I have said may be useful
to you.

15. You must notice that the light which comes from
the King's palace hardly shines at all in these first
mansions ; although not as gloomy and black as the
soul in mortal sin, yet they are in semi-darkness, and
their inhabitants see scarcely anything. I cannot explain
myself ; I do not mean that this is the fault of the
mansions themselves, but that the number of snakes,
vipers, and venomous reptiles from outside the castle
prevent souls entering them from seeing the light.
They resemble a person entering a chamber full of
brilliant sunshine, with eyes clogged and half closed
with dust. Though the room itself is light, he cannot
see because of his self-imposed impediment. In the
same way, these fierce and wild beasts blind the eyes
of the beginner, so that he sees nothing but them.

16. Such, it appears to me, is the soul which, though
not in a state of mortal sin, is so worldly and preoccupied
with earthly riches, honours, and affairs, that as I said,
even if it sincerely wishes to enter into itself and enjoy
the beauties of the castle, it is prevented by these dis-
tractions and seems unable to overcome so many obstacles.
It is most important to withdraw from all unnecessary


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. II.] FIRST MANSIONS. 23

cares and business, as far as compatible with the duties
of one's state of life, in order td enter the second mansion.
This is so essential, that unless done immediately I
think it impossible for any one ever to reach the principal
room, or even to remain where he is without great risk
of losing what is already gained ; otherwise, although he
is inside the castle, he will find it impossible to avoid
being bitten some time or other by some of the very
venomous creatures surrounding him.

17. What then would become of a religious like our-
selves, my daughters, if, after having escaped from all
these impediments, and having entered much farther
into the more secret mansions, she should, by her own
fault, return to all this turmoil ? Through her sins,
many other people on whom God had bestowed great
graces would culpably relapse into their wretched
state. In our convents we are free from these exterior
evils ; please God our minds may be as free from them,
and may He deliver us from such ills.

18. Do not trouble yourselves, my daughters, with
cares which do not concern you. You must notice
that the struggle with the demons continues through
nearly all the mansions of this castle. True, in some of
them the guards, which, as I explained, are the powers
of the soul, have strength for the combat, but we must
be keenly on the watch against the devil’s arts, lest he
deceive us in the form of an angel of light. He


Digitized by LjOOQle


24


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. II.


creeps in gradually, in numberless ways, and does us
much harm, though we do not discover it until too
late. 1 *

19. As I said elsewhere, 14 he works like a file, secretly
and silently wearing its way : 1 will give you some
examples to show how he begins his wiles. For instance :
a nun has such a longing for penance as to feel no peace
unless she is tormenting herself in some way. 1 ' This
is good in itself ; but suppose that the Prioress has for-
bidden her to practise any mortifications without special
leave, and the sister thinking that, in such a meritorious
cause, she may venture to disobey, secretly leads such
a life that she loses her health and cannot even fulfil
the requirements of her rule — you see how this show of
good ends. Another nun is very zealous about religious
perfection ; this is very right, but may cause her
to think every small fault she sees in her sisters a
serious crime, and to watch constantly whether they
do anything wrong, that she may run to the Prioress
to accuse them of it. At the same time, may be, she
never notices her own short-comings because of her
great zeal about other people’s religious observance,
while perhaps her sisters, not seeing her intention but

M Life, ch. xxxi. 23.

M No doubt the Saint often used this excellent comparison
in her verbal instructions, but it occurs nowhere else in her
writings.

11 Way of Perf. ch. x. 5, ch xxxix. 4. Rei. iii. 12.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. II.]


FIRST MANSIONS.


25


only knowing of the watch she keeps on them, do not
take her behaviour in good part.

20. The devil’s chief aim here is to cool the charity
and lessen the mutual affection of the nuns, which would
injure them seriously. Be sure, my daughters, that
true perfection consists in the love of God and our
neighbour, and the better we keep both these command-
ments, the more perfect shall we be. The sole object
of our Rule and Constitutions is to help us to observe
these two laws.

21. Indiscreet zeal about others must not be indulged
in ; it may do us much harm ; let each one look to
herself. However, as I have spoken fully on this
subject elsewhere, 1 ‘ I will not enlarge on it here, and
will only beg you to remember the necessity of this
mutual affection. Our souls may lose their peace and
even disturb other people’s if we are always criticising
trivial actions which often are not real defects at
all, but we construe them wrongly through ignorance
of their motives. See how much it costs to attain per-
fection. ! Sometimes the devil tempts nuns in this way
about the Prioress, which is still more dangerous. Great
prudence is then required, for if she disobeys the Rule
ar Constitutions the matter must not always be over-

m The Saint must frequently have spoken on the subject, but
she never treated it more fully than in this place. Way of
Perf. ch. xli. 7. Life, ch. xiii. 11, 14 sqq.


Digitized by ^ooQle


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


26


[CHAP. II.


looked, but should be mentioned to her ; 11 if, after this,
she does not amend, the Superior of the Order should
be informed of it. It is true charity to speak in this
case, as it would be if we saw our sisters commit a grave
fault ; to keep silence for fear that speech would be a
temptation against charity, would be that very temp-
tation itself. 1 *

22. However, I must warn you seriously not to talk
to each other about such things, lest the devil deceive
you. He would gain greatly by your doing so, because
it would lead to the habit of detraction ; rather, as I
said, state the matter to those whose duty it is to remedy
it. Thank God, our custom here of keeping almost
perpetual silence gives little opportunity for such con-
versation, still, it is well to stand ever on our guard.


17 Way of Perf. ch. ii. 3. Visit. 20-22, 34, 36.
u " It is terrible to think what harm a Prioress can do ! For
although the Sisters witness things which scandalise them (of
which there are plenty here t), yet they think it would be sinning
against obedience to see any harm in them ” (Letter to Father
Gratian, written at Malagon, at the beginning of December, 1579).


Digitized by ^ooQle


THE SECOND MANSIONS.


ONLY CHAPTER.

Treats of the great importance of perseverance in order
to enter the last mansions, and of the fierce war the
devil wages against us. How essential it is to take
the right path from the very commencement of our
journey. A method of action which has proved
very efficacious.


1 . Souls in the second mansions. 2 . Their stale. 3 . Their sufferings. 4 . They
cannot get rtd of their imperfections. 5 . How God calls these souls.
6 . Perseverance is essential 7 . Temptations of the devil 8 . Delusion
of earthly fogs. 9 . God alone to be loved. 10 . Reasons for continuing
the foumeg. 11 . Warfare of the devil 12 . Importance of choice of
friends. 13 . Valour required. 14 . Presumption of expecting spiritual
consolations at first. 15 . In the Cross is strength. 16 . Our falls should
raise us higher 17 . Confidence and perseverance. 18 . Recollection.
19 . Why we must practise prayer. 20 . Meditation kindles love.

I. Now let us consider which are the souls that enter
the second mansions, and what they do there. I do
not wish to enlarge on this subject, having already
treated it very fully elsewhere, 1 for I could not avoid
repeating myself, as my memory is very bad. If I
could state my ideas in another form they would not
weary you, for we never tire of reading books on this
subject, numerous as they are.

1 Life, ch. xiii. i sqq. Way of Perf. ch. xx.-xxix.

27


Digitized by LjOOQle


28


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


2. In this part of the castle are found souls which
have begun to practise prayer ; they realize the impor-
tance of their not remaining in the first mansions, yet
often lack determination to quit their present condition
by avoiding occasions of sin, which is a very perilous
state to be in.

3. However, it is a great grace that they should
sometimes make good their escape from the vipers and
poisonous creatures around them and should under-
stand the need of avoiding them. In some way these
souls suffer a great deal more than those in the first
mansions, although not in such danger, as they begin
to understand their peril and there are great hopes of
their entering farther into the castle. I say that they
suffer a great deal more, for those in an earlier stage
are like deaf-mutes and are not so distressed at being
unable to speak, while the others, who can hear but
cannot talk, find it much harder. At the same time,
it is better not to be deaf, and a decided advantage to
hear what is said to us.

4. These souls hear Our Lord calling them, for as
they approach nearer to where His Majesty dwells He
proves a loving Neighbour, though they may still be
engaged in the amusements and business, the pleasures
and vanities of this world. While in this state we
continually fall into sin and rise again, for the creatures
amongst whom we dwell are so venomous, so vicious, and


— Digitized by LjOOQle


SECOND MANSIONS.


29


so dangerous, that it is almost impossible to avoid being
tripped up by them. Yet such are the pity and com-
passion of this Lord of ours, so desirous is He that we
should seek Him and enjoy His company, that in one way
or another He never ceases calling us to Him. So sweet
is His voice, that the poor soul is disconsolate at being
unable to follow His bidding at once, and therefore, as
I said, suffers more than if it could not hear Him.

5. I do not mean that divine communications and
inspirations received in this mansion are the same as
those I shall describe later on ; God here speaks to souls
through words uttered by pious people, by sermons or
good books, and in many other such ways. Some-
times He calls souls by means of sickness or troubles,
or by some truth He teaches them during prayer, for
tepid as they may be in seeking Him, yet God holds
them very dear.

6. Do not think lightly, Sisters, of this first grace,
nor be downcast if you have not responded immediately
to Our Lord’s voice, for His Majesty is willing to wait
for us many a day and even many a year, especially
when He sees perseverance and good desires in our
hearts. Perseverance is the first essential ; with this
we are sure to profit greatly. However, the devils
now fiercely assault the soul in a thousand different
ways : it suffers even more than ever, because formerly
it was mute and deaf, or at least could hear very


Digitized by LjOOQle


30 . THE INTERIOR CASTLE.

little, and offered but feeble resistance, like one who
has almost lost all hope of victory.

7. Here, however, the understanding being more
vigilant and the powers more on the alert, we cannot
avoid hearing the fighting and cannonading around us.
For now the devils set on us the reptiles, that is to say,
thoughts about the world and its joys which they picture
as unending ; they remind us of the high esteem men
held us in, of our friends and relations ; they tell us how
the penances which souls in this mansion always begin
to wish to perform would injure our health : in fine,
the evil spirits place a thousand impediments in the
way.

8. O Jesus ! What turmoil the devils cause in the
poor soul ! How unhappy it feels, not knowing whether
to go forward or to return to the first mansion I On
the other hand, reason shows it the delusion of overrating
worldly things, while faith teaches what alone can
satisfy its cravings. Memory reminds the soul how all
earthly joys end, recalling the death of those who lived
at ease ; how some died suddenly and were soon forgotten,
how others, once so prosperous, are now buried beneath
the ground and men pass by the graves where they lie,
the prey of worms,* while the mind recalls many other
such incidents.

1 " How many, thinking to live long, have been deceived and
unexpectedly have been snatched away 1 How often hast thou


Digitized by LjOOQle


SECOND MANSIONS.


31


g. The will inclines to love Our Lord and longs to
make some return to Him Who is so amiable, and Who
has given so many proofs of His love, especially by His
constant presence with the soul, which this faithful
Lover never quits, ever accompanying it and giving it
life and being. The understanding aids by showing that
however many years life might last, no one could ever
wish for a better friend than God ; that the world is
full of falsehood, and that the worldly pleasures pictured
by the devil to the mind were but troubles and cares
and annoyances in disguise.

10. Reason convinces the soul that as outside its

interior castle are found neither peace nor security,

it should cease to seek another home abroad, its own being

full of riches that it can enjoy at will. Besides, it is not

every one who, like itself, possesses all he needs within

his own dwelling, and above all, such a Host, Who will

give it all it can desire, unless, like the prodigal son, it

choose to go astray and feed with the swine. 1 Surely

heard that such a one was slain by the sword ; another drowned ;
another, falling from on high, broke his neck ; this man died at
the table ; that other came to his death while he was at play. . . .
Thus death is the end of all ; and man's life passeth suddenly
like a shadow 99 (Imitation, bk. 1. ch. xxiii. 7). The edition of
the Imitation known to St. Teresa under the title of Contemptus
Mundi was translated by Luis de Granada, printed at Seville
in 1536, at Lisbon in 1542, and at Alcald in 1548. See Life,
ch. xxxix. 21, note.

# St. Luke xv. 16 : " Et cupiebat implere ventrem suum de
siliquis quas porci manducabant.”


Digitized by t^.ooQle


32


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


these arguments are strong enough to defeat the devil’s
wiles ! But, O my God, how the force of worldly habits,
and the example of others who practise them, ruin
everything ! Our faith is so dead that we trust less to
its teaching than to what is visible, though, indeed, we
see that worldly lives bring nothing but unhappiness.
All this results from those venomous thoughts I described,
which, unless we are very careful, will deform the soul
as the sting of a viper poisons and swells the body.

11. When this happens, great care is evidently needed
to cure it, and only God’s signal mercy prevents its
resulting in death. Indeed, the soul passes through
severe trials at this time, especially when the devil
perceives from a person’s character and behaviour that
she is likely to make very great progress, for then all
hell will league together to force her to turn back.
O my Lord ! what need there is here that, by Thy
mercy, Thou shouldst prevent the soul from being de-
luded into forsaking the good begun ! Enlighten it
to see that its welfare consists in perseverance in the
right way, and in withdrawing from bad company.

12. It is of the utmost importance for the beginner
to associate with those who lead a spiritual life,* and not
only with those in the same mansion as herself, but with
others who have travelled farther into the castle, who

1 Life, ch. vii. 33-37 ; ch. xvi. 12 ; ch. xxx. 6. Way of Perf.
ch. vi. 1 ; vii. 4.


-Digitized by


Google


SECOND MANSIONS. $$

will aid her greatly and draw her to join them. The
soul should firmly resolve never to submit to defeat, for
if the devil sees it staunchly determined to lose life and
comfort and all that he can offer, rather than return to
the first mansion, he will the sooner leave it alone.

13. Let the Christian be valiant ; let him not be
like those who lay down to drink from the brook when
they went to battle (I do not remember when).* Let
him resolve to go forth to combat with the host of
demons, and be convinced that there is no better weapon
than the cross. I have already said,* yet it is of such
importance that I repeat it here : let no one think
on starting of the reward to be reaped : this would be
a very ignoble way of commencing such a large and
stately building. If built on sand it would soon fall down.’
Souls who acted thus would continually suffer from
discouragement and temptations, for in these mansions
no manna rains ; • farther on, the soul is pleased with
all that comes, because it desires nothing but what
God wills.

14. What a farce it is ! Here are we, with a thousand

* With Gideon. Jud. vii. 5 : “ Qui lingua lambuerint aquas,
sicut solent canes lambere, separabis eos seorsum.”

* Life, ch. xi. 16.

7 St. Matt. vii. 26, 27: "Qui aedificavit domum suam super
arenam . . . et fuit ruina illius magna."

* Ps. lxxvii. 24 : " Pluit illis manna ad manducandum." Way
of Perf. ch. x. 4.

3


Digitized by t^,ooQle


34 the interior castlS.

obstacles, drawbacks, and imperfections within ourselves,
our virtues so newly bom that they have scarcely the
strength to act (and God grant that they exist at all!),
yet we are not ashamed to expect sweetness in prayer
and to complain of feeling dryness.*

15. Do not act thus, sisters ; embrace the cross your
Spouse bore on His shoulders; know that your motto
should be : “ Most happy she who suffers most if it
be for Christ ! ” *• All else should be looked upon as
secondary : if our Lord give it you, render Him grateful
thanks. You may imagine you would be resolute in
enduring external trials if God gave you interior conso-
lations ; His Majesty knows best what is good for us ;
it is not for us to advise Him how to treat us, for He
has the right to tell us that we know not what we ask. 1 '
Remember, it is of the greatest importance — the sole
aim of one beginning to practise prayer should be to
endure trials, and to resolve and strive to the utmost
of her power to conform her own will to the will of God. 1 '
Be certain that in this consists all the greatest perfection
to be attained in the spiritual life, as I will explain later.
She who practises this most perfectly will receive from
God the highest reward and is the farthest advanced
• Life, ch. xii. 5.

*• Way of Perf. ch. xvii. 6, ch. xxiii. 1.
u St. Matt. xx. 22 : “ Nescitis quid petatis."
u Way of Perf, ch. xvi. 2. Found, ch. v. 2, 3. Life, ch.
iv. 11, ch. xi. 20.


Digitized by LjOOQle


SECOND MANSIONS.


35


on the right road. Do not imagine that we have need
of a cabalistic formula or any other occult or mysterious
thing to attain it — our whole welfare consists in doing
the will of God. If we start with the false principle
of wishing God to follow our will and to lead us in the
way we think best, upon what firm foundation can this
spiritual edifice rest ?

16. Let us endeavour to do our best : beware of the
poisonous reptiles — that is to say, the bad thoughts and
aridities which are often permitted by God to assail
and torment us so that we cannot repel them. Indeed,
perchance we feel their sting ! He allows this to teach
us to be more on our guard in the future and to see
whether we grieve much at offending Him. Therefore
if you occasionally lapse into sin, do not lose heart and
cease trying to advance, for God will draw good even
out of our falls, like the merchant who sells theriac, who
first takes poison, then the theriac, to prove the power
of his elixir. “ This combat would suffice to teach us
to amend our habits if we realised our failings in no
other way, and would show us the injury we receive
from a life of dissipation. Can any evil be greater than
that we find at home ? What peace can we hope to
find elsewhere, if we have none within us ? What

“ A drug greatly in vogue until recent times. It was com-
posed of all the essences supposed to contain life-giving and
ife-preserving qualities of animals and plants.


Digitized by LjOOQle


36 THE INTERIOR CASTLE.

friends or kindred can be so close and intimate as the
powers of our soul, which, whether we will or no, must
ever bear us company ? These seem to wage war on us
as if they knew the harm our vices had wrought them.
“ Peace, peace be unto you,” my sisters, as our Lord
said, and many a time proclaimed to His Apostles.' 4
Believe me, if we neither possess nor strive to obtain
this peace at home, we shall never find it abroad.

17. By the Blood which our Lord shed for us, I implore
those who have not yet begun to enter into themselves,
to stop this warfare : I beg those already started in the
right path, not to let the combat turn them back from
it. Let them reflect that a relapse is worse than a fall,
and see what ruin it would bring. They should confide
in God’s mercy, trusting nothing in themselves ; then
they will see how His Majesty will lead them from
one mansion to another, and will set them in a place
where these wild beasts can no more touch or annoy
them, but will be entirely at their mercy and merely
objects of ridicule. Then, even in this life, they will
enjoy a far greater happiness than they are able even
to desire.

18. As I said at the beginning of this work, I have
explained elsewhere 14 how you should behave when
the devil thus disturbs you. I also told you that

14 St. Luke xxiv. 36. St. John xx. 19.

16 Life , ch. xix. 8. Way of Perf. ch. xxiii. 3.


Digitized by i^ooQle


SECOND MANSIONS. 37

the habit of recollection is not to be gained by force
of arms, but with calmness, which will enable you
to practise it for a longer space of time. 1 ' I will say no
more now, except that I think it very helpful for those
of you who are beginners to consult persons experienced
in such matters, lest you imagine that you are injuring
yourselves by leaving your prayer to perform any
necessary duties. This is not the case ; our Lord will
direct such things to our profit, although we may have
no one to counsel us. 1 ' The only remedy for having
given up a habit of recollection is to recc^nmence it,
otherwise the soul will continue to lose it more and more
every day, and God grant it may realise its danger.

19. You may think, that if it is so very injurious to
desist, it would have been better never to have begun,
and to have remained outside the castle. But, as I began
by saying, and as God Himself declares : "He that loves
danger shall perish by it,” " and the door by which we
must enter this castle is prayer. Remember, we must
get to heaven, and it would be madness to think we could
do so without sometimes retiring into our souls so as to
know ourselves, or thinking of our failings and of what we
owe to God, or frequently imploring His mercy. Our Lord
also says, “ No man cometh to the Father but by Me ” *•

*• Way of Perf. ch. xix. 3.

17 Way of Perf. ch. xxiii. 3.

“ Ecclus. iii. 27 : “ Qui amat pericuhun in illo peribit.”

” St. John xiv. 6 : “ Nemo venit ad Patrem nisi per Me."


Digitized by ^ooQle


3 «


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


(I am not sure whether this quotation is correct, but I
think so), and, “ He that seeth Me seeth the Father
also.” '•

20. If we never look up at Him and reflect on what
we owe Him for having died for us, I do not understand
how we can know Him, or perform good deeds in His
service. What value is there in faith without works ?
and what are they worth if they are not united to the
merits of Jesus Christ, our only Good? What would
incite us to love our Lord unless we thought of Him ?
May He give us grace to understand how much we cost
Him ; that " the servant is not above his lord ” M ;
that we must toil for Him if we would enjoy His glory ;
and that prayer is a necessity to prevent us from con-
stantly falling into temptation . 11

*• St. John xiv. 9 : “ Qui videt Me videt et Patrem.”

11 St. Matt. x. 24 : “ Nec servus super dominum suum.”

“ St. Matt. xxvi. 41 : ■' Orate ut non intretis in tentationem.”


Digitized by t^ooQle


THE THIRD MANSIONS.


CHAPTER I.

Treats of the insecurity of life in this exile, however high
we may be raised, and of how we must always walk
in fear. Contains some good points.

1. Souls in the Third Mansions . 2. Insecurity of this life . 3. Our danger

of falling from grace. 4. The Saint bewails her past life. 5. Our Lady's
patronage. 6. Fear necessary even for religious. 7. St. Teresa's con-
trition. 8. Characteristics of those in the Third Mansions. 0. The rich
young man in the Gospel. 10. Reason of aridities in prayer. 11 . Humility.
12. Tepidity. 13. We must give all to God. 14. Our debt. 15. Conso-
lations and aridities.


i. As for those who, by the mercy of God, have van-
quished in these combats and persevered until they
reached the third mansions, what can we say to them but
" Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord ” ? 1 It is no
small favour from God that I should be able to translate
this verse into Spanish so as to explain its meaning,
considering how dense I usually am in such matters.
We may well call these souls blessed, for, as far as we can
tell, unless they turn back on their course they are on
the safe road to salvation. Now, my sisters, you see
how important it is for them to conquer in their former

1 Ps. cxis " Beatus vir qui timet Dominum.”

39


Digitized by LjOOQle


40


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. I.


struggles, for I am convinced that our Lord will hence-
forth never cease to keep them in security of conscience,
which is no small boon.

2. I am wrong in saying “ security,” for there is no
security in this life ; understand that in such cases I
always imply : If they do not cease to continue as they
have begun.” What misery to live in this world ! We
are like men whose enemies are at the door, who must
not lay aside their arms, even while sleeping or eat-
ing, and are always in dread lest the foe should enter
the fortress by some breach in the walls. O my Lord
and my All ! How canst Thou wish us to prize such a
wretched existence ? We could not desist from longing
and begging Thee to take us from it, were it not for
the hope of losing it for Thy sake or devoting it entirely
to Thy service — and above all, because we know it is
Thy will that we should live. Since this is so, " Let
us die with Thee!”* as St. Thomas said, for to be
away from Thee is but to die again and again, haunted
as we are by the dread risk of losing Thee for ever !

3. This is why I say, daughters, that we ought to ask
our Lord as our boon to grant us one day to dwell in
safety with the Saints, for with such fears, what pleasure
can she enjoy whose only pleasure is to please God ?
Remember, many Saints have felt this as we do, and

1 St. John xi. 16 ; “ Eamus et nos ut moriamur cum eo.”
[Lazarus!]


Digitized by t^ooQle


CHAP. I.]


THIRD MANSIONS.


41


were even far more fervent, yet fell into grave sin, and
we cannot be sure that God would stretch forth His
hand to raise us from sin again to do such penance as
they performed. This applies to extraordinary grace.'
Truly, my daughters, I feel such terror as I tell you
this, that I know not how to write it, nor even how to
go on living, when I reflect upon it as I very often
do. Beg of His Majesty, my daughters, to abide within
me, for otherwise, what security could I feel, after a
life so badly spent as mine has been ?

4. Do not grieve at knowing this. I have often seen
you troubled when I spoke about it, for you wish that
my past had been a very holy one, in which you are
right — indeed, I wish the same myself. But what can
be done, now that I have wasted it entirely through my
own fault ? I have no right to complain that God
withheld the aid I needed to fulfil your wishes. It is
impossible for me to write this without tears and great
shame, when I see that I am explaining these matters to
those capable of teaching me. What a hard task has
obedience laid upon me ! God grant that, as I do it for
Him, it may be of some service to you ; therefore beg
Him to pardon me for my miserable presumption.

5. His Majesty knows that I have nothing to rely

' These last words, in the margin, bnt in the handwriting
of the Saint, were scored through by one of the censors, but
Fr. Luis de Leon wrote underneath (as he did in other cases),
" Nothing to be scratched out.”


Digitized by LjOOQle


42


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. I.


upon but His mercy ; as I cannot cancel the past, I have
no other remedy but to flee to Him, and to confide in
the merits of His Son and of His Virgin Mother, whose
habit, unworthy as I am, I wear as you do also. Praise
Him, then, my daughters, for making you truly daughters
of our Lady, so that you need not blush for my wicked-
ness as you have such a good Mother. Imitate her ;
think how great she must be and what a blessing it is
for you to have her for a patroness, since my sins and
evil character have brought no tarnish on the lustre of
our holy Order.

6. Still I must give you one warning : be not too
confident because you are nuns and the daughters of
such a Mother. David was very holy, yet you know what
Solomon became. 4 Therefore rely not on your enclosure,
on your penitential life, nor on your continual exercise
of prayer and constant communion with God, nor
trust in having left the world, or in the idea that you
hold its ways in horror. All this is good, but is not
enough, as I have, already said, to remove all fear;
therefore meditate on this text and often recall it :
" Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord.” *

7. I do not recollect what I was saying, and have
digressed very much : for when I think of myself, my

1 St. Teresa wrote “ Solomon ” ; Fr. Gratian corrected
“Absalom," and Fr. Luis de Leon restored the original text.

* Ps. cxi. 1.


Digitized by ^ooQle


CHAP. I.]


THIRD MANSIONS.


43


mind cannot soar to higher things, but is like a bird
with broken wings ; so I will leave this subject for the
present.

8. To return to what I began to explain about the
souls which have entered the third mansions. God has
shown them no small favour, but a very great one, in
enabling them to pass through the first difficulties.
Thanks to His mercy I believe there are many such
people in the world : they are very desirous not to offend
His Majesty even by venial sins, they love penance and
spend hours in meditation, they employ their time well,
exercise themselves in works of charity to their neigh-
bours, are well-ordered in their conversation and dress,
and those who own a household govern it well. This
is certainly to be desired, and there appears no reason
to forbid their entrance to the last mansions ; nor will
our Lord deny it them if they desire it, for this is the
right disposition for receiving all His favours.

9. O Jesus ! can any one declare that they do not
desire this great blessing, especially after they have
passed through the chief difficulties ? No ; no one can I
We all say we desire it, but there is need of more than
that for the Lord to possess entire dominion over the
soul. It is not enough to say so, any more than it was
enough for the young man when our Lord told him what
he must do if he desired to be perfect.' Since I began

' It. Matt. xix. ar.


Digitized by LjOOQle


44


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. I.


to speak of these dwelling-rooms I have him constantly
before my mind, for we are exactly like him ; this very
frequently produces the great dryness we feel in prayer,
though sometimes it proceeds from other causes as
well. I am not speaking of certain interior sufferings,
which give intolerable pain to many devout souls through
no fault of their own ; from these trials, however, our
Lord always delivers them with much profit to them-
selves. I also except people who suffer from melancholy
and other infirmities. But in these cases, as in all others,
we must leave aside the judgments of God.

io. I hold that these effects usually result from the
first cause I mentioned; such souls know that nothing
would induce them to commit a sin (many of them
would not even commit a venial sin advertently), and
that they employ their life and riches well. They
cannot, therefore, patiently endure to be excluded from
the presence of our King, Whose vassals they consider
themselves, as indeed they are. An earthly king may
have many subjects, yet all do not enter his corut. Enter
then, enter, my daughters, into your interior ; pass
beyond the thought of your own petty works, which
are no more, nor even as much, as Christians are bound
to perform: let it suffice that you are God's servants,
do not pursue so much as to catch nothing . 7 Think
of the saints, who have entered the Divine Presence,

7 Proverbially, like " having too many irons in the fire.”


Digitized by


Google


CHAP. I.] THIRD MANSIONS. 45

and you will see the difference between them and our-
selves.

11. Do not ask for what you do not deserve, nor should
we ever think, however much we may have done for
God, that we merit the reward of the saints, for we have
offended Him. Oh, humility, humility ! I know not why,
but I am always tempted to think that persons who com-
plain so much of aridities must be a little wanting in this
virtue. However, I am not speaking of severe interior
sufferings, which are far worse than a want of devotion.

12. Let us try ourselves, my sisters, or let our Lord
try us ; He knows well how to do so (although we often
pretend to misunderstand Him). We will now speak
of these well-ordered souls. Let us consider what they
do for God and we shall see at once what little right
we have to murmur against His Majesty. If we turn
our backs on Him and go away sorrowfully like the
youth in the Gospel ' when He tells us what to do
to be perfect, what can God do ? for He must proportion
the reward to our love for Him. This love, my
daughters, must not be the fabric of our imagination ;
we must prove it by our works. Yet do not suppose
that our Lord has need of any works of ours ; He only
expects us to manifest our goodwill.*

13. It seems to us we have done everything, by taking

• St. Mark x. 22. Way of Perf. ch. xvii. 5.

• Rel. ix. 15.


Digitized by t^,ooQle


4 6


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. I.


the religious habit of our own will, and renouncing
worldly things and all our possessions for God (although
they may have been but the nets of St. Peter, 1 ' yet
they seemed much to us, for they were our all). This
is an excellent disposition : if we continue in it and
do not return, even in desire, to the company of the
reptiles of the first rooms, doubtless, by persevering in
this poverty and detachment of soul, we shall obtain
all for which we strive. But, mark this, — it must be
on one condition — that we “ hold ourselves for un-
profitable servants,” 11 as we are told either by St. Paul
or by Christ, and that we do not consider that our Lord
is bound to grant us any favours, but that, as we have
received more from Him, we are the deeper in His debt.

14. How little is all we can do for so generous a God,
Who died for us, Who created us. Who gives us being,
that we should not think ourselves happy to be able
to acquit ourselves of part of the debt we owe Him for
having served us, without asking Him for fresh mercies
and favours ? I am loth to use this expression, yet so
it is, for He did nothing else during the whole time He
lived in this world but serve us.

15. Think well, my daughters, over some of the points
I have treated, although confusedly, for I do not know

* St. Matt. iv. 20 : “ Relictis retibus secuti sunt eum."

11 St. Luke xvii. 10 : “ Servi inutiles sumus, quod debuimus
facere fecimus.”


Digitized by


Google


CHAP. II.]


THIRD MANSIONS.


47


how to explain them better. Our Lord will make you
understand them, that you may reap humility from
your dryness, instead of the disquietude the devil strives
to cause by it. I believe that where true humility
exists, although God should never bestow consolations,
yef He-'gives a peace and resignation which make the
soul happier than are others with sensible devotion.
These consolations, as you have read, are often given by
the Divine Majesty to the weakest souls who, I suppose,
would not exchange them for the fortitude of Christians
serving God in aridities : we love consolations better
than the cross ! Do Thou, O Lord, Who knowest all
truth, so prove us that we may know ourselves.


CHAPTER II.

Continues the same subject and speaks of aridities in
prayer and their results : of the necessity of trying
ourselves and how our Lord proves those who are
in these mansions.

1 . Imperfections of dwellers in the first three mansions . 2. Our trials show

us our weakness. 3 . Humility learnt by our faults. 4. Love of money.
5 . Liberty of spirit. 6 . On bearing contempt. 7 . Detachment proved by
' trtals. 8 . Virtue and humility are the essentials. 9 . Perfection requires
detachment. 10 . We should try to make rapid progress. 11 . Leave our
cares in God's hands. 12 . Humility more necessary than corporal
penances. 13 . Consolations rarely received until the fourth mansions .
14 . Advantages of hearing of them. 15 . Perfection consists in love , not
in reward. 16 . Saint Teresa's foy at seeing other souls favoured .
17 . These graces should be striven for. 18 . Obedience and direction.
1 ^. Misguided zeal for others.

i. I have known some, in fact, I may say numerous
souls, who have reached this state, and for many years


Digitized by


Google


48


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


(CHAP. II.


lived, apparently, a regular and well-ordered life, both
of body and mind. It would seem that they must
have gained the mastery over this world, or at least
be extremely detached from it, yet if His Majesty
sends very moderate trials they become so disturbed
and disheartened as not only to astonish but to make
me anxious about them. Advice is useless ; having
practised virtue for so long they think themselves
capable of teaching it, and believe that they have abun-
dant reason to feel miserable.

2. The only way to help them is to compassionate
their troubles ; indeed, one cannot but feel sorry at
seeing people in such an unhappy state. They must
not be argued with, for they are convinced they suffer
only for God’s sake, and cannot be made to understand
they are acting imperfectly, which is a further error in
persons so far advanced. No wonder that they should
feel these trials for a time, but I think they ought speedily
to overcome their concern about such matters. God,
wishing His elect to realise their own misery, often
temporarily withdraws His favours : no more is needed
to prove to us in a very short time what we really are. 1

3. Souls soon learn in this way ; they perceive their
faults very clearly, and sometimes the discovery of how
quickly they are overcome by but slight earthly trials is
more painful than the subtraction of God’s sensible

1 Way of Perf. ch. xxxviii. 7.


Digitized by


Google


CHAP. II.] THIRD MANSIONS. 49

favours. I consider that God thus shows them great
mercy, for though their behaviour may be faulty, yet
they gain greatly in humility. Not so with the people
of whom I first spoke ; they believe their conduct is
saintly, and wish others to agree with them. I will give
you some examples which will help us to understand
and to try ourselves, without waiting for God to try us,
since it would be far better to have prepared and
examined ourselves beforehand.

4. A rich man, without son or heir, loses part of his
property,' but still has more than enough to keep
himself and his household. If this misfortune grieves
and disquiets him as though he were left to beg his
bread, how can our Lord ask him to give up all things
for His sake ? This man will tell you he regrets losing
his money because he wished to bestow it on the poor.

5. I believe His Majesty would prefer me to conform to
His will, and the peace of soul while attending to my
interests, to such charity as this. If this person cannot
resign himself because God has not raised him so high in
virtue, well and good : let him know that he is wanting
in liberty of spirit ; let him beg our Lord to grant it
him, and be rightly disposed to receive it. Another per-
son has more than sufficient means to live on, when an
opportunity occurs for acquiring more property : if it is

* Way of Perf. ch. xxxviii, 10. Concep. ch. ii. n, 12. Life,
ch. xi. 3.

4


Digitized by t^.ooQle


[chap. ti.


§0 THE iNTERIOR CASTLfe.

offered him, by all means let him accept it ; but if he must
go out of his way to obtain it and then continues working
to gain more and more — however good his intention
may be (and it must be good, for I am speaking of people
who lead prayerful and good lives), he cannot possibly
enter the mansions near the King.

6. Something of the same sort happens if such people
meet with contempt or want of due respect. God often
gives them grace to bear it well, as He loves to see
virtue upheld in public, and will not have it condemned
in those who practise it, or else because these persons
have served Him faithfully, and He, our supreme Good,
is exceedingly good to us all ; nevertheless, these persons
are disturbed, and cannot overcome or get rid of the
feeling for some time. 1 Alas ! have they not long
meditated on the pains our Lord endured and how well
it is for us to suffer, and have even longed to do so ?
They wish every one were as virtuous as they are ; and
God grant they do not consider other people to blame
for their troubles and attribute merit to themselves !

7. You may think, my daughters, that I have wandered
from the subject, for all this does not concern you :
nothing of the sort occurs to us here, where we neither
own nor wish for any property, nor endeavour to gain
it, and no one does us any wrong. The instances I
have mentioned do not coincide exactly, yet condu-

* Way of Perf. ch. xxxviii. 12.


Digitized by floosie


<JkAR. II.] tHIRD MANSIONS. 51

sions applicable to us may be drawn from them, which
it would be neither well nor necessary to mention.
These will teach you whether you are really detached
from all you have left ; trifling occasions often occur,
although perhaps not quite of the same kind, by which
you can prove to yourselves whether you have obtained
the mastery over your passions.

8. Believe me, the question is not whether we wear
the religious habit or not, but whether we strive to
practise the virtues and to submit our will in all things
to the will of God. The object of our life must be to
do what He requires of us : let us not ask that our
will may be done, but His. If we have not yet attained
to this, let us be humble, as I said above. Humility
is the ointment for our wounds ; if we have it, although
perhaps He may defer His coming for a time, God,
Who is our Physician, will come and heal us.

9. The penances performed by the persons I spoke of
are as well regulated as their life, which they value very
highly because they wish to serve our Lord with it — in
which there is nothing to blame — so they are very
discreet in their mortifications lest they should injure
their health. Never fear they will kill themselves :
they are far too sensible ! Their love is not strong
enough to overcome their reason ; I wish it were — that
they might not be content to creep on their way to God :
a pace that will never bring them to their journey's end !


Digitized by LjOOQle


52 THE INTERIOR CASTLE. [CHAP. II.

10. We seem to ourselves to be making progress, yet
we become weary, for, believe me, we are walking through
a mist ; it will be fortunate if we do not lose ourselves.
Do you think, my daughters, if we could travel from
one country to another in eight days, that it would be
well to spend a year on the journey, through wind, snow,
and inundations and over bad roads ? * Would it not
be better to get it over at once, for it is full of dangers
and serpents ? Oh, how many striking instances could
I give you of this ! God grant that I have passed
beyond this state myself : often I think that I have not.

11. All things obstruct us while prudence rules our
actions ; we are afraid of everything and therefore fear
to make progress — as if we could reach the inner
chambers while others made the journey for us ! As
this is impossible, sisters, for the love of God let us exert
ourselves, and leave our reason and our fears in His
hands, paying no attention to the weaknesses of nature
which might retard us. Let our Superiors, to whom the
charge belongs, look after our bodies; let our only
care be to hasten to our Lord’s presence — for though
there are few or no indulgences to be obtained here,
yet regard for health might mislead us and it would be
none the better for our care, as I know well.

4 St. Teresa very probably had in her mind her journey to
make a foundation at Seville, when the boat, which was crossing
the Guadalquivir, narrowly escaped being carried down the
river by the current. Found, ch. xxiv. 6.


Digitized by ^ooQle


CHAP. II.]


THIRD MANSIONS.


53


12. I know, too, that our bodies are not the chief
factors in the work we have before us ; they are accessory :
extreme humility is the principal point. It is the want
of this, I believe, that stops people’s progress. It may
seem that we have made but little way : we should
believe that is the case, and that our sisters are advancing
much more rapidly than we are. Not only should we
wish others to consider us the worst of all ; we should
endeavour to make them think so. If we act in this
maimer, our soul will do well ; otherwise we shall make no
progress and shall always remain the prey to a thousand
troubles and miseries. The way will be difficult and
wearisome without self-renunciation, weighed down as
we are by the burden and frailties of human nature,
which are no longer felt in the more interior mansions.

13. In these third mansions the Lord never fails to
repay our services, both as a just and even as a merciful
God, Who always bestows on us far more than we
deserve, giving us greater happiness than could be
obtained from any earthly pleasures and amusements.
I think He grants few consolations here, except, perhaps,
occasionally to entice us to prepare ourselves to enter
the last mansions by showing us their contents. There
may appear to you to be no difference except in name
between sensible devotion and consolations, and you
may. ask why I distinguish them. I thin k there is a
very great difference, but I may be mistaken.


Digitized by LjOOQle


54


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. II.


14. This will be best explained while writing of the
fourth mansion, which comes next, when I must speak
of the consolations received there from our Lord. The
subject may appear futile, yet may prove useful by
urging souls who know what each mansion contains to
strive to enter the best. It will solace those whom God
has advanced so far ; others, who thought they had
reached the summit, will be abashed, yet if they are
humble they will be led to thank God.

15. Those who do not receive these consolations may
feel a despondency that is uncalled for, since perfection
does not consist in consolation but in greater love ;
our reward will be in proportion to this, and to the
justice and sincerity of our actions. Perhaps you wonder,
then, why I treat of these interior favours and their
nature. I do not know ; ask him who bade me write
this. I must obey Superiors, not argue with them,
which I have no right to do.

16. I assure you that when I had neither received
these favours,* nor understood them by experience, or
ever expected to (and rightly so, for I should have felt
reassured if I had known or even conjectured that I
was pleasing to God in any way), yet when I read of
the mercies and consolations that our Lord grants to
His servants, I was delighted and praised Him fervently.
If such a wretch as myself acted thus, how much more

* Life , ch. xii. 2. Rcl. vii. 3.


Digitized by


Google


CHAP. II.]


THIRD MANSIONS.


55


would the humble and good glorify Him ! I think it
is worth while to explain these subjects and show what
consolations and delights we lose through our own
fault, if only for the sake of moving a single soul to
praise God once.

17. When these joys are from God they come laden
with love and strength, which aid the soul on its way
and increase its good works and virtues. Do not imagine
that it is unimportant whether you try to obtain these
graces or no ; if you are not to blame, the Lord is just :
what He refuses in one way. His Majesty will give you
in another, as He knows how ; His secret ways are very
mysterious, and doubtless He will do what is best for
you.

18-/ Souls who by God’s mercy are brought so far
(which, as I said, is no small mercy, for they are likely
to ascend still higher) will be greatly benefited by
practising prompt obedience. Even if they are not
in the religious state, it would be well if they, like certain
other people, were to take a director,* so as never to
follow their own will, which is the cause of most of our
ills. They should not choose one of their own turn
of mind 7 (as the saying goes), who is over-prudent in
his actions, but should select one thoroughly detached
from worldly things ; it is very helpful to consult a
person who has learnt and can teach this. It is encour-
* Life, ch. xiii. 29. 7 Rel. vii. 18.


Digitized by


Google


56 THE INTERIOR CASTLE. [CHAP. II.

aging to see that trials which seemed to ns impossible
to submit to are possible to others, and that they
bear them sweetly. Their flight makes us try to soar,
like nestlings taught by the elder birds, who, though
they cannot fly far at first, little by little imitate their
parents : I know the great benefit of this. However
determined such persons may be not to offend our
Lord, they must not expose themselves to temptation :
they are still near the first mansions to which they
might easily return. Their strength is not yet estab-
lished on a solid foundation like that of souls exercised
in sufferings, who know how little cause there is to fear
the tempests of this world and care nothing for its
pleasures : beginners might succumb before any severe
trial. Some great persecution, such as the devil knows
how to raise to injure us, might make beginners turn
back; while zealously trying to withdraw others from
sin, they might succumb to the attacks made upon them.

19. Let us look at our own faults, and not at other
people’s. People who are extremely correct them-
selves are often shocked at everything they see ; •
however, we might often learn a great deal that is essen-
tial from the very persons whom we censure. Our
exterior comportment and manners may be better —
this is well enough, but not of the first importance. We
ought not to insist on every one following in our foot-
• Way of Per/, ch. vii. 6. Castle, M. i. ch. ii. 20, 21.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. II.]


THIRD MANSIONS.


57


steps, nor to take upon ourselves to give instructions
in spirituality when, perhaps, we do not even know
what it is. Zeal for the good of souls, though given us
by God, may often lead us astray, sisters ; it is best
to keep our rule, which bids us ever to live in silence
and in hope.* Our Lord will care for the souls belonging
to Him ; and if we beg His Majesty to do so, by His grace
we shall be able to aid them greatly. May He be for
ever blessed !

• Isa. xxx. 15: " In silentio et in spe erit fortitudo vestra.”
Rule, § 13.


Digitized by LjOOQle


THE FOURTH MANSIONS.

CHAPTERj I.

How sweetness and tenderness in prayer differ from
consolations. Explains how advantageous it was
(for St. Teresa) to understand that the imagination
and the understanding are not the same thing. This
chapter is useful for those whose thoughts wander
much during prayer.

1. Graces received in this mansion. 2. Mystic favours . 3. Temptations bring
humility and merit. 4. Sensible devotion and natural joys. 5. Sweet -
ness in devotion. 6. St. Teresa* s experience of it. 7. Love of God, and how to
foster it. 8. Distractions. 9. They do not destroy divine union. 10. St.
Teresa's physical distractions. 11. How to treat distractions. 12. They
should be disregarded. 13. Self-knowledge necessary.

i. Now that I commence writing about the fourth
mansions, it is requisite, as I said, 1 to commend myself
to the Holy Ghost and to beg Him henceforth to speak
for me, that I may be enabled to treat these matters
intelligibly. Henceforth they begin to be supernatural
and it will be most difficult to speak clearly about them,
unless His Majesty undertakes it for me, as He did when
I explained the subject (as far as I understood it)
somewhat about fourteen years ago.* I believe I now

1 First Mansions, cb. i. i. * Life, ch. xii. n.

58


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. I.]


FOURTH MANSIONS.


59


possess more light about the favours God grants some
souls, but that is different from being able to elucidate
them.’ May His Majesty enable me to do so if it
would be useful, but not otherwise.

2. As these mansions are nearer the King’s dwelling
they are very beautiful, and so subtle are the things
seen and heard in them, that, as those tell us who have
tried to do so, the mind cannot give a lucid idea of them
to those inexperienced in the matter. People who have
enjoyed these favours, especially if it was to any great
extent, will easily comprehend me.

3. Apparently a person must have dwelt for a long
time in the former mansions before entering these ;
although in ordinary cases the soul must have been in
the last one spoken of, yet, as you must often have
heard, there is no fixed rule, for God gives when, how,
and to whom He wills* — the goods are His own, and
His choice wrongs no one.' The poisonous reptiles
rarely come into these rooms, and, if they enter, do
more good than harm. I think it is far better for them
to get in and make war on the soul in this state of prayer ;
were it not tempted, the devil might sometimes deceive
it about divine consolations, thus injuring it far more.

* Life, ch. xvii. 7.

4 Philippus a SS. Trinitate, Summa Theologies Mystiea,
pare iii. tract, i. disc. iii. art. 2. Life, ch. xv. n, ch. xxii. 22,
23.' Way of Perf. ch. xvi. 4, ch. xli. 2. Concep. ch. v. 3.

* S. Matt. xx. 15 : “ Aut non licet mihi quod volo facere ? ’’


Digitized by LjOOQle


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


6o


[CHAP. I.


Besides, the soul would benefit less, because all occa-
sions of gaining merit would be withdrawn, were it
left continually absorbed in God. I am not confident
that this absorption is genuine when it always remains
in the same state, nor does it appear to me possible for
the Holy Ghost to dwell constantly within us, to the
same extent, during our earthly exile.

4. I will now describe, as I promised, the difference
between sweetness in prayer and spiritual consolations.
It appears to me that what we acquire for ourselves
in meditation and petitions to our Lord may be termed
“ sweetness in devotion.” • It is natural, although
ultimately aided by the grace of God. I must be
understood to imply this in all I say, for we can do
nothing without Him. This sweetness arises principally
from the good work we perform, and appears to result
from our labours : well may we feel happy at having
thus spent our time. We shall find, on consideration,
that many temporal matters give us the same pleasure
— such as unexpectedly coming into a large fortune,
suddenly meeting with a dearly-loved friend, or succeed-

• Way of Perf. ch. xix. 8. Castle , M. iv.ch. ii. 4. The first three
mansions of the Interior Castle correspond with the " first water,"
or the prayer of Meditation, explained in chapters xi.-xiii. of the
Life ; the fourth mansion, or the prayer of Quiet, to the second
water. Life, ch. xiv. and xv. ; the fifth mansion, or the prayer
of Union, with the third water. Life,. ch. xvi. and xvii. ; and the
sixth mansion, ecstasy, etc., with the fourth water, Life, ch. xviii.-
xxi.


Digitized by t^.ooQle


CHAP. I.] FOtTRTH MANSIONS. 6l

ing in any important or influential affair which makes a
sensation in the world. Again, it would be felt by one
who had been told her husband, brother, or son was dead,
and who saw him return to her alive. I have seen
people' weep from such happiness, as I have done myself.
I consider both these joys and those we feel in religious
matters to be natural ones. Although there is nothing
wrong about the former, yet those produced by devotion
spring from a more noble source — in short, they begin
in ourselves and end in God. Spiritual consolations,
on the contrary, arise from God, and our nature feels
them and rejoices as keenly in them, and indeed far more
keenly, than in the others I described.

5. O Jesus ! how I wish I could elucidate this point !
It seems to me that I can perfectly distinguish the
difference between the two joys, yet I have not the skill
to make myself understood ; may God give it me !
I remember a verse we say at Prime at the end of the
final Psalm ; the last words are : " Cum dilatasti cor
meum” — “When Thou didst dilate my heart .” 1 To those
with much experience, this suffices to show the difference
between sweetness in prayer and spiritual consolations ;
other people will require more explanation. The sensible
devotion I mentioned does not dilate the heart,
but generally appears to narrow it slightly ; although
joyful at seeing herself work for God, yet such a person
7 Ps. cxviii. 32. Way of Perf. ch. xxviii. n.


Digitized by i^ooQle


62


+HE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[chap. i.


sheds tears of sorrow which seem partly produced by
the passions. I know little about the passions of the
soul, or I could write of them more clearly and could
better define what comes from the sensitive disposition
and what is natural, having passed through this state
myself, but I am very stupid. Knowledge and learning
are a great advantage to every one.

6. My own experience of this delight and sweetness
in meditation was that when I began to weep over the
Passion I could not stop until I had a severe headache ; •
the same thing occurred when I grieved over my sins :
this was a great grace from our Lord. I do not intend
to inquire now which of these states of prayer is the
better, but I wish I knew how to explain the difference
between the two. In that of which I speak, the tears
and good desires are often partly caused by the natural
disposition, but although this may be the case, yet, as I
said, these feelings terminate in God. Sensible devotion is
very desirable if the soul is humble enough to under-
stand that it is not more holy on account of these senti-
ments, which cannot always with certainty be ascribed
to charity, and even then are still the gift of God.

7. These feelings of devotion are most common with
souls in the first three mansions, who are nearly always
using their understanding and reason in makin g
meditations. This is good for them, for they have not

8 Life , ch. iii. 1.


Digitized by


Google


Chap, i.]


Fourth kANSioks.


63


been given grace for more ; they should, however, try
occasionally to elicit some acts such as praising God,
rejoicing in His goodness and that He is what He is :
let them desire that He may be honoured and glorified.
They must do this as best they can, for it greatly inflames
the will. Let them be very careful, when God gives
these sentiments, not to set them aside in order to finish
their accustomed meditation. But, having spoken fully
on this subject elsewhere,* I will say no more now.
I only wish to warn you that to make rapid progress
and to reach the mansions we wish to enter, it is not so
essential to think much as to love much : therefore you
must practise whatever most excites you to this. Per-
haps we do not know what love is, nor does this greatly
surprise me. Love does not consist in great sweetness
of devotion, but in a more fervent determination to
strive to please God in all things, in avoiding, as far as
possible, all that would offend Him, and in praying for
the increase of the glory and honour of His Son and for
the growth of the Catholic Church. These are the signs
of love ; do not imagine that it consists in never thinking
of anything but God, and that if your thoughts wander
a little all is lost. 1 *

8. I, myself, have sometimes been troubled by this

* Life, ch. xii. 2-4.

M Found, ch. v. 2. Way of Perf. ch. xxxi. 6, 12. Life, ch.
xv. 10, ch. xxx. 19.


Digitized by LjOOQle


6 4


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. I.


turmoil of thoughts. I leamt by experience, but little
more than four years ago, that our thoughts, or it is
clearer to call it our imagination, are not the same
thing as the understanding. I questioned a theologian
on the subject ; he told me it was the fact, which consoled
me not a little. As the understanding is one of the
powers of the soul, it puzzled me to see it so sluggish
at times, while, as a rule, the imagination takes flight
at once, so that God alone can control it by so uniting
us to Himself 11 that we seem, in a maimer, detached
from our bodies. It puzzled me to see that while to
all appearance the powers of the soul were occupied
with God and recollected in Him, the imagination was
wandering elsewhere.

9. Do Thou, O Lord, take into account all that we
suffer in this way through our ignorance. We err in
thinking that we need only know that we must keep
our thoughts fixed on Thee. We do not understand
that we should consult those better instructed than
ourselves, nor are we aware that there is anything for
us to learn. We pass through terrible trials, on account
of not understanding our own nature, and take what is
not merely harmless, but good, for a grave fault. This
causes the sufferings felt by many people, particularly
by the unlearned, who practise prayer. They complain
of interior trials, become melancholy, lose their health,
11 Life , ch. xv. 9, 10.


Digitized by LjOOQle


Chap, i.j


FOURTH MANSIONS.


65


and even give up prayer altogether for want of recog-
nising that we have within ourselves as it were, an
interior world. We cannot stop, the revolution of the
heavens as they rush with velocity upon their course,
neither can we control our imagination. When this
wanders we at once imagine that all the powers of the
soul follow it ; we think everything is lost, and that the
time spent in God's presence is wasted. Meanwhile,
the soul is perhaps entirely united to Him in the inner-
most mansions, while the imagination is in the precincts
of the castle, struggling with a thousand wild arid veno-
mous creatures and gaining merit by its warfare. There-
fore we need not let ourselves be disturbed, nor give up
prayer, as the devil is striving to persuade us. As a
rule, all our anxieties and troubles come from misunder-
standing our own nature.

10. Whilst writing this I am thinking of the loud
noise in my head which I mentioned in the Intro-
duction, and which has made it almost impossible to
obey the command given me to write this. It sounds
as if there were a number of rushing waterfalls within
my brain, while in other parts, drowned by the sound
of the waters, are the voices of birds singing and whist-
ling. This tumult is not in my ears, but in the upper
part of my head, where, they say, is placed the superior
part of the soul. I have long thought that this must be
so because the flight of the spirit seems to take place from
5


Digitized by LjOOQle


66 THE INTERIOR CASTLE. [CHAP. I.

this part with great velocity. Please God I may recollect
to explain the cause when writing of the latter mansions,
this not being the proper place for it. It may be that
God has sent this suffering in my head to help me to
understand the matter, for all this tumult in my brain
does • not interfere with my prayer, nor with my
speaking to you, but the great calm and love and
desires in my soul remain undisturbed and my mind
is clear.

ii. How, then, can the superior part of the soul
remain undisturbed if it resides in the upper part of the
brain ? I cannot account for it, but am sure that I am
speaking the truth. This noise disturbs my prayer
when unaccompanied with ecstasy, but when it is
ecstatic I do not feel any pain, however great. I should
suffer keenly were I forced to cease praying on account
of these infirmities. We should not be distressed by
reason of our thoughts, nor allow ourselves to be worried
by them : if they come from the devil, he will let us
alone if we take no notice of them ; and if they are, as
often happens, one of the many frailties entailed by
Adam’s sin, let us be patient and suffer them for the
love of God. Likewise, since we must eat and sleep
without being able to avoid it, much to our grief, let us
acknowledge that we are human, and long to be where
no one may despise us. 1 ' Sometimes I recall these

,a Way of Perf. ch. xxxiii. 8. Life , ch. xxi. 8. Rel. ii. 12 .


Digitized by t^ooQle


CHAP. I.]


FOURTH MANSIONS.


67


words, spoken by the Spouse in the Canticle ; l * truly
never in our lives have we better reason to say them,
for I think no earthly scorn or suffering can try us so
severely as these struggles within our souls. All un-
easiness or conflict can be borne while we have peace in
ourselves, as I said ; but if, while seeking for rest amidst
the thousand trials of the world — knowing that God
has prepared this rest for us — the obstacle is found in
ourselves, the trial must needs prove painful and
almost insufferable.

12. Take us, therefore, O Lord, to where these miseries
can no longer cause us to be despised, for sometimes it
seems as if they mocked our souls. Even in this life
God delivers us from them when we reach the last
mansion, as by His grace I will show you. Everybody
is not so violently distressed and assaulted by these
weaknesses as I have been for many years, 14 on account
of my wickedness, so that it seems as if I strove to take
vengeance on myself. 14 Since I suffer so much in this
way, perhaps you may do the same, so I shall continue
to explain the subject to you in different ways, in order
to And some means of making it clear. The thing is
inevitable, therefore do not let it disturb or grieve you,
but let the mill clack on while we grind our wheat ;

“ According to Fr. Gratian the Saint here refers to Cant,
viii. 1 : “ Et. jam me nemo despiciat.”

14 Way of Perf. ch. xvii. 2.

“ Way of Perf. ch. xxxi. 9.


Digitized by


Google


68 THE INTERIOR CASTLE. [CHAP. I.

that is, let us continue to work with our will and
intellect.

13. These troubles annoy us more or less according
to the state of our health or in different circumstances.
The poor soul suffers ; although not now to blame, it
has sinned at other times, and must be patient. We are
so ignorant that what we have read and been told has
not sufficed to teach us to disregard wandering thoughts,
therefore I shall not be wasting time in instructing
and consoling you about these trials. However, this will
help you but little until God chooses to enlighten you,
and additional measures are needed : His Majesty wishes
us to learn by ordinary means to understand ourselves
and to recognise the share taken in these troubles
by our wandering imagination, our nature, and the
devil’s temptations, instead of laying all the blame
on our souls.


CHAPTER II.

Continues the same subject, explaining by a comparison
in what divine consolations consist : and how we
ought to try to prepare ourselves to receive them,
without endeavouring to obtain them.

1. Physical results of sensible devotion. 2. Effects of divine consolations .
3. The two fountains. 4. They symbolise two kinds of prayer. 5. Divine
consolations shewed by body and soul. 6. The incense within the soul.
1. Graces received in this prayer. 8. Such favours not to be sought after .

1 . God help me ! how I have wandered from my subject !

I forget what I was speaking about, for my occupations


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. II.] FOURTH MANSIONS. 69

and ill-health often force me to cease writing until
some more suitable time. The sense will be very dis-
connected ; as my memory is extremely bad and I have
no time to read over what is written, even what I really
understand is expressed very vaguely, at least I fear
so. I think I said that spiritual consolations are
occasionally connected with the passions. These feelings
of devotion produce fits of sobbing ; I have even heard
that sometimes they cause a compression of the chest,
and uncontrollable exterior motions violent enough
to cause bleeding at the nose and other painful
effects.*

2. I can say nothing about this, never having experi-
enced anything of the kind myself ; but there appears
some cause for comfort in it, because, as I said, all
ends in the desire to please God and to enjoy His presence.
What I call divine consolations, or have termed else-
where the " prayer of quiet,” is a very different thing,
as those will understand who, by the mercy of God,
have experienced them.

3. To make the matter clearer, let us imagine we see
two fountains with basins which fill with water. I can
find no simile more appropriate than water by which
to explain spiritual things, as I am very ignorant and

1 “ A clear description of an attack of hysteria with the sig-
nificant remark that she herself had never experienced anything
of the kind” (Dr. Goix, quoted by P. Grtgoire, La pritendu*
hysttrie de Sainte Thirise, Lyon, Vitte, 1895, p. 53).


Digitized by LjOOQle


[CHAP. II.


70 THE INTERIOR CASTLE.

have poor wits to help me.* Besides, I love this element
so much that I have studied it more attentively than
other things. God, Who is so great, so wise, has doubt-
less hidden secrets in all things He created, which we
should greatly benefit by knowing, as those say who
understand such matters. Indeed, I believe that in
each smallest creature He has made, though it be but
a tiny ant, are more wonders than can be comprehended.
These two basins are filled in different ways ; the one
with water from a distance flowing into it through
many pipes and waterworks, while the other basin is
built near the source of the spring itself and fills quite
noiselessly. If the fountain is plentiful, like the one
we speak of, after the basin is full the water over-
flows in a great stream, which flows continually. No
machinery is needed here, nor does the water run
through aqueducts.

4. Such is the difference between the two kinds of
prayer. The water running through the aqueducts
resembles sensible devotion, which is obtained by
meditation. We gain it by our thoughts, by meditating
on created things, and by the labour of our minds ; in
short, it is the result of our endeavours, and so makes
the commotion I spoke of, while profiting the soul.* The

1 Way of Perf. ch. xix. 5 ; also St. John of the Cross, Ascent
of Mount Carmel, bk. ii. ch. xiv. 2, and xxi. 3.

* Life, ch. x. 2.


Digitized by ^ooQle


CHAP. II.] FOURTH MANSIONS. 71

other fountain, like divine consolations, receives the
water from the source itself, which signifies God ; as
usual, when His Majesty wills to bestow on us any
supernatural favours, we experience the greatest peace,
calm, and sweetness in the inmost depths of our being ;
I know neither where, nor how.

5. This joy is not, like earthly happiness, at once
felt by the heart ; after gradually filling it to the brim,
the delight overflows throughout all the mansions and
faculties, until at last it reaches the body. Therefore,
I say it arises from God and ends in ourselves, for who-
ever experiences it will find that the whole physical
part of our nature shares in this delight and sweetness.
While writing this I have been thinking that the verse
“ Dilatasti cor meum,” “ Thou hast dilated my heart,” 4
declares that the heart is dilated. This joy does not
appear to me to originate in the heart, but in some
more interior part and, as it were, in the depths of our
being. I think this must be the centre of the soul, as
I have since learnt and will explain later on. I discover
secrets within us which often fill me with astonishment :
how many more must there be unknown to me I O my
Lord and my God ! how stupendous is Thy grandeur !
We are like so many foolish peasant lads: we think
we know something of Thee, yet it must be compara-
tively nothing, for there are profound secrets even in
* Ps. cxviii. 32. .Life, ch. xvii. 14.


Digitized by LjOOQle


[CHAP. II.


72 THE INTERIOR CASTLE.

ourselves of which we know naught. I say " compara-
tively nothing ” in proportion with all the secrets hidden
within Thee, yet how great are Thy mysteries that we
are acquainted with and can learn even by the study
of such of Thy works as we see 1 '

6. To return to the verse I quoted, which may help
to explain the dilation begun by the celestial waters
in the depths of our being. They appear to dilate and
enlarge us internally, and benefit us in an inexplicable
manner, nor does even the soul itself understand what
it receives. It is conscious of what may be described as
a certain fragrance, as if within its inmost depths were
a brazier sprinkled with sweet perfumes. Although the
spirit neither sees the flame nor knows where it is, yet
it is penetrated by the warmth, and scented fumes, which
are even sometimes perceived by the body. Under-
stand me, the soul does not feel any real heat or scent,
but something far more subtle, which I use this metaphor
to explain. Let those who have never experienced it
believe that it really occurs to others : the soul is
conscious of it and feels it more distinctly than can be
expressed. It is not a thing we can fancy or gain by
anything we can do ; clearly it does not arise from the
base coin of human nature, but from the most pure gold
of Divine Wisdom. I believe that in this case the
powers of the soul are not united to God, but are ab-
* Life, ch. xiv. 9. Way of Perf, ch. xxviii. 11.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. II.]


FOURTH MANSIONS.


73


sorbed and astounded at the marvel before them. I
may possibly be contradicting what I wrote elsewhere ; *
nor would this be surprising, for it was done about
fifteen years ago, and perhaps God has given me since
then a clearer insight into the matter. I may be entirely
mistaken on the subject, both then and now, but never
do I wilfully say what is untrue. No ; by the mercy
of God, I would rather die a thousand times than tell
a falsehood : I speak of the matter as I understand it.
I believe that in this case the will must in some way
be united with that of God. The after effects on
the soul, and the subsequent behaviour of the person,
show whether this prayer was genuine or no : this is
the best crucible by which to test it.

7. Our Lord bestows a signal grace on the soul if it
realises how great is this favour, and another greater
still if it does not turn back on the right road.
You are longing, my daughters, to enter into this state
of prayer at once, and you are right, for, as I said, the
soul cannot understand the value of the graces there
bestowed by God upon it, nor the love which draws

' Life, ch. xiv. 3 : " The faculties are not lost, neither are
they asleep ; the will alone is occupied in such a way that without
knowing how it has become a captive it gives a simple consent
to become the prisoner of God.” Ibid. § 4: " The other two
faculties help the will that it may render itself capable of the
fruition of so great a good ; nevertheless, it occasionally happens
even when the will is in union that they hinder it very much.”
See also Way of Perf. ch. xxxj. 8.


Digitized by LjOOQle


74 THE INTERIOR CASTLE. [CHAP. II.

Him ever closer to it : we should certainly desire to learn
how to obtain this favour. I will tell you what I know
about it, setting aside certain cases in which God bestows
these graces for no other reason than His own choice,
into which we have no right to inquire.

8. Practise what I advised in the preceding mansions,
then — humility, humility 1 for God lets Himself be
vanquished by this and grants us all we ask.’ The
first proof • that you possess humility is that you neither
think you now deserve these graces and consolations
from God, nor that you ever will as long as you live.
You ask me : " How shall we receive them, if we do
not try to gain them ? ” I answer, that there is no
surer way to obtain them than the one I have told you,
therefore make no efforts to acquire them, for the following
reasons. The first is, that the chief means of obtaining
them is to love God without self-interest. The second,
that it is a slight lack of humility to think that our
wretched services can win so great a reward. The third,
that the real preparation for them is to desire to suffer
and to imitate our Lord, rather than to receive conso-
lations, for indeed we have all offended Him. The fourth
reason is, that His Majesty has not promised to give us
these favours in the same way as He has bound Himself
to bestow eternal glory on us, if we keep His command-

7 Way of Perf. ch. xvi. i. , Life, ch. xxii. 16.

• Philippus a SS. Trinitate, l,c. art, 3.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. II.] FOURTH MANSIONS. 75

ments. We can be saved without these special graces ;
He sees better than we do what is best for us and which
of us love Him sincerely. I know for a certain truth,
being acquainted with some who walk by the way of love
(and therefore only seek to serve Jesus Christ crucified),
that not only they neither ask for nor desire consolation,
but they even beg Him not to give it them during this
life : this is a fact. Fifthly, we should but labour in
vain : this water does not how through aqueducts,
like that we first spoke of, and if the spring does not
afford it, in vain shall we toil to obtain it. I mean, that
though we may meditate and try our hardest, and
though we shed tears to gain it, we cannot make this
water flow. God alone gives it to whom He chooses,
and often when the soul is least thinking of it. We are
His, sisters, let Him do what He will with us, and lead
us where He will. If we are really humble and annihilate
ourselves, not only in our imagination (which often
deceives us), but if we truly detach ourselves from all
things, our Lord will not only grant us these favours
but many others that we do not know even how to wish
for. May He be for ever praised and blessed ! Amen.


Digitized by LjOOQle


7 6


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. III.


CHAPTER III.

Of the prayer of recollection which God generally gives
the soul before granting it that last described. Its
effects : also those of the prayer of divine consola-
tions described in the last chapter.

1. The prayer of recollection compared to the Inhabitants of the castle. 2. The
Shepherd recalls His flock into the castle. 3. This recollection super-
natural 4. It prepares us for higher favours. 5. The mind must act
until God calls it to recollection by love. 6. The soul should here abandon
itself into God*s hands. 7. The prayer of recollection , and distractions in
prayer. 8. Liberty of spirit gained by consolations. 9. The soul must
be watchful 10. The devil specially tempts such souls. 11. False trances
and raptures. 12. How to treat those deluded in this way. 13. Risks of
delusion in this mansion.

i. The effects of divine consolations are very numerous :
before describing them, I will speak of another kind of
prayer which usually precedes them. I need not say
much on this subject, having written about it elsewhere.*

1 Life, ch. xiv. 2. The Saint says in the second chapter of
this mansion, § 5, and also in a letter dated January 14, 1580,
that when writing the Interior Castle she had more experience
in spiritual things than when she composed her former works.
This is fully borne out by the present chapter. In the corres-
ponding part of her Life she practically confounded the prayer
of recollection with the prayer of quiet (the second state of the
soul). Likewise, in the Way of Perfection , ch. xxviii., she speaks
of but one kind of prayer of recollection and then passes on to
the prayer of quiet. Here, however, she mentions a second
form of the prayer of recollection. See Philippus a SS. Trinitate,
pars iii. tract. 1, disc. iii. art. 1, “ De oration* recollectionis ”
(page 81 of the third vol. of the edition of 1874) ; “de secundo
modo recollectionis 99 (ibid. p. 82) ; and art. 2, “ De oratione
quietis ” (ibid. p. 84). Antonins a Spiritu Sancto, Direct . Mystic.
tract, iv. n. 78: “Duo sunt hujus recollectionis modi, primus


Digitized by t^ooQle


FOURTH MANSIONS.


CHAP. III.]


77


This is a kind of recollection which, I believe, is super-
natural. There is no occasion to retire nor to shut the
eyes, nor does it depend on anything exterior ; involun-
tarily the eyes suddenly close and solitude is found.
Without any labour of one’s own, the temple of which
I spoke is reared for the soul in which to pray : the
senses and exterior surroundings appear to lose their hold,
while the spirit gradually regains its lost sovereignty.
Some say the soul enters into itself ; others, that it
rises above itself. I can say nothing about these terms,
but had better speak of the subject as I understand it.
You will probably grasp my meaning, although, perhaps,
I may be the only person who understands it. Let us
imagine that the senses and powers of the soul (which
I compared in my allegory to the inhabitants of the
castle) have fled and joined the enemy outside. After
long days and years of absence, perceiving how great has
been their loss, they return to the neighbourhood of the
castle, but cannot manage to re-enter it, for their evil
habits are hard to break off ; still, they are no longer
traitors, and they wander about outside.


quidem activus [reference to the Way of Perfection, l.c .], secundns
autem passivus [reference to this chapter of the Fourth Man-
sion].” The former is not supernatural, in the sense that with
special grace from above it can be acquired ; the second is
altogether supernatural and more like gratuitous grace (ibid. no.
80 and 81). On the meaning of “ Solitude,” " Silence." etc.,
see Anton, a Sp. S. l.c., tract, i, n. 78-82.


Digitized by LjOOQle


78


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. III.


2. The King, Who holds His court within it, sees
their good will, and out of His great mercy desires them
to return to Him. Like a good shepherd, He plays so
sweetly on His pipes, that although scarcely hearing it
they recognise His call and no longer wander, but return,
like lost sheep, to the mansions. So strong is this
Pastor’s power over His flock, that they abandon the
worldly cares which misled them and re-enter the
castle.

3. I think I never put this matter so clearly before.
To seek God within ourselves avails us far more than
to look for Him amongst creatures ; Saint Augustine
tells us how he found the Almighty within his own soul,
after having long sought for Him elsewhere.* This

2 Some editors of the Interior Castle think that St. Teresa refers
to the following passage taken from the Confessions of St. Augus-
tine : 44 Too late have I loved Thee, O Beauty, ever ancient yet
ever new ! too late have I loved Thee ! And behold. Thou wert
within me and I abroad, and there I searched for Thee, and,
deformed as I was, I pursued the beauties that Thou hast made.
Thou wert with me, but I was not with Thee. Those things kept
me far from Thee, which, unless they were in Thee, could have had
no being ” (S*. Augustine's Confessions , bk. x. ch. xxvii.) . The Con-
fessions of St. Augustine were first translated into Spanish by
Sebastian Toscano, a Portuguese Augustinian. This edition,
which was published at Salamanca in 1554, was the one used by
St. Teresa. However, it is more probable that here and elsewhere
(Life„ ch. xli. 10 ; Way of Perf . ch. xxviii. 2) St. Teresa quotes
a passage which occurs in a pious book entitled Soliloquia, and
erroneously attributed to St. Augustine : 44 I have gone about the
streets and the broad ways of the city of this world, seeking Thee,
but have not found Thee, for I was wrong in seeking without for


Digitized by t^.ooQle


FOURTH MANSIONS.


CHAP. III.]


79


recollection helps us greatly when God bestows it upon
us. But do not fancy you can gain it by thinking of
God dwelling within you, or by imagining Him as
present in your soul : this is a good practice and an
excellent kind of meditation, for it is founded on the
fact that God resides within us ; * it is not, however,
the prayer of recollection, for by the divine assistance
every one can practise this, but what I mean is quite
a different thing. Sometimes, before they have begun
to think of God, the powers of the soul find themselves
within the castle. I know not by what means they
entered, nor how they heard the Shepherd’s pipe ; the
ears perceived no sound but the soul is keenly conscious
of a delicious sense of recollection experienced by
those who enjoy this favour, which I cannot describe
more clearly.

4. I think I read somewhere that the soul is then
like a tortoise or sea-urchin, which retreats into itself.
Those who said this no doubt understood what they
were talking about ; but these creatures can withdraw
into themselves at will, while here it is not in our power
to retire into ourselves, unless God gives us the grace.


what was within” (ch. xxxi.). This treatise, which is also
quoted by St. John of the Cross, Spiritual Canticle, stanza i. 7,
and Ascent of Mount Carmel, bk. i. ch. v. 1, appeared in a
Spanish translation at Valladolid in 1515, at Medina del Campo
in 1553, and at Toledo in 1565.

* Life, ch. xiv. 7, 8 ; ch. xviii. 20.


Digitized by ^ooQle


8o


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. 111.


In my opinion. His Majesty only bestows this favour on
those who have renounced the world, in desire at least,
if their state of life does not permit their doing so in
fact. He thus specially calls them to devote themselves
to spiritual things ; if they allow Him power to act
freely He will bestow still greater graces on those whom
He thus begins calling to a higher life. Those who
enjoy this recollection should thank God fervently : it
is of the highest importance for them to realise the value
of this favour, gratitude for which would prepare them
to receive still more signal graces. Some books advise
that as a preparation for hearing what our Lord may
say to us we should keep our minds at rest, waiting to
see what He will work in our souls. 1 But unless His
Majesty has begun to suspend our faculties, I cannot
understand how we are to stop thinking, without doing
ourselves more harm than good. This point has been
much debated by those learned in spiritual matters ; I
confess my want of humility in having been unable to
yield to their opinion. 1

5. Some one told me of a certain book written on the
subject by the saintly Friar Peter of Alcantara (as I think
I may justly call him) ; I should have submitted to his
decision, knowing that he was competent to judge, but
on reading it I found he agreed with me that the mind
must act until called to recollection by love, although
1 Life, ch. xii. 8. * Life, ch. xiv. 10 .


Digitized by


Google


CHAP. III.] FOURTH MANSIONS. 8l

he stated it in other words.' Possibly I may be mis-
taken, but I rely on these reasons. Firstly, he who
reasons less and tries to do least, does most in spiritual
matters. We should make our petitions like beggars
before a powerful and rich Emperor ; then, with down-
cast eyes, humbly wait. When He secretly shows us He
hears our prayers, it is well to be silent, as He has drawn
us into His presence ; there would then be no harm in
trying to keep our minds at rest (that is to say, if we can).
If, however, the King makes no sign of listening or of
seeing us, there is no need to stand inert, like a dolt,
which the soul would resemble if it continued inactive.
In this case its dryness would greatly increase, and
the imagination would be made more restless than
before by its very effort to think of nothing. Our Lord
wishes us at such a time to offer Him our petitions and


* See St. Peter of Alcantara's work on meditation, Tratado
de la Oracidn y Meditaci&n, published at Lisbon between 1556
and 1560 and at Medina del Campo 1563. Translated into
English by Giles Willoughby (and lately by George Seymour
Hollings). P. 1, 8th document (p. 168) : " As often as this
spiritual sleep shall sweetly oppress any one — that is to say,
when the understanding is drowned, as it were, in a sleep (but
the will watching) let him quietly enjoy this delicate meat as
long as it shall last. But when it is digested, let him return
again to meditation, in which we must behave ourselves like a
gardener, who, when he watereth a bed of his garden, after he
hath once sprinkled it with water, expecteth a while until it
be drunk in, then sprinkleth again, that at last it may thoroughly
wet the earth that it may become more fruitful.”

6


Digitized by t^.ooQle


82 THE INTERIOR CASTLE. [CHAP. III.

to place ourselves in His presence ; He knows what is
best for us.

6. I believe that human efforts avail nothing in these
matters, which His Majesty appears to reserve to Himself,
setting this limit to our powers. In many other things,
such as penances, good works, and prayers, with His aid
we can help ourselves as far as human weakness will
allow. The second reason is, that these interior opera-
tions being sweet and peaceful,’ any painful effort does
us more harm than good. By “ painful effort ” I mean
any forcible restraint we place on ourselves, such as hold-
ing our breath.* We should rather abandon our souls in-
to the hands of God, leaving Him to do as He chooses
with us, as far as possible forgetting all self-interest
and resigning ourselves entirely to His will. The third
reason is, that the very effort to think of nothing excites
our imagination the more. The fourth is, because we
render God the most true and acceptable service by
caring only for His honour and glory and forgetting
ourselves, our advantages, comfort, and happiness.
How can we be self-oblivious, while keeping ourselves
under such strict' control that we are afraid to move,
or even to think, or to leave our minds enough liberty
to desire God’s greater glory and to rejoice in the glory
which He possesses ? When His Majesty wishes the

7 Sap. viii. i: "Disponit omnia suaviter."

* Life, ch. xv. I.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. III.] FOURTH MANSIONS. 83

min'd to rest from working He employs it in another
manner, giving it a light and knowledge far above any
obtainable by its own efforts and absorbing it entirely
into Himself. Then, though it knows not how, it is
filled with wisdom such as it could never gain for itself
by striving to suspend the thoughts. God gave us faculties
for our use ; each of them will receive its proper reward.
Then do not let us try to charm them to sleep, but
permit them to do their work until divinely called to
something higher.'

7. In my opinion, when God chooses to place the soul
in this mansion it is best for it to do as I advised, and
then endeavour, without force or disturbance, to keep
free from wandering thoughts. No effort, however,
should be made to suspend the intellect and imagination
entirely from acting, for it is well to remember God's


* “The whole of the time in which our Lord communicates
the simple, loving general attention of which I made mention
before, or when the soul, assisted by grace, is established in
that state, we must contrive to keep the understanding in repose,
undisturbed by the intrusion of forms, figures, or particular
knowledge, unless it were slightly and for an instant, and that
with sweetness of love, to enkindle our souls the more. At
other times, however, in all our acts of devotion and good works,
we must make use of good recollections and meditations, so that
we may feel an increase of profit and devotion ; most especially
applying ourselves to the life, passion, and death of Jesus Christ,
our Lord, that our life and conduct may be an imitation of His “
(St. John of the Cross, Ascent of Mount Carmel, bk. ii. ch.
xxxii. 7).


Digitized by ^ooQle


8 4


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. III.


presence and to consider Who He is. If transported
out of itself by its feelings, well and good ; but let it not
try to understand what is passing within it, for this
favour is bestowed on the will which should be left to
enjoy it in peace, only making loving aspirations occa-
sionally. Although, in this kind of prayer, the soul
makes no effort towards it, yet often, for a very short
time, the mind ceases to think at all. I explained else-
where why this occurs during this spiritual state. 1 * On
first speaking of the fourth mansions, I told you I had
mentioned divine consolations before the prayer of
recollection. The latter should have come first, as it is
far inferior to consolations, of which it is the commence-
ment. Recollection does not require us to give up medi-
tation, nor to cease using our intellect. In the prayer of
quiet, when the water flows from the spring itself and not
through conduits, the mind ceases to act ; it is forced
to do so, although it does not understand what is happen-
ing, and so wanders hither and thither in bewildermen t,
finding no place for rest. Meanwhile the will, entirely
united to God, is much disturbed by the tumult of the
thoughts : no notice, however, should be taken of them,
or they would cause the loss of a great part of the favour
the soul is enjoying. Let the spirit ignore these dis-
tractions and abandon itself in the arms of divine love :
His Majesty will teach it how best to act, which chiefly
w Life, ch. xv. 2.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP, in.] FOURTH MANSIONS. 85

consists in its recognising its unworthiness of so great
a good and occupying itself in thanking Him for it.

8. In order to treat of the prayer of recollection, I
passed over in silence the effects and symptoms to be
found in souls thus favoured by God. Divine consola-
tions evidently cause a dilation or enlargement of the
soul that may be compared to water flowing from a
spring into a basin which has no outlet, but is so con-
structed as to increase in size and proportion to the
quantity poured into it. God seems to work the same
effect by this prayer, besides giving many other marvel-
lous graces, so preparing and disposing the soul to
contain all He intends to give it. After interior sweet-
ness and dilation the soul is not so restrained as
formerly in God’s service, but possesses much more
liberty of spirit. It is no longer distressed by the terror
of hell, for though more anxious than ever not to offend
God, it has lost servile fear and feels sure that one day
it will possess its Lord. It does not dread the loss
of health by austerities ; 11 believing that there is nothing
it could not do by His grace, it is more desirous than
before of doing penance. Greater indifference is felt
for sufferings, because, faith being stronger, it trusts
that if borne for God He will give the grace to endure
them patiently. Indeed, such a one at times even longs
for trials, having a most ardent desire to do something

u Life, ch. xxiv. 2.


Digitized by LjOOQle


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


86


[CHAP. III.


for His sake. As the soul better understands the
Divine Majesty, it realises more vividly its own base-
ness. Divine consolation shows it how vile are earthly
pleasures ; by gradually withdrawing from them, it
gains greater self-mastery. In short, its virtues are
increased and it will not cease to advance in perfection,
unless it turns back and offends God. Should it act
thus, it would lose everything, however high the state
it may have reached.

9. It is not to be supposed that all these effects are
produced merely by God’s having shown these favours
once or twice. They must be received continually, for
it is on their frequent reception that the whole welfare
of the soul depends. I strongly urge those who have
reached this state to avoid most carefully all occasions
of offending God. 1 * The soul is not yet fully estab-
lished in virtue, but is like a new-born babe first feeding
at its mother’s breast : 11 if it leaves her, what can it
do but die ? I greatly fear that when a soul to whom
God has granted this favour discontinues prayer, except
under urgent necessity, it will, unless it returns to the
practice at once, go from bad to worse.

10. I realise the danger of such a case, having had the
grief of witnessing the fall of persons I knew, through


“ Way of Perf. ch. xvi. 5. Castle, M. v. ch. i. 2, 3, ; ch. ii.
4, 5 ; ch. iii. 2, 6, 12.
u Way of Perf. ch. xxxi. 7. Concep. ch. iv. 6.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. III.]


FOURTH MANSIONS.


87


their withdrawal from Him Who sought, with so much
love, to make Himself their friend, as He proved by
His treatment of them. I urgently warn such persons
not to run the risk of sinning, for the devil would
rather gain one of these souls than many to whom our
Lord does not grant such graces , 14 as the former may
cause him severe loss by leading others to follow their
example, and may even render great service to the
Church of God. Were there no other reason except
that he saw the special love His Majesty bore these
people, it would suffice to make Satan frantic to destroy
God’s work in them, so that they might be lost eternally.
Therefore they suffer grievous temptations, and if they
fall, they fall lower than others.

11. You, my sisters, are free from such dangers, as
far as we can tell : God keep you from pride and vain-
glory ! The devil sometimes offers counterfeits of the
graces I have mentioned : this can easily be detected
— the effects being exactly contrary to those of the
genuine ones." Although I have spoken of it else-
where , 14 I wish to warn you here of a special danger
to which those who practise prayer are subject, par-
ticularly women, whose weakness of constitution makes
them more liable to such mistakes. On account of their
penances, prayers, and vigils, or even merely because of

M Way of Perf. ch. xl. 3. M Found, ch. vi.

M Life, ch. xx. 31.


Digitized by


Google


88


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. HI.


debility of health, some persons cannot receive spiritual
consolation without being overcome by it. On feeling
any interior joy, their bodies being languid and
weak, they fall into a slumber — they call it spiritual
sleep, — which is a more advanced stage of what I have
described; they think the soul shares in it as well as
the body, and abandon themselves to a sort of intoxi-
cation. The more they lose self-control, the more do
their feelings get possession of them, because the frame
becomes more feeble. They fancy this is a trance and
call it one, but I call it nonsense ; it does nothing but
waste their time and injure their health.

12. This state lasted with a certain person for eight
hours, during which time she was neither insensible,
nor had she any thought of God. 1 ’ She was cured by
being made to eat and sleep well and to leave off some
of her penances. Her recovery was owing to some
one who understood her case ; hitherto she had unin-
tentionally deceived both her confessor and other people,
as well as herself. I feel quite sure the devil had been
at work here to serve his own ends and he was beginning
to gain a great deal from it. It should be known that
when God bestows such favours on the soul, although
there may be languor both of mind and body, it is not
shared by the soul, which feels great delight at seeing
itself so near God, nor does this state ever continue
n Found, ch. vi. 15.


Digitized by


Google


CHAP. III.] FOURTH MANSIONS. 89

for more than a very short time." Although the soul
may become absorbed again, yet, as I said, unless
already feeble, the body suffers neither exhaustion nor
pain. I advise any of you who experience the latter
to tell the Prioress, and to divert your thoughts as much
as possible from such matters. The Superior should
prevent such a nun from spending more than a very few
hours in prayer, and should make her eat and sleep well
until her usual strength is restored, if she has lost it in
this way. If the nun’s constitution is so delicate that
this does not suffice, let her believe me when I tell her
that God only calls her to the active life. There must
be such people in monasteries : employ her in the various
offices and be careful that she is never left very long
alone, otherwise she will entirely lose her health. This
treatment will be a great mortification to her : our
Lord tests her love for Him by the way in which she
bears His absence. He may be pleased, after a time,
to restore her strength ; if not, she will make as much
progress, and earn as great a reward by vocal prayer
and obedience, as she would have done by contemplation,
and perhaps more.

13. There are people, some of whom I have known,
whose minds and imaginations are so active as to fancy
they see whatever they think about, which is very
dangerous. 1 * Perhaps I may treat of this later on, but
u Life, ch. xviii. 16, 17. *» Found, ch. viii. 7-8.


Digitized by LjOOQle


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


90


[CHAP. III.


cannot do so now. I have dwelt at length on this
mansion, as I believe it to be the one most souls enter.
As the natural is combined with the supernatural, the
devil can do more harm here than later on, when God
does not leave him so many opportunities. May God
be for ever praised 1 Amen.


Digitized by LjOOQle


THE FIFTH MANSIONS.

CHAPTER I.

Begins to treat of the union of the soul with God in prayer.
How to be sure that we are not deceived in this
matter.


1. Graces of the fifth mansions. 2. Contemplation to be striven for . 3. Physical
effects of the prayer of union. 4. Amazement of the intellect 5. The
prayer of union and of quiet contrasted. 6. Divine and earthly union .
7. Competent directors in these matters. 8. Proof of union. 9. Assurance
left in the souL 10. Divine union beyond our power to obtain.

i. Oh, my sisters, how shall I describe the riches,
treasures, and joys contained in the fifth mansions !
Would it not be better to say nothing about them ?
They are impossible to depict, nor can the mind conceive,
nor any comparisons portray them, all earthly things
being too vile to serve the purpose. Send me, O my
Lord, light from heaven that I may give some to these
Thy servants, some of whom by Thy good will often
enjoy these delights, lest the devil in the guise of an
angel of light should deceive those whose only desire
is to please Thee.

2. I said “ some,” but in reality there are very few 1

who never enter this mansion : some more and some

1 Found, ch. iv. 8.

9*


Digitized by ^ooQle


92


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. I.


less, but most of them may be said at least to gain
admittance into these rooms. I think that certain
graces I am about to describe are bestowed on only
a few of the nuns, but if the rest only arrive at the portal
they receive a great boon from God, for " many are
called, but few are chosen.” * All we who wear the
holy habit of the Carmelites are called to prayer and
contemplation. This was the object of our Order,*
to this lineage we belong. Our holy Fathers of Mount
Carmel sought in perfect solitude and utter contempt
of the world for this treasure, this precious pearl, 4 of
which we speak, and we are their descendants. How
little do most of us care to prepare our souls, that our
Lord may reveal this jewel to usl Outwardly we
may appear to practise the requisite virtues, but we
have far more to do than this before it is possible to
attain to contemplation, to gain which we should neglect
no means, either small or great. Rouse yourselves,
my sisters, and since some foretaste of heaven may be
had on earth, beg our Lord to give us grace not to miss
it through our own fault. Ask Him to show us where
to find it — ask Him to give us strength of soul to
dig until we find this hidden treasure, which lies buried

* St. Matt. xx. 16 : " Multi enim sunt vocati, pauci vero electi.”

* “ Maneant singuli in cellulis suis, vel juxta eas, die ac nocte
in lege Domini meditantes et in orationibus vigilantes" (Car-
melite Rule).

4 St. Matt. xiii. 46.


Digitized by


Google


CHAP. I.]


FIFTH MANSIONS.


93


within our hearts, as I wish to show you if it please
God to enable me. I said " strength of soul,” that
you might understand that strength of body is not
indispensable when our Lord God chooses to withhold
it. He makes it impossible for no one to gain these
riches, but is content that each should do his best.
Blessed be so just a God I

3. But, daughters, if you would purchase this treasure
of which we are speaking, God would have you keep
back nothing from Him, little or great. He will have
it all ; 1 in proportion to what you know you have
given will your reward be great or small. There is no
more certain sign whether or not we have reached the
prayer of union. Do not imagine that this state of
prayer is, like the one preceding it, a sort of drowsiness
(I call it “ drowsiness ” because the soul seems to
slumber, being neither quite asleep nor wholly awake).
In the prayer of union the soul is asleep, fast asleep, as
regards the world and itself : in fact, during the short
time this state lasts it is deprived of all feeling whatever,
being unable to think on any subject, even if it wished.
No effort is needed here to suspend the thoughts,
if the soul can love — it knows not how, nor whom it loves,

( “The reason why there are so few contemplatives is that
there are so few persons who wholly withdraw themselves from
transitory and created things” ( Imitation , bk. iii. ch. xxxi. r).
See also Way of Perf. ch. xvi. 5. Life, ch. xi. 2-4 ; ch. xxii.
18, r9.


Digitized by


Google


94


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. I.


nor what it desires. In fact, it has died entirely to this
world, to live more truly than ever in God. This is
a delicious death, for the soul is deprived of the faculties
it exercised while in the body : ' delicious because,
(although not really the case), it seems to have left
its mortal covering, to abide more entirely in God.
So completely does this take place, that I know not
whether the body retains sufficient life to continue
breathing ; on consideration, I believe it does not ;
at any rate, if it still breathes, it does so unconsciously.

4. The mind entirely concentrates itself on trying to
understand what is happening, which is beyond its
power ; it is so astounded, that if consciousness is not
completely lost, at least no movement is possible :
the person may be compared to one who falls into a
dead faint with dismay. 7

5. Oh, mighty secrets of God ! Never should I
weary of trying to explain them if I thought it possible
to succeed I I would write a thousand foolish things
that one might be to the point, if only it might make
us praise God more. I said this prayer produced no
drowsiness in the mind ; on the other hand, in the
prayer (of quiet) described in the last mansion, until
the soul has gained much experience it doubts what
really happened to it. “ Was it nothing but fancy, or

* Way of Perf. ch. xxv. 1. Life, ch. xvi. Rel. I. 1 ; viii. 7.

7 Life, ch. xvii. 2.


Digitized by


Google


CHAP. I.]


FIFTH MANSIONS.


95


was it a sleep ? Did it come from God or from the
devil, disguised as an angel of light ? " The mind feels
a thousand misgivings, and well for it that it should,
because, as I said, nature may sometimes deceive us in
this case. Although there is little chance of the poisonous
reptiles entering here, yet agile little lizards will try
to slip in, though they can do no harm, especially if
they remain unnoticed. These, as I said, are trivial
fancies of the imagination, which are often very trouble-
some. However active these small lizards may be,
they cannot enter the fifth mansion, for neither the
imagination, the understanding, nor the memory has
power to hinder the graces bestowed in it.

6. I dare venture to assert that, if this is genuine
union with God, the devil cannot interfere nor do any
harm, for His Majesty is so joined and united with the
essence of the soul, that the evil one dare not approach,
nor can he even understand this mystery. This is
certain, for it is said that the devil does not know our
thoughts, much less can he penetrate a secret so profound,
that God does not reveal it even to us.* Oh, blessed
state, in which this cursed one cannot injure us ! What
riches we receive while God so works in us that neither
we ourselves nor any one else can impede Him ! What

• According to St. Thomas, angels — whether good or bad- —
do not know the thoughts of man unless they become manifest
by some exterior sign. S. Theol. I. q. lvii. art 4. See also
St. John of the Cross, Dark Night, bk. ii. ch. xxiii. 2, 5.


Digitized by


Google


96 THE INTERIOR CASTLE. [CHAP. I.

will He not bestow, Who is so eager to give, and Who
can give us all He desires ! You may perhaps have
been puzzled at my saying " if this is genuine union
with God,” as if there might be other unions. There
are indeed — not with God, but with vanities — when
the devil transports the soul passionately addicted to
them, but the union differs from that which is divine
and the mind misses the delight and satisfaction, peace
and happiness of divine union. These heavenly conso-
lations are above all earthly joys, pleasure, and satis-
faction. As great a difference exists between their
origin and that of worldly pleasures as between their
opposite effects, as you know by experience.

7. I said somewhere ' that the one seems only to
touch the surface of the body, while the other penetrates
to the very marrow : I believe this is correct, and I
cannot express myself better. I fancy that you are not
yet satisfied on this question, but are afraid of decep-
tion, for spiritual matters are very hard to explain.
Enough, however, has been said for those who have
received this grace, as the difference between divine
union and any other is very striking. However, I will
give you a clear proof which cannot mislead you, nor
leave any doubt whether the favour comes from God
or no. His Majesty brought it back to my memory
this very day ; it appears to me to be an unmistakable
• Mansion iv. ch. i. 5.


Digitized by t^.ooQle


FIFTH MANSIONS.


CHAP. I.]


97


sign. In difficult questions, although I think I under-
stand them and am speaking the truth, I always say,
“ it appears tome”; for, in case my opinion is wrong,
I am most willing to Submit to the judgment of theolo-
gians. Although they may not have had personal
experience in such matters, yet, in some way I do not
understand, God Who sets them to give light to His
Church, enables them to recognise the truth when it
is put before them. If they are not thoughtless and
indevout, but servants of God, they are never dismayed
at His mighty works, knowing perfectly well that it
is in His power to perform far greater wonders. If
some of the marvels told are new to them, yet they have
read of others of the same kind, showing the former
to be possible. I have had great experience as to this
and have also met with timid, half-instructed people,
whose ignorance has cost me very dear." I am con-
vinced that those who refuse to believe that God can
do far more than this, and that He is pleased now, as
in the past, to communicate Himself to His creatures,
shut fast their hearts against receiving such favours
themselves. Do not imitate them, sisters : be convinced
that it is possible for God to perform still greater
wonders. Do not concern yourselves as to whether
those who receive these graces are good or wicked ;
as I said, 'He knows best, and it is no business of yours :

*• Life, ch. viii. 15.

7


Digitized by ^ooQle


98


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[chap. I.


you should serve Him with a single heart and with
humility, and should praise Him for His works and
wonders."

8. Let us now speak of the sign which proves the
prayer of union to have been genuine. As you have
seen, God then deprives the soul of all its senses that
He may the better imprint in it true wisdom : it neither
sees, hears, nor understands anything while this state
lasts, which is never more than a very brief time ; "
it appears to the soul to be much shorter than it really
is. God visits the soul in a manner which prevents
its doubting, on returning to itself, that it dwelt in
Him, and, that He was within it, and so firmly is it
convinced of this truth, that although years may pass
before this favour recurs, the soul can never forget it
nor doubt the fact," setting aside the effects left by
this prayer, to which I will refer later on. The con-
viction felt by the soul is the main point.

9. But, you may ask, how can a person who is incapable
of sight and hearing see " or know these things ? I
do not say that she saw it at the time, but that she

11 Life, ch. xviii. 16.

“ Life, ch. xx. 13, 24.

“ Philippus a SS. Trinitate, l.c., pars iii. tr. i. disc. iv. art. 2,
where he adds some further signs. Anton, a Sp. S., l.c., tract, i.
nn. 116 and 117.

M “ The soul does not see the good Master who teaches it,
although clearly conscious of His presence ’’ ( Concept . ch. iv. 3).


Digitized by ^ooQle


CHAP. I.]


FIFTH MANSIONS.


99


perceives it clearly afterwards, not by any vision, but
by a certitude which remains in the heart, and which
God alone could give. I know of some one who was
unaware of God being in all things by presence, power
and essence, yet was firmly convinced of it by a divine
favour of this sort. 11 She asked an ill-instructed priest
of the kind I mentioned to tell her in what way God
dwelt within us : he was as ignorant on the subject as
she had been before our Lord revealed to her the truth,

14 " There are three ways in which God is present in the soul.
The first is His presence in essence, not in holy souls only, but
in wretched and sinful souls as well, and also in all created
things ; for it is by this presence that He gives life and being,
and were it withdrawn at once all things would return to nothing.
This presence never fails in the soul. The second is His presence
by grace, whereby He dwells in the soul, pleased and satisfied
with it. This presence is not in all souls ; for those who fall
into mortal sin lose it, and no soul can know in a natural way
whether it has it or not. The third is His presence by spiritual
affection. God is wont to show His presence in many devout
souls in divers ways, in refreshment, joy and gladness ” (St.
John of the Cross, Spiritual Canticle , stanza xi. 2).

** In every soul, even that of the greatest sinner in the world,
God dwells and is substantially present. This way of union or
presence of God, in the order of nature, subsists between Him
and all His creatures ; by this He preserves them in being, and
if He withdraws it they immediately perish and cease to be.
And so, when I speak of the union of the soul with God, I do
not mean this substantial presence which is in every creature,
but that union and transformation of the soul in God by love
which is only then accomplished when there subsists the likeness
which love begets*' (Saint John of the Cross, Ascent, bk. ii.
ch. v. 3).

Fr. Gracian, Peregrinacidn de Anastasio (Burgos, 1905), p. 171.


Digitized by


Google


100


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. I.


and answered that the Almighty was only present in
us by grace . 11 Yet so strong was her conviction of the
truth learnt during her prayer, that she did not believe
him and questioned other spiritual persons on the
subject, who confirmed her in the true doctrine, much
to her joy. Do not mistake, and imagine that this
certainty of God having visited the soul concerns any
corporal presence, such as that of our Lord Jesus Christ
Who dwells in the Blessed Sacrament, although we do
not see Him : it relates solely to the Divinity. If we
did not see it, how can we feel so sure of it ? That I
do not know : it is the work of the Almighty and I am
certain that what I say is the fact. I maintain that
a soul which does not feel this assurance has not been
united to God entirely, but only by one of its powers,
or has received one of the many other favours God is
accustomed to bestow on men. In all such matters
we must not seek to know how things happened : our
understanding could not grasp them, therefore why
trouble ourselves on the subject ? It is enough to know
that it is He, the all-powerful God, Who has performed
the work. We can do nothing on our own part to gain
this favour ; it comes from God alone ; therefore let
us not strive to understand it.

18 Life , ch. xviii. 20. Rel. ix. 17; xi. 8. St. Teresa was so
deeply impressed by the ignorance of this priest that she very
frequently referred to it*


Digitized by


Google


UN1V. OF

California

CHAP. I.] FIFTH MANSIONS. IOI

io. Concerning my words : “ We can do nothing on
our own part, 1 ' I was struck by the words of the Bride in
the Canticles, which you will remember to have heard :
" The King brought me into the cellar of wine,” 17 (or
" placed me ” I think she says) : she does not say she
went of her own accord, although telling us how she
wandered up and down seeking her Beloved. u I think
the prayer of union is the “ cellar ” in which our Lord
places us, when and how He chooses, but we cannot
enter it through any effort of our own. His Majesty
alone can bring us there and come into the centre of
our souls. In order to declare His wondrous works
more clearly, He will leave us no share in them except
complete conformity of our wills to His, and abandon-
ment of all things : He does not require the faculties
or senses to open the door to Him ; they are all asleep.
He enters the innermost depths of our souls without
a door, as He entered the room where the disciples
sat, saying, " Pax vobis,” ** and as He emerged from
the sepulchre without removing the stone that closed
the entrance. You will see farther on, in the seventh
mansions, far better than here, how God makes the

17 Cant. L 3 : " Introduxit me rex in cellaria sua.” Castle,
M. v. ch. ii. ii. Way of Perf. ch. xviii. i. Concep. ch. iv. 4-8 ;
v. 5 ; vi. 7 ; vii. 2-5. Life, ch. xviii. 17.

M Cant. iii. 2 : " Per vicos et plateas qua ram quem diligit
anima mea.”

" St. John xx. 19.


Digitized by L^OOQle


102


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. I.


soul enjoy His presence in its very centre. O daughters,
what wonders shall we see, if we keep ever before our
eyes our own baseness and frailty and recognise how
unworthy we are to be the handmaids of so great a
Lord, Whose marvels are beyond our comprehension !
May He be for ever praised I Amen.


CHAPTER II.

Continues the same subject : explains the prayer of
union by a delicate comparison and speaks of the
effects it leaves upon the soul. This chapter should
receive great attention.

1. The soul compared to abutterflg. 2. The grandeurs of creation . 3. Sgmbol
of the soul and the silkworm. 4. Preparation of the soul for Go<Ts
indwelling . 5. Mgsttc death of the silkworm. 6. Effects of divine union.
7. Increase of fervour and detachment 8. Trials succeeding the proper
of union. 9.' Longing for death and seal for God's honour. 10. This
zeal supernatural 11. God alone works this grace. 12. The some seal
as that felt bg Our Lord on earth . 13. Christs keenest suffering.


i. You may imagine that there is no more left to be
described of the contents of this mansion, but a great
deal remains to be told, for as I said, it contains favours
of various degrees. I think there is nothing to add
about the prayer of union, but when the soul on which
God bestows this grace disposes itself for their reception,
I could tell you much about the marvels our Lord works
in it. I will describe some of them in my own way,
and also the state in which they leave the soul, and


Digitized by t^ooQle


CHAP. II.] FIFTH MANSIONS: IO3

will use a suitable comparison to elucidate the matter,
showing that though we can take no active part in this
work of God within us, 1 yet we may do much to prepare
ourselves to receive this grace. You have heard how
wonderfully silk is made — in a way such as God alone
could plan — how it all comes from an egg resembling a
tiny pepper-corn. Not having seen it myself, I only
know of it by hearsay, so if the facts are inaccurate the
fault will not be mine. When, in the warm weather,
the mulberry trees come into leaf, the little egg, which
was lifeless before its food was ready, begins to live.
The caterpillar nourishes itself upon the mulberry
leaves, until, when it has grown large, people place near
it small twigs, upon which, of its own accord, it spins silk
from its tiny mouth until it has made a narrow little cocoon
in which it buries itself. Then this large and ugly worm
leaves the cocoon as a lovely little white butterfly.

2. If we had not seen this, but had only heard of it
as an old legend, who could believe it ? Could we
persuade ourselves that insects so utterly without the
use of reason as a silkworm or a bee would work with
such industry and skill in our service that the poor little
silkworm loses its life over the task ? This would
suffice for a short meditation, sisters, without my adding
more, for you may learn from it the wonders and the
wisdom of God. How if we knew the properties of all
1 Way of Perf. ch. xxv. 3.


Digitized by t^,ooQle


104


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. II.


things ? It is most profitable to ponder over the gran-
deurs of creation, and to exult in being the brides of
such a wise and mighty King.

3. Let us return to our subject. The silkworm
symbolises the soul which begins to live when, kindled
by the Holy Spirit, it commences using the ordinary
aids given by God to all, and applies the remedies
left by Him in His Church, such as regular confession,
religious books, and sermons ; these are the cure
for a soul dead in its negligence and sins and liable
to fall into temptation. Then it comes to life and
continues nourishing itself on this food and on devout
meditation until it has attained full vigour, which
is the essential point, for I attach no importance to
the rest. When the silkworm is full grown, as I told
you in the first part of this chapter, it begins to spin
silk and to build the house wherein it must die. By
this house, when speaking of the soul, I mean Christ.
I think I read or heard somewhere, either that our life
is hid in Christ, or in God (which means the same
thing), or that Christ is our life.* It makes little differ-
ence to my meaning which of these quotations is correct.

4. This shows, my daughters, how much, by God’s
grace, we can do, by preparing this home for ourselves,

'* Col. iii. 3 : " Vita vestra est abscondita cum Christo in Deo.”
Gal. ii. 20 : " Vivo autem, jam non ego ; vivit vero in me
Christus.”


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. II.] FIFTH MANSIONS. 105

towards making Him our dwelling-place, as He is in the
prayer of union. You will suppose that I mean we can
take away from or add something to God, when I say that
He is our home, and that we can make this home and
dwell in it by our own power. Indeed we can : though
we can neither deprive God of anything nor add aught to
Him, yet we can take away from and add to ourselves,
like the silkworms. The little we can do will hardly
have been accomplished when this insignificant work
of ours, which amounts to nothing at all, will be united
by God to His greatness and thus enhanced with such
immense value that our Lord Himself will be the reward
of our toil. Although He has had the greatest share
in it, He will join our trifling pains to the bitter sufferings
He endured for us, and make them one.

5. Forward,, then, my daughters I hasten over your
work and build the little cocoon. Let us renounce
self-love and self-will,* care for nothing earthly, do
penance, pray, mortify ourselves, be obedient, and
perform all the other good works of which you know.
Act up to your light ; you have been taught your
duties. Die I die ! as the silkworm does when it
has fulfilled the office of its creation, and you will see
God and be immersed in His greatness, as the little
silkworm is enveloped in its cocoon. Understand that
when I say “ you will see God,” I mean in the m ann er
* Way of Perf. ch. xxxi. 11.


Digitized by UjOOQle


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


106


[CHAP. II.


described, in which He manifests Himself in this kind
of union.

6. Now let us see what becomes of " the silkworm,”
for all I have been saying leads to this. As soon as,
by means of this prayer, the soul has become entirely
dead to the world, it comes forth like a lovely little
white butterfly ! Oh, how great God is ! How beauti-
ful is the soul after having been immersed in God's
grandeur and united closely to Him for but a short time !
Indeed, I do not think it is ever as long as half an hour. 4
Truly, the spirit does not recognise itself, being as
different from what it was as is the white butterfly from
the repulsive caterpillar. It does not know how it can
have merited so great a good, or rather, whence this
grace came, 4 which it well knows it merits not. The
soul desires to praise our Lord God, and longs to sacrifice
itself and die a thousand deaths for Him. It feels
an unconquerable desire for great crosses, and would
like to perform the most severe penances ; it sighs for
solitude, and would have all men know God, while it
is bitterly grieved at seeing them offend Him. These
matters will be described more fully in the next mansion ;
there they are of the same nature, yet in a more advanced
state the effects are far stronger, because, as I told you,
if, after the soul has received these favours, it strives
to make still farther progress, it will experience great
* Life, ch. xviii. j6, * Life, ch. xviii. 5-7.


Digitized by ^ooQle


CHAP. II.] FIFTH MANSIONS. I07

things. Oh, to see the restlessness of this charming
little butterfly, although never in its life has it been
more tranquil and at peace I May God be praised !
It knows not where to stay nor take its rest; everything
on earth disgusts it after what it has experienced,
particularly when God has often given it this wine,
which leaves fresh graces behind it at every draught.

7. It despises the work it did while yet a caterpillar,
the slow weaving of its cocoon thread by thread — its
wings have grown and it can fly ; could it be content to
crawl ? All that it can do for God seems nothing to
the soul compared with its desire. It no longer wonders
at what the saints bore for Him, knowing by experience
how our Lord aids and transforms the soul, until it no
longer seems the same in character and appearance.
Formerly it feared penance, now it is strong : it wanted
courage to forsake relations, friends, or possessions :
neither its actions, its resolutions, nor separation from
those it loved, could detach the soul, but rather seemed
to increase its fondness. Now it finds even their rightful
claims a burden,' fearing contact with them, lest it
should offend God. It wearies of everything, realising
that no true rest can be found in creatures.

8. I seem to have enlarged on this subject, yet far
more might be said about it ; those who have received
this favour will think I have treated it too briefly. No

* Rd. ix. n.


Digitized by LjOOQle


108 THE INTERIOR CASTLE. [CHAP. II.

wonder this pretty butterfly, estranged from earthly
things, seeks repose elsewhere. Where can the poor
little creature go ? It cannot return to whence it came,
for, as I told you, that is not in the soul’s power, do
what it will, but depends upon God’s pleasure. Alas !
what fresh trials begin to afflict the mind 1 1 Who would
expect this, after such a sublime grace ? In fact, in
one way or another we must carry the cross all our
lives. If people told me that ever since attaining to
the prayer of union they had enjoyed constant peace
and consolation, I should reply that they could never
have reached that state, but that, at the most, if they
had arrived as far as the last mansion, their emotion
must have been some spiritual satisfaction, joined to
physical debility. It might even have been a false
sweetness caused by the devil, who gives peace for a
time, only to wage far fiercer war later on. I do not
mean that those who reach this stage possess no peace ;
they do so in a very high degree, for their sorrows, though
extremely severe, are so beneficial and proceed from so
good a source as to procure both peace and happiness.

9 . Discontent with this world gives such a painful
longing to quit it, that if the heart finds comfort it is
solely from the thought that God wishes it to r em ain
here in banishment. Even this is not enough to reconcile

1 Way of Perf. ch. xviii. 1-4. Castle, M. vi. ch. i. 3 sqq. ;
M. vii. ch. iv. 7.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. II.] FIFTH MANSIONS. IO9

it to fate, for, after all the gifts received, it is not yet
so entirely surrendered to the will of God as it afterwards
becomes. Here, although conformed to His will, the soul
feels an unconquerable reluctance to submit, for our
Lord has not given it higher grace. During prayer,
this grief breaks forth into floods of tears, probably
from the great pain felt at seeing God offended and
at thinking how many souls, both heretics and heathens,
are lost eternally, and, keenest grief of all, Christians
also T The soul realises the greatness of God’s mercy
and knows that, however wicked men are, they may
still repent and be saved, yet it fears that many precipitate
themselves into hell.

10. Oh, infinite greatness of God ! A few years ago —
indeed, perhaps but a few days — this soul thought of
nothing but itself. Who has made it feel such tormenting
cares ? If we tried for many years to obtain such
sorrow by means of meditation, we could not succeed.

11. God help me 1 If for long days and years I con-
sidered how great a wrong it is that God should be
offended, and that lost souls are His children and my
brethren'; if I pondered over the dangers of this world,
and how blessed it would be to leave this wretched life,
would not that suffice ? No, daughters, the pain would
not be the same. For this, by the help of God, we can
obtain by such meditation ; but it does not seem to
penetrate the very depths of our being like the other,


Digitized by LjOOQle


no


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. II.


which appears to cut the soul in pieces and grind it to
powder, through no action — even sometimes with no
wish — of its own. What is this sorrow, then ? Whence
does it come ? I will tell you. Have you not heard
(I quoted the words to you just now, but did not apply
to them this meaning) • how the Bride says that God
“ brought her into the cellar of wine and set in order
charity in her.” * This is what happens here. The
soul has so entirely yielded itself into His hands and
is so subdued by love for Him, that it knows or cares
for nothing but that God should dispose of it according
to His will. I believe that He only bestows this grace
on those He takes entirely for His own. He desires that
without knowing how, the spirit should come forth
stamped with His seal, for indeed it does no more than
does the wax when impressed with the signet. It does
not mould itself, but need only be in a fit condition —
soft and pliable ; even then it does not soften itself,
but must merely remain still and submit to the impression.

12. How good Thou art, O God 1 All is done for us
by Thee, Who dost but ask us to give our wills to Thee,
that we may be plastic as wax in Thy hands. You see,
sisters, what God does to this soul, that it may know
it is His. He gives it something of His own — that

* Fifth Mansions, ch. i, 10.

* Cant. ii. 4 : " Introduxit me in cellam vinariam, ordinavit
in me charitatem.”


Digitized by


Google


chap, ii.] fifth mansions. hi

which His Son possessed when living on earth — He
could bestow no greater gift on us. Who could ever
have longed more eagerly to leave this life than did
Christ ? As He said at the Last Supper : “ With desire
have I desired ” this. 1 * O Lord ! does not that bitter
death Thou art to undergo present itself before Thine
eyes in all its pain and horror ? "No, for My ardent love
and My desire to save souls are immeasurably stronger
than the torments. This deeper sorrow I have suffered
and still suffer, while living here on earth, makes other
pain seem as nothing in comparison.”

13. I have often meditated on this, and I know that
the torture a friend of mine 11 has felt, and still feels, at
seeing our Lord sinned against is so unbearable that
she would far rather die than continue in such anguish.
Then I thought that if a soul whose charity is so weak
compared to that of Christ — indeed, in comparison with
His this charity might be said not to exist — experiences
this insufferable grief, what must have been the feelings
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and what must His life have
been ? for all things were present before His eyes and
He was the constant witness of the great offences com-
mitted against His Father. I believe, without doubt,

M St. Luke xxii. 15 : " Desiderio desideravi hoc pascha man-
ducare vobiscum antequam patiar."

“ This friend is, of course, St. Teresa herself. See Life,
ch. xiii. 14 ; ch. xxxii. 9. Way of Perf. ch. i. 3. Castle, M. vii.
ch. i. 5, 6. Excl. x. 9.


Digitized by LjOOQle


1 12 THE INTERIOR CASTLE. [CHAP. II.

that this pained Him far more than His most sacred
Passion. There, at least. He found the end of all His
trials, while His agony was allayed by the consolation of
gaining our salvation through His death, and of proving
how He loved His Father by suffering for Him. Thus,
people who, urged by fervent love, perform great penances
hardly feel them, but want to do still more, and count
even that as little. What, then, must His Majesty have
felt at thus publicly manifesting His perfect obedience
to His Father and His love for His brethren ? What
joy to suffer in doing God’s will ! Yet, I think, the con-
stant sight of the many sins committed against God,
and of the numberless souls on their way to hell, must
have caused Him such anguish, that had He not been
more than man, one day of such torment would have
destroyed not only His life, but many more lives, had
they been His.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. III.]


FIFTH MANSIONS.


113


CHAPTER III

This chapter continues the same subject and speaks of
another kind of union which the soul can obtain,
with the help of God. The importance of love of
our neighbour in this matter. This is very useful
to read.


1 . Zeal for souls left bg divine union. 2 . The soul mag fall from Much a stale.
3 . How divine union mag always be attained to. 4. Union with the will
of God the basis of all supernatural union. 5 . Advantage of union gatned
bg self-mortification. 6 . Defects which hinder this union. 7 . Divine
union obtained bg perfect love of God and our neighbour. 8 . Love for
God and our neighbour are proportionate. 9 . Real and imaginarg virtues •
10 . Illustonarg good resolutions. • 11 . Works , not feelings , procure union .
12 . Fraternal charity mill certainly gain this union.

1. Let us now return to our little dove and see what
graces God gives it in this state. This implies that
the soul endeavours to advance in the service of our
Lord and in self-knowledge. If it receives the grace
of union and then does no more, thinking itself safe,
and so leads a careless life, wandering off the road to
heaven (that is, the keeping of the commandments),
it will share the fate of the butterfly that comes from
the silkworm, which lays some eggs that produce more
of its kind, and then dies for ever. I say it leaves some
eggs, for I believe God will not allow so great a favour
to be lost, but that if the recipient does not profit
by it, others will. For, whilst it keeps to the right
path, this soul, with its ardent desires and great virtues,
helps others and kindles their fervour with its own.

8


Digitized by LjOOQle


1 14 THE INTERIOR CASTLE. [CHAP. III.

Yet, even after having lost them, it may still long to
benefit others and delight to make known the mercies
shown by God to those who love and serve Him. 1

2. I knew a person to whom this happened. Although
greatly erring, she longed that others should profit by
the favours God had bestowed on her, and taught the
way of prayer to people ignorant of it, thus helping
them immensely.' God afterwards bestowed fresh
light upon her ; indeed the prayer of union had not
hitherto produced the above effects in her. How many
people there must be to whom our Lord communicates
Himself who, like Judas, are called to the Apostleship,
and made kings by Him, as was Saul, yet who afterwards
lose everything by their own fault ! We should learn
from this, sisters, that if we would merit fresh favours
and avoid losing those we already possess, our only
safety lies in obedience and in following the law of God.
This I say both to those who have received these graces
and to those who have not.

3. In spite of all I have written, there still seems
some difficulty in understanding this mansion. The
advantage of entering is so great, that it is well that
none should despair of doing so because God does not
give them the supernatural gifts described above. With
the help of divine grace true union can always be attained,

1 Life, ch. vii. 18. Way of Perf. ch. xli. 8;

* Life, ch. vii. 21.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. III.] FIFTH MANSIONS. 115

by forcing ourselves to renounce our own will and by
following the will of God in all things.'

4. Oh, how many of us affirm that we do this, and
believe we seek nothing else — indeed we would die for
the truth of what we say ! If this be the case, I can
only declare, as I fancy I did before, and shall again
and again, that we have already obtained this grace
from God. There is, then, no need to wish for that
other delightful union described above, for its chief
value lies in the resignation of our will to that of God,
without which it could not be reached. 4 Oh, how
desirable is this union ! The happy soul which has
attained it will live in this world and in the next with-
out care of any sort. No earthly events can trouble it,
unless it should see itself in danger of losing God or
should witness any offence offered Him. Neither sick-
ness, poverty, nor the loss of any one by death affect
it, except it be that of persons useful to the Church of
God, for the soul realises thoroughly that God’s disposal
is wiser than its own desires.

5. You must know that there are different kinds of
sorrow : there are both griefs and joys rising from an

* Found, ch. v. 10. " These shall not attain to the true liberty

of a pure heart, nor to the grace of a delightful familiarity with
Me, unless they first resign themselves and offer themselves a
daily sacrifice to Me : for without this, divine union neither is
nor will be obtained ” ( Imitation , bk. iii. ch. xxxvii. 4 ).

4 Philippus a SS. Trinitate, l.c., p. iii. tr. i. disc. ii. art. 4 .


Digitized by LjOOQle


Il6 THE INTERIOR CASTLE. [CHAP. III.

impulse of nature or from a charity which makes us pity
our neighbour, like that felt by our Saviour when He
raised Lazarus from the dead.* These feelings do not
destroy union with the will of God, nor do they disturb
the soul by a restless, turbulent, and lasting passion. They
soon pass away, for, as I said of sweetness in prayer,*
they do not affect the depths of the soul, but only its
senses and faculties. They are found in the former
mansions, but do not enter the last of all. Is it neces-
sary, in order to attain to this kind of divine union,
for the powers of the soul to be suspended ? No ; God
has many ways of enriching the soul and bringing it
to these mansions besides what might be called a
“ short cut.” But, be sure of this, my daughters, in
any case the silkworm must die, and it will cost you
more in this way. In the former manner this death
is facilitated by finding ourselves introduced into a new
life ; here, on the contrary, we must give ourselves
the death-blow. I own that the work will be much
harder, but then it will be of higher value, so that
your reward will be greater if you come forth victorious ; ’
yet there is no doubt it is possible for you to attain this
true union with the will of God.

6. This is the union I have longed for all my life and

* St. John xi. 35, 36 : " Et lacrymatus est Jesus. Dixerunt
ergo Judaei : Ecce quomodo amabat eum.”

• Fourth Mansions, ch. i. 5. Fifth Mansions, ch. i. 7.

7 Way of Perf. ch. xvii. 2.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. III.] FIFTH MANSIONS. II7

that I beg our Lord to grant me ; it is the most certain
and the safest. But alas, how few of us ever obtain
it ! Those who are careful not to offend God, and who
enter the religious state, think there is nothing more to
do. How many maggots remain in hiding until, like
the worm which gnawed at Jonas’s ivy,' they have
destroyed our virtues. These pests are such evils as
self-love, self-esteem, rash judgment of others even in
small matters, and a want of charity in not loving our
neighbour quite as much as ourselves. Although,
perforce, we satisfy our obligations sufficiently to avoid
sin, yet we fall far short of what must be done in order
to obtain perfect union with the will of God.

7. What do you think, daughters, is His will ? That
we may become quite perfect and so be made one with
Him and with His Father, as He prayed we might be.'
Observe, then, what is wanting in us to obtain this.
I assure you it is most painful for me to write on this
subject, for I see how far I am, through my own fault,
from having attained perfection. There is no need

• Jonas iv. 6, 7 : " And the Lord God prepared an ivy,
and it came np over the head of Jonas, to be a shadow over
his head, and to cover him, for he was fatigued : and Jonas was
exceeding glad of the ivy. But God prepared a worm, when
the morning arose on the following day : and it struck the ivy
and it withered.”

* St. John xvii. 22, 23 : " Ut sint unum, sicut et nos nnnm
sumus. Ego in eis, et tu in me s ut sint consummati in unum.”
Way of Perf. ch. xxxii. 6.


Digitized by LjOOQle


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


Il8


[CHAP. III.


for us to receive special consolations from God in order
to arrive at conformity with His will ; He has done
enough in giving us His Son to teach the way. This
does not mean that we must so submit to the will of
God as not to sorrow at such troubles as the death of
a father or brother, or that we must bear crosses and
sickness with joy. 1 * This is well, but it sometimes comes
from common sense which, as we cannot help ourselves,
makes a virtue of necessity. How often the great
wisdom of the heathen philosophers led them to act
thus in trials of this kind ! O^ir Lord asks but two things
of us : love for Him and for our neighbour : these are
what we must strive to obtain. If we practise both these
virtues perfectly we shall be doing His will and so shall
be united to Him. But, as I said, we are very far from
obeying and serving our great Master perfectly in these
two matters : may His Majesty give us the grace to merit
union with Him ; it is in our power to gain it if we will.

8. I think the most certain sign that we keep these
two commandments is that we have a genuine love
for others. We cannot know whether we love God,
although there may be strong reasons for thinking so,
but there can be no doubt about whether we love our
neighbour or no. 11 Be sure that in proportion as you


10 Way of Perf. ch. ix. i, 2.

11 1 St. John iv. 20 : “ Qui enim non diligit fratrem suum
quem videt, Deum quem non videt quomodo potest diligere ? ”


Digitized by t^,ooQle


CHAP. III.] FIFTH MANSIONS. Iig

advance in fraternal charity, you are increasing in your
love of God, 1 ' for His Majesty bears so tender an affection
for us, that I cannot doubt He will repay our love for
others by augmenting, in a thousand different ways,
that which we bear for Him. We should watch most
carefully over ourselves in this matter, for if we are
perfect on this point we have done all. I believe
human nature is so evil that we could not feel a perfect
charity for our neighbour unless it were rooted in the
love of God.

9. In this most important matter, sisters, we should be
most vigilant in little things, and take no notice of the
great works we plan during prayer, which we imagine
that we would perform for other people, even, perhaps, for
the sake of saving a single soul. If our actions after-
wards belie these grand schemes, there is no reason to
imagine that we should do anything of the sort. I
say the same of humility and the other virtues. The
devil's wiles are many ; he would turn hell upside down
a thousand times to make us think ourselves better
than we are. He has good reason for it, for such
fancies are most injurious ; sham virtues springing
from this root are always accompanied by a vainglory
never found in those of divine origin, which are free
from pride.

10. It is amusing to see souls who, while they are

u Way of Perf. ch. xviii. 5.


Digitized by t^,ooQle


120


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. III.


at prayer, fancy they are willing to be despised and
publicly insulted for the love of God, yet afterwards do
all they can to hide their small defects ; if any one
unjustly accuses them of a fault, God deliver us from
their outcries ! Let those who cannot bear such things
take no notice of the splendid plans they made when
alone, which could have been no genuine determination
of the will, but only some trick of the imagination, or
the results would have been very different. The devil
assaults and deceives people in this way, often doing
great harm to women and others too ignorant to under-
stand the difference between the powers of the soul
and the imagination, and a thousand other matters of
the sort. O sisters ! how easy it is to know which of
you have attained to a sincere love for your neighbour,
and which of you are far from it. If you knew the
importance of this virtue, your only care would be to
gain it.

ii. When I see people very anxious to know what
sort of prayer they practise, covering their faces and
afraid to move or think, lest they should lose any slight
tenderness and devotion they feel, I know how little
they understand how to attain union with God, since
they think it consists in such things as these. No, sisters,
no ; our Lord expects works from us ! If you see a
sick sister whom you can relieve, 1 ’ never fear losing
u Way of Perf. ch. vii. 4.


Digitized by


Google


CHAP. III.]


FIFTH MANSIONS.


/

121

your devotion ; compassionate her ; if she is in pain,
feel for it as if it were your own, and, when there is need,
fast so that she may eat, not so much for her sake as
because you know your Lord asks it of you. This is
the true union of our will with the will of God. If some
one else is well spoken of, be more pleased than if it were
yourself ; this is easy enough, for if you were really humble
it would vex you to be praised. It is a great good to
rejoice at your sister’s virtues being known, and to
feel as sorry for the fault you see in her as if it were
yours, hiding it from the sight of others.

12. I have often spoken on this subject elsewhere , 14
because, my sisters, if we fail in this, I know that all
is lost : please God this may never be our case. If you
possess fraternal charity, I assure you that you will
certainly attain the union I have described. If you
are conscious that you are wanting in this charity,
although you may feel devotion and sweetness, and a
short absorption in the prayer of quiet (which makes
you think you have attained to union with God),
believe me, you have not yet reached it. Beg our Lord
to grant you perfect love for your neighbour, and leave
the rest to Him. He will give you more than you know
how to desire if you constrain yourselves and strive with
all your power to gain it, forcing your will as far as
possible to comply in all things with your sisters’ wishes,
14 Way ofiPerf. ch. iv. 3; vii. 4.


Digitized by LjOOQle


122


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. III.


although you may sometimes forfeit your own rights
by so doing. Forget your self-interests for theirs, how-
ever much nature may rebel ; when opportunity occurs
take some burden upon yourself to ease your neighbour
of it. Do not fancy that it will cost you nothing and
that you will find it all done for you : think what the
love He bore for us cost our Spouse, Who to free vis
from death Himself suffered the most painful death
of all — the death of the Cross.


CHAPTER IV.

Further explanation of the same subject ; explains this
prayer. The importance of being on one’s guard,
as the devil eagerly desires to turn souls back from
the right path.

1. The spiritual espousals. 2. The prayer of union resembles a betrothal
3. Before the spiritual nuptials temptations are dangerous. 4. The great
good done by souls faithful to these graces . 5. Religious subfect to the
deviVs deceptions. 6. Satan* s stratagems. 7. Why they are permitted.
8. Prayer and watchfulness our safeguards. 9. God's watchfulness over such
souls. 10. Progress in virtue. 11. Insignificance of our actions compared
with their reward. 12. St. Teresa* s motives for writing on prayer .

i. You appear anxious to know what has become of
the little dove and where she obtains rest, since
obviously she can find it neither in spiritual consolations
nor in earthly pleasures, but takes a higher flight. I
cannot tell you until we come to the last mansion : God
grant I may remember, or have leisure to write it. It
is nearly five months since I began this work, and, as
my head is too weak to read it again, no doubt it will


Digitized by


Google


FIFTH MANSIONS.


CHAP. IV.]


123


be very disconnected and full of repetitions : however,
as it is only for my sisters, that will matter little. Yet
I should like to express myself more fully about the
prayer of union, and will make use, to the best of my
scanty wits, of a comparison. Later on we will speak of
the little butterfly, which is never still, for it can find
no true repose, yet always fertile, doing good both to
itself and others. 1 You have often heard that God
spiritually espouses souls : may He be praised for His
mercy in thus humbling Himself so utterly. Though
but a homely comparison, yet I can find nothing better
to express my meaning than the Sacrament of Matri-
mony, although the two things are very different. In
divine union everything is spiritual and far removed
from anything corporal, all the joys our Lord gives and
the mutual delight felt in it being celestial and very
unlike human marriage, which it excels a thousand times.
Here all is love united to love ; its operations are more
pure, refined, and sweet than can be described, though
our Lord knows how to make the soul sensible of them.

2. I think this union does not attain as far as the
spiritual espousals, but resembles the preliminaries that
take place when two people are contemplating a betrothal.
Their suitability and willingness for the alliance are

1 Compare : “ habebit f rue turn in respectione animarum
sanctarum ” (Breviar. Rom. Ant. ad Laudes de Com. Virg.) ;
" quasi apis argumentosa Domino deservisti ” (Ibid. Feast of
St. Caecilia) .


Digitized by L^OOQle


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


124


[CHAP. IV.


first discussed ; then they may be allowed to see one
another sometimes, so as to come to a decision. Thus
it is in the spiritual espousals : when the pr elimin ary
agreement has been made, and the soul thoroughly under-
stands what great advantages she will gain, having re-
solved to fulfil the will of her Spouse in all things and to
do all she can to please Him, His Majesty Who knows
well whether this is so in reality, wishes in return to
gratify His bride. He therefore bestows this favour upon
her, visits her, and draws her into His presence, as He
wishes her to know Him better. We might compare
the prayer of union to a visit, for it lasts but a
very little while.' There is no longer any question of
deliberation, but the soul in a secret manner sees to
what a Bridegroom it is betrothed ; the senses and
faculties could not, in a thousand years, gain the know-
ledge thus imparted in a very short time. The Spouse,
being Who He is, leaves the soul far more deserving
of completing the espousals, as we may call them ; the
enamoured soul in its love for Him makes every effort
to prevent their being frustrated. Should it grow
neglectful, and set its affections on anything except
our Lord, it will forfeit everything : this loss is as great
as are the favours the soul has continually received,
which are precious beyond description.'

3. O Christian souls, you whom God has brought
* Life, ch. xviii. 16. * Way of Perf. ch. xxxi. 10.


Digitized by ^ooQle


CHAP. IV.]


FIFTH MANSIONS.


125


thus far, I implore you for His dear sake not to grow
careless, but to avoid all occasions of sin ; you are not
strong enough yet to undergo temptation, as you will
be after the espousals which take place in the next
mansion. Here the betrothed are, as they say, only
acquainted by sight,* and the devil will spare no pains
to oppose and prevent their nuptials. Afterwards,
when he sees the Bride is wholly given to her Bride-
groom, he is afraid to interfere, having learnt by experi-
ence that if he molest her, while he loses much, she will
gain greatly in merit.

4. I can assure you, my daughters,' that I have known
people far advanced in the spiritual life who had reached
this state of prayer, yet whom the devil reclaimed by
his subtlety and wiles : as I have often said, all hell
leagues together against such souls, because the loss of
one of them entails the perdition of many more, as
Satan is well aware. If we considered how many men
God draws to Himself by means of one, we should praise
Him fervently. Think of the multitudes converted by
the martyrs, or by one young maiden like St. Ursula !
Again, of how many victims the evil one was deprived
by St. Dominic, St. Francis, and other founders of
religious orders ! How many more he loses, even now,

* Phil, a SS. Trinit. l.c. p. iii. tract, i. disc. ii. art. 2 .

* Contrast with this paragraph what the Saint says in her
Life, ch. xix. $ 8.


Digitized by


Google


126


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[chap. IV.


through Father Ignatius [Loyola], who founded the
Company [of Jesus] ! As we read their lives, we learn
that they received such graces from God. How was
this great good done except by their efforts not to forfeit,
through any fault of theirs, these divine espousals ?
Oh, my daughters, how willing our Lord is to grant us
the same graces ! In fact, there is even more urgent
need now for persons to prepare for such favours, since
there are fewer who care for His honour. We love
ourselves too much and are too prudent to give up
any of our rights. What a deception ! May God in
His mercy give us light, lest we sink into such darkness !

5. You may question or be in doubt on two points.
First : “ If the soul is entirely united with the will of
God, as I have stated, how can it be deceived, since it
ever seeks to follow His pleasure ? Secondly, how can
the devil enter and work such havoc as to destroy your
soul while you are so utterly withdrawn from the world
and constantly frequent the Sacraments ? • At the
same time you enjoy the society of angels (as we might
call them) and by the mercy of God you desire nothing
but to serve and please Him in all things ? 7 It is not
surprising that people in the world should run such
risks.” I admit you have the right to say this, for God
has shown us signal mercy ; but, as I said above, knowing

• Life, ch. xxxvi. 26 ; ch. xxxix. 14. Found, ch. i. 1-4.

T Way of Perf. ch. i. 2 ; ch. xiii. 5. Found, ch. i. 3.


Digitized by


Google


CHAP. IV.] FIFTH MANSIONS. 127

as I do that Judas was amongst the Apostles, and that
he held constant intercourse with God Himself, to Whose
words he listened, I learn that the state of religion does
not make us safe.

6. To your first question I reply, that doubtless
if such a soul is always faithful to the will of God, it
cannot be lost ; the evil one, however, comes with his
keen subtlety, and, under the pretext of good, leads it
astray in some trivial matter and causes it to commit
small defects, which he leads it to believe are harmless.
Thus, little by little, the reason is obscured and the
will is weakened, while the devil fosters his victim’s
self-love, until, by degrees, he succeeds in withdrawing
it from union with the will of God and makes it follow
his own will.

7. The answer to your first inquiry will serve for the
second. No enclosure can be too strict for Satan to
enter, nor any desert too remote for him to visit . Besides,
God may permit him to tempt the soul to prove its
virtue ; for as He intends it to enlighten others, it is
better for it to fail in the beginning than when it might
do them great harm.

8. We must beg God constantly in our prayers to
uphold us by His hand ; we should keep ever in our
minds the truth that if He leaves us, most certainly we
shall fall at once into the abyss, for we must never be
so foolish as to trust in ourselves. After this I think


Digitized by ^ooQle


128


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. IV.


the greatest safeguard is to be very careful and to
watch how we advance in virtue ; we must notice
whether we are making progress or falling back in it,
especially as regards the love of our neighbour, the desire
to be thought the least of all, and how we perform our
ordinary, everyday duties. If we attend to this and
beg Our Lord to enlighten us, we shall at once perceive
our gain and loss.

9. Do not suppose that after advancing the soul to
such a state God abandons it so easily that it is light
work for the devil to regain it. When His Majesty sees
it leaving Him, He feels the loss so keenly that He
gives it in many a way a thousand secret warnings
which reveal to it the hidden danger.*

10. In conclusion, let us strive to make constant
progress : we ought to feel great alarm if we do not
find ourselves advancing, for without doubt the evil
one must be planning to injure us in some way ; it is
impossible for a soul that has come to this state not to
go still farther, for love is never idle. Therefore it is
a very bad sign when one comes to a stand-still in virtue.
She who aspires to become the spouse of God Himself, and
has treated with His Majesty and come to such an under-
standing with Him, must not leave off and go to sleep.*

11. To show you, my daughters, how Christ treats
the souls He takes for His brides, I will now speak of

' Life, ch. xix. 9. • Life, ch. xix. 7.


Digitized by


Google


CHAP. IV.] FIFTH MAtfSIOMS. T ^9

the sixth mansions. You will then see how little, in
comparison, is all that we can do or suffer in His service
to prepare ourselves for the reception of such immense
favours. Perhaps our Lord decreed that I should write
this, in order that the knowledge of the great reward
to come, and of His infinite mercy in seeking to give
and to manifest Himself to such worms as we are, might
make us forget our wretched, petty, earthly pleasures,
and run on our way with eyes fixed on His grandeur,
inflamed with love for Him.

12. May He enable me to explain some of these
difficult matters ; if our Lord and the Holy Ghost do
not guide my pen, I know the task will prove impossible.
I beg Him to prevent my saying anything unless it will
profit you. His Majesty knows that, as far as I can
judge, I have no other wish but that His Name may
be glorified, and that we may strive to serve a Lord Who
thus recompenses our efforts even in this world. What,
then, will be our joy in heaven, where it will be continuous,
without the interruptions, labours, and dangers of this
tempestuous sea of life ? Were it not for the fear of
losing or offending Him, we should wish to live until
the end of the world, 1 ' that we might work for so great a
God — our Lord and our Spouse. May His Majesty enable
us to render Him some service free from the many
faults we always commit, even in good works I Amen.

“ Rel. ix. 19.

9


Digitized by t^ooQle


THE SIXTH MANSIONS.

CHAPTER I.

This chapter shows how, when God bestows greater
favours on the soul, it suffers more severe afflictions.
Some of the latter are described, and directions how
to bear them given to the dwellers in this mansion.
This chapter is useful for those suffering interior
trials.

1. Love kindled by divine favours, 2. Our Lord 'excites the souVs longings,
3. Courage needed to reach the last mansions . 4. Trials accompanying
divine favours, 5. Outcry raised against souls striving for perfection,
6. St. Teresa's personal experience of this. 7. Praise distasteful to an
enlightened souL 8. This changes to indifference. 9. Humility of such
souls. 10. Their zeal for Gods glory . 11. Perfect and final indiffer-

ence to praise or blame. 12. Love of enemies. 13. Bodily sufferings.
14. St. Teresa's physical ills. 15. A timorous confessor. 16. Anxiety on
account of past sins. 17. Fears and aridity. 18. Scruples and fears
raised by the devil. 19. Bewilderment of the souL 20. God alone relieves
these troubles. 21. Human weakness. 22. Earthly consolations are of no
avail. 23. Prayer gives no comfort at such a time. 24. Remedies for these
interior trials. 25. Trials caused by the devil. 26. And other afflictions.
27. Preparatory to entering the seventh mansions.


i. By the aid of the Holy Ghost, I am now about to
treat of the sixth mansions, where the soul, wounded
with love for its Spouse, sighs more than ever for soli-
tude, withdrawing, as far as the duties of its state permit,
from all that can interrupt it. The sight it has enjoyed
of Him is so deeply imprinted on the spirit that its

130


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. I.] SIXTH MANSIONS. 131

only desire is to behold Him again. I have already
said that, 1 even by the imagination, nothing is seen in
this prayer that can be called sight. I speak of it as
" sight " because of the comparison I used.

2. The soul is now determined to take no other Bride-
groom than our Lord, but He disregards its desires for
its speedy espousals, wishing that these longings should
become still more vehement and that this good, which
far excels all other benefits, should be purchased at
some cost to itself. And although, for so great a gain,
all that we must endure is but a poor price to pay, I
assure you, daughters, that this pledge of what is in
store for us is needed to inspire us with courage to
bear our crosses.

3. O my God, how many troubles both interior and
exterior must one suffer before entering the seventh
mansions 1 Sometimes, while pondering over this I fear
that, were they known beforehand, human infirmity
could scarcely bear the thought, nor resolve to encounter
them, however great might appear the gain. If, how-
ever, the soul has already reached the seventh mansions,
it fears nothing : boldly undertaking to suffer all things
for God, • it gathers strength from its almost uninter-
rupted union with Him.

4. I think it would be well to tell you of some of the

1 Castle, M. v. ch. i. 9. Life, ch. xxviiL 5.

* Life, ch. xl. 28 sqq.


Digitized by LjOOQle


132


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. I.


trials certain to occur in this state. Possibly all souls
may not be led in this way, but I think that those who
sometimes enjoy such truly heavenly favours cannot
be altogether free from some sort of earthly troubles.
Therefore, although at first I did not intend to speak
on this subject, yet afterwards I thought that it might
greatly comfort a soul in this condition if it knew what
usually happens to those on whom God bestows graces
of this kind, for at the time they really appear to have
lost everything.

5. I shall not enumerate these trials in their proper
order, but describe them as they come to my memory,
beginning with the least severe. This is an outcry
raised against such a person by those amongst whom
she lives, and even from others she has nothing
to do with, but who fancy that at some time in her
life they recollect having seen her. They say she wants
to pass for a saint, that she goes to extremes in piety
to deceive the world and to depreciate people who are
better Christians than herself without making such a
parade of it. But notice that she does nothing except
endeavour to carry out the duties of her state more
perfectly. Persons she thought were her friends desert
her, making the most bitter remarks of all. They
take it much to heart that her soul is ruined— she is
manifestly deluded — it is all the devil’s work — she will
share the fate of so-and-so, who was lost through him.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. I.]


SIXTH MANSIONS.


133


and she is leading virtue astray. They cry out that
she is deceiving her confessors, and tell them so, citing
examples of others who came to ruin in the same way,
and make a thousand scoffing remarks of the same sort.*

6. I know some one who feared she would be unable
to find any priest who would hear her confession, to such
a pass did things come ; but, as it is a long story, I
will not stop to tell it now. The worst of it is, these
troubles do not blow over, but last all her life, for one
person warns the other to have nothing to do with
people of her kind ! You will say that, on the other
hand, some speak in her favour. O my daughters,
how few think well of her in comparison with the many
who hate her!

7. Besides this, praise pains such a soul more than
blame, because it recognises clearly that any good it
possesses is the gift of God and in no wise its own, seeing
that but a short time ago it was weak in virtue and
involved in grave sins. 4 Therefore commendation causes
it intolerable suffering, at least at first, although later
on, for many reasons, the soul is comparatively indifferent
to either.

8. The first is that experience has shown the mind

• The Saint went through all this herself ; every detail is
taken from her own experience. See Lift, ch. xxv. 20 ; ch.
xxviii. 20-24 ; ch. xxx. 6 ; ch. xxxiii. 2. Anton, a Sp. S. l.o.
tract, ii. n. 268.

* Lift, ch. xxviii. 19.


Digitized by LjOOQle


134


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. I.


that men are as ready to speak well as ill of others, so
it attaches no more importance to the one than to the
other. Secondly, our Lord having granted it greater
light, it perceives that no good thing in it is its own,
but is His gift, and becomes oblivious of self, praising
God for His graces as if they were found in a third
person.

9. The third reason is that, realising the benefit
reaped by others from witnessing graces given it by God,
such a one thinks that it is for their profit He causes
them to discover in her virtues that do not exist.

10. Fourthly, souls seeking God’s honour and glory
more than their own are cured of the temptation (which
usually besets beginners) of thinking that human praise
will cause them the injury they have seen it do to others.
Nor do these souls care much for men’s contempt, if
only, by their means, any one should praise God, at
least for once — come what may afterwards.

11. These and other reasons to a certain extent allay
the great distress formerly given by human praise,
which, however, still causes some discomfort, unless
the soul has become utterly regardless of men’s tongues;
It is infinitely more grieved at being undeservedly
esteemed by the world than by any calumny; and
when at last it becomes almost indifferent to praise, it
cares still less for censure, which even pleases it and
sounds like harmonious music to the ears.


Digitized by floosie


CHAP. I.]


SIXTH MANSIONS.


135


12. This is perfectly true ; the soul is rather strength-
ened than depressed by its trials, experience having
taught it the great advantages derived from them. It
does not think men offend God by persecuting it, but
that He permits them to do so for its greater gain.'
So strong is this belief, that such a person bears a special
affection for these people, holding them as truer friends
and greater benefactors than those who speak well of her.*

13. Our Lord now usually sends severe bodily infirmity.
This is a far heavier cross, especially if acute pain is
felt ; if this be violent, I think it is the hardest of earthly
trials. I speak of exterior trials, but corporal pains,
if of the worst kind, enter the interior of our being
also, affecting both spirit and body, so that the soul,
in its anguish, knows not what to do with itself, and
would far rather meet death at once by some quick
martyrdom than suffer thus. However, these paroxysms
do not last long, for God never sends us more than we
can bear, and always gives us patience first.

14. Now to speak of other trials and illnesses of many
kinds which generally occur to people in this state. I
knew some one who, from the time when, forty years
ago,’ our Lord began to bestow on her the favour

9 Rel. ii. 4.

• Anton, a Sp. S. lx. ii. n. 272. Way of Perf. ch. xv. 1 ;
ch. xvii. 4. Found, ch. xxvii. 19, 20. Life , ch. xix. 12 ; ch. xxxi.
13 - 17 . 25.

1 “ Forty years ago." The Saint seems to refer to her first


Digitized by


Google


136 THE INTERIOR CASTLE. [CHAP. I.

described, could not affiim, with any truth, that she
had been a single day without pain and other kinds
of suffering : I am speaking of physical infirmities
besides heavy crosses sent her.* True, she had led a
wicked life, and therefore held these troubles very
light in comparison with the hell she had deserved.* Our
Lord leads those who have offended Him less by some
other way, but I should always choose the way of
suffering, were it only for the sake of imitating our
Lord Jesus Christ ; though, in fact, it profits us in many
other manners. Yet, oh ! the rest would seem trifling
in comparison, could I relate the interior torments
met with here, but they are impossible to describe !

15. Let us first speak of the trial of meeting with
so timorous and inexperienced a confessor that nothing
seems safe to him ; he dreads and suspects everything
but the commonplace, especially in a soul wherein he
detects any imperfection, for he thinks people on whom
God bestows such favours must be angels, which is
impossible while we live in our bodies." He at once
ascribes everything to the devil or melancholy. As tp
the latter, I am not surprised ; there is so much of it
in the world, and the evil one works such harm in this

experience in the mystical life, which took place during her
illness in the winter of 1537-38. See Life, ch. iv. 9.

* Life, ch. iv. 6 ; ch. v. vi. ; vii. 18 ; xi. 23 ; xxx. 9.

• Life, ch. iii. 6, 7.

» # Life, ch. xiii. 21-27. Way of Perf. ch. v. 1, 2.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. I.]


SIXTH MANSIONS.


137


way that confessors have the strongest reason for
anxiety and watchfulness about it.

16. The poor soul, however, beset by the same fears,
seeks its confessor as judge, and feels a torture and
dismay at his condemnation that can only be realised
by those who have experienced it themselves. 11 For
one of the severe trials of these souls, especially if they
have lived wicked lives, is their belief that God permits
them to be deceived in punishment for their sins. While
actually receiving these graces they feel secure, and can-
not but suppose that these favours proceed from the Spirit
of God ; still, as this state lasts a very short time, while
the remembrance of their misdeeds is ever before them,
when, as is sure to happen, they discover any faults
in themselves, these torturing thoughts return. 1 *

17. The soul is quieted for a time when the confessor
reassures it, although it returns later on to its former
apprehensions, but when he augments its fears they
become almost unbearable. Especially is this the case
when such spiritual dryness ensues that the mind
feels as if it never had thought of God, nor ever will
be able to do so. When men speak of Him, they seem
to be talking of some person heard of long ago.

18. All this is nothing, without the further pain of
thinking we cannot make our confessors understand

u Life, ch. xxx. 15.

“ Life, ch. xxxviii, 21. Rel. ii. 15.


Digitized by


Google


138 THE INTERIOR CASTLE. [CHAP. I.

the case and are deceiving them." Although such a
person may examine her conscience with the greatest
care, and may know that she reveals even the first
movement of her mind to her director, it does not help
her. Her understanding being too obscured to discern
the truth, she believes all that the imagination, which
has now the upper hand, puts before her mind, besides
crediting the falsehoods suggested to her by the devil,
whom doubtless our Lord gives leave to tempt her.
The evil spirit even tries to make her think God has
rejected her. Many are the trials which assault this
soul, causing an internal anguish so painful and so
intolerable that I can compare it to nothing save that
suffered by the lost in hell, for no comfort can be found
in this tempest of trouble. 1 '

19. If the soul seeks for consolation from its confessor,
all the demons appear to help him to torment it more.
A confessor who dealt with a person suffering in this
manner thought that the state must be very dangerous,
as so many things were troubling her ; therefore, after
she had recovered from her trials, he bade her tell him
whenever they recurred : however, he found this made

** Life, ch. xxviii. 20 sgq.

M Antonius a Sp. S. l.c. tr. ii. n. 313. On this subject, which
is commonly called the passive purgation of the intellect, it
would be advisable to consult some good author such as Philippus
a SS. Trinitate, l.c. part. i. tr. iii. disc, iii.-v., especially disc,
iv. art. 5, 6.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. I.] SIXTH MANSIONS. I39

matters worse than ever. She lost all control over
herself : although she had leamt to read, yet she could
no more understand a book in the vulgar tongue than
if she had not known the alphabet, for her mind was
incapable of acting. 1 '

20. In short, there is no other remedy in such a tempest
except to wait for the mercy of God, Who unexpectedly,
by some casual word or unforeseen circumstance, sud-
denly dispels all these sorrows ; then every cloud of
trouble disappears and the mind is left full of light and
far happier than before." It praises our Lord God
like one who has come out victorious from a dangerous
battle, for it was He Who won the victory. The soul
is fully conscious that the conquest was not its own,
as all weapons of self-defence appeared to be in the
enemies' hands. Thus it realises its weakness, and how
little man can help himself if God forsake him.

21. This truth now needs no demonstration, for past
experience has taught the soul its utter incapacity ;
it realises the nothingness of human nature and what
miserable creatures we are. Although in a state of
grace from which it has not fallen — for, in spite of these
torments, it has not offended God, nor would it do so
for any earthly thing 17 — yet so hidden is this grace,

11 Life, ch. xxv. 21. l * Life, ch. xxv. 23.

17 Life, ch. xxiv. 3. Way of Perf. ch. xli. 5. Castle, M. vii.
ch. iv. 1.


Digitized by LjOOQle


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


140


[CHAP. I.


that the sufferer believes that neither now, nor in the
past, has she ever possessed the faintest spark of love
for God. 1 * If at any time she has done good, or if
His Majesty bestowed any favours on her, they seem
to have been but a dream or a fancy, while her sins
stand clearly before her.

22. O Jesus ! how sad it is to see a soul thus forsaken,
and how little, as I said, can any earthly comfort avail !
Do not imagine, sisters, if you are ever brought to such
a state, that rich and independent people have more
resources than yourselves in these troubles. No, no !
to offer such consolations would be like setting all the
joys of the world before people condemned to death :
far from mitigating, it would increase their torture. So
with the souls I spoke of: their comfort must come
from above — nothing earthly can help them. This
great God wishes us to acknowledge His sovereignty
and our own misery — an important point for those who
are to advance still farther.

23. What can the poor soul do if such a trial lasts
for many days ? Prayer makes no difference as far
as comforting the heart, which no consolation can
enter, nor can the mind even grasp the meaning of the
words of vocal prayer : mental prayer is out of the
question at such a time, since the faculties are unequal
to it. Solitude harms the soul, yet society or conver-

** Excl. xvi. 4.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. I.] SIXTH MANSIONS. I4I

sation is a fresh torment. Strive as the sufferer may
to hide it, she is so wearied and out of sorts with all
around that she cannot but manifest her condition. •

24. How can the soul possibly tell what ails it ?
its pains are indescribable ; it is wrung with nameless
anguish and spiritual suffering. The best remedy for
these crosses (I do not mean for gaining deliverance
from them, for I know of nothing that will do that, but
for enabling one to bear them) is to perform external
works of charity and to trust in the mercy of God, which
never fails those who hope in Him. 1 * May He be for
ever blessed ! Amen.

25. The devils also bring about exterior trials, which
are more unusual, therefore need not be mentioned.
They are far less painful, for whatever the demons may
do, I believe they never succeed in paralysing the faculties
or disturbing the soul in the former manner. In fact,
the reason is able to discern that the evil spirits can do
no more harm than God permits ; and while the mind
has not lost its powers, all sufferings are comparatively
small.

26. I shall treat of other internal afflictions met with
in this mansion, when describing the different kinds of
prayer and favours bestowed here by our Lord. Al-
though some of these latter pains are harder to endure,
as appears by their bodily effects, yet they do not deserve

“ Life, ch. xxxi. 27.


Digitized by ^ooQle


[chap. I.


142 THE INTERIOR CASTLE.

the name of crosses, nor have we the right to call them
so. Indeed, they are great graces from God, as the
soul recognises amidst its pangs, realising how far it is
from meriting such graces.

27. This severe torture felt by souls just at the
entrance of the seventh mansion is accompanied by
many other sufferings, some of which I will mention :
to speak of them all would be impossible, nor could I
portray them, because they come from another and
far higher source than the rest. If I have succeeded so
ill in writing of trials of a lower kind, much less could I
treat of the others. May God assist me in all things,
through the merits of His Son ! Amen.

CHAPTER II.

Treats of several ways whereby our Lord quickens the
soul ; there appears no cause for alarm in them,
although they are signal favours of a very exalted
nature.

1. Our Lord excite* the love of Hi* Spouse. 2. The wdund of love. 3. The
pain it cause*. 4. The call of the Bridegroom. 5. Effect on the *ouL
6. A spark of the fire of looe. 7. The spark die* out 8. This grace evi-
dently divine. 9. One such wound repays many trials. 10. First reason
of immunity from deception. 11. Second and third reasons. 12. The
imagination not concerned in it 13 .St. Teresa never alarmed at thts
prayer. 14. M The odour of Thine ointment." 15. No reason to fear
deception here.

1. It seems as if we had deserted the little dove for
a long time, but this is not the case, for these past trials
cause her to take a far higher flight. I will now describe


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. II.]


SIXTH MANSIONS.


143


the way in which the Spouse treats her before uniting
her entirely to Himself. He increases her longing for
Him by devices so delicate that the soul itself cannot
discern them ; nor do I think I could explain them,
except to those who have personal experience. These
desires are delicate and subtle impulses, springing from
the inmost depths of the soul ; I know of nothing to
which they can be compared.

2. These graces differ entirely from anything we
ourselves can gain, and even from the spiritual conso-
lation before described. 1 In the present case, even
when the mind is not recollected or even thinking of
God, although no sound is heard. His Majesty arouses
it suddenly, as if by a swiftly flashing comet, or by a
clap of thunder.* Yet the soul thus called by God
hears Him well enough — so well, indeed, that sometimes,
especially at first, it trembles and even cries out, although
it feels no pain. It is conscious of having received
a delicious wound, but cannot discover how, nor who
gave it, yet recognises it as a most precious grace, and
hopes the hurt will never heal.

3. The soul makes amorous complaints to its Bride-
groom, even uttering them aloud ; nor can it control
itself/ for it knows that, though He is present. He will

1 Mansion iv. ch. i. Life, ch. xxix. 10-15. Rel. viii. 15.

* The saint first wrote " relam pago,” flash of lightning, bnt
afterwards altered it to " trueno,” clap of thunder.


Digitized by


Google


[chap. II.


144 THE INTERIOR CASTLE.

not manifest Himself so that it may enjoy Him. This
causes a pain, keen although sweet and delicious, from
which the soul could not escape even if it wished ; this,
however, it never desires.’ This favour is more delightful
than the pleasing absorption of the faculties in the prayer
of quiet, which is unaccompanied by suffering. 4

4. I am at my wit’s end, sisters, as to how to make
you understand this operation of love ; I know not how
to do so. It seems contradictory to say that the Beloved
clearly shows He dwells in the soul and calls by
so unmistakable a sign, and a summons so penetrating,
that the spirit cannot choose but hear it, while yet He
appears to reside in the seventh mansion. He speaks
in this manner, which is not a set form of speech, and
the inhabitants of the other mansions, the senses, the
imagination and the faculties, dare not stir.*

5. O Almighty God ! how profound are Thy secrets,
and how different are spiritual matters from anything
that can be seen or heard in this world ! I can find
nothing to which to liken these graces, insignificant as
they are compared with many others Thou dost bestow
on souls. This favour acts so strongly upon the spirit
that it is consumed by desires, yet knows not what to
ask, for it realises clearly that its God is with it. You

• Rel. viii. 16. St. John of the Cross, Spiritual Cant. st. i.
22 sqq.

* Life, ch. xxix. 18. * Life, ch. xv. 1,


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. IlJ


SIXTH MANSIONS.


145


may inquire, if it realises this so clearly, what more
does it desire, and why is it pained ? What greater good
can it seek ? I cannot tell : I know that this suffering
seems to pierce the very heart, and when He Who
wounded it draws out the dart He seems to draw the
heart out too, so deep is the love it feels.'

6. I have been thinking that God might be likened
to a burning furnace, 1 from which a small spark flies,
into the soul which feels the heat of this great fire,
which, however, is insufficient to consume it. The sensa-
tion is so delightful that the spirit lingers in the pain
produced by its contact. This seems to me the best
comparison I could find, for the pain is delicious and is
not really pain at all,, nor does it always continue in
the same degree ; sometimes it lasts for a long time, and
on other occasions passes quickly. This is as God chooses,
for no human means can obtain it ; and though felt
at times for a long while, yet it is intermittent.

7. In fact, it is never permanent and therefore does
not wholly inflame the spirit ; but when the soul is ready
to take fire, the little spark suddenly dies out, leaving
the heart longing to suffer anew its loving pangs. No
grounds exist for thinking this comes from any natural
cause, or from melancholy, or that it is an illusion of
the devil or the imagination. Undoubtedly this move-

• Life, ch. xxix. 17-18.

7 Life, ch. xv. 6 ; xviii. 4 ; xxi. 9.

10


Digitized by


Google


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


I46


[CHAP. II.


ment of the heart comes from God, Who is unchangeable ;
nor do its effects resemble those of other devotions, in
which the strong absorption of delight makes us doubt
their reality.

8. There is no suspension here of the senses or other
faculties : they wonder at what is happening, without
impeding it. Nor do I think that they can either increase
qr dispel this delightful pain. Any one who has received
this favour from our Lord will understand my meaning
on reading this ; let her thank Him fervently : there
is no need to fear deception, but far more fear of
not being sufficiently grateful for so signal a grace.
Let her endeavour . to serve Him and to amend her life
in every respect, and she will see what will follow, and
how she will obtain still higher and higher gifts.

9. A person on whom this grace was bestowed passed
several years without receiving any other favour, was yet
perfectly satisfied, for even had she served God for
very many years in the midst of severe trials, she would
have felt abundantly repaid. May He be for ever
blessed. Amen !

10. Perhaps you wonder why we may feel more secure
against deception concerning this favour than in other
cases. I think it is for these reasons. Firstly, because
the devil cannot give such delicious pain : he may
cause pleasure or delight which appears spiritual, but
is unable to add suffering, especially suffering of so keen


Digitized by l^OOQle


CHAP. II.]


SIXTH MANSIONS.


147


a sort, united to peace and joy of soul. His power is
limited to what is external ; suffering produced by him
is never accompanied with peace, but with anxieties
and struggles.

11. Secondly, because this welcome storm comes from
no region over which Satan has control. Thirdly,
because of the great benefits left in the soul, which, as
a rule, is resolute to suffer for God, and longs to bear
many crosses. It is also far more determined than
before to withdraw from worldly pleasures and inter-
course and other things of the same sort.

12. It is very clear that this is no fiction : the imagina-
tion may counterfeit some favours, but not this, which
is too manifest to leave room for doubt. Should any
one still remain uncertain, let her know that hers were
not genuine impulses,* that is, if she is dubious as to
whether or no she experienced them, for they are as
certainly perceived by the soul as is a loud voice by
the ears. It is impossible for these experiences to
proceed from melancholy, whose whims arise and exist
only in the imagination, whereas this emotion comes
from the interior of the soul.

13. I may be mistaken, but I shall not change my
opinion until I hear reasons to the contrary from those
who understand these matters. I know some one who
has always greatly dreaded such deceptions, yet could

• Life, ch. xv. 15, 16.


Digitized by LjOOQle


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


148


[CHAP. II.


never bring herself to feel any alarm about this state of
prayer.’

14. Our Lord also uses other means of rousing the
soul ; for instance — when reciting vocal prayer, without
seeking to penetrate the sense, a person may be seized
with a delightful fervour, 1 ' as if suddenly encompassed
with a fragrance powerful enough to diffuse itself
through all the senses. I do not assert that there really
is any perfume, but use this comparison because it
somewhat resembles the manner by which the Spouse
makes His presence understood, moving the soul to a
delicious desire of enjoying Him, and thus disposing it
to heroic acts, and causing it to render Him fervent
praise.

15. This favour springs from the same source as the
former, but causes no suffering here, nor are the soul’s
longings to enjoy God painful : this is what is more
usually experienced by the soul. For the reasons
already given, there appears no cause here for fear, but
rather for receiving it with thanksgiving.

• Life, ch. xxix. 6 -io.

M Life, ch. xv. 12. On the matter treated by St. Teresa
in this chapter, compare St. John of the Cross, Spiritual Can-
ticle, stanza i. (circa finem), stanza ix. ; The Living Flame of
Love, stanza ii.


Digitized by i^ooQle


CHAP. III.]


SIXTH MANSIONS.


149


INTRODUCTORY NOTE TO CHAPTER III.

BY THE EDITOR.

The readers, especially those not well acquainted with
Scholastic philosophy, will, perhaps, be glad to find
here a short explanation of the various kinds of Vision
and Locution, Corporal, Imaginary, and Intellectual.
The senses of Taste, Touch, and Smell are not so often
affected by mystical phenomena, but what we are about
to say in respect of Sight and Hearing applies, mutatis
mutandis, to these also.

I. A Corporal Vision is when one sees a bodily
object. A Corporal Locution is when one hears words
uttered by a human tongue. In both cases the respective
senses are exercising their normal function, and the
phenomenon differs from ordinary seeing or hearing
merely by the fact that in the latter the object seen is
a real body, the words perceived come from a real
tongue, whereas in the Vision or Locution the object
is either only apparent or at any rate is not such as it
seems to be. Thus, when young Tobias set out on a
journey, his companion, Azarias, was not a real human
being, but an archangel in human form. Tobias did
really see and hear him, and felt the grip of his hand ;
Sarah and her parents, as well as Tobias’s parents,
saw and heard him too, but all the time the archangel


Digitized by t^ooQle


[CHAP, m.


150 THE INTERIOR CASTLE.

made himself visible and audible by means of an assumed
body, or perhaps of an apparent body. It would be
more correct to describe such a phenomenon as an
APPARITION than as a Vision, and in fact the appari-
tions of our Risen Lord to the holy women and the
Apostles belong to this category. For, though His was a
real body, it was glorified and therefore no longer subject
to the same laws which govern purely human things.
(St. Thomas, Sutntna theol. III., qu. 54, art. 1-3.)

St. Teresa tells us more than once that she never
beheld a Corporal Vision, nor heard a Corporal Locution.

II. An Imaginary Vision or Locution is one where
nothing is seen or heard by the senses of seeing or
hearing, but where the same impression is received
that would be produced upon the imagination by the
senses if some real object were perceived by them.
For, according to the Scholastics, the Imagination
stands half-way between the senses and the intellect,
receiving impressions from the former and transmitting
them to the latter. This is the reason why imaginary
Visons and Locutions are so dangerous that, according
to St. Teresa, St. John of the Cross, and other spiritual
writers, they should not only never be sought for, but
as much as possible shunned, and, under all circum-
stances, discountenanced. For the Imagination is
closely connected with the Memory, so that it is fre-
quently impossible to ascertain whether a Vision, etc..


Digitized by CjOOQle


CHAP. III.] SIXTH MANSIONS. 151

is not perhaps a semiconscious or unconscious repro-
duction of scenes witnessed. It is here also that
deception, wilful or unwilful, self-deception or deception
by a higher agency, is to be feared. Hence the general
rule that such Visions or Locutions should only be
trusted upon the strongest grounds. According to
St. Thomas Aquinas ( Summa theol. 2 a 2a, qu. 175,
art. 3 ad 4 m ), the visions of Isaias, St. John in the
Apocalypse, etc., were Imaginary.

As an example of Imaginary Visions we may mention
St. Stephen, who saw “ the heavens opened, and the
Son of Man standing on the right hand of God " ; or
St. Peter, who saw “ the heavens opened, and a certain
vessel descending, as it were of a great linen sheet, let
down by the four corners from heaven to the earth . . .
and there came a voice to him : Arise, Peter, kill and
eat” (Acts vii. 55 j x. n-13).

These Visions, Locutions, etc., are not hallucinations.
The latter are due to physical disorder which affects the
memory and causes it to represent impressions formerly
received by it, in a disorderly and often grotesque
manner. The Imaginary Vision takes place inde-
pendently of a morbid state, is caused by an extraneous
power, good or evil, and has for its object things of
which the memory neither has nor ever has had
cognisance.

III. An Intellectual Vision or Locution is one


Digitized by LjOOQle


152


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. III.


where nothing is seen or heard by the eyes and ears,
and where no sensation is received by the imagination.
But the impression which would be delivered by the
imagination to the intellect, had it come through the
senses and been handed on to the imagination, is
directly imprinted upon the intellect. To understand
this it is necessary to bear in mind that the impressions
we receive through the. senses must undergo a trans-
formation — must be spiritualised — before they reach
the intellect. This is one of the most difficult problems
of psychology ; none of the solutions offered by various
schools of philosophy seem to render it entirely free
from obscurity. According to St. Thomas Aquinas,
the impression received by the eye (. Species sensibilis)
is spiritualised by a faculty called Intellectus agens by
means of abstraction (Specicsimpressa), and is treasured
up in the memory, like lantern slides, available at
demand. The mind, identifying itself with the Species
itnpressa, produces the " Word of the Mind ” ( Verbum
mentis), wherein consists the act of Understanding or
Mental Conception. In the Intellectual Vision or
Locution, God, without co-operation on the part of the
senses, the imagination, or the memory, produces directly
on the mind the Species impress 4. As this is super-
natural with regard to its origin, and often also with
respect to its object, it stands to reason that it is too
exalted for the memory to receive it, so that such Visions


Digitized by ^ooQle


CHAP. III.]


SIXTH MANSIONS.


153


and Locutions are frequently only imperfectly remem-
bered and sometimes altogether forgotten, as St. Teresa
tells us. On the other hand, they are far less dangerous
than Corporal or Imaginary Visions and Locutions,
because the senses and the imagination have nothing
to do with them, whilst evil spirits are unable to act
directly upon the mind, and self-deception is altogether
excluded for the reasons stated by St. Teresa.

An instance of such a vision is mentioned by St. Paul :
" I know a man in Christ above fourteen years ago
(whether in the body I know not, or out of the body
I know not : God knoweth), such an one rapt even
to the third heaven. And I know such a man
(whether in the body or out of the body, I know not :
God knoweth) : that he was caught up into paradise,
and heard secret words, which it is not granted to
man to utter” (2 Cor. xii. 2-4).


Digitized by LjOOQle


154


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. III.


CHAPTER III.

Treats of the same subject and of the way God is some-
times pleased to speak to the soul. How we should
behave in such a case, in which we must not follow
our own opinion. Gives signs to show how to
discover whether this favour is a deception or not :
this is very noteworthy.

1. Locutions . 2. Sometimes caused by melancholia, 3. Caution needed ai
first 4. Locutions frequently occur during prayer . 5. Resist those con-

taining false doctrine, 6. First sign of genuine locutions. 7. Effect of
the words : “ Be not troubled.** 8. “ It is I , be not afraid.** 9. 44 Be
at peace.** 10. Second sign. 11. Third sign. 12. The deoil suggests
doubts about true locutions. 13. Confidence of the soul rewarded. 14. Its
foy at seeing God*s words verified. 15. Its seal for God*s honour. 16. Locu-
tions coming from the fancy. 17. Imaginary answers given to prayer •
18. A confessor should be consulted about locutions. 19. Interior locutions.
20. First sign of genuine locutions. 21. Second sign. 22. Third sign.
23. Fourth sign. 24. Fifth sign. 25. Results of true locutions . 26.
They should remove alarm. 27. Answer to an objection.


i. God arouses the soul in another manner which,
though in some ways apparently a greater favour
than the above mentioned, yet may prove more
dangerous, therefore I will give some particulars about
it. He does this by means of words addressed to
the soul in many different ways ; sometimes they
appear to come from without, at other times from the
inner depths of the soul, or again, from its superior
part, while other speeches are so exterior as to be
heard by the ears like a real voice.

2. At times, indeed very often, this may be only a
fancy ; especially with persons of a lively imagination


Digitized by LjOOQle


SIXTH MANSIONS.


CHAP. III.]


155


or who are afflicted with melancholy to any marked
extent. I think that no attention should be paid to
either class of people when they say they see, hear, or
leam anything supernaturally. Do not disturb them
by saying that it comes from the devil,' but listen to
them as if they were sick persons. Let the prioress
or confessor to whom they tell their story bid them
think no more of it, as such matters are not essential
in the service of God : the devil has deceived many
Christians thus, although perhaps it is not so in their
case ; therefore they need not trouble themselves about
it. Thus we must accommodate ourselves to their
humour : if we tell them their fancies proceed from
melancholia, there will be no end to the matter, for they
will persist in maintaining they have seen and heard
these things, for so it seems to them.

3. The truth is, care should be taken to keep such
people from too much prayer, and to persuade them, as
far as possible, to take no notice of their fancies : the
devil makes use of these weak souls to injure others,
even if they themselves escape unhurt. There is need
for caution, both with feeble and strong souls at first,
until it is certain from what spirit these things proceed.
I maintain that, in the beginning, it is always wiser to
resist these communications ; if they come from God
this is the best way to receive more, for they increase

1 Life, ch. xxiii. 14.


Digitized by LjOOQle


156 THE INTERIOR CASTLE. [CHAP. III.

when discouraged. At the same time the soul should
not be too strictly controlled or disquieted, for it cannot
help itself in the matter.

4. To return to discuss the words addressed to the
soul : any kind I mentioned may come either from
God, the devil, or the imagination. By the help of
God, I will endeavour to describe the signs distinguishing
the one from the other, and when these locutions are
dangerous, for they occur to many persons who practise
prayer. I do not wish you to think, sisters, that there
is any harm either in believing or in disregarding them.
When they only console you, or warn you of your faults,
it matters not whence they come, or whether they are
only fancies.

5. I caution you on one point — although they may
come from God, you must not esteem yourself more
highly, for He often spoke to the Pharisees ’ — all the
good consists in profiting by His words. Take no more
notice of any speeches you hear which disagree with
the Holy Scriptures, than if you heard them from Satan
himself. Though they may only rise from your vivid
imagination, look upon them as a temptation against
the faith. Always resist them ; then they will leave you,
and cease, for they have little strength of their own. 1

* Antonius a Sp. S. l.c. tr. iii. n. 323. St. John of the Cross,
Ascent of Mount Carmel, bk. ii. ch. xxviu

* Life, ch. xxv. 13, 18.


Digitized by ^ooQle


SiXtH mansions.


CHAP. III.]


157


6. Now let us return to the first point — whether
these communications come from the inferior or the
superior part of the soul, or from without, does not
affect their originating from God. In my opinion
these are the most certain signs of their being
divine.

7. The first and truest is the power and authority
they carry with them, for these words are operative. 4

For example : a soul is suffering all the sorrow
and disquiet I have described : the mind is darkened
and dry ; but it is set at peace, freed from all trouble
and filled with light, merely by hearing the words,
" Be not troubled.” These deliver it from all its
pains, although it felt as though, if the whole world
and all its theologians had united in trying to per-
suade it there was no cause for grief, it could not, in
spite of all their efforts, have been delivered from its
affliction.*

8. Again, a person is troubled and greatly terrified
at being told by her confessor and other people that her
soul is under the influence of the evil one : she hears a
single sentence which says, " It is I, be not afraid,” *
and is at once freed from all fears and filled with


4 Ps. cxlviii. 5 : " Ipse dixit et facta sunt." Life, ch. xxv. 5.
Ant. a Sp. S. l.c. tr. iii. n. 353. St. John of the Cross, Ascent of
Mount Carmel, bk. ii. ch. xxxi, calls these " substantial words."

* Life, ch. xxvi. 6; ch. xxx. 17. Rel. i. 26.

* St. Luke xxiv. 36.


Digitized by t^.ooQle


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


158


[chap. III.


consolation ; indeed, she believes it would be impossible
for any one to disturb her confidence. 7

9. Again, when exceedingly anxious about a certain
important business, not knowing whether or not it will
be successful, on hearing words bidding her, “Be at
peace, all will go well,” she feels reassured and free
from all care in the matter. 8 Many other instances of
the same sort could be mentioned.

10. The second sign is a great calm and a devout
and peaceful recollection which dwell in the soul,
together with a desire to praise God. They say that
communications, at any rate in this mansion, are not
uttered directly by God, but are transmitted by an angel. 1
Then, O my God, if a word sent to us by Thee through
Thy messenger has such force, what effects wilt Thou
not leave in the soul united to Thee ia a mutual bond
of love ? 18


T Life , ch. xxv. 22 ; ch. xxxiii. 10^ Rel. vii. 22. St. John of
the Cross, Ascent of Mount Carmel , bk. ii. ch. xxxi. 1.

• Life , ch. xxxv. 7. Rel. ix. 6 . St. John of the Cross, Ascent
of Mount Carmel , bk. iii. ch. ii. 7.

• Rel. v. 14.

10 Life , ch. xxv. 23-25. See also Schram, lnstit. theol .
myst . 528 schol. ; 529 schol. ii. and iii. ; 531 schol. ii. ; 532
schol. ii. Exterior locutions may proceed direct from God,
but generally are due to the ministry of angels ; the same
holds good with regard to the imaginary ones. Intellectual
locutions, in which the words are merely impressed upon the
substance of the soul without intervention of the imagination,
can only proceed from God, Who alone is able to act upon


Digitized by t^.ooQle


CHAP. III.]


SIXTH MANSIONS.


159


11. The third proof is that these words do not pass
from the memory, but remain there for a very long time ;
sometimes they are never forgotten. This is not the
case with what men may utter, which, however grave
and learned they may be, is not thus impressed on our
memory. Neither, if they prophesy of things to come,
do we believe them as we do these divine locutions, which
leave us so convinced of their truth, that, although their
fulfilment sometimes seems utterly impossible, and we
vacillate and doubt about them, there still remains in
the soul a certainty of their verity which cannot be
destroyed. Perhaps everything may seem to militate
against what was heard, and years pass by, yet the -
spirit never loses its belief that God will make use of
means unknown to men for the purpose, and that,
finally, what was foretold must surely happen ; as
indeed it does. 1 *

12. Still, as I said, the soul is troubled at seeing many
obstacles in the way of the accomplishment of the
prophecy. The words, their effects, and the assurance
they carried with them, convinced the soul at the moment
that they came from God. Afterwards, however, doubts
arise as to whether the locutions came from the devil

the substance of the soul. See also Life, ch. xxvii. 7 (end),

8, 9, and 10, and the corresponding chapters in St. John's Ascent
of Mount Carmel.
u Life, ch. xxv. 3, 10. Rel. ii. 17.


Digitized by


Google


160 the interior castle. [chap. hi.

or from the imagination, although while hearing them
the person would have died to defend their truth. 11 But,
as I said, these misgivings must be suggested by the
evil one to afflict and intimidate her, especially if by
carrying out a command thus given great good will
result to souls, and some work be done conducing notably
to the honour and service of God, concerning which
great difficulties have to be overcome. In such cases,
where will Satan stop short ? At least, he weakens
faith, and it is a terrible evil to doubt that God has
power to work in a way far beyond our understanding.

13. Despite all these difficulties, and although the
confessors consulted on these matters say the words
were but fancies, while events take such an unfavourable
turn as to make the realisation of these predictions seem
impossible, there yet remains so lively a spark of certainty
in the mind (I know not whence it comes) that, although
all other hopes die out, it cannot, if it would, quench
this ardent spark of confidence. At last, as I said, our
Lord’s words are accomplished, at which the soul is so
satisfied and joyful that it can do nothing but praise
His Majesty — more because it sees His words prove true
than on account of the thing itself, even though it may
be of consequence to the person concerned.

14. I know not why the soul attaches such importance
to these communications being verified. I think that

M Life, ch. xxv. 10.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. III.] SIXTH MANSIONS. l6l

if the person herself were detected in telling falsehoods,
she would not be so grieved as at these locutions proving
untrue — as if she could do anything in the matter beyond
repeating what has been said to her ! A certain person
was frequently reminded, in such a case, of the Prophet
Jonas, when he found Nineveh was not to be destroyed. 1 *

15. In fact, as these words come from the Spirit of
God, it is right thus to trust them and to desire that He,
Who is supreme truth, should not be thought a deceiver.
Justly, therefore, does their hearer rejoice, when, after
a thousand delays and enormous difficulties, they are
accomplished. Although this success may entail great
suffering on herself, yet she prefers it to the nonfulfil-
ment of what she knows our Lord most certainly fore-
told. Possibly every one is not so weak as this, if
indeed it is a weakness, though I cannot myself condemn
it as an evil.

16. If these locutions proceed from the imagination, 14
they show no such signs, bringing neither conviction,
peace, nor interior joy with them. However, in some
cases I have come across, on account of a very
weak constitution or vivid imagination, or of other
causes I do not know, persons while absorbed in

“ Jonas iv. 1 : " Et afflictus est Jonas afflictione magna
et iratus est ; et oravit ad Dominum et dixit : Obsecro, Domine,
numquid non hoc est verbum meum cum adhuc essem in terra
mea ? '*

14 Life, ch. xxv. 4 (end) and 5 (beginning).

II


Digitized by LjOOQle


162


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. III.


the prayer of quiet and in spiritual slumber are so
entirely carried out of themselves by their deep state
of recollection as to be unconscious of anything external.
All their senses being thus dormant, as if asleep — as
indeed, at times, they really are — they thus, in a sort
of dream, fancy they are spoken to, or see things they
imagine come from God, but which leave no more effect
than dreams.

17. Again, one who very lovingly asks something of
our Lord may fancy that an answer comes from Him. 1 *
This often occurs, but I think that no one accustomed
to receive divine communications could be deceived on
this point by the imagination.

18. The devil’s deceptions are more dangerous ; but
if the foregoing signs are present, we may feel fairly
confident that these locutions are from God, though not
so certain but that, if they refer to some weighty matter
in which we are called upon to act, or if they concern
a third person, we should consult some confessor who
is both learned and a servant of God, before he attempt
or think of acting on them, although we may have
heard them repeated several times and are convinced
of their truth and divine origin. 1 * His Majesty wishes
us to take this course ; it is not disobedience to His

u Life, ch. xxv. 4 (beginning).

w Way of Perf. ch. xxxix. 6. Life, ch. xxvi. 4, 5. St. John of
the Cross, Ascent of Mount Carmel, bk. ii. ch. xxii. 14-18.


Digitized by LjOOQle


SIXTH MANSIONS.


CHAP. III.]


X63


commands, for He has bidden us hold our confessor as
His representative, even where there is no doubt that
the communications come from Him : thus we shall
gain courage, if the matter is a very difficult one.
Our Lord will reassure our confessor, whom, when
He so chooses. He will inspire with faith that these
locutions are from the Holy Ghost.” If not, we are
freed from all further obligations in the matter. I think
it would be very dangerous to act against our con-
fessor’s advice, and to prefer our own opinions in such
a matter. Therefore, sisters, I admonish you, in the
name of our Lord, never to do anything of the sort.

19. God speaks to the soul in another way, by a
certain intellectual vision, which I think undoubtedly
proceeds from Him, and will be described later on. 1 *
It takes place far within the innermost depths of
the soul, which appears to hear distinctly, in a most
mysterious manner, with its spiritual hearing, the words
spoken to it by our Lord Himself. The way in which
the spirit perceives these words, and the results pro-
duced by them, convince us that they cannot in any way
come from the devil. Their powerful after-effects force
us to admit this, and also clearly show they do not
spring from the . imagination. 1 * Careful consideration
will assure us of this for the following reasons : —

20. Firstly, the clearness of the language varies in the

17 Rel. vii. 15. 11 Infra, ch. viii. 11 Life, ch. xxvii. 8.


Digitized by LjOOQle


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


164


[CHAP. III.


different kinds of locutions. Those that are divine are
so distinct that the hearer remembers if there were a
syllable missing, and also what special words were made
use of, although a whole sentence may have been spoken.
If, however, the speech is only a freak of fancy, it would
not be so audible, nor the words be so distinct, but
would be only half articulated. 1 *

21. The second reason is, that often the person was
not thinking of what is heard ; sometimes it even comes
unexpectedly during conversation, although at times it
refers to some thought that passed quickly through
the mind, or to a subject it was before engaged upon.
Frequently, however, it concerns things of whose exist-
ence the hearer knew nothing, nor even imagined such
events could ever come to pass ; therefore it is impos-
sible for the imagination to have framed such speeches
and deceived the mind by fancies about what it had
never wished, nor sought for, nor even thought
about. 11

22. The third reason is, that in a genuine case the soul
seems to listen to the words, whereas when the imagina-
tion is at work, little by little it goes on composing
what the person wishes to hear.”

23. The fourth reason is, because divine locutions
differ immensely from others, a single word comprising


80 Life , ch. xxv. 6 and 10 (end).

11 Life , ch. xxv. 9, 16. “ Life , ch. xxv. 4, 6.


Digitized by t^.ooQle


SIXTH MANSIONS.


CHAP. III.]


165


a depth of meaning which our understanding could not
thus quickly condense into one phrase. M

24. Fifthly, because, in a manner I cannot explain,
these communications, without any further explana-
tions, frequently give us to understand far more than
is implied by the words themselves. I shall speak
farther on of this way of understanding hidden things,
which is very subtle, and a favour for which we should
thank God. Some people are exceedingly suspicious
about these and other communications of the same
kind. I speak particularly of some one " who experienced
them herself, though there may be others who cannot
understand them. I know that she has considered
the subject very carefully, God often having bestowed
this grace on her. Her principal difficulty was to discover
whether they were merely fancied. It is easier to know
when they come from the devil, although, being so wily,
he can with facility imitate the spirit of light. However,
he would do this in a form of words pronounced distinctly,
so that there would be no more doubt as to their reality
than if they came from the spirit of truth, while those
coming from the imagination leave us uncertain whether
we heard the words or not. But Satan could never


** Life, ch. xxv. 12 (beginning).

** The whole of this chapter as well as chapter xxv. of the
Life prove clearly that the Saint speaks about herself and that
she investigated^the subjecbwith the greatest care.


Digitized by LjOOQle


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


166


[CHAP. III.


counterfeit the effects I spoke of ; " he leaves neither
peace nor light in the soul, only anxiety and confusion.
In any case, he can do little or no harm to one who is
humble and who, as I advised, does not act on what is
heard.

25. If the soul receives favours and caresses from
our Lord, let it examine carefully whether it rates itself
more highly in consequence ; unless self-abasement in-
creases with God's expressions of love, they do not come
from the Holy Spirit. Inevitably, when they are divine,
the greater the favours, the less the soul esteems itself,
and the more keenly it remembers its sins." It becomes
more oblivious of self-interest : the will and memory
grow more fervent in seeking solely God’s honour with
no thought of self. It also becomes more careful not
to deviate deliberately from the will of God, and feels
a keener conviction that, instead of meriting such favours,
it deserves hell.

26. When these results follow, no graces or gifts
received during prayer need alarm the soul which
should rather trust in the mercy of God, Who is faithful
and will not allow the devil to deceive it ; however,
it is always well to be on one’s guard.

** Life, ch. xxv. 15.

" Life, ch. xii. 5, " the nearer we draw unto God the more
this virtue (humility) should grow ” ; ch. xv. 16 ; ch. xix. 2 ;
ch. xx. 38. Rel. ii. 15; vii. 17; viii. 7, 9. Way of Perf.
ch. xvii. 3.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. III.]


SIXTH MANSIONS.


167


27. Those our Lord does not lead by this path may
suppose that the soul can avoid listening to these locu-
tions, and that even if they are interior it is at least
possible to distract the attention from them so as not to
hear them and thus escape danger. This cannot be
done : I am not speaking of those that are freaks of the
fancy, which may be prevented by ceasing to desire
certain things, or by paying no attention to its inventions.
This is not feasible when these communications come
from the Holy Ghost ; Who, when He speaks, stops
all other thoughts and compels the mind to listen.”
Notice this, that I believe it would be easier for a person
with very keen ears to avoid hearing a loud voice, for
he could occupy his thoughts and mind in other things.
Not so here ; the soul can do nothing, nor has it ears to
stop, nor power to think of aught but what is said
to it. For He Who could stay the sun on its course
(at the prayer of Josue,** I believe) can so quiet the
faculties and the interior of the spirit as to make it
perceive that another and a stronger Lord than itself
governs this castle ; it is thus affected with profound
devotion and humility, seeing that it cannot but listen.
May the divine Majesty vouchsafe that, forgetting our-
selves, our only aim may be to please Him, as I said.

w Life, ch. xxv. 21.

** Josue x. 12, 13 : " Tunc locutus est Josue . . . : sol contra
Gaboon ne movearis ; steteruntque sol et luna.”


Digitized by LjOOQle


i68


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. III.


Amen. God grant I have succeeded in explaining
what I wished, and that it may be some guide to those
who may experience such favours.


CHAPTER IV.

Treats of how God suspends the soul in prayer by a trance,
ecstasy, or rapture, which I believe are all the same
thing. Great courage required to receive extra-
ordinary favours from His Majesty.

1. Courage required kg the soul for the divine espousals . 2. Raptures . 3. Rap-
ture caused kg the spark of love . 4. The powers and senses absorbed.

5. Mysteries revealed during ecstasies. 6. These mgsteries are unspeak-
able. 7 . Moses and the burning bush. 8. Simile of the museum. 9. St.
Teresa's visit to the Duchess of Alva. 10. Jog of the soul during
raptures. 11. No imaginary vision. IX True and false raptures.
13. Revelations of future bliss. 14. The touts preparation. 15. The soul
blinded bg its faults. 10. God ready to give these graces to aJL 17. Facul-
ties lost during ecstasy. 18. Spiritual inebriation. 19. Fervour and love
of suffering left in the soul. 20. Sctmdal caused to spectators bg such
favours. 21. Our Lord's predilection for such a soul. 22. IUusionarg
raptures.

i. What rest can the poor little butterfly find, with
all the trials I have told you of, and many more ? All
serve to make her desire the Bridegroom more ardently.
His Majesty, well aware of our weakness, fortifies her
by these and other means, that she may obtain courage
for union with a Lord so great and may take Him
for her Spouse. Perhaps you will laugh, and think
I am talking foolishly : there can be no call for courage
here ; there is no woman, however low her class, who
would not dare to wed a king. So I think, were he an


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. IV.]


SIXTH MANSIONS.


169


earthly monarch, but there is need of more fortitude
than you suppose in order to espouse the King of heaven. 1
Our nature appears too timid and base for anything so
high ; without doubt, unless God gave us the grace,
it would be impossible for us, however much we might
appreciate its benefits. You will learn how His Majesty
ratifies these espousals ; probably this is done when He
ravishes the soul by ecstasies, so depriving it of its
faculties ; if the use of these were retained, I think the
sight of its close vicinity to so mighty a Sovereign would
probably deprive the body of life. I am speaking of
genuine raptures, not fancies that come from women’s
weakness — which so often occur nowadays, making
them imagine everything to be a rapture or an ecstasy.
As I think I said, some are so feebly constituted as to
die of a single prayer of quiet.'

2. I should like to describe here several kinds of
raptures of which I have learnt from spiritual persons
with whom I have discussed the subject, but I am not
sure whether I shall succeed in explaining them, as I
did elsewhere.' It has been decided that it will not be
amiss to repeat what was said about these and other
things that happen in this state, were it only so as to
treat of all that the mansions contain in proper order.

3. In one sort of rapture, the soul, although perhaps

1 Life, ch. xxxix. 30. * Life, ch. xx. passim.

1 Castle, M. iv. ch. iii. 11.


Digitized by LjOOQle


170 THE INTERIOR CASTLE. [CHAP. IV.

not engaged in prayer at the time, is struck by some
word of God which it either remembers or hears. 4 His
Majesty, touched with pity by what He has seen it suffer
for so long past in its longing for Him, appears to increase
the spark I described in the interior of the spirit until
it entirely inflames the soul, which rises with new life
like a phoenix from the flames. Such a one may piously
believe her sins are now forgiven,* that is, if she be in
the disposition and have made use of the means required
by the Church. The soul being thus purified, God unites
it to Himself in a way known only to Him and the
spirit, nor does even the latter so understand what
happens as to be able to explain it to others afterwards.
The mind, however, had not lost the use of its faculties,
for this ecstasy does not resemble a swoon or a fit, in
which nothing either interior or exterior is felt.

4. What I do understand is that the soul has never
been more alive to spiritual things, nor so full of light
and of knowledge of His Majesty as it is now. This
might seem impossible ; if the powers and senses were
so absorbed that we might call them dead, how does the
soul understand this mystery ? I cannot tell ; perhaps
no one but the Creator Himself can say what passes in
these places — I mean this and the following mansions,
which may be treated as one, the door leading from one

4 Philippus a SS. Trinitate, l.c. p. iii. tr. i. disc. iii. art. 3.

* Rel. ix. 4. Way of Perf. ch. xix. 8.


Digitized by t^ooQle


CHAP. IV.] SIXTH MANSIONS. I71

to the other being wide open. However, as there are
some things in the last rooms, only shown to those who
get thus far, I thought it better to divide them.

5. While the soul is in this suspension, our Lord
favours it by discovering to it secrets, such as heavenly
mysteries and imaginary visions, which admit of de-
scription afterwards, because they remain so imprinted
on the memory that it never forgets them. But when
the visions are intellectual they are not thus easily
related, some of those received at such a time being so
sublime that it is not fitting for man, while living in
this world, to understand them in a way that can be
told, although, when the use of the faculties returns,
much can be described of what was seen in intellectual
vision. Possibly you do not know what a vision is,
especially an intellectual one. Since I have been bidden
by one who has authority, I will tell you at the proper
time. Although seemingly superfluous, it may prove
useful to certain people.

6. " But,” you will ask me, " if the very sublime
favours our Lord bestows in this mansion cannot after-
wards be remembered, what profit do they bring ? ” •
Oh, daughters! their value cannot be overrated; for
though the recipient is incapable of describing them,
they are deeply imprinted in the centre of the soul and
are never forgotten. “ How can they be remembered

* Philippus a SS. Trin. l.c.


Digitized by LjOOQle


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


172


[CHAP. IV.


if no image is seen and the powers of the soul do not
comprehend them ? ” I, too, do not understand this,
but I know that certain truths of the greatness of God
remain so impressed on the spirit by this favour, that,
did not faith teach Who He is and that it is bound
to believe He is God, it would henceforth worship Him
as such, as did Jacob, when he saw the ladder.’ Doubt-
less the Patriarch learnt other secrets he was unable
to reveal, for, unless he had received more interior
light, he could never have discovered such sublime
mysteries merely by watching angels ascending and
descending the steps. I am not certain whether this
quotation is correct ; although I have heard the passage,
I cannot feel sure of recalling it exactly.

7. Neither was Moses able to relate more than God
willed of what he had seen in the burning bush ; • but
unless the Almighty had clearly revealed certain mysteries
to his soul, causing it to see and know its God was present,
the lawgiver could never have undertaken so many
and such great labours. Such mighty revelations
were shown him amidst the thorns of the bush, as to
give him the needful courage for his great deeds on
behalf of the Children of Israel. We must not, sisters,
search out reasons for understanding the hidden things
of God, but, believing Him to be Almighty, we should
be convinced that such worms as ourselves, with our
7 Gen. xxviii. 12. # Exod. iii. 2.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. IV.]


SIXTH MANSIONS.


173


limited power of intelligence, are unable to comprehend
His wonders. Let us praise Him fervently for allowing
us to understand something of them.

8. I wish I could find some simile for my subject :
none seem to suit the purpose, but I will make use of
the following. Imagine that you are in an apartment —

I fancy it is termed a camarin (or private museum) —
belonging to a king or a great nobleman, in which are
placed numberless kinds of articles of glass, porcelain, and
other things, so arranged that most of them are at once
.seen on entering the room.

9. While on a visit to the house of the Duchess of
Alva (where at her request I was bidden by obedience
to stay during a journey),* I was taken into such a
room. I stood amazed on entering it, and wondered
what could be the use of such a jumble of knick-knacks ;
then I thought that the sight of so many different things
should lead one to praise God. It is fortunate I saw
them, for they offer me a suitable comparison in this
case. Although I was in the room some time, there
were so many objects in it that I forgot what I had
seen and could no more remember each object, nor of
what it was made, than if I had never seen it, although
I recalled the sight of the whole collection.

* Dofia Maria Enriquez, wife of Ferdinand de Toledo, Duke
of Alva. This visit took place in February 1574, and lasted
two days, the Saint being then on her journey from Salamanca
to Alva de Tonnes.


Digitized by LjOOQle


17 4


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. IV.


10. Something of this sort occurs when the spirit
is very closely united to God. It is introduced into
this mansion of the empyrean heaven, which must be
in the centre of our souls — for since God resides in them.
He must own one of the mansions. While the soul is in
ecstasy, our Lord does not appear to wish it to appre-
hend these mysteries, and its inebriation of joy in Him
suffices it. Sometimes, however, He is pleased to with-
draw it from this rapture, and it at once perceives what
the mansion contains. On returning to itself, the mind
can recall what has been seen, but is unable to describe
it, nor can it, by its natural abilities, attain to see more
of the supernatural than God has chosen to show it.

11. Do I seem to own that the soul really sees some-
thing and that this is an imaginary vision ? I mean
nothing of the sort : I am speaking of an intellectual
vision, but being so ignorant and dull I can explain
nothing, and am well aware that if anything is rightly
stated, it does not come from myself.

12. I think that if the soul learns no mysteries at
any time during raptures, they are no true raptures,
but some natural weakness that may occur to people
of delicate constitutions, such as women, when by its
strenuous efforts the spirit overpowers physical nature,
and produces stupor, as I think I said in connection
with the prayer of quiet. 1 *

10 Castle, M. iv. ch. iii. 2.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. IV. |


SIXTH MANSIONS.


175


13. This is not so in genuine raptures, for then, I
believe, God ravishes the soul wholly to Himself, as one
who is His very own and His bride, and shows her some
small part of the kingdom she has thus won. However
little this may be, all is great that is in this great God.
He will allow of no obstacle from the powers or the
senses, but bids that the doors of all the mansions should
be closed at once, only leaving open the one He is in,
that we may enter it. Blessed be such mercy — well
may men be accursed who do not seek to profit by it,
but who forfeit it !

14. Oh, my sisters, what nothingness is all we have
given up, or that we do, or ever could do, for a God
who thus wills to communicate Himself to a worm !
If we hope to enjoy this favour even during our mortal
life, what are we doing ? Why do we delay ? What
can repay the loss of the time of a “ Memento ” 11 in
searching for this Lord, like the bride, through the
streets and the squares ? l * Oh, what a mockery is
everything in this world that does not lead towards,
and help us to attain to this state ! Even though all

11 The Saint wrote here and elsewhere Memento, and not
memento as is commonly printed. It refers, of course, to that
short interruption at Mass when the priest makes a Memento
of those for whom he intends to pray. Likewise St. Teresa
often speaks of the “ space of a Credo or an Ave Maria" always
implying a very short duration.

11 Cant. iii. 2 : " Per vicos et plateas quseram quern diligit
anima mea.”


Digitized by


Google


176 THE INTERIOR CASTLE. [CHAP. IV.

the earthly pleasures, riches, and happiness that can
be imagined could last for eternity, they would be dis-
appointing and base contrasted with the treasures which
are to be enjoyed for ever — and yet even these are nothing
compared with the possession for our own of the Lord
of all treasures in heaven and earth.

15. Oh, human blindness ! When, oh when shall
this dust be taken from our eyes ? Although we think
it insufficient to blind us, yet I see some little motes
or grains of dust, which, if left to spread, will suffice
to harm us greatly. At least, for the love of God, my
sisters, let these faults convince us of our misery, that
they may serve to clear our sight as did the clay the
eyes of the blind man who was cured by our Spouse.”
Thus, realising our imperfections, we shall beg Him more
fervently to let us benefit by our defects that we may
please Him in all things.

16. I have unconsciously wandered far from my
subject : forgive me, sisters. Believe me, when I come
to these wonders of God’s greatness (I mean when I
come to speak of them), I cannot but feel keenly grieved
at seeing what we lose by our own fault. It is true that
His Majesty grants such favours to whom He chooses ;
yet if we sought Him as He seeks us, He would give them
to us all. He only longs for souls on whom He may
bestow them, for His gifts diminish not His riches.

** St. John ix. 6.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. IV.]


SIXTH MANSIONS.


177


17. To return to what I was describing. By the
commands of the Bridegroom, the doors of the mansions,
and even those of the keep and of the whole castle,
are closed ; for when He intends ravishing the soul He
takes away the power of speech, and although occasion-
ally the other faculties are retained rather longer, no
word can be uttered. 14 Sometimes the person is at
once deprived of all the senses, the hands and body
become as cold as if the soul had fled ; occasionally no
breathing can be detected. 11 This condition lasts but
a short while ; I mean in the same degree, 19 for when
this profound suspension diminishes the body seems to
come to itself and gain strength to return again to this
death which gives more vigorous life to the soul.

18. This supreme state of ecstasy never lasts long,
but, although it ceases, it leaves the will so inebriated, 11

u Life, ch. xx. 18. “ Like a person who, having a rope

around his neck, and being strangled, tries to breathe.”

15 Life , ch. xx. 23, 29. Way of Perf. ch. xxxii. Rel. viii. 8, 11.

“ The first effect of ecstatic prayer concerns the body, which re-
mains as if the soul had departed ; it grows cold from a deficiency
of natural heat, the eyes close gently, and the other senses are sus-
pended ; and yet a weak body recovers health in this prayer ”
(Anton, a Spiritu Sancto, Direct , Mystic . tr. iv. d. 2 § 4, n. 150).

19 “ Digo para estar in un ser.”

17 Christusque nobis sit cibus,

Potusque noster sit fides,

Laeti bibamus sobriam
Ebrietatem spiritus.

(Hymn for Lauds, Feria secunda, old version.

Compare Anton, a Sp. S. l.c. tr. iv. n. 30.)

12


Digitized by


Google


178


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. IV.


and the mind so transported out of itself, that for a
day, or sometimes for several days, such a person is
incapable of attending to anything but what excites the
will to the love of God ; although wide awake enough to
this, she seems asleep as regards all earthly matters.

19. Oh, when the soul wholly returns to itself, how
abashed does it feel at having received this favour, and
how passionate are its desires of serving God in any way
He asks of it ! If the former states of prayer caused
the powerful effects described, what will not such a
signal grace as this do ? Such a person wishes she had
a thousand lives ” to spend for God ; she would have
all earthly creatures changed into as many tongues
to praise Him on her account. She longs to perform
most severe penances,” nor do they cost her much, for
the power of her love almost prevents their being felt.
She realises how little the martyrs suffered during their
tortures, for pain is easy when our Lord thus aids us :
therefore such a soul complains to His Majesty when
He gives her no suffering.”

20. She considers it a great favour when God sends
her this rapture in secret, for when others see it the
shame and confusion she feels are so great as somewhat to
diminish her transport. Knowing the malice of the

“ Life, ch. xx. 30.

“ Castle, M. vii. ch. iii. 4. Way of Perf. ch. xxxviii. 1. Excl.
xiv. 3. Life, ch. xl. 27.

*® Life, ch. xvi. 0 . Rel. i. 4.


Digitized by i^ooQle


CHAP. IV.]


SIXTH MANSIONS.


179


world, she fears her ecstasy will not be attributed to
its proper cause, but may give rise to rash judgment
instead of the praise due for it to God. Although this
pain and distress are unavoidable, they seem to me
to show a certain want of humility, for if she wished to
be despised, what would she care ? “

21. Our Lord once said to some one who was troubled
by such thoughts : "Do not be disturbed ; people
will either praise Me or condemn thee ; in either case
thou wilt be the gainer.” " I learnt afterwards that
she was greatly encouraged and comforted by this speech ;
I speak of it in case others may suffer in the same way.
Apparently our Lord would have all men know that
this soul is His own, and that none may molest it, for
it is all His. Men are welcome to attack, if they will,
the body, the honour, and the possessions of such a
person, for glory will accrue to His Majesty from all
they do ; but the soul they may not assail : unless


11 Life, ch. xx. 5, 6.

” Life, ch. xxxi. 15. St. John of the Cross in stanza xiii. 8 of
the Spiritual Canticle, refers to this and the following chapters.
“ This,” he says, " is an appropriate opportunity for discus-
sing the difference between raptures, ecstasies, and other ele-
vations and subtle flights of the spirit, to which spiritual persons
are liable ; but as my object is to do nothing more than explain
this canticle, I leave the subject for those who are better
qualified than I am. I do this the more readily because our
mother, the blessed Teresa of Jesus, has written admirably on
this matter, whose writings I hope to see soon published.”


Digitized by ^ooQle


l8o THE INTERIOR CASTLE. [CHAP. IV.

by a most culpable presumption it withdraws from the
protection of its Spouse, He will defend it against the
whole world and against all hell besides.

22. I do not know whether I have succeeded in
teaching you what a rapture is ; to explain it fully,
would, as I said, be impossible. Still I do not think time
has been lost in describing a genuine rapture. The
effects in false raptures are very different. I do not
call them " false ” because people who experience them
intentionally deceive others, but because they are
themselves unwittingly deceived. As the signs and
effects do not correspond with this great grace, the
favour itself becomes so discredited that naturally,
when our Lord afterwards bestows it on any soul, nobody
believes in it. May He be for ever blessed and praised !
Amen, Amen !


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. V.]


SIXTH MANSIONS.


181


CHAPTER V.

Treats of the same subject as the last chapter, and describes
the flight of the spirit, which is another way by
which God elevates the soul : this requires great
courage in one experiencing it. This favour, by
which God greatly delights the soul, is explained.
This chapter is very profitable.

1 . The flight of the spirit 2 . Self-control completely lost . 3 . Symbol of the
two cisterns. 4 . Obligations following these favours. 5 . Humility pro-
duced by them. 6 . How our crucified Lord comforted such a souL 7 . A
humble soul fears these favours. 8 . Mysteries learnt during the flight of
the spirit 0 . Imaginary visions sometimes accompany intellectual ones.
10 . How the flight of the spirit takes place. 11 . The soul fortified by
it 12 . Three great graces left in the souL 13 . The third grace . 14 . Fear
caused by this favour.

i. There is another form of rapture, which, though
essentially the same as the last, yet produces very
different feelings in the soul. I call it the “ flight of
the spirit,” 1 for the soul suddenly feels so rapid a sense
of motion that the spirit appears to hurry it away with
a speed which is very alarming, especially at first. There-
fore I said that the soul on whom God bestows this
favour requires strong courage, besides great faith, trust,
and resignation, so that God may do what He chooses
with it.

2. Do yott suppose a person in perfect possession of
her senses feels but little dismay at her squI being drawn
above her, while sometimes, as we read, even/the body

1 Rel. viii. io, ii. Life, ch. xviii. 8 ; ch. xx. 3.


Digitized by LjOOQle


182


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. V.


rises with it ? * She does not know where the spirit is
going, who is raising her, nor how it happens ; for at
the first instant of this sudden movement one does not
feel sure it is caused by God. Can it possibly be
resisted ? No ; resistance only accelerates the motion, as
some one told me. God now appears to be teaching
the soul, which has so often placed itself absolutely in
His hands and offered itself entirely to Him, that it
no longer belongs to itself ; thus it is snatched away
more vehemently in consequence of its opposition.
This person, therefore, resolved to resist no more than
does a straw when attracted by amber (a thing you
may have seen) ; she therefore yielded herself into the
hands of Him who is Almighty, seeing it is best to make
a virtue of necessity. Speaking of straw, doubtless it
is as easy for a stalwart, strapping fellow to lift a straw

1 Life , ch. xx. 9. St. John of the Cross, Spiritual Canticle ,
stanzas xiv.-xv. 23 sqq. Philippus a SS. Trinit. l.c. p. iii.
tr. i. disc. iii. art. 3. " This prayer of rapture is superior to

the preceding grades of prayer, as also to the ordinary prayer
of union, and leaves much more excellent effects and opera-
tions in many other ways.” St. Catherine of Siena (Dialogue,
ch. lxxix. 1) says : " Wherefore, oftentimes, through the perfect
union which the soul has made with Me, she is raised from the
earth almost as if the heavy body became light. But this does
not mean that the heaviness of the body is taken away, but that
the union of the soul with Me is more perfect than the union
of the body with the soul ; wherefore the strength of the spirit,
united with Me, raises the body from the earth.” (Transl.
by Algar Thorold.)


Digitized by t^.ooQle


CHAP. V.] SIXTH MANSIONS. 183

as for our mighty and powerful Giant to elevate our
spirit. 1

3. It seems that the cistern of water of which I spoke
(but I cannot quite remember where) in the fourth
mansion, 4 was formerly filled gently and quietly, without
any movement ; now, however, this great God, who
restrains the springs and the waters, and Mill not permit
the ocean to transgress its bounds,' lets loose the streams,
which with a powerful rush flow into the cistern and a
mighty wave rises, strong enough to raise on high the
little vessel of our soul. Neither the ship herself, nor
her pilot and sailors, can at their choice control the
fury of the sea and stop it from carrying the boat where
it will : far less can the interior of the soul now stay
where it chooses, or force its senses or faculties to act
more than He Who holds them in His dominion decrees ;
as for the exterior powers, they are here quite useless.

4. Indeed I am amazed, sisters, while merely writing
of this manifestation of the immense power of this
great King and Monarch. What, then, must be felt by
those who actually experience it ? I am convinced that
if His Majesty were to reveal Himself thus to the
greatest sinners on earth, they would never dare to
offend Him again — if not through love, at least through
fear of Him. What obligations bind those taught in

* Life, ch. xxii. 20. 6 Prov; viii. 20.

4 Castle, M. iv. ch. ii. 3.


Digitized by LjOOQle


[chap. V.


184 THE INTERIOR CASTLE.

so sublime a manner to strive with all their might not
to displease such a Master ! In His Name, I beg of
you, sisters, who have received these or the like favours,
not to rest content with merely receiving them, but to
remember that she who owes much has much to
pay ! *

5. This thought terrifies the soul exceedingly : unless
the great courage needed was given it by our Lord, it
would suffer great and constant grief ; for, looking
first at what His Majesty has done for it and then upon
itself, it sees how little good it has performed compared
with what it was bound to do, and that the paltry
service it has rendered was full of faults, failures, and
tepidity. To efface the remembrance of the many
imperfections of all its good deeds (if indeed it has
ever performed any), it thinks best to forget them
altogether and to be ever mindful of its sins, casting
itself on the mercy of God, since it cannot repay its debt
to Him, and begging for the pity and compassion He
ever shows to sinners.

6. Perhaps He will answer as He did to some one who
was kneeling before a crucifix in great affliction on this
account, for she felt she had never had anything to offer
God, nor to sacrifice for His sake. The Crucified One
consoled her by saying that He gave her for herself

* St. Luke xii. 48 : “ Cui multum datum est, multum quaere tur
ab eo, et cui commendaverunt multum, plus petent ab eo.”


Digitized by t^ooQle


CHAP. V.]


SIXTH MANSIONS.


185


all the pains and labours He had borne in His passion,
that she might offer them as her own to His Father.’
I learnt from her that she at once felt comforted and
enriched by these words, which she never forgets,
but recalls whenever she realises her own wretched-
ness, and feels encouraged and consoled. I could
relate several other incidents of the same kind learnt
in conversation with many holy people much given
to prayer, but I will not recount than lest you might
imagine they relate to myself.

7. I think this example is very instructive; it shows
that we please our Lord by self-knowledge, by the
constant recollection of our poverty and miseries, and
by realising that we possess nothing but what we have
received from Him.' Therefore there is need of
courage, sisters, in order to receive this and many other
favours which come to a soul elevated to this state by
our Lord ; I think that if the soul is humble it requires
more valour than ever for this last mercy. May God
grant us humility for His Name’s sake.

8. To return to this sudden rapture of the spirit.
The soul really appears to have quitted the body, which,
however, is not lifeless, and though, on the other hand,
the person is certainly not dead, yet she herself cannot,
for a few seconds, tell whether her spirit remains within

’ Rel. ix. 8. This happened at Seville in 1575 or 1576.

* 1 Cor. iv. 7 : " Quid antem babes quod non accepisti ? "


Digitized by L^OOQle


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


186


[CHAP. V.


her body or not.* She feels that she has been wholly
transported into another and a very different region
from that in which we live, where a light so unearthly
is shown *• that, if during her whole lifetime she had
been trying to picture it, and the wonders seen, she
could not possibly have succeeded. In an instant her
mind learns so many things at once that if the
< imagination and intellect spent years in striving to
enumerate them, it could not recall a thousandth part
of them.

9. This vision is not intellectual but imaginary and
is seen by the eyes of the soul more clearly than earthly
things are seen by our bodily eyes. Although no words
are pronounced, the spirit is taught many truths ; if,
for instance, it beholds any of the saints, it knows them
at once as well as if intimately acquainted with them
for years." Occasionally, besides what the eyes of the
soul perceive in intellectual vision, other things are shown
it. In an imaginary vision it usually sees our Lord,
accompanied by a host of angels ; neither the bodily

• 2 Cor. xii. 2 : “ Sive in corpore nescio, sive extra corpus
nescio, Deus scit.”

10 This is called “ lumen prophetiae ” and is a transient form
of the “ lumen gloriae.” See St. Thomas Aquinas, Sum. theol.
2a 236 , q. 175, art. 3 ad 2.

u The same thing is related of some Saints while on earth,
e.g . St. Paul the first hermit and St. Anthony, who greeted each
other by name though neither knew nor had heard of the
other.


Digitized by LjOOQle


-CHAP. V.]


SIXTH MANSIONS.


187


eyes, however, nor the eyes of the soul 11 see anything,
for these visions, and many other things impossible to
describe, are revealed by some wonderful intuition that
I cannot explain. Perhaps those who have experienced
this favour and possess more ability than myself may
be able to describe it, although it seems to me a most
difficult task.

10. 1 cannot tell whether the soul dwells in the body
meanwhile or not : I would neither affirm that it does,
nor that the body is deprived of it. I have often thought
that as, though the sun does not leave his place in the
heavens, yet his rays have power to reach the earth
instantaneously, so the soul and the spirit, which make
one and the same thing (like the sun and his rays)
may, while remaining in its own place, through the
strength of the ardour coming to it from the true
Sim of Justice, send up some higher part of it above
itself. In fact, I do not understand what I am talking
about, but the truth is that, with the swiftness of a
bullet fired from a gun, an upward flight takes place in
the interior of the soul. (I know no other name for it
but “ flight.") Although noiseless, it is too manifest
a movement to be any illusion, 1 * and the soul is quite
outside itself ; at least that is the impression made upon

“ These words, though necessary for the context, were only
begun, but not completed by St. Teresa.

* Life, ch. xx. 32. Castle, M. iv. ch. i. 10.


Digitized by LjOOQle


i88


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. V.


it. Great mysteries are revealed to it meanwhile, and
when the person returns to consciousness she is so
greatly benefited that she holds all this world's goods
as filth, compared with what she has seen. Henceforth
earthly life is grievous to her, and what used to please
her now remains uncared for and unnoticed . 14

ii. Those children of Israel who were sent on first
to the Land of Promise brought back tokens from it ; 11
so here our Lord seems to seek to show the soul something
of the land to which it is travelling, to give it courage
to pass through the trials of its painful journey, now
that it knows where it must go to find rest. You may
fancy that such profit could not thus quickly be obtained,
yet only those who have experienced what signal benefits
this favour leaves in the soul can realise its value.

14 Compare §§ S-io with Philippus a SS. Trinit. l.c. p. iii.
tr. i. disc. iii. art. 3.

" Muchas veces he pensado, si como el sol estAndose en el
cielo, que sus rayos tienen tanta fuerza, que no mudindose 61
de alii, de presto llegan ac 4 ; si el alma y el espiritu (que son
una misma cosa, como le es el sol y sus rayos) puede, queddndose
ella en su puesto, con la fuerza de calor que le viene del ver-
dadero Sol de justicia, alguna parte superior salir sobre si misma.
En fin, yo no s6 lo que digo, lo que es verdad es, que con la
presteza que sale la pelota de nn arcabuz, cuando le ponen el
fuego, se levanta en lo interior un vuelo (que yo no s6 otro
nombre que le poner) que aunque no hace ruido, hace movimento
tan claro, que no puede ser an to jo en ninguna manera ; y muy
fuera de si misma, 4 todo lo qne puede entender, se le muestran
grandes cosas.”

M Num. xiii. 24.


Digitized by ^ooQle


CHAP. V.] SIXTH MANSIONS. 189

12. This clearly shows it to be no work of the devil ;
neither the imagination nor the evil one could represent
what leaves such peace, calm, and good fruits in the
soul, and particularly the following three graces of a
very high order.** The first of these is a perception of
the greatness of God, which becomes clearer to us as we
witness more of it. Secondly, we gain self-knowledge
and humility as we see how creatures so base as our-
selves in comparison with the Creator of such wonders,
have dared to offend Him in the past or venture to gaze
on Him now.

13. The third grace is a contempt for all earthly things
unless they are consecrated to the service of so great
a God. With such jewels the Bridegroom begins to
deck His Bride ; they are too valuable for her to keep
them carelessly.” These visions are so deeply engraved
in her memory that I believe she can never forget them
until she enjoys them for evermore, for to do so would
be the greatest misfortune. 1 * But the Spouse Who gave
her these gifts has power to give her grace not to lose
them.

** Life, ch. xx. 31. The same distinctions with respect to
divine and diabolical locutions may be found in Life, ch. xxv. 5.

17 ** Dezteram meam et collum meum cinxit lapidibus pretiosis,
tradidit auribus meis inaestimabiles margaritas ” (from the
Office of St. Agnes).

14 This is undoubtedly the correct rendering of this difficult
and obscure passage.


Digitized by LjOOQle


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. V.


190

14. I told you that courage was required by the
soul, for do you think it is a trifling matter for the
spirit to feel literally separated from the body, as it does
when perceiving that it is losing its senses without
understanding the reason ? There is need that He Who
gives all the rest should include fortitude. You will
say this fright is well rewarded, and so say I. May He
Who can bestow such graces be for ever praised, and
may His Majesty vouchsafe that we may be worthy to
serve Him. Amen.


CHAPTER VI.

Describes an effect which proves the prayer spoken of
in the last chapter to be genuine and no deception.
Treats of another favour our Lord bestows on the
soul, to make it praise Him fervently.

1. The soul longs for death. 2. The soul cannot help desiring these favours.
3. SL Teresa bewails her inability to serve God. 4. Fervour resulting from
ecstasies. 5. Excessive desires to see God should be restrained. 6. They
endanger health. 7. Tears often come from physical causes. 8. St. Teresa? s
own experience. 9. Works , not tears , are asked by God. 10. Confide en-
tirely in God. 11. The fubilee of the soul 12. Impossibility of concealing
this foy. 13. The world* s judgment of this jubilee. 14. Which is often
felt by the nuns of SL Joseph's. 15. The Saint's delight in this fubilee.

1. These sublime favours leave the soul so desirous of
fully enjoying Him Who has bestowed them, that life
becomes a painful, though delicious torture, and death
is ardently longed for. Often, with tears, such a one
implores God to take her from this exile where every-


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. VI.]


SIXTH MANSIONS.


I 9 I


thing she sees wearies her . 1 Solitude alone brings great
alleviation for a time, but soon her grief returns, and
yet she cannot bear to be without it. In short, this
poor little butterfly can find no lasting rest. So tender
is her love, that at the slightest provocation it flames
forth and the soul takes flight. Thus, in this mansion
raptures occur very frequently, nor can they be resisted,
even in public. Persecutions and slanders ensue ; *
however she may try, she cannot keep free from the
fears suggested to her by so many people, especially
by her confessors.

2. Although in one way she feels great confidence
within her soul, especially when alone with God, yet, on
the other hand, she is greatly troubled by misgivings
lest she is deceived by the devil, and so should offend
Him Whom she deeply loves. She cares little for blame,
except when her confessor finds fault with her, as if
she could help what happens I She asks every one to
pray for her,* since she has been told to do so, and begs
His Majesty to direct her by some other way than this,
which is so full of danger. Nevertheless, so great are
the benefits left by these favours that she cannot but
see that they lead her on the way to heaven , 4 of

1 Excl. ii. See poems, ** Cuan triste es, Dios mio,” and
the two versions of "Vivir sin vivir en mi.”

1 Life, ch. xxv. 18.

* Life, ch. xxv. 20. Ret. vii. 7.

4 Life, ch. xxvii. 1, 2.


Digitized by LjOOQle


[CHAP. VI.


192 THE INTERIOR CASTLE.

which she has read and heard and learnt in the law of
God. As, strive how she may, she cannot resist desiring
to receive these graces, she resigns herself into God's
hands. Yet she is grieved at finding herself forced to
wish for these favours, which appears to be disobedience
to her confessor, for she believes that in obedience,
and in avoiding any offence against God, lies her safe-
guard against . deception. Thus she feels she would
prefer to be cut in pieces rather than wilfully commit a
venial sin, yet is greatly grieved at seeing that she cannot
avoid unwittingly falling into a great number. God
bestows on such people so intense a desire neither ever to
displease Him, in however small a matter, nor to commit
any avoidable imperfection, that, were there no other
reason, they would try to avoid society, and they greatly
envy those who live in deserts. 1 On the other hand,
they seek to live amidst men in the hopes of helping if
but one soul to praise God better.' In the case of a
Woman, she grieves over the impediment offered by her
sex,’ and envies those who are free to proclaim aloud
to all Who is this mighty God of hosts. 1

3. Oh poor little butterfly I chained by so many
fetters, that stop thee from flying where thou wouldst !

• Rel. i. 6.

• Life, ch. xxxii. 14; ch. xxxv. 13. CasUo, M. vii. ch. iv.
21. Found, ch. i. 6, 7.

’ Way of Perf. ch. i.

• III Reg. xix. 10.


Digitized by LjOOQle


SIXTH MANSIONS.


CHAP. VI.]


193


Have pity on her, O my God, and so dispose her ways
that she may be able to accomplish some of her desires
for Thy honour and glory ! Take no account of the
poverty of her merits, nor of the vileness of her nature,
O Lord, Thou Who hast the power to compel the vast
ocean to retire, and didst force the wide river Jordan
to draw back, that the Children of Israel might pass
through ! * Yet spare her not, for aided by Thy strength
she can endure many trials. She is resolved to do so —
she desires to suffer them. Stretch forth Thine arm,
O Lord, to help her, lest she waste her life on trifles !
Let Thy greatness appear in this Thy creature, womanish
and weak as she is, that men, seeing the good in
her is not her own, may praise Thee for it ! Let it
cost her what it may, and as dear as she desires, for
she longs to lose a thousand lives to lead one soul to
praise Thee but a little better ! If as many lives were
hers to give, she would count them well spent in such
a cause, knowing, as a truth most certain, that she is
unworthy to bear the lightest cross, much less to die,
for Thee.

4. I cannot tell why I have said this, sisters, not
what made me do so ; indeed I never intended it.
You must know that these effects are bound to follow from
such trances or ecstasies : they are not transient, but
permanent desires ; when opportunity occurs of acting
• Ps. cxiii. 3, Exod. xiv., and Jos. iii.

13


Digitized by LjOOQle


194


The interior Castle.


tCHAP. VI.


on them, they prove genuine. How can I say that they
are permanent, when at times the soul feels cowardly
in the most trivial matters and too timorous to under-
take any work for God ?

5. I believe it is because our Lord, for its greater good,
then leaves the soul to its natural weakness, which at
once convinces it so thoroughly that any strength it
possessed came from His Majesty, as to destroy self-love
and to endue it with a greater knowledge of the mercy
and greatness of God, which He deigned to show forth
in one so vile. However, the soul is usually in the
former state. Beware of one thing, sisters ; these
ardent desires to behold our Lord are sometimes so
distressing as to need rather to be checked than to
be encouraged — that is, if feasible, for in another kind
of prayer, of which I shall speak later, it is not possible,
as you will see.

6. In the state I speak of, these longings can sometimes
be arrested, for the reason is at liberty to conform to
the will of God and can quote the words of St. Martin, 1 '

10 “ When St. Martin was dying, his brethren said to him :

* Why, dear Father, will yon leave us ? Or to whom can you
commit us in our desolation ? We know, indeed, that you
desire to be with Christ, but your reward above is safe and will
not be diminished by delay ; rather have pity on us whom
you are leaving desolate.’ Then Martin, always pitiful, moved
by these lamentations, is said to have burst into tears. Turning
to God, he replied to the mourners around him only by crying :

' O Lord, if I am still necessary to Thy people, I do not shrink


Digitized by ^ooQle


CHAP. VI.]


SIXTH MANSIONS.


195


while, if these desires become very oppressive, the
thoughts may be turned to some other matter. As
such desires are generally found in persons far advanced
in perfection, the devil may excite them in order to
make us think we are of their number — in any case, it
is well to be cautious. For my part, I do not believe
he could cause the calm and peace given by this pain
to the soul, but would disturb it by such uneasiness as
we feel when afflicted concerning any worldly matter.
However, a person inexperienced in both kinds of sorrow
cannot understand the difference, but thinking such
grief an excellent thing, will excite it as much as possible,
which greatly injures the health, as these longings are
incessant, or at least very frequent.

7. You must also notice that bodily weakness may
cause such pain, especially with people of sensitive char-
acters, who cry over every trifling trouble. 11 Times
without number do they imagine they are mourning for
God’s sake, when they are doing no such thing. If for
a considerable space of time, whenever such a person
hears the least mention of God or thinks of Him at
all, these fits of uncontrollable weeping occur, 1 * the
cause may be an accumulation of humour round the ^

from toil ; Thy will be done ' ” (Sulpitius Severus, Life of St.
Martin, letter 3).

u Way of Perf. ch. xvii. 4 ; ch. xrx. 6.

11 Life, ch. xxix. 12.


Digitized by


Google


196


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. VI.


heart, which has a great deal more to do with such tears
than has the love of God. Such persons seem as if
they would never stop crying : believing that tears are
beneficial, they do not try to check them nor to distract
their minds from the subject, but encourage them as
much as possible. The devil seizes this opportunity
of weakening nuns, so that they become unable to
pray, or to keep their Rule.

8. I think you must be puzzling over this, and would
like to ask what I would have you do, as I see danger
in everything. If I am afraid of delusions in so good
a thing as tears, perhaps I myself am deluded, and may
be I am ! But, believe me, I do not say this without
having witnessed it in other people, although not in my
own case, for there is nothing tender about me, and
my heart is so hard as often to grieve me. 1 ’ However,
when the fire burns fiercely within, stony as my heart
may be, it distils like an alembic. 14 It is easy to know
when tears come from this source, for they are soothing
and gentle rather than stormy, and rarely do any
harm. This delusion, when it is one, has the advantage,
with a humble person, of only injuring the body and
not the soul. But if one is not humble, it is well to be
ever on one's guard.

u Compare with this what we have said in note 1 to the
second chapter of the Fourth Mansions. Ret. ii. 12.

14 Life, ch. xix. 1-3.


Digitized by


Google


CHAP. VI.]


SIXTH MANSIONS.


197


9. Let us not fancy that if we cry a great deal we
have done all that is needed — rather we must work
hard and practise the virtues : that is the essential —
leaving tears to fall when God sends them, without
trying to force ourselves to shed them. Then, if we
do not take too much notice of them, they will leave
the parched soil of our souls well watered, making it
fertile in good fruit, for this is the water which falls
from heaven. 1 * However we may tire ourselves in
dig g ing to reach it, we shall never get any water like
this ; indeed, we may often work and search until we
are exhausted, without finding as much as a pool, much
less a springing well 1

10. Therefore, sisters, I think it best for us to place
ourselves in the presence of God, to contemplate His
mercy and grandeur and our own vileness, and to leave
Him to give us what He will, be it water or drought,
for He knows best what is good for us ; thus we enjoy
peace, and the devil will have less chance to deceive us.

11. Amongst these favours, at once painful and pleasant.
Our Lord sometimes causes in the soul a certain jubila-
tion, 1 * and a strange and mysterious kind of prayer.
If He bestows this grace on you, praise Him fervently
for it ; I describe it so that you may know that it is

11 Way of Perf. ch. xix. 6. Life. ch. xviii. 12 sqq.

M Philippas a SS. Trinit. l.c. p. iii. tr. i. disc. iv. art. 5.
Antonias a Sp. S. l.c. tr. iv. n. 156.


Digitized by L^OOQle


198


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. VI.


something real. I believe that the faculties of the soul
are closely united to God, but that He leaves them at
liberty to rejoice in their happiness, together with the
senses, although they do not know what they are enjoying
nor how they do so. This may sound gibberish, yet it
really happens. So excessive is its jubilee, that the
soul will not enjoy it alone, but speaks of it to all
around it, that they may help it to praise God, which
is its one desire. 1 ’

12. Oh, what rejoicings would this person utter,
and what demonstrations would she make, if possible,
so that all might know her happiness ! She seems to
have found herself again, and wishes, like the father of
the prodigal son, to invite all her friends to feast with
her, 1 ' and to see her soul in its rightful place, because
(at least for the time being) she cannot doubt its security.
I believe she is right, for the devil could not possibly
infuse a joy and peace into the very centre of her being
which make her whole delight consist in urging others
to praise God. It requires a painful effort to keep
silent and to dissemble such impulsive happiness. St.
Francis must have experienced this when, as the robbers
met him rushing through the fields, crying aloud, he
told them, in answer to their questions, that he was the
“ herald of the great King.” *• So felt other saints who

« Rel. ii. 12. 11 St. Luke xv. 23.

“ " He plunged into a vast forest, and there in a loud voice


Digitized by LtOCK -


CHAP. VI.] SIXTH MANSIONS. 199

retired into the deserts, that, like St. Francis, they might
proclaim the praises of their God.

13. I knew Fray Peter of Alcantara, who used to do
this. I believe he was a saint, on account of the life
he led, yet people often took him for a fool when they
heard him. 1 * Oh happy folly, sisters ! Would that
God might let us all share it ! What mercy He has
shown you in placing you where, if He gave you this
grace and it were perceived by others, it would rather
turn to your advantage than bring on you contempt,
as it would do in the world, where men so rarely hear
God praised that it is no wonder they take scandal at it.

14. Oh, miserable times and wretched life spent in


and in French, he made the echoes resound with the praises
of God. Some robbers, attracted by his singing, rushed out
upon him. But the sight of so poor a man destroyed their
hopes of booty. They questioned him, and Francis gave them
no answer beyond saying in allegorical language : * I am the
herald of the great King ! * The robbers considered themselves
insulted by these words. They threw themselves upon him,
beat him severely, and went off, after having thrown him into
a ditch full of snow. This treatment only added fire to the
zeal of Francis. He sang his holy canticles with greater love
than before ” (Rev. Father L6on, Lives of the Saints and Blessed
of the Order of St. Francis , vol. i. ch. i.).

,0 ** St. Peter of Alcantara, in the jubilation of his soul through
the impetuosity of divine love, was sometimes unable to refrain
from singing the divine praises aloud in a wonderful manner.
To do this more freely, he sometimes went into the woods,
where the peasants who heard him sing took him for one who
was beside himself ” (Rev. Alban Butler, Lives of the Saints).


Digitized by t^.ooQle


200


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. VI.


the world ! How blest are those whose happy lot it
is to be freed from them ! 11 It often delights me, when
in my sisters’ company, to see how the joy of their
hearts is so great that they vie with one another in
praising our Lord for placing them in this convent :
it is evident that their praises come from the very depths
of their souls. I should like you to do this often, sisters,
for when one begins she incites the rest to imitate her.
How can your tongues be better employed, when you are
together, than in praising God, Who has given us so
much cause for it ?

15. May His Majesty often grant us this kind of
prayer, which is most safe and beneficial ; we cannot
acquire it for ourselves, as it is quite supernatural.
Sometimes it lasts for a whole day and the soul is like
one inebriated, although not deprived of the senses ; "
nor like a person afflicted with melancholia,” in which,
though the reason is not entirely lost, the imagination
continually dwells on some subject which possesses it and
from which it cannot be freed. These are coarse com-
parisons to make in connection with such a precious
gift, yet nothing else occurs to my mind. In this state
of prayer, a person is rendered by this jubilee so forgetful
of self and everything else, that she can neither think

** Way of Perf. ch. ii. 8 ; ch. iii. 1 ; ch. viii. 1.

B Compare with this what has been said in the fourth chapter
of this Mansion, § 17 (note 17).

** Melancholia here as elsewhere means hysteria.


igitized by


Google


CHAP. VI.]


SIXTH MANSIONS.


201


nor speak of anything but praising God, to which her
joy prompts her. Let us all of us join her, my daughters,
for why should we wish to be wiser than she ?
What can make us happier ? And may all creatures
unite their praises with ours for ever and ever ! Amen,
amen, amen !


CHAPTER VII.

Describes the grief felt on account of their sins by souls
on whom God has bestowed the before-mentioned
favours. Shows that, however spiritual a person
may be, it is a great error not to keep before our mind
the Humanity of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ
and His sacred Passion and Life, as also the glorious
Mother of God and the saints. The benefits gained
by such meditation. This chapter is most profitable.

1. Sorrow for sin felt by souls in the sixth Mansion . 2. How this sorrow is felt,
3. St. Teresa's grief for her past sins, 4. Such souls, centred in God,
forget self-interest. 5. The remembrance of divine benefits increases con-
trition. 6. Meditation on our Lord's Humanity. 7. Warning agains
discontinuing it. 8. Christ and the saints our models. 9. Meditation of
contemplatives. 10. Meditation during aridity. 11. We must search for
God when we do not feel His presence. 12. Reasoning and mental prayer.
13. A form of meditation on our Lord's Life and Passion. 14. Simplicity
of contemplatives* meditation. 15. Souls in every state of prayer should think
of the Passion. 16. Need of the example of Christ and the saints. 17. Faith
shows us our Lord as both God and Man. 18. SL Teresa's experience on
meditation on the sacred Humanity. 19. Evil of giving up such meditation.

i. It may seem to you, sisters, that souls to whom God
has communicated Himself in such a special manner
may feel so sure of enjoying Him for ever as no longer
to require to fear or to mourn over their past sins. Those


Digitized by LjOOQle


202


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. VII.


of you will be most apt to hold this opinion who have
never received the like favours ; souls to whom God
has granted these graces will understand what I say.
This is a great mistake, for sorrow for sin increases in
proportion to the divine grace received, and I believe
will never quit us until we come to the land where
nothing can grieve us any more. Doubtless we feel
this pain more at one time than another, and it is of a
different kind, A soul so advanced as that we speak
of does not think of the punishment threatening its
offences, but of its great ingratitude towards Him to
Whom it owes so much, 1 and Who so justly deserves
that it should serve Him, for the sublime mysteries
revealed have taught it much about the greatness of
God.

2. This soul wonders at its former temerity and
weeps over its irreverence ; its foolishness in the past
seems a madness which it never ceases to lament as
it remembers for what vile things it forsook so great a
Sovereign. The thoughts dwell on this more than on
the favours received, which, like those I am about to
describe, are so powerful that they seem to rush through
the soul at times like a strong, swift river. The sins,
however, remain like the mire in the river bed, and dwell
constantly in the memory, making a heavy cross to bear.

3. I know some one who, though she had ceased to

1 Life, ch. vi. 7.


Digitized by LjOOQle


203


CHAP, vn.j SIXTH MANSIONS.

wish for death in order to see God,' yet desired it that
she might be freed from her continual regret for her
past ingratitude towards Him to Whom she owed,
and always would owe, so much. She thought no one’s
guilt could be compared to her own, for she felt there
could be none with whom God had borne so patiently,
nor on whom He had bestowed such graces.

4. Souls which have reached the state I speak of
have ceased to fear hell. At times, though very rarely,
they grieve keenly over the possibility of their losing
God; their sole dread is lest He should withdraw
His hand, leaving them to offend Him, and so they
might return to their former miserable condition. They
care nothing for their own pain or glory ; if they are
anxious not to stay long in purgatory, it is more on
account of its keeping them from the Presence of God
than because of its torments. Whatever favours God
may have shown a soul, I think it is dangerous for it
to forget the unhappy state it was once in : painful as
the remembrance may be, it is most beneficial.

5. Perhaps I think so because I have been so wicked,
and that may be the reason why I never forget my sins ;
people who have led good lives have no cause for grief,
although we always fall at times whilst living in this
mortal body. This pain is not lessened by reflecting

* Excl. vi. 4, 5. Supra, M. v. cb. 2, 5. Poems (those men-
tioned ch. vi. note 1 ).


Digitized by LjOOQle


204 THE INTERIOR CASTLE. [CHAP. VII.

that our Lord has already forgiven and forgotten our
faults ; our grief is rather increased at seeing such
kindness and favours bestowed on one who deserves
nothing but hell. I think St. Paul and the Magdalen
must thus have suffered a cruel martyrdom ; * their
love was intense, they had received many mercies and
realised the greatness and the majesty of God : they
must have found it, therefore, very hard to bear the
remembrance of their sins, which they must have
regretted with a most tender sorrow.

6. You may fancy that one who has enjoyed such
high favours need not meditate on the mysteries of the
most sacred Humanity of our Lord Jesus Christ, but
will be wholly absorbed in love. I have written fully
about this elsewhere. 4 I have been contradicted, and
told that I was wrong and did not understand the matter ;
that our Lord guides souls in such a way that after
having made progress it is best to exercise oneself in
matters concerning the Godhead and to avoid what is
corporeal ; yet nothing will make me admit that this
latter is a good way.

7. I may be mistaken; we may all really mean the
same thing, but I found the devil was trying to lead

me astray in this manner. Having been warned by

* Life, ch. xxi. 9. All editions have Peter. St. Teresa
only wrote P°, but the parallel passage proves she meant Pablo,
and not Pedro. See also M. i. ch. i. 5.

4 Life, ch. xxii. 9-1 1.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. VII.]


SIXTH MANSIONS.


205


experience in this respect, I have decided to speak
again about it here, although I have very often done
so elsewhere.* Be most cautious on the subject ;
attend to what I venture to say about it, and do not
believe any one who tells you the contrary. I will
endeavour to explain myself more clearly than I did
before. If the person who undertook to write on the
matter had treated it more explicitly he would have
done well, for it may do much harm to speak of it in
general terms to us women, who have scanty wits.

8. Some souls imagine they cannot meditate even
on the Passion, still less on the most blessed Virgin, or
on the saints, the memory of whose lives greatly benefits
and strengthens us.‘ I cannot think what such persons

* Life, ch. xxii. 1 ; ch. xxiii. 18 ; ch. xxiv. 2.

* " Deliberate forgetfulness and rejection of all knowledge
and of form must never be extended to Christ and His sacred
Humanity. Sometimes, indeed, in the height of contempla-
tion and pure intuition of the divinity the soul does not remember
the Sacred Humanity, because God raises the mind to this,
as it were, confused and most supernatural knowledge; but
for all this, studiously to forget it is by no means right, for the
contemplation of the sacred Humanity and loving meditation
upon it will help us up to all good, and it is by it we shall
ascend most easily to the highest state of union. It is evident
at once that, while all visible and bodily things ought to be
forgotten, for they are a hindrance in our way. He, Who for our
salvation became man, is not to be accounted among them,
for He is the truth, the door, and the way, and our guide to
all good" (St. John of the Cross, Ascent of Mount Carmel ,
bk. iii. ch. i. 12-14).


Digitized by t^.ooQle


206 the interior castle. [chap. VII.

are to meditate upon, for to withdraw the thoughts from
all corporeal things, like the angelic spirits who are
always inflamed with love, is not possible for us while
in this mortal flesh ; we need to study, to meditate
upon and to imitate those who, mortals like ourselves,
performed such heroic deeds for God. How much less
should we wilfully endeavour to abstain from thinking
of our only good and remedy, the most sacred Humanity
of our Lord Jesus Christ ? I cannot believe that any
one really does this ; they misunderstand their own
minds, and so harm both themselves and others. Of
this, at least, I can assure them : they will never thus
enter the two last mansions of the castle. If they
lose their Guide, our good Jesus, they cannot find the
way, and it will be much if they have stayed safely in
the former mansions. Our Lord Himself tells us that He
is “ the Way ” : He also says that He is “ the Light,"
that “ No man cometh to the Father but by Him,”
and that " He that seeth Me, seeth the Father also.” ’
9. Such persons tell us that these words have some
other meaning ; I know of no other meaning but this,
which my soul has ever recognised as the true one, and
which has always suited me right well. Some people
(many of whom have spoken to me on the subject), after
our Lord has once raised them to perfect contempla-
tion, wish to enjoy it continually. This is impossible ;

7 St. John viii. 12 ; xiv. 6, 9.


zed by LjOOQle


chap, vii.]


SIXTH MANSIONS.


207


still, the grace of this state remains in their souls in such
a way that they cannot reason as before on the mysteries
of the Passion and the Life of Christ. I cannot ac-
count for this, but it is very usual for the mind thus
to remain less apt for meditation. I think it must
be because, as the one end of meditation is to seek God,
after He has once been found, and the soul is accustomed
to seek Him again by means of the will, it no longer
wearies itself by searching for Him with the intellect.

10. It also appears to me that as the will is already
inflamed with love, this generous faculty would, if it
could, cease to make use of the reason. This would be
well, were it not impossible, especially before the soul
has reached the two last mansions.* Time spent in
prayer would thus be lost, as the will often needs the
use of the understanding to rekindle its love. Notice
this point, sisters, which is important, therefore I will
explain it more fully. Such a soul desires to spend
all its time in loving God, and wishes to do nothing
else ; but it cannot succeed, for, though the will is not
dead, yet the flame which kindled it is dying out, and

• Life, ch. xv. 20. St. John of the Cross treats the subject
most carefully. He shows how and when meditation becomes
impossible : Ascent of Mount Carmel, bk. ii. ch. xii ( circa finem ) ;
ch. xiii. { per totum). Living Flame of Love, stanza iii. line iii.
Obscure Night, bk. i. ch. x. and bk. ii. ch. viii. That it should be
procured whenever possible: Obscure Night, bk. L ch. x. (in
fine) ; that it should be resumed : Ascent of Mount Carmel,
bk. ii. ch. xv.


Digitized by LjOOQle


208


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. VII.


the spark needs fanning into a glow. Ought the soul
to remain quiescent in this aridity, waiting, as did our
father Elias, for fire to descend from heaven • to con-
sume the sacrifice which it makes of itself to God ?
Certainly not ; it is not right to expect miracles ; God
will work them for this soul when He chooses. As I
have told you already, and shall do again. His Majesty
wishes us to hold ourselves unworthy of their being
wrought on our account, and desires us to help ourselves
to the best of our abilities.

ii. In my opinion, we ought, during our whole life,
to act in this manner, however sublime our prayer^
may be. True, those whom our Lord admits into the
seventh mansion rarely or never need thus to help
their fervour, for the reason I will tell you of, if I recollect
it, when I come to write of this room where; in a won-
derful manner, souls are constantly in the company
of Christ our Lord, both in His Humanity and His
Divinity." Thus, when the fire in our hearts, which
I spoke of, does not burn in the will, nor do we feel the
presence of God, we must search for Him as He would
have us do, like the Bride in the Canticles , 11 and must

• III Reg. xviii. 30-39.

“ Continual sense of the presence of God: Life, ch. xxvii.
6 ; Rel. xi. 3 : " the intellectual vision of the Three Persons and
of the Sacred Humanity seems ever present.” Castle, M. vii.
ch. iv. 15.

11 Cant. iii. 3 : “ Num quem diligit anima mea vidistis ? "


Digitized by


Google- -


209


CHAP. VII.] SIXTH MANSIONS.

ask all creatures " who it was that made them ” ;
as St. Augustine (either in his Soliloquies or his
Confessions) tells us that he did. 11 Thus we shall not
stand like blockheads, wasting our time in waiting for
what we before enjoyed. At first, it may be that our
Lord will not renew His gift again for a year, or even
for many years ; His Majesty knows the reason, which
we should not try to discover, for there is no need for
us to understand it.

12. As most certainly the way to please God is to
keep the commandments and counsels, let us do so
diligently, while meditating on His life and death

n “ I asked the earth, and it answered me: *1 am not
He ’ ; and whatsoever it contains confessed the same. I asked
the sea and the depths, and the living, creeping things, and
they answered : * We are not thy God, seek above us.' I asked
the heavens, I asked the moving air ; and the whole air with its
inhabitants answered : ' Anaximenes was deceived, I am not
God.* I asked the heavens, sun, moon, stars. * Nor/ say
they, * are we the God Whom thou seekest.’ And I replied
unto all things which encompass the door of my flesh : * Ye have
told me of my God, that ye are not He ; tell me something of
Him.’ And they cried out with a loud voice : * He made us.’
By my thought of them I questioned them, and their beauty
gave their answer” (St. Augustine* s Confessions , bk. x. ch. 6).

St. Teresa may have read this in St. Augustine* s Confessions
(see above, p. 78), or in the Soliloquies, a collection of extracts
from St. Augustine, St. Bernard, St. Anselm, etc., which was
printed in Latin at Venice in 1512, translated into Spanish and
brought out at Valladolid in 1515, and again at Medina del
Campo in 1553, and at Toledo in 1565. The words quoted by
St. Teresa occur in chapter xxxi. See Life , ch. xl. 10.

14


Digitized by t^.ooQle


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


210


[CHAP. VII.


and all we owe Him ; then let the rest be as God chooses.
Some may answer that their mind refuses to dwell on
these subjects ; and for the above causes, this to a certain
extent is true. You know that it is one thing to reason,
and another thing for the memory to bring certain
truths before the mind. Perhaps you may not under-
stand me ; possibly I fail to express myself rightly,
but I will do my best. Using the understanding much,
in this manner, is what I .call meditation.

13. Let us begin by considering the mercjrGod showed
us by giving us His only Son ; let us not sto\> hefe, but
go on to reflect upon all the mysteries of His glorious
life ; or let us first turn our thoughts to His prayer in
the garden, then allow them to continue the subject
until they reach the crucifixion. Or we may take
some part of the Passion, such as Christ’s apprehension,
and dwell on this mystery, considering in detail the
points to be pondered and thought over, such as the
treachery of Judas, the flight of the Apostles, and all
that followed. This is an admirable and very meri-
torious kind of prayer. 1 *

14. Souls led by God in supernatural ways and raised
to perfect contemplation are right in declaring they
cannot practise this kind of meditation. As I said, I
know not why, but as a rule they are unable to do so.
Yet they would be wrong in saying that they cannot

** Life, ch. xiii. 17-23.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. VII.]


SIXTH MANSIONS.


211


dwell on these mysteries, nor frequently think about
them, especially when these events are being celebrated
by the Catholic Church. Nor is it possible for the soul
which has received so much from God to forget these
precious proofs of His love, which are living sparks
to inflame the heart with greater love for our Lord, nor
can the mind fail to understand them. Such a soul
comprehends these mysteries, which are brought before
the mind and stamped on the memory, in a more perfect
way than do other people, so that the mere sight
of our Lord prostrate in the garden, covered with His
terrible sweat, suffices to engross the thoughts, not merely
for an hour, but for several days. The soul looks with
a simple gaze upon Who He is, and how ungratefully
we treat Him in return for such terrible sufferings.
Then the will, although perhaps without sensible tender-
ness, desires to render Him some service for such
sublime mercies, and longs to suffer something for Him
Who bore so much for us ; and employs itself in similar
considerations in which the memory and understanding
also take their part.

15. I think this is why such souls cannot reason
connectedly about the Passion, and fancy they are
unable to meditate on it. Those who do not medi-
tate on this subject had better begin to do so ; for I
know that it will not impede the most sublime prayer,
nor is it well to omit practising this often. If God


Digitized by L^OOQle


212 THE INTERIOR CASTLE. [CHAP. VII.

then sees fit to enrapture them, well and good ; even
if they are reluctant, He will make them cease to
meditate. I am certain that this way of acting is
most helpful to the soul, and not the hindrance it would
become were great efforts made to use the intellect.
This, as I said, I believe, cannot be done when a higher
state of prayer is attained. It may be otherwise in
some cases, for God leads souls in many different
ways. Let not those be blamed, however, who are
unable to discourse much in prayer, nor should they
be judged incapable of enjoying the great graces con-
tained in the mysteries of Jesus Christ, our only Good,
which no one, however spiritual he may be, can persuade
me it is well to omit contemplating.

16. There are souls who, having made a beginning,
or advanced half-way, when they begin to experience the
prayer of quiet, and to taste the sweetness and conso-
lations God gives, think it is a great thing to enjoy
these spiritual pleasures continually. Let them, as I
advised elsewhere, cease to give themselves up so much
to this absorption. Life is long and full of crosses,
and we have need to look on Christ, our pattern, to see
how He bore His trials, and even to take example by
His Apostles and saints, if we would bear our own
trials perfectly. Our good Jesus and His most blessed
Mother are too good company to be left, and He is
well pleased if we grieve at His pains, even though


Digitized by floosie


213


CHAP. VII.] SIXTH MANSIONS.

sometimes at the cost of our own consolations and joys. 14
Besides, daughters, consolations are not so frequent
in prayer that we have no time for this as well. If
any one should tell me she continually enjoys them,
and that she is one of those who can never meditate
on the divine mysteries, I should feel very doubtful
about her state. Be convinced of this, keep free from
this deception, and to the utmost of your power stop
yourselves from being constantly immersed ' in this
intoxication. If you cannot do so, tell the Prioress,
so that she may employ you too busily for you to think
of the matter ; thus you will be free from this danger,
which, if it does no more, when it lasts long, greatly
injures the health and brain. I have said enough to
prove, to those who require it, that however spiritual
their state, it is an error so to avoid thinking of corporeal
things as to imagine that meditation on the most sacred
Humanity can injure the soul.

17. People allege, in defence, that our Lord told His
disciples it was expedient for them that He should go
from them. 1 * This I cannot admit. He did not say so to
His blessed Mother, for her faith 'was firm. She knew
He was both God and man ; and although she loved
Him more dearly than did His disciples, it was in so

14 Way of Perf. ch. xxv. 7.

“ St. John xvi. 7 : " Expedit vobis ut ego vadam ; si enim
non abiero, Paracletus non veniet ad vos.” Life, ch. xxii. 1,
s and note.


Digitized by LjOOQle


214


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. VII.


perfect a way that His bodily presence rather helped
her. The faith of the Apostles must have been
weaker than it was later on, and than ours has reason
to be. I assure you, daughters, that I consider this
a most dangerous idea, whereby the devil might end
by robbing us of our devotion to the most blessed
Sacrament.

18. The mistake I formerly made *' did not lead me
as far as this, but I did not care so much about medi-
tating on our Lord Jesus Christ, but preferred to remain
absorbed, awaiting spiritual consolations. I recognised
clearly that I was going wrong, for as I could not always
keep in this state, my thoughts wandered hither and
thither and my soul seemed like a bird, ever flying
about and finding no place for rest. Thus I lost much
time and did not advance in virtue, nor make progress
in prayer.

19. I did not understand the reason, and as I believed
that I was acting wisely I think I should never have
learnt it but for the advice of a servant of God whom
I consulted about my mode of prayer. Then I perceived
plainly how mistaken I had been, and I have never
ceased regretting that there was a time when I did not
realise how difficult it would be to gain by so great a

“ Life, ch. xxii. n. Although the Saint defends herself
against the charge of self-contradiction, there can be no doubt
from this avowal that she too was at one time mistaken on this
point.


Digitized by LjOOQle


215


CHAP. VII.] SIXTH MANSIONS.

loss. Even if I could, I would seek for nothing save
by Him through Whom comes all the good we possess.
May He be for ever praised ! Amen.


CHAPTER VIII.

Speaks of the manner in which God communicates with
the soul by intellectual vision ; and gives advice
upon the subject. Of the effects produced by this
vision, when genuine. Secrecy about these favours
is enjoined.


1. Our Lord's presence accompanying the soul 2. St. Teresa's experience of
this. 3. Confidence and graces resulting from this vision. 4. Effects of
this vision. 5. It produces humility. 6. And prepares the soul for other
graces. 7. Consciousness of the presence of the saints. 8. Obligations
resulting from this grace 9. Signs that this favour is genuine. 10. A
confessor should he consulted. 11. Our Lord will enlighten our advisers •
12. Cautions about this vision.

i. To prove to you more clearly, sisters, the truth of
what I have been saying, and to show that the more
the soul advances, the closer does this good Jesus bear
it company, it would be well for me to tell you how,
when He so chooses, it cannot withdraw from His presence.
This is clearly shown by the manners and ways in which
His Majesty communicates Himself to us, manifesting
His love by wonderful apparitions and visions which,
if He is pleased to aid me, I will describe to you,, so
that you may not be alarmed if any of these favours
are granted you. We ought, even if we do not
receive them ourselves, to praise Him fervently for thus


Digitized by CjOOQle


216 the interior castle. [chap. VIII.

communing with creatures, seeing how sovereign are His
majesty and power.

2. For example, a person who is in no way expecting
such a favour, nor has ever imagined herself worthy
of receiving it, is conscious that Jesus Christ stands by
her side, although she sees Him neither with the eyes
of the body nor of the soul. 1 This is called an intel-
lectual vision; I cannot tell why. I knew a person to
whom God granted both this grace and others I shall
describe later on. At first it distressed her, for she
could not understand it ; she could see nothing, yet
so convinced did she feel that Jesus Christ was thus
in some way manifesting Himself, that she could not
doubt that it was some kind of vision, whether it came
from God or no. Its powerful effects were a strong
argument that it was from Him ; still she was alarmed,
never having heard of an intellectual vision, nor was
she aware that such a thing could be. She, however,
felt certain of our Lord’s presence,* and He spoke to her
several times in the way that I described. Before she
had received this favour, she had heard words spoken,
but had never known who uttered them.

. 3. She was frightened by this vision, which, unlike an
imaginary one, does not pass away quickly, but lasts
for several days and even sometimes for more than a year.

1 Life, ch. xxvii. 3, 5. Rel. vi>. 26.

1 Life, ch. xxvii. 7.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP, yin.] SIXTH MANSIONS. 217

She went, in a state of great anxiety, to her con-
fessor,' who asked her how, if she saw nothing, did she
know that our Lord was near her, and bade her describe
His appearance. She said she was unable to do so, nor
could she see His face, nor tell more than she had already
done, but that she was sure it was the fact, that it was
He Who spoke to her, and it was no trick of her imagina-
tion. Although people constantly cautioned her against
this vision, she, as a rule, found it impossible to dis-
believe in it, especially when she heard the words : “It
is I, be not afraid.” 4

4. The effect of this speech was so powerful that, for
the time being, she could not doubt its truth. She
felt much encouraged, and rejoiced at being in such
good company, seeing that this favour greatly helped
her to a constant recollection of God and an extreme
care not to displease in any way Him Who seemed
ever by her side, watching her. Whenever she desired
to speak to His Majesty in prayer, or even at other
times. He seemed so close that He could not fail to hear
her. He did not, however, speak to her whenever she
wished, but unexpectedly, when necessity arose. She
was conscious of His being at her right hand, although

* Life, lx. 4. Father Juan de Pradanos was then the Saint's
confessor.

4 Life, ch. xxv. 22 ; ch. xxx. 17. Supra, M. vi.ch.iii. 5.
Ret. vii. 22. St. John of the Cross, Ascent of Mount Carmel,
bk. ii. ch. xxxi. 1.


Digitized by LjOOQle


218


THE INTERIOR CASTLE. [CHAP. VIII.


not in the way we know an ordinary person to be beside
us, but in a more subtle manner, which cannot be
described. This Presence is, however, quite as evident
and certain, and indeed far more so, than the ordinary
presence of other people about which we may be
deceived; not so in this, for it brings with it graces
and spiritual effects which could not come from
melancholia. Nor could the devil thus fill the soul
with peace, with a constant desire to please God, and such
utter contempt of all that does not lead to Him. As
time went on, my friend recognised that this was no
work of the evil one, as our Lord showed her more and
more clearly.

5. I know, however, that she often felt great alarm
and was at times overcome with confusion, being unable
to account for so high a favour having been granted
her. She and I were so very intimate/ that I knew all
that passed in her soul, hence my account is thoroughly
true and reliable. This favour brings with it an over-
whelming sense of self-abasement and humility ; the
reverse would be the case, did it come from Satan/
It is evidently divine ; no human effort could produce
such feelings, nor could any one suppose that such profit
came from herself, but must needs recognise it as a gift
from the hand of God.

‘ * In fact, one and the same person.

' Life, ch. xix. 2 ; ch. xx. 38. Way of Ptrf. ch. xxxvi. 10.


Digitized by t^.oc^ e


CHAP. VIII.]


SIXTH MANSIONS.


219


6. Although I believe some of the former favours
are more sublime, yet this brings with it a special know-
ledge of God ; a most tender love for Him results from
being constantly in His company, while the desires of
devoting one’s whole being to His service are more
fervent than any hitherto described. The conscience
is greatly purified by the knowledge of His perpetual
and near presence, for, although we know that God
sees all we do, yet nature inclines us to grow careless
and forgetful of it. This is impossible here, for our
Lord makes the soul conscious that He is close at hand.
The soul is thus prepared to receive the other graces
mentioned, by constantly making acts of love to Him
Whom it sees or feels at its side. In short, the benefits
caused by this grace prove how great and how valuable
it is. The soul thanks our Lord for bestowing it on one
unworthy of it, but who would refuse to exchange it
for any earthly riches or delight.

7. When our Lord chooses to withdraw His presence,
the soul in its loneliness makes every possible effort to
induce Him to return. This, however, avails but little,
for this grace comes at His will, and not by our endeavours.
At times we may enjoy the company of some saint/
which also brings us great profit. You will ask me, if
we see no one, how can we know whether it is Christ,
or His most glorious Mother, or a saint ? Such a

7 Life , ch. xxix. 6.


Digitized by t^ooQle


220


THE INTERIOR CASTLE. [CHAP. VIII..


person cannot answer this question, or know how she
distinguishes them, but the fact remains undoubted.
It seems easy to recognise our Lord when He speaks, but
it is surprising how the soul can, without hearing a word
from him, recognise which saint has been sent by God to
be its companion and helper.

8. There are other spiritual matters which cannot be
explained. Our inability to grasp them should teach
us how incapable is our nature of understanding the
sublime mysteries of God. Those on whom these favours
are bestowed should marvel at and praise God’s mercy
for them. As these particular graces are not granted
to everybody, any one who receives them should esteem
them highly, and strive to serve God more zealously,
since He has given her such special aid. Therefore such
a person does not rate herself more highly on this
account, but rather thinks she serves Him less than
any one else in the world ; feeling herself to be under
greater obligations to Him than others, any fault she
commits pierces her to the heart, as indeed it ought
under the circumstances.

9. When the effects described are felt, any of you
whom our Lord leads by this way may be certain that
it is neither deceptioa nor. fancy in her case. I believe
it to be impossible for the. devil to produce an illusion
lasting so long, nor could he benefit the soul so remark-
ably, nor cause such interior .peace.. It is not his custom,


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. VIII.] SIXTH MANSIONS. 221

nor, if he would, could such an evil creature bring about
so much good ; the soul would soon be clouded by
self-esteem and the idea that it was better than others.
The mind’s continual keeping in the presence of God,*
and the concentration of its thoughts on Him, would
so enrage the fiend, that, although he might try the
experiment once, he would not often repeat it. God
is too faithful to permit him so much power over one
whose sole endeavour is to please His Majesty and to
lay down her life for His honour and glory ; He would
soon unmask the demon’s artifices.

io. I contend, and always shall do, that if the soul
reaps the effects described from these divine graces,
although God may withdraw these special favours.
His Majesty will turn all things to its advantage ; even
if He permit the devil to deceive it at any time, the
evil spirit will only reap his own confusion. Therefore,
as I told you, daughters, none of you who are led by
this way need feel alarm. Fear is good, and we should
be cautious and not over-confident, for if such favours
made you careless, it would prove they were not from
God, as they did not leave the results I described. It
would be well at first to tell your case, under the seal
of confession, to a thoroughly qualified theologian (for
that is the source whence we must obtain light) or to
some highly spiritual person. If your confessor is not
• Gen. xvii. i : “ Ambula coram Me et esto perfectus."


Digitized by LjOOQle


222 THE INTERIOR CASTLE. [CHAP. VIII.

very spiritual, a good theologian would be preferable ; •
best of all, one who unites both qualities. 1 * Do not be
disturbed if he calls it mere fancy ; if it is, it can neither
harm nor benefit your soul much. Recommend your-
self to the divine Majesty and beg Him not to allow you
to be misled.

ii. It would be worse should he tell you the devil
is deceiving you, although no learned man would say
so if he sees in you the effects described. Even should
your adviser say this, I know that the same Lord Who
is beside you will comfort and reassure you, and will
go to your counsellor and give him light that he may
impart it to you . 11 If the director, though given to
prayer, has not been led by God in this way, he will
at once take fright and condemn it. Therefore I advise
you to choose a qualified theologian, and, if possible,
one who is also spiritual. The Prioress ought to allow
you this, for, although she may feel sure that you are
safe from delusion, because you lead a good life, yet she

9 “ Magni doctores scholastici, si non sint spirituales, vel
omni rerum spiritualium experientia careant, non solent esse
magistri spirituales idonei — nam theologia scholastica est
perfectio intellectus ; mystica, perfectio intellectus et volun-
tatis : unde bonus theologus scholasticus potest esse malus
theologus mysticus. In rebus tamen difficilibus, dubiis, spiritua-
libus, praestat mediocriter spiritualem theologum consulere
quam spiritualem idiotam ” (Schram, Theolog . Mystic , § 483).

10 Life, ch. v. 6.

u Life , ch. xxv. 18 sqq. Way of Perf, ch. iv. 11 ; ch. v. 3.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. VIII.]


SIXTH MANSIONS.


223


is bound to allow you to consult some one for your
mutual security. When you have conferred with these
persons, be at peace ; trouble yourself no more about
the matter, for sometimes, when there is no cause for
fear, the demon gives rise to such immoderate scruples
that the person cannot be satisfied with consulting her
confessor only once on the subject, especially if he is
inexperienced and timid, or if he bids her consult him
again.

12. Thus, that which should have been kept strictly
private becomes public ; 11 such a person is persecuted
and tormented, and finds that what she believed to be
her own secret has become public property. Hence
she suffers many troubles, which may even devolve
upon the Order in such times as these. I warn all
Prioresses that great caution, therefore, is required in
such matters ; also that they must not think a nun
more virtuous than the rest because such favours are
shown her. Our Lord guides every one in the way He
knows to be best. This grace, if made good use of, pre-
pares one receiving it to become a great servant of God,
but sometimes our Lord bestows it on the weakest souls ;
therefore, in itself, it is neither to be esteemed nor con-
demned. We must look to the virtues ; she who is
most mortified, humble, and single-minded in serving
God is the most holy. However, we can never feel
M Life, ch. xxiii. 14-15. Ret. vii. 17.


Digitized by


Google


224


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. IX.


very certain about such matters, until the true Judge
rewards each one according to his merits. Then we
shall be surprised to find how very different is His
judgment from that of this world. May He be for ever
praised. Amen!


CHAPTER IX.

This chapter speaks of the manner in which God com-
municates with the soul by imaginary visions. Strong
reasons are given for not desiring to be led in this
way ; this is very profitable reading.

1 . The jewel in the locket . 2 . The simile explained. 3 . The apparition of
Chriei . 4 . Awe produced by this vision. 5 . False and genuine visions.
6 . Illusive visions. 7 . Effects of a genuine vision. 8 . Conviction left by a
genuine vision. 9 . Its effects upon the after conduct 10 . A confessor
should be consulted. 11 . How to treat visions. 12 . Effects of seeing the
face of Christ 13 . Reasons why visions are not to be sought. 14 . The
second reason. 15 . Third reason. 16 . Fourth reason. 17 . Fifth reason.
18 . Sixth reason. 19 . Additional reasons. 20 . The virtues more meritorious
than consolations. 21 . Fervent souls desire to serve God for Himself
atone .


i. Now we come to treat of imaginary visions, whereby
it is held that the devil is more liable to deceive people
than by the other visions I have already described.
This is probably true. When, however, imaginary
visions are divine, they seem, in a certain manner, more
profitable for us than the others, as being more suited
to our nature — with the exception of the visions sent
by our Lord in the seventh mansion, which far surpass
all others. The presence of our Lord described in


Digitized by L^OOQle


SIXTH MANSIONS.


CHAP. IX.]


225


the last chapter may thus be symbolised. Let us
suppose that we have in our possession a gold locket,
containing a precious stone of the highest value and
powers, which, although we have not seen it, we are
certain is in the case, and its virtues benefit us when
we wear the pendant. Although we have never gazed
on it, we value it highly, knowing by experience that
it has cured us of maladies for which it is remedial.
However, we dare not look at it, nor open the locket,
nor could we do so even if we wished, for the owner of
the jewel alone knows the secret of unfastening its
casket. Although he lent it us for our use, yet he kept
the key for himself ; he will open the trinket when he
chooses to show us its contents, and close it again when
he sees fit to do so.

2. Our Lord treats us here in this way. Now,
suppose the owner of this locket suddenly opened it at
times for the benefit of the person to whom he has
entrusted it ; doubtless the latter would value the
diamond more highly through remembering its wonderful
lustre. This may be compared to what happens when
our Lord is pleased to caress the soul. He shows it in
vision His most sacred Humanity, under whatever form
He chooses ; either as He was during His life on earth,*
or after His resurrection.* The vision passes as quickly
as a flash of lightning, yet this most glorious picture

* Life, ch. vii. n. * Life, ch. xxix. 4.

15


Digitized by LjOOQle


26


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. IX.


lakes an impression on the imagination that I believe
in never be effaced until the soul at last sees Christ
a enjoy Him for ever. Although I call it a “ picture,”
ou must not imagine that it looks like a painting;
hrist appears as a living Person, Who sometimes speaks
nd reveals deep mysteries. You must understand that
hough the soul sees this for a certain space of time,
t is no more possible to continue looking at it than to
;aze for a long time on the sun, therefore this vision
masses very quickly, although its brightness does not
lain the interior sight in the same way as the sun's
jlare injures our bodily eyes.

3. The image is seen by the interior sight alone ; but
if bodily apparitions I can say nothing, for the person
1 know so intimately never experienced anything of
the kind herself, and therefore could not speak about
them with certainty.’ The splendour of Him Who is re-
vealed in the vision resembles an infused light, as of
the sun, covered with a veil as transparent as a diamond,
f such a texture could be woven, while His raiment
ooks like fine linen. The soul to whom God grants
;his vision almost always falls into an ecstasy, nature
leing too weak to bear so dread a sight. I say " dread,”
:hough this apparition is more lovely and delightful
:han anything that could be imagined, even though
iny one should live a thousand years, and spend all
• Life, ch. vii. 11, 12.


Digitized by LjOOQle


SIXTH MANSIONS.


CHAP. IX.]


227


that time in trying to picture it, for it far surpasses
our limited imagination and understanding ; yet the
presence of such surpassing majesty inspires the soul
with great fear.

4 . There is no need to ask how the soul knew Who
He was or who declared with absolute certainty that
He was the Lord of heaven and earth. This is not so
with earthly kings ; unless we were told their names
or saw their attendant courtiers, they would attract
little notice. O Lord 1 how little do we Christians
know Thee ! What will that day be in which Thou
comest as our Judge, since now, when Thou comest as
a Friend to Thy spouse, the sight of Thee strikes us with
such awe ? O daughters ! what will it be when He says
in wrath: “Go, accursed of My Father ?” 4 Let this
impression be the result of this favour granted by God
to the soul and we shall reap no little benefit from it,
since St. Jerome, saint as he was, ever kept the thought
of the last judgment before his eyes.* Thus we shall

4 St. Matt. xxv. 41 : " Discedite a me, maledicti, in ignem
sternum.”

4 “ Whenever I ponder on the Day of Judgment I am over-
whelmed by the thought and tremble from head to foot” (St.
Jerome). The following saying is by some attributed to St. Jerome,
though not to be found in his works : “ Whether I eat or drink,
or whatever else I do, the dreadful trumpet of the last day
seems always sounding in my ears : Arise, ye dead, and come to
judgment " (Alban Butler, Life of St. Jerome). The Life of Christ
by Ludolf of Saxony gives this quotation with the word vox
instead of tuba (part ii. ch. lxxxvii. 9).


Digitized by LjOOQle


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


228


[CHAP. IX.


care nothing what sufferings we endure from the aus-
terities of our Rule, for, long as they may last, the time
is but a moment compared to this eternity of pain. I
sincerely assure you that, wicked as I am, I have
never feared the torments of hell,* for they have
seemed to me as nothing when I remembered that the
lost would see the beautiful, meek, and pitiful eyes of
our Lord turned on them in wrath.* I have thought,
all my life, that this would be more than my heart
could bear.

5. How much more must any one fear this to whom
our Lord so revealed Himself in vision here as to
overcome her feelings and produce unconsciousness !
This must be the reason that the soul remains in a

4

rapture : our Lord strengthens its weakness so as to
unite it to His greatness in this sublime communion
with God. When any one can contemplate this sight
of our Lord for a long time, I do not believe it is a vision,
but rather some overmastering idea which causes the
imagination to fancy it sees something ; this illusion,
however, is but as a dead image in comparison with the
living reality of the other case.

6 . Not only three or four, but a large number of
people have spoken to me on the subject, therefore I
know by experience that there are souls which, either
because they possess vivid imaginations or active minds,

• Life, ch. iii. 7. ’ Excl. ariii. 3.


Digitized by LjOOQle


SIXTH MANSIONS.


CHAP. IX.]


229


or for some other reason of which I am ignorant, are so
absorbed in their own ideas as to feel certain they see
whatever their fancy imagines. If they had ever beheld
a genuine vision, they would recognise the deception
unmistakably. They themselves fabricate, piece by
piece, what they fancy they see : no after effects are
produced on the mind, which is less moved to devotion
than by the sight of a sacred picture. It is clear that no
attention should be paid to such fancies, which pass
more quickly than dreams from the memory.

7. In the favour I am speaking about, the case is
very different. A person is far from thinking of seeing
anything, no idea of which has crossed the mind, when
suddenly the vision is revealed in its entirety, causing
within the powers and senses of the soul a fright and
confusion soon changed into a blissful peace. Thus,
after St. Paul was thrown prostrate on the ground, a
great tempest and noise followed from heaven ; • so, in
the interior world of the soul, there is a violent tumult,
followed instantly, as I said, by perfect calm. Mean-
while, certain sublime truths have been so impressed
on the mind that it needs no other master, for, with no
effort of its own, Wisdom Himself has enlightened its
former ignorance.

8. The soul for some time afterwards possesses such
certainty that this grace comes from God, that whatever

• Acts ix. 3, 4.


Digitized by LjOOQle


230 the interior castle. [chap. IX.

people may say to the contrary it cannot fear delusion.
Later on, when her confessor suggests doubts to her,
God may allow such a person to waver in her belief for
a time, and to feel misgivings lest, in punishment for
her sins, she may possibly have been left to go astray.
However, she does not give way to these apprehensions,
but (as I said in speaking of other matters)* they only
affect her in the same way as the temptations of the
devil against faith, which may disturb the mind, but do
not shake the firmness of belief. In fact, the more
severe the assault, 1 * the more certain is she that the
evil one could never have produced the great benefits
she is conscious of having received, because he exercises
no such power over the interior of the soul. He may
present a fake apparition, but it does not possess
such truth, majesty, and efficacy.

9. As confessors cannot see these effects, which
perhaps the person to whom God has shown the vision
is unable to explain, they are afraid of deception, as,
indeed, they have good reason to be. Therefore
caution is necessary, and time should be allowed to see
what effects follow. Day by day, the progress of the
soul in humility and in the virtues should be watched :
if the devil is concerned in the matter, he will soon
show signs of himself and will be detected in a thousand
lies. If the confessor is experienced and has received
* Castle, M. vi. ch. iii. 12. *• Way of Perf. ch. xL 4.


Digitized by


,7C


CHAP. IX.] SIXTH MANSIONS. 23I

such favours himself, he will not take long in discovering
the truth. In fact, he will know immediately, on being
told of the vision, whether it is divine or comes from
the imagination or the demon: more especially if he
has received the gift of discerning spirits — then, if he is
learned, he will understand the matter at once, even
though he has not personally experienced the like.

10. The great point is, sisters, that you should be
perfectly candid and straightforward with your confessor :
I do not mean in declaring your sins — that is evident
enough — but in giving him an account of your prayer. 11
Unless you do this, I cannot assure you of your safety,
nor that you are led by God. Our Lord desires that we
should be as truthful and open with those who stand
in His place as we should be with Himself ; that we
should wish them to know not only our thoughts but
especially all relating to our actions, however insignificant.
Then you need feel no trouble nor anxiety, H because
even were your vision not from God, it could do you no
harm if you are humble and possess a good conscience ;
for His Majesty knows how to glean good from evil.
What the devil intended to injure you will benefit you
instead : believing that God has granted you such
signal favours, you will strive to please Him better,
and will keep His image ever before your memory.

u Life, ch. xjcvi. 5 ; ch. xxviii. 21.

11 Way of Perf. ch. xL 3,


Digitized by LjOOQle


232


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. IX.


ii. A great theologian ** once said that he should
not trouble himself though the devil, who is a clever
painter, should present before his eyes the living image
of Christ, which would only kindle his devotion and
defeat the evil one with his own weapons. However
wicked an artist may be, we should reverence his picture
if it represents Him Who is our only Good. This great
scholar held that it was very wrong to advise any one
who saw a vision of our Lord to offer it signs of scorn , 14
because we are bound to show respect to the portrait
of our King wherever we see it. I am sure that he was
right, for even in the world, any one who was on friendly
terms with a person would take it as an offence were
his portrait treated with contempt. How much more,
then, should we always show respect to a crucifix or a
picture of our heavenly Sovereign, wherever it meets
our gaze ! Although I have written about this else-
where, I am glad of the opportunity of saying it
now, for I know some one who was deeply pained at
being bidden to behave in this way. I know not who
can have invented such a torture for one who felt bound
to obey the counsel given by her confessor, for she would
have thought her soul was at stake had she disobeyed
him. My advice is, if you are given such an order, that,

u This was Father Dominic Bafiez. Found, ch. viii. 3.
Life, ch. xxix. 6, 7 and note.

14 Letters of Blessed John of Avila (translated by the Bene-
dictines of Stanbrook), i. 5, p. 19.


Digitized by t^ooQle


CHAP. IX.]


SIXTH MANSIONS.


233


humbly alleging the reasons I have set before you to your
confessor, you should not carry it out. I am perfectly
satisfied with the motives given for doing so by him
who counselled me on this subject.

12. One great advantage gained by the soul from
this favour shown by our Lord is that, when thinking
on Him or on His life and Passion, the remembrance of
His most meek and beautiful face brings with it the
greatest consolation. In the same way, we feel happier
after having seen a benefactor than if we had never
known him personally. I can assure you that the
remembrance of the joy caused by this vision gives us
the greatest comfort and assistance.

13. Many other advantages result ; but as I have
written elsewhere “ at length about the effects these
visions produce, and must do so again later on, I will
say no more now, lest I weary us both. However, I
most earnestly advise you, when you know or hear of
God bestowing these graces on others, that you never
pray nor desire to be led by this way yourself, though
it may appear to you to be very good ; indeed, it ought
to be highly esteemed and reverenced, yet no one should
seek to go by it, for several reasons. Firstly, it is a
want of humility to desire what you have never deserved,
therefore I do not think any one who longs for these
graces can be really humble : a common labourer never

* Life, ch. xxviii. 13, 14.


Digitized by


Google


234


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. IX.


dreams of wishing to be made a king — the thing seems
impossible, and he is unfit for it ; a lowly mind has the
same feeling about these divine favours. I do not
believe God will ever bestow these gifts on such a person,
as before doing so He always gives thorough self-
knowledge. How can that soul, while filled with such
lofty aspirations, realise the truth that He has shown
it great mercy in not casting it into hell ?

14. The second reason is that such a one is certain
to be deceived, or at least is in great danger of delusion,
for an entrance is thus left open to the devil, who only
needs to see the door left ajar to slip in at once and play
us a thousand tricks.

15. Thirdly: when people strongly desire a thing,
the imagination makes them fancy they see or hear it,
just as when a man’s mind is set upon a thing all day
he dreams of it at night.

16. Fourthly: it would be very presumptuous of
me to choose a way for myself without knowing what
is good for me." I should leave our Lord, Who knows
my soul, to guide me as is best for me, that His will
may be done in all things.

17. Fifthly : do you think people on whom our Lord
bestows these favours have little to suffer ? No,

* St. Teresa, when led in this way, always asked to be delivered
from favours so dangerous as visions, etc. See Life, ch. xxv.
30; ch. xxvii. 3.


Digitized by LjOOQle


SIXTH MANSIONS.


CHAP. IX.]


235


indeed ! their trials are most severe and of many kinds.
How can you tell whether you would be able to bear
them ?

18. Sixthly : perhaps what you think would be your
gain might prove your loss, as happened to Saul when
he was made king. 17 In short, sisters, there are other
reasons besides these ; believe me, it is safer to wish
only what God wishes, Who knows us better than we
know ourselves, and Who loves us. Let us place our-
selves entirely in His hands, that His will may be
done in us ; we can never go astray if our will is ever
firmly fixed on this.

19. Know that for having received many favours
of this kind, you will not merit more glory, but will be
the more stringently obliged to serve, since you have
received more. God does not deprive us of anything
by which we merit more, for this remains in our own
control. There are many saints who never knew
what it was to receive one such favour, while others,
who have received them, are not saints at all. Do not
imagine that these gifts are continually bestowed ;
indeed, for one that is granted, the soul bears many a
cross, so that, instead of longing to receive more favours,
it only strives to use them better.

20. True, such a grace is a most powerful aid towards
practising the virtues in their highest perfection, but

* I. Reg. xv. 26-28.


Digitized by LjOOQle


236 THE INTERIOR CASTLE. [CHAP. IX.

it is far more meritorious to gain them at the cost of
one’s own toil. I was acquainted with some one, 1 *
indeed with two people (of whom one was a man), on
whom our Lord had bestowed some of these gifts. They
were both so desirous of serving His Majesty at their
own cost without these great consolations, and so longed
to suffer for His sake, that they remonstrated with
Him for giving them these favours, and, if it had been
possible, would have refused to receive them. When
I say “ consolations,” I do not mean these visions,
which greatly benefit the soul and are highly to be
esteemed, but the delights given by God during con-
templation.

21. I believe that these desires are supernatural,
and proper to very fervent souls who wish to prove to
God that they do not serve Him for pay ; so, as I said,
such people do not urge themselves to work harder
for Him by the thought of the glory they will gain,
but rather labour to satisfy their love, of which the
nature is to toil for the Beloved in a thousand ways.
Such souls would fain find a way to consume them-
selves in Him, and were there need that, for the sake
of God’s greater glory, they should be annihilated for
ever, they would count it great gain. May He be for
ever praised Who, in abasing Himself to hold converse

* Life, ch. zL 27. She herself was one, and the other, no
doubt, was a St. John of the Cross.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. IX.] SIXTH MANSIONS. 237

with us miserable creatures, vouchsafes to manifest
His greatness I Amen.


CHAPTER X.

Speaks of various other graces God bestows on the soul in
different ways, and of the great benefits conferred by
them.

1 . Reasons for speaking of these supernatural favours, 2 . An intellectual vision,
3 . God compared to a palace in which His creatures dwell 4 . Forgive
as we are forgiven, 5 . The vision shows God to be Truth itself. 6 . We
should imitate God by truthfulness, 7 . Why God reveals these truths,

i. Our Lord communicates with the soul by means of
these apparitions on many occasions — sometimes when
it is afflicted, at other times when it is about to receive
some heavy cross, and again for the sake of the mutual
delight of Himself and His beloved. There is no need for
me to specify each different case, nor do I intend to do so.
I only wish to teach you (as far as I am acquainted with
them myself) what are the different favours God shows
a soul in this state, that you ipay understand their
characteristics and the effects they produce. Thus you
will not mistake every idle fancy for a vision, and if
you really see one, knowing that such a thing is possible,
you will not be disturbed nor unhappy. As the devil
gains greatly by this, he is delighted to see a soul
troubled and distressed, knowing how this hinders it
from employing itself wholly in loving and praising God.


Digitized by LjOOQle


238


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. X.


2. His Majesty has far higher ways of communicating
Himself to the soul, which are less dangerous, for I
do not think the evil spirit can imitate them. They
are more difficult to explain, being more abstruse ;
therefore imaginary visions are easier to describe. God
is sometimes pleased, while a person is engaged in prayer,
and is in perfect possession of her senses, to suspend
them and to discover sublime mysteries to her, which she
appears to see within God Himself. This is no vision
of the most sacred Humanity, nor can I rightly say
the soul “sees,” for it sees nothing; this is no imag-
inary vision, but a highly intellectual one, wherein is
manifested how all things are beheld in God, and how
He contains them within Himself. 1 It is of great value,
for, although passing in an instant, it remains deeply
engraved in the memory, producing a feeling of great
shame in the mind, which perceives more clearly the
malice of offences against God, since these most heinous
sins are committed within His very being, seeing that
we dwell within Him. I will try to explain this truth
to you by a comparison, for, although it is obvious,
and has been often told us, we either never reflect upon
it or do not wish to understand it. If we realised it,
we could not possibly behave with such audacity.

3. Let us compare God to a very spacious and mag-
nificent mansion or palace, and remember that this

1 Life, ch. xl. 13-16.


Digitized by LjOOQle


SIXTH MANSIONS.


CHAP. X.]


239


edifice is God Himself. Can the sinner withdraw from
it in order to carry out his crimes ? No, certainly not,
for within this very palace, that is, within God Himself,
are perpetrated all the abominations, impurities, and
evil deeds that sinners commit. Oh awful thought,
well worthy to be pondered over ! What profit it would
bring to us, who know so little and understand these
truths but partially, or how could we possibly be so
reckless in our daring ? Let us, sisters, meditate on the
infinite mercy and patience of God in not casting us
down to hell at once, and let us render Him hearty
thanks. Surely we should be ashamed of resenting
anything done or said against us — we, who are the
scum of the earth, when we see what outrages are offered
to God our Creator, within His very being, by us His
creatures ; yet we are wounded whenever we hear of
an unkind word having been spoken of us in our absence,
although perhaps with no evil intention.

4. Oh misery of mankind ! When, daughters, shall
we imitate Almighty God in any way ? Oh, let us not
think we are doing great things if we suffer injuries
patiently, rather let us bear them with alacrity, let us
love our enemies, since this great God has not ceased
to love us, in spite of our many sins I This is indeed
the chief reason that all should forgive any harm done
them. I assure you, daughters, that though this vision
passes very quickly, our Lord has bestowed signal grace


Digitized by LjOOQle


The interior castle.


240


[chap. x.


on her to whom He grants it, if she seeks to profit
by keeping it constantly in mind.

5. Short as the time lasts, yet, in a manner impossible
to describe, God also manifests that in Him there is a
verity which makes all truth in creatures seem obscure.
He convinces the soul that He alone is that Truth which
cannot lie, thus demonstrating the meaning of David’s
words in the psalm : “ Every man is a liar,” * which
could never be thus realised by any other means, how-
ever often we might hear that God is truth infallible.
As I recall Pilate and how he besought our Lord in
His Passion to tell him : “ What is truth ? ” * I realise
how little mortals know of that sublime veracity.

6. I wish I could explain this better, but am unable
to do so. Let us learn from it, sisters, that if we would
bear any resemblance to our God and our Spouse, we
must strive to walk ever in the truth. I do not merely
mean that we should not tell falsehoods, — thank God,
I see that in these convents you are most careful never
to do so on any account, but I desire that, as far as
possible, we should act with perfect truth before God
and man, and above all that we should not wish
to be thought better than we are ; that in all our
deeds we should ascribe to God what is His, and at-
tribute what is ours to ourselves, and that we should


1 Ps. cxv. 11 : " Omnis homo mendax.”

• St. John xviii. 38 : " Quid est veritas ? ”


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. X.]


SIXTH MANSIONS.


241


seek for verity in all things. Thus we shall care little
for this world, which is but deception and falsehood,
and therefore cannot last. Once, while I was won-
dering why our Lord so dearly loves the virtue of
humility, the thought suddenly struck me, without
previous reflection, that it is because God is the
supreme Truth, and humility is the truth, for it is
most true that we have nothing good of ourselves,
but only misery and nothingness : whoever ignores
this, lives a life of falsehood. They that realise
this fact most deeply are the most pleasing to God,
the supreme Truth, for they walk in the truth. God
grant, sisters, that we may have the grace never to lose
this self-knowledge ! Amen.

7. Our Lord shows the soul these favours because
she is now indeed His bride, resolute to do His will in
all things ; therefore He wishes to give her some idea
how to accomplish it, and to manifest to her some of
His divine attributes. I need say no more about it,
but I believe the two points above mentioned will prove
very useful. These favours should cause no fear, but
lead us to praise God for bestowing these graces. I
think neither the devil nor our own imaginations can
have much to do with them, therefore the soul may
rest in perfect peace.


16


Digitized by LjOOQle


242


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. XI.


CHAPTER XI.

Treats of how God inspires the soul with such vehement
and impetuous desires of seeing Him as to endanger
life. The benefits resulting from this divine grace.

1. Favour t increase the soots desire for God. 2. The dart of love. 3. Spiritual
sufferings produced. 4. Its physical effects. 5. Torture of the desire for
God . 6. These sufferings are a purgatory. 7. The torments of hell 8. SI
Teresa* s painful desire after God. 9. This suffering irresistible. 10. Effects
of the dart of love . 11. Two spiritual dangers to life. 12. Courage
needed here and given by our Lord.


i. Will all these graces bestowed by the Spouse upon
the soul suffice to content this little dove or butterfly
(you see I have not forgotten her after all !) so that she
may settle down and rest in the place where she is to
die ? No, indeed, her state is far worse than ever ;
although she has been receiving these favours for many
years past, she still sighs and weeps, because each grace
augments her pain. She sees herself still far away from
God, yet with her increased knowledge of His attributes
her longing and her love for Him grow ever stronger
as she learns more fully how this great God and
Sovereign deserves to be loved. As, year by year
her yearning after Him gradually becomes keener, she
experiences the bitter suffering I am about to describe.
I speak of "years,” because relating what happened
to the person I mentioned, though I know well that
with God time has no limits and in a single moment
He can raise a soul to the most sublime state I have


Digitized by LjtXWLr


CHAP. XI.] SIXTH MANSIONS. 243

described. His Majesty has the power to do all He
wishes, and He wishes to do much for us. These longings,
•tears, sighs, and violent and impetuous desires and
strong feelings, which seem to proceed from our vehement
love, are yet as nothing compared with what I am
about to describe, and seem but a smouldering fire, the
heat of which, though painful, is yet tolerable.

2. While the soul is thus inflamed with love, it
often happens that from a passing thought or spoken
word of how death delays its coming, the heart receives,
it knows not how or whence, a blow as from a fiery
dart. 1 I do not say that this actually is a “ dart,” but,
whatever it may be, decidedly it does not come from
any part of our being.* Neither is it really a " blow,”
though I call it one, but it wounds us severely — not,
I think, in that part of our nature subject to physical
pain, but in the very depths and centre of the soul,
where this thunderbolt, in its rapid course, reduces all
the earthly part of our nature to powder. At the time
we cannot even remember our own existence, for, in an
instant, the faculties of the soul are so fettered as to be
incapable of any action, except the power they retain
of increasing our torture. Do not think I am exag-
gerating ; indeed I fall short of explaining what happens,
which cannot be described.

1 Life, ch. xxix. 17 (Transverberation).

* Life, ch. xxix. 13, 14. Rel. viii. 16-19.


Digitized by LjOOQle


244


the interior castle.


[chap. xi.


3. This is a trance of the senses and faculties, except
as regarding what helps to make the agony more intense.
The understanding realises acutely what cause there
is for grief in separation from God, and His Majesty
now augments this sorrow by a vivid manifestation of
Himself. This increases the anguish to such a degree
that the sufferer gives vent to loud cries, which she
cannot stifle, however patient and accustomed to pain she
may be, because this torture is not corporal, but attacks
the innermost recesses of the soul. The person I speak
of learnt from this how much more acutely the spirit
is capable of suffering than is the body ; she under-
stood that this resembled the pains of purgatory,
where the absence of the flesh does not prevent the
torture from being far worse than any we can feel in
this world.

4. I saw some one in this condition who, I really
thought, would have died, nor would it have been
surprising, for there is great danger of death in this
state. Short as is the time it lasts, it leaves the limbs
all disjointed and the pulse as feeble as if the soul were
on the point of departure, which is indeed the case, for
the natural heat fails, while that which is supernatural
so burns the frame that were it increased ever so little
God would satisfy the soul's desire for death. Not that
any pain is felt by the body at the moment, although,
as I said, all the joints are dislocated, so that for two or


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. XI -1


SIXTH MANSIONS.


245


three days afterwards the suffering is too severe for the
person to have even the strength to hold a pen ; * indeed
I believe that the health becomes permanently enfeebled
in consequence. At the time this is not felt, probably
because the spiritual torments are so far more keen that
the bodily ones remain unnoticed; just as when there
is very severe pain in one part, slighter aches elsewhere
are hardly perceived, as I know by experience. During
this favour, there is no physical suffering either great or
small, nor do I think the person would feel it were she
tom to pieces.

5. Perhaps you will say this is an imperfection, and
you may ask why she does not conform herself to the
will of God, since she has so completely surrendered
herself to it. Hitherto she has been able to do so,
and she consecrated her life to it ; but now she cannot,
because her reason is reduced to such a state that
she is no longer mistress of herself, nor can she think
of anything but what tends to increase her torment —
for why should she seek to live apart from her only
Good ? She feels a strange loneliness, finding no com-
panionship in any earthly creature ; nor could she, I
think, among those who dwell in heaven, since they are

* St. John of the Cross, Obscure Night, bk. ii. ch. i. (in fine) ;
Spiritual Canticle, stanza xiii. ; stanza xiv.-xv. (in fine). When
this happened to St. Teresa she was unable to write for twelve
days. Ribera, Acta SS. p. 555 (in fine). Rel. viii. 13. Life,
ch. xx. 16.


Digitized by


Google


246 THE INTERIOR CASTLE. [CHAP. XI.

not her Beloved : meanwhile, all society is a torture
to her. She is like one suspended in mid-air, who
cannot touch the earth nor mount to heaven ; she is
unable to reach the water while parched with thirst,
and this not a thirst that can be borne, but one which
nothing will quench — nor would she have it quenched,
save with that water of which our Lord spoke to the
Samaritan woman, but this is not given her. 4

6. Alas, O Lord, to what a state dost Thou bring those
who love Thee ! Yet these sufferings are as nothing
compared with the reward Thou wilt give for them.
It is right that great riches should be dearly bought.
Moreover, her pains purify her soul so that it may
enter the seventh mansion, as purgatory cleanses spirits
which are to enter heaven : * then indeed these trials
will appear like a drop of water compared to the sea.
Though this torment and grief could not, I think, be
surpassed by any earthly cross (so at least this person
said, and she had endured much both in body and
mind), yet they appeared to her as nothing in comparison
with their recompense. The soul realises that it has
not merited anguish which is of such measureless value.
This conviction, although bringing no relief, enables
the sufferer to bear her trials willingly — for her entire

* St. John iv. 15. Life, ch. xxx. 24. Way of Perf. ch-

xix. 4 sqq. Exd. ix. Found, ch. xxxi. 42. See note. Life, ch.
i. 6. :

* St. John of the Cross, Obscure Night, bk. ii. ch. xii.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. XI.] SIXTH MANSIONS. 247

lifetime, if God so wills, — although instead of dying
once for all, this would be but a living death, for truly
it is nothing else.

7. Let us remember, sisters, how those who are in hell
lack this submission to the divine will and the resigna-
tion and consolation God gives such a soul, and the solace
of knowing that their pains benefit them, but the damned
will continually suffer more and more ; (more and more , I
mean in regard to accidental pains •). The soul feels far
more keenly than the body, and the torments I have
just described are incomparably less severe than those
endured by the lost, who also know that their anguish
will last for ever ; what, then, will become of these
miserable souls ? What can we do, or suffer, in our
short lives which is worth reckoning if it will free us
from such terrible and endless torments ? I assure you
that, unless you have learnt by experience, it would be
impossible to make you realise how acute are spiritual
pangs and how different from physical pain. Our Lord

• Marginal note in the Saint's handwriting. The " substan-
tial " pain of hell consists in the irrevocable loss of God, our last
end and supreme Good ; this is incurred from the first moment
in its fullest intensity and therefore cannot increase. The
physical pain with which the bodies will be afflicted when
united to the souls after the general resurrection may vary, but
will neither increase nor abate. The ** accidental ” pain of the
damned arises from various causes, for instance from the ever-
increasing effects of evil actions, and therefore increases in the
same proportion. Thus a heresiarch will suffer keener accidental
pain as more and more souls are lost through his false teaching.


Digitized by t^.ooQle


248


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. XI.


wishes us to understand this, so that we may realise what
gratitude we owe Him for having called us to a state
where we may hope, by His mercy, to be freed from
and forgiven our sins.

8. Let us return to the soul we left in such cruel
torment. This agony does not continue for long in its
full violence — never, I think, longer than three or four
hours ; were it prolonged, the weakness of our nature
could not endure it except by a miracle. In one case,
where it lasted only a quarter of an hour, the sufferer
was left utterly exhausted ; indeed, so violent was the
attack that she completely lost consciousness. This
occurred when she unexpectedly heard some one remark
that life seemed unending ; she was engaged in con-
versation at the time, which was on the last day of
Easter. All Eastertide she had suffered such aridity
as hardly to realise what mystery was being celebrated. 7

7 Rel. iv. 1. Concep. ch. vii. 2. Isabel of Jesus, in her
deposition in the Acts of Canonisation (Fuente, Obras, vol. vi.
316) declares that she was the singer. The words were :

V6ante mis ojos,

Dulce Jestis bueno :

V6ante mis ojos,

Y mu6rame yo lu6go.

(Fuente, l.e. vol. v. 143, note 1. CEuvres , ii. 231 (Poem 36,
English version) .) There is a slight difference in the two relations
of this occurrence. In Rel. iv. St. Teresa seems to imply that it
happened on Easter Sunday evening, but here she says distinctly,
“ Pascua de Resurrection, el postrer dia,” that is, on Easter
Tuesday, April 17, 1571, at Salamanca.


Digitized by t^.ooQle


CHAP. XI.]


SIXTH MANSIONS.


249


9. It is as impossible to resist this suffering as it
would be to prevent the flames having heat enough to
bum us if we were thrown into a fire. These feelings
cannot be concealed : all who are present recognise the
dangerous condition of such a person, although they are
unable to see what is passing within her. True, she knows
her friends are near, but they, and all earthly things
seem to her but shadows. To show you that, should
you ever be in this state, it is possible for your weak-
ness and human nature to be of help to you, I may tell
you that at times, when a person seems dying from her
desire for death,* which so oppresses her soul with grief
that it appears on the point of leaving her body, yet her
mind, terrified at the thought, tries to still its pain so
as to keep death at bay. Evidently this fear arises
from human infirmity, for the soul’s longings for death
do not abate meanwhile, nor can its sorrow be stilled or
allayed until God brings it comfort.' This He usually
does by a deep trance, or by some vision, whereby the
true Comforter consoles and strengthens the heart,
which thus becomes resigned to live as long as He wills. 1 *

10. This favour entails great suffering, but leaves

• Compare the words " Que muero porque no muero,” in
the dosa of St. Teresa. Way of Perf. ch. xlii. 2. Castle, M.
vii. ch. iii. 14.

• Way of Perf. ch. xix. 10. Excl. vi. ; xii. 2 ; xiv.

1# See the two versions of the poems written by the Saint
on her recovery from the trance into which she was thrown.


Digitized by


Google


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


250


[CHAP. XI


most precious graces within the soul which loses all
fear of any crosses it may henceforth meet with, for in
comparison with the acute anguish it has gone through
all else seems nothing. Seeing what she has gained, the
sufferer would gladly endure frequently the same pains, 11
but can do nothing to help herself in the matter. There
are no means of reaching that state again until God
chooses to decree it, when neither resistance nor escape
is possible. The mind feels far deeper contempt for
the world than before, having learnt that nothing earthly
can succour it in its torture ; it is also much more de-
tached from creatures, having learnt that no one but
its Creator can bring it consolation and strength. It
is more anxious and careful not to offend God, seeing
that He can torment as well as comfort."

11. Two things in this spiritual state seem to me to
endanger life, — one is what I have just spoken of, which

beginning “ Vivir sin vivir in me" and the poem, “ Cuan triste
es, Dios mio" (Poems 2, 3, and 4, English version).

See also St. Teresa’s poem, " Ya toda me entregu6 y di ”
(Poem 7, English version).

Struck by the gentle Hunter
And overthrown.

Within the arms of Love
My soul lay prone.

Raised to new life at last.

This contract 'tween us passed.

That the Beloved should be mine owij,

I His alone.
u Rel. viii. 17.

“ Ada SS. p. 64, n. 229.


Digitized by CjOOQle


SIXTH MANSIONS.


CHAP. XI.]


251


is a real peril and no small one ; the other is an excessive
gladness and delight, which is so extreme that the
soul appears to swoon away and seems on the point
of leaving the body, which indeed would bring it no
small joy.

12. Now you see, sisters, whether I had not reason
to tell you that courage was needed for these favours,
and that when any one asks for them from our Lord
He may well reply, as He did to the sons of Zebedee :
" Can ye drink the chalice that I shall drink ? ” ** I
believe, sisters, we should all answer "Yes ” — and
we should be perfectly right, for His Majesty gives
strength when He sees it needed : He ever defends
such souls and answers for them when they are perse-
cuted and slandered, as He did for the Magdalen — if
not in words, at least in deeds . 14 At last, ah, at last !
before they die. He repays them for all they have
suffered, as you shall now learn. May He be for ever
blessed, and may all creatures praise Him! Amen.

u St. Matt. xx. 22 : “ Potestis bibere calicem quem ego

bibiturus sum ? ”

14 St. Matt. xxvi. 10 ; St. Mark xiv. 6 ; St. John xii. 7. Way
of Perf. ch. xvi. 7 ; ch. xvii. 4. Excl. v. 2-4.


Digitized by LjOOQle


THE SEVENTH MANSIONS.


CHAPTER I.

Treats of the sublime favours God bestows on souls which
have entered the seventh mansions. The author
shows the difference she believes to exist between
soul and spirit, although they are both one. This
chapter contains some noteworthy things.


1. Sublime mysteries of these mansions . 2. SL Teresa abashed at treating
such subjects. 3. Our Lord introduces His bride into His presence chamber.
4. Darkness of a soul in mortal sin. 5. Intercession for sinners. 6. The
soul an interior world. 7. The spiritual nuptials. 8. Former favours
differ from spiritual nuptials . 9. The Blessed Trinity revealed to the
souL 10. Permanence of Its presence in the soul 11. The effects.
12. This presence is not always equally realised. 13. It is beyond the
sours control 14. The centre of the soul remains calm. 15. The soul
and the spirit distinct though united. 16. The soul and its faculties not
identical

l. You may think, sisters, that so much has been said
of this spiritual journey that nothing remains to be
added. That would be a great mistake : God’s immen-
sity has no limits, neither have His works ; therefore,
who can recount His mercies and His greatness? ‘ It
is impossible, so do not be amazed at what I write
about them, which is but a cipher of what remains
untold concerning God. He has shown great mercy

1 Ps. cxliv. 3: " Magnitudinis ejus non est finis.”

* 253


Digitized by LjOOQle


seventh mansions.


Chap, i.]


253


in communicating these mysteries to one who could
recount them to us, for as we learn more of His inter-
course with creatures, we ought to praise Him more
fervently, and to esteem more highly the soul in which
He so delights. Each of us possesses a soul, but we do
not realise its value, as made in the image of God, there-
fore we fail to understand the important secrets it
contains. May His Majesty be pleased to guide my
pen, and to teach me to say somewhat of the much there
is to tell of His revelations to the souls He leads into
this mansion. I have begged Him earnestly to help
me, since He sees that my object is to reveal His mercies,
for the praise and glory of His name. I hope He will
grant this favour, if not for my own sake, at least for
yours, sisters — that you may discover how vital it is
for you to put no obstacle in the way of the Spiritual
Marriage of the Bridegroom with your soul, which
brings, as you will learn, such signal blessings with it.

2. O great God ! surely such a miserable creatine as
myself should tremble at the thought of speaking on
a subject so far beyond anything I deserve to under-
stand. Indeed I felt abashed, and doubted whether it
would not be better to finish writing about this mansion
in a few words* lest people might imagine that I recounted
my personal experience. I was overwhelmed with
shame, for, knowing what I am, it is a terrible under-
taking. On the other hand, this fear seemed but a


Digitized by LjOOQle


254 the interior castle. [chat, ti

temptation and weakness : even if I should be mis-
judged, so long as God is but a little better praised and
known, let all the world hoot at me. Besides, I may be
dead before this book is seen. May He Who lives and
shall live to all eternity be praised 1 Amen.

3. When our Lord is pleased to take pity on the
sufferings, both past and present, endured through her
longing for Him by this soul which He has spiritually
taken for His bride, He, before consummating the
celestial marriage, brings her into this His mansion or
presence chamber. This is the seventh mansion, for
as He has a dwelling-place in heaven, so has He in the
soul, where none but He may abide, and which may
be termed a second heaven.

4. It is important, sisters, that we should not fancy
the soul to be in darkness. As we are accustomed
to believe there is no light but that which is exterior,
we imagine that the soul is wrapt in obscurity. This
is indeed the case with a soul out of the state of grace,*
not, however, through any defect in the Sun of Justice, '
which remains within it and gives it being, but the
soul itself is incapable of receiving the light, as I think
I said in speaking of the first mansion.* A certain person
was given to understand that such unfortunate souls

1 See the Saint's description of a soul in the state of sin,
Rel. iii. 13 (towards the end).

* Supra, M. i. ch. ii. 1.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. I.] SEVENTH MANSIONS. 255

are, as it were, imprisoned in a gloomy dungeon, chained
hand and foot, and unable to perform any meritorious
action : they are also both blind and dumb. Well
may we pity them, when we reflect that we ourselves
were once in the same state and that God may show
them mercy also.

5. Let us, then, sisters, be most zealous in interceding
for them, and never neglect it. To pray for a soul in
mortal sin is a far more profitable form of almsgiving
than it would be to help a Christian whom we saw with
hands strongly fettered behind his back, tied to a post
and dying of hunger — not for want of food, because
plenty of the choicest delicacies lay near him, but
because he was unable to put them into his mouth —
although he was extremely exhausted and on the point
of dying, and that not a temporal death, but an eternal
one. Would it not be extremely cruel of us to stand
looking at him, and give him nothing to eat ? What
if by your prayers you could loose his bonds ? Now yo u
understand.

6. For the love of God I implore you constantly to
remember in your prayers souls in a like case. We are
not speaking now of them, but of others who, by the
mercy of God, have done penance for their sins and
are in a state of grace. You must not think of the soul
as insignificant and petty, but as an interior world,
containing the number of beautiful mansions you have


Digitized by LjOOQle


256 the interior castle. [chap. I.

seen ; as indeed it should, since in the centre of the
soul there is a mansion reserved for God Himself.

7. When His Majesty deigns to bestow on the soul
the grace of these divine nuptials. He brings it into
His presence chamber, and does not treat it as before,
when He put it into a trance. I believe He then united
it to Himself, as also dining the prayer of union ; but
then only the superior part was affected, and the soul
did not feel called to enter its own centre as it does in
this mansion. Here it matters little whether it be in
the one way or the other.

8. In the former favours our Lord unites the spirit
to Himself and makes it both blind and dumb, like
St. Paul after his conversion, 4 thus preventing it from
knowing whence or how it enjoys this grace, for the
supreme delight of the spirit is to realise its nearness to
God. During the actual moment of divine union the
soul feels nothing, all its powers being entirely lost.
Now, however, He acts differently : our pitiful God
removes the scales from its eyes,* that it may see and
understand somewhat of the grace received, in a strange
and wonderful manner in this mansion, by means of
intellectual vision.

4 Acts ix. 8 : “ Surrexit autem Saulus de terra ; apertisque
oculis nihil videbat.” There is, however, nothing to imply
that he was dumb as well as blind.

* Acts ix. 18 : " Et confestim ceciderant ab oculis ejus tam-
quam squamae et visum recepit.” Way of Perf. ch. xxviii. 11.


Digitized by LjO Me


CHAP. I.]


SEVENTH MAfcStONS.


25 1

9. By some mysterious manifestation of the truth,
the three Persons of the most Blessed Trinity reveal
themselves, preceded by an illumination which shines
on the spirit like a most dazzling cloud of light. 1 The
three Persons are distinct from one another ; a sublime
knowledge is infused into the soul, imbuing it with a
certainty of the truth that the Three are of one substance,
* power, and knowledge, and are one God. Thus that
which we hold, as a doctrine of faith, the soul now, so
to speak, understands by sight, although it beholds the
Blessed Trinity neither by the eyes of the body nor of
the soul, for this is no imaginary vision. All the three
Persons here communicate Themselves to the soul, speak
to it, and make it understand the words of our Lord in

• Rel. iii. 6; v. 6-8; viii. 20, 21 ; ix. 12, 17, 19. Deposi-
tion by Fr. Giles Gonzalez, S.J., Provincial of Old Castile,
afterwards Assistant-General in Rome : " While the holy

Mother lived at the convent of the Incarnation of Avila, I often
spoke with her, and once I remember she asked me : * What
am I to do. Father ? Whenever I recollect myself I realise that
already in this life the Three Persons of the Blessed Trinity may
be seen, and that They accompany me and assist me in the
management of my affairs * ” (Fuente, Obras , vol. vi. p. 280).

41 Doha Maria Enriquez, duchess of Alva, said that St. Teresa
made known to her many revelations she had received from
our Lord, and that she (the duchess) held in her possession
three paintings of the Blessed Trinity made according to the
description of the holy Mother, who, while they were being
done, effaced with her own hand those portions which the painter
failed to design conformably to the vision she had had ” (Fuente,
l.c. p. 297).

17


Digitized by t^.ooQle


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


258


[CHAP. I.


the Gospel, that He and the Father and the Holy Ghost
will come and make their abode with the soul which
loves Him, and which keeps His commandments.'

10. O my God, how different from merely hearing
and believing these words is it to realise their truth in
this way 1 Day by day a growing astonishment takes
possession of this soul, for the three Persons of the
Blessed Trinity seem never to depart ; it sees with
certainty, in the way I have described, that They dwell
far within its own centre and depths ; though unable
to describe how, for want of learning, it is conscious of
the indwelling of these divine Companions.

11. You may fancy that such a person is beside
herself and that her mind is too inebriated to care for
anything else. On the contrary, she is far more active
than before in all that concerns God’s service, and
when at leisure she enjoys this blessed companionship.
Unless she first deserts God, I believe He will never
cease to make her clearly sensible of His presence : she
feels confident, as indeed she may, that He will never
so fail her as to allow her to lose this favour, after
once bestowing it ; at the same time, she is more careful
than before to avoid offending Him in any way.

12. This presence is not always so entirely realised.


' St. John xiv. 23 : “ Si quis diligit me, sermonem meum
servabit, et Pater meus diliget earn, et ad earn veniemus et
mansionem apud eum faciemus.”


Digitized by


Go ^


1


CHAP. I.] SEVENTH MANSIONS. 259

that is, so distinctly manilest, as at first, or as it is
at times when God renews this favour, otherwise the
recipient could not possibly attend to anything else, nor
live in society. Although not always seen by so clear
a light, yet whenever she reflects on it she feels the
companionship of the Blessed Trinity. This is as if,
when we were with other people in a very well lighted
room, some one were to darken it by closing the shutters ;
we should feel certain that the others were still there,
although unable to see them. 1

13. You may ask : “ Could she not bring back the
light and see them again ? ” • This is not in her power ;
when our Lord chooses. He will open the shutters of
the understanding : He shows her great mercy in never
quitting her and in making her realise it so clearly.
His divine Majesty seems to be preparing His bride for

• One of the Saint’s favourite comparisons. See Life , ch.
xxvii. 7. Castle , M. vi. ch. viii. 3. Rel. vii. 26.

• “ Though the soul be always in the high estate of marriage
since God has placed it there, nevertheless, actual union in all
its powers is not continuous, though the substantial union
is. In this substantial union the powers of the soul are most
frequently in union, and drink of His cellar, the understanding
by knowledge, the will by love, etc. We are not therefore to
suppose that the soul, when saying it went out, has ceased from
its substantial or essential union with God, but only from the
union of its faculties, which is not, and cannot be, permanent in
this life ” (St. John of the Cross, Spiritual Canticle, stanza xxvi. 9.
On the words : 44 In the inner cellar of my Beloved have I
drunk, and when I went forth”).


Digitized by t^.ooQle


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


260


[CHAP. I.


greater things by this divine companionship: which
clearly helps perfection in every way, and makes her
lose the fear she sometimes felt when other graces were
granted her.

14. Thus a certain person so favoured found she
had improved in all the virtues : whatever were her
trials or labours, the centre of her soul seemed to her
never moved from its resting-place. ’ Thus in a manner
her soul seemed divided : a short time after God had
done her this favour, when she was undergoing great
sufferings, she complained of her soul as Martha did of
Mary, 1 * reproaching it with enjoying solitary peace while
leaving her so full of troubles and occupations that she
could not keep it company.

15. This may seem extravagant to you, daughters,
yet though the soul is known to be undivided, it is fact
and no fancy, and often happens. Interior effects show
for certain that there is a positive difference between
the soul and the spirit, although they are one with
each other." There is an extremely subtle distinction


*• St. Luke ch. x. 40. Ex cl. v. 2, 3 ; Way of Perf. ch. xv. 4 ;
ch. xxxi. 4. Rel. viii. 6. Concep. ch. vii. 4.

u Life, ch. xviii. 4. The distinction between soul and spirit,
to be found in the Epistle to the Hebrews, iv. 12, according to
Cornelius a Lapide (ad loc.) consists in this, that the term soul
comprises the faculties, senses, and passions, whereas the term
spirit denotes the substance of the soul independently of its
powers. In the inferior degrees of the Mystical life God operates
through the faculties, while in the Mystical marriage He acts


Digitized by ^ooQle


CHAP.' I.] SEVENTH MANSIONS. 26l

between them, so that sometimes they seem to act in a
different manner from one another, as does the know-
ledge given to them by God.

. 16. It also appears to me that the soul and its faculties
are not identical. There are so many and such trans-
cendental mysteries within us, that it would be pre-
sumption for me to attempt to explain them. If by
God’s mercy we enter heaven we shall understand these
secrets.


CHAPTER II.

Treats of the same subject : explains, by some delicately
drawn comparisons, the difference between spiritual
union and spiritual marriage.

1 . The spiritual nuptials introduced by an imaginary piston . 2 . Spiritual
espousals and marriage differ . 3 . Spiritual marriage lasting . 4 . Not so
spiritual espousals. 5 . Spiritual marriage permanent 6 . St Paul and
spiritual marriage. 7 . The sours fog in union. 8 . Its conviction of God? s
indwelling. 9 . Its peace. 10 . Christs prayer for the divine union of the
soul 11 . Its fulfilment 12 . Unalterable peace of the soul in Mansion
VII. 13 . Unless it offends God. 14 . Struggles outside Mansion VII.
15 . Comparisons explaining this.

i. We now come to speak of divine and spiritual
nuptials, although this sublime favour cannot be received
in all its perfection during our present life, for by for-
saking God this great good would be lost. The first
time God bestows this grace. He, by an imaginary

directly on the substance of the soul. St. Teresa is not quite
consistent in the use of these terms, which is not surprising, as she
owns that she does not quite understand this subtle distinction.


Digitized by LjOOQle


262 THE INTERIOR CASTLE. [CHAP. IL

vision of His most sacred Humanity, reveals Himself
to the soul, that it may understand and realise the
sovereign gift it is receiving. He may manifest Himself
in a different way to other people ; the person I men-
tioned, after she had been to Holy Communion, beheld
our Lord, full of splendour, beauty, and majesty, as He
was after His Resurrection. 1 He told her that hence-
forth she was to care for His affairs as though they
were her own, and He would care for hers : He spoke
other words, which she could understand better than
repeat. This may seem to be nothing new, for our
Lord had thus revealed Himself to her at other times ; *
yet this was so different that it left her bewildered and
amazed, both on account of the vividness of what she
saw and of the words heard at the time, and also because
it took place in the interior of the soul, where, with the
exception of the one last mentioned, no other vision
had been seen.

2. You must understand that between the visions
seen in this and in the former mansions there is a vast
difference ; there is the same distinction between spiritual
espousals and spiritual marriage as between people
who are only betrothed and others who are united for
ever in holy matrimony. I have told you * that though
I make this comparison because there is none more

1 Rel. iii. 20 ; ix. 8 and 25. • Castle, M. v. ch. iv. 1.

* Life, ch. xxxix. 29.


Digitized by


CHAP. II.]


SEVENTH MANSIONS.


263


suitable, yet these espousals are no more related to our
corporal condition than if the soul were a disembodied
spirit. This is even more true of the spiritual marriage,
for this secret union takes place in the innermost centre
of the soul, where God Himself must dwell : I believe
that no door is required to enter it. I say, “ no door
is required,” for all I have hitherto described seems to
come through the senses and faculties, as must the
representation of our Lord’s Humanity, but what
passes in the union of the spiritual nuptials is very
different. Here God appears in the soul’s centre, not
by an imaginary but by an intellectual vision, far more
mystic than those seen before, just as He appeared to
the Apostles without having entered through the door
when He said : “ Pax vobis.” 4
3. So mysterious is the secret and so sublime the
favour that God thus bestows instantaneously on the
soul, that it feels a supreme delight, only to be de-
scribed by saying that our Lord vouchsafes for the
moment to reveal to it His own heavenly glory, in a
far more subtle way than by any vision or spiritual
delight. As far as can be understood, the soul, I
mean the spirit of this soul, is made one with God, 1
Who is Himself a spirit, and Who has been pleased to
show certain persons how far His love for us extends,
that we may praise His greatness. He has thus deigned
4 St. John xx. 19. * Rel. xL 1 sqq.


Digitized by


Google


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


264


[CHAP. 11.


to unite Himself to His creature ; He has bound
Himself to her as firmly as two human beings are
joined in wedlock, and will never separate Himself
from her.

4. Spiritual espousals are different, and like the
grace of union are often dissolved ; for though two things
are made one by union, separation is still possible, and
each part then remains a thing by itself. This favour
generally passes quickly, and afterwards the soul, as
far as it is aware, remains without His company.

5. This is not so in spiritual marriage with our Lord,
where the soul always remains in its centre with its God.
Union may be symbolised by two wax candles, the tips
of which touch each other so closely that there is but
one light; or again, the wick, the wax, and the light
become one, but the one candle can again be separated
from the other, and the two candles remain distinct ;
or the wick may be withdrawn from the wax. But
spiritual marriage is like rain falling from heaven into
a river or stream, becoming one and the same liquid,
so that the river and the rain water cannot be
divided ; or it resembles a streamlet flowing into the
ocean, which cannot afterwards be disunited from it.
This marriage may also be likened to a room into
which a bright light enters through two windows, —
though divided when it enters, the light becomes one
and the same.


Digitized by


Google


CHAP. II.]


SEVENTH MANSIONS.


265


6. Perhaps when St. Paul said, “ He who is joined
to the Lord is one spirit,” • he meant this sovereign
marriage, which presupposes His Majesty’s having been
joined to the soul by union. The same Apostle says :
" To me, to live is Christ and to die is gain.” * This, I
think, might here be uttered by the soul, for now the
little butterfly of which I spoke dies with supreme
joy, for Christ is her life.

7. This becomes more manifest by its effects as time
goes on, for the soul learns that it is God Who gives it
“ life,” by certain secret intuitions too strong to be
misunderstood, and keenly felt, although impossible to
describe. These produce such overmastering feelings
that the person experiencing them cannot refrain from
amorous exclamations, such as, " O Life of my life, and
Power which doth uphold me ! ” with other aspirations
of the same kind.* For from the bosom of the Divinity,
where God seems ever to hold this soul fast clasped,
issue streams of milk, which solace the servants of the
castle. I think He wishes them to share, in some way,

* 1 Cor. vi. 17 : " Qui adhasret Domino unus spiritus est.”

7 Phil. i. 21 : “ Mihi vivere Christus est et mori lucrum."

* Such exclamations, in considerable number, form the Booh
of Exclamations published by Fray Luis de Leon. De Fuente
thinks it was written in 1569, but as St. Teresa’s Spiritual
Espousals took place on November 18, 1572, it seems, at least
in parts, of a later date. The Spiritual Nuptials must be placed
between the aforementioned year and May 1575, but it is not
possible to ascertain the exact date.


Digitized by


Google


266


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP, n,


the riches the soul enjoys ; therefore from the flowing
river in which the little streamlet is swallowed up,
some drops of water flow every now and then to
sustain the bodily powers, the servants of the bride
and Bridegroom.

8. A person who was unexpectedly plunged into
water could not fail to be aware of it ; here the case is
the same, but even more evident. A quantity of water
could not fall on us unless it came from some source —
so the soul feels certain there must be some one within
it who lances forth these darts and vivifies its own
life, and that there is a Sun whence this brilliant light
streams forth from the interior of the spirit to its
faculties.

9. The soul itself, as I said, never moves from this
centre, nor loses the peace He can give Who gave it
to the Apostles when they were assembled together.*
I think this salutation of our Lord contains far deeper
meaning than the words convey, as also His bidding
the glorious Magdalen to “go in peace.” *• Our. Lord's
words act within us, 11 and in these cases they must have
wrought their effect in the souls already disposed to
banish from within themselves all that is corporal
and to retain only what is spiritual, in order to be

* St. John xx. 19.

*• St. Luke vii. 50.

11 Supra, M. vi. ch. iii. 6. Life, ch. xxv. 5.


Digitized by


Go ~ ;le


CHAP. II.] SEVENTH MANSIONS. 267

joined in this celestial union with the uncreated Spirit.
Without doubt, if we empty ourselves of all that
belongs to the creature, depriving ourselves of it for
the love of God, that same Lord will fill us with
Himself.

10. Our Lord Jesus Christ, praying for His Apostles,
(I cannot remember the reference), asked that they
might be made one with the Father and with Himself,
as Jesus Christ our Lord is in the Father and the
Father in Him 1 11 I know not how love could be
greater than this ! Let none draw back from enter-
ing here, for His Majesty also said : “ Not only for
them do I pray, but for them also who through their
word shall believe in Me” ; " and He said : “ I am in
them.” 14

11. God help me 1 how true these words are, and how
clearly does the soul understand them which in this state
of prayer finds them fulfilled in itself 1 And so should
all of us, were it not through our own fault, for the
words of Jesus Christ, our King and our Lord, cannot
fail. It is we who fail, by not disposing ourselves fitly,
nor removing all that can obstruct this light, so that

11 St. John xvii. 21 : “ Ut omnes unum sint, sicut tu. Pater,
in me et ego in te, ut et ipsi in nobis unum sint.”

** St. John xvii. 20 : “ Non pro eis autem logo tantum, sed
et pro eis qui credituri sunt per verbum eorum in me.”

M St. John xvii. 23 : “ Ego in eis.”


Digitized by t^,ooQle


268 THE INTERIOR CASTLE. [CHAP. II.

we do not behold ourselves in this mirror wherein our
image is engraved. 11

12. To return to what I was saying. God places the
soul in His own mansion, which is in the very centre
of the soul itself. They say the empyreal heavens,
wherein our Lord dwells, do not revolve with the rest :
so the accustomed movements of the faculties and
imagination do not appear to take place in any way
that can injure the soul or disturb its peace.

13. Do I seem to imply that after God has brought
the soul thus far it is certain to be. saved, and cannot
fall into sin again ? 1# I do not mean this : whenever

15 This idea is expressed in St. Teresa's poem, 44 Alma, buscarte
has en Mi " (Poem io, English version).

Such is the power of love, O Soul,

To paint thee in my heart
No craftsman with such art
Whate’er his skill might be, could there
Thine image thus impart 1
'Twas love that gave Thee life —

Then, fair one, if thou be

Lost to thyself, thou'lt see

Thy portrait in my bosom stamped : —

Soul, seek thyself in Me.

lf In a letter dated May 1581, and addressed to Don Alonso
Velasquez, then Bishop of Osma, St. Teresa writes as follows :

44 She [herself] has received such an assurance of coming one day
to the fruition of God that she almost imagines she has already
come into possession of Him, without, however, the joy that
will accompany it. She is in the same position as one who by
legal contract has received a splendid property which wiU become
his, and whose fruit he will enjoy at a given date. Until then


Digitized by t^.ooQle


CHAP. IlJ


SEVENTH MANSIONS.


269


I say that the soul seems in security, I must be under-
stood to imply for as long as His Majesty thus holds
it in His care and it does not offend Him. At any rate
I know for certain that though such a person realises
the high state she is in, and has remained in it for several
years, she does not consider herself safe, but is more
careful than ever to avoid committing the least offence
against God. As I shall explain later on, she is most
anxious to serve Him, and feels a constant pain and
confusion at seeing how little she can do for Him, com-
pared with all she ought. This is no light cross; but a
great mortification, for the harder the penances she can
perform, the better is she pleased. Her greatest penance
is to be deprived by God of health and strength to
perform any. I told you elsewhere what keen pain
this caused her, but now it grieves her far more: This
must be because she is like a tree grafted on a stock
growing near a stream which makes it greener and more


he. only holds the title-deeds, without being able to take posses-
sion of the property. Nevertheless my soul would not like to
come immediately into the possession of God, for it does not
believe that it has deserved such a grace. It only desires to
continue in His service, even at the cost of terrible sufferings.
It would not mind thus serving Him to the end of the world,
after having received such a pledge.' * St. John of the Cross, in
treating of this subject (Sptr. Cant, stanza xxii. 3) says : " I
believe that no soul ever attains to this state without being
confirmed in grace in it." See also .Ribera, in the Acta Ss.
p. 554, circa finetn.


Digitized by


Google


[CHAP. II.


270 THE INTERIOR CASTLE.

fruitful. 1 ’ Why marvel at the longings of this soul,
whose spirit has indeed become one with the celestial
water I described ?

14. To return to what I wrote about. It is not
intended that the powers, senses, and passions should
continually enjoy this peace. The soul does so, indeed,
but in the other mansions there are still times of struggle,
suffering, and fatigue, though as a general rule, peace is
not lost by them. This “ centre of the soul ” or “ spirit ”
is so hard to describe or even to believe in, that I think,
sisters, my inability to explain my meaning saves you
from being tempted to disbelieve me ; it is difficult to
understand how there can be crosses and sufferings,
and yet peace in the soul.

15. Let me give you one or two comparisons, — God
grant they may be of use ; if not, I know that what I say
is true. A king resides in his palace ; many wars and
disasters take place in his kingdom, but he remains on
his throne. In the same way, although tumults and
wild beasts rage with great uproar in the other mansions,
yet nothing of this enters the seventh mansions, nor
drives the soul from it. Although the mind regrets
these troubles, they do not disturb it nor rob it of its
peace, for the passions are too subdued to dare to

17 Ps. i. 3 : " Et erit tamquam lignum quod plantation est
secus decursus aquarum, quod fructum suum dabit in tempore
suo.”


Digitized by


Google


SEVENTH MANSIONS.


CHAP. II.]


271


enter here, where they would only suffer still further
defeat. Though the whole body is in pain, yet the head,
if it be sound, does not suffer with it. I smile at these
comparisons, — they do not please me — but I can find
no others. Think what you will about it — I have told
you the truth 1


CHAPTER III.

The great fruits produced by the above-mentioned prayer.
The wonderful difference between these effects and
those formerly spoken of should be carefully studied
and remembered.

1 . Effects of the graces last received. 2 . The soulonlg cares for God's honour .
3 . But still performs its duties. 4 . Other fruits of these favours. 5 . The
sours fervent desire to serve God. 0 . Christ dwells within this soul.
7 . And recalls it to fervour if negligent. 8 . God's constant care of such
souls. 9 . Peace and silence of such souls. 10 . Few ecstasies occur in
Mansion VII. 11 . Probable reasons for this. 12. Allusions in Holg
Scripture to this stale. 13 . Watchfulness of such souls. 14 . Crosses
suffered in this state.

i. The little butterfly, then, has died with the greatest
joy at having found rest at last, and now Christ lives
in her. 1 Let us see the difference between her present
and her former life, for the effects will prove whether
what I told you was true. As far as can be ascertained
they are these : first, a self-forgetfulness so complete
that she really appears not to exist, as I said,* for such
a transformation has been worked in her that she no
1 Phil. i. 21. * Castle, M. vii. ch. i. n and 15.


Digitized by ^ooQle


fCHAE. III.


2?2 THE INTERIOR CASTLE.

longer recognises herself, nor does she remember that
heaven, or life, or glory are to be hers, but seems entirely
occupied in seeking God’s interests. Apparently the
words spoken by His Majesty have done their work:
“ that she was to care for His affairs, and He would care
for hers.” *

2. Thus she recks nothing, whatever may happen,
but lives in such strange oblivion that, as I said, she
seems no longer to exist, nor does she wish to be of any
account in anything — anything 1 unless she sees that
she can advance, however little, the honour and glory
of God : for which she would most willingly die.

3. Do not fancy I mean, daughters, that she neglects
to eat and drink, though it brings no small torment to
her, nor to perform the duties of her state. I am
speaking of her interior ; as regards her exterior actions,
there is little to say, for her chief suffeiing is to see
that she has hardly strength to do anything. Fof
nothing in the world would she omit doing all in her
power which she knows would honour our Lord.

4. The second fruit is a strong desire for suffering,
although it does not disturb her peace as formerly,
because the fervent wish of such souls for the fulfilment
•of God’s will in them makes them acquiesce in all He
does. If He would have her suffer, she is content ;
if not, she does not torment herself to death about it

*. Castle, M. vii. ch. ii. 1 . Compare the references there given.


Digitized by L. OOQl


CHAP. III.]


SEVENTH MANSIONS.


273


as she used to do. She feels a great interior joy when
persecuted, and is far more peaceful than in the former
state under such circumstances : she bears no grudge
against her enemies, nor wishes them any ill. Indeed
she has a special love for them, is deeply grieved at
seeing them in trouble, and does all she can to relieve
them,* earnestly interceding with God on their behalf.
She would be glad to forfeit the favours His Majesty
shows her, if they might be given to her enemies instead,
to prevent them offending our Lord.

5. The most surprising thing to me is that the sorrow
and distress which such souls felt because they could
not die and enjoy our Lord’s presence * is now exchanged
for as fervent a desire of serving Him, of causing Him to
be praised, and of helping others to the utmost of their
power. Not only have they ceased to long for death,
but they wish for a long life and most heavy crosses,
if such would bring ever so little honour to our Lord.
Thus, if they knew for certain that immediately on
quitting their bodies their souls would enjoy God, it
would make no difference to them, nor do they think
of the glory enjoyed by the saints, and long to share
it. Such souls hold that their glory consists in helping,
in any way. Him Who was crucified, especially as they

4 Don Alvaro de Mendoza, Bishop of Avila, used to say that
the best means of becoming befriended by Saint Teresa was to
injure or insult her. Acta Ss. n. 1233. Rel. vii. 20.

• Rel. viii. 15.

18


Digitized by


Google


274 the interior castle [chap. III.

see how men offend against Him, and how few, detached
from all else, care for His honour alone. True, people
in this state forget this at times, and are seized with
tender longings to enjoy God and to leave this land of
exile, especially as they see how little they serve Him.
Then, however, they return to themselves, reflecting
how they possess Him continually in their souls, and
so are satisfied, offering to His Majesty their willingness
to live as the most costly oblation they can make.*
They fear death no more than they would a delicious
trance.

6. The fact is, that He Who gave them these tor-
turing desires of death has exchanged them for the
others. May He be for ever blessed and praised 1
Amen. In fact, such persons no longer wish for conso-
lations nor delights, since they bear God Himself within
them, and it is He Who lives in them. It is evident
that His life was one continual torment : so would He
have ours to be, at least in desire, for as to the rest
He leads us mercifully as our weakness requires,

• Compare with the Saint's poem on Self-oblation, " Vuestro
soy, para Vos naci ” (Poem i, English version):

Long life bestow, or straightway let me die ;

Let health be mine, or pain and sickness send ;

Honour or foul dishonour — be my path

Beset by war or peaceful till the end.

My strength or weakness be as Thou dost choose.

Since naught Thou askest shall I e'er refuse.

Say, Lord, what is it Thou dost will for me ?


Digitized by t^.ooQle


SEVENTH MANSIONS.


CHAP. III.]


275


though when He sees the need He imparts to us His
strength.

7. Such a soul, thoroughly detached from all things,
wishes to be either always alone, or else occupied on
what benefits the souls of others : she feels neither
aridity nor any interior troubles, but a constant tender
recollection of our Lord, Whom she wishes to praise
unceasingly. When she grows negligent, the same
Lord arouses her in the way that I told you, and it is
easy to see that this impulse (I know not what term
to use for it) comes from the interior of the soul, like
the former impetuous desires.’ It is now felt very
sweetly, but is neither produced by the intellect nor
the memory, nor. is there any reason to believe the soul
itself has any share in it. This is so usual and so frequent
that any .one who has been in this state must have
noticed it. However large a fire may be, the flame
never burns downwards, but upwards, and so this move-
ment is seen to come from the centre of the soul whose
powers it excites. Indeed, were nothing else gained by
this way of prayer but the knowledge of the special
care God takes to communicate Himself to us, and how
He entreats us to abide with Him (for indeed I can
describe it in no other way), I think that for the sake of
these sweet and penetrating touches of His love all our
past pains were well spent.

7 Castle, M. vi. ch. vi. 6.


Digitized by LjOOQle


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


276


[CHAP. III.


8. You will have learnt this by experience, sisters, for
I think that when our Lord has brought us to the
prayer of union, He watches over us in this way, unless
we neglect to keep His commandments. When these
impulses are given you, remember that they come from
the innermost mansion, where God dwells in our souls.
Praise Him fervently, for it is He Who sends you this
message, or love letter, so tenderly written, and in a
cipher that only you can understand and know what
He asks. By no means neglect to answer His Majesty,
even though you may be occupied exteriorly and en-
gaged in conversation. Our Lord may often be pleased
to show you this secret favour in public, and it is very
easy, as the reply should be entirely interior, to respond
by an act of love or to ask, with Saint Paul : “ Lord,
what wilt Thou have me to do ? Jesus will show
you in many ways how to please Him. It is a propitious
moment, for He seems to be listening to us, and the
soul is nearly always disposed by this delicate touch
to respond with a generous determination.* As I told


» Acts ix. 6: “ Domine, quid me vis facere ? ”

* The words from " know what He asks ” to “ as I told you ”
are not in the original manuscript, but must have been written
on a separate slip, as is proved by a marginal note in the- hand-
writing of the Saint : " Cuando dice aqui : os pide, tease luego
este pa pel.” This paper is now lost, but the passage it contained
is preserved in the early manuscript copies of Toledo, Cordova, and
Salamanca, as well as in the first printed edition, and, through
this, in the old translations ; hence both Woodhead and Dalton


Digitized by Ld.ooQle


SEVENTH MANSIONS.


CHAP. III.]


2 77


you, this mansion differs from the rest in that, as I said, 1 *
the dryness and disturbance felt in all the rest at times
hardly ever enters here, where the soul is nearly always
calm. It does not fear that this sublime favour can be
counterfeited by the devil, but feels a settled conviction
that it is of divine origin because, as above stated,
nothing is here perceived by the senses or faculties,
but His Majesty reveals Himself to the spirit, which
He takes to be with Himself in a place where I doubt
not the devil dare not enter, nor would our Lord ever
permit him.

9. All the graces here divinely bestowed on the soul
come, as I said, through no action of its own, save its
total abandonment of itself to God. They are given
in peace and silence, like the building of Solomon’s
Temple, where no sound was heard. 11 It is thus with
this temple of God, this mansion of His where He and
the soul rejoice in each other alone in profound silence.
The mind need not act nor search for anything, as
the Lord Who created it wishes it to be at rest, and
only to watch, through a little chink, what passes
within. Though at times it cannot see this, yet such


have it in its proper place. It is, of course, not to be found in the
autograph published in 1882, nor in Fuente’s Spanish editions,
nor in translations based upon these. The Spanish text will be
found in (Euvres , vi. 297 note.

,# Supra, §§ 1 and 2.
u III Reg. vi. 7.


Digitized by LjOOQle


278


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. III.


intervals are very short, because, I believe, the powers
are not here lost, but only cease to work, being, as it were,
dazed with astonishment.

10. I, too, am astonished at seeing that when the
soul arrives at this state it does not go into ecstasies,
except perhaps on rare occasions — even then they are
not like the former trances and the flight of the spirit,
and seldom take place in public as they did before."
They are no longer produced by any special calls to
devotion, such as by the sight of a religious picture, by
hearing a sermon (were it only the first few words), or
by sacred music ; formerly, like the poor little butter-
fly, the soul was so anxious that any thing used to alarm it
and make it take flight. This may be either because
the spirit has at last found repose, or that it has seen
such wonders in this mansion that nothing can frighten
it, or perhaps because it no longer feels solitary, since
it rejoices in such Company.

11. In short, sisters, I cannot tell the reason, but
as soon as God shows the soul what this mansion con-
tains, bringing it to dwell within the precincts, the
infirmity formerly so troublesome to the mind, and
impossible to get over, disappears at once. Probably
this is because our Lord has now strengthened, dilated,
and developed the soul, or it may be that He wished to

" ** That is, so as to lose the senses ” (marginal note in the
Saint’s handwriting). Rel. iii. 5.


Digitized by


Google


CHAP. III.]


SEVENTH’ mansions.


279


make public (for some end known only to Himself) what
He was doing in secret within such souls, for His judg-
ments are beyond our comprehension in this life.

12. These effects, with all the other good fruits I have
mentioned of the different degrees of prayer, are given
by God to the soul when it draws near Him to receive
that “ kiss of His mouth ” which the bride asked for, 1 ’
and I believe her petition is now granted. Here the
overflowing waters are given to the wounded hart :
here she delights in the tabernacles of God 14 : here the
dove sent out by Noah, to see whether the flood had
subsided, has plucked the olive branch, showing that she
has found firm land amongst the floods and tempests of
this world. 1 * O Jesus ! who knows how much in Holy
Scripture refers to this peace of soul ! Since, O my
God, Thou dost see of what grave import is this peace to
us, do Thou incite Christians to strive to gain it l In
Thy mercy do not deprive those of it on whom Thou
hast bestowed it, for, indeed, until Thou hast given
them true peace and brought them to where it is un-
ending, they must ever live in fear.

13. I do not mean that peace is unreal on earth be-
cause I say “ true peace,” but that such souls might have
to begin all their struggles over again if they forsook
God. What must these persons feel at the thought
that it is possible to lose so great a good ? Their dread

u Cant. i. 1. 14 Ps. xli. 2, 5. u Gen. viii. 8, 9.


Digitized by LjOOQle


28 o


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. HI.


makes them more careful ; they try to gather strength
from their weakness lest, through their own fault, they
should miss any opportunity of pleasing God better.
The greater the favours they have received from His
Majesty, the more diffident and mistrustful are they
of themselves ; the marvels they have witnessed having
revealed more clearly to them their own miseries and
the heinousness of their sins, so that often, like the
Publican, they dare not so much as lift up their eyes. 1 *
14. Sometimes they long to die and be in safety, but
then, at once, their love makes them wish to live in
order to serve God, as I told you, therefore they commit
all that concerns them to His mercy. 17 At times they
are more crushed than ever by the thought of the many
graces they have received, lest, like an overladen ship,
they sink beneath the burden. I assure you, sisters, such
souls have their cross to bear, yet it does not trouble
them, nor rob them of their peace, but is, quickly gone,
like a wave or a storm which is followed by a calm,
for God’s presence within them soon makes them forget
all else. May He be for ever blessed and praised by
all His creatures l Amen.

i* St. Luke xviii. 13. n Rel. ix. ig.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. IV.]


SEVENTH MANSIONS.


28 z


CHAPTER IV.

The conclusion sets forth what appears to be our Lord’s
principal intention in conferring these sublime
favours on souls, and explains how necessary it is
for Mary and Martha to go together. This chapter
is very profitable.


1. Vicissitudes of Mansion VII . 2. Humility produced by them . 3. Such
souls free from mortal and from wilful venial sins . 4. The fate of Solomon,
5. Holy fear. 6. These favours strengthen souls to suffer. 7. Crosses
borne by the saints. 8. Effect of vision of our Lord on Si. Peter. 9. Effects
of these favours. 10. Why the spiritual marriage takes place . 11. Love

for Christ proved by our deeds . 12. True spirituality. 13. Humility

and the virtues must combine with prayer. 14. Zeal of advanced souls •
15. Strengthened by the divine Presence within them. 10. Examples of
the saints. 17. Both Martha and Mary must serve our Lord. 18. Christs
food. 19. Mary's mortification. 20. Her grief at the Passion. 21. Can
we lead souls to God? 22. How to do so. 23. Love gives value to our
deeds. 24. Conclusion.

1. You must not suppose, sisters, that the effects I
mentioned always exist in the same degree in these
souk, for, as far as I remember, I told you that in most
cases our Lord occasionally leaves such persons to
the weakness of their nature. The venomous creatures
from the moat round the Castle and the other mansions
at once join together to revenge themselves for the
time when they were deprived of their power.

2. True, this lasts but a short time — a day perhaps,
or a little longer, — but during this disturbance, which
generally arises from some passing event, these persons
learn what benefits they derive from the holy Company
they are in. Our Lord gives them great fortitude, so


Digitized by


Google


282


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. IV.


that they never desert His service nor the good reso-
lutions they have made, which only seem to gather
strength by trial, nor do their hearts ever turn from
them, even by a first slight movement of the will. This
trouble but rarely happens ; our Lord wishes the soul
to keep in mind its natural condition, that it may be
humble, and may better understand how much it owes
Him, and how great is the grace it has received, and so
may render Him praise.

3. Do not fancy that in spite of the strong desire
and determination of these souls that they do not commit
imperfections and even fall into many sins. (Not
wilfully ; for such people are given special grace from
God on this point.) I mean, venial sins ; as far as they
are aware, they are free from mortal sins, although they
do not feel certain they may not be guilty of some of
which they are ignorant.

4. This grieves their hearts sorely, as does the sight
of the souls perishing around them ; although on the one
hand they have strong hopes of not being themselves
among the number of the lost, yet, remembering what
we are told in Holy Scripture of the fate of the men who,
like Solomon, seemed the special favourites of God, 1
and conversed so familiarly with His Majesty, they
cannot help fearing for themselves.

5. Let that one among you who feels most confidence

1 III. Reg. ».


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. IV.]


SEVENTH MANSIONS.


283


on this point fear the most, for : “ Blessed is the man
who feareth the Lord,” as David said.* May His Majesty
ever protect us ! Let us beg Him never to permit us
to offend Him : therein lies our greatest safety. May
He be for ever praised ! Amen.

6. It would be well to tell you, sisters, the reason
why God bestows such favours on souls in this world,
although you must have learned this by the effects
produced, if you have considered the matter. I return
to the subject, that none of you may think it is only
for the sake of the pleasure such persons feel, which
would be a great mistake on your part, for His Majesty
can bestow no greater favour on us than to give us
a life such as was led by His beloved Son. Therefore,
as I have often told you, I feel certain that these graces
are sent to strengthen our weakness, that we may imitate
Him by suffering much.

7. We always find that those nearest to Christ our
Lord bear the heaviest cross : think of what His glorious
Mother and the Apostles bore. How do you think
St. Paul went through such immense labours ? ’ We

* Ps. cxi. 1 : " Beatus vir qui timet Dominum.”

* "Though thou shouldst have been rapt up to the third
heaven with Saint Paul, thou art not thereby secured that thou
shalt suffer no adversity. ‘ 1/ said Jesus, ' will show him how
great things he must suffer for My name’s sake’ (Acts. ix. 16).
To suffer, therefore, is what waits for thee, if thou wilt love
Jesus and constantly serve Him. . . . For our merit and the


Digitized by LjOOQle


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


284


[CHAP. IV.


learn from his conduct the fruits of genuine visions and
contemplation which come from our Lord and not from
our own imagination, or the devil’s fraud. Do you
suppose that St. Paul hid himself to enjoy these spiritual
consolations at leisure and did nothing else ? You know
that he never took a day's rest, as far as we can learn,
nor could he have slept much since he worked all night
to get his living. 4

8. I am delighted with St. Peter, who, when fleeing
from prison, was met by our Lord, Who told him He
was going to Rome to be crucified again.* I never
recite the Office in which this is commemorated without
feeling a special joy. What effect did this vision have
on Saint Peter, and what did he do ? He went at once
to meet his death — and our Lord did Him no small
favour in finding him an executioner !

9. Oh, my sisters ! how forgetful of her ease, how


advancement of our state consist not in having many sweet-
nesses and consolations, but rather in bearing great afflictions
and tribulations" ( Imitation , bk. ii. ch. xii. 12).

4 1 Thess. ii. 9.

* The Antiphon of the Magnificat at first Vespers of the
Feast of Saints Peter and Paul, June 29, in the Carmelite Breviary
used by St. Teresa is : “ Beatus Petrus Apostolus vidit sibi
Christum occurrere. Adorans eum ait : ‘ Domine, quo vadis ? '
— ‘ Venio Romam iterum crucifigi.’ ” " The Blessed Apostle Peter
saw Christ come to meet him. Adoring Him, he asked ‘ Lord,
where art Thou going ? ’ — ' I go to Rome to be crucified anew.’ ”
The saint at once returned to Rome and was taken by the
soldiers and crucified.


Digitized by LjOOQle


CHAP. IV.]


SEVENTH MANSIONS.


285


unmindful of honours, and how far from seeking men’s
esteem should she be whose soul God thus chooses for
His special dwelling-place ! For if her mind is fixed
on Him, as it ought to be, she must needs forget herself :
all her thoughts are bent on how to please Him better,
and when and how she can show the love she bears
Him.

10. This is the aim and end of prayer, my daughters ;
this is the reason for the spiritual marriage, whose
children are always good works. Works are the unmis-
takable sign which shows these favours come from God,
as I told you. It will do me little good to be deeply
recollected when alone, making acts of the virtues,
planning and promising to do wonders in God’s service,
if afterwards, when occasion offers, I do just the oppo-
site. I did wrong in saying, “ It will do me little good,”
for all the time we spend with God does us great good.
Though, afterwards, we may weakly fail to perform
our good intentions, yet some time or other His Majesty
will find a way for us to practise them, although per-
haps, much to our regret. Thus, when He sees a soul
very cowardly. He often sends it some great affliction,
much against its will, and brings it through this trial
with profit to itself. When the soul has learnt this,
it is less timid in offering itself to Him.

11. I ought to have said, " will do us little good,”
in comparison with the far greater good we gain when


Digitized by


Google


286 THE INTERIOR CASTLE. [CHAP. IV.

our works fulfil our aspirations and our promises. She
that cannot do all this at once should do it little by
little, gradually dominating her will, if she would gain
fruit from prayer. Even in this little nook she will
find many a chance to practise this. Remember,
this is of far more importance than I know how to
express. Fix your eyes on the Crucified One, and all
will seem easy. If His Majesty proved His love for us
by such stupendous labours and sufferings, how can
you seek to please Him by words alone ?

12. Do you know what it is to be truly spiritual ?
It is for men to make themselves the slaves of God —
branded with His mark, which is the cross. Since they
have given Him their freedom. He can sell them as
slaves to the whole world, as He was, which would be
doing them no wrong, but the greatest favour. Unless
you make up your minds to this, never expect to make
much progress,* for humility, as I said, is the founda-
tion of the whole building, and unless you are truly
humble, our Lord, for your own sake, will never permit
you to rear it very high, lest it should fall to the
ground.

13. Therefore, sisters, take care to lay a firm founda-
tion, by seeking to be the least of all and the slave of

* " If thou wilt stand upon self and wilt not offer thyself freely
to My will, thine offering is not perfect, nor will there be entire
union between us” ( Imitation , bk. iv. ch. viii. 2).


CHAP. IV.]


SEVENTH MANSIONS.


287


others, watching how you can please and help them,
for it will benefit you more than them. Built on such
strong rocks, your Castle can never go to ruin. I insist
again : your foundation must not consist of prayer
and contemplation alone : unless you acquire the
virtues and practise them, you will always be dwarfs ;
and please God no worse may befall you than making
no progress, for you know that to stop is to go bach — if
you love, you will never be content to come to a stand-
still.

14. Perhaps you think I am speaking of beginners,
and that one may rest later on, but, as I told you, the
rest such souls feel is within them : they have less out-
wardly nor do they wish for it. Why, do you think,
does the soul send from its centre these inspirations, or
rather aspirations (the messages of which I spoke)
to the dwellers in the precincts of the Castle, and to
the surrounding mansions ? To send them to sleep ?
No, no, no ! The soul wages a fiercer war from thence
to keep the powers, senses, and the whole body from
being idle, than ever it did when it suffered in their
company. Formerly it did not understand the immense
benefit its afflictions brought, though indeed they may
have been the means God used to advance it to this
state.

15. Besides, the Company it enjoys gives it far greater
strength than ever before. If as David says : “ With


Digitized by


Google


208


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


[CHAP. IV.


the holy Thou shalt be holy,’ doubtless by its becoming
one with the Almighty, by this sovereign union of spirit
with spirit, the soul must gather strength, as we know
the saints did, to suffer and to die. Beyond doubt,
with the force thus gained, the soul succours all within
the Castle, and even the very body itself, which often
seems to have no feeling left in it. The vigour the soul
derives from " the wine ” drunk in the “ cellar ” '
(into which the Spouse brought her and would not let
her go) overflows into the feeble body, just as the food
we eat nourishes both the head and the whole frame.

16. Indeed the body suffers much while alive, for
whatever work it may perform, the soul has energy
for far greater tasks and goads it on to do more, for
all it can perform appears as nothing. This must be
the reason of the severe penances performed by many
of the saints, especially the glorious Magdalen, who had
always spent her life in luxury.* This caused the zeal
felt by our Father Elias for the honour of God,** and

* Ps. xvii. 26 : " Cum sancto sanctus eris.”

* Cant. ii. 4.

* " St. Mary Magdalen gave herself up to penance and con-
templation in a deep excavation of the rocks at La Baume,
near Marseilles. In this wild spot there was neither bread,
water, nor even herbage. Thus she lived for more than thirty-
two years, without any kind of nourishment but that which
was celestial, performing meanwhile most severe penances”
(St. Vincent Ferrer).

*• III Reg. xix. 10.


Digitized by v^ocrjle


289


CHAP. IV.] SEVENTH MANSIONS.

the desires of St. Dominic, 11 and St. Francis 11 to draw
souls to praise the Almighty. I assure you that, forgetful
of themselves, they must have passed through no small
trials.

17. This, my sisters, is what I would have us strive
for — to offer our petitions and to practise prayer, not
for our own enjoyment, but to gain strength to serve
God. Let us seek no fresh path ; we should lose our-
selves in ways of ease. It would be a strange thing to
fancy we should gain these graces by any other road
than that by which Jesus and all His saints have gone
before. Let us not dream of such a thing : believe

u ** There was one sentiment within him to which may almost
be given the name of a passion : it was his ceaseless burning
thirst for the salvation of souls. As his Divine Master had
come into the world to save sinners and loved them even unto
death, so he, too, gave up all that was most dear to him in his
life to win souls to Christ. He was always giving himself : it
was the very keynote of his existence. He would have sold
himself as a slave, he would have been cut to pieces by the
heretics, he would spare himself neither by day nor by night, if
by any means he might save some 0 (from the History of St.
Dominic , by Augusta Theodosia Drane. London, 1891, p. 256).

M “ St. Francis of Assisi, at the very beginning of his Order,
when he had only seven followers, said to them ; ' Consider,
my brethren, what is our vocation. It is not only for our
own salvation that the mercy of God has called us, but for the
salvation of many other souls. It is that we may go forth and
exhort all men rather by our example than by our words, to
do penance and keep the divine commands 1 0 (The Life of St.
Francis of Assisi, by a religious of the Order of Poor Clares,
London, 1861, p. 32).

10


Digitized by t^.ooQle


sgo the interior castle. [chap. iv.

me, both Martha and Mary must entertain our Lord
and keep Him as their Guest, nor must they be so
inhospitable as to offer Him no food. How can Mary
do this while she sits at His feet, if her sister does not
help her ? **

18. His food is, that in every possible way we should
draw souls to Him, that they may be saved and may
praise Him for ever. You may offer two objections —
first that I said that Mary had chosen the better part, 14
for she had already done Martha’s work by waiting on
our Lord, by washing His feet and by wiping them with
her hair.

ig. Do you think it was a small mortification for a
woman of rank, as she was, to go through the streets,
perhaps by herself, for in her zeal she never thought of
how she went ? Then she entered a house where she
was a stranger, and had to bear the railing of the Phari-
see, and many other trials. “ It was strange to see
such a woman as she had been thus publicly change
her life. With a wicked nation like the Jews, the sight
of her love for our Lord, Whom they hated so bitterly,
was enough to make them cast in her face her former
life, and taunt her with wanting to become a saint.
Doubtless she must have changed her rich robes and

** St. Luke x. 39, 40. Life, ch. xvii. 6. Rel. viii. 6. Way
of Perf. ch. xxxi. 4. Concep. ch. vii. 4.

'* St. Luke x. 42 : " Maria optimam partem elegit.”

** St Luke vii. 37.


Digitized by LjOOQle


SEVENTH MANSIONS.


CHAP. IV.]


29I


all the rest. Considering how men talk now of people
far less well known than she was, what must have been
said of her ?

20. I assure you, sisters, she won the better part,
after many crosses and mortifications. Must not the
mere sight of men’s hatred of her Master have been
an intolerable trial ? Then, think of what she endured
afterwards at our Lord’s death ! I believe, myself, that
she did not suffer martyrdom because she was already
a martyr by grief at witnessing the crucifixion.** Then
what terrible pain His absence must have caused her**
during the long years afterwards ! You see, she was not
always enjoying contemplation at the feet of our Saviour !

21. Secondly, you may say that you have neither
the power nor the means to lead souls to God ; though
you would willingly do so, you do not know how, as
you can neither teach nor preach as did the Apostles.
I have often written an answer to this objection, though
I cannot tell whether I have done so in connection
with the Castle. However, as the difficulty probably
often crosses your minds on account of the desires our
Lord gives you of serving Him, I will now speak of it
again. 1 * I told you elsewhere how the devil frequently
fills our thoughts with great schemes, so that instead of

i* Marginal note in the Saint’s handwriting.

17 Life, ch. xxi. 9.

11 Way of Perf. ch. i. 1. Found, ch. i. 6, 7. Supra, M. vi,
ch. vi. 2 .


Digitized by LjOOQle


292 the interior castle. [CHAP. IV.

putting our hands to what work we can do to serve our
Lord, we may rest satisfied with wishing to perform
impossibilities.

22. You can do much by prayer ; and then, do not
try to help the whole world, but principally your com-
panions ; this work will be all the better because you are
the more bound to it. Do you think it is a trifling matter
that your humility and mortification, youi readiness
to serve your sisters, your fervent charity towards them,
and your love of God, should be as a fire to enkindle
their zeal, and that you should constantly incite them to
practise the other virtues ? This would be a great work,
and one most pleasing to our Lord : by thus doing all
that is in your power, you would prove to His Majesty
your willingness to do still more, and He would reward
you as if you had won Him many souls. Do you
answer : " This would not be converting my sisters,
for they are very good already ” ? What business is
that of yours ? If they were still better, the praise
they render God would please Him more, and their prayers
would be more helpful to their neighbours. 1 '

23. In short, my sisters, I will conclude with this
advice ; do not build towers without a foundation, for
our Lord does not care so much for the importance of
our works as for the love with which they are done.
When we do all we can. His Majesty will enable us to

" Way of Perf. ch. vii. 7.


ized by - - le


CHAP. IV.]


SEVENTH MANSIONS.


293


do more every day. If we . do not grow weary, but
during the brief time this life lasts (and perhaps it will
be shorter than any of you think) we give our Lord
every sacrifice we can, both interior and exterior, His
Majesty will unite them with that He offered to His
Father for us on the Cross, that they may be worth the
value given them by our love, however mean the works
themselves may be.

24. May it please His Majesty, my sisters and my
daughters, that we may all meet together, where we
may praise Him for ever, and may He give me grace
to practise ' something of what I have taught you, by
the merits of His Son, Who liveth and reigneth for ever !
Amen. I assure you that I am filled with confusion
at myself, and I beg you, for the sake of the same Lord,
not to forget this poor sinner in your prayers.


Digitized by


Google


IHS.

Although, as I told you, I felt reluctant to begin this
work, yet now it is finished I am very glad to have
written it, and I think my trouble has been well spent,
though I confess it has cost me but little. Considering
your strict enclosure, the little recreation you have, my
sisters, and how many conveniences are wanting in some
of your convents, I think it may console you to enjoy
yourselves in this interior Castle, where you can enter,
and walk about at will, at any hour you please, without
asking leave of your superiors. It is true you cannot
enter all the mansions by your own power, however great
it may appear to you, unless the Lord of the Castle
Himself admit you. Therefore, I advise you to use
no violence if you meet with any obstacle, for that would
displease Him so much that He would never give you
admission to them. He dearly loves humility : 1 if you
think yourselves unworthy to enter the third mansion.
He will grant you all the sooner the favour of entering
the fifth. Then, if you serve Him well there, and often
repair to it. He will draw you into the mansion where

1 Way of Ptrf. ch. xvi. i.


Digitized by LjOOQle


EPILOGUE. 295

He dwells Himself, whence you need never depart,
unless called away by the Prioress, whose commands
this sovereign Master wishes you to obey as if they were
His own. If, by her orders, you are often absent from
His presence chamber, whenever you return He will
hold the door open for you. When once you have
learnt how to enjoy this Castle, you will always find
rest, however painful your trials may be, in the hope
of returning to your Lord, which no one can prevent.
Although I have only mentioned seven mansions, yet each
one contains many more rooms, above, below, and around
it, with fair gardens, fountains, and labyrinths, besides
other things so delightful that you will wish to consume
yourself in praising the great God for them. Who has
created the soul in His own image and likeness. If
you find anything in the plan of this treatise which
helps you to know Him better, be certain that it is
sent by His Majesty to encourage you, and whatever
you find amiss in it is my own. In return for my strong
desire to aid you in serving Him, my God and my Lord,
I implore you, whenever you read this, to praise His
Majesty fervently in my name, and to beg Him to prosper
His Church, to give light to the Lutherans, to pardon
my sins and to free me from purgatory, where perhaps
I shall be, by the mercy of God, when you see this book
(if it is given to you after having been examined by
theologians). If these writings contain any error, it


Digitized by LjOOQle


2gf>


THE INTERIOR CASTLE.


is through my ignorance ; I submit in all things to the
teachings of the holy Catholic Roman Church, of which
I am now a member, as I protest and promise both to
live and die. May our Lord God be for ever praised and
blessed 1 Amen, Amen.

I finished writing this book in the convent of St.
Joseph of Avila, 1577, on the Vigil of St. Andrew, for
the glory of God, Who liveth and reigneth for ever
and ever! Amen.


FINIS


Digitized by LjOOQle


INDEX


Absalom, III. i. 6
Acts of praise, love, etc., IV. i. 7
Agnes, St, VI. v. 13
Alcantara, St Peter of, IV. iii. 5 ;
VI. vi. 13

Alva, Duchess of, VI. iv. 9 ; VII.
i. 9». 6

Amber, VI. v. 2
Anthony, St, VI. v. 9
Antonins a Spir. Sto., IV. iii. 1 ;

VI. i. 3, 12, 18 ; iii. 5 ; IV. 17,

vi. 11

Apostles, our Lord's prayer for,

VII. ii. 10 ; sufferings of, VII.
iv. 7

Augustine, St, IV. iii. 3 ; VI.

vii. 11

Avila, BL John of, VI. ix. 11 ; St.
Joseph's convent at, VI. vi.
14 ; VII. iv. conclusion
Awe, produced by visions, VI.
ix. 4

Babe, likeness of, IV. iii. 9
Baflez, Fr. Dominic, VI. ix. 11
Bee, likeness of, I. ii. 9 ; V. ii. 2
Beggar, likeness of, IV. iii. 5
Beginners, II. i. passim
Bethsaida, the blind man at the
pool of, I. i. 10
Blindness, spiritual, VI. iv. 15
Body, the setting of the diamond,
I.|L 3 ; the outer walls of the
Castle, I. i. 3 ; care of. III. ii.
9, 11 ; IV. iii. 12 ; strength of,
necessary in prayer of Union,
V. i. 2 ; effect of prayer of
Union on, V. i. 3


Books, spiritual, insufficiency of,
IV. iii. 4 ; use of, V. ii. 3
Bride, in the Canticle, V. i. 10 ;

and Bridegroom, V. iv. 3
Butterfly, likeness of, V. ii. 1, 2,
6, 7, 8 ; iv. 1 ; VI. iv. 1, 6, 13 ;
xi. 1 ; VII. iii. 1, 10

Caecilia, St., V. iv. 1
Call, God's, to the soul, II. i. 4-6 ;
IV. iii. 2, 3

Carelessness. in prayer, I. i. 9
Carmel, our Lady of, Preface,
argument ; III. i. 5 ; Order of.
Constitutions, I. ii. 7 ; V. i. 2 ;
Rule of, VI. vi. 7
Carmelite nuns, discalced. Pre-
face, argument, p. 3; I. L 9;
VI. vi. 14

Castle, Interior, Preface, argu-
ment, p. 1 ; I. i. 2, 3, ii. 1 ;

VI. iii. 2, 7, iv. 17 ; description,
I. ii. 8 ; entrance to, I. i. 7 ;
foundation of, VII. iv. 13 ;
prayer and meditation, 1. i. 9,
11 ; precincts of, I. i. 10

Caterpillar, likeness of, V. ii. 6
Cellar of wine, V. L 10, ii. 11
Certitude of the soul, a sign of
Union, V. i. 8, 9
Changes wrought in the soul by
prayer of Union, V. ii. 7, 10, 12
Charity, works of, only remedy in
times of darkness, VI. i. 24 ;
effect of spiritual matrimony,

VII. iv. 16-23

Christ's face, VI. ix. 12 ; sufferings,
our pains joined to, V. ii. 4


Digitized by t^.ooQle


298


INDEX.


Church, holy Roman Catholic,
Preface, p. 2 ; VII. iv. conclu-
sion ; love of, IV. i. 7
Clearness, a sign that locutions
come from God, VI. iii. 20
Communion, holy, VII. ii. 1
Complaints, loving, VI. ii. 3
Confession, regular, V. ii. 3
Confessor, to be consulted on
locutions, VI. iii. 18 ; and on
visions, VI. ix. 10 ; if mistaken,
VI. viii. 10-11 ; timorous, VI.

i. 15-19

Confidence, II. i. 17
Confirmation in grace, VII. ii. 13
Conformity with the will of God,

II. i. 15; III. ii. 5, 8; VI. xi. 5
Consolations, divine (prayer of

Quiet), III. ii. 13 ; IV. i. 4, 5,

ii. 2, 4, 5, 6, iii. 7 ; earthly, no
use, VI. i. 22

Contempt, III. ii. 6 ; for earthly
things, an effect of raptures,
VI. v. 13

Contradiction, by good people,

VI. i. 5

Courage, necessary, II. i. 13 ;

III. ii. 10; VI. i. 2, 3, iv. 1,
v. 7, 14

Cross, II. i. 17 ; necessary in
prayer of Union, V. ii. 8 ; of
saints, VII. iv. 7
Crystal, I. i. 2, ii. 3, 4

Darkness, dispelled by God, VI.
i. 20; different kinds of, I. ii.
1 ; VII. i. 4

David, King, III. i. 6 ; VI. x. 5 ;

VII. iv. 5, 15

Deaf mutes, II. i. 3, 6
Deception, fear of, VI. i. 16 ;
satanic, V. iv. 5, 6, 7 ; where
impossible, VI. ii. 9-12
Defects, impeding union, V. iii. 6
Desires, of death, VI. xi. 9 ; VII.

iii. 14 ; generous, IV. i. 7 ; to
serve God, better than visions,
etc., VI. ix. 20-21 ; VII. iii. 5 ;


of suffering, VII. iii. 4 ; some-
times to be checked, VI. vi. 5
Detachment, III. i. 13, ii. 7
Detraction, I. ii. 22
Devil, I. ii. 2 ; like a file, I. ii. 19 ;
deceives by false favours, IV.

iii. 10-13 ; V. ii. 8 ; a good
painter, VI. ix. 11 ; unable to
interfere in prayer of Union, V.

1. 6 ; and in intellectual visions,

VI. x. 1 ; wiles of, I. ii. 13, 18,
20 ; II. i. 11 ; IV. iii. 10 ; VI.
i- 25

Devotion, sensible, see Sweetness
in prayer

Diamond, soul likened to, I. L

2, 3

Dilatation, of heart, IV. i. 5, ii. 5
Direction, necessary, II. i. 18 ;

III. ii. 18

Directors, learned and unlearned,

V. i. 7 ; VI. i. 16-19
Distractions, in prayer, I. i. 10 ;

IV. i. 10, 11

Dominic, St., V. iv. 4 ; VII. iv. 16
Dove, soul likened to, V. iii. 1,

iv. 1 ; VI. ii. 1, xi. 1
Drowsiness, V. i. 3, 5
Dryness, in prayer. III. i. 9, 10, 15

Easter, trance on the feast of, VI.
xi. 8

Ecstasies, rare in Seventh Man-
sions, VII. iii. 10
Elias, St., VI. viL 10 ; VII. iv. 16
Energy, III. ii. 10-11
Enriquez, Doha Maria, VI. iv. 9 ;

VII. i. 9

Entering within oneself, IV. iii.
1* 3. 4

Envy, spiritual, I. i. 5
Espousals, spiritual, V. iv. 1-3 ;

VI. ii. 1, iv. 1 ; difference be-
tween, and matrimony, VII. ii.
2. 4

Exclamations, VII, ii. 7
Exterior works do not interfere
with interior life, VII. iii. 3


Digitized by t^.ooQle


INDEX.


299


Faculties, given to be used, IV.

iii. 6 ; suspension of, VI. iv. 17
Faults, slight, V. iv. 6
Favours, divine, not to be disbe-
lieved, I. i. 6 ; value of. III. ii.
16, 17 ; how to be used, IV. iii.
9, 10 ; false, IV. iii. 11, 12 ; V.
ii. 8 ; distinction from divine,

IV. iii. 12

Fear of illusions, VF ix. 8
Ferrer, St. Vincent, VII. iv. 16
Fervour, supernatural, VI. ii. 14 ;
VII. iv. 14

File, devil likened to a, I. ii. 19
Fire of burning coal, God likened
to, VI. ii. 6

Flight of the spirit, VI. v. 1, 2, 8,
10-13

Francis, St., V. iv. 4 ; VI. vi. 12 ;
VII. iv. 16

Fraternal charity, V. iii. 11, 12
Fretting under trials. III. ii. 1, 2
Friendship, spiritual, II. i. 12
Fuente, Don Vicente de, VII.
ii. 7

Gideon, II. L 13
Give all to God, V. i. 3
God compels the soul to listen
when He speaks, VI. iii. 27
God's special care of souls most
advanced, VII. iii. 8
Gonzalez, Giles, VII. i. 9
Gratian, Father Jerome, I. ii. 21 ;

IV. i. 11 ; V. i. 9

Grief, natural and supernatural,

V. ii. 11, 13, iii. 7

Hart, wounded, VII. iii. 12
Heathen philosophers, V. iii. 7
Hell, VI. xL 7 ; fear of, lost, VI.
vii. 4 ; torments of, smaller
than those of the last Judg-
ment, VI. ix. 4

Human praise and blame alike
troublesome, VI. i. 7-1 1
Humanity, sacred, of our Lord,


meditation on, VI. vii. 6-19 ;
vision of, VI. ix. 2 ; VII. ii. 1
Humility, effect of supernatural
favours, VI. iii. 25, v. 5, ix. 9 ;
false, I. ii. 11-12 ; always
necessary, I. ii. 9, 10, 12 ; II.

i. 13 ; III. i. 15, ii. 3, 8 ; IV.

ii. 8 ; from vision of a soul in
mortal sin, I. ii. 5 ; want of,
I. L 3 ; III. ii. 11-12 ; humility
and truth, VI. x. 6

Hysteria, see Melancholia

Ignatius of Loyola, St., V. iv. 4
Ignorance, injurious, IV. i. 9, 13 ;

of a priest, V. i. 7, 9
Imagination, IV. i. 8-10, iii. 13 ;

VI. i. 1 ; difference between it
and visions, VI. ix. 5-6 ; locu-
tions proceeding from, VI. iii.
16-17

Imitation of Christ, I. i. 8 ; II.

i. 8 ; V. i. 3, iii. 3 ; VII. iv. 7,
12

Impulses, VI. ii. 12, xi. per totum
Incense, spiritual, IV. ii. 6 ; VI.

ii. 14

Inebriation, spiritual, VI. iv. 18-
19, vi. 15

Insecurity, III. i. 3
Intellectual locutions, VI. iii.
19-24

Interior Castle, see Castle
Isabel of Jesus, VI. xi. 8

Jacob, VI. iv. 6
Jerome, St., VI. ix. 4
Jesus, I. ii. 4 ; ever our guide, VI
7-8 ; our model, I. ii. 12 ; His
Passion, V. ii. 4, vi. 7-9
Jewels, V. i. 2-, VI. iv. 9, v. 13,
ix. 1

John of Avila, Blessed, VI. ix.
11 n.

John of the Cross, St., I. i. 2, 4 ;
IV. i. 3, iii. 3, 6 ; V. i. 6, 9 ;
VI. ii. 3, 14, iii. 5, 7 sqq., iv.


Digitized by


Google


3oo


INDEX.


21, v. 2, vii. 8, io, viii. 3, ix. 20,
xi. 4, 6; VII. i. 13, ii. 13
Jonas, prophet, V. iii. 6, 14
Jordan, river, VI. vi. 3
Josue, VI. iii. 27
Joy at seeing locutions fulfilled,
VI. iii. 13-14

Jubilation, I. ii. 5 ; VI. vi. 11-15
Judas, V. iii. 2, iv. 5
Judgment, last, VI. ix. 4

Kernel of palmito, I. ii. 8
Kiss of the Bridegroom, VII. iii.
12

Lazarus, III. i. 2 ; V. iii. 5
Leon, Fray Luis de, III. i. 3 ; VII.

ii. 7

Liberty of spirit, I. ii. 9
Light, I. ii. 15 ; supernatural,

VI. v. 8

Likeness of Christ, VI. ix. 11
Lizards, V. i. 5

Locutions, VI. iii. per totum ;
" Be not troubled,” ib. 7 ; VI.
iv. 21 ; “ It is I,” VI. ui. 8,
viii. 3-4 ; “ Be at peace,” VI.
iii 8 ; VII. ii. 3 ; “ To care for
God's affairs,” VII. ii. 1, iii. 1
Loss of highly favoured souls, IV.

iii. 10

Lot's wife, I. i. 8
Love of enemies, VI. i. 12 ; of God,
IV. i. 7 ; V. iii. 7-8 ; of neigh-
bour, V. iii. 7-8
Ludolf of Saxony, VI. ix. 4
Lutherans, VII. iv. conclusion

Mansions, I. i. 2, 4, ii. 4, 8, 15 ;

VII. iv. conclusion
Martha, VII. i. 14, iv. 17
Martin, St., VI. vi. 6

Mary, Blessed Virgin, our help, I.

ii. 14 ; meditation on, VI. vii.
8 ; sufferings of, VII. iv* 7
Mary Magdalen, St., I. i. 5 ; VI.
vii. 5, xi. 12 ; VII. i. 14, ii. 9,

iv. 16-20


Matrimony, spiritual, VII. i. 1, 7,

ii. per totum ; difference be-
tween, and Espousals, VII. ii.
2 ; effects of, VII. iv. 10 sqq. ;
in this state soul free from sin,
VII. iv. 3 ; and confirmed in
grace, VII. ii. 13

Meditation, VI. vii. 11-13
Melancholia (hysteria), III. i. 9;
IV. ii. 1-2 ; VI. i. 15, iii. 2-3,

vi. 7, 15

Memento, VI. iv. 14
Mendoza, Don Alvaro de, VII.

iii. 4

Moses, VI. iv. 7
Mount Carmel, see Carmel
Music, VII. iii. 10
Mysteries, revealed during rap-
tures, VI. iv. 10, 12, 13

Noah's Ark, VII. iii. 12
Nuptials, spiritual, see Matrimony

Obedience, preface, p. 1 ; I. i. 1 ;
III. i. 4, ii. 18

Obligations, of a soul enraptured,

VI. v. 4 ; on account of in-
tellectual visions, VI. viii 8

Odour, supernatural, VI. ii. 14
Olive branch, VII. iii. 12

Padranos, Juan de, Fr., VI. viii 3
Palace, God likened to, VI. x. 3 ;

VII. ii. 15
Palmito, I. ii. 8

Passion of Christ, V. ii. 13 ; be-
comes the property of the soul,
VI. v. 6 ; meditation on, VI.

vii. 8, 9, 13-15

Paul, St, I. i 5 ; III. i. 13 ; VI.
vii. 5, ix. 7 ; VII. i. 8, ii. 6,

iv. 7 ; (hermit) VI. v. 9
Peace, II. i. 16 ; following upon

Spiritual Matrimony, VII. ii.
10-13, iii. 9, 13 ; " Peace be
with you,” V. i. 10 ; VII. ii. 2
Penances, indiscreet, L ii. 19 ; too
discreet. III. ii. 9


Digitized by


Google


INDEX. 301


Perfection, true, I. ii. 20
Perfume, IV. ii. 6 ; VI. ii. 14
Perseverance, II. i. 17-18 ; III. i.
1

Peter, St., III. i. 13 ; VI. vii. 5 ;

VII. iv. 8
Phenix, VI. iv. 3
Philippus a Ss. Trinitate, IV. i.
3 ; ii. 8, iii. 1 ; V. i. 8, iii. 4,
iv. 3 ; VI. i. 18, iv. 3 sqq., v. 2,
10, vi. 11

Pictures, holy, VII. iii. 10
Pilate, VI. x. 5

Prayer, St. Teresa’s writings on.
Preface, p. 2 ; books on, I. i. 8 ;

IV. iii. 4, 5 ; no difference be-
tween vocal and mental, I. i. 9 ;
talking inconsiderately to God
is not prayer, I. i. 9 ; need of
guidance in, I. ii. 7 ; II. i. 18 ;
perseverance in, II. i. 19 ;
prayer and mortification a great
work, VII. iv. 21-22

Preparation for prayer of Union,

V. ii. 4-5

Presence, spiritual, of our Lord,

VI. viii. 2-6 ; VII. iii. 6-7 ;
of Saints, ib. 7 ; of the Blessed
Trinity, VII. i. 9-13

Presence chamber, God’s, VII. i.
3 » 7

Prioress, advice to, IV. iii. 12 ;

VI. iii. 2, vii. 16, viii. 11, 12
Prophecies, VI. iii. 11, 12
Purgatory, VI. xi. 6

Quiet, prayer of, IV. iii. 7 ;
difference from prayer of Union,
V. i. 5. Sec also Consolations,
divine

Raptures, VI. iv. per totum ;
effects of, VI. vi. 1 ; false, IV.
iii. 11 ; VI. iv. 22 ; rare in
Seventh Mansion, VII. iii. 10
Recollection, prayer of, IV. iii 1,
3, 4 ; difference from prayer
of Quiet, IV. iii 7


Reptiles, I. i 11, ii. 15 ; II. i. 16 ;

IV. i. 3 ; VII. ii. 15, iv. 1
River of living waters, I. ii 1, 3

Sacrament, Blessed, V. i. 9
Samaritan woman, VI. xi. 5
Saul, king, V. iii 2 ; VI. ix. 18
Schram, Dom, VI. iii. 10 ; viii.
10

Search for God, VI. vii. 11
Secrecy of raptures, VI. iv. 20, 21,
viii. 12

Security, III. i. 1-2
Self-knowledge, I. ii. 9-1 1 ; IV.

i. 13 ; V. iv. 8 ; VI. v. 12
Senses, I. ii. 4 ; IV. iii. 1 ; VI. iv.

17

Sepulchre, V. i. 10
Sermons, V. ii. 3 ; VII. iii. 10
Seville, III. ii. 10
Siena, St. Catherine of, VI. v. 21
Silkworm, likeness of, V. ii. 1-6 ;
HI. i. 5

Sin, mortal, I. ii. 1-3 ; committed
under the very eyes of God,

VI. x. 2-3

Sinners in prison, VII. i. 4, 5
Slaves of Christ, VII. iv. 12 ; of
our neighbour, VII. iv. 13
Sleep of the soul in prayer of
Union, V. i. 3

Solitude, desire of, VI, vi. 1, 2
Solomon, III. i. 6; VII. iii. 9,
iv. 4

Sorrow for sins increasing with
graces, VI. vii. 1-5
Soul likened to a castle, I. i. 2 ;
to a crystal, I. ii. 3 ; to a gar-
den, I. i. 2 ; to a ship, VI. v. 3 ;
dignity of, I. i. 3 ; a soul that
does not pray is lame, I. i. 8 ;
soul in mortal sin, I. ii. 1-5 ;

VII. i. 4-6 ; the soul and its
faculties, VII. i. 15-16

Spark from the fire of^God, VI.

ii. 6, 7

Standstill in virtue, V. iv. 10
Struggles, interior, IT. i. 9, 10


Digitized by t^.ooQle


302


INDEX.


Sufferings, bodily, VI. L 13, 14

Sun, source of light, I. ii. 1, 3-5, 8

Sweetness in prayer (sensible
devotion), IV. i. 4-7, ii. 4

Tears, IV. i. 4, 6 ; V. ii. 9 ; VI. vi.
6 , 9

Temptations, advantages of, IV.

i. 3 ; particularly fierce before
Espousals, V. iv. 4, 7

Teresa, St., consoled by Christ,
VI. v. 6 ; cures a melancholy
nun, IV. iii. 12 ; desires death,
VI. vii. 3 ; desires others to
serve God better, V. iii. 2 ; her
experience in spiritual matters,

V. i. 7, iv. 4 ; feels no pain
during ecstasies, IV. i. 11 ;
feels presence of our Lord, VI.
viii. 2-5 ; of the Saints, ib. 7 ;
former mistakes, VI. vii. 18-19 ;
suffers from headaches. Pre-
face, pp. 1, 2 ; IV. i. 10 ;
never suffered from hysteria,
IV. ii. 2 ; locutions, vide sub
voce ; has more light now than
formerly, I. ii. 7 ; IV. i. 1, ii. 6 ;
praises God for favours be-
stowed on others. III. ii. 16;
profits by vision of a soul in
mortal sin, I. ii. 1, 2, 5 ; VII.
i. 4 ; by heavenly visions, VII.
L 14 ; her raptures, vide sub
voce ; readiness to suffer, VI.
xi. 10 ; self-disparagement.
Preface, p. 3 ; I. ii. 7 ; III. i.
4-5, 7 ; submits her writings to
the judgment of the Church,
Preface, p. 2 ; VII. iv. con-
clusion ; suffers at the sight of
sin, V. ii. 13 ; transverberation,

VI. xi. 2, 4, 8 ; is troubled by
turmoil of thoughts, IV. i. 8 ;
troubles she went through, VI.
i. 5-27 ; vi. 1, viii. 12 ; her
visions, VI. ix. 20 ; VII. ii. 1 ;
of the Blessed Trinity, VII. i.
9 sqq, ; wound of love, VI. ii.


9 ; writings. Preface, p. 2 ; I.

ii. 6, 7 ; V. iv. 12
Theriac, II. i. 16

Thomas Aquinas, St., V. i. 6;
VI. v. 8

Toledo, St. Joseph's convent at.
Preface, p. 2
Tortoise, IV. iii. 4
Trance, false, IV. iii. 11, 12 ; VI.

iv. 22 ; at Easter, VI. xi. 8
Transverberation, VI. xi. 2, 4, 8
Tree of life, I. ii. 1,3
Trinity, Blessed, feast of, Preface,
p. 2 ; I. i. i ; vision of, VII. i.
9 ; presence of, VII. i. 9-13
Troubles preceding perfect Union,
VI. i. 3-20

Understanding, IV. i. 8
Union, prayer of, difference from
prayer of Quiet, V. i. 5 ; leads
to Espousals, V. iv. 2 ; with
vanities of the world, V. i. 6, 7 ;
with the Will of God, V. iii.
5-8

Ursula, St., V. iv. 4

Velasquez, Don Alonso, VII. ii. 13
Virtues, real and imaginary, V.

iii. 9, 10

Visions, corporal, St. Teresa never
saw one, VI. ix. 3 ; imaginary,

VI. iv. 6, v. 9, ix. per totum ;
intellectual, VI. iv. 10, 11, v.
9, viii. per totum , x. 1 per
totum ; not to be sought or
wished for, VI. ix. 13-19 ; of a
soul in mortal sin, I. ii. 2, 5

Watchfulness, III. i. 2 ; V. iv. 8, 9
Water, spiritual, I. ii. 3 ; IV. ii.
3, 4, 8 ; iii. 8 ; VI. v. 3. ». 5 ;

VII. ii. 8, 13

Wax, soul likened to, V. ii. 11,
12 ; wax candles, VII. ii. 5
Will of God, Union with, V. iii.
4-5 ; VI. xi. 5


Digitized by


Google


INDEX. 303

Works, good, II. i. 20 ; III. i. 12,

14, ii. 15 ; V. iii. ix ; VI. i. 24 ;

VII. iv. 17-24

World, persons in the. III. i. 8,

9» ii. 4. 5

Worldliness, I. ii. 16-17, II. i. 7


Printed and bound by Hasell , Watson & Viney , Ld., London and Aylesbury


Wound of love, VI. ii. 2-12,
xi. 2-4, 10-12

Zeal, indiscreet, I. ii. 19, 21 ; III.
ii. 19

Zebedee, sons of, VI. xi. 12


Digitized by LjOOQle


Digitized by


Google


Digitized by


- zed by


Digitized by


Google


Digitize —


Google


U.C. BERKELEY LIBRARIES


fflinimu


C10735b4?7


Digitized by LjOOQle
