OSWALD,CHARACTER; EMPLOYMENT。LOCATION OF PRESIDENTIAL CAR AT TIME
mont
OFSHOTS
State/of Witnossos,- Roy Sansome TRULY,
Tostimony
March24,1964(3H212-41);
Doposition
May 14,1964
(7丑380-6）；
Arridavit
August3,196l(7H591)
He has boon manager of'the Texas School Book Depository for 20
yoars. Ho is also a mombor of its board of diroctors. Aftor doscrib-
ing his owm background and oxperionco,bo is askod about how Oswald
if there might be an oponing), how Oswald impressod Truly, how he did
his work, and in goneral Truly's impression of him as an omployoe.
Oswald, from Truly's description, was a very satisfactory omplayeo
and a man whose characteristics Truly approvod.He was favorably im-
prossed by Oswald upon interviowing him prior to employing hm. He was
TTon pue qornb, se uty qutatuosop "gxouueu sry fa posgordut Attetoodso
outu Jo osn s,ptenso fq possordut fttefoodso pouoos pue a'potouueu
word sir, you know,which a lot or thom don't do at this timo。
On
roporting for work on the l6th or Oetobor, ho was put with a moro ox-
perioncod cmployeo. "He worked with him, it soomed to mo, like only an
hour or two,and then ho started filling ordors by himself. And from
thon on ho worked alono." Askod how Oswald's work progressod, Truly
We havo several thousand titlos of books in our warohouse.But ho was
filling mostly ono or two publishers! ordors. .o. The main publishor
was Scott, Foresman and Co." (p.2ll) Asked whero Scott, Foromman books
sixth floor was not exactly'a rosorve or a warohouse sipply,but a
source fron which the bins on the first floor woro roplonishod for tho
smallor orders.
Frun this it is cloar that thero was nothing unusual about Oswald's
prosonco on the sixth floor on the day of tho assassination. Thore was

--- PAGE BREAK ---woro roplonishod for tho
smallor orders.
Frun this it is cloar that thero was nothing unusual about Oswald's
prosonco on the sixth floor on the day of tho assassination. Thore was

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2_Tmuly
likewise nothing unusual about his statement upon being interrogated
that he was on the first floor about the time of the mototcade.，This
is what he told the polioe and FBI and Becret Service,although Capt.
Fritz misropresents it (Report,p.6oo） in quoting Oswald as saying that
he usually worked on the second floor. The FBI agent, James Booyhout,
in a statement dictsted Nov.22, 1963, (Report, p.619) quoted Oswald
as saying "his usual place of work in the building is on the'first
floor; however, he frequently is roquired.to go to the fourth, fifth,
slxth,and seventh floors of the buiiding in order to get books and
this was true on November 22, 1963, ..." (p.215.)
Asked to classify Oswald as an employee, Truly said he was above
average.(p.216)
What the Commiasion and some of its witnessestried to portray as
an unusual and, by inferonce, abnormal part of Oswald's makeup, his
quietness and his tendency to stay to himselr and mind his own business,
Truly found a highly desirable characteristic, in an employee, saying,
"I never saw him with anyone else, except occasionally talking, maybe
asking where books were or something. I don't know what he would say.
But very little conversation he had with anyone. And he worked o by.
himself。... I thought it was a pretty good trait at the time,because
occasionally you have to spread your boys out and say, 'Quit talking
So much, let's get to work.! And it seemed to me he paid attontion to
hisjob."
As to his own conversations with Oswald, they were brief,but he
noted Oswald's apparent joy at the birth of the baby: "I would speak
to him in the morning when I would come through, and I would say, Good
morning, Lee,! and he would say, 'Good morning, sir.! I would ask him
bowhe-was。
Occasionally I would ask about his baby, and he wouldm in the morning when I would come through, and I would say, Good
morning, Lee,! and he would say, 'Good morning, sir.! I would ask him
bowhe-was。
Occasionally I would ask about his baby, and he would

--- PAGE BREAK ---n I would come through, and I would say, Good
morning, Lee,! and he would say, 'Good morning, sir.! I would ask him
bowhe-was。
Occasionally I would ask about his baby, and he would

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3=Truly
usually smile a big smile when I asked him how his now baby was. And
that was just about the extent of my conversation that I can remember
with the boy. But I usually saw him every morning as I would come
through。He would be working around the front part of the Scott,Fores-
man bins and shelf space." (p.217)
About whether or not Oswald brought a lunch:
"Mr. Truly. I never was aware that he brought a lunch. I would
see him occasionally in the shipping department eating some little snack
or som thing - didn't pay much attention.Offhand, it seemed to be not
too much - a Coca-Cola, Dr. Pepper, and some little thing.  Maybe he
Would be sitting there reading a book or a newspaper.
Mr. Belin。 You would see him occasionally reading a newapaper at
the lunch hour?
Mr. Truly. I am sure so; yes.
And occasionally-I didn't al-
goto
wags Mx/ lunch at l2- usually a little after. And he would have to
pass my dopr to go out the front. Occasionally I had seen the boy go
out, and maybe he would be gone long enough to get across the street
and back, with something in his hand. I seem to recall possibly a news.
paper, maybe potato chips or something like that.! (p.218)
It may be without significance, but notice that.the boss said he
saw Oswald sometimos eating in the shipping department (which is on the
first floor),not in the lunchroom. This is consistent with what Capt。
Fritz quotes Oswald as having said the day of the assassination of what
he had done for lunch that day:"I asked him what part or the building
he was in at the time the President was shot, and he said that he was
having his lunch about that time on the first floor." This is in the
report on p.6oo. This was partly confirmed by the statement of Hosty
and Bookhout in the roport on p.613, dictated Nov.22, 1963, which quotes lunch about that time on the first floor." This is in the
report on p.6oo. This was partly confirmed by the statement of Hosty
and Bookhout in the roport on p.613, dictated Nov.22, 1963, which quote

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4-Truly
Oswald as saying he had lunch on the first floor (mistakenly identified
be
by the FBI men.as the location of the lunchroom) and that/went to the
in questioning the witnesses who had been in the fifth floor window,
the Commission asks them if they had eaten with Oswald in the lunchroom.
W
of course, if he ate on the first floor, he could not have been in the
lunchroom.I have as yet seen no question intended to ascertain whether
in fact Oswald had eaten on the first floor. Asked if he had anything
else to say about Oswald prior to Nov. 22, Truly summed it up as follows:
"orrhand I cannot recall a thing. Just like I said - he seemed to go
about his business in a quiet way, didn't talk much, seemed to be doing
a satisfactory job.".
Then Belin gets to the assassination day:
"Mr. Belin. Now I want to take you to themorning of November 22d.
fact that the motorcade would be going by the Texas School Book Deposl-
tory? Was that first on the morning of November 22d that you heard that,
or at anyprior date?
Mr. Truly. I don't recall. I don't recall hearing any partieular
discussion about him coming by. No, sir; I don1t." (p.218)
Note the real sneaky approach Belin has taken in assuming what
has not been testified to and what turns out to be false, that Truly
past.As Truly pointed out, it was not a fact。 Here, as a matter of
fact, is a blow to the Commissionls basic assumption, that everybody
in Dallas knew all the'deteals of the President's trip and route.Of
all the depositions, statements' and testimony I have thus far read,
only two refer to Oswald and the mot orcade. The first case was Marina

--- PAGE BREAK ---als of the President's trip and route.Of
all the depositions, statements' and testimony I have thus far read,
only two refer to Oswald and the mot orcade. The first case was Marina

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5Truly.
who said Oswald knew so little about it he didn't even know how she
mentioned it to him. The second was one of.the Negro employees, I be-
lieve Jarman, who indicated also that Oswald knew nothing about the
details.And now Truly testifies that so far as he knew none of his
employees'discussedit.
In any event, what Belin has done here is a basically dishonest
thing. It is something he could not get away with in a court of law;
it is something he should not have been allowed to get away witb if
the Commission was at all interested in its integrity and in decent
procedures.（p.218)
Unintentionally, Belin gets Truly to emphasize the complete nor
mality of Oswaldis being on the first floor. Trying to get Truly to
say if he saw Oswald after the beginning of work, Truly replied, "I
cannot recall..I believe I saw him that morning later on, around his
work. But I probably wasn't on that floortoo much,or out on the floor
that morning." (p.2i9) Truly assumed Oswald would have beon on the
first floor, and if he had.to get additional books, he had to go to
the sixth floor. It is also possible, fom Truly's testimony, that he
could have been on any one of the other floors, especially the fifth
or the seventh. Hence,in spite or the inferences/made by the Comnis-
sion's counsel in their verious interrogations, there was absolutely
nothing abnormal or unusual in Oswald asking employees topeturn the
elevator to him on whatever floor he was. (p.219)
In describing his own actions and observations, Truly had said
that he and o.V. Campbell, the vice president, had started for lunch
and noticing that it wouldn't be too long before the motorcade came
past, decided to stay.Asked if he noticed any company employees where

--- PAGE BREAK ---the vice president, had started for lunch
and noticing that it wouldn't be too long before the motorcade came
past, decided to stay.Asked if he noticed any company employees where

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6-Tmuly
were, I believe, three of our colored boys had comie out and started up,
and two or them came back..And I didn't see them when the motoroade
passed. But they had started across Houston Street up Eim, and they
came back later on, and I think those were the ones that were - two of
them were the ones on the fifth floor. Possibly they could not see ovor
the crowd. They are short boys. I wasn't doing too well at that, myself.
(p.22)
Note that he said just before the moborcade went past. He hadn't
gotten outside until 10 or 15 minutes after 12 himself. He has described
before the motorcade" part baars on Williams' testimony that he had
been up to the sixth floor and seen nobody,also just beforo the motor
cadewentpast.
Truly then said something I have seen referred to no place else,
and I have certainly not seen any indication that, in its reconstruction,
theCommission, the FBI, or any other agency took it into account: "And
the driver of the Presidential car swung out too far to the right,and
he came almost within an inch of running into this little abutment here,
between Eim and the Parkway. And he slowed down perceptibly and pulled
back to the left to get over into the middle lane of the parkway. Not
being familiar with the street, he came too far out this way when he
made his turn。" (p.22 d)
The Commissions interest in this has to do with the speed of the
vehicle. My interest is another one. There is no evidence in any of
the reconstructions or in any of the photographs of any of the recon-
structions or in any or the testimony of any of the experts indicating
that the car was in any except the center lane. There ls no imd ication
anyplace that, in calculating at what freme of the film the President

--- PAGE BREAK ---imony of any of the experts indicating
that the car was in any except the center lane. There ls no imd ication
anyplace that, in calculating at what freme of the film the President

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7-Tmulg
could have been shot, no allowance was made for this wide swerve, nor
is there any indication as to what effect, ifiany, it might have had
upon the reconstruction, especially of wben the President could have
become a target because of the presence of tbe tree between him and the
sixth floor window. Examination of the Altgens photograph, Exhibit 900,
(Report, p.ll3) shows that the Secret Service followup car ls at a
dirferent angle from the President's car. I don!t know owhebher it
have。
I have already noted the lack of fidelity in reproducing the
Zapruder film at the reenactment. In the light of this statoment by
Truly, this may become quite significant. The Zapruder film is Exhibit
885 infVol. xvIll. Zaprudeols pictures covered the entire motorcade
beginning on Houston Street. The Cormmission reproduces in enlargement
nothing earlier than frame l7l. The earliest comparative picture is
frame 166..16g appears on p.1oo in the Report and in Vol.xvIII on p.86.
In the light of Truly's statement, it is eanl ier sections axf of this
film that are important. However, examination of freme l66 shows the
reenactment is not faithful. There are certain landmarks that make this
clear.First, that Zapruder was hot holding his camera perfectly level
as an examination of the black lightpole in the background wll show.
It leans to the left at the top.The effect of this is to increase the
difforence I am about to point out.In the reenactment, the car is
closer to the opposite curb on Elm Street, the south curb.Second,there
is visible in the Zapruder film.The most casual examination of the
thnough
car would have been more underneath the tree. In examining the position

--- PAGE BREAK ---reet, the south curb.Second,there
is visible in the Zapruder film.The most casual examination of the
thnough
car would have been more underneath the tree. In examining the position

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8--Truly
of the Presidentis car in frame 166, notice that in the Zapruder film,
the real-life version, the visors on both side in the front are up. They
are not in the reenactment. The metal frame around the windshiled of
a8
the real Presidential car does not reach as high us the top of the curb
on the opposite side of Elm St. In the reenactment, the curbline is
well below the top of the windshield. As I have alreddy pointed out,
taking the pietures under different shadow conditions effectively de-
positive
stroys thebackground which makes pbpayll
identification more poesible.
Whther or not Truly's account of the wide swerve of the car is
accurate,my observations about the pictures are and tend to corroborate
Truly's on-the-spot observation.
In any event, Larry, as I pointed out on soveral occasions prior
to what I am now dictating, the reenactments are not faithful and the
variations of:only as little as a Eootin the case of the sequences
around frame 2l0,a variation of only inches-alter and invalidate the
entire reconstruction.
I do mot know the date on which the signs weremoved and juggled
of the reenactment, this would supply the simplest answer to the lack
of fidelity in the reproductlon..In his testimony,Hudson.did not re-
veal the date on whieh the signs were moved.
The sections quoted from Tuly's testimony above are on p.220.
Truly recounts what happened and, in talking about the first shot,
he is specific in saying that it came
With regard to.the reaction of the people, he said of those around the
abutment (to the west of where he was standing) "they began screaming
and Balling to the ground." People with him, directly underneath the
sixth floor window,merely surged back.

--- PAGE BREAK ---he
abutment (to the west of where he was standing) "they began screaming
and Balling to the ground." People with him, directly underneath the
sixth floor window,merely surged back.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9-Truly
He then comes to the incident of the police officer rushing into
and hollering, just moments later I saw a young motorcycle policeman
run up to the building, tp the steps to the entranco of our building.
pushed a number of people out of the way before he.got to me.I saw
him coming thro ugh, I believe. As ge ran up the stairway - I mean gp
the steps, I was almost to the steps, I'ran up and caught up with him.
I believe.I caught up with him inside the lobby of the building,or
possibly the front steps. I don't remember that. alose. But I remember
it occurred to me that this man wants on top or the building. He doesn't
know the plan or the floor. And that is - that just popped in my mind,
and I ran in with him.As we got in the lobby, almost on the inside of
the first floor, this policeman asked me where the stairway is. And I.
said,This way'.And.I ran diagonally across to the northwest corner
of the building."_(p.221)
Truly testifies, based on Exhibit 362, the Commission's graphic
representation of the street-floor plan.Step by step, he tracμs his
path and that of Orficer Baker through the first floor/At various
points he ia instructed to make marks, such as a "r", on this floor
plan.He and Baker are over by the elevators in the northwest corner.
Either the elevators or the stairs must be taken to get to the upper
floors. The front stairway goes only to the second floor.
Exhibit 362 (16 H 362) has a barely perceptible mark which may
be the route. drawn on it by Truly. The scale is so mf small and the
lettering is so small (yet halr the page is blank) that even with a
magnifying glass I am not at all certain that I make out Truly's marks.
The Commission doesn't make it any oasier when it prints this upside

--- PAGE BREAK ---alr the page is blank) that even with a
magnifying glass I am not at all certain that I make out Truly's marks.
The Commission doesn't make it any oasier when it prints this upside

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10-Truly
dow. Normally,north is up and south is down.In this case the photo-
graph of the building showsothe south side in the fon ground,so the
Commission prints othe chart, which is keged to the photograph, with
the south in the background.(p.222)
They got to the olevators and "I am pointing to the west one.
This elevator was on the fifth floor.Also, the east elevator - as far
as I can tell - both of them were on the fifth floor at that time."
Both elevators on the fifth floor clearly establish neither Oswald nor
any body else had come down by way of the elevator.Belin.leads him
into an explanation of the way the elevators work and I think gets a
little bit ridiculous with some of these markings that you can't see,
the elevator for"button'."

button," maybe that's why I can't see Truly!s mark!
When the elevators
didn't come down immediately and there was no response to his call,
Truly started going up the stairs with the officer only "a few feet"
behind him.
"Mr. Belin. Was he a few feet bohind you then?
Mr. Truly. He was a few feet. It is hard for me to tell. I ran
right on around to my left, started to continue on up the stairway to
the third floor, and on up.
Mr. Belin. Now, when you say you ran on to your left, did you
look straight ahead to see whether there was anyone in tbat area,or
were you intent on just going upstairs?
Mr. Truly. If there had been anybody in that area, I would have
seen him on the outside ..."(p.223)
I believe it is important that Truly, who was ahead of the police-
man and would have seen anyone entering the lunchroom earlier than the.

--- PAGE BREAK ---have
seen him on the outside ..."(p.223)
I believe it is important that Truly, who was ahead of the police-
man and would have seen anyone entering the lunchroom earlier than the.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11-Truly
policeman, here says he didn:t。(p.223)
They then discuss Exhibig 497 (17 H 212), a second-floor plan
of the Depository which clearly has errors in it. For one thing, there
is no post in the center of the vestibule area that is-the focus.of all
of this testimony. For another thing, two elevators are drawn in with
no access indicated for the elevators. I suppose it's possible that
the elevators didn't stop on the second floor;. that is what this dia-
gram shows. In addition, unless Belin has deliberately failed to correct
B
xμg known error in Truly's testimony, thero is an offset in the wall
clearly visible in the background of Exhibit 498 which is next discussed.
It cannot possibly be on the east side of the buiiding, which is what
Truly has been uncorrectedly allowed to call it. But if it is the east
26
sade, then the diagran, Exhbit l97, 1s wrong on an additional point.
Leaving out the post in the diagram serves a useful purpose. The post
was between the stairway and the outer of the two ontrances to the
Truly 1s careful to pohnt out,with respect to Exhibit 498, "This
pioture is just part of this vostibule out hero."
As Truly was racing up the steps, he was "two or three steps
before I realized the officer wasn't following me.". He then went to
where he heard volces from just inside the lunchroom proper. He is
asked if the door was open. He replied that he didn't know, but he
thought he opened the door.Then he said, "I feel like I did." Belin
says, "It could have been open or it could have been closed, you do
not remember?"
This door has an automatic closing device on it. Ifothe Com-
know
mission didn!t Khwy it at the time of Truly!s testimony, It certainly
shbuld have known。.It ultimately did know it and it is the subject of
Truly's affidavit.ic closing device on it. Ifothe Com-
know
mission didn!t Khwy it at the time of Truly!s testimony, It certainly
shbuld have known。.It ultimately did know it and it is the subject of
Truly's affidavit.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12 - Truly
Truly replies, "The chances are it was closed." (p.224) He found
Oswald with the policeman pointing a gun at him:
"Mr. Truly. When I reached there, the officer had his gun pointing
at Oswald. The officer turned this way and said, This man work here?!
And I said, iyes.!
Mr. Belin.
And then what happened?
Mr. Tmuly.
Then we left Lee Harvey Oswald immediately and con-
tinued to run up
pthe stairways until we reached the fifth floor.
Mr. Belin。.
All right. Let me ask you this now. How far was the
officer's gun from Lee Harvey Osuald when he asked the question?
Mr.Truly. It would be hard for me to.say, but it seemed to me
like it was almost touching hin."(p.225)
Asked if Oswald had anything in his hands,Truly'refuses to be
spdecific. First he. says that he "noticed" nothing in either hand; then
were empty.
The questianing continue s:
"Mr. Beling. Did you hear Lee Harvey Oswald say anything?
Mr. Truly. Not a thing.
Mr.Belin。
Did you see any expression on his face? Or weren't
you paying attentlon?
Mr. Truly. He didn't seem to be exoited or overly afraid or any-
thing. He might have beon a bit startled, like I might have been if
somebody confronted me. But I cannot recall any change in expression
of any kind on his face."(p.225)
Truly then identifies the interior view or the lunchroom, looking
east.
They proceeded upward through the building.

--- PAGE BREAK ---recall any change in expression
of any kind on his face."(p.225)
Truly then identifies the interior view or the lunchroom, looking
east.
They proceeded upward through the building.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13-Truly
Dulles wahted to know why the officer didn't follow Truly up the
stairs:
"Mr. Truly. I never knew until a day or two ago that he said he
saw a movement, saw a man going away fram him.
Mr. Dulles. As he was going up the stairs?
Mr. Truly. As he got to the second floor landing. While I was
going around, he saw. a movement." (p.226)
This may, in fact, have happened, but recall Trulys earlier tes-
timony, that if anybody had been there, he would have seen them。
Of
cogrse, it's hearsay for Truly.
There is further discussion of the lunchroom layout, then:
"Mr. Belin. Now, Mr. Truly, did you notice when you got to the
third floor - first of all。
On the second floor, was there any elevator
there?
Mr. Truly.
No, sir.
Mr.
Beline
What about the third floor?
Mr。
Truly.
No, sir.
(p.226)
Mr。
Belin.
Foubth floor?
Mr.
Truly.
No, I am sure not。
Mr。1
Belin.
What about the fifth floor?
Mr. Truly.
Whon we reached the fifth floDr, the east elevator
was on that floor.
Mr. Belin.
What about the west elevator? Was that on the fifth
floor?
Mr. Truly. No, sir. I am sure it wasn't, or I could not have
seen the east elevator." (p.227)
"Mr. Belin. o.. Now, where did you go with the east elevator, to
what floor?

--- PAGE BREAK ---th
floor?
Mr. Truly. No, sir. I am sure it wasn't, or I could not have
seen the east elevator." (p.227)
"Mr. Belin. o.. Now, where did you go with the east elevator, to
what floor?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14-Truly
Mr. Truly. We rode the east elevator to the seventh floor.
Mr. Belin. Did you stop at the sixth floor at all?
Mr. Truly. No, sir.
Mh Belin.
What did you do when you got to the seventh floor?
Mr. Truly. We ran up a little stairway that leads out through
a little penthouse on to the roof.
Mr. Belin. What did you do on the roof?
Mr. Truly. We ran immediately to the west side of the building.
Thefe is a wall around hhe building that you cannot see over without
getting your foot between themortar of the stones and, or some such
below. There we saw many officers and a lot of spectators, people run-
ning up and down.
Mr. Belin。
Did the officer say to you why he wanted to go up to
the roof?
Mr. Truly. No. At that time, he didn't.
Mr. Belin.
Did he ever prior to meeting you again on March 2oth
toll you why he wanted to go on the roof?
Mr.Tmuly. No, sir."(p/227)
Then Truly is asked where he thought the shots came from, and he
replied, "I thought the shots came from the vicinity of the railroad or
the WPA project, behind the WPA project west of the building." He is
not asked what the WPA progect is, nor is the phrase in quotations marks
The structure to the west of the building, to the best of my knowledge,
is part of Dealey Plaza, and I believe it is referred to by the local
people as the arcade.
He reemphasized this beiief: "I believe the officer told me as
we walked dow into the seventh floor,Be careful, this man will blow

--- PAGE BREAK ---is referred to by the local
people as the arcade.
He reemphasized this beiief: "I believe the officer told me as
we walked dow into the seventh floor,Be careful, this man will blow

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15 -Truly
your head off.! And I told the officer that I didnt feel like the
shots came from the building。I said,'I think we are wasting our time
up here,! or words to that effect, 'I don't believe these shots'came
from the building.!
Mr. Belin.
Did he say anything to that at all?
Mr. Truly. I don't recall exactlynwhat he said. I believe he
said, yes, or somebody said they did, or some such thing as that. I
On March 20, 196l, with Belin, Baker and Truly tried to recon-
struct the incident in an effort to establish the elapaed time. Bakef!g
timing began from "in front of the sheriffis office" on Houston Street
and: "Mr. Belin.And then you saw Officer Baker race his motorcycle
over and come in frant of the building, and then you ran in with him,
is-that correct?
Mr. Truly. That is correct.
Mr. Belin。
And then what is the fact as to thether or not you
here, going into the lobby with the conversation you had with Orricer
Baker, and running into that swinging door, and going back to the elevator
and pushing the elevator button, and then calling or yelling twice for
the elevator to come down, and then coming·up the stairs to the second
froor. Do you remember that?
Mr.Truly. I romember that。
Mr. Belin。
When we recreated that incident, did we walk or run?
Mr. Truly.
We walked.We trotted。
Mr.Belin.
We trotted。Did we get out of breath,do you remember?
Mr.Truly.
Yes.
Mr.Belin。
Did we go at about the speed that you feel you went on

--- PAGE BREAK ---run?
Mr. Truly.
We walked.We trotted。
Mr.Belin.
We trotted。Did we get out of breath,do you remember?
Mr.Truly.
Yes.
Mr.Belin。
Did we go at about the speed that you feel you went on

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16-Truly
that day with Orricer Baker?
Mr. Truly. I think so - which was a little more than a trot,I
would say."(p.228)
Note the use' of the word "trot". On p.221 Truly used the word
"ran"
and Belin himself, on p.22l, had said, "Now, as you raced around
This is not an exercise in semantics.
The-reconstruction Bf time
is crucial,'it ld dpdn't work the first time so they did it over a little
did, hence, all of a sudden the "run" and the "race" become a "trot"
In response to a guestion from Cong. Ford, asking "you went more or
" Truly said, "As far as I can tell; yes, sir."
less at a similar pace .o.
Belin rephrases the question and Truly does not make an unequivocal
answer.He merely statos it is his belief that they went at about the
same speed. Here again, Belin uses the word "ran". It is Truly's
belief the March 2o reconstruction would have been the minimum time.
Truly changes his story about not being able to see the west
elevator. He said he doesnt remember saying it.(p.228)
Larry,I want to reemphasize that this isstrictly a phony. The
report said that there was only a few seconds difference between the
time it took in the Baker-Truly reconstruction and the time it took in
this
the Oswald reconstruction. But the report doesn't say is that ttxmas
3 seconds was the 3-second intefval that got Baker to the lunchroom
ahead of Oswald. In addition, the reconstruction of Baker's mo vements
began in front of the sheriffis office.F
Baker's testimony was not that
he heard the last shot in front of the sherifr's office, but that he
heard the first shot there. The index in the report gives the wrong
page. It is not in this volume, 3, on p.24l, but on p.2l5. Thereafter,

--- PAGE BREAK ---ront of the sherifr's office, but that he
heard the first shot there. The index in the report gives the wrong
page. It is not in this volume, 3, on p.24l, but on p.2l5. Thereafter,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

17.-Truly
there were 2 more shots. The Commission itself speculates there could
have been as many as 7 seconds between the first and the last shot.
And whoever, the marksman was, he certa血nly didnt start leaving until
afterhe fired the last shot.
There are a number of referencessto Baker's testimony in the
Report,but I want to call attention to the excerpt from p.ll9 where
the Cormission said, "Baker was riding a two-wheeled motorcycle .o.
from the north almost unseated him." There are other references to the
strong wind, and I note this here to keop from forgetting, but I soe
no reference to any allowance for a strong wind in any of the recon-
struetions. This bears on the motion of the branches of the trees,
Larry。
With respect to thepeast elevator, he could have seen it from
the fifth floor but didn't notico it.But one of hiselevators was
not on the fifth floor when he got back there from the seventh:
"Mr. Belin. I believe you said when you first saw the elevators,
you thought they were both on the same floor, the fifth floor.
Mr. Truly. Yes, sir.
Mr. Belin. Then how do you expla血n that when you got to the
fifth floor,one of the elevators was not there?
/Mr. Truly. I don't know, sir. I think one or my boys was getting
stock off the fifth floor on the back side,and probably moved the ele
vator at the time -somewheres between the time we were running upstairs.
And I would not have remembered that. I mean I wouldn't have roally
heard that, with the commotion we were making running up the enclosed
stairwell.
Mr.Belin。Did you see anyone on the fifth floor?

--- PAGE BREAK ---have remembered that. I mean I wouldn't have roally
heard that, with the commotion we were making running up the enclosed
stairwell.
Mr.Belin。Did you see anyone on the fifth floor?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

18-Truly
Mr.Truly. Yes. When coming down I am sure I saw Jack Dougherty
getting some books off the fifth floor.
Now,this is so dim in my mind
that I could be making a miatake.
But I believe that he was getting
some stock, that he had already gone back to work, and that he was getting
some stock off the fifth floor.
Mr. Belin. You really don't know who was operating the elevator,
then, is that correct?
Mr. Truly.That is correct.
Mr. Belin.
What is your best guess?
agencies of any kind or the Commission to find out whether, in fact, any
of the employees was using the missing elevator at that time.It is an
obvious means of exit for anyone who might hsve been hiding on the fifth
floorp. This is especially true becauee of the following excerpt, which
shows that no search was made of the sixth floor:
"Mr. Belkn. Did he look around on the sixth floor at all or not?
Mr. Truly. Just before we gon on the elevator on the seventh floor,
Officor Baker ran over and looked in a little room on the seventh floor,
and
ag glanced around on that floor,.which is open,and it didnit take much
of a search. And then we reached the sixth floor: I stopped. He glanced
over the sixth floor quickly.
Mr.Belin. Could you see the southeast corner of the sixth floor
Mr.Truly..I don't think so; no, sir. You could not.
Mr. Belin.
Then what?
Mr. Truly.
Then we continued on down,and we saw officers on.the
fourth floor.
I don't recall that we stopped any more yuntil we reached

--- PAGE BREAK ---o, sir. You could not.
Mr. Belin.
Then what?
Mr. Truly.
Then we continued on down,and we saw officers on.the
fourth floor.
I don't recall that we stopped any more yuntil we reached

--- PAGE BREAK ---

19 - Truly
the first floor.But I do recall there was an officor on the fourth
floor, by the time we got down that far." (p.229)
So it can be seen that at this time no police had gotten above
the fourth floor, and all he recalls there was a single officer. (p.229)
In the following excerpt note that Truly is not dasked the names
of the other employees missing ( we know of at least Givens, who was a
criminal and was not reported):
"Mr. Truly. ... There were other orficers in other parts ofothe
building taking other employees, like orfico people's names. I noticed
that Lee Oswald was not among these boys.
So I picked up the telephone
and called Mr. Aiken down at the other warehouse who keeps our application
blanks. Back up there.. First I mentioned to Mr. Campbell - I asked
Bill Shelloy if he had seen him, he looked around and said no.
Mr.Belin。
When you akked Bill Shelley if he had seen whom?
Mr. Truly. Lee Oswald. I said,Have you seen him around lately,!
h
and he said no.
So Mr.Campbell is standing there, and I said, 'I gave
14ou to 4T 4todex o touzoum mgux 4suop I  dutsstu etog xoao Loq 8
Because I had another one or two out then. I didn't know whether they
were all there or not.He said,-What do you think'?And I got to
thinking. He said, woll, we bettor do it anyway.! It was so quick
after that."(p.230)
Truly's next explanation just doesn't ring true:
"Mr. Belin. Did you ask for the name and addresses of any other
enployees who might have been missing?
Mr. Truly. No, sir.
Mr. Belin。
Why didn't you ask for any other employees?
Mr.Truly.
That is the only one that I coula be certain right
then was missing." (p.230)

--- PAGE BREAK ---ave been missing?
Mr. Truly. No, sir.
Mr. Belin。
Why didn't you ask for any other employees?
Mr.Truly.
That is the only one that I coula be certain right
then was missing." (p.230)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20-Truly
Especlally does it not ring true with a former criminal in his omploy.
Note that throughbut the questioning or Truly, there is no reforence
made to Givens and his record. And there is no explanation of why they
had to relyon just an estimate..Theyknew whowas employed andwho
was at work that day, and with the number of men hhere (l9), it was a
simple matter to find out.It may be that it just didn't occur to them.
But the police had the names of the emplbyees who were there, and Truly
had the names of the employees on the payroll; hence, it was no trouble
for the.Commission to find out..It is ignored here.(p.230)
The boxes stacked up near the window,with the exception of the
two small cartons of Rolling Readers at the window, were all properly
in the area and had been put there prior to Nov.22 by the men repairing
the floor.Truly's description:
"Mr. Belin. Where did it appear that they had moved them?
Mr.Truly. They moved a long row of books down parallel to the
windows on the south side, following the building, and had quite a lot
/?
of cartons on the north - letis see --the southeast corner of the building.
(p.231)
As a matter of fact, the boxes wore not piled as high behind the
window from whicb the shots were reportedly fired as othey were elsewhere
in the area.(p.232)
Cong. Ford tries to find out whether there is any way of checking
on the orders that Oswald filled。This is quite a valid point.The last
order he filled,or the first order to be filled on which he might have
been working, might very well show ezactly what part orf the building he
should have beon in.Had there been any kind of legttimate investigation
at all,the police would have turned up the missing clipbaard immodiatelp
And this would at least in part have told the story. Likewise, they wouldn.Had there been any kind of legttimate investigation
at all,the police would have turned up the missing clipbaard immodiatelp
And this would at least in part have told the story. Likewise, they would

--- PAGE BREAK ---kind of legttimate investigation
at all,the police would have turned up the missing clipbaard immodiatelp
And this would at least in part have told the story. Likewise, they would

--- PAGE BREAK ---

21-Truly
have checked up onthe 22nd on what work Oswald had done.Truly said
that they couldn't find out "how many or those he filled on the 22nd"
with reference to orders,and he explains a number of reasons for this.
There is one aspect he didn't consider, and the Cormission didnlt and
I believe should have asked him about: Oswald worked almost entirely
on Scott, Foresman books. The Texas Book Depository had to account for
its sales to Scott, Foresman for their books. There certai nly should
certainly
have been a Scott, Foresman file - and othere/must have been working
papers prior to the monthly billings,which means at the time of the
assassination.What Oswald was doing the day of the assassination is
so obvious that there can be no ezcuse'for the police not looking into
it, if, in fact, they didn't, or for the Commission ignorang it, which,
in fact, it apparently did until the moment of Truly's testimony. Even
then the Texas School Book Depository fire on Scott,Foresman should
show approximately what work Oswald did. As Truly points out, if the
outgoing bills were dated before Nov. 22, thenit is clear Oswald had
completed those tasks bofore the day of the assassination. While it
may be true that work he did on the 2lst wasn't billed until the 22nd,
as of the 22nd there were duplicates of all the orders on which Oswald
was working in the School Book Depository office,and it would have been
child's play for the police to have learned. Ir the story that is sub-
sequently told about the clipboard is true, then it was even a simpler
matter, for the orders he had not filled were still on the clipboard。
And all of the orders were in the main office.(p.233)
The mlssing clipboard apparently never occurred to anybody, which
short period of time when the orders weren't filled the women in the
office, worling from their copies, checked up on it. It was also Truly'ssing clipboard apparently never occurred to anybody, which
short period of time when the orders weren't filled the women in the
office, worling from their copies, checked up on it. It was also Truly's

--- PAGE BREAK ---

22-Truly
when
testimony that/an order was filled, that sheet was removed from the
clipboard, leaving only the unrilled orders on the clipboard。
The delay on the clipboard is made clear in Truly's testimony,
saying, "They were trying to identify the elipboard just a short while
ago for someone - the FBI or the Secret Service .
n In short, none of
the people who had the responsbbility for checking this out did anything
until it was entirely too late.(p.234)
Onthe checkup system:
"Representative Ford. In other words, if 2 weeks had passed without
the order being fiiled according to your records, you would have insti-
tuted a more thorough search to find out where the unfilled order blank
was.
Mr. Truly. Yes, sir - less than that, I would say, because we do
not - our customers would probably write to us before then,if they did
not recelve it...." (p.235)
And as to when the clipboard was found, the Commissian's staff
ignores I& until Rep. Ford asks a direct question to which he gets this
"Mr. Belin. Yes, sir. I can give you that date in about one
mlnute.According to our records,Frankie Kaiser,when interviewed on
December 2d,said that on the morning.of December 2d he found·a clipboard
which he had made and whichy he had turned over to Lee Harvyy Oswald
with orders.And we have a list of the orders also in one of the Com-
mission documents. It 1s Document 7, page 381." (p.235)
Thhe The following excerpt should have been part of the planned
hearing.It clearly is not, and was just a thought that occurred to
Mr. McCloy, who asked: "Mr..Truly, while Oswald was in your omploy, did
you have any inquiries made of you by any of the United States agencies,

--- PAGE BREAK ---was just a thought that occurred to
Mr. McCloy, who asked: "Mr..Truly, while Oswald was in your omploy, did
you have any inquiries made of you by any of the United States agencies,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

23-Truly
such as FBI, regarding him?" and Mr. Truly replied, "No, sir; nothing
ever." (p.237)
I rogard this as very important, not only because the starf has
deliberately ignored it,but it boars diroctly on the honesty and forth
I think it certalnly validates Oswald's uncontested allegation that the
FBI was pressuring his wife and that they were engaging in what I earlier
terned "rough shadowing". It certainly makes clear that locating Oswald
was hardly the purpose of Hostyis visit.
Truly had said he thought a hard-working employee, Jack Dougherty,
might have been the man who moved the elevator from the fifth floor.
There is about 1/3 of.a page of discussion of Mr. Doughterty, who turns
pout to be a hard-working batchelor, never married, and with "no interest
血n women". During the lengthy reply about Dougherty's character, there
is a deletion indicated in the printed transcript.Trulys opinion
"what is wrong with him mostly 1s his omotional makeup...." (p.237)
Wrhen they return to the elevators agaln.This would have been
a subjeet pursued most diligently if the police and everybody else hadn't
immediately decidod they had a live goat and didn't care about anything
else:
"Mr.Belin
and Secrot Sorvice Agent Howlett simulated putting
a rifle at the spot where the rirfe was found; and then we took the stairs
down to/the second floor lunehroom where ofricer Baker encountered Lee
HarveyOswald?
You remember-us doing that?
Mr.
Pruly.
Yos/
sir
My
Belin.
Howfastwerewegoing
funningstrbtting,/walking
Mr. Truly.: Walkingat a brisk walk, and/thon a littl bit faster,
Iwould say.

--- PAGE BREAK ---You remember-us doing that?
Mr.
Pruly.
Yos/
sir
My
Belin.
Howfastwerewegoing
funningstrbtting,/walking
Mr. Truly.: Walkingat a brisk walk, and/thon a littl bit faster,
Iwould say.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2l-Truly
"Mr. Belin. But when you got back to the fifth flopr that west
elevator was not there?
Mr. Truly. No, sir.
Mr. Belin.
Was it on any floor below the fifth rloor?
Mr. Truly.
Ididntlook/
Mr. Belin. As you were climbing up the floors, you did not see it?
Mr. Truly.
No, sir.
Mr. .Belin. And if it wasn't on the fifth floor when you got there,
it could have been on the.sixth or soventh, I assume.
Mr. Truly. No, sir; I don't believe so, because I think I would
have heard or soen it com_ing downstairs whon I got on the fifth flobr
elevator, on the east side.
Mr.Belin.Were you looking.in that direction as you rode up on
the fifth floor, or were you facing the east?
Mr. Truly. No, sir. I don't know which way I was looking.
Iwas
only intent on getting to hhe seventh floor.
Mr.Belin.So you cannot say when you passed the sixth floor
whether or not an elevator was there?
Mr.Truly.I cannot." (p.238)
So here again the record shows it was clearly possible for another
marksman to have used the elevator in his escape.
Truly had about 15 warehouse employees on the payroll of that
butlding at that time. They had another warehouse elsewhere. Notice
that he is not asked if any had quit or had been fired. He was asked
only about hirings. Again, a possibly lmportant lead would be the firing
or the unexplained quitting of an employee.
Especially with the known absence of other employees, wasn't it odd

--- PAGE BREAK ---about hirings. Again, a possibly lmportant lead would be the firing
or the unexplained quitting of an employee.
Especially with the known absence of other employees, wasn't it odd

--- PAGE BREAK ---

25-Truly
that only the name of Oswald was mentioned by Truly:.
"Representative Ford. When you noticed the polico assembling
the employees aftor the assassination,what prompted you to think that
Oswald was not among them?"(p.238)
Truly's estimates or time are very poor, as the following indident
shows, and I mention this in connection with his participation in the
reconstruction:
"Representative Ford.Do. you know.about what time that was that
you told the police?
Mr.Truly. I could be wrong, but I think it was around 15 - be-
20
tween 15 minutes or wg minutes after the shots, or something. I could
be.as far off as 5minutes or so...
（p.239)
He was more than loo percent wrong. The Commission says the shots
were fired at about 12:30.The rifle wasn't found until 1:22. There is
no telling how much time.elapsed between the fiading of the rifle and
the time Truly found Fritz where the rifle had beenfound, but it certainly
was after l:22.
The early stories coming out of Dallas said that Oswald, when Baker
poked his pistol in his gut, was dringing a Coke. Truly's version:
"Mr. Truly. He was just standing there.
Mr. Dulles. Did he have a coke?
Mr. Truly. No, sir.
Mr.Dulles..No drink?
Mr. Truly. No dring at all. Just standing there.
Mr. Dulles. Anything about his appearance that was ztraxk
startling or unusual?
Mr.Truly. No, sir. No, sir; I didn't see him panting like he
P.239
had been running or anything." (p)