OPTIONALPORM.MO.10
GSAFPMR1e!CFR1101.t1.0
JULV1073ED1T1ON
UNITEDSTATESGOVERNMENT
Memorandum
The AttorneyGeneral
October 1, 1975
TO
FROM
Director, FBI
SUBJECT:
ASSASSINATION OF PRESIDENT JOHN F.KENNEDY
Reference is made to my memorandum of July 29, 1975,
captioned as above, which advised you of the results of this Bureau's
preliminary inquiry concerning an allegation that Lee Harvey Oswald
had visited the FBI office in Dallas sometime prior to the assassina-
tion of President Kennedy for the purpose of talking to Special Agent
J.imcs P.Hosty,Jr.Ln the absence of Mr.Hosty,Oswald allegedly
left a note which was threatening in nature. Also, that this visit and
note were not reported following the assassination of President Kennedy
by Oswald.
As a matter of background,in my absence from the city,
Messrs. Callahan, Adams and Bassett met with Deputy Attorney
General Tyler on August 29, 1975. At this meeting Mr. Tyler was
advised that in accordance with the feeling of the Department,after a
thorough review of my memorandum of July 29, 1975,we anticipated
conducting approximately six additional interviewsof individualswho
Mr. Tyler was in agreement with'this course of action. This meeting
waslater attended byAssistant Attorney General Thornburg and he too
subscribed to the additional interviews. He was also in agreement that
each person interviewed be furnished a waiver of rights and that the
interviewsbe recorded by sworn statement.
Later in the afternoon on the same day Mr. Adams was
advised that the Dallas "Times Herald"newspaper intended to publish
a story in conne ction with the aforementioned allegation and they
desired a statement from this Bureau. The proposed statement was
prepared and the Deputy Atorney General was advised of the content
of this proposed press release. Late in the evening of August 30, 1975,
the Bureau learned of the text of the proposed article to appear in the .
August 31, 1975, issue of the Dallas "Times Herald" (a copy of this
Rure II S Savinec.Rnds Reeularde an the Pavroll Savines Plane Bureau learned of the text of the proposed article to appear in the .
August 31, 1975, issue of the Dallas "Times Herald" (a copy of this
Rure II S Savinec.Rnds Reeularde an the Pavroll Savines Plan

--- PAGE BREAK ---the text of the proposed article to appear in the .
August 31, 1975, issue of the Dallas "Times Herald" (a copy of this
Rure II S Savinec.Rnds Reeularde an the Pavroll Savines Plan

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Attorney General
article is attached). At that point it became apparent that our inquiry
would probably have to go beyond six individuals but in any event there
would be a logical reason for interviewing anyone beyond the initial
six。
Inquiry was conducted by Assistant Director Harold N.
Bassett, Inspector - Deputy Assistant Director J. Allison Conley,
Inspector Edgar N. Best, all of the Inspection Division; and Special
Agents in Charge Philip A.McNiff of the New York Office; Francis M.
Mullen, Jr., of the Tampa Office; and Arthur F. Nehrbass of our
Jacksonville Office. They all met in Dallas, Texas, on the evening of
September 1, 1975, and there followed a thorough briefing concerning
the information which had been developed to date.
Unless specifically advised to the contrary, all individuals
mentioned herein who were interviewed furnished a signed Interrogation;
Advice of Rights form and their interview was recorded by sworn state-
/ment.Copies of these statements are attached.
Mrs. Nannie Lee Fenner was reinterviewed on September 2,
1975.She stated that the statement which she initially furnished on
July 15, 1975, is accurate within the bounds of her recollection. She
categorically stated thatthenote which shereceived from Oswald made
absolutely no mention.concerning President Kennedy.It is her recol-
lection that the note was handwritten, which she described as a large
scrawl, very childlike in nature. She indicated that on giving this matter
additional thought she was now of the opinion that Miss Helen May may
have seen Oswald as he was departing the office after he delivered the
note. It may be recalled that in Mrs. Fenner's initial statement of
July 15, 1975, she advised that she had shown the note in question·to
JoePearce。
On September 5, 1975, an additional statement was taken
from Mrs. Fenner and at this time she advised that it is her clear
recollection that Pearce did not see the Oswald note but that he had the
envelope and/or letter in his hand and she is certain now that he did not
read the letter. She claimed that she told Pearce that "some nut" had
left the letter and he merely picked it up and laid it down..
Miss Helen Lee May was reinterviewed on September 2, 1975;
and she categorically denied ever seeing Oswald at any time or ever seeing
-2一left the letter and he merely picked it up and laid it down..
Miss Helen Lee May was reinterviewed on September 2, 1975;
and she categorically denied ever seeing Oswald at any time or ever seeing
-2一

--- PAGE BREAK ---he merely picked it up and laid it down..
Miss Helen Lee May was reinterviewed on September 2, 1975;
and she categorically denied ever seeing Oswald at any time or ever seeing
-2一

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Attorney General
the note or letter which he delivered.She did recall that sometime sub-
sequent to the assassination Mrs. Fenner again brought up the subject
of the Oswald note and stated that Clark (former ASAC Kyle Clark) had
told her to forget about it.
Miss Marian F. Roberts, former secretary to former SAC
Gordon Shanklin, was interviewed on September 6, 1975, in Sun City,
Arizona.She advised that she was aware that Oswald had appeared at
the reception desk of the Dallas Office and left a note with Mrs. Fenner
for SA Hosty prior to the assassination of President Kennedy. She stated
that she had never seen the note and was not aware of its contents
although she had heard the letter wanted Hosty to stop harassing Oswald's
wife.Sherelated thatsherecalleaenteringtheDallasOfficeatabout
the Saine tine ti.t Hielen Miay as entering at approximately mid-
day.Toherrecollection this wasa fewweeksbefore theassassination
and she and Miss May saw a slender, dark haired, young man hand some-
thing to Mrs. Fenner. This was not significant to her at the time; how-
ever,following theassassinationHelenMaysaid something toher to the
effect,"You remember,Marian,we were coming into the office about the
time Oswald handed Fenner the note." She stated that after she saw
pictures of Oswald after the assassination she can easily assume that he
was the individual she saw hand something to Mrs. Fenner. She recalled
that on the same day she observed this person Mrs. Fenner told her a
short time later a man had left a note for Hosty to quit bothering his wife.
She said that Mrs. Fenner told her the man did not say much but he was
"teed off' at Hosty. This, according to Miss Roberts, tended to further
her belief that the man she and Miss May saw was Oswald.She said
in her opinion, Oswald's appearance in the Dallas Office and the note he
  sa   o
who were there at the time of the assassination.
She stated thatafter
the assassination she heard from an unrecalled source that it was decided.
to destroy the notebut she does notknowwhomade this decision to have
the note destroyed. She stated she recognized the importance of the note
after she heard of the decision to destroy it.
In addition to the above,Miss Roberts also furnished the
following information butrefused to furnish itin a sworn statement since
she considered it hearsay and she had no firsthand kmowledge of same.
She stated that there was some talk around the office of a meeting held
She recalled that this meeting took place one or two days after the
-3~d it hearsay and she had no firsthand kmowledge of same.
She stated that there was some talk around the office of a meeting held
She recalled that this meeting took place one or two days after the
-3~

--- PAGE BREAK ---had no firsthand kmowledge of same.
She stated that there was some talk around the office of a meeting held
She recalled that this meeting took place one or two days after the
-3~

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Attorney General
assassination and by 'brass' she meant SAC Shanklin, ASAC Clark and
Mr. Malley (James R. Malley, former Number One Man to the Assist-
ant Director, General Investigative Division). She did not kmow whc
furnished this information to her.
SA Charles T. Brown, Jr., was interviewed on September 5,
1975.He advised that his first kmowledge of the note reportedly left at
theDallasOfficebyOswald came aboutthroughaconversationatsome
time in the early part of 1964 with Special Agent Vince Drain. He advised
that he and Drain were discussing Oswald's motive and mental condition
which would cause him to do what he·did and in tallking to Drain along
this vein the latter advised that Oswald had left a note at the office prior
to the assassination in which note Oswald stated that if the FBI did not
stop harassinghiswifehewouldblow up theFBI and theDallasPolice
Department.He said that he was so shocked and angered at this revela-
'.tion that he did not press further as to the disposition of the note and to
this. date he does not know what disposition was made of it.He advised
that in discussing receipt of this note Drain advised that Mrs. Fenner
and Joe Pearce, who was then a clerk in the office, were present in the
reception room at the time Oswald appeared in the office with the note.
According to Brown, at no time did Drain advise him as to the identity
of his source of the information.Brown also advised that he participated
on two occasionsininterviews with Marina Oswald subsequentto the
assassination and on neither occasion did she mention that Oswald had
informed her of a visit to the Dallas Office prior to the assassination.
On September 5, 1975, SA Joe A. Pearce was reinterviewed.
He categorically denied that he ever saw Lee Harvey Oswald,that he had
  m     sssso s  ro s sr   r
he had’ever read any note left by him.He said that after deliberating
on the matter since his prior affidavit of July 22, 1975, he recalled that
there were several discussions in thelatterpart of the 1960s concerning
a note left by Oswald for Hosty. During some of these discussions
Mrs. Fenner remarked to others in his presence that Pearce had seen
the note. He admitted that he did not contradict the statement and explains.
his failure to do so on his lack of appreciation of the seriousness of what
she was communicating to the people involved.
SA Vincent E. Drain was interviewed on September 2, 1975.
He advised that the extent of his kmowledge concerning the matter was
-4the seriousness of what
she was communicating to the people involved.
SA Vincent E. Drain was interviewed on September 2, 1975.
He advised that the extent of his kmowledge concerning the matter was
-4

--- PAGE BREAK ---hat
she was communicating to the people involved.
SA Vincent E. Drain was interviewed on September 2, 1975.
He advised that the extent of his kmowledge concerning the matter was
-4

--- PAGE BREAK ---

TheAttorneyGeneral
as follows. He claimed that approximately six years ago Mrs. Fenner
wasin theAgents'squadroom and shespoke toDrain about Oswald's
visit to the Dallas Office prior to the assassination. According to Drain,
she said that Oswald was mad at SA Hosty for interviewing his wife.
She said that Hosty was not in the office and Oswald left a letter for him.
He claimed that to the best of his memory she did not mention the con-
tentsoftheletterandhedidnotquestionheraboutitorpursuethe
conversation further.He said this is the first kmowledge he had of
Oswald either visiting theofficeorleavinga letter and thatheheard
no further comment concerning the incident until he read the newspaper
story on August 31, 1975.
On September 3,1975, Drain was reinterviewed in view of
certain conflicts as furnished in his first statement.In his second
statementhe ineffect stands onhis first statement.
的
Mrs. Martha Ann Campbell, formerly Martha Ann Connally,
wasinterviewedonSeptember3,1975.Sheisnolongeremployedin
theBureaubutatthetimeoftheassassinationwasservingas the
secretary to Supervisor Kenneth C.Howe.She advised that within a
weekafter the assassination she wasinthe"Coke-room'onthetwelfth
floor of theFBI space taking abreakwith one or two other female
clerical employees.One employee was Mrs.Fenner and she can't
recall the other. She recalled Mrs. Fenner making a statement that
Oswald came to the office looking for.Agent Hosty and was very upset
because Hosty had been interviewing Marina Oswald.Hosty was not
in the office and Oswald leftanote.Mrs.Campbell stated shewas.
surprised to hear this and immediately after leaving the room she went
into Supervisor Howe's office and told him what she had heard.She
said that she can't recall his reaction buthe asked her who had told her
this and who was present. She told him Mrs. Fenner but can't recall
the other persons present.She said that upon hearing Fenner's name Howe
made a face" and Howe told her that she was not to discuss the visit or
note any more and it was emphatic enough that she followed his instruction.
She said thatshe had enough sense to realize that something was being held
back at that time but she said nothing about it. Continuing, Mrs. Campbell
5phatic enough that she followed his instruction.
She said thatshe had enough sense to realize that something was being held
back at that time but she said nothing about it. Continuing, Mrs. Campbell
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---he followed his instruction.
She said thatshe had enough sense to realize that something was being held
back at that time but she said nothing about it. Continuing, Mrs. Campbell
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

TheAttorneyGeneral
advised that she cannotrecall the full conversation with Supervisor Howe
but it would have been either he or Mrs.Fenner who at that time mentioned
the note Oswald left was then in Agent Hosty's workbox.She stated she
cannot recall ever hearing what actually happened to the note but she had
thefeelingitwasdestroyed.
On September 4, 1975, Mrs.Campbellwas reinterviewed,
results of which were reported by FD-302.In reference to her above
statement she cannot be positive whether it was in fact Mrs.Fenner who
hadfurnished theinformation toherbutitwasherfeelingthatFenner
wastheonewhotoldheroftheletterbutsheisnotascertainofthisas
she is of the fact that Fenner was present during the conversation relating
to Oswald's visit and leaving of the note. She was unable to furnish the
identity of any other individuals present.This reinterview of Mrs
Campbell was uccasioned by thefact that Mrs.Fenner orally advis.d
that she never took a break and never went to the "Coke room"and also
for the purpose of Mrs.Campbell reviewing the office roster at tr: time
of the assassination in an effort to determine if she could recall the
other employeewho waspresent.
On August 31, 1975, Tom Johnson, publisher of the Dallas
"Times Herald" telephonically contacted Assistant to the Director -
Deputy Associate Director (Investigation) James B. Adams. It should
be noted that Johnson was identified as the writer of the article appearing
in the August 31, 1975, issue of the Dallas "Times Herald"referred to
previously.Johnson advised that on that date he received an anonyrnous
telephone call from a female. This individual called at 10:50 a.m.,
Dallas time and made reference to the article which appeared in tivat
day's issue of the Dallas "Times Herald." She told Mr.Johnson that
'Not everyone in Dallas kmew about it and she thinks it unfair to leave
the impression that many of the men kmew about it. In case you are
interested, Mr. Hosty destroyed the note on orders of Mr.Howe.
Mr.Gemberling was handling the case. Mr.Bill Anderton and Mr.Horton
also kmow of it. Mr. Gemberling kmew about the note and saw it but it
was destroyed on instructions ofMr.Howe."Subsequently,on this same
date, this anonymous caller identified Mr. Horton as Urial Horton.
Mr.Johnson advised that he was furnishing this information only for the
purposeof asking for confirmation as to whether the information iscorrect
before publication. Mr. Adams informed Mr. Johnson that his request
would be noted; however, as previously stated in Mr. Kelley's press releasc
concerning this situation no additional commentwould be made by the
6ation. Mr. Adams informed Mr. Johnson that his request
would be noted; however, as previously stated in Mr. Kelley's press releasc
concerning this situation no additional commentwould be made by the
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---ormed Mr. Johnson that his request
would be noted; however, as previously stated in Mr. Kelley's press releasc
concerning this situation no additional commentwould be made by the
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Attorney General
FBIuntil all inquiries had been completed and the matter considered by
the Department.
At the time of this current inquiry SA Robert P. Gemberling
was on sick leave, having been diagnosed by his doctor on August 2, 1975,
as having had a heart attack.In the absence of obtaining clearance from -
his physician, who was out of town and whereabouts unknown, Gemberling
was not interviewed at this time.
SA James W. Anderton was interviewed on September 2, 1975.
He advised that the first knowledge he had concerning a note from Oswald
directed to SA Hosty occurred in the general time frame of 1969 to 1970.
HeSaidi
:::. car the close of business while in the squad room
of tine DallasUiiicehe overheard SA Gemberling make some remark about
the additional leads he had received concerning the Kennedy assassination.
: As Gemberling was departing Anderton overheard Mrs. Fenner make a
remarkconcerningeither a noteor aletter ofa threateningnaturewhich
had been directed toHostyfromOswald sometimeprior to theassassina-
tion.He stated that while Mrs.Fenner did not indicate that this was
firsthand kmowledge she remarked in unrecalled words that the note or
letter had been delivered to Hosty who in turn took it to the Special Agent
in Charge.He said that he heard no further discussion on this subject
matter until approximately two or three years ago when, during a dis-
cussion concerning the assassination he overheard Mrs. Fenner make
a remark such as "and the letter'or words to that effect at which time
she laughed and departed without further elaboration.
Former SA Ural Horton was reinterviewed on September 4,
1975..He advised that he could furnish no additionalinformation other
than what he had previously furnished in his statement of July 23,1975.
He did note that helearnedof Oswald'svisit sometimebetween the
latter part of November, 1963, and the latter part of December, 1963.
He stated, however,that as to how and under what circumstances he
first learned of the Oswald note he has no specific recollection whatso-
ever. He added that the note allegedly contained a threat to Hosty; however,
he never saw the note nor is he aware of its'disposition.He said that he
has the impression that the note and circumstances surrounding it never
received official investigative attention but he has no direct knowledge
that this is a fact.of its'disposition.He said that he
has the impression that the note and circumstances surrounding it never
received official investigative attention but he has no direct knowledge
that this is a fact.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e said that he
has the impression that the note and circumstances surrounding it never
received official investigative attention but he has no direct knowledge
that this is a fact.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

TheAttorney General
SA James W. Bookhout was interviewed on September 2, 1975.
He advised that sometime during the investigation of the assassination
case he greeted SA Gemberling in the office and asked him how it was
coming.Herecalled that Gemberlingresponded that everythingwas fine
and his only currentproblem was to decide theproprietyofputting a
certain Oswald letter into the assassination report.Gemberling said
it was not so much his problem as it was that of Special Agent Hosty.
According to Bookhout he immediately terminated the conversation since
assassination and he did not want to have any kmowledge of Hosty's prob-
lems and did not want to get involved with them.He added that he does
not know that this particular Oswald letter is the same Oswald letter
that is now in question.He did not see the letter and does not kmow the
contents of it。
SA Bookhout also advised that he was present on November 22,
1963, with SA Hosty duringan interview of Lee Harvey Oswald at the
Dallas Police Department.He stated that Oswald,upon hearing Hosty's
name,immediately showed a hostile attitude toward Hosty and accused
him of being the Agent who had been harassing his wife; however, at no
time during this interview did Oswald mention that he had visited the Dallas
Office and left a note for SA Hosty.Bookhout also noted that he was in-
volvedinanotherinterviewwithOswaldaswellas interviewswithRuth
Paine and Marina Oswald and at no time was there ever mentioned any-
thing about Oswald having visited the Dallas FBI Office and leaving a note.
On page one of the September 1, 1975, issue of the Dallas
"Times Herald" there appeared an article (copy attached) captioned "Ex-
Agent:. Letter Left in Hosty's Box." This article set forth an interview
with former SA Joseph L. Schott. Schott is quoted as stating that he
understood that Oswald in his note threatened to kill Hosty if Hosty tried
to talk to his wife Marina again. Hosty put his letter in his workbox --
for incoming mail -- and it was still there on the day of the assassination.
Schott added that he doesn't kmow what happened to the letter but assumed
it was destroyed.He noted that he did not kmow whether the SAC lmew
about it or not but he knew a lot of people in the office kmew about it and
were talkingabout it.
Schott was interviewed on September 3, 1975. He refused to
sign the Interrogation: Advice of Rights form and he also refused to
8a lot of people in the office kmew about it and
were talkingabout it.
Schott was interviewed on September 3, 1975. He refused to
sign the Interrogation: Advice of Rights form and he also refused to
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---the office kmew about it and
were talkingabout it.
Schott was interviewed on September 3, 1975. He refused to
sign the Interrogation: Advice of Rights form and he also refused to
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---

TheAttorneyGeneral
furnish a sworn statement. The interview was recorded by FD-302, a
copy of which is attached. Schott refused to identify any individuals who
may have furnished the information attributed to him in the above-
mentioned news article.He said that when contacted by the Associated
Press reporter with regard to the article referred to previously, he
referred to some notes that he had made and from these notes he con-
cluded that he had received the information in the early part of 1964,
while in Wichita Falls, Texas, in connection with either a Grand Jury
proceeding or a trial. Schott claimed that he has since destroyed these
notes. He stated that as he understood it Oswald came to the office and
gave a note to some people, that it contained a threat to kill Hosty, that
it in his workbox where it was at the time of the assassination. While
Schott refused to identify the source or sources of his information, he
.assigned to Dallas Headquarterswho were there at the time of the
assassination or shortly thereafter.
In view of the foregoing, United States Attorney Frank D.
McCown was contacted on September 3, 1975, to ascertain from avail-
ablerecords the identityofcasespresentedor identity ofAgentsof the
FBI listed as appearing before the Federal Grand Jury in Wichita Falls,
Texas, in 1964. Mr. McCown advised that it would be necessary to
refer this request to the Executive Office for U. S.Attorneys, Washington,
D. C., to obtain authority to release such information from his records.
On September 4, 1975,Assistant United States Attorney Alex
McGlichey telephonically advised he had received suchpermissionfrom
the Department to make the requested information available to the FBI.
Itwasdetermined thatin1964oneFederalGrand Jurymet inWichita
Falls on October 7, 8, and 9. During those Grand Jury proceedings
fourteen Agents were called to appear. Of these fourteen, which inchudes
former SA Schott, only two, SAs Emory Horton and Joseph Hanley, are
currently assigned to headquarters in Dallas and Ural Horton, previously
referred to, while living in the Dallas area, is retired. Excluding Schott, .
these were the only three of the fourteen who were interviewed during
this current inquiry.
During the current inquiry all those employees still in head-
quarters city who were there at the time of the assassination or shortly
thereafter were interviewed with the exception of SA Gemberling,
9=ring the current inquiry all those employees still in head-
quarters city who were there at the time of the assassination or shortly
thereafter were interviewed with the exception of SA Gemberling,
9=

--- PAGE BREAK ---uiry all those employees still in head-
quarters city who were there at the time of the assassination or shortly
thereafter were interviewed with the exception of SA Gemberling,
9=

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Attorney General
previously mentioned as not being interviewed because of a recent heart
attack.In addition to those already mentioned in this memorandum the
following were interviewed: SAs Joe B. Abernathy, Robert P. Butler,
Milton L. Newsom and Manning C. Clements. Current or former non-
investigative personnel who were interviewed,together with the position
they occupied at the time of the assassination are as follows: Nancy J.
Collins, stenographic supervisor; Elva A. Jones, Secretary to AsAC;
Wanda V. McElroy, stenographer; Jewell E. Gilstrap, stenographer;
and L. Winifred Dixon, assistant chief clerk. Miss Dixon who is no
longer in the Bureau was the assistant chief clerk at the time of the
assassination and was serving as the chief clerk at the time of her
retirement. All of these people furnished statements advising that they
had no information whatsoever concerning the matter in question.
The following employees who were assigned to the Dallas
Office at.the time of the assassination were also interviewed: SAs Will
Hayden Griffin, Emory E. Horton, Gaston C. Thompson, Joseph H.
Hanley, Raymond C.Eckenrode, Alfred C. Ellington. Noninvestigative
personnel whowere assigned to theDallas Office at the time of the
assassination or shortly thereafter and who are still so employedwere
also interviewed: T. Lanette Posey, Evalyn Middleton, and Anna D.
King. To varying degrees this group of individuals furnished some
information relative to Oswald's visit and the leaving of a note;however,
they had no firsthand kmowledge, having heard it from some other
employee and nothing of sigmificance was developed as a result of these
interviews.
SA J. V. Almon was interviewed on September 7, 1975, in
Denver, Colorado. Almon advised that it was common kmowledge in the
DallasOffice thatOswalddid infactvisittheofficetwoor threedaysbe-
fore the assassination of President Kennedy; that he had left a threatening
note with the receptionist which was addressed to SA Hosty. He claimed
that it was also common kmowledge that the note was not placed in Oswald's
file and was destroyed. He claims that he never personally viewed the
note.He stated that to his recollection the first reference he heard to the
note was several days following the assassination and he does not recall
precisely which Agent first mentioned its existence. He feels, however,
that it was one of the following: Edwin D. Kuykendall (now retired),
W. Harlan Brown (now retired), Wallace R. Heitman (now retired),
Richard E. Harrison (since resigned), Robert M. Barrett, currently
assigned to our Birmingham Office, or Robert P. Gemberling previously
-10-lan Brown (now retired), Wallace R. Heitman (now retired),
Richard E. Harrison (since resigned), Robert M. Barrett, currently
assigned to our Birmingham Office, or Robert P. Gemberling previously
-10-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed), Wallace R. Heitman (now retired),
Richard E. Harrison (since resigned), Robert M. Barrett, currently
assigned to our Birmingham Office, or Robert P. Gemberling previously
-10-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

TheAttorney General
referred to in this memorandum). According to Almon, Mrs. Fenner
mentioned the note on several occasions and appeared to have some
personal kmowledge of it and may in fact have read it. He stated that
according to the information he received the note made no reference to
PresidentKennedybut was a threat directed toward SAHosty if he did
not stop harassing Oswald's wife.He said that there was some dis-
whether thenoteconstituted aviolationof thelawinviewof the threat
to an Agent.He thinks that possibly Gemberling or Heitman may have
.mentioned this but he cannot nowbe certain.
Continuing, Almon stated that he heard through an employee
of the Dallas Office,whose identity he cannot recall,that there was a
meeting of supervisors and Agents coordinating the investigation which
was held for the purpose of deciding what to do about the note.He said
'this group would normally include Shanklin, Clark, Howe, Hosty,
.Gemberling, and Manning C. Clements (now retired). He said that he
personally did not kmow what decision was made or who made the final
decision but there was little discussion pertaining to the note following
the meeting until the assassination came before the Warren Commission.
He stated thatfollowing therelease of the report bytheWarren Com-
mission the matter subsided but would occasionally come up in conversa-
tion during Agent gatherings.He recalled that on one occasion one Agent
remarked that he wondered what the Bureau would do if they kmew about
the note and they replied with words to'the effect "You had better hope
they never do find out." He said that he also recalls that SAs Drain and
Ural E.Horton questioned what the Warren Commissionwould have done
had they known about the note and what would happen if the newspapers
found out about it.He advised that on another occasion Drain or Horton
made some reference to the matter to SA Anderton who remarked I
do not kmow what you are talking about -- I never saw the note," leaving
the impression with Almon thathewanted nothingwhatsoever to do with
thematter.
Almon also commented that during June, 1975, shortly before.
his retirement, SA Ural Horton remarked in the presence of Agents
Griffin, Drain, Anderton and possibly Hanley that he wondered what would
happen if the newspapers found out about the threatening note and someone,
possibly Drain, replied, "Let's hope the newspapers never find out about
the existence of the note'and the matter was dropped.
-11-if the newspapers found out about the threatening note and someone,
possibly Drain, replied, "Let's hope the newspapers never find out about
the existence of the note'and the matter was dropped.
-11-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ound out about the threatening note and someone,
possibly Drain, replied, "Let's hope the newspapers never find out about
the existence of the note'and the matter was dropped.
-11-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The AttorneyGeneral
The foregoing was placed in a sworn statement by Almon.
In addition, he advised that based on vague recollection he seems·to
recall a conversation with former investigative clerk Robert G.Rcairu
whereinRenfro stated that he had eitherhandled or seen the note in
question.(Renfro is no longer an employee of the Bureau.) He also
commented based solely on his opinion that Joseph J. Loeffler originally
had the Kennedy assassination assigmed to him and "had to kmow about it,"
referring to the Oswald visit and note.
On September 8, 1975, SA Kenneth C. Howe was reinterviewed
at Washington, D. C: It may be recalled that Howe furnished'three state-
ments in July of this year.In addition to that information which he
why he kmew the note in question was from Oswald he kmows it was citi.er
signed by him or Oswald's wife's name, Marina, was mentioned thoroin.
'.He stated at that time they had acase on Marina and he kmew her to be
thewife of Lee Harvey Oswald.He recalled that the notewas on plain
paper and was either handwritten or hand printed and was threatening in
nature either concerning some action Oswald said he was going to take
possibly against SA Hosty or against the FBI office. He said that he
can'tremember whether hefound the notebefore or-afterOswaldwas
shot but believes it was after.He advised that he found the note ir. Hosty's
tion of the SAC and took it immediately to SAC Shanklin.He can't
remember what wording he used to convey to SAC Shanklin what he had
but kmows that Shanklin was made aware by him of what he had..He
recalls that Shanklin's reaction was to wave him away and say, "Don't
tell me about it. I don't want to hear or I don't want to kmow anything
about it." He said from this reaction it was his impression that Sha.kli
had possibly heard of the existence of the notebeforebuthe does not
kmow this tobea fact.
Contimuing, Howe stated that he cannot remember whether he
left the note with Shanklin but feels that at that point one of three things
had to have occurred: (1) He left the note with Shanklin;(2) He returned
the note to Hosty's workbox; or (3) He held the note and personally gave
it to Hosty. He claims that he subsequently told Hosty what had happened
but he does not recall having any discussion with him concerning it. He
stated that at that stage he felt it was a matter for the SAC to resolve
with Hosty and having told both about the matter he took no further action.
-12-ving any discussion with him concerning it. He
stated that at that stage he felt it was a matter for the SAC to resolve
with Hosty and having told both about the matter he took no further action.
-12-

--- PAGE BREAK ---with him concerning it. He
stated that at that stage he felt it was a matter for the SAC to resolve
with Hosty and having told both about the matter he took no further action.
-12-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Attorney General
He claims that he did not subsequently discuss it with Shanklin, Hosty
or anyone else.He denies instructing Hosty to destroy the letter and
denies receiving any instructions from anyone else that he should tell
Hosty to destroy the letter.He said he never kmew of the ultimate
disposition of the letter. He claims he has no recollection of having
prepared a memorandum or having made any written record of the note.
Howe was confronted with the information furnished by his
former secretary.He advised he does not recall this nor under the
circumstances as they existed at that time can he categorically deny
it didn't happen.Hesaid at that time the matter was still in the hands
of the SAC and until some adjudication by him he felt thematter should
not be discussed.He claims that if any decision was made that infor-
mation concerning the note should or should not be included in a con-
munication he had no part in that decision.
On September 8, 1975, James R. Malley was interviewed at
Washington, D. C. He advised that on the date of the assassination he
held the position of Number OneMan to the Assistant Director of the
General Investigative Division. He advised that on November 24, 1963,
he received an instruction to proceed to Dallas, Texas, and arrived
there approximately 8:00 p.m. that evening. To his recollectian he
returned to Washington on December 12,1963. He advised that at no
time did he ever hear of Oswald having visited the Dallas Office or
bringing a note to the Dallas Office until he read an article in the news-
paper in late August or early September, 1975. He also advised that at
no time during the period he was in Dallas did he attend any conference
at which there was any discussion concerning a note that had been
delivered by Oswald.
Concerning Ruth Paine, it was determined on September 9,
1975, that she is currently residing at 222 Winona Street, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, telephone VI 9-6799. It was also determined that as of
that date she was out of town and the expected date of her return was
not kmown.
On September 10,1975,SAC Joseph J.Loeffler of our Columbia
Office was interviewed at Washington, D. C. At the time of the assassina-
tion there were four supervisory desks in Dallas. One was handled by SAC
Shanklin, one by ASAC Clark, one by SA Howe and the other by Loeffler.
- 13 -t Washington, D. C. At the time of the assassina-
tion there were four supervisory desks in Dallas. One was handled by SAC
Shanklin, one by ASAC Clark, one by SA Howe and the other by Loeffler.
- 13 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---At the time of the assassina-
tion there were four supervisory desks in Dallas. One was handled by SAC
Shanklin, one by ASAC Clark, one by SA Howe and the other by Loeffler.
- 13 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

TheAttorneyGeneral
Loeffler advised that to his recollection he first learned of Oswald's
visit to the Dallas Office probably sometime during the week of
November 24,1963.He doesnotrecallwhoinformed him ofthis
andwhen theinformationwasconveyed tohimheconsidered ittobe
commonkmowledgein theoffice.Untilreadingitin therecentnews-
papers he stated he was not aware that Oswald had left a note. He
advised that immediately following the assassination he was assigned
tomarshal the investigation and insure that appropriateleadswere
receiving expeditious attention. He denies that he was present at any
time during any discussion concerning receipt of a note from Oswald
or the decision to destroy such a note.
As you may recall, in Hosty's statement of July 17, 1975,
he advised that at the time he received the note he thought it was from
another subject of his, one Jimmy George Robinson, a Ku Klux Klan
leader from Garland, Texas, who had made a complaint to the Dallas
Office of the FBI alleging his civil rights had been violated by the Garland,
Texas, Police Department. Hosty stated that he and another Agent went
to Robinson's residence and not finding him at home interviewed his wife
who gave a completely different version of his allegation against the
Garland Police Department. Her statement completely wiped out the
civil rights complaint according to Hosty.
The incident to which Hosty referred to is apparently a case
handled by him in June, 1963. A copy of the report in connection with
this case is attached. In essence it discloses that Robinson was placed
in jailin June,1963,for assaulting his wife.While in jail his wife
allowed Garland Police Department officers to search his residence,
inchuding the area which he claimed to be his study.He claimed his wife
had no right to let the police search his office as it was not under her
control; hence,he felt his civil rights had been violated.  As noted in
wife on June 24, 1963. She said that while still married to Robinson
she left him following the assault on her person. She stated that she
allowed thepoliceofficers to conductasearch.
In the September 15, 1975, issue of "Time" magazine, there
appears an article on page nineteen captioned "The Oswald Cover-up."
This article makes reference to Oswald's visit to the Dallas Office prior
to the assassination and delivery of a threatening note. This article
-14-e on page nineteen captioned "The Oswald Cover-up."
This article makes reference to Oswald's visit to the Dallas Office prior
to the assassination and delivery of a threatening note. This article
-14-

--- PAGE BREAK ---aptioned "The Oswald Cover-up."
This article makes reference to Oswald's visit to the Dallas Office prior
to the assassination and delivery of a threatening note. This article
-14-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The AttorneyGeneral
claims that FBI sources close to the investigation believe that the note
was more ominous than Kelley (Director) implied and that the Bureau's .
Inspectors have learned that Oswald specifically threatened to take
action against the Government. This article points out that according
to present and former FBI officials John P. Mohr, then the Bureau's
administrative chief, told the Dallas Agents to destroy it. Continuing,
the article claims that Mohr, who retired in 1972, denies any kmowledge
of Oswald's note or its disappearance. So too do his former aides in
the Administrative Division, Nicholas P. Callahan, James B. Adams,
and Eugene W. Walsh. The article notes that the continuing FBI inves-
tigation is especially sensitive because these men now hold three of the
Bureau's five top jobs.
Sworn statements have been obtained from Messrs. John P.
Mohr, Nicholas P. Callahan, James B. Adams, and Eugene W. Walsh
in which they categorically denied these allegations.
On September 11, 1975, Sandy Smith of "Time"magazine
and the author of the above-mentioned "Time"article of September 15,
1975, came to Bureau Headquarters to see Mr.Adams. Mr.Smith
had previously indicated a desire to talk with Mr.Adams.On this oc-
casion Smith was advised that his article troubled Mr. Adams because
     e  s r
have taken place could be an institutional cover-up by involvement of
FBI superiors in Washington concerning the Oswald note. Mr. Adams
noted that if Smith did not act in good faith in preparation of the article
and if he could not back it up such could be construed as being malicious
and grounds of libel. Mr. Smith stated that he had received this infor-
mation from four, five, or six separate officials, present or former,
and he was certain the information was true. He was asked if all of
these sources specifically claimed to have personal kmowledge or had
just heard that such might be the case and had heard Mr. Mohr had
ordered the destruction of the note. He replied that only one of his
sources claimed to have personal kmowledge Mr. Mohr told the Dallas
Agents to destroy it and the other sources had varying degrees of
kmowledge concerning it.
Smith would not identify his sources and also. would not
provide any leads leading to the identification of his sources. He said
he realized that his allegation was most material to our inquiries and
-15th would not identify his sources and also. would not
provide any leads leading to the identification of his sources. He said
he realized that his allegation was most material to our inquiries and
-15

--- PAGE BREAK ---y his sources and also. would not
provide any leads leading to the identification of his sources. He said
he realized that his allegation was most material to our inquiries and
-15

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Attorney General
recognized he may be forced to produce the identity of his sources
through a libel suit or other action and then they could tell their story
as they told it to him which would clearly show he acted on informa-
tion coming from individuals who had provided him with reliable infor-
mation in the past. He did define official as someone above the Special
Agent level and would fall within the range of Special Agent supervisor
or a top official, either present or former. During this conversation
Mr.Smith also stated that some of his sources indicated that even
Mr. Hoover kmew about this; however, he did not include it in the '
article because there was a conflict between his sources in this regard
and he confined his article to what the sources agreed upon.
In view of the above information, it was determined that at
this point it would be essential to interview those employees and former
employeeswhowereinvolved in the chainof commandin thetwo
divisions at Bureau Headquarters who were engaged in Headquarters
supervision of the assassination case as well as other individuals who
/had various reporting responsibilities.
In view of the above, Mr. John P. Mohr was reinterviewed
on September 12, 1975, and the results of this interview were recorded
by FD-302.Mr.Mohr was advised ofthe information which Mr.Smith
suitbecauseofthehighcostsinvolvedand thefactthathewasalready
engaged in a suit which may prove financially burdensome.Nevertheless,
he stated that if there was some way in which the Government could file
body, inchuding a grand jury to testify to the accuracy of his prior sworn
statement in which he denied having any kmowledge of the Oswald visit
util it appeared in the newspapers.
The two divisions having the investigative responsibilities
with regard to the assassination were the Domestic Intelligence Division
and the General Investigative Division. The following individuals were
interviewed and title as of the time of the assassination and current status
as to whether employed or retired are setbrth parenthetically beside
eachname:
(The exception is James Handley, who is deceased, but
the assassination case.)
- 16 -he assassination and current status
as to whether employed or retired are setbrth parenthetically beside
eachname:
(The exception is James Handley, who is deceased, but
the assassination case.)
- 16 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Attorney General
Alan H.Belmont (Assistant to the Director
Investigative - retired). Mr. Belmont is seriously
ill and therefore no effort was made to obtain an
Interrogation; Advice of Rights form or a sworn
statement from him.
Sterling B. Donahoe (Inspector - Number One Man
to Mr. Belmont - retired).
Alex Rosen (Assistant Director, General Investigative
Division - retired).
James R. Malley (Inspector - Number One Man to
Assistant Director, General Investigative Division).
See prior interview of Mr. Malley.
James Handley (deceased,but at the time of the
assassination was the Section Chief of the Criminal
Section, General Investigative Division).
Henry A. Schutz (Unit Chief, Criminal Section, General
Investigative Division - retired).
Richard D. Rogge and Fletcher D. Thompson (both
Supervisory Special Agents, Criminal Section,
General Investigative Division, who had reporting
responsibilities and who arrived in the Dallas Office
on November 25, 1963, to assist in the preparation of
the initial communications. Rogge is currently
employed. Thompson is retired.)
William C. Sullivan (Assistant Director, Domestic
Intelligence Division - retired).
Joseph A. Sizoo (Inspector - Number One Man,
Domestic Intelligence Division - retired).
Donald E. Moore (Inspector - Number Two Man,
Domestic Intelligence Division - retired).
- 17 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---seph A. Sizoo (Inspector - Number One Man,
Domestic Intelligence Division - retired).
Donald E. Moore (Inspector - Number Two Man,
Domestic Intelligence Division - retired).
- 17 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Attorney General
William A. Branigan (Section Chief, Espionage Section,
Domestic Intelligence Division - current employee).
Elbert T. Turner, W. Marvin Gheesling, Lambert L.
Anderson, and Charles D. Brennan (Supervisory
Special Agents who were responsible for various
aspects of the investigation and/or reporting respon-
sibilities.Anderson is a current employee, whereas
theother threeareretired.)
With the exceptions of Sullivan and Turner,all of the afore-
mentioned advised that theyhad nokmowledge whatsoever of Oswald's
visit and theleaving ofanote.
With regard to Elbert T. Turner, following the recent
publicity concerning the Oswald visit and note,he recalled that wnile
he did not remember any threatening notebyOswald he did have a
/ vague recollection that Oswald had complained to the Dallas Office
concerning inquiries made about his wife.According to Turner,he
believedhereceivedthiskmowledgefromreviewingsomecommunica-
tion in the Bureau file and has no recollection of discussing this
Oswald complaint with anyone. Mr. Turner said he is reasonably sure
that his recollection of Oswald's complaint to theDallas Officewas not
based on seeing the results of SA Hosty's interview of Oswald on
November 22, 1963, at the Dallas Police Department.
Based on the initial interview with Mr. Turner and his
recollection,he was reinterviewed and exhibited a copy of a letter
dated November 9, 1963, written by Lee H. Oswald to the Soviet
. Embassy in Washington, D. C., which letter reads in part as follows:
"The Federal Bureau of Investigation is not now
interested in my activities in the progressive organi-
zation 'Fair Play For Cuba Committee', of which I
was secretary in New Orleans (state Louisiana) since
I no longer reside in that state. However, the F.B.I.
has visited us here in Dallas, Texas, on Noyember 1st.
Agent James P. Hasty warned me that if I engaged in
F.P.C.C. activities in Texas the F.B.I. will again
take an 'interrest' in me.
- 18 -e F.B.I.
has visited us here in Dallas, Texas, on Noyember 1st.
Agent James P. Hasty warned me that if I engaged in
F.P.C.C. activities in Texas the F.B.I. will again
take an 'interrest' in me.
- 18 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---us here in Dallas, Texas, on Noyember 1st.
Agent James P. Hasty warned me that if I engaged in
F.P.C.C. activities in Texas the F.B.I. will again
take an 'interrest' in me.
- 18 -

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Attorney General
"This agent also 'suggested to Marina Nichilayeva
that she could remain in the United States under F.B.I.
'protection', that is, she could defect from the Soviet
Union, of course, I and my wife strongly protested
these tactics by the notorious F.B.I."
After reviewing this particular Oswald letter, Turner stated
while he cannot be absolutely certain that this particular communica-
tionisthematerialhethoughthehadseenintheBureaufilehedoes
nowrecallhavingseen thisparticularletterinthefileandbelievesit
was mostlikely the communication thathe referred to when he was
initially interviewed. (It is noted that full details concerning this
particular Oswald letter were made available to and published in the
Warren Commission report.)
With regard to Mr, Sullivan,telephonic arrangements were
made on September 12,1975,to interview him on the following Tuesday
" at his residence in New Hampshire. He subsequently advised on
September 15, 1975, that he had conflicting schedules and wondered
if our questions could be submitted through ourBoston Office and he
would then respond to them. During this discussion he agreed, however,
to meet with Bureau representatives on the morning of September 16,
1975.He refused to sign an Interrogation;Advice of Rights form and
also refused to be placed under oath. However, upon arrival of the
Inspector he made available a three -page typed statement concerning
this matter. Among other things, Mr. Sullivan in his statement noted
that on one occasion during a conversation with Mr. Shanklin the
l atter mentioned that he had internal personnel problems in the Oswald
case because one of his Agents (the name was not given to Sullivan or
if so he has forgotten) had received while Oswald was alive a threatening
letter from him because of the Agent's investigation of Oswald. According
to Sullivan,he raised a question as to the details and Shanklin seemed
disinclined to discuss it other than to say he was handling it as a per-
sonnel problem with Mr. J. P. Mohr. He advised he did not press the
matter and they went on to other topics. Further, no mention was
made of anythingbeingdestroyed.
Continuing, Mr. Sullivan advised that in another later con-.
versation Mr.Shanklin mentioned to him that Director J. Edgar Hoover
was furious at one of his Agents, James Hosty, and was going to give
-19-tinuing, Mr. Sullivan advised that in another later con-.
versation Mr.Shanklin mentioned to him that Director J. Edgar Hoover
was furious at one of his Agents, James Hosty, and was going to give
-19-

--- PAGE BREAK ---n advised that in another later con-.
versation Mr.Shanklin mentioned to him that Director J. Edgar Hoover
was furious at one of his Agents, James Hosty, and was going to give
-19-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Attorney General
him a transfer out of Dallas. When he inquired why Shanklin replied
that Mr.Hoover did not like the way Mr.Hosty had handled his part
of the Oswald investigation,it was then Mr.Shanklin told Sullivan
that it was Hosty who had received the threatening message from
Oswald before the assassination.Hestated thatShanklin did not
mention that any message had been destroyed.
Mr. Sullivan, at the Inspector's request, added an addendum
to his statement noting that the conversation he had with Shanklin con-
cerning one of his Agents who had received a threatening message from
Oswald occurred subsequent to the assassination.He further stated
that at no time was he present or did he have any kmowledge whatso-
everof theidentitiesof anyonewhomade adecision to destroy an
alleged threatening note delivered by Oswald to the Dallas FBI Office.
James H.Gale, Assistant Director of the Inspection Division
at the time of the assassination, conducted two internal inquiries con-
cerning the Bureau's investigaticn of Lee Harvey Oswald prior to the
assassination. In view of this, Mr. Gale was interviewed. He advised
recent newspaper articles.He recalls that a few days following the
assassination and it may have been the following Monday, which he
knew was a holiday,he was called to the office at the instruction of
Mr. Hoover. He said he met with Mr.Hoover and former Associate
Director Clyde A. Tolson in Mr. Hoover's office for approximately two
hours. During that period of time Mr. Hoover instructed Mr. Gale to
conduct a thorough inquiry as to the Bureau's handling of the Oswald
case. He recalls Mr.Hoover stating that in his opinion there probably
would be aPresidential commissionwhichwould review theBureau's
handling of this matter and he wanted to be certain that it had been
properly handled. If on the contrary there were shortcomings and
delinquencies Mr. Gale was instructed to thoroughly report same and
in fact Mr.Hoover specifically stated Leave no stone unturned and
the most important responsibility I have given you since you have been
in the FBI. According to Mr. Gale, Mr. Hoover reiterated this a
number of times during the interview with emphasis.
James P. Hosty was reinterviewed on September 22, 1975.
Hosty stated that his best recollection is that the note left by Oswald
-20一iterated this a
number of times during the interview with emphasis.
James P. Hosty was reinterviewed on September 22, 1975.
Hosty stated that his best recollection is that the note left by Oswald
-20一

--- PAGE BREAK ---er of times during the interview with emphasis.
James P. Hosty was reinterviewed on September 22, 1975.
Hosty stated that his best recollection is that the note left by Oswald
-20一

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Attorney General
was in the nature of a complaint, complaining about Hosty having inter-
viewed Oswald's wife. He stated that he recalls it said, "If you have
the note concluded,If you don't cease bothering my wife, I will take
recall a signature and doesn't recall Oswald's wife's name being
mentioned. He still maintains that at the time he received the note he
thought it was from a prior subject, Jimmy George Robinson, but
that his interview with Robinson took place in June, 1963.
According to Hosty, about an hour following his interview
of Oswald on the day of the assassinationhe received a message atthe
police department to return to the Dallas Office. Upon reporting to
Mr. Shanklin's office he recalls Mr. Shanklin and Mr. Howe being
present. They had Hosty's workbox in their possession and either
Shanklin or Howe showed him thenote from Oswald and asked what
/ the note was all about. He then explained his previous interview of
Mrs. Paine and Oswald's wife at the Paine residence on November 1,
1963, and the vehement protest that Oswald had made to him during
the interview on November 22, 1963.
After explaining this to Mr. Shanklin, he instructed him to
set forth in memorandum form the information which he had orally
explained, making specific reference to the note. He stated he dictated
this memorandum as instructed to Miss Martha Connally (now Martha
Campbell) and that the memorandum was addressed to the SAC under
the caption "Lee Harvey Oswald, aka; IS -R - Cuba." He stated he did
not have the note from Oswald in his possession when he dictated this
memorandum, it having been left with Mr.Shanklin. He said the memo-
randum when typed was an original and one copy and was possibly three
or four pages in length.He said he remained in the office while
Miss Connally transcribed his dictation and when it was completed
carried the memorandum to Mr. Shanklin and it was probably about
8:00 or 9:00 p.m. He handed this memorandum to Mr. Shanklin and
recalls no pertinent comment made at that time.
According to Hosty, nothing further occurred concerning
this memorandum and the Oswald note until Sunday, November 24, 1963.
He said he was on duty in the office on that date handling various duties
-21-ording to Hosty, nothing further occurred concerning
this memorandum and the Oswald note until Sunday, November 24, 1963.
He said he was on duty in the office on that date handling various duties
-21-

--- PAGE BREAK ---hing further occurred concerning
this memorandum and the Oswald note until Sunday, November 24, 1963.
He said he was on duty in the office on that date handling various duties
-21-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Attorney General
when helearned that Oswald had been shot and later learned that he
haddied.Approximately twohourslater hereceivedword from
Mr. Howe that Mr. Shanklin wanted to talk to both of them and they
proceeded to Mr. Shanklin's office. On entering Mr. Shanklin stated
"Oswald is dead now. There will be no trial." He then handed Hosty
his memorandum of November 22, 1963, with the note from Oswald
attached and told him to get rid of it.He claims the memorandum had
notbeenblockstampedorserialized.Hetoreypboth copiesofthe
memorandum and the note in the presence of Shanklin and Howe and
threw them in the wastepaper basket in Mr. Shanklin's office. He
advised that Mr. Shanklin then said "Get rid of it, get it out of here.
He said he then took the torn pieces out of the wastepaper basket,
left Mr.Shanklin's office,went to the men's wash room and flushed
the scraps of paper down the commode. He said that no one was with
him when he did this.
Mr.Hostyalso advised that on November 23,1963,he
interviewed Ruth Paine and during this interview she made available
to Hosty what appeared to be a rough draft handwritten letter prepared
by Oswald and addressed to the Soviet Embassy at Washington, D. C.
He said that on the following Monday or Tuesday,-November 25 or 26,
1963, inpreparation to dictate the results of his interview with
Mrs. Paine he was not sure howto report Oswald's rough draft letter
so he went to discuss the matter with Mr.Shanklin.He said he told
Mr. Shanklin he had a letter from Oswald which mentioned Hosty's
name and Shanklin became highly excited and agitated and started
screaming at him, stating "I thought I told you to get rid of that letter.
Get rid of it." He realized that Mr. Shanklin had been under extreme
pressure, possibly verging on a nervous breakdown and decided not to
discuss the matter with him further and left..On leaving Mr. Shanklin's
office he met SA Bardwell D. Odum who had apparently overheard
Mr.Shanklin yelling at him and inquired as to what the problem was.
He claims he then told Odum what had transpired and at that point,
according to Hosty, Odum confided in him that on late Saturday night,
November 23, or the early morning hours of the 24th, 1963, he, Odum,
had been sent by Mr. Shanklin to interview Mrs. Paine in order to
verify Hosty's story as to his prior interview of Mrs. Paine and Marina
Oswald on November 1, 1963, and to determine if he had in any way
mistreated any of these individuals.
-22-s. Paine in order to
verify Hosty's story as to his prior interview of Mrs. Paine and Marina
Oswald on November 1, 1963, and to determine if he had in any way
mistreated any of these individuals.
-22-

--- PAGE BREAK ---verify Hosty's story as to his prior interview of Mrs. Paine and Marina
Oswald on November 1, 1963, and to determine if he had in any way
mistreated any of these individuals.
-22-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Attorney General
According to Hosty, Odum told him that Mrs. Paine had.
advised him that she had given Hosty Oswald's rough draft letter to
the Russian Embassy but had retained a copy of the rough draft that
shehad made in her own handwriting.Odum told her that she should
give him the rough draft which she did. Odum said that he took this
rough draft to Mr. Shanklin sometime on the 24th or 25th of November
and told Mr.Shanklin about it and that Mr.Shanklin told Odum'I
thought I told Hosty to get rid of that note," and according to Odum
Mr.Shanklin became hysterical.
Hosty advised that at a later date the rough draft which he
had obtained from Mrs.Paine was forwarded to the Bureau and that
following submission of it to FBI Headquarters Mr.Shanklin said to
him that he apparentlyhad misunderstood Hosty about the rough draft
of the letter and aga n asked Hosty if he had gotten rid of the earlier
letter by Oswald as instructed by Shanklin and Hosty assured him that
hehad。
On September 24, 1975,a review of the files of the Dallas
Office verified that SA Hosty had interviewed Mrs.Paine on November 23,
1963,and he prepared an exhibit envelope on that same day and placed
in the appropriate file the rough draft letter to the Soviet Embassy
prepared by Oswald and referred to above. This particular specimen
of Oswald's handwriting was forwarded to the FBI Laboratory by Dallas
airtel dated January 23, 1964. The Dallas files also verify that on
November 24, 1963, SA Odum did interview Mrs. Paine and on that
same dateprepared an exhibitenvelope for the file and included therein
a copy of a letter he received from Mrs. Paine. This exhibit was
returned to Mrs. Paine on April 28, 1964.
Martha Ann Campbell, nee Connally, was reinterviewed
September 23, 1975. Mrs. Campbell was exhibited that portion of the
affidavit furnished by Hosty on September 22, 1975,as it relates to
his dictation of a memorandum to then Miss Connally. She advised
that she had no recollection of SA Hosty dictating such a memorandum.
She said he may have but at this time she simply cannot recall it.
Former SA Bardwell D. Odum was interviewed on September 24,
1975. He advised that until he read recent newspaper publicity he had
-23-he said he may have but at this time she simply cannot recall it.
Former SA Bardwell D. Odum was interviewed on September 24,
1975. He advised that until he read recent newspaper publicity he had
-23-

--- PAGE BREAK ---but at this time she simply cannot recall it.
Former SA Bardwell D. Odum was interviewed on September 24,
1975. He advised that until he read recent newspaper publicity he had
-23-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

TheAttorney General
never heard any reference made to a note left by Oswald for Hosty or
that Oswald had ever been in the Dallas Office of the FBl. That portion
of Hosty's statement of September 22, 1975,dealing with Mr. Odum
was read to him. Mr. Odum stated that he recalled obtaining a note
in Mrs.Paine's handwriting which was a copy of something she had
already turned over to the FBI and thinks it is the same note that
Hosty's statement talks about. However, Odum stated he did not make
any statement to Mr. Hosty at any time that Mr. Shanklin had ever
said anything to Mr.Odum about destroying anything or telling Hosty
or anyone else to destroy anything. He stated that any statement by
an Agent of the FBI pertaining to the destruction of anything which
might be considered evidence would be a matter which would be so
unusual that he would not forget it. Moreover,Odum advised that he
does not recall ever specifically being sent by Mr.Shanklin to inter-
view Mrs. Paine except on one occasion when Mr. Shanklin stated go
back out there and be sure we don't miss anything.
产
As to interviewing Mrs. Paine on a late Saturday evening
or early morminghours of the following day,he doesnotrecallever
making a visit to Mrs. Paine's house at "such an ungodly hour."
Odum also advised that approximately three weeks ago he
received along-distance telephonecall from Ruth Paine,who is now
living in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. She asked Odum if they had ever
talked about Oswald being in the Dallas Office of the FBI and he replied
that he could not recall any such conversation.She stated she was
reporter who asked her about Oswald being in the FBI office.She told
Odum she informed the reporter that she had never heard about him
beingin the office and the reporter then read that portion of her
testimony before the Warren Commission wherein she advised that
Oswald had claimed he had been there but that she later found out it
was not true.He said that her reaction to this was it sounded like
something she might have said although she still had no recollecticn
of the eventitself.She told Odum that the reporter asked herhow
she had checked to find out that the claim of Oswald was a lie and told
Odum that since he was.her primary contact at that time she felt that
if she had checked it would have been with Odum.
Ruth Paine was telephonically contacted on September 25,
1975. She advised of her telephonic contact with both the newspaper
-24-at time she felt that
if she had checked it would have been with Odum.
Ruth Paine was telephonically contacted on September 25,
1975. She advised of her telephonic contact with both the newspaper
-24-

--- PAGE BREAK ---t
if she had checked it would have been with Odum.
Ruth Paine was telephonically contacted on September 25,
1975. She advised of her telephonic contact with both the newspaper
-24-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

TheAttorneyGeneral
reporter and former SA Odum. She stated the purpose in calling Odum
was to alert him that she had received a call from a reporter.She
advised thattothebestofherrecollectionOswaldvisitedMarinaat
Mrs.Paine's apartment the weekend of November 8,and she believes
that it was on this weekend that Oswald told her he had visited the
Dallas Office of the FBI and was upset concerning the visit the prior.
week by SA Hosty to the Paine residence.She stated she does not
recall anyone specifically telling her but she learned later on that
Oswald had not gone to the Dallas Office of the FBI and it only came to
her attention when the newspaper man read her testimony before the
Warren Commission to her. Her only explanation was that prior to
testifying before the Commission she had been in contact with SA Odum.
a number of times and it was her thought that possibly Odum had told
her that Oswald had never gone to the FBI office.She stated that Qrlum
recently toldherheneverkmewthatOswaldhad come totheDallas
Office。
Mr.Shanklin was reinterviewed on September 24,1975.He
    s   a n
the two affidavits furnished by Hosty and the affidavits of Ural Horton
of July 23, 1975, and of Marian F. Roberts of September 6, 1975, as
well as the FD-302 concerning the interview of William C.Sullivan.
He categorically denied having anykmowledge or recollection ofHowe
ever bringing the matters he mentioned to Shanklin's attention either
before or after the assassination.He also had no independent kmowledge
of Hosty ever discussing with him Oswald being in the office or leaving
of a note or telling him to type up a memorandum and later telling him
to destroy it. He does remember a conversation with Ural Horton con-
cerning Hosty. He recalls that he mentioned to Horton that he had seen
Hosty a month or two previously and Hosty was still upset over what
Hosty claimed to be unjust criticism of his handling of the Oswald case.
He said that he does not personally recall Horton mentioning a note and
not kmowing anything about it. As he recalled it was just a general
statement as to whether Hosty was a well-balanced Agent.
Concerning Sullivan's comments, Mr.Shanklin stated that
he is completely at a loss to understand any comments Sullivan made
concerning their conversation regarding any note received from Oswald.
He said he did discuss the Oswald investigation on a number of occasions
-25=