£lx ~ Trujillo * 3 son-in-law or brother-in-law,
role in the Arbenz overthrow, from Venezuela,
because he couldn't shed the Trujillo woman,
repeatedly described by others as a whore. The
Washington assignment was an accomodation to


touts a, Jfreae
301/473-6186
9/23/75


•ttaqhe. with the ellipsis his

her


free them both, with a SI ,7CXJ) monthly
remitrtap.ce to him. He couldn t live on that, a

for tlie 1950s. ~ v .

It is witii many regrets that I read of Nando *s death in this morning s Post.


One always regrets the death of a friend, more 'that of one who so fully enjoyed
life and living, and especially one who was so warm, so giving and so intensely
human. He was, more than most Latins I know, all of whom .are that Way by nature, a
bom raconteur. After all these years - and I knew Kendo for some time before you and
I met - I remember some of those stories so clearly. Particularly his account of how
he survived birth and the means of his sustainance. I have often thought of and used
in speeches one of his aphorisms, his special twist of Socrates and Ecclesiastes.


after the events of 1965, I amde a number of efforts to learn where in Santo
Domingo he libed. Didn't I once ask you?

As I was not always a farmer, so also did I want very much to talk to him about
his unreported role in some important historical developments. He had indicated some
to me rather broadly and at the time I did not question him because at the time it
would have been wrong for him to respond. With the passing of time and the end of
secrecy, of course, that changed. Some of our mutual friends in the diplomatic
community also indicated knowledge, especially one other military attache.


How I wish I had known of his return to Washington! And that you had married.

I recall your poignant sorrow when he was recalled. If his -was a lingering heart
condition, he would have enjoyed visiting us where we now live. We had to move from
the firm. We are part of the way up a mountain, generally above the air pollution
that may have given him problems. I think he would have enjoyed our situation, close
to a city and close to Washington (an easy hour during rush traffic; yet isolated,
in calm, quiet, and deep in nature.

I hope that in tine you will visit us, one of the purposes of my writing to
express our sorrow instead of sending a card.

Nando wa. so outgoing I doubt ho told me anything he did not tell you in more
detail, so I doubt I can tell you anything of him you do not know except a couple
of humorous stories, perhaps. I remenoer one about his daring to trick Trujillo,
which took some guts.


I suppose his return was after the attention to my books. However, if he did
try to phone me, we have not been at tire farm for six years. X don^t think the
petty sum he owed me would have deterred him.

When you feel up to it, I would like to discuss these historical things with
you, for I would like to leave a record of them as he knew them. I think I do have
a background for this, coning from a yx life before I wa3 a lamer. To the best of
my knowledge, and I followed those things with care even when I farmed, there has
never been any public acknolwedgenent of his servxce3.


We join the uany:,others ..hose lives A, ando brightened in expressions of sorrow
and sympathy that are not just formal. How can one be but formal when he remembers
the time Kando and I were both broke and I needed some money he owed me that he
could not then pay and lie dashed off to return with three bottle* one of El %no,
anisette ho gave person -lly to my wife and insisted was for her alone? (She didn t
like it but fronh boyhood I have loved it — and it was the last good stuff I had. )


We do hope you can visit us. Please feel free to do it anytime, and I suggest
that when the pain is sharpest, our surroundings here can mean much.

S-? nneT'el vv
