1
TABLE OF CONTENTS I.

The Fortress of King Ipir ..................

9 1.

The White King of Amambay, 9 — 2.

The Wall of Cerro Cora, 14 — 3.

The "Old 
Man's House", 24 — 4.

The warriors' bath, 30 — 5.

A Viking military centre, 33.

II.

The untouched necropolis ...................

36 
1 .

A strange hill, 36 — 2.

The Land of the Sleeping Beauty of the Forest, 43 — 3.

A Sacred Norse Forest, 47 — 4.

The 
Necropolis of the Kings of Tiahuanaco?, 53.

III.

The Buried Temple
.......................

57 1.

The "Tupao Cué", 57 — 2.

The Viking village of Ta- cuati, 66 — 3.

The quiet stream, 68 — 4.

Defence and 
burial, 70 — 5.

A lasting settlement, 73.

IV.

The largest Rumic complex in the
world ......

75 1.

The rock shelters of Cerro Guazú, 75 — 2.

Odin, a drakkar and a riddle, 83 — 3.

The altars of death, 86 — 4.

War and victory, 92 — 5.

Some anthroponyms, 95 — 6.

Some men-li" sages and an enigma, 100 — 7.

A place of retreat on the 
northern route, 104.

V .

Horses, dogs and cattle in pre-Columbian America ................................

106 1 .

Some unexpected
animals, 106 — 2.

The post-Columbian horse dogma, 112 — 3.

The dog of the Incas, 120 — 4.

The horse and bull of 
Tiahuanacu, 122 — 5.

Some Normans in Tiahuanacu, 128 — 6.

The end of a legend, 139.

VI.

The marks of the Southeast 
....................

142 1 .

The strange Landsknecht, 142 — 2.

The roads of Potosí, 145 — 3.

From Weibingo to the Atlantic, 151 —
4.

The lock of Amambay, 158 — 5.

A breeding ground, 163 — 6.

Vikings and Normans, 166 — 7.

The empire's communication 
routes, 169.

Epilogue .......................................

175 Bibliographical notes .......................................................................................178
I
The
Fortress of King Ipir 1.

The white king of Amambay "At that time, a powerful and wise king named Ipir ruled the region.

He 
was white and had a long blond beard.

He lived with men of his race and Indian warriors loyal to him in a large village on top of a 
hill.He 
was white and had a long blond beard.

He lived with men of his race and Indian warriors loyal to him in a large village on top of a 
hill.

He had formidable weapons and possessed immense riches in gold and silver.

One day, however, he was attacked by 
savage tribes and disappeared forever.

This is how my father told it to me, who had heard it from his father.

In these terms or in 
very similar ones, Major Samaniego had often heard some old Indian speak to him, in his guttural Guaraní, of the white king of 
Amambay.

This brilliant young Paraguayan army officer, passionate about ethnology, did not get bored during the long hours of 
free time left to him by the routine service of his sapper battalion in a then unpopulated border province.

Every night, in some
tented settlement, he recorded on magnetic tapes the endless stories of the elders whose friendship he had managed to win.

In 
this way, he helped to save from oblivion traditions that would soon be erased from the memory of future generations, and 
ancestral beliefs doomed to disappear under the veneer of vague imported Christianity.

These traditions and beliefs were 
common, in essence, to all the Guaraní tribes of Paraguay, Bolivia and Brazil, with the addition, as a local peculiarity, of the
memory of an unexpected white king.

Major Samaniego knew that indigenous traditions can distort historical facts, but they 
never invent them.

Who, then, could this Ipir have been, whose name has nothing to do with the Guaraní?

The problem arose, 
but there was no reasonable expectation that it could be solved.

Some, however, must have known what to expect in this 
regard, and one even has the right to wonder if it is not a state secret that has been forgotten today.

On 1 March 1870, Marshal
Francisco Solano López, president of Paraguay, fought his last battle.

For five years, he had kept the allied forces of Brazil,
Argentina and Uruguay in check, but the end was near.On 1 March 1870, Marshal
Francisco Solano López, president of Paraguay, fought his last battle.

For five years, he had kept the allied forces of Brazil,
Argentina and Uruguay in check, but the end was near.

Slowly, metre by metre, he had been retreating towards the northeast 
and now found himself in Cerro Cora, in Amambay, 32 km from the Brazilian border.

In a country that had 1,200,000 inhabitants 
at the beginning of the war, only
28,000 men—over the age of twelve—fit to bear arms.

That morning, the marshal had donned his full dress uniform for a final 
baroud ii'honneur.

He had just seen his eldest son, a sixteen-year-old colonel, fall in battle.

Surrounded by the Brazilians, he
stood his ground, without retreating a single step.

A lance throw unseated him, another finished him off as he continued to 
defend himself with his gold-hilted parade sword.

"I die with my country" were his last words, as reproduced in all the history
books of Paraguay.

But tradition adds a seemingly meaningless phrase, which, perhaps for this reason, the books omit: "This is 
not the first civilisation to disappear in this place." By retreating to Brazil instead of making his way to neutral Bolivia, thus giving 
up all hope of escaping his fate, did the marshal want not only to die with his last soldiers, but also to fall in that precise place, 
whose symbolic value he knew?

We have the right to ask ourselves this question.

Ipir and López were certainly absent 
from the thoughts of a German engineer who, in February 1940, crossed the avenue that serves as the border between the twin 
cities of Ponía Pora in Brazil and Pedro Juan Caballero in Paraguay, a few dozen kilometres from Cerro Cora.

A native of the 
Sudels, Fritz Berger had been wandering around South America for years without settling anywhere.Ipir and López were certainly absent 
from the thoughts of a German engineer who, in February 1940, crossed the avenue that serves as the border between the twin 
cities of Ponía Pora in Brazil and Pedro Juan Caballero in Paraguay, a few dozen kilometres from Cerro Cora.

A native of the 
Sudels, Fritz Berger had been wandering around South America for years without settling anywhere.

He had been seen in 
Asunción during the Chaco War from 1932 to 1935, where he had rendered good and loyal service to the Paraguayan army in a 
workshop where weapons taken from the enemy were reconditioned.

He then went to Brazil, where for four years he tried in vain 
to locate oil deposits in the state of Paraná.

His geological knowledge, it seems, was extremely limited, which is not unusual for a 
mechanical engineer.

Nevertheless, he planned to continue his search in Paraguay.

But very soon, he made some discoveries 
of a different nature, which greatly interested Major Samaniego, to the point that he obtained the army's approval to create the
Geological and Archaeological Association, better known by the acronym AGA, which hired Fritz Berger.

From 1941 to 1944, the 
AGA worked hard and effectively.

Not only did its leader, Major Samaniego, and the German engineer travel throughout the 
region and discover inscriptions and drawings that could not be attributed to the Indians, as well as numerous other vestiges of a 
vanished civilisation, but its sappers also almost completely dismantled an enormous hill on top of which stood an imposing wall.

No one in Paraguay, however, gave the slightest importance to the results obtained.

On the other hand, the international press 
was not very interested in what might happen in a small South American country: the Second World War provided it with more 
information than it could publish.

In 1945, the AGA was dissolved.

Discouraged and ill, Fritz Berger remained in Amambay with 
the army until the civil war of 1947.In 1945, the AGA was dissolved. Discouraged and ill, Fritz Berger remained in Amambay with 
the army until the civil war of 1947. He then moved to Brazil, where he died the following year in Dourados, at the home of an old
friend and fellow countryman. Sceptics questioned our engineer's mental stability, and it must be said that they had good reason
to do so. Among other things, Berger was searching for the "treasure of the White King", while suspecting at times that the 
Jesuits had found it before him. On the other hand, he became increasingly delusional as the years of a very hard life in the 
rainforest passed for a European in his fifties. Was he not seeing, in a state close to hallucination, palaces and temples hidden beneath the trees, where clearly there were 
only rocks of somewhat strange shapes? Berger himself realised that something was wrong with his brain, and wrote about it 
to a friend in Munich with whom he corresponded.

--- PAGE BREAK ---2
spaced out but continuous.

A reader from Germany kindly sent us the text of some of these letters.

We must admit that, had we 
received these documents before our first expedition to Cerro Cora, and not after the third, as was the case, we would not have
left without some concern.

Didn't our improvised archaeologist claim to have discovered a city, Atlantik, "50 km in diameter and
150 km long", a "grand Phoenician installation", "large deposits of helium and oil, with pipelines still usable", and "monuments
that appear to be a cathedral and large palaces"?

He was certain that Noah had lived in the region.

But he added: "Tonight, I 
was awakened by loud cries.

There was no one there.

Was it an oscillation, or did it all happen in my head?

One of these days, 
people will say, 'The engineer is crazy, you know.'" Let us admit that such a judgement would not have been far from the truth.

Needless to say, we found neither helium deposits, nor grandiose buildings, nor the ruins of an Atlantis in the places explored by 
Berger, which our engineer, who was not very cultured according to those who knew him, wanted to make the capital of Atlantis.

The "madman," however, had not wasted his time.

For years, day after day, he had explored, not without venturing beyond from 
time to time, a relatively small area, and nothing in the sector must have escaped him.

When, a few months before our first 
expedition to Amambay, former Major Samaniego, now a Major General and Minister of National Defence, deigned, in the 
course of a long audience, to give us precise and prudent information about the archaeological sites discovered more than thirty
years earlier, he insisted on the role played at that time by Fritz Berger.

For our part, the existence of pre-Columbian remains in 
Amambay came as no surprise to us.When, a few months before our first 
expedition to Amambay, former Major Samaniego, now a Major General and Minister of National Defence, deigned, in the 
course of a long audience, to give us precise and prudent information about the archaeological sites discovered more than thirty
years earlier, he insisted on the role played at that time by Fritz Berger.

For our part, the existence of pre-Columbian remains in 
Amambay came as no surprise to us.

Years earlier, we had demonstrated that Vikings from Schleswig had conquered a vast 
empire in South America in the Middle Ages (1), that we had discovered runic inscriptions left by them in Paraguay (2) and Brazil
(3), and that we had even found their descendants (2, 4).

In 1973, two of our collaborators — we will discuss this at length in
Chapter IV — had surveyed Cerro Guazú, a small mountain range located 50 km as the crow flies from Cerro Cora, the largest 
runic complex in the world, and sixty-one of its inscriptions had already been translated.

We could therefore expect new 
discoveries—or rediscoveries—in the region.

On the other hand, the name of the white king was highly significant to us.

Not 
only, as we have already said, does Ipir have no meaning in Guaraní, but it is foreign to the structure of a language whose 
words, with a few exceptions that do not include any cases in ir, end in a vowel.

On the contrary, it has a Norse consonance: 
suffice it to compare it with Ymir, the name of the giant whose body the gods Odin, Vili and Ve used to make the earth in 
Scandinavian mythology.

2.

The Cerro Cora Wall When, about 500 km from Asunción, along the good paved road that has connected Coronel Oviedo 
with Pedro Juan Caballero since 1969 (see map fig.

1), and 32 km before the latter city, you cross the Aceite stream, a small 
passable road leads to the place where Marshal López died, on the banks of the Aquidabán-Nigui stream, an indirect tributary of
the Aquidabán River.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Cerro Cora Wall When, about 500 km from Asunción, along the good paved road that has connected Coronel Oviedo 
with Pedro Juan Caballero since 1969 (see map fig. 1), and 32 km before the latter city, you cross the Aceite stream, a small 
passable road leads to the place where Marshal López died, on the banks of the Aquidabán-Nigui stream, an indirect tributary of
the Aquidabán River. This leads into a national park guarded by an army detachment, thanks to which the area has retained its 
natural appearance. All around, the large, centuries-old trees were cut down without the slightest consideration, and of the 
beautiful tropical forest of yesteryear, almost nothing remains, except in the vicinity of the hills, except for a dense, low forest,
dotted with stunted trees, where fires wreak havoc when the dry season arrives, now that the tall species are no longer there to
maintain the protective humidity. We are in Cerro Cora, a Cerco de Cerros (this is the meaning of the Spanish-Guaraní name), 
which forms an almost perfect circle with a diameter of about 5 km. Of the dozen hills that make it up, only one is located north
of the Aquidabán that cuts through it. This one is of no interest to us, nor are those to the west. The five to the east, on the other 
hand, deserve our attention. From south to north: Cerro Tupa (Cerro-Dios), also known today as Cerro Aceite; the three hills 
collectively called Ñemoñanga (the Family): Tuja Og (the Old Man's House), Guaive Og (the Old Woman's House) and Guyracu 
Amba, a name whose meaning is not entirely clear to us, and not only to us, since almost everyone calls this hill "Alambi-

--- PAGE BREAK ---3
"beca
use of a drawing engraved on one of its walls that resembles the instrument in question: amba means "dwelling" and Professor 
Pistilli, director of the Paraguayan Institute of Human Sciences, believes that guyracu is an archaic form, or a recent 
deformation, of guyraju, yellow bird, the eternal solar bird of Guaraní mythology.

Guyracu Amba therefore means "Dwelling of 
the Eternal Solar Bird." Finally, there is Cerro Itaguambypé, or Cerro del Murallón.

Our first expedition to Cerro Cora, in August
and September 1975, had the sole purpose of allowing us to define the objectives of the second and, in particular, to study its
exact location and access routes.

At first glance, the task seemed simple, despite the lack of any detailed map of the region.

On
the ground, it turned out to be more complicated than we thought.

The Indians had, in fact, abandoned their immemorial hunting 
grounds when the road was built and had retreated to the still virgin jungle further south.

The few settlers who had taken their
place had arrived there two or three years earlier and knew nothing about the area.

Fortunately, Lieutenant Colonel Escobar, 
commander of the military detachment, had served under Major Samaniego during the AGA era, as had an old non-
commissioned officer, Sergeant López, who was unfortunately almost blind and had retired to the village of Lorito in Cerro Cora.

It was thanks to them that we were able to locate Cerro del Murallón and the Aquidabán-Nigui wall, which are located inside the
national park, in a restricted military area, and of which the new residents of the area had therefore never heard.

Another 
difficulty, less serious in itself but impossible to overcome, complicated our work.

The small car we had come in from Buenos 
Aires, lacking the four-wheel drive vehicle that would have been indispensable, was completely unsuitable for travelling on 
sandy roads where construction trucks had left ruts 50 cm deep and more.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Another 
difficulty, less serious in itself but impossible to overcome, complicated our work. The small car we had come in from Buenos 
Aires, lacking the four-wheel drive vehicle that would have been indispensable, was completely unsuitable for travelling on 
sandy roads where construction trucks had left ruts 50 cm deep and more. And we could not find a single horse to hire in the 
entire region. With our assistant Jorge Russo, we therefore had to walk almost twenty kilometres every day, most of which we 
would have been spared if we had had a suitable vehicle, and then advance with machetes —and "by smell"— rummaging 
through the dense forest to find —or rediscover— something, not always knowing exactly what and never knowing exactly 
where. On certain days, one or two Paraguayan soldiers accompanied us, and their collaboration was extremely useful. Rarely, 
we believe—perhaps never—has an archaeological expedition achieved such extraordinary results with such limited material 
resources. Except for the second one, also to Cerro Cora, in June and July 1976. There were three of us this time, as we were 
accompanied by Professor Hermán Munk, a runologist from the Institute of Human Sciences that we run in Buenos Aires, and 
engineer Hansgeorg Bóttcher. We had a large car, more comfortable but no more suitable than the previous one. At least we 
now knew the objectives of our research, which were no easier to achieve. And for us, it was a matter of exploiting, in the 
military sense of the word, the data collected.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ast we 
now knew the objectives of our research, which were no easier to achieve. And for us, it was a matter of exploiting, in the 
military sense of the word, the data collected.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4
Ten months earlier. Let's look at the results obtained. To the northeast of Cerro Cora stands Cerro Itaguambypé, or Cerro del 
Murallón: about two kilometres long and around one hundred metres high above the plain that forms the interior of the enclosure
to the west. A valley about five hundred metres wide and approximately fifty metres deep separates it from another hill that runs
parallel to it. We are only giving estimated dimensions here, since in order to take exact measurements, which are otherwise of
no interest to our work, we would have had to cut paths through the jungle, which we were not in a position to do. Seen from the
plain, the hill does not differ much from its neighbours, apart from Guyracu Amba, which is a truncated peak. Its wooded western
flank rises gently to the foot of a rocky wall. But its summit, at least to the south, is neither a plateau nor a rounded ridge. There, 
the "rock" forms a narrow ridge whose two parallel sides rise vertically five to ten metres, depending on the sector, above the
slopes of the hill. The ridge in question, three metres wide and somewhat reduced in some sections by landslides, is flat and 
forms a usable path. It extends for about three hundred metres — again, we did not take exact measurements — following the 
irregular summit of the hill in a north-south direction (cf. sketch, fig. 2), cut in the centre by an opening of about ten metres,
corresponding to a twenty-metre gap between the two sections it separates (cf. sketch, fig. 3). At the southern end of the hill, it 
reaches a platform five metres above the path (photo 1), which seems to have been round in its time: a kind of tower from which
one has a panoramic view of the entire surrounding region. For the Indians, the whole complex was an itaguambypé, a fortress. 
The Indians were right, even more so than they could have imagined. For it is a wall built by human hands. Its base is natural 
throughout. But its slopes have different characteristics that allow them to be divided into three groups. Some are nothing more
than rock walls, almost vertical, but irregular; others are also rock, but carved vertically; and others, which are the most 
numerous, are built with blocks of stone of unequal dimensions, perfectly fitted together, forming absolutely smooth walls (photo
2), at least when they were not disarticulated by tree roots, which in some places caused displacement and even collapse 
(photo 3). Are our conclusions certain? Could it simply be a natural rock wall, despite appearances? In a case like this, it is
appropriate to play devil's advocate. With regard to the vertically carved slopes, we consulted a geologist who was categorical: a 
phenomenon of this kind can only be the work of nature if it involves hard rock subjected to the action of glaciers. However, we
have relatively soft sandstone here, and the region has never experienced a glacial period.ind can only be the work of nature if it involves hard rock subjected to the action of glaciers. However, we
have relatively soft sandstone here, and the region has never experienced a glacial period.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6
The sections made of blocks raise even 
fewer doubts, if possible. No geological movement could have broken the rock with such geometric precision, nor systematically 
carved sharp edges, nor respected the horizontal and vertical alignment of the blocks that it would have produced. Moreover, 
the wall, in the sections in question, has exactly the same appearance as the pre-Inca buildings of Peru and Bolivia, in which 
the irregularity of the carved stones constitutes a defence against earthquakes: each one responds in its own way to seismic 
force; the whole thus manifests a certain flexibility that it would be impossible to achieve with a rigid structure. Peru and Bolivia,
in which the irregularity of the carved stones constitutes a defence against earthquakes: each responds in its own way to 
seismic force; the whole thus exhibits a certain flexibility that prevents it from collapsing, as would sometimes happen if all the 
aligned stones were to move with the same movement or if, being smaller, they were less fixed to each other by their own force 
of inertia. This method of construction is, in itself, incomprehensible in Paraguay, where there are and never have been 
earthquakes of any significant magnitude. Therefore, it could not have been invented there. The Guaraní Indians, on the other 
hand, were unfamiliar with carved stone before their incorporation into the Jesuit missions, and the Jesuits, whose architecture
is well known and who used a technique completely different from the one just described, never settled in Cerro Cora. One 
conclusion is therefore obvious: the builders of Itaguambypé,

--- PAGE BREAK ---7
or their ancestors had come from another region.

Where and when?

Clearly, from the Andean highlands, the only place in the 
world where walls of uneven blocks had ever been built, and before the founding of the Inca Empire, since the technique had 
been lost after the conquest of Tiahuanacu by the Araucanians of Kari around 1290 (1).

This double deduction is not surprising:
we know (2) that some Vikings who escaped the massacre on the Island of the Sun had taken refuge in the Paraguayan jungle 
where, earlier, in Peaviru, the "Soft Road" that led from Lake Titicaca to the Atlantic, there were forts whose indigenous 
garrisons were commanded by white officers.

Our last doubts about the nature of the wall disappeared during our third 
expedition.

On the one hand, Professor Pistilli, who is an engineer, confirmed after a thorough examination that it was indeed a
construction.

On the other hand, we discovered a small inscription (•fig.

4), clearly
 runic, which had escaped our 
attention during our previous investigations.

Unfortunately, its poor state of preservation made it impossible to translate or even
transliterate it with any degree of certainty.

It remains to be seen why the Vikings who took refuge in Amambay built the 
enormous wall we have just described there.

Located on top of a hill, it could not have served as a "Great Wall of China" or a 
Danevirk, designed to prevent the enemy from accessing a certain territory.

The "tower" at the southern end was a magnificent 
observation platform and could only have been used to detect troop movements: if it had been a place of worship, it would have 
been isolated, whereas it is part of a much larger complex whose sole purpose could only have been military.

During our first 
expedition to Cerro Cora, we thought we had spotted the remains of a similar construction on the top of the hill parallel to the
one we are interested in.The "tower" at the southern end was a magnificent 
observation platform and could only have been used to detect troop movements: if it had been a place of worship, it would have 
been isolated, whereas it is part of a much larger complex whose sole purpose could only have been military.

During our first 
expedition to Cerro Cora, we thought we had spotted the remains of a similar construction on the top of the hill parallel to the
one we are interested in.

We therefore concluded that the wall formed one side of a huge fortified enclosure, similar to Danish
military camps.

We were wrong.

The survey carried out in 1976 showed that there were only rocks opposite and that our wall 
was the only one of its kind.

So, do we have to give up our interpretation?

Certainly not.

Two hypotheses, which nothing will ever
confirm or disprove, and between which no data allows us to choose with any degree of certainty, are in fact capable of 
explaining the presence of this apparently useless wall.

The first is that it was a fortress whose construction had been 
interrupted.

In this case, the Vikings would have taken advantage of the hill's privileged location and geological configuration to 
build an observation "tower" and then the wall, which was partly natural and required only minimal work, at least for them, who
had an abundant indigenous workforce at their disposal.

For one reason or another — the destruction of the Tiahuanacu empire, 
which put an end to the construction of the capital itself, if the work predates 1290; the harassment of the Amambay refugees by
hostile Indians, or their own decline, if it is later — they would later have abandoned their project.In this case, the Vikings would have taken advantage of the hill's privileged location and geological configuration to 
build an observation "tower" and then the wall, which was partly natural and required only minimal work, at least for them, who
had an abundant indigenous workforce at their disposal.

For one reason or another — the destruction of the Tiahuanacu empire, 
which put an end to the construction of the capital itself, if the work predates 1290; the harassment of the Amambay refugees by
hostile Indians, or their own decline, if it is later — they would later have abandoned their project.

The other hypothesis is that
the wall constituted one side of a fortified enclosure whose other three sides were built with stakes, a procedure that was familiar
to both the Vikings and—we have testimony to this effect from the chronicler Ulrich Schmidel (4) when he describes, in the 16th
century, the village of the Carians that bore the Germanic name of Froenirtiere1— the Indians of Paraguay.

In both cases, the 
stronghold, in addition to its function as an observation platform, would have been intended to serve as a place of refuge for the
whites and their Indian allies in case of attack.

Today, there is no water in the hills or in the valley they covered, but perhaps the 
situation was different seven or eight hundred years ago and, in any case, the Aquidabán River is very close by.

3.

The "Old Man's House" South of Itaguambypé, as we have already mentioned, three hills form the eastern arc of Cerro 
Cora.

The third, Tuja Og, is an important mambla, about 150 metres high, whose summit consists of a plateau that slopes 
gently southwards.

At its highest point, there is a small rocky platform, devoid of any vegetation, on whose ground four figures
are engraved.

The first, a cross whose equal arms branch into three terminal branches (fig.--- PAGE BREAK ---

At its highest point, there is a small rocky platform, devoid of any vegetation, on whose ground four figures
are engraved. The first, a cross whose equal arms branch into three terminal branches (fig. 5), is a drawing
1  From the Norse froenir, nominative plural of froeno, belonging to the
Lord, common good, and ajara, tar, whose Indo-European root dru
or drew gave triu in Gothic and tree in English, with the meaning of 
carbon. The name of the village would thus mean "Good of the Lord-
forest, Common Forest".

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8
purely
European symbol that was related to the various
crosses of the Middle Ages, derived from the sacred tree of the Germanic peoples, the Irminsul. The Indians often drew three-toed
"ostrich footprints," but always in isolation. The second has a geometric Y shape
(fig. 6)
whose meaning escapes us but which cannot, in any case, be of indigenous origin. The third seems to be the image of some 
fabulous bird (fig. 7). The fourth, finally, is more familiar to us (joto 4): it is a compass rose, perfectly oriented, which attests to 
the considerable geographical knowledge of its author, whether or not he knew the compass. The existence of these drawings 
had been pointed out to us by General Samaniego. Lieutenant Colonel Escobar and Sergeant López, for their part, had told us 
at the end of our first expedition about a cave in Tuja Og whose walls were covered with inscriptions but whose entrance had 
been blocked at some unknown point in time by a landslide.

--- PAGE BREAK ---he end of our first expedition about a cave in Tuja Og whose walls were covered with inscriptions but whose entrance had 
been blocked at some unknown point in time by a landslide.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9
earth. We decided, the
the following year, to carry out excavations at the indicated location, in the hope of uncovering the 
entrance. Thanks to the minister's kindness, we had the support of the Paraguayan army for this. On the eastern flank of the hill,
seven metres from the top, at the point where the wooded terrain, with an increasingly steep slope, is interrupted by a vertical
rock face, there is a large arched cavity 26 metres wide and 5 metres high. Its maximum depth is only 5 metres, but we did not 
know this until after eight days of work: as we had been told, part of the ledge had fallen. Not on its own, it is true, for we found 
the remains of a fuse in the rubble: others before us had tried, by unorthodox means, to open the cave. In vain, like us: there
was nothing there but a shelter under the rock. Once the rocks and earth had been removed, we had to surrender to the 
evidence. The concave rock wall at the back joined the natural ground — we even dug further — without revealing any opening.
We only found an inscription on it (fig. 8).
Engraved by human hands, without a doubt, but devoid of any meaning for us. The rubble, on the other hand, held a pleasant 
surprise. In the course of their work, the soldiers unearthed twelve engraved stones from among the sand and blocks covering 
the shelter. Eleven of them are made of ochre sandstone, extremely friable, like the rest of Tuja Og, and only their surface, 
exposed to the air for centuries, is a few millimetres harder. Everything seems to indicate that these are the remains of a frieze
that must have adorned the ledge of the shelter. Unfortunately, it is impossible to reconstruct the whole or to reconstruct its
design: the explosion caused by the predators had reduced much of the ledge and its frieze to dust. Of these eleven stones, 
eight bear only incomplete traces that seem to belong to mere ornamental motifs, but we cannot say for sure. Another shows a 
Latin cross, but this may be an illusion caused by the cracks that limit its design. The last two, although also only fragments of 
the frieze, offer us complete figures. On one of them (photo 5), which measures 25 cm high by 24 cm wide at its base—but 
remember that it is only a piece arbitrarily cut outh also only fragments of 
the frieze, offer us complete figures. On one of them (photo 5), which measures 25 cm high by 24 cm wide at its base—but 
remember that it is only a piece arbitrarily cut out

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
by the explosion—we see a well-known sign (fig. 9): the double
which we had already found in Sete Cidades (3), in north-eastern Brazil, resembles, although it lacks the handle, Poseidon's 
trident, the Fosite of the Frisians. Now, the latter, settled along the coasts of the North Sea, maintained close contacts with their 
neighbours in Schleswig, from whom they were not always clearly distinguishable. The sign in question is found again on the 
last stone in the group (photo 6), topped by six runes, the first of which is isolated while the remaining five are linked in two
groups of two and three, respectively. This lithoglyph has a strange appearance that links it to one of the ideograms previously
found in the "treasure urn" of Cerro Morotí (2). It differs from it, however, in that it constitutes an alphabetical series whose
transliteration gives: aukoss The whole is untranslatable because it is incomplete. The first rune appears, in fact, on the edge of 
the break in the stone, and it is very likely that others preceded it. After the last one, almost completely erased traces can be
guessed at, which must belong to other characters. Nevertheless, what remains of the inscription gives us two comprehensible 
Norse words: auk, from aukz, offspring, descendant; oss, us. We know that auki was the title given to the sons of the Inca before
their marriage (l). Finally, there is a twelfth stone, made of harder and lighter sandstone, which did not belong to the frieze.

--- PAGE BREAK ---11
It bears a single motif (fig.

11), clearly related to the one we have already encountered twice: a kind of trident without a handle.

Let us complete this analysis of the inscriptions at Cerro Cora by mentioning the strange "coat of arms" seen on the western 
flank of Cerro Tupa, 2 km south of Tuja Og.

It is a square measuring about 10 m on each side, whose bare stone stands out 
amid the surrounding vegetation.

It is divided into four "cantons" by a cross, deeply engraved in the rock, although we cannot 
say whether it is natural or artificial.

In the canton to the right of the chief—that is, at the top left from the observer's point of 
view—six lines of engraved characters are clearly visible, although they have been severely damaged by erosion.

The first line 
contains only four legible runes (fig.

12), which make no sense to us.

The third
(fig.

13) is composed of large runoide-looking signs, also incomprehensible, and, below, a drawing that may represent a ship and is 
not unlike one of the lithoglyphs of Cerro Polilla (2), and even the drakkar, easily identifiable, discovered by Araripe in 
northeastern Brazil (:í).

However, everything we have just said must be taken with the utmost caution, as we were only able to 
survey the "shield" with binoculars and a telephoto lens.

As for the other lines, they are completely illegible: they are more 
guessed at than seen.

4.

The warriors' bath -
South of Cerro Itaguambypé—Cerro del Murión—is the source of a small stream mentioned above, the Aquidabán-Nigui, which 
first flows northward and then curves widely to join the Aceite stream, a tributary of the Aquidabán, below Cerro Cora.

A few 
hundred metres from the cross marking the spot where Marshal López died, the stream breaks into a waterfall at the foot of 
which a natural pool has formed, with a sandy bottom and calm, clear water that invites bathing.

The military detachment 
personnel often use it.A few 
hundred metres from the cross marking the spot where Marshal López died, the stream breaks into a waterfall at the foot of 
which a natural pool has formed, with a sandy bottom and calm, clear water that invites bathing.

The military detachment 
personnel often use it.

This idyllic spot is accessed by a path that leads to the top of the waterfall, which is only partially covered 
by water, at least during the dry season.

Next to the stream, the rock dominates, from a height of just over three metres, a 
charming little beach on the banks of the pool, which is the only access route.

We were not surprised, then, to find four steps
carved into the wall, at least one of which was particularly well preserved, with sharp edges that could only have been carved 
with the help of a metal tool.

Things would have ended there if we hadn't wanted to take the opportunity to take a dip in the cool
water.

As we descended, we realised that, despite our height (1.80 m) and long legs, we found it uncomfortable to use the steps,
which were too far apart.

A Paraguayan soldier who was 1.60 m tall and accompanying us had to slide down from step to step, 
holding on with his hands.

The climb was a real challenge for him and required an unusual amount of effort on our part.

There is
85 cm between the ground and the first step of the waterfall, 65 between the first and second, 60 between the second and third,
and 90 between the third and fourth.

This means that these steps were carved by men over 1.80 m tall, thus excluding both 
Paraguayans and Spaniards, not to mention the Guaraní, who did not have metal tools.

No one would have spaced the steps in 
such a way as to make them difficult or impossible to use.

Everything therefore suggests that the Aquidabán-Nigui staircase is 
the work of the Vikings.--- PAGE BREAK ---

No one would have spaced the steps in 
such a way as to make them difficult or impossible to use. Everything therefore suggests that the Aquidabán-Nigui staircase is 
the work of the Vikings. We have a very precise indication of the height of the latter: their Guayaki descendants owe their 
average height—in males—of 1.57 m to degenerative dwarfism, but they have the head and genitalia of men measuring 1.90 m 
or more (2). The soldiers of Cerro Itaguambypé, then, used the natural pool to bathe, as those of Cerro Cora do today. Nothing 
could be more natural. This conclusion is reinforced by the existence, on the bank of the stream and at the height of the 
waterfall's drop, of a wall parallel to the access path. It is a rock measuring 16.80 m long by 1.90 m wide.

--- PAGE BREAK ---12
maximum width of m, whose highest point is currently 1.43 m above the ground.

The wall facing the path is made of vertical, 
continuous planes, perfectly smooth and clearly man-made.

Why?

The answer to this question is provided by a pile of stones that can still be seen among the trees, just behind the wall.

These uncut blocks weigh between 10 and 20 kg and can therefore be easily transported.

They are of the type that the Vikings, 
as we shall see in Chapter III, used to build the walls of some of their buildings.

The sandstone they are made of is redder than
the surrounding rocks, which tend towards grey: they were brought here.

It follows from all this that the Aquidabán-Nigui wall 
must have served as the foundation for one of the walls of a building overlooking the waterfall.

What was this building used for?

It was certainly not a changing room, as the Vikings were not ashamed of their bodies.

We see two possible explanations, which,
moreover, are not mutually exclusive.

The first is that the building in question was a guard post, a fort designed to protect the
bathers, who were obviously unarmed.

The second is that it was a sauna.

We know that the Vikings had preserved the custom of 
this unique steam bath in America, since the Indians of Mexico had adopted it in every detail (').

It would therefore not be 
surprising to find it in Paraguay.

5 .

A Viking military centre Our previous campaigns had enabled us to identify, in the Sierra 
de Yvytyruzú (2), a Viking monument whose runic inscriptions were significant, as they indicated directions to follow.

It was a
post station located at a crossroads in Peaviru, a mere staging post, like the tampu of the Inca and pre-Inca Royal Roads, which
also served as a place of worship.

The buildings that must have stood there disappeared under the jungle.

All that remains is a
large, barely worked rock with the 'signpost' and some engraved drawings, including a magnificent image of Odin, the Sun God.The buildings that must have stood there disappeared under the jungle.

All that remains is a
large, barely worked rock with the 'signpost' and some engraved drawings, including a magnificent image of Odin, the Sun God.

As for the village of Cerro Morotí (2), where we had carried out excavations that allowed us to discover fragments of pottery with
runic inscriptions, all we know about it is that it was destroyed in 1626 by the Guayakíes, descendants of the Vikings, who lived
there.

We do not know whether it was an important town before the destruction of the Tiahuanacu empire around 1290, or 
whether it was founded later by refugees.

The second hypothesis is the most likely, as we found no traces of stone buildings at
the site.

Cerro Cora offers us a completely different picture.

A fortress, especially one with a wall three hundred metres long,
implies a large garrison, likely established in a hostile region and, in any case, intended to protect a point of special importance.

There, as in all the eastern parts of their empire, the Vikings must have employed Guaraní auxiliaries: not soldiers, but warriors
who, in times of peace, lived in their villages according to their ancestral customs and, in times of war, were grouped into militias
led by white officers.

The fortified enclosure must therefore have served as a place of retreat for the families of the combatants,
which would explain its size, but it also constituted a solid bastion from which it was possible to control both the Cerco de Cerros
to the west and the region to the east and south-east, extending as far as the Ypané River and perhaps beyond.

It is no 
coincidence, then, that south of Itaguambypé, on the other side of the pass crossed today by the two roads that run from Cerro 
Cora, one to the east and the other to the south, we see the traces left by the Vikings in Tuja Og.The fortified enclosure must therefore have served as a place of retreat for the families of the combatants,
which would explain its size, but it also constituted a solid bastion from which it was possible to control both the Cerco de Cerros
to the west and the region to the east and south-east, extending as far as the Ypané River and perhaps beyond.

It is no 
coincidence, then, that south of Itaguambypé, on the other side of the pass crossed today by the two roads that run from Cerro 
Cora, one to the east and the other to the south, we see the traces left by the Vikings in Tuja Og.

The observation and, probably,
worship platform located at the top of that hill, with its perfectly oriented compass rose, not to mention the pattée cross and the 
geometric design of unknown meaning engraved on its floor, is opposite the "tower" of the wall.

The identity of those who used it
leaves no room for doubt: the incomplete but intelligible runic inscription found on one of the fragments of the frieze that adorned
the rock shelter a few metres below would suffice to define it.

Nor is it by chance that the Cerro-Dios, which dominated the 
southern road a few kilometres away, the southern road, bears on its eastern flank a "coat of arms" in which, despite the ravages
of erosion, runic and runoid characters can still be seen, and even a silhouette of a ship that we have already found in Paraguay
and Brazil in a Viking context.

The wall of a fortress built in the style of the pre-Inca buildings of the Andean Altiplano where the 
Danes had their capital, the runic and runoid inscriptions of Tuja Og and Cerro Tupa, and also some steps, in the stone of a 
waterfall, which were carved with a metal instrument and could only be used by men of very tall stature: This is certainly enough
to establish that Cerro Cora was a military centre located in a strategic location.

It remains to be seen what its purpose was.

II
The untouched necropolis 1 .

A strange hill The year was 1940.II
The untouched necropolis 1 .

A strange hill The year was 1940.

During one of his regular horse rides in the jungle, Fritz 
Berger had just forded the Ypané River, about 10 km south-southeast of Cerro Cora as the crow flies, and about 30 km along the 
old roads he had taken (cf.

map, fig.

73).

Before him stretched a potrero, as it is improperly called in the region, a natural plain
surrounded by hills, at the edge of which stood a small hill.

The Indians had told him that this was the dwelling place of King Ipir.

The hill in question appears to be nothing more than a large rock about forty metres high (photo 7), made up of two ridges and 
covered halfway up, like all the hills in Amambay, with dense vegetation.

The indigenous people, the only inhabitants of the 
region at that time, called it Yvyty Pero, or Cerro Pelado in Guaraní: the same name given today in Spanish to another rock 
located in the Sierra de Yvytyruzú, 500 km further south, at the foot of which we found splendid runic inscriptions (2).

We do not
know exactly what Don Federico —as he was called— saw in Yvyty Pero.

We do know that he returned from there convinced 
that the hill was a burial mound containing a real underground palace, built around the burial chamber of the White King.

His 
observations must have been quite accurate and his arguments quite solid for the AGA to send a detachment and set up a 
permanent camp with wooden houses on the banks of a small stream, a few dozen metres from the hill.

Major Samaniego had 
decided to open up the hill, now renamed Ipir.

Where to attack?

Fritz Berger had an instrument that we were unable to identify 
but that two reliable witnesses—an officer and a non-commissioned officer who served in the AGA at the time—described to us: 
it looked like a theodolite topped with a large "clock" and allowed metals to be detected and differentiated.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Where to attack? Fritz Berger had an instrument that we were unable to identify 
but that two reliable witnesses—an officer and a non-commissioned officer who served in the AGA at the time—described to us: 
it looked like a theodolite topped with a large "clock" and allowed metals to be detected and differentiated. Now, in the hollow
that separates the two ridges of the hill, there was a square-shaped pit, several metres deep, at the bottom of which the device
indicated the presence of gold. The soldiers began to dig. At first, it was easy: a conglomerate of soft earth and stones was 
removed without much difficulty. They found two man-made objects: first, a triangular piece of gold that 'looked like the broken
corner of a table'; then, a staff topped with a hand made of the same metal. Shortly afterwards, they came across the sandstone
that makes up the hill. Dynamite had to be brought in from Asunción. In the meantime, the pit had filled with rainwater. A pump
was brought in after a few weeks. By the end of 1941, the excavation had reached a depth of 18 metres. It was impossible to 
obtain the necessary explosives, which were normally imported from Germany and the United States, countries at war. The work 
had to be interrupted. It resumed at the end of 1942, this time with a small pneumatic drill. On the side of the hill, there was

--- PAGE BREAK ---13
He dug a second shaft, slanted and open to the sky, which joined the first at the point where it had been abandoned, in order to
facilitate ventilation.

At a depth of 23 metres—calculated vertically—that is, at the level of the base of the hill, the soldiers came 
across a kind of slab that proved impossible to break.

The machine's wicks broke one after another, and the explosives, unable 
to drill holes in the mine, failed to even scratch the surface of what Berger considered to be the "roof" of the palace.

Our 
witnesses assured us that it was undoubtedly an artificial material, similar to cement but harder.

A third attempt, in 1944, was
made at the base of the hill.

At a height of about 10 metres, another square-section shaft opened up on the side of the hill.

On
the back wall, an inscription, whose characters, damaged by erosion, did not seem to belong to the Latin alphabet, caught our 
attention.

This vertical trench was deepened.

In this case too, the slab blocked further progress.

Various events led to the work
being abandoned for good.

All that remained of three years of effort were increasingly vague memories.

The gold objects found 
during the excavations have disappeared, as have the pieces mentioned by Fritz Berger in a 1941 letter to his friend in Munich: a 
"14 x 10 cm plaque — stone or metal — shining like a diamond"; several representations of heads, some amphorae, some 
artefacts, "all of high artistic value", some mixed with the rubble and others "displayed as in a museum"; the image.

buried, of a 
woman (fig.

14) "made of alabaster or the finest porcelain", 1.20 m long, suggesting a medieval tomb reclining figure; two dice,
topped with unidentifiable figures, "similar to cut diamonds" (fig.

14).

While directing the work, Don Federico devoted much of his 
time to surveying the hill.

Its external measurement presented no difficulty.While directing the work, Don Federico devoted much of his 
time to surveying the hill.

Its external measurement presented no difficulty.

But our engineer went much   further   beyond   
and   drew up   the   plan   of   the   underground installations   .

"The   building   is
 38
Enormous, he wrote in October 1941.

And I have not yet been able to estimate it fully.

There are probably eight hundred pieces,
perhaps more.

It is interesting to see how these people worked geometrically, down to the centimetre.

I found polygons so exact,
from an arithmetic point of view, that the best engineers could not have made them.

The thickness of the walls...

Separate 
pieces, but at the same time joined by systems of paths.

Everything is
so precise without anything being interchangeable.

Was this one of those daydreams in which Fritz
Did Berger sink so often?

Or had he resorted to a working method that escapes us?

Let us confess our ignorance.

In his letters,
we find only one clue: "Today, while an explosion was taking place in the pit, I felt vibrations in the cavities below me at a 
distance of about 200 metres." This was a useful procedure, which we were also going to use, but it did not allow us to count 
underground rooms or survey polygons to the nearest centimetre.

We knew no more than that about the AGA's research when, 
in 1977, we set up camp at the foot of Cerro Ipir, which we had been able to reach, via impassable roads, thanks to the Unimog 
provided to us by Mercedes-Benz Argentina, a hundred metres from the farm that has been there for about twenty years.

The hill 
is located on the edge of a bare plateau that extends southwards into a small plain where, today, zebu cattle are raised.

All 
around is the impenetrable jungle that our incomparable vehicle would nevertheless allow us to explore.

What interested us 
most, of course, was the hill itself.--- PAGE BREAK ---

All 
around is the impenetrable jungle that our incomparable vehicle would nevertheless allow us to explore. What interested us 
most, of course, was the hill itself. One of the members of our mission, engineer Vicente Pistilli, quickly determined that the hill 
was not a burial mound at all, but rather a completely natural formation. We had expected this, as we knew that it would be 
impossible for us, without technical means superior to those available to the Paraguayan army at the time, to penetrate the cavity
indicated by Berger. At the very least, we wanted to confirm the data established by the AGA and, first of all, to find out whether
the plateau was really hollow. We found the pit and the trench intact. Their poor state of preservation prevented us from reading
the inscription engraved on one of the walls of the latter, but the uruz —or rune— that could be clearly seen on it was enough to
identify it. This was, for us, an essential point. It remained to examine the bottom of the excavations. Professor Hermann Munk,
who, like a good Tyrolean, had brought his mountaineering ropes, was able to reach it. Once the pebbles and dead leaves that 
had accumulated over more than thirty years had been removed, he came into contact with the slab, whose whitish colour stood 
out amid the red sandstone of which the hill is made. But he was unable to remove even the smallest fragment of it, either with a 
pickaxe or a geologist's hammer. All he could ascertain, and this was the most important thing, was that the slab sounded 
hollow. Fritz Berger was right, then. We still had to make sure that the cavity he had detected was really as large as he claimed. In the absence of an echo sounder, there was no other way to do this.

--- PAGE BREAK ---14
to project, in a regrettably primitive manner, a sound wave from the wells.

We therefore detonated a dozen firecrackers in 
succession at the bottom of the wells and, with our ears pressed against the ground, we listened to the vibrations caused by the
explosions on the plateau, moving further and further away from the base of the hill.

We were thus able to verify that the wave
propagated underground as quickly as in the atmosphere, up to about 200 m: the distance indicated by Berger.

Beyond that, 
nothing happened, which is not surprising considering the incomparable damping power of sandstone, a rock made of highly 
compacted sand.

Conversely, we could deduce from this that where the wave was felt, there was indeed a void.

A natural void?

Beneath the plateau, this is theoretically possible.

But not beneath the hill, as far as we can tell.

Sandstone has a high specific
weight.

It is also extremely brittle.

These two characteristics combined mean that any underground cavity would have been 
crushed by the hill, which no rock layer would have been able to support.

Furthermore, there are no limestone deposits in the 
region that could provide natural cement.

It therefore seems that the slab on which the hill rests was poured by human hands in
a veritable mining operation.

If so, the cavity must have an entrance.

We did not have much hope of finding it.

Nevertheless, 
we continued to examine the hill and its surroundings metre by metre.

Soldiers from an engineering battalion placed at our 
disposal by the Minister of National Defence — former Major Samaniego — searched all the crevices that could conceivably 
conceal
 a
 corridor.

In
 vain.

Or
 well
 the
 entrance
 was
 cover
 centuries ago
 and
 the
na-
 Nature took care of erasing its traces; o r else it 
is located miles away and only chance, which in this case was unfavourable to us, could point it out to us.

We will have to 
obtain—that is, borrow—machinery that will allow us to drill through the slab.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Or
 well
 the
 entrance
 was
 cover
 centuries ago
 and
 the
na-
 Nature took care of erasing its traces; o r else it 
is located miles away and only chance, which in this case was unfavourable to us, could point it out to us. We will have to 
obtain—that is, borrow—machinery that will allow us to drill through the slab. Perhaps we will succeed. 2 . The Land of 
Sleeping Beauty in the Forest For Fritz Berger, Cerro Ipir was nothing more than the centre of a vast region that, in a distant 
era, had been densely populated. Let us allow him to ramble, as he so often did, about the gigantic palaces, temples and 
industrial facilities he saw everywhere, "as far as the horizon", and to which he generously attributed an age of "6,000 years, or 
500,000": mere hallucinations of a "madman". But this 'madman' knew how to escape from the 'land of Sleeping Beauty in the 
Woods', as he himself put it, when faced with a technical problem. The engineer would then reappear, with his tape measure, his
slide rule and his metal detector, and draw, if necessary, highly accurate sketches. We can therefore believe him when, 
emerging from his daydream, he claims to have found a plate of iron alloy, cast iron, coke or "a good portland cement mortar, 
much better than the one we know today", or when he tells us about a concrete ford under the waters of the Ypané River.

--- PAGE BREAK ---15
Not to mention that the soldiers were going to build a bridge on the site, which, incidentally, remained a project.

These are 
concrete facts.

The AGA engineering officers would certainly not have mistaken rock for cement.

The same reasoning applies to 
the underground canal that Don Federico discovered in 1941 near Cerro Ipir, where he found 1.5 metres of running water at a 
depth of about 25 metres, without being able to determine whether it was part of a water supply system or a sewer.

We know 
nothing more about this canal, but its existence should come as no surprise, as we often heard mention of works of this kind 
during our three expeditions to Amambay from local inhabitants who had found their remains.

-during hunting trips.

The underground channel we have just mentioned is not, incidentally, the only one Berger discovered.

As 
early as 1940, he wrote to Munich that he knew of tunnels 130 km long and provided several sketches (jigs.

15 to 18) showing 
extremely detailed cross-sections and branching chambers.

This is certainly not the product of a sick imagination.

To be 
convinced of this, one need only note that the measurements are given in centimetres and that the drawing is perfectly 
consistent.

Nor does it seem possible to question the authenticity of the half-erased inscription (fig.

19) that our engineer claims
to have surveyed above an open gate on the side of an unspecified hill—which we were unable to locate—always in the vicinity 
of Cerro Ipir.

This is for two reasons.

Firstly, because one of its motifs—a kind of three-toed foot whose meaning escapes us—
appears, along with three other drawings, above the entrance to the Buritizal burial mound in Brazilian Piaui, where the Viking
place of worship of Sete Cidades is located, which we were able to identify (3) beyond any doubt thanks to its runic inscriptions.

Secondly, because the group of signs to the right of what vaguely resembles a flower appears to be made up of runes.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Firstly, because one of its motifs—a kind of three-toed foot whose meaning escapes us—
appears, along with three other drawings, above the entrance to the Buritizal burial mound in Brazilian Piaui, where the Viking
place of worship of Sete Cidades is located, which we were able to identify (3) beyond any doubt thanks to its runic inscriptions. Secondly, because the group of signs to the right of what vaguely resembles a flower appears to be made up of runes. The 
condition of the inscription and the poor quality of the drawing do not allow us to be more certain. However, if we read three 
characters from top to bottom and the remaining three from bottom to top, as if the
whole constituted
Lo
which means in Old Norse, Professor Munk tells us: equal victory or, more freely, victory in spite of everything. The orthographic 
anomalies in this inscription—inverted I, Latinised s, k at the end of sik instead of the g that would be required by the old futhark
corresponding to the form of k, and the absence of the nominative singular ending in r—are common in South America. We 
analysed the reasons for this in a previous work (2) and will have the opportunity to return to the subject in chapter vi. 3 . A 
sacred Nordic forest Let us return to our own research. About 500 m south of Cerro Ipir, on the small plain mentioned above, 
rocks can be seen on the surface of the ground that gave the site its name, Pora Ñu, the Field of the Dead. Some of them do 
indeed vaguely resemble gravestones with recumbent figures. It seems that thirty years ago the resemblance was more striking 
than it is today. However, these are only natural outcrops. This does not exclude the possibility that some may have been

--- PAGE BREAK ---16
carved by King Ipir's men.

What makes this latter hypothesis possible is another set, located 100 m from the "tombs", which no 
one had ever paid the slightest attention to before our study.

It is a semicircle of rocks with a maximum height of 3 m, whose 
arch measures around 17 m (photo S).

It is made of natural stones, some of which have probably been moved, but also of 
geometric blocks that have clearly been carved by human hands.

In its centre, there is an artificial cavity (photo 9) opened in a 
worked rock with two blocks added on top — two more appear to have fallen — from which a spring, now dry, at least in winter, 
probably emerged.

This is suggested not only by the basin-like shape of the lower part of the niche, but also by the small wood
surrounding the site, which suggests that the location is more humid than the surrounding area.

About H m from the semicircle is
a large natural stone block, 2.50 m high, into which a seat has been carved facing the centre of the complex.

The aligned rocks,
the spring, the "pulpit", the trees: these are the characteristics of a distinctly Nordic-style sacred forest.

It is known that the 
Germanic peoples in general, and the Scandinavians in particular, although they had temples, celebrated most of their religious
ceremonies outdoors.

The Vikings who settled in South America did the same, as evidenced by the sacred forests surveyed fifty 
years ago by Schwennhagen in Piaui, south of the Amazon, near the impressive place of worship of Sete Cidades (3).

It is not 
unreasonable, therefore, to assert that the presence of a site of this nature in the immediate vicinity of Yvyty Pero is sufficient to 
confirm the Guaraní traditions that make the hill the "dwelling place" of a pre-Columbian white king.

But there is other evidence
to support t h e m .

Three kilometres northeast of Cerro Ipir is a group of three hills: Cerro Tejú (Lizard Hill), Cerro Guaiví (Old
Woman Hill) and Cerro Kysé (Knife Hill).But there is other evidence
to support t h e m .

Three kilometres northeast of Cerro Ipir is a group of three hills: Cerro Tejú (Lizard Hill), Cerro Guaiví (Old
Woman Hill) and Cerro Kysé (Knife Hill).

The latter, the smallest of the three, is about 60 m high.

At its highest point, its crest
consists of a narrow stone bench with vertical sides and a surface covered with engraved signs that form an incoherent whole.

One gets the impression of being faced with graffiti drawn, at random, by successive visitors.

Its survey is all the more difficult as 
the ground does not, of course, have a natural orientation, making it often impossible to establish with certainty which is the
bottom and which is the top of the drawing.

Most of the signs on Cerro Kysé are mere lines, often parallel, sometimes crossed, 
which could be attributed to the Indians.

Similar ones, painted or engraved, are found throughout the Guaraní settlement area in
southern Brazil.

Two groups, however, have different characteristics.

The first (fig.

20) is too schematic in composition to draw
any conclusions from it, despite the unexpected triangular shape of its   frame.

The second   (fig.

21),   on the other hand,
constitutes   a complex
complex ensemble that 
seems difficult to attribute to the indigenous people.

In the centre we see a French coat of arms — but the resemblance may, of
course, be coincidental — on which are inscribed lines of the same type as those mentioned above.

Below and to the left are two
groups of signs that have a vague alphabetical appearance, but cannot be deciphered.

At the top right, above illegible 
"characters," there is a "Fosite trident," identical to those we discovered in the rock shelter of Tuja Og (see chap.

I, 3), which
would be sufficient to identify the authors of the inscriptions, or at least some of them.

Other signs leave no doubt about this last 
point.

One of them (fio.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Other signs leave no doubt about this last 
point. One of them (fio. 22), which we find twice, separately, on the rock, is an algiz (fí) from the old futhark or a   hagalaz   (h.)   
from the new   . In   the   group   from   the   figure   23,   we see,   in addition   from   large   characters-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

17
res devoid, for us, of meaning 
(although one of them could be a Latinised solewu (s), of a type we already found (2) in the Posta de Yvytyruzú) a line of small
letters that appear to be runic, but whose poor state of preservation did not allow us to identify them with any degree of certainty.
Near this group, two signs — an odala (o) and an uruz (u) — are clearly runic. There are three drawings of particular importance.
One of them (fig. 24) represents a "stick figure" that we will find again, better preserved and probably better drawn, on a stone
block from Cerro Guazú (cf. chap. IV), in the middle of indisputable runic inscriptions. The other is even stranger. It is, in fact, an 
unfinished pentacle (fig. 25) from which a broken line emerges, at the top of which we see a group of small characters, the first
three of which—the others are erased—have a distinctly runic appearance, although it is impossible to transcribe them with 
certainty. The pentacle, o r
five-pointed star
 51

--- PAGE BREAK ---first
three of which—the others are erased—have a distinctly runic appearance, although it is impossible to transcribe them with 
certainty. The pentacle, o r
five-pointed star
 51

--- PAGE BREAK ---

18
, 
which 
was unknown to the Vikings of Scandinavia, belongs to the esoteric symbolism of the Western Middle Ages and, more 
specifically, to that of the alchemists. Its presence on Cerro Kysé could be attributed to the contacts—only one of which has 
been proven (2)—that took place as early as the 13th century between South America and Normandy. Nevertheless, in the 
current state of our research, it remains a mystery that we may one day solve. But whatever its origin, it rules out any temptation
to attribute all of the inscriptions to the Indians. As for the third figure, it shows us a strange character (photo 10 and fig. 26). 
Short rays emanate from its round "head" and the kind of aura that surrounds its cylindrical "body". Perhaps it is

--- PAGE BREAK ---19
a
That is, Cemetery near (or:
en) the tormented mountain range.

The last sign is not runic.

It suggests a hand pointing north, that is to say, the direction in
which the Viking territory extends from Cerro Cora to Cerro Guazú, where Yvyty stands.

But its Guaraní name is identical, as we
have already said, to that of Cerro Pelado, at the foot of which the Posta is located.

As for the "tormented mountain range", this
is a name that would be very appropriate for the Amambay mountain range, which today serves as the border between 
Paraguay and Brazil and whose foothills extend westward into the region of our discoveries.

Due to a lack of resources, we were
unable to open the enormous cavity that extends beneath Cerro Ipir and the adjacent plateau.

We are not even entirely sure that
it is artificial, despite the existence of the slab that serves as its "roof".

Perhaps it would have been more prudent not to mention
it until it has been opened, as we are well aware that thieves of other people's work are lying in wait.

But Cerro Ipir is too 
important in the context of our search for us not to take the risk of mentioning it here.

First of all, it is a Viking site.

Located
between Cerro Cora and Cerro Guazú, it is part of an imposing complex whose Nordic origin no longer needs to be proven, as 
we saw in Chapter I and as we will see in Chapter IV.

On the side of the hill, there is a runic inscription; in its surroundings, a 
sacred forest in the purest Germanic style; and, on Cerro Kysé, some characters that are presumably runic and some drawings 
that cannot in any way be attributed to the Indians.

Secondly, if the cavity is indeed artificial, as everything suggests, Cerro Ipir is 
very likely to be the "cemetery" mentioned in the Posta de Yvytyruzú.

The Vikings, at least before their conversion to Christianity,
used to burn their dead.

But they often made an exception for their great war chiefs, whom they buried under burial mounds.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Vikings, at least before their conversion to Christianity,
used to burn their dead. But they often made an exception for their great war chiefs, whom they buried under burial mounds. The
caves of Paracas, in Peru, where hundreds of pre-Inca mummies were found in 1925, many of which belong to individuals of 
Nordic biotype, are clearly a transposition of the artificial hills of Scandinavia. It is all the more strange, at first glance, that 
nothing equivalent has ever been found in Tiahuanacu, the capital of the Viking empire of South America. A t first glance only. For if one reflects on the situation in which the Men of Titicaca found themselves in the midst of a huge indigenous population, it 
is easy to understand that they could not die without losing their divine character in the eyes of their subjects. They therefore had 
to make the corpses disappear. It was feasible to secretly burn those who, according to custom, were to undergo this treatment,
but it was impossible to bury the chiefs in burial mounds that would obviously not have gone unnoticed. It would have been futile
to search the region for a "hiding place" similar to the caves of Paracas, located on a peninsula whose access could easily be 
strictly prohibited. The only solution was to transport the bodies far from the Aymara and Quechua territories. Amambay, on one
of the roads leading from Tiahuanacu to the Atlantic, offered the necessary guarantees: the Guaraní who lived there were hated 
by the Indians of the Altiplano, a hatred that still persists, while their loyalty to the Vikings was such that the latter

--- PAGE BREAK ---ssary guarantees: the Guaraní who lived there were hated 
by the Indians of the Altiplano, a hatred that still persists, while their loyalty to the Vikings was such that the latter

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20
had entrusted the custody of their land and river communication routes east of the Andes (»).
^ This is only a hypothesis, of course. To confirm or disprove it, it will be necessary to force entry into Cerro Ipir. If correct, it 
provides us with an explanation—or one of the explanations—for the powerful garrison that the Vikings of Tiahuanacu, as 
evidenced by Itaguambypé, maintained at Cerro Cora: its mission was to protect access to the enormous underground 
necropolis where the dead gods rested^ III The buried temple 1 . The "Tupao Cué" 160 km from Cerro Cora, after the raft that 
allows you to cross the Ypané on your way to Asunción, a small road opens up, passable in dry weather, leading to the village of
Tacuatí, 32 km from the route (cf. map, fig. 28). A grass-covered "avenue", where cows, pigs and donkeys roam freely at any 
time of day, crosses the cluster of wooden houses surrounded by rose bushes and hibiscus and disappears 400 m further on 
into the jungle that covers the banks of the Ypané. One hundred metres from the gate that closes the entrance to the village, on
the right, that is to say to the east, you can see the square, with a small wooden church in the centre, whose external bell tower
resembles one of those watchtowers that were used in heroic times to give early warning of Indian raids. This square, measuring
about four hectares, is a mere natural meadow that no one ever bothered to level. Irregular mounds can be seen everywhere. 
They are shapeless, except behind the church, where a mound of earth approximately one metre high forms—or rather, formed 
before our intervention—a rectangle measuring about 29 metres by
11 metres. Local tradition says that these are the remains of Tupao Cué —an ancient temple or church, in
Guaraní—whose last remains of
superstructure — wooden pillars — were set on fire by Brazilian troops in 1869. Informed, purely by chance, during our first 
expedition to Amambay, of the existence of a "buried village", we took a trip there. The police commissioner, Don Francisco 
Torres, was very surprised that an outsider knew about it and confirmed the news. Following his instructions, we conducted a 
survey on the north side of the route, in a place where the grass-covered ground was less elevated than elsewhere. We were 
thus able to verify the existence of a row of large boulders, one of which bore a sign corresponding to the gebo
(g)
runic
(•fig.
29).
According to
variousd was less elevated than elsewhere. We were 
thus able to verify the existence of a row of large boulders, one of which bore a sign corresponding to the gebo
(g)
runic
(•fig.
29).
According to
various

--- PAGE BREAK ---than elsewhere. We were 
thus able to verify the existence of a row of large boulders, one of which bore a sign corresponding to the gebo
(g)
runic
(•fig.
29).
According to
various

--- PAGE BREAK ---

21
accounts, 
these 
were the foundations of a wall whose carved stones, located at ground level, had been used thirty to forty years ago by the 
villagers to build bread ovens. If this information was accurate, it could be assumed that the wall was intact on the other sides of 
the building, which were better protected. We therefore returned to Tucuatí the following year to verify this hypothesis. First, we 
had the north side cleared: the alignment extended over 10 m. We then tackled the east side, starting from the north-east corner.
We were thus able to uncover a wall of carved stones 58 cm wide by 43 cm high, resting on foundations approximately 80 cm 
wide on average, made of boulders (photo 11). The blocks, fitted together without mortar, are carved with a precision that 
suggests the use of metal tools. The wall, perfectly straight, runs north-south with an accuracy not found in the layout of the
current church, which deviates significantly from the compass needle. When we arrived, our intention was to completely 
dismantle the walls and floor of the Tupao Cué. From the outset, we realised that the resources and time available to us would 
not allow us to do so. The earth, constantly trampled by livestock roaming freely in the "square", was all the harder because it
had not rained in Tacuatí for two months. In fact, with two labourers, we were only able to advance 11.40 m, beyond which there
was an opening 1.64 m wide at its narrowest point (photo 12), whose two embryonic jambs have semicircular notches, clearly 
intended to hold wooden pillars. Halfway up the wall, the floor of this entrance is covered with a plank of urunde'y (Astronium
fraxinifolium), a rot-resistant wood. A piece of lapacho (Tacoma, according to botanists), about 2 m long, was found in the rubble
from the excavations, located outside the building, at the height of the door. We took a large fragment of the latter to Buenos
Aires for study: it is in the process of petrification. We had to interrupt our work at this point, but not before carrying out some 
surveys that showed us that the wall extended along the south and west sides. We resumed work in 1977. With the help of 
soldiers from the Cerro Cora Detachment, we cleared the entire enclosure, which we were then able to measure (cf. plan, fig. 
30). However, the measurements of the side walls—28.11 m to the east and 28.13 m to the west—are not entirely accurate, 
since the stones on the north side were removed. On the other hand, we were able to correctly measure the width: 10 m to the 
south and 10.22 m to the north. The parallelism of the sides is notrate, 
since the stones on the north side were removed. On the other hand, we were able to correctly measure the width: 10 m to the 
south and 10.22 m to the north. The parallelism of the sides is not

--- PAGE BREAK ---

22
perfect. 60
.
The south wall of the building, which is slightly wider (60 cm) than the others, and, at 6.50 m, the side walls that extend from it 
are raised a few centimetres above the rest of the sides. In contrast, the height of the wall at this point is reduced to compensate
for a slight progressive elevation of the ground towards the south. There, at the back of the building, a second door 1.63 m wide
opens on the right, with a step made of urunde'y wood. Two thick pillars, carved from the same wood, protrude about forty 
centimetres from the south wall, 2.20 m from the left corner and 2.40 m from the right. Since our second visit to Tacuatí, we 
knew that the tradition of Tupao Cué was not the fruit of popular imagination. But to whom should we attribute the construction of 
the "ancient temple"? Not to the Jesuits, for sure. It is a habit in Paraguay to see the hand of the fathers everywhere. This is
because the ruins of their missions show us the remains of the only stone buildings constructed during the colonial era. But, on
the one hand, the Jesuits never settled in Tacuatí. Their nearest establishment was in Belén, 50 km away as the crow flies and 
92 km via Horquesta. We are absolutely certain of this, as the history of the Society in South America is known in minute detail,
thanks not only to the works of Fr. Lozano (") and Fr. de Charlevoix (7), to mention only the most important ones concerning 
Paraguay, but also to the annual letters and reports that, every

--- PAGE BREAK ---23
year, the provincials sent to Rome.

On the other hand, the mission buildings were constructed entirely of stone, which was not 
the case with the one we are interested in.

Nor is it possible to attribute the Tupao Cué to the Guaraní Indians, who did not know
how to work with stone, or to the Spaniards.

Since the Conquest, apart from the Jesuits, only plank, adobe and, more recently, 
brick have been used for construction in the interior of Paraguay.

However, none of these three materials was used to erect the
building in question.

If it had been made of planks, the stones in the walls would have been perforated at regular intervals to nail 
the essential pillars into them, as was done at the door.

If adobe had been used, the wall would have been superfluous, since in
a tropical region where it rains heavily during the summer, it could only have been a precarious construction.

Moreover, the earth
covering the foundations did not contain any plant residue, as would have been the case if it had come from crumbling adobe 
walls.

As for the bricks, when dealing with a building several metres high, as in this case, they require the use of mortar, of which 
we found no trace in the rubble.

It would be futile to search Paraguay, outside the cities and even within them, for any evidence
of its use as a building material before the end of the last century.

And we know that Tupao Cué was already in ruins in 1869.

There is only one explanation, then: the wall we unearthed supported walls made of squared logs, in the Viking style.

This is 
confirmed by the wooden pillars on the south wall: the columns that supported the roof of all Nordic buildings.

This is an 
indication of the origin of the "ancient temple".

Nothing more than an indication, of course.

For a procedure as simple as this one 
could very well have been reinvented or imitated.

But two pieces of information confirm it.

The first is the unit of measurement
used in the construction of the building.But two pieces of information confirm it.

The first is the unit of measurement
used in the construction of the building.

The dimensions of the latter, as expressed above in metres, are, of course, approximate.

On the one hand, the stone has deteriorated over the centuries and its irregularities, although not very marked, justify a certain
inaccuracy in the measurements we took, which were otherwise made with a simple tape measure.

But, on the other hand, it is 
clear that the builders did not use the metre as a unit of measurement: in architecture, since time immemorial, the foot has been
used.

But which foot?

The question is important, since this unit varied considerably from one town to another.

To answer it, let us 
consider two of our measurements: the height and width of the side walls before the modifications made to the southern part of 
the building.

These are the only constants: the width of the temple varies, as we have seen, and the doors have irregular edges.

If the unit of measurement had been the Castilian foot, 27.80 cm, used in Paraguay during the Spanish period, we would have, 
for the height of our wall, 1 foot 7 inches (44 cm) and for its width, 2 feet 2 inches (60.2 cm), with a difference of more than 1 cm 
and 2.2 cm, respectively.

It is acceptable that time has affected the thickness of the stone.

However, it seems inadmissible that it 
has reduced the width of the wall by 2.2 cm, which is very regular as shown in photo 11.

If, on the contrary, it was the Danish
foot of 29.33 cm, the unit used by the Vikings of Tiahuanacu (l), that was used, this anomaly disappears.

The height of the wall is 
then, in fact, 1 foot 6 inches (43.99 cm) and its width 2 feet (58.6 cm), with a satisfactory difference in both cases of 9.9 mm and 
6 mm, respectively.

On the other hand, we now have round numbers (1 foot 6 inches, i.e.

one and a half feet, and 2 feet) for a 
wall along which the dimensions had to remain constant, which is logical.On the other hand, we now have round numbers (1 foot 6 inches, i.e.

one and a half feet, and 2 feet) for a 
wall along which the dimensions had to remain constant, which is logical.

Taken out of context, this analysis would not be very
convincing.

But we will see that, even without taking into account the construction method specified above, this context is 
definitive.

It includes runic inscriptions, one of which (.fio.

31) was found in the rubble of our excavations.

It is engraved, in letters 
about five centimetres high, on a broken stone lying on the ground, halfway up the inner face of the   wall   and   at   25   
cm   of   this one.

Its   four   runes   are   classic.

They belong,   the   three
It is a complete word—surrounded by a 
curved line that delimits it—whose meaning is unclear, since the words with the same root that we know—Anglo-Saxon cloene, 
clean; German klein, small—are adjectives.

The term probably had another meaning in the dialect (cf.

chap.

IV) spoken by the 
Vikings of Tiahuanacu.

Another stone, also broken, appeared in the rubble, in the same position as the previous one, but 2 m 
away from it.

It bears a single sign: a Latin cross 9 cm high, whose unequal arms — 1.5 and 3 cm, respectively — deviate 
slightly from the horizontal, as if to create a lateral perspective effect.

The Viking origin of Tupao Cué thus seems to us to be
solidly proven.

We will see, moreover, that the building was part of a village that other runic inscriptions allow us to identify.

It 
remains to be seen what it was.

A temple, most likely, as indicated by local tradition and its dimensions, which are much larger
than those of the current church, which, for less than a thousand inhabitants, measures only 14 m by 7 m.

But was it a pagan or
Christian temple?--- PAGE BREAK ---

A temple, most likely, as indicated by local tradition and its dimensions, which are much larger
than those of the current church, which, for less than a thousand inhabitants, measures only 14 m by 7 m. But was it a pagan or
Christian temple? Its entrance, located on the east side of one of the side walls, and its north-south orientation—rather than east-
west like most medieval Christian churches, which face Jerusalem—suggest a place of solar worship. The Latin cross, on the 
other hand, is Catholic. But although the stone on which it is engraved comes, like those of the building, from the banks of the
Ypané, it cannot be ruled out that it was brought there later. However, a cross in a primitive pagan Viking temple should not 
surprise us in Paraguay, since we know (1, 2) that the country had been partially Christianised around 1250 by a Catholic priest
who had arrived from Europe, that the

--- PAGE BREAK ---e should not 
surprise us in Paraguay, since we know (1, 2) that the country had been partially Christianised around 1250 by a Catholic priest
who had arrived from Europe, that the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

24
Guaraní traditions refer to it as Pay Zumé, while the indigenous peoples of the Altiplano call it Thuí Gnupa, or Father Gnupa, in
Norse. This would explain the door at the back of Tupao Cué, which is much cruder than the main entrance and seems to have 
been opened after the temple was built: it was probably the entrance to a sacristy, which was precarious as it had no foundations
and was added according to Christian church standards. 2. The Viking village of Tacuatí To the south of the meadow where 
the current church and the ruins of Tupao Cué are located, a wire fence marks the boundary of the cemetery, which is accessed 
through a wooden gate. Just in front of this entrance, a thick rough stone weighing about 250 kg, whose surface stands out 
against the green background of the surrounding grass, is embedded in the ground, just above the surface. On its upper surface,
there is a group of three large runes (fig. 32) which, due to the angular shape of the first two, cannot be confused with Latin
letters: raido (r), solewu (s) and isa (i). The nature of this inscription, which is untranslatable, leaves no room for doubt: it can 
only
be
A la
To the right of the cemetery, also separated from the "square" by a wire fence, there is a thicket of thorny bushes and small, 
stunted trees. The poverty of this vegetation is due, in part, to the stench of the ground, which is littered with stones, sometimes
roughly carved without the slightest concern for regularity, all similar t o those that form the foundations of the temple, except
that they are generally larger.
A fantasy of nature? Certainly not, for one would search in vain for stones in the soil of Tacuatí and its immediate surroundings,
which is made up of a thick layer of sandy earth. Those that El perth, in runic ideography, symbolises the jungle. On another 
stone of the same kind, in the same area, it is a drawing that catches the eye (fig.de up of a thick layer of sandy earth. Those that El perth, in runic ideography, symbolises the jungle. On another 
stone of the same kind, in the same area, it is a drawing that catches the eye (fig.

--- PAGE BREAK ---25
34).

In it, you can see
just
Above a break that interrupts its outline, the head and neck of a horse that appears to be rearing up, some very deteriorated 
lines that must belong to the animal's body and its rider, and a circle at the bottom left.

The meaning of this lithoglyph would
probably have escaped us had we not been able to compare it with another drawing (fig.

38), previously surveyed at Cerro 
Guazú (cf.

chap.

IV).

It is undoubtedly the same motif: Odin on horseback, brandishing his javelin and, presumably, leaping from
one world to another.

There was, therefore, and this was to be expected, a cluster of buildings around the temple.

The carved 
stones from its houses must have been used, like those from the north wall of Tupao Cué, by the inhabitants of the present-day 
village.

Three sides of the "square" are now occupied by wooden buildings and the gardens surrounding them: the vestiges of 
the past have disappeared.

To the south, on the other hand, there is nothing but the cemetery and the wasteland we have just 
mentioned: the foundation stones, removed over the centuries, still remain, at least in part, as they could not be used for much
else.

3 .

The quiet stream E ] Tacuatí Viking must have been of some importance, as evidenced not only by the size of the 
temple, but also by the fact that 500 metres to the west, as the crow flies, there is another wooded area whose ground is covered
with rough stones from the river.

There, too, everything was destroyed.

Except, however, for the ruins of a small square building,
2 m on each side, whose foundations — unless they are dry stone walls — are still about 80 cm high.

One kilometre from this 
group of houses, or what remains of them, runs the Tupí stream, a tributary of the Ypané: an insignificant stream, as is, 
apparently, the waterfall that interrupts its continuity.Except, however, for the ruins of a small square building,
2 m on each side, whose foundations — unless they are dry stone walls — are still about 80 cm high.

One kilometre from this 
group of houses, or what remains of them, runs the Tupí stream, a tributary of the Ypané: an insignificant stream, as is, 
apparently, the waterfall that interrupts its continuity.

Waterfall is, moreover, a somewhat presumptuous term, as its drop is no
more than one metre, sufficient, however, to form a small natural pool of calm waters.

When our first expedition took us there,
the police commissioner had brought us there without telling us anything, enjoying our amazement in advance: the waterfall wall
is artificial, made of large blocks of carved stone!

Needless to say, this is not the work of the current inhabitants of the village,
who know nothing about stonework and, moreover, bathe and wash their clothes in the Ypané, nor of their possible Indian 
predecessors.

The discovery of runic inscriptions in the surrounding area and our previous examination of the Aquidabán-Nigui 
waterfall naturally prepared us to answer the question raised by the new "dam": the Vikings of Tacuatí must have been its 
builders.

Confirmation was not long in coming.

Our assistant, Jorge Russo, called out to us: he had just discovered an 
inscription.

On the upper, horizontal part of one of the blocks of the waterfall wall, which was not covered by water—it was 
winter, the dry season in the tropics—we saw five large characters (fig.

35), clearly legible, topped by four or five smaller signs,
almost completely erased.

As we were unable to make out the latter, let us limit ourselves
 to
 the
 others:
 are
runes
 whose
 transliteration
 gives:
toth
 log.

The th and the I are linked.

The t and 
the o, strongly Latinised, as found elsewhere in Paraguay and the Amazon, bear witness to a later period, after the partial 
Christianisation of Tiahuanacu in the mid-10th century.The th and the I are linked.

The t and 
the o, strongly Latinised, as found elsewhere in Paraguay and the Amazon, bear witness to a later period, after the partial 
Christianisation of Tiahuanacu in the mid-10th century.

The meaning of the inscription is clear: peaceful stream.

O r also, since
logn, in Old Norse as in modern Norwegian, is a noun—but this was not necessarily the case in the dialect spoken by our 
Vikings—: peaceful place by the stream.

Which, incidentally, changes nothing.

4 .

Defence and burial Further away in the same 
direction, about 2 km from the village, the old road leading to Concepción crosses an extremely strange piece of terrain.

It is a 
ditch six to eight metres wide, which, at this point, is about two metres deep.

It is clearly visible under the thorn bushes a n d
shrubs that fill it.

Unfortunately, we were not in a position to study it, which we would have liked to do because of its obvious
artificial nature: the work would have taken weeks and required more personnel than we had available.

We therefore had to limit
ourselves to gathering the information provided by the police commissioner, whose family farm is located in the vicinity, and 
several inhabitants of the area.

The moat, which is straight, is about 2 km long and isolates a wide strip of forest, bordered by a 
bend in the Ypané River, which is very deep at this point, as we were able to verify.

On the banks of the river, countless signs
are engraved in the rock, but they are too faded to reveal their meaning.

The ditch in question would not have caught our 
attention had it not reminded us of a defence method used by the Vikings.

In 1951-52, a Danish-Swedish mission carried out 
excavations at the foot of the Hague dyke, an earthen wall that divides the Cotentin peninsula in Normandy in two.

They 
confirmed the existence of a parallel ditch, at the bottom of which traces of fire were found.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In 1951-52, a Danish-Swedish mission carried out 
excavations at the foot of the Hague dyke, an earthen wall that divides the Cotentin peninsula in Normandy in two. They 
confirmed the existence of a parallel ditch, at the bottom of which traces of fire were found. In 1953, on Easter Island, Thor 
Heyerdahl opened a similar ditch that cuts across the Poike peninsula for about 3 km. Indigenous traditions claimed that when 
the conflict that led to the "short ears" —the
2TOTH: Old Norse, dodra, stream. (This root appears in numerous 
Germanic place names such as Dudweiller, Duderstadt, Todtnau.) LOG: 
Old Norse, logn, calm.

--- PAGE BREAK ---26
population of colour, whatever their origin— had eliminated the "long ears", white men who had arrived from South America, the 
latter having retreated behind the moat filled with branches which they had set on fire.

Alfred Métraux ("), who never missed a
thing, had been quick to argue that the moat was nothing more than a natural depression.

But the Norwegian expedition found a 
thick layer of charcoal and ashes 2 metres deep.

In both cases, we are faced with the same procedure: a straight trench that 
enclosed a peninsula and, in the event of an attack, became a barrier of fire.

N o w , the Ypané meander also constitutes a sui 
generis peninsula, although here the sea is replaced by the river.

Did the Vikings of Tacuatí use the same method of defence as
their cousins in Normandy and the "long-ears", descendants of the Danes of Tiahuanacu who, in 1290, had set sail from Ecuador 
to the Pacific islands?

It is plausible.

But to be sure, excavations would have to be carried out at the bottom of the moat.

If traces 
of fire were found, the problem would be solved.

Otherwise, it would remain unresolved.

For there is nothing to suggest that the
trench, prepared as we have seen, was ever used.

Near the trench in question, in the middle of a "pasture", there is a sandstone
outcrop about 2 m high, on which are engraved signs, clearly made by human hands, which have no meaning for us.

They do 
not seem to come from the Indians, or at least they are not in the indigenous style.

We make this last reservation because, a few
hundred metres away, a Brazilian farmer, who had been living in the region for twenty-five years, found an extremely strange 
burial chamber in a field in 1976.

It was destroyed when we examined the site, but from the hole that remained, it must have 
been shaped like a cube with sides measuring one metre.We make this last reservation because, a few
hundred metres away, a Brazilian farmer, who had been living in the region for twenty-five years, found an extremely strange 
burial chamber in a field in 1976.

It was destroyed when we examined the site, but from the hole that remained, it must have 
been shaped like a cube with sides measuring one metre.

According to its discoverer, its walls were covered with square bricks 
measuring about 25 cm on each side and 3 cm thick, some of which bore inscriptions that, unfortunately, we were unable to find.

Inside the burial chamber was an earthen urn containing a skull that turned to dust as soon as the lid covering the container was
removed.

The use of tile-shaped bricks initially led us to believe that this was an indigenous burial site from the colonial era, as 
the indigenous people were unfamiliar with this material, which the Spanish used to tile the floors of their houses.

However, one
detail led us to change our minds.

The farmer brought us a large fragment of the neck of the urn (photo 13).

It features a 
completely unexpected decorative motif: a torsade made of intertwined terracotta discs applied to the wall of the container.

None
of the countless Amerindian urns, funerary or otherwise, that fill museums offer such a motif.

And the Spanish, of course, did not
manufacture funerary urns.

We must therefore admit that this is an indigenous work made according to a foreign model.

Now, 
the torsade is, par excellence, the decorative motif of medieval Scandinavian art.

It would not be surprising, then, if the Indians
who, under the orders of Viking officers, were garrisoned in Tacuatí had copied it from some object belonging to their chiefs.

5 .

A lasting settlement Our previous expeditions had provided us with much material evidence of the presence in Paraguay of the 
Vikings of Tiahuanacu and their descendants.

At Cerro Polilla (or Cerro Pelado), we had identified a post station located at a 
crossroads.A lasting settlement Our previous expeditions had provided us with much material evidence of the presence in Paraguay of the 
Vikings of Tiahuanacu and their descendants.

At Cerro Polilla (or Cerro Pelado), we had identified a post station located at a 
crossroads.

(2): There was probably an inn in the vicinity, but we had found no trace of it.

At Cerro Guazú, as we shall see in Chapter IV, the 
rock shelters we had surveyed appeared to have been used as guard posts and places of worship: everything suggested that a 
village had been located on the plateau overlooking the hill, but nothing remained of it.

In both cases, we were faced with barely
modified natural sites which, although frequented for a long time, as indicated by their runic inscriptions, still had the appearance
of precarious installations.

At Cerro Cora, things were different.

The wall of Itaguambypé was reminiscent of the great pre-Inca
constructions of the Andean Altiplano.

Cerro Ipir, its sacred forest and the underground channels—whose existence remains to 
be confirmed—pointed out by Fritz Berger suggested an intention to remain.

Only in Tacuatí, however, did we find the remains of
a lasting settlement.

A village whose houses were built on stone foundations and whose temple, measuring some 300 m, rested 
on walls of carved stone suggests, in fact, a sedentary population of a certain level.

We will see, in Chapter VI, what its raison
d'être was.

IV The world's 
largest collection of runic inscriptions 1.

The rock shelters of Cerro Guazú In January 1973, the Asunción newspaper ABC 
Color published a long article that greatly interested us.

It announced the discovery by a geologist from the Ministry of Public
Works of 157 caves located in various massifs in the department of Amambay.The rock shelters of Cerro Guazú In January 1973, the Asunción newspaper ABC 
Color published a long article that greatly interested us.

It announced the discovery by a geologist from the Ministry of Public
Works of 157 caves located in various massifs in the department of Amambay.

Without seeking in any way to play the role of 
archaeologist, Pedro González, the geologist in question, could not help but notice the existence, on the walls of some of these
caves, of countless inscriptions that were incomprehensible to him.

In addition, he had brought back entire boxes of stones 
engraved or, at least, worked by human hands.

The article added that, according to specialists from the (Brazilian) University of
the State of Paraná to whom samples had been sent (?), the archaeological site dated back to around 2,500 to 3,500 BC.

More 
important than these fanciful estimates were some poor-quality photos illustrating the statements—extremely circumspect, they 
were—of Pedro González.

For we thought we could make out runic characters in them.

This should not have surprised us, since 
at that time we had already unearthed the urn with runic inscriptions at Cerro Morotí and surveyed the Viking post at Yvytyruzú^).

As usual, we had neither the time nor the necessary means to conduct an exhaustive study of the Amambay caves.

We 
therefore decided to carry out a simple survey to establish the nature of the inscriptions.

It was then that we received an offer
from two young Frenchmen, Jean-Pierre Bouleau and Jean-Francois Mongibeaux, the former of whom had participated in one of 
our previous expeditions, to come and work with us, provided they obtained a grant from the Dotation Nationale de l'Aventure, 
established by the Guilde Européenne du Raid.

The project we agreed upon was selected by the jury, chaired by the famous 
polar explorer Paul-Emile Victor.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It was then that we received an offer
from two young Frenchmen, Jean-Pierre Bouleau and Jean-Francois Mongibeaux, the former of whom had participated in one of 
our previous expeditions, to come and work with us, provided they obtained a grant from the Dotation Nationale de l'Aventure, 
established by the Guilde Européenne du Raid. The project we agreed upon was selected by the jury, chaired by the famous 
polar explorer Paul-Emile Victor. Timely information led us to choose as our objective the Cerro Guazú massif, which, it was 
said, contained several caves of special interest. It is a somewhat irregular truncated cone, whose plateau measures about 70 
km in average diameter and whose flanks drop steeply into the surrounding jungle. It is located about a hundred kilometres from
the small town of Pedro Juan Caballero (see map, fig. 73), from which it can be reached by a 90 km dirt road, which can only be
used by horses and, during the dry season, four-wheel drive vehicles, and which leads to the Celestino Rojas ranch. To reach 
the first caves, there are 14 km of a trail opened in 1972 by Pedro González's team and closed again in September 1973, to the 
point that our collaborators preferred to abandon their horses and make the journey on foot. Accompanied by an Indian guide, 
they thus reached the area where the caves had been marked. Five of them — more precisely, rock shelters — were located 
during the first two days of work, and the corresponding trails were opened with machetes, with constant attacks from countless
wild bees. Three days were devoted to photographing the shelters, which we will describe briefly.

--- PAGE BREAK ---27
with the names we gave them: 76 Shelter under Odin's rock.

About thirty metres wide and 5 metres deep at its deepest point.

The wall is made up of large blocks of grey stone that appear to be granite, topped with a mixture of volcanic rocks welded 
together in lava (puddingstone).

Numerous figures engraved on detached blocks; a few alphabetical inscriptions on the wall.

Altars rock shelter.

60 metres wide and about ten metres deep at its deepest point.

The wall, 40 metres high, is made of a layer 
of red sandstone about fifteen metres thick, topped with puddingstone.

Numerous alphabetical inscriptions across its entire 
width, up to a height of 4 m.

Rock shelter of the Caballo.

About forty metres wide and around 20 m deep at its maximum.

Sandstone wall 4 to 5 m high, topped by a layer of puddingstone that forms a real roof.

Hundreds of inscriptions, both 
alphabetical and other, can be seen in the sandstone, sometimes overlapping.

Above some of them, a wretch recently carved a 
large "CERRO GUAZU".

Shelter under the Buen Bebedor rock.

This is a small cave 4 or 5 m deep and 1 to 1.50 m high, with an 
entrance measuring about 6 m.

Geological composition similar to that of the two previous shelters.

Numerous alphabetical 
inscriptions.

Rock shelter of the Fallen Stones.

About thirty metres wide and ten metres deep at its maximum.

Geological 
composition similar to that of the three previous shelters.

Sloping ground, strewn with fallen stones.

A few large inscriptions, very 
faded and covered with a kind of greenish sediment.

All the inscriptions in the first three shelters could be surveyed, despite
extremely poor lighting.

A flash failure meant that only one photograph could be taken in the fourth, but fortunately it was an
excellent one.

It was impossible to survey the fifth without highly specialised equipment that was not available, either during the 
expeditions carried out by our collaborators or during our subsequent quick inspection.A flash failure meant that only one photograph could be taken in the fourth, but fortunately it was an
excellent one.

It was impossible to survey the fifth without highly specialised equipment that was not available, either during the 
expeditions carried out by our collaborators or during our subsequent quick inspection.

Back at the ranch, Celestino Rojas asked
Jean-Francois Mongibeaux and Jean-Pierre Bouleau if their guide had shown them the "Round House": this was not the case.

The Indian confessed that he had not done so for fear of the "white monkeys who shoot arrows": the Guayaki.

The threats of his 
employer and the promises of our collaborators finally persuaded him, after countless refusals, to agree to take part in a second
expedition the following month.

After reaching the site of the rock shelters previously studied, the three men, well armed, climbed
onto the plateau and crossed its southern spur for about 7 km, cutting a path with machetes without much difficulty through 
vegetation that was much less dense than that surrounding the massif.

They then descended
It is located in a kind of hollow covering ten hectares, overgrown with lush vegetation.

In this ravine grow the reeds that the
"white Indians" periodically come to cut to make their arrows.

Hence the guide's justified fears.

The expedition finally reached the 
"Casa Redonda" at the foot of the southern flank of Cerro Guazú without any unpleasant encounters.

It is a gigantic monopod 
dolmen made of an oval block of puddingstone measuring 30 and 10 metres in diameter, respectively, placed on top of a 
sandstone base 20 to 25 metres long and 6 metres wide.

This "mushroom", about 10 m high, is completely covered with bushes 
and vines that fall to the ground.

Its base bears numerous inscriptions, in very poor condition, which were surveyed despite very
poor lighting conditions.

We do not know whether this dolmen is natural or artificial.Its base bears numerous inscriptions, in very poor condition, which were surveyed despite very
poor lighting conditions.

We do not know whether this dolmen is natural or artificial.

In favour of the first hypothesis, we note that 
the same geological duality appears in four of the five shelters under rock previously described; in favour of the second, that the 
two rock layers do not appear to be welded together and that there are gaps of 20 to 25 cm in height between them.

The vast 
majority of the hundreds—or thousands—of alphabetic inscriptions and figures that adorn the walls of the shelters and the base 
of the dolmen are lithoglyphs, chiselled into very soft sandstone.

It is not surprising, then, that most of them are now extremely
deteriorated and almost completely erased.

To make matters worse, numerous overlays have often aggravated the destructive 
work of time.

Thus, many alphabetical inscriptions have become illegible or, at least, could not be deciphered with the desired
degree of certainty.

Others, very clear, have remained incomprehensible.

However, sixty-one were translated by Professor 
Hermann Munk, a runologist at our Institute of Human Sciences.

They constitute the largest runic collection known to date, with
no equal even in Scandinavia.

These are runic inscriptions.

The characters they are made up of are identical to those we 
previously recorded at Cerro Morotí and Cerro Polilla in Paraguay (-;) and at Sete Cidades in Brazil (:{).

Most of them belong to
the classical futhark; some to the Anglo-Saxon futhorc.

Others are archaic and were no longer in use at the time of the ancient
futhark.

Still others are, on the contrary, late and even strongly Latinised.

We saw in a previous work (3) that the mixing of the
futharks was due to the period of Viking migration to America.

In 967, the date of their arrival in Mexico, the dotted runes began
to mix with the new futhark.We saw in a previous work (3) that the mixing of the
futharks was due to the period of Viking migration to America.

In 967, the date of their arrival in Mexico, the dotted runes began
to mix with the new futhark.

The old futhark, although eliminated at the beginning of the 9th century, had not disappeared without
a trace, and some of its characters appear in much later inscriptions in Scandinavia.

The contribution of the futhorc can be 
explained by the presence of Danish Vikings in England for three centuries.

As for the Latinised letters — t, o, s, w, and a p that
is almost the same shape as in our cursive writing — they clearly come from the arrival of P.

Gnupa in South America around 
1250 (2).

There remain the archaic signs which, it seems, were never used in Scandinavia and which belong to some local 
futharks of continental Germania.

It should not be forgotten that the runic "alphabets" were not fixed as the Latin and Greek 
alphabets have been for millennia.

Each region, each tribe, had its own, which evolved according to the contacts and imagination
of the few literate people of the time.

On the other hand, the Vikings of Tiahuanacu were not pure Danes.

They came from 
Schleswig, where German influence was very strong, without the somewhat shifting border separating Denmark from Saxony 
marking a cultural break between related peoples whose tribal identity and feudal organisation had none of the national 
characteristics we know today.

At the beginning of our research (1), the presence of Danish and German words in Quiche Maya 
and Quechua had led us to think of an ethnic mixture, and we have no reason to retract this, as this is still one of the 
characteristics of Schleswig today.

But this mixture was deeper than we had imagined at the time.--- PAGE BREAK ---

At the beginning of our research (1), the presence of Danish and German words in Quiche Maya 
and Quechua had led us to think of an ethnic mixture, and we have no reason to retract this, as this is still one of the 
characteristics of Schleswig today. But this mixture was deeper than we had imagined at the time. The hundred or so inscriptions
found in Paraguay and Brazil that could be translated allowed Professor Munk to establish that the language spoken by the 
discoverers of Central and South America was not pure Norse, but an intermediate dialect between Norse and Old Low German, 
whether it had been used as such in Europe or had been formed in the New World as a result of seven centuries of common life. Further research may one day make it possible to reconstruct the dialect in question and establish its lexicon and grammar. For
the time being, the translation of the texts surveyed can only be done — as is also the case for numerous European runic 
inscriptions, called "continental" because they do not belong to the Scandinavian peninsulas — on the basis of words belonging 
to Old Norse and other known Germanic languages, and even from the Indo-European roots of words that we do not find 
anywhere else in the form they have here. Professor Munk therefore had to rediscover the meaning of each sentence as we do 
with a message written in "telegraphic style", in

--- PAGE BREAK ---find 
anywhere else in the form they have here. Professor Munk therefore had to rediscover the meaning of each sentence as we do 
with a message written in "telegraphic style", in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

28
function of the order of terms whose grammatical sequence was often unknown. This was an extremely delicate task, which 
sometimes leaves room for doubt. The transliteration of the runes used to engrave the texts was not always easy either, not only
because of the mixture of futharks and various graphic anomalies, but also because of numerous ligatures. Nevertheless, we 
had no difficulty whatsoever in subsequently reconstructing the "alphabet" that constitutes what we might call the "South 
American futhark" (fig. 36). To do so, we analysed all the translated runic inscriptions from Paraguay and Brazil, and not only
those from Cerro Guazú. We did not consider inverted or misaligned characters, which are also found, albeit less frequently, in
classical Scandinavian texts, to be variants. On the other hand, we disregarded some unique aberrant forms, clearly due to the 
engraver's imagination or inability in the context of a long process of graphic degeneration, which is normal if we consider that
the Vikings of Tiahuanacu spent, three hundred years in America before resuming sporadic contact with Europe—only one 
proven instance, in 1250—at a time when runic writing was no longer used there but merely survived. The South American 
futhark comprises twenty-five letters, one more than in the old futhark, compared to sixteen for the new futhark, twenty-eight for
the dotted futhark and twenty-eight, and later thirty-three, for the futhorc.
 The
 multiplicity
 of
 the
 forms
 of
some
 of
 their
 characters
 pro-
81
comes, as we have 
already said, from the coincidental influence of European runic "alphabets", whether the engraver chose freely among them 
according to personal preference, or whether circumstances of time and place caused one or the other to predominate in a 
particular region. Some of these forms are, moreover, nothing more than insignificant variants. In two cases, however, it seems
that our conclusions should be different: those of the e and the
o. Each of these vowels is represented by seven forms, which we could reduce to six, some of which are sometimes used 
together in the same inscription. This suggests that they expressed nuances of pronunciation in a dialect different from 'classical'
Norse, which must have evolved over the centuries, if only through the influence of the indigenous languages — Quechua, 
Aymara and Guaraní.
— which the Vikings of Tiahuanacu evidently used in their dealings with the Indians, who were forbidden — at least this was the
case in Inca Peru — to learn the language of their masters.   2. Odin, a drakkar and a riddle The rock shelter we named Odin 
is 
very 
poor 
in 
alphabetical 
inscriptions: 
only 
one 
(iig. 
37)the
case in Inca Peru — to learn the language of their masters.   2. Odin, a drakkar and a riddle The rock shelter we named Odin 
is 
very 
poor 
in 
alphabetical 
inscriptions: 
only 
one 
(iig. 
37)

could 
be 
deciphered 
and 
translated. It is composed of runes of classical design, with a ligature that is no less so. Its only anomaly is the extremely small
size of the last letter, joined to the previous ones by a slight curved stroke, as if the engraver had wanted to indicate that it
belonged to the group despite its small size and thus correct an error. Its transliteration gives: iolf - otasu. Lolf is, like Olif, Olf and 
Alf, a Viking diminutive of Adalwolf, the Germanic name from which they come, probably that of the last Inca emperor, the 
usurper Atahuallpa, and certainly our first name Adolfo. Otasu is also a very common anthroponym in Scandinavia:

--- PAGE BREAK ---from which they come, probably that of the last Inca emperor, the 
usurper Atahuallpa, and certainly our first name Adolfo. Otasu is also a very common anthroponym in Scandinavia:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

29
Son of otter 3  This inscription, isolated as it is, would be sufficient, if necessary, to "sign" —and perhaps it is a double 
signature— the cloak and certify the origin of the men who used it. But in this field, we have even more satisfactory evidence. On 
one of the detached blocks, there is an engraved drawing, very similar to the one we found in Tacuatí (see chapter III), 
representing a horseman. The man, who is holding the reins of his mount in his left hand, is brandishing a weapon. Although his
silhouette is extremely
burnt, badly damaged, as clearly shown in 
figure 38. The horse, drawn in a childlike style, jumps from a small globe to a larger one. It has six legs, which allows us to
identify it: it is Sleipnir, Odin's steed. Therefore, the rider is the god himself, carrying his javelin Gungnir. Perhaps the jump from 
one balloon to another symbolises the passage of the Vikings from Europe to America. This interpretation is reinforced by the 
fact that, on another block of the same shelter, we see what can only be the somewhat idealised image of a drakkar (fig. 39). A
mammal's head, wolf or fox, on a swan's neck and body, is how a Viking, lost in the jungle, might imagine a ship he had probably
never seen. There remains a strange drawing, engraved on a whitish block. It represents the grotesque silhouette of a puppet 
that seems, like Odin's horse, to have come out of a child's imagination. photo
14). To his left — to the right in the
photo—is a line drawing that appears to be devoid of any meaning. We would not have given any importance to this strange 
character if it did not also appear on a ritual shield from Chancay, Peru (photo 15). Professor Munk considers it to be one of 
those cryptograms, very few of which, incidentally, have been interpreted in our time, that rune engravers sometimes enjoyed 
drawing. Here, it is even
3OTA: Old Norse: to hear; Norse and Old German, ottar; Anglo-Saxon, 
otor: otter. SU(N): Old Norse, sunr; Gothic, sunus; Anglo-Saxon, Old 
Frisian and Old German, sunu: son.drawing. Here, it is even
3OTA: Old Norse: to hear; Norse and Old German, ottar; Anglo-Saxon, 
otor: otter. SU(N): Old Norse, sunr; Gothic, sunus; Anglo-Saxon, Old 
Frisian and Old German, sunu: son.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s even
3OTA: Old Norse: to hear; Norse and Old German, ottar; Anglo-Saxon, 
otor: otter. SU(N): Old Norse, sunr; Gothic, sunus; Anglo-Saxon, Old 
Frisian and Old German, sunu: son.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

30
would have gone to the joker. The decomposed drawing (fig. 40), whose transliteration gives liotesa, would mean:
fortune teller 4  (n.f.).
3. The altars
of death In front of the Shelter of the Altars are two roughly worked stone blocks, which are practically identical in shape. 
Everything seems to indicate that these are sacrificial stones, too small for human beings to have been sacrificed on them. Both
have a series of deep notches on one side, most of which were probably used to drain the blood of the victims. Others are easily
recognisable runes. Thus, on one of these altars (photo 16), the rune of death can be clearly seen on the left; below and to the
right of it, a hagalaz (h), the rune of blessing and greeting; and in the centre, a solewu (s), the rune of the Sun and victory (fig. 
41). We know that runic characters have,
in
addition to their phonetic value, one or more aerophonic names, meaning that they begin with the sound they represent, and 
sometimes a symbolic meaning (rune of Life, Death, Fidelity, etc.). Each sign therefore has one or more meanings and thus 
constitutes an ideogram. Their interpretation, however, is almost always subject to caution, due to the multiplicity of runic 
nomenclature, and the utmost prudence is required. It must be recognised, however, that Death, Blessing and the Sun or Victory 
are concepts that are not uncommon on a Viking altar. On the second sacrificial stone ('fig. 42), a group of three runes can be
seen in the centre and slightly to the left: eihwaz, fehu and uruz. The first (e long), which appears in the old futhark but was no 
longer in use at the time, belongs to a Germanic series whose origin is lost in the distant past. It symbolises law and justice. The 
aerophonic names fehu and uruz mean, respectively, goods and virility.
A
isolated 
sign
isolated,
below
a
the
4LIOTESA: Old Norse, hijota; Anglo-Saxon, hieotan; Old English, hliotan; Old German, Hozan: to divine, to prophesy.uruz mean, respectively, goods and virility.
A
isolated 
sign
isolated,
below
a
the
4LIOTESA: Old Norse, hijota; Anglo-Saxon, hieotan; Old English, hliotan; Old German, Hozan: to divine, to prophesy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

31
whose colour is much darker 
than that of the surrounding rock, is a cryptogram that Professor Munk, with the reservations imposed by all cases of this kind,
breaks down as follows: 'thurisaz, isa, odala, ansuz and two solewu. Four odalas follow in succession. The first group gives, in
transliteration: thi o as s. Thi means 'to you' in Old Norse. As, 'Ase' is the generic name for the main gods in Scandinavian 
mythology. The odala is the rune of Odin; the solewu, that of the
Sun.
We therefore have:
:
Atí,
Odin,
God
Sun.
two separate groups, one above 
the other, at the top left of the inscription, and a third at the bottom right. Its transliteration is easy, despite some linked runes: 
ofak les that uile ifuil. 89 That is to say, literally 5: sacrifice leave this
5  OFAK: Old Norse, offra: to sacrifice. LES: Old Norse, lata; Gothic, 
leían; Old Frisian, leía: to leave. THAT:
Old Norse, at; Gothic, ata; Anglo-Saxon, aet; Old German daz: this. 
THIS. UILE: Old Norse, hvila; Gothic weillan;

--- PAGE BREAK ---d Norse, lata; Gothic, 
leían; Old Frisian, leía: to leave. THAT:
Old Norse, at; Gothic, ata; Anglo-Saxon, aet; Old German daz: this. 
THIS. UILE: Old Norse, hvila; Gothic weillan;

--- PAGE BREAK ---

32
May the stubborn one endure. Or, in a freer translation: May this sacrifice be lasting. Ifuil, the stubborn one—a name or 
nickname—seems to be the signature of the ensemble, although another word, indecipherable, is engraved below. In the Horse 
Shelter we find another inscription of a religious nature (photo 17). It is of particular importance in the context of our research.
Not because of its text, which is classical, nor because of the cryptographic composition of its last two words, which seems to be 
a characteristic of divine invocations, but because it is the work of a professional runic engraver. From this point of view, at least 
as far as we know at present, it constitutes a unique case in South American runology. The transliteration of the lithoglyph in
question leaves no room for doubt, although the artist did not hesitate to sacrifice graphic rigour to his desire for harmony: kallil
olif ull uli. Olif is, as we have already seen, one of the diminutives, common in the Viking era, of the name Adalwolf. Ull is the god 
of hunters in Germanic mythology. The meaning of the whole is(6)  Olif, brave man, to Ull (protector) of the inheritance. A 
lithogram (painted inscription) of the same nature adorns the base of the Cerro Guazú dolmen
(fig. 45).
7
4. War and victory The Vikings of Cerro Guazú had more than one reason to place themselves under the protection of their 
gods. Not only did the jungle make life difficult for these Norse people, but so did the enemy —
Old German, wilon: to continue, to last. IF: medio atenían, ifer:
serious. UTL: Old Norse, vili; Gothic, wilja; Old Frisian and Anglo-
Saxon , milla; Old German, millo: will.
6  KALLIL: Old Norse, karl. brave man; Norse,
kall, old man. (IL is probably a suffix whose meaning escapes us.) ULI: 
Old German, ul, inheritance, ancestral domain of a family, tribe or race.
OS: graphic variant of As, Ase. Cf. above. LEUO:
Old Norse, Old Frisian and Anglo-Saxon: ío.f; Old German, lob: praise; 
(from the Indo-European root leubh). LIUTH: Old Norse, tíodh: magic 
formula; Old Saxon, lioth; Old German, ¿»od;
Anglo-Saxon, eod: song, poem; hence: LEUO LIUTH: song or poem of 
praise, hymn.
7  UIK: Old Norse, vega; Gothic, weifcan; Anglo-Saxon and Old German, 
wigan: to fight. UINA: Old Norse, vinda;
Gothic, windan; Old German, wintan: to return. US: Old Norse, Gothic and 
Anglo-Saxon, ut; Old German, uz: from, in the sense of "since, outside of". 
LUTH: Old German, lud: glory. THI:
Old Norse, thi: to you. ATE: Old German, atto; Gothic, atta: father. KLE: 
Old German, kliban: to be fixed, to adhere. UF:
Old Norse, yfir; Gothic, ufar; Old German, in/ber: on, above: Old Norse, 
ofan; Anglo-Saxon, ufan; Old German, obana: above.Gothic, atta: father. KLE: 
Old German, kliban: to be fixed, to adhere. UF:
Old Norse, yfir; Gothic, ufar; Old German, in/ber: on, above: Old Norse, 
ofan; Anglo-Saxon, ufan; Old German, obana: above.

--- PAGE BREAK ---33
Evidently, certain very warlike Indians from the region must have imposed frequent battles on them (which, incidentally, was 
certainly not to their displeasure).

We find evidence of this in some inscriptions at Abrigo del Caballo that relate to war.

One of 
them consists of two lines of very well-drawn characters, inscribed in a kind of oval medallion (photo 18).

Four or five signs at the 
end of the first line could not be transliterated.

What remains is: uik uina klok us luth thi...

ate kle uf thi.

The last three characters 
of the second line (the group th does not represent a thurisaz: it is formed by the letters t and h) have nothing to do with the thi, 
"to you", of the previous sentence or proposition and are incomprehensible to us.

The whole, however incomplete, is no less 
clear (8):War has returned from Klok.

Glory to you...

Father, stay above...

Klok, whose meaning escapes us, must be a place 
name.

If, in the face of a possible attack, the writer recommends that his father, probably elderly, remain on the plateau, which is 
easier to defend because there is water there, where the Vikings must have had their houses and, perhaps, a fortress, another 
message from the same shelter indicates that measures had been taken to defend its access points.

We read, in fact, despite 
two groups of runesquite
difficult
to
transliterate
(fig.

46):
Wars 
usually 
end 
in 
victory or defeat.

But epigraphy tends to mention successes more readily than failures.

This is demonstrated once again by two 
other inscriptions from Abrigo del Caballo.

The first (photo 19) is composed of large letters with rather fanciful shapes.

However,
its transliteration does not pose any serious problems: klua kult kulms si.

Its translation is more delicate.

It literally means
(9):Victory shines like gold on the mountain.

" Shine like gold" is probably an idiomatic expression.

If this is indeed the case, we
have: Victory shines like gold on the mountain." Shine like gold" is probably an idiomatic expression.

If this is indeed the case, we
have: Victory shines like gold on the mountain.

The second inscription, also in the same shelter, is engraved just below the first
one,   on a narrow strip of stone ( fig.

47).

It is quite deteriorated, except for   in the
regarding
its last legible characters.

It has the peculiarity of including three Arabic numerals, including a 5 which, according to medieval
usage, has the shape of our 4, as in one of the dates we noted earlier in Cerro Morotí (2).

Its transliteration gives: 5 olefs 8 og 7 
lits no faföiol kluo sig a...

A n d its translation: 5 plus 8 and still 7 expeditions (to) Faföiol.

Victory shone
 The etymology of 
lits indicates, for
this word means "journey".

However, in the context of military operations, "expedition" seems more appropriate.

Fafoiol, whose 
meaning escapes us, must be a place name.

5 .

Some anthroponyms As always in runic epigraphy, we find numerous 
anthroponyms in Cerro Guazú, some of which simply consist of one or two names or nicknames —three in one case— while 
others, more scarce, begin with ik, I, in the manner of the jegformlen of Danish runologists.

Let us limit ourselves here to 
mentioning a few of them.

In Abrigo del Caballo, we found a lithoglyph, legible despite four ligatures (fig.

48), composed of three
well-known names: oljsa og nethl olui.

Oljsa is still used today in Germanic countries,    with    the    form    from    
Alisa    (in    Spanish.

Alicia).

Nethl    o.

more
8  UI: Old German, wio: like, as well as.

LUK: Old German, luogen; Old 
Saxon, lofcon; Anglo-Saxon, loción; Modern English, to loofc: to look.

LEFT: Anglo-Saxon, ly-ften; Modern English, left.

LOIP: Old Norse, 
hiaupa; Anglo-Saxon, hieapan; Old Frisian, hiapa; Old German, loufan: 
to run, to jump; Modern Scandinavian, íoipe: ski slope.--- PAGE BREAK ---

LEFT: Anglo-Saxon, ly-ften; Modern English, left. LOIP: Old Norse, 
hiaupa; Anglo-Saxon, hieapan; Old Frisian, hiapa; Old German, loufan: 
to run, to jump; Modern Scandinavian, íoipe: ski slope. 9  OLEF'S: Old German, li-f: more (from which, in modern German, cl-f, 
eleven —from einlif, one more— and zwolf, twelve —from zweüif, two 
more—). OG: Old Norse, og: and. LITS- Old Norse, leid: Old Saxon, 
leda; Anglo-Saxon, íad: direction? ca-mino, journey. NO: Old Norse, 
naúh: Old Saxon and Old German, noh: still. KLUO; cf. above. SIG or 
sik: idem.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

34
Exactly, Nethel (the omission of the e does not change the pronunciation) has become Ethel. Oluin (the final n is missing, but 
this does not make the transcription any less clear) has been transformed into Alwin. Og, as we know, means 'and' in Old Norse.
Just below, slightly to the right, on the surface of a stone block, we read: list followed by a rune of life (fig. 49). This term is one 
of the many names of Odin and means ( 10)  :The wise one. Let us also mention, still for the same shelter, an inscription whose 
spelling, careful in its own way, is one of the most unorthodox (photo 20). However, its transliteration leaves no room for doubt:
malisku or izot. Malis means exactly "letter painter". We know that in Scandinavia it was used, depending on the case, to express
the
action
of
"engraving
runes"
the
verbs
writan,
hoggva and rista, to engrave, or faihian, to 
paint. But just as writan became write in modern English, faihian very early on acquired the more general meaning of "to write"
("). Mlíis must have undergone a similar evolution, since at Cerro Guazú, the vast majority
of
the
ILLUSTRATIONS
10  LIST: Old Norse and Old German, list: to know.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

35

--- PAGE BREAK ---

36

--- PAGE BREAK ---

37

--- PAGE BREAK ---

38

--- PAGE BREAK ---

39

--- PAGE BREAK ---

40

--- PAGE BREAK ---

41

--- PAGE BREAK ---st: to know.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

35

--- PAGE BREAK ---

36

--- PAGE BREAK ---

37

--- PAGE BREAK ---

38

--- PAGE BREAK ---

39

--- PAGE BREAK ---

40

--- PAGE BREAK ---

41

--- PAGE BREAK ---

42
11.   
 Professor Jacques de Mahieu examining.   during the
courseof the excavations,   the foundations of thetempleof
Tacuati

--- PAGE BREAK ---

43

--- PAGE BREAK ---

44

--- PAGE BREAK ---

45

--- PAGE BREAK ---

46

--- PAGE BREAK ---

47

--- PAGE BREAK ---

48

--- PAGE BREAK ---

49

--- PAGE BREAK ---

50

--- PAGE BREAK ---

51

--- PAGE BREAK ---

52

--- PAGE BREAK ---

53

--- PAGE BREAK ---

54

--- PAGE BREAK ---

55

--- PAGE BREAK ---

56

--- PAGE BREAK ---

57

--- PAGE BREAK ---

58

--- PAGE BREAK ---

59

--- PAGE BREAK ---REAK ---

52

--- PAGE BREAK ---

53

--- PAGE BREAK ---

54

--- PAGE BREAK ---

55

--- PAGE BREAK ---

56

--- PAGE BREAK ---

57

--- PAGE BREAK ---

58

--- PAGE BREAK ---

59

--- PAGE BREAK ---

60
inscriptions, or at least 
those that have survived to this day, are engraved. Hence the translation 11  Small writer and iron (point). Here, 'writer' should be 
understood in the primitive and general sense of the term. The whole does not constitute an anthroponymic, but it had the same 
function for those who knew the runic engraver in question. Also in Abrigo del Caballo, a lithoglyph that, like the previous one,
shows a real artistic sense on the part of its author, is composed of two groups of extremely irregular characters which, due to
their presentation and ligatures, almost constitute a cryptogram (photo 21). Professor Hermann Munk gives us the following 
transliteration: ginil gilokal. Ginil is a person's name; gilokal, a nickname. Hence (12)  :Ginií the Curly. Another anthroponym from
11  MALIS: Gothic, mela: letter; meijan: to write; Old Germanic
man; mal: sign, point; modern German, Moler, painter. K.U: diminutive. 
O: Old Norse: og, y (the 9 is missing, possibly due to an oversight by the 
engraver). IZOT: Old German, iserin: iron.
12GI: prefix which, in all Germanic languages, expresses
meeting, sum, integrity. LOK: Old Norse, U>fckr; Old Frisian and Old 
Saxon, lok; Anglo-Saxon loce (pronounced Toke);

--- PAGE BREAK ---iron.
12GI: prefix which, in all Germanic languages, expresses
meeting, sum, integrity. LOK: Old Norse, U>fckr; Old Frisian and Old 
Saxon, lok; Anglo-Saxon loce (pronounced Toke);

--- PAGE BREAK ---

61
same
coat
also
offers
a
appearancesemi-cryptographic
(fig.
50).
such as, by
moreover
more,
many of our modern 
signatures. We read without the slightest difficulty ils, fairy of the woods, in Old German. This is a feminine name that has been
preserved to this day in a slightly modified form: Use. Let us also mention two nicknames:
bliki-f.
the
Brilliant
*
(iig.
51),
whose
prime-
13  At the 
foot of the dolmen, a jegform, very clear despite three ligatures, catches our attention first (fig. 53) ik tulakat. That is 14 : I, 
offspring of a cat. This refers to a woman, since tula is feminine. A name of this kind should come as no surprise. Hysteria has
preserved for us that of Cenn Caith, Cat's Head, Irish prince
Irish
of the
century
i-
''a.
J.
C.
Old German, ioc; loop, curl (of hair). AL: suffix. 13  BLIKIF: Old 
Norse, blikja, to shine; Old German, blie, lightning.
MO: Old Norse, modhr, anger; Old Frisian, Old
Saxon and Anglo-Saxon, mod; Old German, muot: ardy, courage. WEI: 
Old Norse uinr; Old German, win: friend of, lying down.
14IK: Old Norse, ik, I. TULA: Old German, toldo: corolla of a flower. de] 
Old Germanic dul, to sprout, to blossom; Irish, deü, branch. KAT: Old 
Norse, ketta; Old Frisian, fcdtta; Old German, kazza: cat.
. &

--- PAGE BREAK ---: Old German, toldo: corolla of a flower. de] 
Old Germanic dul, to sprout, to blossom; Irish, deü, branch. KAT: Old 
Norse, ketta; Old Frisian, fcdtta; Old German, kazza: cat.
. &

--- PAGE BREAK ---

62
We 
have 
just seen that tulo, here in the masculine form, means "offspring". The u poses a problem that can only be solved if we see it,
somewhat arbitrarily, as an abbreviation or reduction of uin. If this hypothesis is correct, we obtain the following literal meaning:
Giuk, the friend of the offspring. The Offspring, in Scandinavian mythology, is the god Heimdall, "Born of the Earth". We would
thus have: Giuk, the friend of Heimdall. 6 . Some messages and an enigma Let us conclude this sampling of the translated 
inscriptions from Cerro Guazú by reproducing five more of them, four of which represent messages of various kinds, while the 
last one offers astronomers a problem that we assume would not be difficult for them to solve. In a small engraved medallion 
from the Abrigo del
Caballo,
we read
(fig.
56);
A group of signs 
below is too faded to be deciphered. Let us therefore limit ourselves to translating the incomplete phrase 15: New river. Another 
lithoglyph (fig. 57) from Abrigo de los Altares expresses a double demand, part of
the
which
is
escapes us
.
Em-
15ALF: Norse, alf, river. NUI: Old Norse, nuath, nua; Gothic, niugis; 
Old Frisian, me; Old Saxon, niwi; Anglo-Saxon, niwe niowe; Old High 
German, niwi, Middle German, niuwe; Modern Danish, ny 
(pronounced nii): new.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rse, nuath, nua; Gothic, niugis; 
Old Frisian, me; Old Saxon, niwi; Anglo-Saxon, niwe niowe; Old High 
German, niwi, Middle German, niuwe; Modern Danish, ny 
(pronounced nii): new.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

63
piece 
with 
a 
drawing that is not a rune and seems to symbolise a male human being. It reads, in transliteration: uil iltla o fe of ten tilth. Iltla 
means nothing to us. Could it be the name of a rich heiress, or that of an estate? We do not know. There is still some doubt 
about one of the words in the sentence. However, this does not make the general meaning any less understandable (16):The man 
wants to obtain Iltlaa and the cattle of the valley (or: of the forest). What cattle could this be, in that tropical forest where llamas 
could never acclimatise? We will see in the next chapter. In the meantime, let us reproduce an inscription (fig. 58) of a nature-d&l
of a
different
which
shows
that
The Vikings had lost neither 
their fondness for mead nor their sense of humour in South America. Indeed, we read in the Abrigo del Buen Bebedor: laf. ual 
kith nual. We have replaced an illegible letter with a dot. One of the five groups of linked runes in the lithoglyph could not be
transliterated, but this does not affect the translation of the remaining four (17):Good drinking gladdens the cleft. The "cleft" here is 
obviously the mouth... Let us mention one last inscription, found on the base of the dolmen, whose runes are arranged in a 
semicircle around a rising or setting sun, as if they were its rays (fig. 59). To the left of the "horizon line", a large star can be 
seen. Three ligatures do not prevent the text from being transliterated with certainty: elis kuk nas sa. The final s of nas and the 
initial s of sa are confused by haplography, as is the case with the ligature s-k-k-k.
horizon" line, a large star can be seen. 
Three ligatures do not prevent the text from being transliterated with certainty: elis kuk nas sa. The final s of nas and the initial s 
of sa are confused by haplography, as is customary in classical runic epigraphy. Translation 18: The other vagabond
16  UIL: Old Norse, vili; Gothic, wilja; Old Frisian and Anglo-Saxon, willio; 
Old German, willo: to want. O: Old Norse, og: and (the g is missing, as in 
a previous inscription). FE: Old Norse, fe; Gothic, faihu; Old Saxon, fehu; 
Anglo-Saxon, feoh; Old German, feho: cattle. OF: Old Norse, Old Saxon 
and Gothic, af; Anglo-Saxon, of: of. TEN: Old Frisian, dene, below; 
Anglo-Saxon, denn, valley; Old German, tan, forest.
TILTH: Old Frisian, tilia; Old Saxon, tillan: to obtain.
17LAF; Germanic, iap; Anglo-Saxon, tapian: to drink; Norse, l apia: 
Old German, laffan: to lick. UAL: Old Norse, vel, val: Gothic, waila; 
Anglo-Saxon, weí; Old German, wola, wala,
vuela: well. KITH: Old Norse, geta, to obtain; Old German, ir-getzan, to 
make forget; modern German, ergótzen, to entertain, to cheer up. NUAL: 
Old German, hnua, nuoa: cleft.
18ELIS: Old Norse, elja, the other, the competitor; Gothic, nljis; Old 
German, eíi: other. KUK: Old German, geugaron; modern Tyrolean 
dialect, geigein: to wander. ÑAS; Gothic,an, hnua, nuoa: cleft.
18ELIS: Old Norse, elja, the other, the competitor; Gothic, nljis; Old 
German, eíi: other. KUK: Old German, geugaron; modern Tyrolean 
dialect, geigein: to wander. ÑAS; Gothic,

--- PAGE BREAK ---64
sows moisture.

It seems that the "other vagabond" that brings abnormal rain is a large comet, schematically represented next to
the inscription.

If this is indeed the case, astronomers should be able to tell us in which year, from the 11th to the 15th century,
the period of Viking presence in South America, such a meteorological phenomenon took place, catastrophic enough for the 
inhabitants of Cerro Guazú to have deemed it appropriate to leave a written record of the event.

This implies, moreover, a level
of scientific knowledge on the part of the latter, which is also attested to by the map of South America brought to Dieppe around
1250 by the Vikings of Tiahuanacu (5) and reproduced in 1507 by Martin Waídseemüller.

7 .

A place of retreat on the northern 
route The runic complex at Cerro Guazú, of which we have only surveyed a part, clearly shows that the area was frequented by 
the Vikings for a long time: the number of inscriptions, their varying degrees of deterioration and, above all, the superimposition
of some of them, not to mention the walls entirely covered with ornamental engravings — especially harmoniously intertwined 
tree branches — prove this beyond any doubt.

However, we do not see any permanent construction here: neither a temple, as in 
Tacuatí, nor a wall, as in Cerro Cora.

The village must have been located on the plateau, where there is abundant water, but its
houses could only have been made of wood, since nothing remains of them.

Cerro Guazú, therefore, was not a parcha, a post 
station located at a crossroads, like that of Yvytyruzú.

Firstly, because we do not find there the equivalent dej, 'signpost', which
characterises the latter ('-), but above all, as we shall see in Chapter VI, because the road that leads to it is nothing more than a 
dead-end branch of the northern route.Cerro Guazú, therefore, was not a parcha, a post 
station located at a crossroads, like that of Yvytyruzú.

Firstly, because we do not find there the equivalent dej, 'signpost', which
characterises the latter ('-), but above all, as we shall see in Chapter VI, because the road that leads to it is nothing more than a 
dead-end branch of the northern route.

The rock shelters probably served as outposts for the garrison that protected the village,
located in an insecure region, as evidenced by the inscriptions referring to war.

During the long hours on guard duty, the warriors
carved drawings into the soft rock and, those who knew how to write, names, invocations to the gods, messages and even, to 
pass the time, cryptograms similar to those found in Scandinavia and continental Germany.

The small altars seen in one of the 
shelters show that the latter was used—or also used—for religious ceremonies and that sacrifices were offered to the gods 
there, as in Yvytyruzú (2).

We will see later what the purpose of this complex was.

For now, let us simply mention that the 
drawings of animals on the walls of the shelters are of particular importance in the context of our research.

They contribute 
decisively to solving one of the most exciting problems posed by the history of South America.

V Horses, dogs and cattle in 
pre-Columbian America 1 .

Unexpected animals When the Cerro Guazú survey was carried out, we had already known for 
years that the Vikings of Tiahuanacu had frequented Paraguay.

The discovery of runic inscriptions in Amambay provided us with 
new evidence of this — and what evidence!

— but it was not surprising.

The image of the six-legged horse at Odin's Shelter was 
also easy to explain in the context of our previous conclusions, since it was merely a local adaptation of a mythological being
whose form had been preserved in religious iconography, and even in tradition, over the centuries.

All the more so since this 
animal is barely recognisable.The image of the six-legged horse at Odin's Shelter was 
also easy to explain in the context of our previous conclusions, since it was merely a local adaptation of a mythological being
whose form had been preserved in religious iconography, and even in tradition, over the centuries.

All the more so since this 
animal is barely recognisable.

But we were startled to observe, in the series of photos taken by our collaborators at the shelter
that owes its name to it, the drawing of another horse, completely different.

The lithoglyph in question (photo 22) shows us, in
fact, an animal with very pure lines: a work of art, despite the simplicity of the stroke — or, in part, thanks to it.

At first, as we 
mentioned in our press release about our discoveries at Cerro Guazú, the authenticity of the drawing seemed highly 
questionable: its lines are much clearer than those of the surrounding inscriptions, in a tropical region where patina forms very
quickly.

But who, in our time, not to mention in the previous months, could have engraved such an image?

Certainly not one of 
the forest-dwelling Guayakí people who frequent the area, nor the only Paraguayan who lives there, Celestino Rojas, who is full
of respect for his country's cultural heritage.

We doubted very much that the geologist who had discovered the rock shelter had
the necessary artistic talent.

On the contrary, it was quite possible that some barbarian had traced over such a surprising but
barely visible drawing with a sharp point.

This hypothesis proved to be correct.

A photographic enlargement revealed, in fact, 
beneath the contemporary trace, a line as patinated as those of the adjacent lithoglyphs.

A personal examination carried out later
at the site confirmed the age of the primitive drawing.

This is also confirmed by the silhouette of the animal itself, which is very 
different from that of the small Creole horses of the region.--- PAGE BREAK ---

A personal examination carried out later
at the site confirmed the age of the primitive drawing. This is also confirmed by the silhouette of the animal itself, which is very 
different from that of the small Creole horses of the region. We are looking at a horse of a great breed, as evidenced by its noble
bearing and slender legs, whose thinness, a natural consequence of an unfavourable climate, reinforces its elegance. Could we 
identify this breed? Yes, thanks to an anatomical detail that is immediately apparent: an exceptionally small head. This is the
most striking characteristic of the war horses bred by the Scandinavians in the Middle Ages. An example (fig. 60) will show us 
this better than a long explanation. Apart from its thinness, the conformation of the animal depicted in Cerro Guazú is exactly
what one would expect from a Viking. The authenticity of our horse is indirectly supported by the recent drawing, this time 
without superimposition, which appears just below it. This is, in fact, an unfinished and not very accurate sketch of a reproduction
of the dog (photo 23) engraved on the same wall, but difficult to reach, whose patina attests to its age. As it is not possible to 
inflict the same damage on this latter lithoglyph same
treatment
as
the
preceding one,
 ; Old German, naz: moisture. SA: Gothic, saian; Old German, saen; to 
sow.

--- PAGE BREAK ---not possible to 
inflict the same damage on this latter lithoglyph same
treatment
as
the
preceding one,
 ; Old German, naz: moisture. SA: Gothic, saian; Old German, saen; to 
sow.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

65
The barbarian tried to 
copy it but, for one reason or another, gave up immediately: perhaps because his first attempts made him foresee failure. This 
dog is not just any animal. Without the slightest hesitation, every film buff — we conducted several experiments in this regard — 
recognises it as a terrier. It has a compact body, a straight tail and, above all, a large, long head with a rounded skull and square
muzzle, which characterise most varieties of the breed. It would be futile, however, to try to compare it to any of the latter, which 
are of recent origin. But it is important to note that all terriers seem to descend from the old broken-haired terrier of Ireland and 
that all its varieties, historical and contemporary, come from the latter country, Scotland and Wales. Now, we know that the 
South American Vikings came precisely from the British Isles. It is not surprising, then, that they brought with them dogs—great
hunters and fierce fighters, like today's Airedale, which belongs to the breed—that they must have valued very highly. On the 
other hand, as Madeleine Friant Cn) writes about the Canis Ingae, which we will discuss later, "the wild Canis of South America,
with the sub-genera Chrysoción, Cerdoción and Notoción, very different from our wolf [Canis fcanis) lupus L.], differ considerably
in their general appearance from both the Canis Ingae and the domestic dogs of Europe. It is therefore impossible to accept that
the Dog of the Incas comes from South American wild dogs." Nor, even more so, our terrier, which is even more distant and 
clearly belongs to a well-differentiated, typically European breed. We find the Cerro Guazú dog again in a drawing by Fritz 
Berger (fig. 61), who describes it as a tiger, although it is wearing a collar. The animal, of which we can only see its characteristic
head, neck, part of its body and the outline of one of its front legs, is chasing an unidentified mammal, slightly smaller than itself.collar. The animal, of which we can only see its characteristic
head, neck, part of its body and the outline of one of its front legs, is chasing an unidentified mammal, slightly smaller than itself.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

66
Berger
He claims to have discovered it engraved on the ceiling of a "room" whose location, unfortunately, he does not specify, in the 
Cerro Cora region. It should be noted that we have never found a dog wearing a collar in Paraguay outside of cities. It therefore
seems unlikely that this could be a contemporary lithoglyph. If it were, the coincidence with our terrier would border on the 
miraculous. In the Abrigo del Caballo de Cerro Guazú, a third unexpected animal joins the horse and dog we have just 
described. Above and to the right of the inscription in photo 18, we find the silhouette of a bovine animal (fig. 62) that is easily
identifiable b y its or its  
 solid body, 
short legs
short legs and embryonic horns. One aspect of its anatomy, however, does not fail to surprise us: its small head on a neck that is 
swollen at the base and tapers and rises much higher than in the breeds we know today, even in females, whose necks are 
always less solid than those of males. This detail

--- PAGE BREAK ---that is 
swollen at the base and tapers and rises much higher than in the breeds we know today, even in females, whose necks are 
always less solid than those of males. This detail

--- PAGE BREAK ---

67
could make us doubt the species of the animal if we did not find it again in the medieval Bayeux Tapestry (frame 24) which, as 
we all know, illustrates the conquest of England by the Normans, cousins of the Vikings of Tiahuanacu. 2. The dogma of the 
post-Columbian horse Why are we startled by the image of the horse of Cerro Guazú? Because it contributed powerfully to 
destroying one of the dogmas of conformist American studies: that equines were imported into the New World by the post-
Columbian Spanish, as were cattle (except for bison) and poultry (except for turkeys). This exceptionally persistent legend arose
from a misapprehension by the conquistador Juan de Garay, who in 1580 travelled from Asunción to the Río de la Plata with the 
aim of founding a city there, Buenos Aires, on the site of the fort built in 1536 by Pedro de Mendoza and abandoned a few years
later. As they approached their destination, the expedition members were surprised by "the existence of large herds of chucaro 
ponies, descendants of the horses and mares abandoned when the previous settlement was depopulated (12)". Nothing could 
be more implausible than such an origin. Thanks to Ulrico Schmidel (4), who was part of the expedition, we know all the details
of Mendoza's expedition very well. We know, in particular, that the governor and captain general had brought only seventy-two 
horses and mares from Spain. On the other hand, the three hundred sailors and two thousand three hundred and fifty soldiers—
Castilians and Germans—who served under his command experienced months of hunger, to the point that, according to 
Schmidel, they resorted to eating rats and "even their shoes and leather". The chronicler even mentions some cases of 
cannibalism. Of course, they had already devoured numerous horses (fig. 63), killed or wounded in the course of incessant 
fighting with the Indians who besieged the fort, or simply too tempting: all of them, probably, since none reached Asunción when
the final retreat took place. On the other hand, even though a few dozen horses,
males
and
females,
had
managed to
esca-or simply too tempting: all of them, probably, since none reached Asunción when
the final retreat took place. On the other hand, even though a few dozen horses,
males
and
females,
had
managed to
esca-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

68
survive the hunts 
of the indigenous people and reproduce, it would have been very difficult for them to become the "large number of herds" 
mentioned by Garay in forty years. It is even more impossible to attribute this same origin, as so many historians do, to the wild
cattle that abounded in the surroundings of Buenos Aires, since Mendoza "had not shipped cattle on board his ships. However, 
as early as the 16th century, the future capital of Argentina lived off the export of cowhides that the gauchos obtained by 
capturing the animals that populated the pampas by the tens or hundreds of thousands. Everything leads us to believe, then, that
there were already horses and cattle in South America before the arrival of the Spanish. We also have some evidence regarding 
the former from chroniclers of the Conquest era. For example, that of Father Gaspar de Carbajal (13), whom we have already 
quoted in relation to another matter in a previous work (3). The chaplain of Orellana's expedition, which was the first to travel
down the Amazon in 1542, recounts the battle between the Spanish and the Indians led by a dozen "naked" women who were 
"very white and tall". He recounts, with the precision and heaviness of a court clerk, the interrogation of a chieftain, taken 
prisoner during the battle, who had had the opportunity to penetrate the territory of the "women without husbands". Let us 
reproduce a passage from his statement: "He [the Indian] said that in this land, as we understood, there are camels that carry 
loads, and he says that there are other animals, which we did not understand, that are the size of a horse and have the hair of a 
jeme and a cleft pear, and that they are tied up and that there are few of them". The camels in questionther animals, which we did not understand, that are the size of a horse and have the hair of a 
jeme and a cleft pear, and that they are tied up and that there are few of them". The camels in question

--- PAGE BREAK ---69
They were clearly llamas, camelids that are used as pack animals in the Andes.

As for the other animals, they can only be 
horses, despite the discordant detail of the length of their hair, probably due to the difficulties, pointed out by Carbájal, that the 
Spaniards had in understanding their prisoner.

No other animal in America matches the characteristics mentioned by the 
chaplain.

The fact that the latter did not recognise the species from the description given to him, which makes his account more
reliable, is obviously due to the inconceivable nature of the chieftain's statement: there could not have been horses in America
before Columbus...

Another testimony comes from the chronicler Joáo Felipe Betendorf (14), who recounts the two expeditions 
carried out in 1676 and 1679 from San Luis del Marañón, where he himself resided, in the current state of Piauí, Brazil.

At that
time, this territory had not yet been conquered, and only two bandeirantes had arrived, one from São Paulo, Domingos Jorge 
Velho, and the other from Bahia, Domingos Alfonso Sertão, better known by his nickname Mafrense, who had conquered small 
fiefdoms there.

However, in both cases, the explorers heard from the indigenous people about white men who rode on 
horseback across "immense plains" covered with "beautiful meadows" (1-').

Perhaps these were just Portuguese people whom 
history does not remember.

But since we know (3) that there was a significant non-Indian population in the region in the 17th 
century, which must not have been as mixed as it is today and which, in any case, with its still blond hair, must have been 
considered white by the indigenous people, we have the right to wonder if it was not them who were being talked about.Perhaps these were just Portuguese people whom 
history does not remember.

But since we know (3) that there was a significant non-Indian population in the region in the 17th 
century, which must not have been as mixed as it is today and which, in any case, with its still blond hair, must have been 
considered white by the indigenous people, we have the right to wonder if it was not them who were being talked about.

In one 
case, we are told of the Amazons, whom we know (;f) to be the descendants of Viking women who escaped the massacre on the 
Island of the Sun and who are said to have owned animals whose characteristics, with one minor exception, are those of horses; 
in another, white horsemen settled in a region where the Vikings had an important place of worship, one of whose statues is that
of a man on horseback (3), and where their descendants still live today.

We cannot, therefore, fail to ask ourselves the question:
did the Vikings of America have horses?

Let us begin by correcting ourselves.

We said in a previous work (a) that the 
Scandinavian ships that reached Panuco, in the Gulf of Mexico, in 967, had probably been blown there by a storm.

"Culterreux's 
assumption" (19),a friend, an old sea dog, kindly wrote to us.

"Seven ships as unwieldy as drakkars, if they had been blown off 
course by a violent wind, would have scattered without the slightest hope of ever reuniting on the high seas.

On the other hand,
no one sets out on an adventure with several ships: it would be pointlessly multiplying the risks.

Therefore, Ullman's fleet, like
Columbus's later fleet, knew where it was going." All this seems obvious to us now.

The most plausible hypothesis, under these 
conditions, is that the fleet was following the path of a drakkar that had previously been blown by a storm onto the American 
coast.

This is how Leif Eiriksson reached Vinland, which had been sighted unintentionally a few years earlier by Bjarni 
Herjulfsson.The most plausible hypothesis, under these 
conditions, is that the fleet was following the path of a drakkar that had previously been blown by a storm onto the American 
coast.

This is how Leif Eiriksson reached Vinland, which had been sighted unintentionally a few years earlier by Bjarni 
Herjulfsson.

However, it cannot be ruled out that the Vikings knew about the "New World" from the Irish, who already had 
settlements in America in the 10th century ('), or even from the descendants of Scandinavians who had taken refuge there during
the great migration of 1200 BC.

If this were the case, and the reasoning seems convincing, it could only have been an expedition 
of conquest.

It seems, in fact, that we must rule out any immediate intention of colonisation.

For, in the latter case, the drakkars
would have transported "livestock" to Mexico, as did those of Thorfinn Karisefni in the early 11th century, who set out to settle in 
Vinland, and we find no traces or memories of cattle in Central America.

Ullman had therefore set sail with the aim of seizing an
'island', well aware that its population was numerous and combative, since he had taken with him some seven hundred men and 
women, the latter accompanying the warriors, as was the custom, and very capable of wielding the battle axe and javelin.

Under 
these conditions, he had surely taken horses with him, as the Vikings always did when it was not a mere fishing expedition or 
commercial voyage: war horses, thoroughbreds and light horses, like the one at Cerro Guazú.

We now understand better why 
the Men of Tiahuanacu traced, over some 3,000 km, the Peaviru, the "Soft Road" that led from the Altiplano to the Atlantic: the
Indians walked or ran, but the whites had horses.

Had we not already found in Paraguay, in one of the ceramic fragments 
unearthed at Cerro Morotí (:i), a sign very similar to one of the characters on the rongo-rongo of Easter Island, representing a
man on horseback?We now understand better why 
the Men of Tiahuanacu traced, over some 3,000 km, the Peaviru, the "Soft Road" that led from the Altiplano to the Atlantic: the
Indians walked or ran, but the whites had horses.

Had we not already found in Paraguay, in one of the ceramic fragments 
unearthed at Cerro Morotí (:i), a sign very similar to one of the characters on the rongo-rongo of Easter Island, representing a
man on horseback?

Our analysis sheds new light on the cave paintings of indigenous origin in Peru—particularly in Kelkatani, 
near Lake Titicaca—and Argentina, which depict horsemen.

For example, the one in Zapagua, in the Argentine province of 
Jujuy, which a brochure from the Ministry of Tourism defines as an illustration of "the struggle between the aboriginal and the
conqueror" (1), despite the fact that the character on horseback wields a javelin, a weapon that the Spanish did not use at that
time, for the simple reason that all horses were necessarily post-Columbian.

However, Jujuy belonged to the Tiahuanacu empire, 
and one of the Inca Royal Roads crossed a region where the presence of horsemen before the Conquest should come as no 
surprise.

Some ethnologists and archaeologists, without the data that our research has allowed us to establish, dared, 
courageously, to break the taboos of conformist science.

Dick Edgar Ibarra Grasso (17), for example, with regard to lithographs
depicting horsemen discovered by Pedersen in the Patagonian province of Neuquén, does not hesitate to write that "they appear 
to be indisputably pre-Columbian".

To tell the truth, he was already prepared for such a conclusion, as he had identified —and 
reproduced (17)— a piece of Mexican pottery, undoubtedly pre-Hispanic, which also depicts a horseman.

The man's body is 
broken in half, but the animal, despite its overly short legs, originally mounted on wheels, is easy to recognise, and the saddle it 
carries leaves no room for doubt as to its species.--- PAGE BREAK ---

To tell the truth, he was already prepared for such a conclusion, as he had identified —and 
reproduced (17)— a piece of Mexican pottery, undoubtedly pre-Hispanic, which also depicts a horseman. The man's body is 
broken in half, but the animal, despite its overly short legs, originally mounted on wheels, is easy to recognise, and the saddle it 
carries leaves no room for doubt as to its species. With regard to Mexico, in 1896 the French historian Eugène Beauvois 
gathered together the facts and traditions recounted by chroniclers of the Conquest (18), and his essay, which we will simply 
summarise here, leaves little doubt as to the memory that the Aztecs and Mayans had retained of the horse they had once 
known. He recalls that the Indian Tezozomoc (la) and Father Diego Duran (2") recount, in almost identical terms, that 
Moctezuma, when he learned of Juan de Grijalba's landing, "had the Spaniards, their ships, their weapons and their horses 
painted; however, upon examining the images of the latter, he noticed their resemblance to animals depicted in ancient paintings
and called mamaza by the Mexicans." This word is the plural of mazatl, deer, in Nahuatl, from which comes the name castiían 
mazatl, deer of Castile, which the Indians gave to the horse after the Conquest. The emperor had taken particular notice of an 
ancient painting preserved in Xochimilco, in which "knights were seen on tonacamazatl, which are their mounts, like very large 
deer and powerful stags," according to Tezozomoc (li1). Father Duran adds that Moctezuma "was terrified... to see white people 
on horses that were like very large deer, called tonacamazatl" (w). And he was astonished to see the resemblance between the 
Spaniards and the horsemen of old. The chronicler Dávila Padilla (-'') recounts, on the other hand
19  An untranslatable French expression that seafarers use, usually 
jokingly, to refer to country folk.

--- PAGE BREAK ---70
On the other hand, seventeen years before the arrival of the Spanish, that is, in 1502, chalk drawings had been made on the wall
of a steep rock located in Tanazulapa, in the current state of Oaxaca, depicting white men on horseback, dressed in ancient 
clothing and wearing caps, as well as Castilian chickens.

The outdated clothing indicates, as Beauvois rightly notes, that the 
artist had not used Columbus's men as models, who, in 1502, had made some incursions into the coasts of Honduras and 
Panama; but, moreover, he did not have horses on board his ships, as Las Casas expressly states (2a).

In Yucatán, the horse 
was called tzimin.

Beauvois translates the word as "tapir": this confusion is due to the ambiguity of the Castilian word danta or
anta, which applies to both the American pachyderm and the moose.

In fact, he quotes Father Alonso Ponce (23) in a footnote, 
who writes: "There are some tapirs near the Lagartos River, which they call tzimines, and they call horses the same thing, 
because they say they look very similar." Nothing looks less like a horse than a tapir.

On the contrary, the moose is a large deer,
like the tonacamazatí of the Nahuas, and that is what is meant here.

Father Ponce, who visited Mexico from 1584 to 1589, writes
elsewhere: "It is suspected that the indigenous people of Yucatán had knowledge of the horse; in fact, a stone was exhumed 
from the garden of the cloister in Mérida on which a horse's leg was carved, or rather imprinted, in memory of which the friars
had it embedded in a wall of that garden." Other testimonies confirm this suspicion.

In 1861, an American traveller, Stephens 
Salisbury (-'4), saw two life-size horse heads lying on the ground near ruined buildings in Xuyum, near Mérida.Father Ponce, who visited Mexico from 1584 to 1589, writes
elsewhere: "It is suspected that the indigenous people of Yucatán had knowledge of the horse; in fact, a stone was exhumed 
from the garden of the cloister in Mérida on which a horse's leg was carved, or rather imprinted, in memory of which the friars
had it embedded in a wall of that garden." Other testimonies confirm this suspicion.

In 1861, an American traveller, Stephens 
Salisbury (-'4), saw two life-size horse heads lying on the ground near ruined buildings in Xuyum, near Mérida.

And Las Casas 
recounts that in an unspecified region of Guatemala there was "an idol in the shape of a horse's head whose eyes had been 
removed and from whose empty sockets blood seemed to flow perpetually, which, it is said, was a remarkable sight to behold".

3 .

The dog of the Incas We have even more solid evidence, in addition to the terrier of Cerro Guazú, of the existence in pre-
Columbian South America of dogs of recent European origin.

Their breed has survived to this day, and Inca tombs have yielded 
numerous well-preserved mummies of individuals belonging to it, especially in Ancón, on the Peruvian coast, in the province of 
Atacama, now part of Chile, and in north-western Argentina.

We owe to Tschudi the first description of the Inca dog, which he 
classified in 1844 with the name Canis (canis) familiaris L.

Ingae: small head, very pointed muzzle, small, erect triangular ears, 
solid body, short limbs, very long tail curving up towards the head, and thick, coarse, dark reddish coat with blackish waves; an
aggressive animal, even when faced with stronger opponents, but with unpredictable reactions.

However, it was a dog that had 
been crossbred with individuals belonging to European breeds imported by the Spanish.Ingae: small head, very pointed muzzle, small, erect triangular ears, 
solid body, short limbs, very long tail curving up towards the head, and thick, coarse, dark reddish coat with blackish waves; an
aggressive animal, even when faced with stronger opponents, but with unpredictable reactions.

However, it was a dog that had 
been crossbred with individuals belonging to European breeds imported by the Spanish.

The mummies from the Inca period, on 
the other hand, allow us to know exactly the characteristics of the primitive animal, which differs from the current one in that it is 
taller, has a shorter tail and fairly uniform suede-coloured hair.

The study of the Ancón mummies was carried out in 1885 by A.

Nehring, who distinguished three varieties of Canis Ingae: pecuarius (sheepdog), vertagus (herding dog) and molossoid
(bulldog).

At the same time, W.

Reiss and A.

Stübel published a colour drawing of the pecuarius, which we reproduce here 
(photo 25) in black and white.

However, it was not until 1942 that a taxonomic analysis by Madeleine Friant and H.

Reichlen 
provided the solution to the problem of the origin of Canis Ingae.

This analysis covered not only the animal's external 
appearance, but also its anatomical characteristics, based on two mummies, one of them complete, brought back from the 
Atacama Desert in 1905 by the Créqui-Montfort and Sénéchal de la Grange expedition.

After confirming that the animal in 
question — of the pecuarius type — could not possibly be descended from the wild dogs of South America, the authors set about 
establishing its parentage.

They were struck by its anatomical resemblance to the small sheepdogs of Neolithic Europe.

Ruling 
out Canis Gilardoti Hue from Lake Morat in Switzerland, some of whose characteristics are too different, they settled on Canis 
(canis) familiaris L.

palustris Rut., dating from the late Neolithic period (2000 BC) and of which numerous skeletons were 
discovered in Bundsó, on the island of Ais, Denmark.Ruling 
out Canis Gilardoti Hue from Lake Morat in Switzerland, some of whose characteristics are too different, they settled on Canis 
(canis) familiaris L.

palustris Rut., dating from the late Neolithic period (2000 BC) and of which numerous skeletons were 
discovered in Bundsó, on the island of Ais, Denmark.

The anatomical similarities were striking: overall dimensions, narrow 
forehead, high cranial cavity, remarkably wide palate, and short jaw with a well-defined convex lower edge.

For a specialist such
as Madeleine Friant, who belonged to the Laboratory of Comparative Anatomy at the Muséum d'Histoire Naturelle in Paris, there 
was no doubt: the dog of the Incas was necessarily descended from a Scandinavian sheepdog, of the Bundsó type.

No one else 
has ever questioned such a solidly founded opinion.

It remained to be explained how Canis palustris had managed to travel from 
Denmark to South America.

At the time—1950-1965—the publications by M.

Friant and H.

Reichien (2S) (1950) and M.

Friant 
(n,2'-') (1955-1965) lacked the data necessary to do so.

The latter, however, formulated a hypothesis that came as close to the
truth as possible: "everything suggests that the dogs of the Vikings, about which we have no details, were the descendants of the
Neolithic dogs of Scandinavia, especially those of Bundsó.

At the beginning of the 11th century, when the victorious Indians took
considerable booty from the Vikings, they surely seized dogs, which they took with them on their nomadic journey to South 
America.

And it is the dogs of the Vikings that we find again, under the name of 'dogs of the Incas', before the arrival of the
Spanish at the end of the 15th century." Expressed in this way, based on what was known in the first half of our century about 
the colonisation of America by the Vikings, this hypothesis is rather implausible.At the beginning of the 11th century, when the victorious Indians took
considerable booty from the Vikings, they surely seized dogs, which they took with them on their nomadic journey to South 
America.

And it is the dogs of the Vikings that we find again, under the name of 'dogs of the Incas', before the arrival of the
Spanish at the end of the 15th century." Expressed in this way, based on what was known in the first half of our century about 
the colonisation of America by the Vikings, this hypothesis is rather implausible.

First of all, there is no evidence that the 
Norwegian Vikings who founded the settlements in Vinland possessed animals similar to the 'bog dog' of Bundsó.

Furthermore, it 
is unlikely that the Algonquians of present-day New England, with whom Leif Eiriksson and his brothers had relations, sometimes
friendly and sometimes violent, at the beginning of the 11th century, and the descendants of the first colonisers for several 
centuries, ever had the slightest contact with South America.

And it is somewhat unreasonable to assume, without even a shred 
of evidence, that the Viking dog passed from tribe to tribe to Mexico and then to Panama, from where the rafts of the Inca 
merchant fleet could have taken it to Peru.

For those of us who know that Danish Vikings had settled in Tiahuanacu, the 
explanation for the presence in South America of a descendant of Bundsó's dog is obvious.

What would be surprising is if Ullman
had not taken dogs with him when he set out on his expedition or if his successor, Heimiap, had abandoned them, while 
struggling to load horses onto his umiakes as he set sail again on the Pacific.

The dog of the Incas is indeed descended from the
Danish Canis palustris, as Madeleine Friant conclusively established, but it is natural that it arrived in Peru with the Vikings of 
Schieswig, like the Amambay terrier.

4 .--- PAGE BREAK ---

The dog of the Incas is indeed descended from the
Danish Canis palustris, as Madeleine Friant conclusively established, but it is natural that it arrived in Peru with the Vikings of 
Schieswig, like the Amambay terrier. 4 . The horse and the bull of Tiahuanacu In the Altiplano, the Spanish found neither 
cattle nor horses, and the indigenous people, judging by the chronicles, had not even the faintest memory of these animals. We 
even believe, although the interpretation of their feelings is very subject to caution, that Atahuallpa's warriors were frightened by 
the horsemen, whom they took to be beings of an unknown species, half-men, half-beasts. From this we must conclude that the 
horses brought by the Vikings had disappeared from the empire of Tiahuanacu. These animals of Nordic origin had probably 
degenerated.

--- PAGE BREAK ---71
in the Altiplano.

There must have been very few left in 1290, at the time of the final defeat of the Island of the Sun (').

It can be 
assumed that some of them were killed by the aggressors and the rest were used to flee by the survivors, including the women 
who would eventually become the Amazons (3) and whose descendants still seemed to have some at the beginning of the 16th 
century.

We would have to stop our analysis here if, at the end of the last century and in the early years of this one, some pieces
of a very particular type of weaving had not been discovered in Inca and pre-Inca graves on the Island of the Sun and the Island
of the Moon (Koati), both located on Lake Titicaca, some pieces of fabric of a very particular type, most of which, found by the
American archaeologist Adolph Bandelier, belong to the collections of various museums in the United States.

The very fine wool 
threads that make up the weft go around the cotton threads of the warp.

The motifs represented — flowers, animals, characters, 
Tiahuanaco signs and symbols — appear identical on both sides of the fabric.

This is a very sophisticated technique, long lost at
the time of the Conquest.

One of these pieces is of particular importance to us.

It was discovered in 1904, unfortunately by an
unknown person, in a tomb on the Isla de la Luna that was "untouched and undoubtedly pre-colonial," according to Arthur 
Posnansky, to whom we owe the magnificent colour reproduction that illustrates, outside the text, an unobtainable quarto 
brochure (3]J) 123.

The author is not always reliable.

But the authenticity of what appears to be a piece of unku (a sleeveless
shirt worn before the Conquest) does not seem debatable and, moreover, is only disputed on the basis of a priori arguments.

Its
workmanship would be sufficient to date it.

The unku of Koatí —let us call the piece of fabric in question that, for simplicity's
sake— measures 55 cm long by 47 cm high.Its
workmanship would be sufficient to date it.

The unku of Koatí —let us call the piece of fabric in question that, for simplicity's
sake— measures 55 cm long by 47 cm high.

It is composed of nine strips of varying widths.

From top to bottom, these are: a 
narrow strip with a yellow background dotted with cantuta flowers—a small carnation related to the European carnation—among 
baskets of fruit, roosters, and other birds; a wider strip with a brown background bearing three lines of Tiahuanaco signs and 
symbols; a large stripe with a red background, whose motifs we will describe later; a stripe with a brown background, with three
lines of Tiahuanaco signs and symbols; a narrow stripe with a blue background, with birds, monkeys and baskets or vases of 
flowers.

Everything is then repeated in reverse order, except that the final yellow strip contains, in addition to the motifs of the 
first, baskets of cantuta flowers.

The two main bands are identical in composition, but some of their motifs offer slight variations:
for example, an animal looking to the right in one and to the left in the other.

This repetition allows us to study all the figures,
even though some of them, in one band or the other, are damaged.

The central theme of the unku is a parody of the temptation 
of Adam and Eve.

At the foot of a tree, a naked man and woman are seen offering fruit...

to a monkey.

The biblical serpent is 
also present, coiled around another tree: two men, an Indian and a European, are attacking it, one with a bow, the other with a
sword.

A crowned mermaid, with a fish tail as it should be, plays the guitar.

An Indian woman, on her knees, makes a libation 
before a kind of fountain from which emerges a two-headed bird, from whose beak lightning emerges.

Below this motif, an Indian 
standing in profile appears, in the lower band, to be holding a black dog covered with a small yellow blanket by a leash.An Indian woman, on her knees, makes a libation 
before a kind of fountain from which emerges a two-headed bird, from whose beak lightning emerges.

Below this motif, an Indian 
standing in profile appears, in the lower band, to be holding a black dog covered with a small yellow blanket by a leash.

In both
bands, the various motifs, including the secondary ones that we have not mentioned—or not yet—are repeated, starting from the 
centre, to the right and left, with some variations and omissions.

Among the main motifs, we see, very well represented, 
sometimes with humour (some monkeys have human faces), the most diverse animals: birds of all kinds, monkeys, foxes, deer, 
fallow deer, rabbits and felines.

Next to the central fountain are two quadrupeds: one on the left, which looks a bit like a sheep,
but with a white head and legs and the rest of its body grey; the other on the right, which vaguely resembles an Asian camel, 
although the second hump is located on the rump.

Finally, in each strip, there is a white horse (twice) and a bovine animal of the
same colour.

It goes without saying that no Christian would ever have had the idea, or the audacity, to replace the serpent with a 
monkey to personify the Devil and that, if a pagan had dared to do so after the Conquest—which already excludes the technique 
of weaving—he would have had certain difficulties with the Holy Inquisition.

Hence, the author of the "cartoon" was a pre-
Columbian pagan who had heard the myth of the Garden of Eden and illustrated it in his own way, probably because he found it 
highly implausible that a serpent could physically offer fruit to anyone.

The reptile is there, but it is kept at bay by a European and 
an Indian, symbolising the alliance of the races against the Devil.Hence, the author of the "cartoon" was a pre-
Columbian pagan who had heard the myth of the Garden of Eden and illustrated it in his own way, probably because he found it 
highly implausible that a serpent could physically offer fruit to anyone.

The reptile is there, but it is kept at bay by a European and 
an Indian, symbolising the alliance of the races against the Devil.

To this unorthodox conception of the Temptation, the artist
added two more characters in keeping with his own beliefs: the mermaid (lauraku, in Aymara, the language of the Indians of 
Titicaca), wife of the god Ekabo, who sings credibly of the unexpected victory of Good over Evil; and the Indian woman who 
makes a libation to the two-headed bird —the tarapaka of the indigenous people— perhaps as a token of gratitude.

It should be 
noted that the mermaid is of European origin, but this did not prevent her from appearing in the mythology of Tiahuanacu.

As for
the guitar played by our unku, the Vikings were familiar with it, since they traded assiduously with the Arabs who imported it to
Spain in the 11th century and, on the other hand, supplied mercenaries to the emperors of Byzantium, who were in constant war 
with the Muslims.

That leaves the animals.

The American species are here in their place and therefore pose no problem.

The 
sheep and the camel — if they are indeed a sheep and a camel — are barely recognisable.

The artist could only represent them 
in this way on the basis of a verbal description or, at best, a rough drawing.

After the Conquest, he would have seen sheep and
the Spanish would have described the dromedary to him, not the Asian two-humped camel, which the Vikings, on the other 
hand, knew very well, since one of the Swedes' routes through Russia ran down the Volga to the Caspian Sea.

Perhaps, 
moreover, the 'camel' in our unku is nothing more than a vicuña with overly short legs, that is to say, one of the camelids of the
Altiplano.After the Conquest, he would have seen sheep and
the Spanish would have described the dromedary to him, not the Asian two-humped camel, which the Vikings, on the other 
hand, knew very well, since one of the Swedes' routes through Russia ran down the Volga to the Caspian Sea.

Perhaps, 
moreover, the 'camel' in our unku is nothing more than a vicuña with overly short legs, that is to say, one of the camelids of the
Altiplano.

There is no doubt, however, about the perfectly drawn horse (photo 26), especially since it is wearing a saddle blanket.

It is a powerful animal, like those used in the Middle Ages not only as beasts of burden and draught animals, but also as war 
horses, the only ones capable of bearing the weight of a knight and his armour.

Even today, we find its type in the Percheron of
Normandy, the Bouicnnais and the Norwegian Fjording, for example.

Is it a coincidence that the latter has white hair, like the 
horse of the unku'?

The bovine animal depicted on the same piece of fabric (photo 27) also leaves no room for doubt.

The 
general shape of the body, the prominent bones of the haunches, the long, feathery tail and the horns all match.

The two images
we have of it vary somewhat.

In the upper strip, the animal, seen from the side, has its head bowed, facing the observer, and an
angry expression.

In the lower band, on the contrary, it has its head held high and appears placid.

The relative thinness of the
body, the absence of udders and the aggressive appearance shown in the upper image allow us, without much risk of error, to 
see it as a bull and not a cow, which is otherwise irrelevant to the problem at hand.

What interests us, in fact, is the origin of the 
animal.

In terms of its silhouette and colour, it has nothing in common with the bison, which, moreover, only exists in North 
America.

Is it possible to take our analysis further?

Yes, thanks to a detail of the utmost importance: the short, flat face of our 
bull.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Is it possible to take our analysis further? Yes, thanks to a detail of the utmost importance: the short, flat face of our 
bull. This is a characteristic exclusive to the

--- PAGE BREAK ---72
Germanic cattle breed, about which one specialist (31) writes: "The Germanic type differs from that of the Netherlands in the 
configuration of the face: the Germanic type has a short face rather than an elongated one.

The supra-nasal bones are flattened,
the profile slightly concave, and the muzzle broad.

Below the eye there is a fairly deep depression, which is particularly 
noticeable when the head is viewed from the front.

These cattle breeds have a tendency to accidentally produce individuals with
'bulldog heads'.

The Unku bull fits this description very closely, and even the latter characteristic is occasionally noticeable in this 
breed.

It differs from the Norman breed in only two respects: its horns are straight, rather than horizontally curved and pointing
forward; its coat is white, rather than yellow and pale red with extensive white speckles.

However, these current peculiarities may 
be nothing more than variations obtained by breeders over the last few centuries.

This is certainly the case if we consider, on the 
one hand, that the native Norwegian Telemarken breed, which still exists, has a white back and belly and straight horns and, on
the other hand, that the cow in the Bayeux Tapestry (Cfoío 24) has exactly the same 'half-moon' horns as our bull.

The reference
to the Telemarken breed is not arbitrary.

In fact, in the aforementioned work, we read the following about the Germanic type: 
"Samson has placed the cradle of this breed in the Germanic regions of the Baltic, and from there it was introduced into the 
regions of Central Europe by the Norman invasions.

Today, these cattle are only found in their pure form in Normandy.

However, 
in Germany, the red Holstein breed is included within the Germanic type, although it has been influenced by the Dutch type, 
which can be seen mainly in the shape
from the head...

M.

Mallévre believes that today only Normandy cattle can be considered a pure breed.M.

Mallévre believes that today only Normandy cattle can be considered a pure breed.

This confirms what we 
already knew about the Vikings' custom of transporting livestock on board their ships when they went to settle in a foreign 
country.

They did so from Europe to America and from Scandinavia to Normandy.

It is logical, then, that the bull from Unku and 
the cow from Cerro Guazú belong to the breed they raised.

Conversely, the fact that these latter cases involve Germanic-type 
cattle firmly establishes that their presence is due to the Vikings of Tiahuanacu, whether they transported them themselves or 
commissioned the Normans to do so after contact was re-established in 1250.

5 .

Normans in Tiahuanacu Let us now 
consider the characters.

The naked man and woman have nothing to teach us.

The Indian woman is dressed as the indigenous 
women of the Altiplano still are.

The two Indians wear the traditional unku, very short on the archer, which is logical.

He wears
the borla, a ribbon that covers the forehead and holds the hair in place; the other wears a round hat.

The bow of the first, very 
poorly drawn, is small: it is the Norman double-curved bow (') used by the civilised peoples of Mexico and Peru, unlike the 
primitive Indians who used, and still use, the large two-metre bow with a single curve, the Amazonian bow.

The European (photo 
28) wears yellowish breeches and, over a black shirt, a matching sleeveless jacket with flared skirts and a white collar that rises
to the chin.

In two of the figures, he is bareheaded; in the other two, he wears a round hat identical to that of the Indian with the 
dog.

A costume from the same period, although quite different, appears on a keru found on the Copacabana peninsula, on the 
shores of Lake Titicaca and opposite the islands of the Sun and the Moon.

Keru are drinking vessels shaped like a cup with a 
slightly open top.--- PAGE BREAK ---

A costume from the same period, although quite different, appears on a keru found on the Copacabana peninsula, on the 
shores of Lake Titicaca and opposite the islands of the Sun and the Moon. Keru are drinking vessels shaped like a cup with a 
slightly open top. The ones we are interested in—there are about three hundred of them—are made of wood and decorated with 
polychrome designs using a very particular technique. The artist carved his designs deeply into the wood and then filled the 
hollows with resins—mainly—and other substances of different colours. This resulted in a kind of cloisonné sui generis. At the 
time of the Conquest, this technique had not been completely forgotten, but it was in decline and did not take long to disappear. However, it cannot be ruled out that some of the keru that have been preserved were made after the arrival of the Spanish. This
is certainly not the case with the one whose motifs we reproduce (fig. 64). In it, we see a European man and an Indian woman, 
who has two keru in her hands, seemingly inviting him to toast. The man is wearing a red jacket with hanging tails and a yellow
cape. A collar, similar to that of the European in the unku, covers his throat. The brim of his hat, raised at the forehead, descends
very low at the back. This is a costume quite different from those worn in the 16th century or later. osnansky (•'"') rightly points out that we are woefully uninformed about the dress of medieval burghers. The painters, engravers,
miniaturists, and sculptors of the period show us almost nothing of

--- PAGE BREAK ---ightly points out that we are woefully uninformed about the dress of medieval burghers. The painters, engravers,
miniaturists, and sculptors of the period show us almost nothing of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

73
effect, but rather to high-ranking figures and, sometimes, to peasants. Otherwise, only in castles did fashion bring about 
noticeable changes from generation to generation. In cities, merchants and artisans wore a kind of "sleeved tunic" that "reached
to the middle of the thigh" and "breeches that were tied above the knee" (:!•;). A cloak was often added to the ensemble. A few
illustrations, some of which can be seen in the work just mentioned, show us that among the wealthy bourgeoisie, the coat took 
on the appearance of a suit with skirts, sometimes sleeveless. It is therefore somewhat bold to write, as Posnansky does, that 
the European in the unku is dressed like a 14th-century Venetian and the character in the keru like an Italian, Spanish or 
Portuguese merchant from the 12th or 13th century. Let us simply say that breeches, doublets and capes were garments 
commonly worn by the medieval bourgeoisie. One detail allows us to rule out the southern origin of the costumes in question. 
What the keru character wears on his head is not, in fact, the round Indian hat worn by the European in the unku, but a sueste, a 
waterproof sea hat, raised at the front to resist the wind and sloping down at the back so that rainwater and splashes from the
waves do not penetrate the neck. Fishermen on the Atlantic coast, from Norway to Brittany, still use it today. It probably comes
from the Vikings: a medieval illustration from the Prose Edda shows the god Thor wearing a sea hat (photo 29) that closely 
resembles both the keru's sueste and its contemporary version, despite being shorter at the back. Everything leads us to believe,
therefore, that the Europeans depicted in their textiles and vessels by artists of the Inca period were Normans. Were they sailors
who had accompanied Father Gnupa around 1250 (•J), or merchants who later frequented the Atlantic coast of South America, 
where the Vikings of Tiahuanacu had bases (;;)? We will see in the next chapter. Neither the unku nor the keru we have just 
discussed can therefore be attributed to Spanish influence. Nor can the vase in fig. 65, where swastikas appear alongside 
condor heads in the purest Tiahuanaco style, or the one in fig. '66, in which we see a kind of medieval knight facing a fantastic
animal that is found in Peruvian ceramics and is reminiscent of the wolf Fénrir in Scandinavian iconography, even though, as we
know, wolves are absent from South American fauna. The man is clad in padded cotton armour. He wears a kind of metal helmet 
with a visor — raised — which, in Western Europe, would date from around 1350. In his left hand, he holds
a
shield
of
a
type
of
all
unknown;
in
thedded cotton armour. He wears a kind of metal helmet 
with a visor — raised — which, in Western Europe, would date from around 1350. In his left hand, he holds
a
shield
of
a
type
of
all
unknown;
in
the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

74

--- PAGE BREAK ---helmet 
with a visor — raised — which, in Western Europe, would date from around 1350. In his left hand, he holds
a
shield
of
a
type
of
all
unknown;
in
the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

74

--- PAGE BREAK ---

75
On the right, a sword, no less strange, resembling an enormous kitchen knife. Judging by his clothing, this warrior is neither 
Spanish nor Indian. Nor is he a man-at-arms from the European Middle Ages. We can only see in him the fruit of a historical 
reconstruction, based on traditions distorted by time. The artist tried to illustrate one of those countless medieval legends that
describe the combat of a knight with a fantastic animal, the incarnation or instrument of the Devil. But, although he had 
references to the Norman men-at-arms who, in the second half of the 12th century, had arrived in Tiahuanacu with Father Gnupa 
or on subsequent voyages, he was unaware of the details of their clothing and armament. Except that, at that time, the 
Europeans had adapted to the environment and, in particular, had replaced their metal armour, which was too heavy for the 
rarefied atmosphere of the Altiplano, with cotton armour, sufficient to protect them from the indigenous arrows. In any case, it is 
significant that the knight in question bears Tiahuanaco symbols in the shape of an S on his arm—the runic solewu symbolising 
the Sun and Victory—and that an uruz—uro—is painted on the tree behind which the wolf takes shelter, a Nordic symbol of virile 
strength. Let us not forget that, while the Normans who arrived in South America around 1250 were Christians, the Vikings of 
Tiahuanacu had retained their ancestral beliefs, and it was from the contact between the two faiths that the religious syncretism
of the Incas was born. Another keru (fig. 67), found, like the previous ones, in Copacabana, is even stranger. Its cloisonné band
shows us, above cantuta flowers and a row of Tiahuanaco signs, a great lord of the Inca period—perhaps the emperor himself—
carried in a sedan chairin Copacabana, is even stranger. Its cloisonné band
shows us, above cantuta flowers and a row of Tiahuanaco signs, a great lord of the Inca period—perhaps the emperor himself—
carried in a sedan chair

--- PAGE BREAK ---

76
by high dignitaries of the empire and preceded by a herald of equally high rank. In front of him, facing him, an Inca holds a 
halberd in his left hand and swings a sling with his right. Two severed, bloody heads lie on the ground to the right on a white
canvas.
The second part of the keru's decoration features, as its main motif, a coat of arms surmounted by a metal breastplate—the 
articulated joints are clearly visible—of the type used in Western Europe from the 13th century onwards, whose helmet is 
enhanced by a double red crest and whose arm wields a sword. In terms of its shape, this coat of arms is not Spanish. It could 
be French if its lower edge were not reduced to two straight lines at an angle. It is divided into two fields. At the top, in black, is a 
korikenke, the sacred bird of the Inca emperors, with outstretched wings and open legs, in the manner of the eagles of European
heraldry, flanked by two stylised trees; at the bottom are two upright snakes and a jaguar topped by an unidentified geometric 
figure. Two korikenke with folded wings hold the shield, while two others, in flight, reminiscent of Odin's two ravens (fig. 68), carry 
various imperial attributes in their beaks. At the foot of the
 shield,
 two
 standard-bearers
 incas
 are
 located
in
 magical circles,
 similar to

--- PAGE BREAK ---'s two ravens (fig. 68), carry 
various imperial attributes in their beaks. At the foot of the
 shield,
 two
 standard-bearers
 incas
 are
 located
in
 magical circles,
 similar to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

77
whom 
the 
Vikings considered protectors. Among them were three cantuta flowers. This shield is not the only one of its kind that we know 
of. The mestizo chronicler—so to speak—Phelipe Guarnan Poma de Ayala, grandson of Emperor Tupak Yupanki on his 
mother's side, reproduces, among the five hundred drawings, tracings made with a goose quill, which illustrate his work
 (:1:;)
sobre
 e]
 imperio
 de
 los
 incas,
 dos
 blasones
 (iig.
 69)
 donde
 encon-
trames, in the 
"one, e] korikenke, the jaguar, the snakes, the tree and a tassel roa!, and, in the other, a Sun strangely endowed with whiskers,
the moon, a wandering Sun resembling those of Cerro Guazú, and the image of the "idol" of Pakari Tampu, the village from 
which Manko Kápak had set out to reconquer the empire and where his father, fifty years earlier, had welcomed P. Gnupa ('2). In
both cases, the shield is French. Let us return to our 'keru. Is it reasonable to attribute a post-Columbian origin to it? Certainly
not. No Indian would have dared, the day after the Conquest, to challenge his conquerors by reproducing, on an everyday 
utensil, scenes showing the emperor in all his glory and, even less so, by attributing to him a coat of arms, characteristic of the 
Spanish nobility. Strictly speaking, however, one could accept the idea that an indigenous artist might have done so at the 
request of a conquistador interested in collecting works of art of typically Inca inspiration: but there was certainly no shortage of 
authentic pieces, and the Spanish were bent on destroying them. Furthermore, the keru in question is

--- PAGE BREAK ---78
found in the excavations of Copacabana, on the shores of Lake Titicaca, which the Castilians only discovered very late and 
where they never settled: therefore, it had belonged to an indigenous person.

Let us admit, however, for a moment, that the coat
of arms responded to the engraver's intention to 'ennoble' the Incas by adapting the coat of arms worn by the Spanish lords, and
this for his own satisfaction.

It must be acknowledged that it was a strange idea to assimilate their divine emperors to the 
enemies who were destroying the empire with fire and sword.

But, in this hypothesis, which coat of arms would our artist have 
copied?

Obviously, the Spanish one with a rounded tip, and not the French one, which no conquistador carried.

And he would 
not have placed a helmet seen in profile on top of it, when Castilian arms show theirs from the front, and even less so a half-
armour with a sword brandished, which is only found in Germanic countries.

As for the coats of arms of Poma de Avala, it is 
even more inconceivable, if possible, that the chronicler would have Hispanicised images that he only drew to preserve the 
traditions of his race, without publishing them.

And there is no need to fear any confusion on his part: he was a man of 
exceptional culture.

If, moreover, he had distorted reality for one reason or another, it would be the Spanish coat of arms that we 
would find here as well.

Everything leads us to believe, then, that our kerú is authentically pre-Hispanic and that the Incas carried
coats of arms, replacing our European figures, but on a French shield, with their own symbols.

Where could such knowledge 
have come from, not only of this coat of arms, but also of the European armour that the Spanish did not use in America?

Obviously, from the Normans, as we shall see in the next chapter.Where could such knowledge 
have come from, not only of this coat of arms, but also of the European armour that the Spanish did not use in America?

Obviously, from the Normans, as we shall see in the next chapter.

But the knight, in his armour, could only fight and even move
around on horseback, and to support the 200 kilos he weighed, with the metal shell of his mount, he needed a powerful animal, 
like the one depicted on the unku of the Island of the Moon.

The pre-Columbian authenticity of the latter thus seems to be 
confirmed.

6 .

The end of a legend The engraved horse, dog and cow that we discovered among the runic inscriptions of 
Cerro Guazú definitively resolve the problem of the presence of animals belonging to European species in Central and South 
America.

There was already solid evidence of this, of course, particularly the Mexican statuette of a horseman, unfortunately 
incomplete, and the mummies of Canes Ingae, which in their anatomy closely resemble the dog of Bundsó.

Other evidence was 
less convincing, such as the horse and bull from Isla de la Luna, because although everything pointed to the pre-Columbian 
origin of the piece of fabric in question, some people nevertheless denied it.

It is almost impossible to do so today, since the
doubt arose precisely from the representation of animals "that could not have existed in America before Columbus", even 
though, on the contrary, they did exist, as we have just demonstrated.

Under these circumstances, it is not surprising that some
pre-Columbian keru, whose dating is thus confirmed, bear swastikas, a typically Aryan symbol that the Scandinavians used 
extensively, European characters, mermaids or coats of arms.

139 The drawings at Cerro Guazú give us even more information.

Not only do they depict a horse, a dog and a cow, but also a Viking horse, an Irish dog and a Norman cow, which allows us to 
pinpoint the chronology of the arrival of these animals in America.139 The drawings at Cerro Guazú give us even more information.

Not only do they depict a horse, a dog and a cow, but also a Viking horse, an Irish dog and a Norman cow, which allows us to 
pinpoint the chronology of the arrival of these animals in America.

When they set out on expeditions of plunder or conquest, the
Vikings used to take with them war horses that matched the characteristics of the drawings discovered at Cerro Guazú.

There 
were undoubtedly some on board Ullman's drakkars, and it is not surprising that their memory was preserved in Mexico until the 
arrival of the Spanish.

Only their memory, for the Vikings certainly did not abandon them when they re-embarked.

These animals 
must have been extremely useful for the journey through Venezuela and Colombia, and although their subsequent transport 
aboard wolf-skin umiakes must have posed a serious problem, they reached Tiahuanacu and were then used for over two 
hundred years to travel the Psaviru, the "Soft Road" that led to the Atlantic via Paraguay, before being used for the escape of the 
defeated whites on the Island of the Sun.

This is why the Incas did not have horses, while some specimens still survived in the
Amazon in the 17th century and, perhaps, in Piaui a hundred years later, and entire herds, returned to the wild, populated the 
pampas south of Paraguay, at the time of the second founding of Buenos Aires by Juan de Garay.

Our terrier, which belongs to 
a typically Irish breed, confirms what philology had already taught us about Ullman's starting point: the Danish colonies in the
British Isles.

On the contrary, this is not where the cattle whose traces we find in South America came from: if Ullman had 
brought them with him from Ireland or the English Danelaw, they would have belonged to an Irish breed (Kerry, Ayr, Bretya) or 
an English breed (Shorthorn) of the Dutch type.

However, at Cerro Guazú, we find the image of a Norman cow, similar to the one 
depicted on the Bayeux Tapestry.On the contrary, this is not where the cattle whose traces we find in South America came from: if Ullman had 
brought them with him from Ireland or the English Danelaw, they would have belonged to an Irish breed (Kerry, Ayr, Bretya) or 
an English breed (Shorthorn) of the Dutch type.

However, at Cerro Guazú, we find the image of a Norman cow, similar to the one 
depicted on the Bayeux Tapestry.

It is therefore necessary that the cattle were brought later from Normandy, either during the 
return voyage of the ship or ships with which the Vikings of Tiahuanacu re-established contact with Europe around 1250 and 
which, as we know (1,''1), tccaron to the port of Dieppe, or by the Norman ships that soon afterwards established permanent 
trade with South America (:1).

This is confirmed by the figures on the unku of Isla de la Luna — a European in somewhat Indian-
style clothing, a Norman bull and a heavy horse —, the figure of the sailor, covered with a sueste, on the keru of Copacabana, 
and others.

Incidentally, we now know why Mexicans at the time of the Conquest remembered horses and not cattle.

Nothing 
remains of the legend created by the Spanish, probably in good faith, regarding the post-Columbian origin of European animals 
in America.

And this is not one of the least important contributions of our research.

VI The marks of the Southeast 1 .

The 
strange Lansquenete On 6 January 1536, fourteen ships—some say twelve—under the flag of Castile entered the Río de la 
Plata.

It was a private expedition, like all those carried out by the Spanish in the West Indies.

Under the terms of the capitulation
signed between the crown a n d him, its leader, Don Pedro de Mendoza, had received authorisation from Charles V to discover 
and populate the lands adjacent to the enormous river reached twenty years earlier by Juan Díaz de Solís, who was to sail "as 
far as the Pacific".

He undertook to cover all the expenses of the expedition.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Under the terms of the capitulation
signed between the crown a n d him, its leader, Don Pedro de Mendoza, had received authorisation from Charles V to discover 
and populate the lands adjacent to the enormous river reached twenty years earlier by Juan Díaz de Solís, who was to sail "as 
far as the Pacific". He undertook to cover all the expenses of the expedition. In return, the Emperor conferred on him the title of 
adelantado and captain general and recognised his right to retain four-fifths of any booty he might gather, not to mention various
commercial privileges. Mendoza had a considerable fortune at his disposal, which, according to malicious gossip, came largely 
from the sacking of Rome. Perhaps it was not enough, after all, to fully finance such a costly enterprise. Or perhaps this career
officer had doubts about his own ability in the commercial field. The fact is that he had partnered with Jacobo Welser and 
Sebastián Neithardt or Neudhart, bankers from Nuremberg, one of whose ships, loaded with trade goods, was part of the fleet. This is why, among the three hundred sailors and two thousand three hundred and fifty soldiers who had embarked in Seville, 
there were one hundred and fifty Germans and Dutchmen. We owe the account of the adventure to one of them (l). Ulrich 
Schmidel has often been portrayed as a mere mercenary. Nothing could be less plausible. He was a soldier, to be sure, and he 
took pride in it, as did any free man of the time. But a simple mercenary would never have been able to leave us such precise 
memoirs as those in which he describes, in a lively and cheerful style but devoid, whatever anyone may say, of any naivety, his
eighteen years of exploration and combat. Not only could Schmidel read and

--- PAGE BREAK ---79
He could write, which must have been exceptional among the mercenaries of the 16th century, and he expressed himself in 
correct German, still legible today despite its archaisms, rather than in the Bavarian dialect of his native country.

Furthermore,
his account shows that, although he had not learned a word of Spanish, he had at least a basic knowledge of Italian and French 
— he systematically writes Nostra Signara d'Assumption instead of Nuestra Señora de la Asunción — and a good knowledge of 
Latin, since he uses a word that is not common in this language to refer to the Amazons (Amazon, is) and declines it correctly 
according to the German preposition that precedes it: zu den Amazonibus, in the dative, for example.

Everything leads us to 
believe, in accordance with Hans-Jürgen Wóhier's hypothesis ( :''1), that our "landsknecht" was, in reality, an agent that the 
expedition's commanders had slipped in among the soldiers supplied to Mendoza.

Having arrived in America aboard a Welser 
ship, he would return to Europe, thanks to the intervention of his partner, Neithardt or Neudhart, and the Fugger representative in 
Seville, Christoff Kaiser, on a ship belonging to a certain Johann von Hielst, an agent of the Erasmus Schetz firm in Lisbon, who,
at the request of the latter's representative in San Vicente, lavished on him, considerable marks of respect that were not 
accorded to a soldier of fortune.

And Schmidel, upon arriving in Seville, was received by "the counsellors of His Imperial 
Majesty," to whom he delivered a letter from Domingo de Irala, governor of the provinces of the Río de la Plata, and, if we are to 
believe it, a personal report.

This analysis of the chronicler's actual functions is of more than anecdotal interest.

Schmidel 
travelled up the Paraná with the remnants of Mendoza's troops, except for the handful of men who remained in Buenos Aires.

In 
Paraguay, he took part in the four expeditions launched from Asunción towards Peru.Schmidel 
travelled up the Paraná with the remnants of Mendoza's troops, except for the handful of men who remained in Buenos Aires.

In 
Paraguay, he took part in the four expeditions launched from Asunción towards Peru.

And, although throughout his account he 
expresses a soldier's concerns about supplies and indigenous women, he also gives us precise information about the routes 
taken, the distances travelled and the local place names.

It is important for us to know that this information comes from a man of 
some culture and not from a simple mercenary.

Reading Schmidel's little book forces us to rectify everything that has been 
written about the itineraries followed by the expeditions of Juan de Ayolas, Alvar Nuñez Cabeza de Vaca and Domingo de Irala, 
and, previously, by Alejo García.

Historians have almost limited themselves, on this point, to repeating the account left to us by 
Ruy Díaz de Guzmán (3''), and we unwisely followed their example in a previous work (2).

We repeat, then, that García, Ayolas 
and Irala had travelled up the Paraguay River to Cerro San Fernando, located near the ports of La Candelaria and San 
Sebastián, a short distance from a promontory with a very distinctive shape, the Pan de Azúcar, while Cabeza de Vaca and 
Hernando de Ribera had reached, further north, the Xarayes lagoon, to the south of which the former had founded the village of 
Puerto de los Reyes.

From this we had deduced, as everyone else had until now, that the Spanish expeditions had entered the 
Chaco, towards the west, some from Cerro San Fernando, at 19° latitude, and others from a point further north, around the 17th 
parallel.

We did not know then that, as far as the former were concerned, Guzmán had confused two points that were very 
distant from each other.

There are, in fact, two Cerros San Fernando on the banks of the Paraguay.

One of them, now Cerro del 
Triunfo, is located near Pan de Azúcar, La Candelaria and San Sebastián, on the right bank of the river.There are, in fact, two Cerros San Fernando on the banks of the Paraguay.

One of them, now Cerro del 
Triunfo, is located near Pan de Azúcar, La Candelaria and San Sebastián, on the right bank of the river.

But we found the other
much further south, almost on the Tropic of Capricorn, exactly at 23° 10' and on the left bank: currently Cerro Tres Hermanas.

We had noticed the latter on the maps of Levinus Hulsius and Diego de Torres, but had not paid any attention to it.

Otherwise, 
we had only read Schmidel's account in an extremely poor Spanish translation (:i"): among other things, the translator had seen
fit to replace the place names mentioned by the author with those that appear on current or at least recent maps, not without 
making more than one mistake.

This is why we had not realised that Hulsius' map, which we reproduced in our work on the pre-
Columbian geography of America C'), takes its toponymy for Paraguay from Schmidel.

It is to Pistilli, a surveyor, that we owe the
correction of Guzmán's error: the confusion between the two Cerros San Fernando.

The real breach of trust committed by 
Schmidel's translator then became apparent to us, and we obtained a facsimile edition of the latter's original text (4).

We were
thus able to easily reconstruct the two correct itineraries of the Spaniards.

2.

The roads to Potosí Let us leave aside the 
expeditions that took the northern route: that of Antonio de Cabrera, which only advanced for four days in the Chace, that is, in
the region that extends west of the Paraguay River; that of Alvar Nuñez Cabeza de Vaca, which had to retrace its steps after 
eighteen days of marching; and Hernando de Ribera's expedition, which travelled up the Paraguay River to the Sierra de 
Paressis and then, after seventeen days of progress through a swampy area, reached the village of Orthuesi.

These futile 
attempts to reach Peru via the Xarayes lagoon are beyond the scope of our study.The roads to Potosí Let us leave aside the 
expeditions that took the northern route: that of Antonio de Cabrera, which only advanced for four days in the Chace, that is, in
the region that extends west of the Paraguay River; that of Alvar Nuñez Cabeza de Vaca, which had to retrace its steps after 
eighteen days of marching; and Hernando de Ribera's expedition, which travelled up the Paraguay River to the Sierra de 
Paressis and then, after seventeen days of progress through a swampy area, reached the village of Orthuesi.

These futile 
attempts to reach Peru via the Xarayes lagoon are beyond the scope of our study.

Let us simply mention that Orthuesi seems to 
come from the German Orí, meaning region, and the Quechua huasi, meaning house(s), a word that, in turn, derives from hus, 
which has the same meaning in Norse.

This toponym therefore means "Houses of the Region": it was a staging post on the pre-
Inca road that linked the Altiplano with a point of great strategic importance for the communications of the Viking empire.

The
Sierra de Paressis constitutes, in effect, the divortium aquarum between the basins of the Río de la Plata and the Amazon, and it
was not without good reason that the Danes of Tiahuanacu had installed part of their "Guard of Honour" (:!) there, some Arawaks
whose descendants still exist, thus placing a barrier between the Guaraní of the south and the Tupí of the north.

What interests
us here are the itineraries of the expeditions from Cerro San Fernando del Sur, located very close to the Tropic of Capricorn, that
is, according to Schmidel (fig.

70), twelve leagues north of the village of Weibingo, whose name, as we have seen in two 
previous works ('-, •"'), comes from the Norse vej, road, and vink.--- PAGE BREAK ---

What interests
us here are the itineraries of the expeditions from Cerro San Fernando del Sur, located very close to the Tropic of Capricorn, that
is, according to Schmidel (fig. 70), twelve leagues north of the village of Weibingo, whose name, as we have seen in two 
previous works ('-, •"'), comes from the Norse vej, road, and vink. sign, or vinkekl, angle, and therefore means "Sign of the Road"
or, more likely, "Bend in the Road": the point where travellers going up the river from Paragua'y, now Asunción, had to turn left,
towards the west, to take the road that led through Potosí to Tiahuanacu, the capital of the Viking empire. Weibingo, which Alvar
Nuñez Cabeza de Vaca calls Ypananié, was located at the mouth of the Ypané River, at 23° 35' latitude. There is no doubt about 
this. On the one hand, the first maps of Paraguay (•'') show the village at the height of the tropic (23° 27'), Hulsius' map shows it 
slightly 
to 
the 
north, 
and 
Diego's 
map 
shows 
it 
slightly 
to 
the 
south. Diego
de

--- PAGE BREAK ---uay (•'') show the village at the height of the tropic (23° 27'), Hulsius' map shows it 
slightly 
to 
the 
north, 
and 
Diego's 
map 
shows 
it 
slightly 
to 
the 
south. Diego
de

--- PAGE BREAK ---

80
FIG. 70 - Facsimile of a page from Schmidel's account, mentioning Cerro San Fernando and Weibingo. Torres, much more 
accurate from every vantage point, a little to the south. On the other hand, Schmidel tells us that the village was 80 leagues from
Asunción. To do so, he uses the word Meil (Meile in modern German), which has the double meaning of "mile" and "league". It is 
well known that this latter topographical unit varied from one town to another. But Meil applies exclusively to the French league,
or post league, which is worth 4 km. Indeed, 80 French leagues equal 320 km, the exact distance between Asunción at that time, 
located in Eri'Itá Enramada, 10 km south of the current Paraguayan capital —a fact we owe to Professor Pistiili— and the mouth 
of the Ypané River. The first post-Columbian expedition to cross South America from the Atlantic to the Andes took place in 
1521, before the Spanish settled in Paraguay. That year, Alejo García, a Portuguese man in the service of Castile, survivor of 
the shipwreck of one of Juan Díaz de Solís' ships that had just discovered the Río de la Plata, heard from the Indians who 
populated the island of Santa Catalina about the distant lands of the White King, owner of immense riches of gold and silver. 
With three companions, García set out o n an adventure through Guayrá, the region that separates the ocean from present-day 
Paraguay. To do so, he took a perfectly maintained road: one of the branches of the Viking Peaviru ('•1). We know this part of his
itinerary very well, as it was the one followed in 1542 by the conquistador Alvar Nuñez Cabeza de Vaca, who left us an account 
of his journey. The road passed through the villages of Tocanguzir, whose name (from the Norse toga, genitive plural of tog, 
expedition, and husir, nominative plural of hus, house) means 'Houses of the Expeditions', and Tocanguazú, which has the same 
meaning, a Guaraní deformation of Tocanhuasi, a word formed from the Norse toga and the Quechua huasi, which comes from 
the Norse hus. García reached the mouth of the Yguazú, on the Paraná, at a point that the Jesuit map of 1609 ('•1, •'') mentions
with the name Storting, "Great Assembly" in Norse. In theh comes from 
the Norse hus. García reached the mouth of the Yguazú, on the Paraná, at a point that the Jesuit map of 1609 ('•1, •'') mentions
with the name Storting, "Great Assembly" in Norse. In the

--- PAGE BREAK ---81
Paraguay, our adventurer recruited a thousand Guaraní and led them "towards the west to discover and explore the lands from 
which beautiful garments and metal objects were brought, both for war and for peace".

The brave troop travelled up the 
Paraguay River to Cerro San Fernando, entered the Chaco, crossed the current Bolivian province of Santa Cruz, reached the 
foothills of the Andes and penetrated Inca territory — the Spanish had not yet occupied Peru — as far as Tomina and Tarabuco.

But the Charcas, vassals of the Incas, repelled what was a veritable invasion army.

García turned back with a rich booty of gold
and silver and returned to Paraguay, where hostile Indians slaughtered the white men of the expedition.

Contrary to what was 
said and what we repeat ('2), the Cerro San Fernando at which point the Portuguese sailor had left the river was not the one in
the north, but the one in the south, near Weibingo.

Schmidel gives us decisive testimony in this regard when he tells us that Juan
de Ayolas, who set out in 1539 to follow García's trail, travelled up the Paraguay River to Weibingo, near Cerro San Fernando, in
the region where the Payaguáes (or Paiembós) Indians lived.

There, he ordered three of his five brigantines to be dismantled 
and instructed the men—including Schmidel—whom he left aboard the other two to wait for him for four months.

He did not 
return.

It was later learned from the Indians that he had advanced far into the Chaco and then, due to the hostility of the natives,
had retraced his steps, despite which he had been killed along with all the Spaniards who accompanied him.

In this part of his 
account, Schmidel specifies that Weibingo was 80 leagues from France, Asunción and Cerro San Fernando, "which resembles 
Bogenberg", 12 leagues north of that "last village of the Carios", Guaraní allies of the conquistadors.

Bogenberg is a hill located
near Straubing on the Danube, the chronicler's hometown.In this part of his 
account, Schmidel specifies that Weibingo was 80 leagues from France, Asunción and Cerro San Fernando, "which resembles 
Bogenberg", 12 leagues north of that "last village of the Carios", Guaraní allies of the conquistadors.

Bogenberg is a hill located
near Straubing on the Danube, the chronicler's hometown.

It was also via Cerro San Fernando del Sur that Domingo de Irala 
twice entered the Chaco in search of Ayolas—in 1539, even before knowing that the probos had been killed by the indigenous 
people, during an expedition that he had to interrupt due to rain after twenty-six days of travel, and in 1548.

There is no doubt: " a 
high, rounded hill called San Fernando, where the already known Payaguáes dwell," writes Schmidel.

Now, the Payaguáes had 
their villages west of San Fernando del Sur, on the other side of the Paraguay River, and the description of the hill coincides with 
the chronicler's previous comparison, since Bogenberg means "Hill of the Arch," thus a rounded hill.

Schmidel also points out 
that in 1548, the Spaniards' 130 horses had travelled upriver by land, which would not have been possible if Irala's starting point
to the west had been Cerro San Fernando del Norte.

We should add that the expedition members, 36 leagues away, 
encountered the Naperúes Indians, whom Hulsius' map places west of San Fernando del Sur and Weibingo.

It is known that 
Irala's second expedition achieved its objective.

It reached the foot of the Andes mountain range, in the encomienda of Pedro de
Anzures.

Contrary to what has often been said, Irala could not have been unaware, fourteen years after Pizarro's conquest of the
country, of the presence of the Spanish in Peru.

But this did not make him any less disappointed when he found that his 
compatriots already occupied the lands of gold and silver—the region of Potosí—that he coveted.Contrary to what has often been said, Irala could not have been unaware, fourteen years after Pizarro's conquest of the
country, of the presence of the Spanish in Peru.

But this did not make him any less disappointed when he found that his 
compatriots already occupied the lands of gold and silver—the region of Potosí—that he coveted.

He sent his lieutenant Ñuflo de
Chaves to Lima to negotiate with the viceroy, but he ultimately had to return without having achieved anything.

He found his 
ships again a year and a half after his departure.

Of the four expeditions that entered the Chaco via Weibingo, two reached the
Sierra de la Plata, near Potosí, without major difficulties.

Another failed only because of the hostility of the indigenous people,
and the last one because of adverse weather conditions.

This was the right path, in the true sense of the word: "On the first day
we set out," writes one of Irala's companions in 1539 in his anonymous account (:!7), "we found the right path, and another day
we found the path flooded and in poor condition, so much so that there were many days when we could not find dry land to rest...

[due to] the rain that fell every day." It was, in fact, a mapped route that the summer rains—the expedition took place in 
February—had made impassable.

Let us note, in parentheses, that 34 leagues from France south of Ypané and 46 leagues 
north of Asunción, Schmidel points out another river, "as wide as the Danube", which, in the text of the Hulsius edition (4) and on 
the accompanying map, is named Stuesia.

This place name is neither Castilian nor Guaraní.

Professor Hermann Munk sees it as 
a distorted compound of Sturz, waterfall, cascade, in German, and aa, running water, river, in Norse (Old High German, ahawa).

Schmidel's manuscript is written in Gothic cursive, a script in which the r and e are easily confused.

Its editor, Hulsius, faced with 
a term that, however Germanic it may have been, was not German, had misread it.Schmidel's manuscript is written in Gothic cursive, a script in which the r and e are easily confused.

Its editor, Hulsius, faced with 
a term that, however Germanic it may have been, was not German, had misread it.

Moreover, do we not find in the same work a 
place name, no less unexpected, with two forms, one of which can only be explained by a reading error: Froenirtiere, on the 
map, with a corrected t, and Froemidiere, in the text?

This interpretation of Stuesia is reinforced by the fact that there is indeed a 
waterfall above the mouth of the river in question — today's Jejui — near the village that our chronicler calls Iübaric Sabaie —
and not Lüburic Saba.

As we wrote elsewhere, due to the poor condition of the Hulsius map at our disposal, this place name is 
clearly of Germanic origin.

3 .

From Weibingo to the Atlantic In a previous work (2), we reconstructed the network of pre-
Hispanic roads in southern Paraguay.

We were able to do so thanks to our discovery of a portolan chart engraved on the 
"signpost" of the Viking post at Cerro Polilla —or Cerro Pelado—, located in the Sierra de Yvytyruzú.

We saw that, through this
veritable roundabout, the Peaviru —Soft Road— led from Paragua'y —"river of the men of the sea" in Guaraní!—, present-day 
Asunción, to the Atlantic coast, slightly north of Santa Catalina Island, via two routes, one of which passed through the 
confluence of the Yguazú and Paraná rivers and the other through present-day Puerto Adela.

This last detail is thanks to 
Professor Pistilli, who corrected and completed our cartographic work on this point, as on many others, in a detailed study, still
unpublished, which he kindly gave us a preview of.We saw that, through this
veritable roundabout, the Peaviru —Soft Road— led from Paragua'y —"river of the men of the sea" in Guaraní!—, present-day 
Asunción, to the Atlantic coast, slightly north of Santa Catalina Island, via two routes, one of which passed through the 
confluence of the Yguazú and Paraná rivers and the other through present-day Puerto Adela.

This last detail is thanks to 
Professor Pistilli, who corrected and completed our cartographic work on this point, as on many others, in a detailed study, still
unpublished, which he kindly gave us a preview of.

This Peaviru, which had numerous branches, had been constructed in an 
extremely ingenious manner; the Vikings had planted certain grasses in clearings in the jungle that prevented—and still prevent,
as some sections of these roads remain, particularly in the Caaguazú mountain range—the thorny bushes and shrubs from 
growing back (2).

Does this mean that, in order to travel from the Atlantic to Tiahuanacu—or to Potosí—it was essential to pass
through Asunción and then, between this city and the Andes, take the road that ran along the Pilcomayo River or go up the 
Paraguay River to Cerro San Fernando?

At the time of the Conquest and long afterwards, yes, of course, because the Spanish 
were completely unfamiliar with the north of the country.

We know that, on the contrary, the Vikings had a village at the mouth of 
the Ypané, 12 leagues, let us repeat, south of Cerro San Fernando, opposite which, on the other side of the Paraguay River, 
began the road that led to Peru.

One might think that this village was nothing more than a port of embarkation or disembarkation
for travellers arriving from the Altiplano and heading towards it.

This was undoubtedly one of its reasons for being.

But it also
controlled the mouth of the Ypané.

Today, this river is almost unnavigable, despite the fact that armadillas travel down it, but
perhaps this was not the case hundreds of years ago.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But it also
controlled the mouth of the Ypané. Today, this river is almost unnavigable, despite the fact that armadillas travel down it, but
perhaps this was not the case hundreds of years ago. Furthermore, Weibingo closed off the Paraguay River to the south of the 
road that came from Tiahuanacu and extended eastwards to the Atlantic. This road still exists. It no longer begins in the vicinity
of Cerro San Fernando, but in Concepción, a city of
30,000 inhabitants located between Ypané and the hill in question. Its layout was modified in several places when

--- PAGE BREAK ---n the vicinity
of Cerro San Fernando, but in Concepción, a city of
30,000 inhabitants located between Ypané and the hill in question. Its layout was modified in several places when

--- PAGE BREAK ---

82
the construction of the road that, via Belén and Horqueta, still connects Concepción with Pedro Juan Caballero and its twin city,
the Brazilian city of Ponía Pora, despite the fact that another road has replaced it from the latter town to Cerro Cora. One of its 
branches, at the height of the current Horqueta, crossed the Ypané, passed through Tacuatí and reached the road that, from 
Lüberic Sabaie —today Barranquerita— skirted the Stursia River (now Jejuí) and its tributary, the Aguaray Guazú, and arrived 
Cerro Torín, to the Amambay mountain range, which ran through Ñuverá to present-day Pedro Juan Caballero (cf. map, fig. 72). 
The name Torín is neither Spanish, Portuguese, nor Guaraní. Could it be a slight deformation of Thoring, "lineage of Thor"? This
is the opinion of Professor Pistilli, a profound expert on Guaraní toponymy. From Ponía Pora, the Peaviru del Norte flowed 
through what is now Brazilian territory towards the town of Dourados, reaching the village of Ivinheima on the banks of the river
of the same name, crossing the Paraná at Presidente Epitácio and joining at Ourinhos, with the branch that, via Puerto Adela, 
led from Asunción to the Gulf of Santos, or San Vicente as it was formerly known. When Ulrich Schmidel left the Paraguayan 
capital in December 1552 to embark for Europe, he travelled up the Paraguay River to Lüberic Sabaie, took the Stursia road (our
Jejuí) and, via Cerro Torín, reached the Paraná at Puerto Camargo. From there, he travelled up the river a distance that he 
exaggerates (400 km instead of a little less than 300) —which is not surprising since he was making the journey for the first time
vez
 y
 no
 disponía,
 evidentemente,
 de
 instrumentos
 de
 medición—

--- PAGE BREAK ---nstead of a little less than 300) —which is not surprising since he was making the journey for the first time
vez
 y
 no
 disponía,
 evidentemente,
 de
 instrumentos
 de
 medición—

--- PAGE BREAK ---

83
to
Presidente Epitácio, where he took the road whose two branches came from Ponía Pora and Puerto Adela, respectively. All the 
place names we have just mentioned are those used today. But Ivinheima is neither Portuguese nor Spanish. Indeed, we find 
countless Guaraní place names on Brazilian maps. Are we looking at one of them? This is what the Swiss-Paraguayan scholar 
Moisés Bertoni thought, in the absence of a more satisfactory explanation. On his 1912 map, he wrote Ihvihñehema, or, 
according to the unified Guaraní spelling, Yvyñe'éma, the name of the river, a tributary of the Paranapanéma, on the banks of 
which the village is located. Analysis of this word gives us yvy, meaning 'land', and ñe'e, meaning 'language', plus the phonetic
suffix ma from Tupi-Guaraní. Hence: 'language of the land'. This is a surprising name for a town, and even more so for a river.
The toponymy of the river in question and its various branches is extremely imprecise, it is true. On the first map that mentions it, 
as far as we know, that of P. Ernot, dating from 1632, the Ivinheima is called the Monici River. On the 1865 map found in Martín
de Moussy's atlas ('"") (cf. fig. 71), we read "R. Iguarey ou Ivinheima", with a tributary to the south curiously named "R. de las
Amazonas" and another tributary to the north formed by three branches: Vaccaria, Brilhante and Monici. Bertoni, in his 1912 
map, shows, from north to south, the Brilhante River, with Ihvihñehema in parentheses a n d in capital letters, the Rio dos 
Dcurados a n d the Rio das Oncas with, again, but in

--- PAGE BREAK ---2 
map, shows, from north to south, the Brilhante River, with Ihvihñehema in parentheses a n d in capital letters, the Rio dos 
Dcurados a n d the Rio das Oncas with, again, but in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

84
lowercase letters, Ihvihñehema in parentheses, without us knowing how these rivers join, as a box interrupts their course. 
Finally, current maps of Brazil, very few of which are reliable, only mention the Vacaría, Brilhante and Dourados rivers as 
tributaries of the Ivinheima. Paraguayan historian J. Natalicio González ("") further complicates the issue when he writes that
Díaz de Guzmán, from Villarica del Espíritu Santo, then located in Guayráf, that is, east of the Paraná a n d
south of the 
Paranapanéma, founded,
in 1593, "the second Santiago de Jerez, on the banks of San Salvador, Jaguary or Ybynheima (three names for the same river)". 
Jaguary has the same meaning in Guaraní as Rio das Oncas in Portuguese. The double toponym
—'Iguarey or Ivinheima'— which Martín de Moussy attributes to the river, is of particular importance to us. It could be 
understood, in fact, that the same river has two names: the one given to it by the indigenous people, in Guaraní, before the 
Conquest, and the one that the Spanish or Portuguese later invented, as they often did. But in no case are both names Guaraní. 
The Indians were extremely conservative when it came to place names. They were certainly unaware of the changes that our 
administrations like to impose in this field: only tradition, which was unchanging, mattered to them. Now then: Iguarey —Yguarey
according to the correct spelling— is a Guaraní word composed of Ygua. inhabitant(s), re, ancient, and y, river: the river of the
Ancient Inhabitants. Ivinheima, therefore, logically does not belong to the indigenous language. The word, as we have already 
said, is neither Spanish nor Portuguese: its Germanic roots are, on the contrary, evident. It means 'Country of the Ivas'; the iva is 
the tree whose red, hard and flexible wood was used by the Norse to make their bows. It should be noted that in 1865, the date 
of Martin de Moussy's map, there was no Germanic colony in the region and that, moreover, ivin could not derive from modern 
German, in which iva is called ezbe. Therefore, Ivinheima comes from the "ancienttin de Moussy's map, there was no Germanic colony in the region and that, moreover, ivin could not derive from modern 
German, in which iva is called ezbe. Therefore, Ivinheima comes from the "ancient

--- PAGE BREAK ---85
inhabitants, not Indians, of the riverbanks, prior to the arrival of the Spanish and Portuguese.

The place name leaves no doubt as 
to its origin: it was Vikings who had discovered a tree in the region—probably the mbocaya palm (Cacrocomia tatai), still used by
the Guayakíes—whose wood had the same properties as European iva and who must have established a village of craftsmen 
specialising in the manufacture of bows.

4 .

The Amambay lock
 In Horqueta, let us take the old Pedro Juan Caballero route, 
which, as we have already seen, overlaps most of the pre-Columbian road.

About 5 km before it meets the new route, which at 
this point follows the old route, a little east of Cerro Cora, we see, on the right, on the western flank of Cerro Tupa, the "shield"
we mentioned in Chapter I.

Let us continue for a few hundred metres and we will see, on the left, the Tuja Og, whose inscriptions
we have surveyed, with its platform for worship and, we can now confirm, observation.

In other words, the road passed, and still
passes, between two hills where traces of the Viking presence have survived to this day.

We will then reach the point where the
old route merges with the new one, where the Viking road, coming from the south, turns at a right angle to the east.

Directly 
opposite is the Itaguambypé, or more precisely, its southern tip, with the tower from which the entire region can be seen (see 
map, fig.

37).

The fortress, therefore, controlled the communication route, vital to the Vikings, which led from Tiahuanacu to the
Gulf of Santos.

Its location was certainly not chosen at random.

The area probably suffered periodic incursions by hostile Indian
tribes that may not have belonged to the Guaraní race.

In any case, it would have been difficult to find a better location for a
fortification than this point, where the road changed direction radically.

The fortified enclosure of Itaguambypé covered some 
fifteen hectares.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In any case, it would have been difficult to find a better location for a
fortification than this point, where the road changed direction radically. The fortified enclosure of Itaguambypé covered some 
fifteen hectares. It could therefore shelter, in
 caso
 de
 alerta,
 miles
 de
 familias:
 las
 de
 los
auxiliares
 guaraníes
 que,
 en
In times of 
peace, they lived in villages on the surrounding plains. Only a small garrison, made up of Vikings and Indians, was required to
occupy it permanently to prevent any possible surprise attacks and detect any suspicious movements in the surrounding area. At 
the top of Tuja Og, some sentries were required to stand guard. As for the "shield", although the condition of its inscriptions does 
not allow us to establish with certainty its purpose, it is perhaps not unreasonable to see it as a "signpost" announcing the 
"gendarmerie post" and staging post that the fortress constituted. Let us return to the old route. A dozen kilometres before 
reaching Cerro Cora, on the right for those heading towards Itaguambypé, there is a road that leads to Ypané. On the other side
of the river, which can be crossed at this point, at least today, stands Yvyty Pero, 2 km away. Indigenous traditions consider it
the "dwelling place of the white king Ipir" and its characteristics led us to believe, although we have not yet been able to open it, 
that it was a necropolis: perhaps that of the white chiefs of Tiahuanacu. W h e t h e r o r not these latter hypotheses are 
accurate, the fact remains that the hill was of very special importance to the Vikings: the inscriptions on Cerro Kysé, in its 
surroundings, a n d above all the sacred Nordic-type forest that

--- PAGE BREAK ---86
We discovered a few hundred metres away that this is clearly demonstrated.

The Itaguambypé therefore covered not only a 
vulnerable point on the road, but also a hautlieu, necropolis or not, of the Men of Titicaca.

One question remains: why was Yvyty
Pero, located beyond Ypané, chosen instead of any of the hills that rise between the road and the river?

Let us look at the map
(fig.

72) and we will see that this is a constant.

Weibingo, the important village that controlled the crossing of the Paraguay River, 
was not located at the foot of Cerro San Fernando, where the Atlantic road began and opposite which the road from Tiahuanacu 
arrived, but on the other side of Ypané.

Tacuatí, no less important judging by the size of its temple, was not built on the banks of 
the road, but also south of the river, 2 km away at this point.

Itaguambypé, at least in relation to Cerro Ipir, therefore follows the 
general rule.

This is, moreover, quite understandable from a military point of view.

Despite its shallow depth, the Ypané is very
difficult to cross on foot due to its strong current and the slippery, shifting stones that cover its bottom.

The slightest defence of 
one of its banks is therefore effective.

However, for the enemies of the Vikings, the road was the most practicable access route:
all around, the jungle presented potential attackers with an almost impenetrable obstacle.

The Itaguambypé served as a military
base and a place of retreat.

But where there were only unfortified villages, it was prudent to place the river between them and the 
enemy.

The same reasoning applies to the Yvyty, a necropolis and probably a place of refuge, where we find no trace of 
permanent defences.

As in Weibingo and Tacuatí, there must have been only a wooden fort there that the men — every man 
was a warrior, regardless of his usual occupation — could use in case of attack from the rear.The same reasoning applies to the Yvyty, a necropolis and probably a place of refuge, where we find no trace of 
permanent defences.

As in Weibingo and Tacuatí, there must have been only a wooden fort there that the men — every man 
was a warrior, regardless of his usual occupation — could use in case of attack from the rear.

But the main danger came from 
the road, and the river provided an effective barrier against it.

The jungle, for its part, prevented any movement of troops.

Only
individual infiltration was possible through it, which was easy to detect and even easier to repel.

The secondary roads that ran
through the villages were mere paths, which should not have been difficult to block.

That leaves Cerro Guazú.

The hill is located
50 km south-southeast of Cerro Cora and 40 km southwest of Yvyty Pero.

For those coming from the north, it is necessary to 
cross the Ypané and then its tributary, the Ypané-mi, to reach it; for those coming from the west, the Ypané below the 
confluence of its two arms.

To the east and south, there is nothing but jungle, even denser than elsewhere.

The position, 
therefore, is the same as in the previous cases: the river served as a natural defence.

For the road that led — and still leads — 
to Cerro Guazú came from Cerro Cora, then from the north, passing through Yvyty Pero.

The enormous truncated peak on 
whose flanks we found the countless runic inscriptions, the most important of which we studied in Chapter IV, was therefore 
linked to the Viking base whose stronghold was Itaguambypé.

Was it part of it?

We have more than one good reason to think 
not.

Firstly, the road leading to it did not go any further, where there was only — and still is today — virgin forest.

Secondly, we 
found no traces of buildings on the hill and its surroundings — although it is true that we did not explore the entire plateau —: the 
houses must have been made of wood, as we have already said, without stone foundations.Firstly, the road leading to it did not go any further, where there was only — and still is today — virgin forest.

Secondly, we 
found no traces of buildings on the hill and its surroundings — although it is true that we did not explore the entire plateau —: the 
houses must have been made of wood, as we have already said, without stone foundations.

The only exception is the dolmen, 
located at the foot of the southern flank of the massif.

But we cannot say for certain that it was built by human hands.

Finally, the 
rock shelters at the foot of the hill could only have served as guard posts, as confirmed by some of their inscriptions that speak of 
war and victory.

Two of them even prove that the inhabitants of Cerro Guazú were on the defensive: "War has returned from 
Kiok...

Father, stay above"; "Sunold and Ekath, watch the path on the left slope".

They certainly made numerous sorties — "5 
plus 8 and still 7 expeditions to Fafóiol" — but their situation was clearly precarious: the enemy threatened the approaches to
their village.

Such a state of affairs would have been inconceivable during the era of the Tiahuanacu empire.

The Itaguambypé 
then had a firm control over the region, and well-protected convoys frequently travelled the road, which otherwise would have 
had no reason to exist.

Things were no longer the same after the Araucanians of Chief Kari took the Viking capital in 1290.

Suddenly, the garrisons of Paraguay lost all contact with the Altiplano.

Duly informed, if only by the arrival of refugees, of the
defeat of the Island of the Sun (1), the Guaraní auxiliaries gradually regained their independence.

The hostile Indians in the area,
who had until then been kept at bay, became increasingly aggressive.

Without troops, the Itaguambypé was no longer defensible 
and, moreover, no longer had any reason to exist.

The white men who, until then, had commanded the indigenous units had only 
one solution: to retreat to a more solid position.Without troops, the Itaguambypé was no longer defensible 
and, moreover, no longer had any reason to exist.

The white men who, until then, had commanded the indigenous units had only 
one solution: to retreat to a more solid position.

Cerro Guazú, from this point of view, was unrivalled: a plateau with a lagoon,
whose few access points were easy to defend.

However, the refuge of the Sun God became his tomb.

Forced to live in the 
indigenous way, since they no longer had any helpers, the Vikings slowly degenerated to the level of the present-day Guayakíes.

Perhaps it is no mere coincidence that a band of "white Indians" still frequents the surroundings of Cerro Guazú, just as other
bands still roam near the Posta de Yvytyruzú, in Peaviru del Sur.

5 .

A breeding ground The road that, coming from 
Tiahuanacu, crossed the Paraguay River at Cerro San Fernando and headed towards the Gulf of Santos via what is now Pedro 
Juan Caballero was considerably shorter than the one that skirted the Pilcomayo River and, via Paragua'y (Asunción) and 
Puerto Adela, reached the Atlantic at the same point.

This was its fundamental use.

But perhaps there was another that was 
hardly less important.

We saw in Chapter V that, contrary to legend, there were horses and cattle in pre-Columbian South 
America.

Ullman's Vikings had brought with them war horses that they had re-embarked when they left Mexico in 989.

These 
animals explain why their owners embarked on the overland journey from Venezuela to Colombia, a distance of about 1,200 km 
as the crow flies: the men were not forced to carry themselves the heavy equipment needed for several hundred people.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Ullman's Vikings had brought with them war horses that they had re-embarked when they left Mexico in 989. These 
animals explain why their owners embarked on the overland journey from Venezuela to Colombia, a distance of about 1,200 km 
as the crow flies: the men were not forced to carry themselves the heavy equipment needed for several hundred people. We 
have already said, moreover, that they help us to better understand the existence of the Peaviru, who, over a distance of about
3,000 km as the crow flies, linked Lake Titicaca with the Atlantic coast: the chasquis probably used them for running, according
to the postal system that the Peru of the Incas has made known to us, but the Vikings certainly used them for riding. If the 
Spanish did not find horses in the Altiplano during the Conquest, it was because the survivors of the massacre of 1290 had taken
those that had escaped from their attackers with them when they fled. We have proof of this, since the Amazons, the Viking 
women who had taken refuge in the jungle, where they had created very special living conditions, still had some at the beginning
of the 16th century (:1). On the contrary, Juan de Garay, in 1580, had verified, not without surprise, north of Buenos Aires, the
"existence of large numbers of herds of chucaro horses". Where had these come from? It is known, from the example of Spanish 
colonisation, that horses do not acclimatise well in the Andes and that the species degenerates there. Furthermore, Peru has no
grasslands, either in the mountains or along the coast, that meet the requirements of European livestock. The Vikings therefore
had grazing lands elsewhere where their horses could reproduce without any problems. This was not the Argentine pampas, 
since the Men of Tiahuanacu had not colonised it: the livestock, returned to the wild after the destruction of the empire, only

--- PAGE BREAK ---87
The arrival of ships returning from the Old World meant that, at least during the winter, they could sail up the river to Iquitos,
Peru, and beyond.

From there, the drakkars could follow a triangular route, which travellers were not obliged to take, however.

It 
was feasible for them to take either one of the Peaviru rivers or the Amazon to go from Tiahuanacu to the Atlantic or vice versa,
at least when the summer floods did not make navigation too dangerous due to the submerged logs they carried.

We have 
evidence of only one voyage by South American Vikings to Europe: thanks to which, around 1250, information, including precise 
maps of the subcontinent, reached Dieppe, subsequently enabling its shipowners to import heartwood from the Amazon and, on 
the return journey, the sculptural models of Amiens Cathedral brought by Father Gnupa to Tiahuanacu.

However, there is no 
reason to believe that there were not others.

On the contrary, it is very likely that the Normans' maritime traffic encouraged their
cousins, who had been responsible for initiating contact, to follow their example.

In any case, the extent of their land, river and 
sea communication routes meant that the Vikings of South America had geographical knowledge several centuries ahead of that 
of Europe.

Or, more precisely, of that which was in the public domain in Europe.

Epilogue
The existence of America was 
certainly not unknown in the Old World before 1250 (•'•).

As early as the 1st century AD, Marino of Tyre placed the city of 
Cattigara on his map, on the eastern coast of the Sinus Magnus, the Great Gulf that stretched beyond Asia and was none other 
than the Pacific Ocean.

The European Middle Ages, nourished by Ptolemy, the Alexandrian who, in the 2nd century, had taken 
up, without distorting them, the works of Marino de Tiro, knew very well that there was a land east of Indochina whose western 
coasts were frequented by ships from India and, above all, from China, and even from Rome.As early as the 1st century AD, Marino of Tyre placed the city of 
Cattigara on his map, on the eastern coast of the Sinus Magnus, the Great Gulf that stretched beyond Asia and was none other 
than the Pacific Ocean.

The European Middle Ages, nourished by Ptolemy, the Alexandrian who, in the 2nd century, had taken 
up, without distorting them, the works of Marino de Tiro, knew very well that there was a land east of Indochina whose western 
coasts were frequented by ships from India and, above all, from China, and even from Rome.

The Arabs, who sailed the Indian 
Ocean, were probably the first, as early as the 9th century, to give the Land of Cattigara the shape of a peninsula extending east
Asia southwards.

Therefore, one or more of their ships had crossed the Pacific and recognised Cape Horn, or at least gathered 
accurate information from Chinese or Indian sailors who had done so.

But their knowledge did not go beyond that.

On their 
maps, the contours of South America are vague and inaccurate, and the subcontinent remains blank.

The discovery by the East 
was not to yield any further results.

Suddenly, in 1489, Henricus Martellus (Heinrich Hammer) offers us an image of the 
peninsula in question that is very close to the reality of South America, in which even Tierra del Fuego is not missing.

Furthermore, his London planisphere, and it is Professor Paúl Gallez (n) to whom we owe this extraordinary revelation, includes
the layout of the subcontinent's main rivers and its great mountain ranges.

Then, in 1507, Martín Waídseemüller's "impossible 
map" appeared, in which, apart from the Land of Cattigara, which did not disappear, we find an America separated from the 
Asian continent, the southern part of which is implausibly accurate.

Clearly, new data had been at the origin of this cartographic
revolution.

New, at least, for geographers.

The source of this data leaves no room for doubt.New, at least, for geographers.

The source of this data leaves no room for doubt.

To establish it, in fact, it was not
enough to have a few adventures, even repeated ones, of sailors blown off course by storms.

On the contrary, it required a 
complete survey of the South American coastline by navigators with extensive scientific knowledge and, on the other hand, a 
detailed exploration of an enormous territory.

Now then: we know that the Vikings, accomplished sailors of high cultural level,
controlled politically and militarily an immense empire that covered the Mountain —Berg, according to their inscriptions—, that is 
to say, the Andes, and the Plain —Matt—, that is to say, the jungle that stretched from the mountain range to the Atlantic: an 
empire criss-crossed by land and river communication routes.

They were therefore in a position to draw a map of South America.

And they were the only ones who could do so.

This map, as we established in a previous work, was evidently taken with them on 
their 1250 voyage to Europe, and the Dieppians obtained it.

In the Middle Ages, sovereigns and shipowners' guilds kept the 
deepest secrets regarding sea routes and the lands they allowed them to reach.

Inevitably, some leaks occurred in the long run,
no matter how many precautions were taken.

This is how, in the case that interests us, Pizigano, in 1367, was able to include on
his map, in three different places, an island called Bragir —"a name given by the Normans", the cartographer specifies— which 
represents, on the basis of contradictory data, several points on the "new" continent.

This is how Henricus Martellus, in 1489,
was able to give the Land of Cattigara the approximate contours of a South America whose rivers and mountains are perfectly 
identifiable.This is how, in the case that interests us, Pizigano, in 1367, was able to include on
his map, in three different places, an island called Bragir —"a name given by the Normans", the cartographer specifies— which 
represents, on the basis of contradictory data, several points on the "new" continent.

This is how Henricus Martellus, in 1489,
was able to give the Land of Cattigara the approximate contours of a South America whose rivers and mountains are perfectly 
identifiable.

This is how, above all, Waídseemüller, in 1507, was able to represent an autonomous America whose northern part 
was limited to Vinland, colonised from the year 1000 onwards by Norwegian Vikings, plus Florida, and whose central part was 
limited to the islands and mainland reached by Columbus, but whose southern part was complete, except for the strait and Tierra
del Fuego, and better designed than the Old World.

This is how, finally, Johannes Schoner, in 1515, five years before Magellan's
voyage, was able to copy the previous map, adding what was missing.

It is not surprising, under these conditions, that the 
Portuguese were able to obtain, in Dieppe, the map of South America that Columbus, first, and Magellan, later, were going to 
steal from the King's Treasury.

America had been officially discovered and then conquered, but the Vikings were no longer there.

The descendants of those who had taken refuge in the jungle in 1290 had long resisted the living conditions imposed on them by 
a hostile environment, but degeneration had taken its toll, even though some still wrote in runes in the mid-15th century.

The 
descendants—this is the meaning of the word Inca in Norse—of those who had founded the New Empire had managed to 
preserve some of their traditions and even their language, but the mestizo Atahuallpa, before Pizarro's arrival, had ordered most
of them to be beheaded.

The Spanish completed the picture by marrying the girls of the white aristocracy and enslaving their 
brothers.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The 
descendants—this is the meaning of the word Inca in Norse—of those who had founded the New Empire had managed to 
preserve some of their traditions and even their language, but the mestizo Atahuallpa, before Pizarro's arrival, had ordered most
of them to be beheaded. The Spanish completed the picture by marrying the girls of the white aristocracy and enslaving their 
brothers. The civilising epic of the Men of the North had lasted five hundred years.