AfflDA V I T 
! I 
; i 
i»: 
I, Floyd David Itoore, Chief of the Intelligence Division, 
Internal Revenue Service, New Orleans District, being duly sworn, do 
swear, depose and state that to t»Se best of ray knoviledge, information, 
and belief: ’ 
(1) Cn Kay 29, 15o9, I met Pershing Gcrvais for the first 
time, at his request, at the Fontainebleau Motor Hotel Coffee Shop in 
New Orleans, Louisiana, in the company of Internal Revenue Service 
Group Supervisor Naurbon Perry. Gcrvais told me that he had personal * 
knowledge of payoffs to certain Louisiana public officials. He indicated 
his willingness to furnish the Internal Revenue Service information' 
» • t * * • 
about payoffs under certain conditions: that his identity would not 
be disclosed outside the Internal Revenue Service without his permission; 
that his testimony would not be required against his will; and that in- 
formation he voluntarily furnished the Internal Revenue Service would * * 
not be used against him in a criminal case. 
Gervais said he was making his offer voluntarily and that he 
was not seeding immunity in the continuing Internal Revenue Service 
investigation of his federal Income tax returns for 1965, 1966, and 
1967. He told me that he was confident' that v:e could not develop a 
prosecution tax case against him. He said his offer of cooperation was 
good only after, we had reached the same conclusion. He told me to ,Ttake 
your best shot et rr.a and then we will work together". Gervais told me 
that his sen was missing In Viet Nam and that he could not stand the 
thought of losing his son to protect the corrupt system which he knew 
.to exist in New Orleans. 
1 told Gervais that I would have to check with a limited number 
or officials in the Internal Revenue Service and in the Department or 
Justice. 1 told him I could not enter into an agreement with him if 
trere was a possibility I could not keep it or if the acjre?rent would 
compromise the activities or another government agency. Gervais gave 
r,e permission to make the minimum disclosures of his identity necessary 
for me to chock with r-;y superiors and with the Department of Justice.activities or another government agency. Gervais gave 
r,e permission to make the minimum disclosures of his identity necessary 
for me to chock with r-;y superiors and with the Department of Justice.

--- PAGE BREAK ---r government agency. Gervais gave 
r,e permission to make the minimum disclosures of his identity necessary 
for me to chock with r-;y superiors and with the Department of Justice.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

• I next met with Gervais on June 24, 15^3. in my office at 
600 South Street in Hew Orleans in the presence of Group Supervisor 
Perry. I told Gervais that my superiors in the Internal Revenue Service 
and responsible officials in the Department of Justice had agreed to 
Honor any agreement I made with him concerning his cooperation with the 
Internal Revenue Service in developing cases against corrupt public ' 
officials. We reached the following agreement: that Gervais would dis- 
close to me. or to my representative, details of payoffs to public 
officials about which he had personal.knowledge, and would make complete 
disclosures about all the payoff situations he recalled; that Gervais- 
disclosures would not be used against him in any prosecution, except 
’ ’f hC Had en9a9ed in CrimI"al actions which were already known to*' 
the government his disclosures of these actions to me would not preclude 
h.s prosecution, and any criminal act on his pert which he did not dis- 
close to me and which was subsequently discovered by a government agency 
would be used against him in prosecutive action; that neither 1 nor the 
Internal Revenue Scryice*would be a party to criminal violations, hence 
Gervais would not participate in payoffs to public officials in the 
future,'except when such activities ware in . • • 
C|es v.^re in legitimate cooperation with 
the Internal Revenue Service for the purpose of obtaining evidence; that 
Gervais would not be required to testify as a witness without his per- 
mission; and that Gervais- identity would not be disclosed further 
without his specific consent. Following this June 24, ,9S9. meeting, 1 
assigned Special Agent Arlie G. Puckett to deal with Pershing Gervais 
within the terns of our agreement. . 
(3) Between June 24. 10.30. aRd j,ly 2?> wo> porshIng G2rvais 
-not with Special Agent Puckett at frequent but irregular intervals, 
at which times Gervais furnished Puckett with extensive informat ion’re- 
$■-* • u 1 c r in ♦ na I act»v»11 es in th-** J r ri •»- , 
n r‘c*v Cr 1 £ar.s area. During the earlier 
portion of this nor! Pa^ ori.• 
on J i »J 1 seussed the .condi 
^ 03 Government witness in the several 
1 1 ted. Gervais told me he v/ould not 
“ i«°'« P*>H« ww, hc '1 £ar.s area. During the earlier 
portion of this nor! Pa^ ori.• 
on J i »J 1 seussed the .condi 
^ 03 Government witness in the several 
1 1 ted. Gervais told me he v/ould not 
“ i«°'« P*>H« ww, hc '

--- PAGE BREAK ---the earlier 
portion of this nor! Pa^ ori.• 
on J i »J 1 seussed the .condi 
^ 03 Government witness in the several 
1 1 ted. Gervais told me he v/ould not 
“ i«°'« P*>H« ww, hc '

--- PAGE BREAK ---

leave Hew Orleans with his family before his family was exposed to any 
publicity. He recalled that his cooperation with the Internal Revenue 
Service which disclosed corruption in the Mew Orleans Police Department 
during the 1550's resulted in wide-spread publicity in which he was . * 
accused of being a “stool pigeon" and a traitor to his friends. Gervais 
said his elder son was old enough to read the newspaper and that as 
a result his relationship with his son suffered. According to Gervais, 
his son .lost respect for his father and never regained it completely. 
He said'he would not go through a similar ordeal with his younger son. 
Gervais indicated to roe he would consider disclosure of his 
cooperation with us if he could be relocated to an area where his • 
t • 
family would not be exposed to publicity and under conditions in which . 
he could support his family at the level to which they were accustomed. 
Gervais did not name a specific amount of Income he would require, * - 
but 1 concluded from our conversations and from his tax returns that^ 
—$167000 annual income was a min.imum figure,. 1 told Gervais that I 
would contact ir.y superiors in the Internal Revenue Service and explore 
the possibility of relocating him and his family. Gervais made no com- 
mitment to me about relocating and 1 nade no corrcnitment to him beyond 
exploring possibilities. 
* l contacted my superior at the Regional level and outlined 
generally a portion of the information Gervais had furnished to Special 
Agent Puckett and asked him to explore possibilities of relocating 
Gervais and his family and of obtaining employment for Gervais at about 
$16,000 per year. After about three weeks my superior told me that such 
arrangements were not possible. I relayed this information to Gervais 
and We agreed to continue receiving information from him under the terms 
of our original—agreement. 
(I*) Cn July 17, 13*59, I met with Pershing Gervais at my offic 
In the company of Group Supervisor HjtfrL.cn Ferry and Speci-l *%r: *ie 
G. Puckett. Gervais had asked for the meeting because he was concerned 
that full disclosure about sc-ne payoff situations would be cut r h..-nt -; 
to himself. He said that he felt that it would be In the best interesthad asked for the meeting because he was concerned 
that full disclosure about sc-ne payoff situations would be cut r h..-nt -; 
to himself. He said that he felt that it would be In the best interest

--- PAGE BREAK ---eeting because he was concerned 
that full disclosure about sc-ne payoff situations would be cut r h..-nt -; 
to himself. He said that he felt that it would be In the best interest

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of everyone involved if he told everything about criminal activities of which 
he was aware, including payoffs and bribes in which he was involved person- 
al ly. 1 told Gervais that should he make such voluntary disclosures he 
would have to pay the civil taxes he owed as the result of' income he had 
| 
omitted from his tax returns in prior years. I told Gervais that' I would 
check to see if he could be given some relief in the way of time payments 
after he filed amended returns reporting his omitted income. I agreed that 
if Gervais felt he was providing information which would, if used, identify 
him as the-informant, Special Agent Puckett would keep this information in 
a special f.ile. 1 also explained to Gervais that my commitment to him 
would be upheld by my successor should I be transferred from Mew Orleans. I 
repeated my commitment to Gervais that we would not use him as a witness* 
without his permission, provided he cooperated with us fully. I also re- *'. f 
assured him that we would not disclose his identity without his permission. 
Gervais filed an amended 1966 return with Special Agent Arlie G. Puckett on 
► . 
February 2, 1970. Gervais filed amended 1967 and 1968 returns on or about 
May 8, 1970. ’• 
(5) On July 27,* 1970, in the presence of Special Agent Puckett, 
I introduced Gervais to John Wall, Attorney in Charge of the Mew Orleans 
Organized Crime Strike Force which had become operational on June 1, 1970. 
At this time Gervais was told by me and by Wall that the conditions upon which 
Wall would receive information from Gervais would be the same as those upon 
v.’hich the Internal Revenue Service had received information from him -- then 
would be no disclosure of Gervais' identity without his authority; he would 
not be called os a government witness against his will so long as he cooper- 
ated fully and truthfully; there would be no prosecution of him for informatio 
he provided unless the information was already known to a government agency or 
the information came from a source independent of himself; that the only v/ay 
the government would continue to receive knowledge of current violations' 
of lew in which he was involved was in the process of getting evidence 
Ter projections. Cen/nis was asked by V‘.J11 if ho would agree to have his 
name revealed to \l- tit's immediate supervisor in hashing ton, Thomas Kennel Ty, 
Deputy Chief, Organized Crime and Racketeering Section of the Criminal 
Division. Gervais expressed a reluctance until end if it ever\l- tit's immediate supervisor in hashing ton, Thomas Kennel Ty, 
Deputy Chief, Organized Crime and Racketeering Section of the Criminal 
Division. Gervais expressed a reluctance until end if it ever

--- PAGE BREAK ---supervisor in hashing ton, Thomas Kennel Ty, 
Deputy Chief, Organized Crime and Racketeering Section of the Criminal 
Division. Gervais expressed a reluctance until end if it ever

--- PAGE BREAK ---

{ 
became absolutely necessary to do so in order for Kennel ly to know all the 
facts to make a decision in a particulor case. Wall agreed to this and 
said that he would not reveal Gervais* name even to Kennel ly without Gervais' 
consent. It was further agreed by Gervais that Wall could be made privy 
henceforth to any information heretofore given to Internal Revenue Service, 
and that he be allowed to see the reports of interview made by Special Agent 
Puckett during the previous year. It was at this time that I specifically 
asked Gervais that if he, Gervais, had all those reports in his physical 
possession at this time, would he furnish them to Wall? Gervais said that 
he would, and it was only after this -meeting and this conversation with' 
Gervais that Wall became aware of the information in and first examined 
. * Internal Revenue Service reports regarding information furnished by Gervais 
to Special Agent Puckett over the previous year. At the conclusion of this. • 
July 27, 1970 meeting it was agreed that all contacts between Wall and 
Gervais would be made through or In the presence of Special Agent Puckett. 
(6) On July 31, 1970, Gervais told Special Agent Puckett to 
% 
tell. John V/all that he could disclose Gervais’ identity to Wall's superior, 
Tom Kennelly. " 
(7) On Tuesday, August 4, 1970, John Wall met with Pershing 
Gervais and Special Agent Puckett. Gervais agreed that Wall could reveal * 
his identity orally only to Y/illiam Lynch, Chief of the Organized Crime 
Section of the Justice Department, and to Tom Kennelly. Deputy Chief, both . 
of whom were stationed in Washington; that his specific identity should not 
be reduced to written form by any of the three of them; and that none of 
them should reveal his identityto anyone else without his express permission. 
Vail agreed, and all memos written by Wall regarding information from 
Gervais described the source as “New Orleans £ 14". Wall also told Gervais 
at that time that Gervais should be keenly aware that Wall wanted to hear 
the truth 2nd nothing but the objective truth;’and that he (’./all) wanted It 
clearly understood that undir no circumstances should Gervais’ information * 
to him ever be shaded to conform to ’.hat Gervais might think Wall wanted 
to hear or what Wall might think the truth is. Gervais insisted that he, 
too, was interested in furnishing the objective truth no matter what that 
night be, and said that at no time would lie shade the facts in any way. 
5ht think the truth is. Gervais insisted that he, 
too, was interested in furnishing the objective truth no matter what that 
night be, and said that at no time would lie shade the facts in any way. 
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---s. Gervais insisted that he, 
too, was interested in furnishing the objective truth no matter what that 
night be, and said that at no time would lie shade the facts in any way. 
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---

■'■■'"a*>i  , — ■ — 
CH'‘t 
# 
l 
j 
: t 
U 
vv 
tf ■ 
j. i 
j I 
(3) On August 31, 1970, Wall met with Gervais and Special 
Agent Puckett. Wall told Gervais that on a recent trip to Washington 
he had orally revealed Gervais’ identity to Lynch and Kennelly, his 
superiors; that Lynch mentioned that should the matter come up he would 
like to be able to orally identify Gervais to Will Wilson, Chief of the 
Criminal Division, as v/el 1 as to Henry Petersen, V/i Ison’s deputy. At 
this time, on August 31, 1970, Gervais told Wall that he would leave it 
to Wall's discretion as to whom he should reveal his (Gervais*) identity, 
but to remember that if he were ‘'burned" he would be through in Hew Orleans. 
Wall told Gervais that Lynch and Kennelly were interested in his information 
but wary of him, and that they asked Wall to question Gervais on some 
• | • -matters about which they had knowledge in order to test his reliability, 
which questioning took place. 
At this same August 31, 1970, meeting Gervais personally outlined 
to. Wall for the first time various illegal aspects of the pinball business 
in Louisiana, including the information that the pinball bribery scheme 
had been in effect v/ith him as an active participant since 1962. (He 
Had notified Special Agent Puckett of these matters on July 13, 1969). 
(9) On September 2, 1970, Wall met Gervais in the presence of 
Special Agent Puckett end the three discussed at length Gervais’* attitude 
toward taking the witness stand as a government witness In a criminal 
case. Gervais* view at that time was that he didn’t have the "guts" to 
take the witness stand and physically point the finger in the courtroom 
to these persons with whom he had been dealing for so long; that he would 
be ostracized by all those elements of the Hew Orleans community with which 
he now associates, and that he would no longer be able to provide for his 
family here. Gervais said at this September 2, 19/0, meeting that as much, 
as he would like to testify for the government, "after all the fanfare and 
excitement, after all the flags waving and the'bugles blowing, after all 
that is over, l have to go home alone!” Gervais said at this time and on 
other oo<—I - ^u ■k ~ 11 V- • -**»J - - *• --*•»   *•-* 
rg. -n go through the experience he went* through when lie testified in the 
Hew Orleans police corruption scandals or the 19^0’s. 
6e and on 
other oo<—I - ^u ■k ~ 11 V- • -**»J - - *• --*•»   *•-* 
rg. -n go through the experience he went* through when lie testified in the 
Hew Orleans police corruption scandals or the 19^0’s. 
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---I - ^u ■k ~ 11 V- • -**»J - - *• --*•»   *•-* 
rg. -n go through the experience he went* through when lie testified in the 
Hew Orleans police corruption scandals or the 19^0’s. 
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

\ 
5 
: i 
t 
3 y [ 
f t. 
1 
F 
i 1 
t 
i t 
(10) Cn Saturday, November 7, 1970, Wall met with Gervais and 
Special Agent Puckett. The three discussed conditions* under which Gervais 
might or might not testify as to certain past, present, and continuing 
crimes and the conditions under which he might or might not be able to 
transmit and record conversations of present and continuing crimes.' Gervais 
stated to Wall that up until the passage of the Organized Crime Control 
Act of 1970, which became law on October 15, 1970, he was confident that 
he v/as not in violation of "federal law regarding a certain bribery situ- 
ation in which he v/as the middle-man; he stated, however, that after having 
seen a copy of the Organized Crime Control Act of 1970 he was aware that 
he was in all likelihood now involved in federal violations; that he 
wanted some guidance whether to continue in these activities or to imme- 
diately get out of them; he told Wall that he was next scheduled to re- 
ceive pinball bribe money as the middle-man sometime in December. Wall’ * 
suggested to him that in conjunction with the possibilities of his transmit- 
ting and recording certain conversations withrespect to these illegal 
transactions, judgment should be for the time being deferred as to whether 
or not to act as go-between for the forthcoming bribes, and that they would 
again discuss the matter-before Gervais v/as next scheduled to act as go- 
between for payment of pinball bribe money In early December. 
(11) At a November 13, 1970, meeting between*Val1, Special Agent 
Puckett, and Gervais, the latter again expressed concern lest he run afoul 
of the Organized Crime Control Act of 1970. Gervais said that with regard 
to the pinball payoffs to certain officials, which payoffs were then being 
discussed and renegotiated due to a change in the city administration, 
•he thought he would be able to stay out of the actual transfers of rone/ 
and still supply us with the infprrnation, but that he might have to be 
involved in actual transfers of money in order not to arouse suspicion, 
since it v/as liardiy his style to back off from participating directly in 
such money transact ions. Wall told Gervnis it was preferable that h . t 
be an actual participant in transfers of money, but that if it were un- 
avoidable, for him to CD ahead and participate in transfers of money. *'.»?] 
further told him that within the next month the federal government would 
be taking such action as to cripple the pinball gambling industry in 
7D ahead and participate in transfers of money. *'.»?] 
further told him that within the next month the federal government would 
be taking such action as to cripple the pinball gambling industry in 
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---ate in transfers of money. *'.»?] 
further told him that within the next month the federal government would 
be taking such action as to cripple the pinball gambling industry in 
7

--- PAGE BREAK ---

s i 
! i 
i i 
i 
it night well later be unfortunate indeed not to have taken advantage of 
the opportunity of having made tapes of the actual voices of the conspir- 
ators planning and executing their illegal activity. Wall further told 
Gcrvais that ha understood the latter's concern, not only for the psycho- 
logical pressure involved in testifying but also Gervais' concern for the 
future safety and well being of his family should it ever be revealed that 
Gervais had been cooperating with the Government in these matters. 
Wall told Gervais that the opportunity for obtaining on tapes 
these incriminating conversations of the conspirators was coming to an 
end; that rf and when the tapes ever were used by the Government, Gervais 
^ would first be consulted, in order that he be assured that .our plan would 
• ’*?<>£ surface his identity and cooperation, without his prior consent. 
Gervais agreed at this November 13* 1971, meeting to the consensual eaves- 
dropping on his conversations by Government agents. 
In several discussions of the conditions under which Gervais / - 
might, also be a Government witness, Gervais suggested that if he were able 
to become some kind of Government agent he might testify; that he simply 
could not take the stand and testify for the Government and suffer the 
br.and of "stool pigeon" that he and his family, particularly his young 
son, would have to suffer. He explained his anguish over the trauma his 
older son, then missing in Viet Mam, had gone through when he (Gervais) 
testified fn the Mew Orleans police scandals of the 1950's. Ha further 
stated that as arv employed Government agent he would have Identity and 
would not be subject to the same contempt which x-.ould focus on him other- 
wise. Gervais said that while possibly helping the Government from an 
evidentiary and trial tactics standpoint if he were an "employee" rather 
than just an informant, he could also use seme money now. Gervais said 
he wanted to help himself if possible, as well as help the Government, 
and asked wouldn't it look better for trial purposes if he had status as 
an "employee" regarding the Information he was now supplying the* Government! 
was c '.‘ miant ‘.hot the c.ppc • i to .. the rrefused to consider 
pjying Go ■ :i~ h‘s cooperation us such, though Gervais, Wall, and 
Packet’ It . .1 swvn.til occasions discussed (just as had Moore, Puckett, and 
I 
w*. 
* 
rV1*" y^[ 
* '«'V\** 4 * 
9d to consider 
pjying Go ■ :i~ h‘s cooperation us such, though Gervais, Wall, and 
Packet’ It . .1 swvn.til occasions discussed (just as had Moore, Puckett, and 
I 
w*. 
* 
rV1*" y^[ 
* '«'V\** 4 * 
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---g Go ■ :i~ h‘s cooperation us such, though Gervais, Wall, and 
Packet’ It . .1 swvn.til occasions discussed (just as had Moore, Puckett, and 
I 
w*. 
* 
rV1*" y^[ 
* '«'V\** 4 * 
9

--- PAGE BREAK ---

«*> r 0 
\l* 
M i ¥ 
J' v<*^ 
sr 
rK i 
Wi'4v 
JVT^ 
5t:V A 
JM > 
A. o*\ 
f ^ * A 
rf'V^V' 
*i*' 
* h 
I 
. j 
. 4v 
>' .*• 
n.^s £ 
'.>0 
4V 
VJ* ■ 
At * 
«. ' ✓ 
'>*}* 
1 * V* 
Yf 
A 
11 
/V>v 
^-r J * 
; 
ry/4 
Gervais before the leIter ever met Well) the necessity, in the event of 
relocation of Gervais and his family, of locating a job for him. 
(12) As outlined in the affidavit filed with this Court with 
arrest and search warrants on June 30,1971, and as again testified to in 
this Court on July 9, 1571, by John Wall after he and United States Attor- 
ney Gerald J. Gollinghouse were charged criminally by District Attorney 
Jim Garrison: on November 16, 1970, Special Agents of the Intelligence 
Division, Internal Revenue Service, began monitoring and recording conver- 
sations between Gervais and various other persons. In most instances 
Internal Revenue Service Agents v/ere 4in an adjoining room to Gervais* at 
the Fontainebleau Motore Hotel in New Orleans, with connecting doors. In- 
ternal Revenue Service Agents attempted to surveil and photograph parties 
coming to the hotel to discuss i1 legal activity with Gervais and in some .* 
instances surveilled parties directly intc Gervais* room. Internal Rev- 
enue Service agents would be with Gervais before the parties appeared,* would 
then, through the connecting doorway, .go into the adjoining room, whereupon 
they, would sImultaneously eavesdrop on the conversations that were taking 
place while tape-recording them and taking notes. As Chief of the Intelli- 
gence Division of the Internal Revenue Service in the New Orleans District 
and as supervisor of this joint Internal Revenue Service-Strike Force in- 
vestigation, I personally monitored all or parts of the following conver- 
sations as they took place and were tape-recorded: 
Date 
Subjects Monitored 
N, W . 
Others Present Resides 
Floyd D. Mcore 
2/25/71 
Gervais, Jim Garrison, £> 
Mrs. Jim Garrison 
Arlie G. Puckett 
Joel J. Lanoux 
Ellington G. Burleson 
Edmond J. Martin 
James 0. Gann 
Irving J. Johnson 
John Wa 11 
3/1/71 
Gervais S Mrs. Jim Garrison 
Arlie G. Puckett 
Joel J. Lanoux 
James 0. Gann 
John Wall. 
3/5/71 
Gervais S Frederick A. Soule, Sr. 
Arlie G. pLV.V.att 
.Joel J. Lchis’+x 
Irving J. Johnson 
3/3/71 
Gervais, Jin Garrison, V 
Mrs. Jirn Garrison 
Arlie G. 
James 0. Gann 
Joel J. Lanoux 
Edmond J. Martin 
Irving J. Johnson 
Ellington Burleson 
James DoProto 
John Wall 
10Irving J. Johnson 
3/3/71 
Gervais, Jin Garrison, V 
Mrs. Jirn Garrison 
Arlie G. 
James 0. Gann 
Joel J. Lanoux 
Edmond J. Martin 
Irving J. Johnson 
Ellington Burleson 
James DoProto 
John Wall 
10

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Date 
3/13/71 
3/27/71 
Subjects Mon»Cored 
Gervais £■ Louis M. Doasbcrg 
Gervais G John Elms, Jr. 
3/3I/7I. • Gervais & Frederick A. Soule, Sr. 
Others Present Cesidcs 
Floyd D. Too re 
Arlic G. Puckett 
Joel J. Lanoux 
Edmond J. Martin 
Irving J. Johnson 
John Wal1 
Joel J. Lanoux 
Arlie G. Puckett 
Edmond J. Martin 
Irving J. Johnson 
Arlie G. Puckett 
"Joel J. Lanoux 
1 1 
\ I 
1 
l 
\ 1 
3/3I/7I 
4/6/71 
.4/23/71 
5/4/71 
5/28/71 
5/28/71 
6/29/71 
6/.Vv/7l 
Gervais £• John Elms, Jr,. 
Gervais £• John Elms, Jr. 
Gervais G Frederick A. Soule, S*r. 
Gervais £ Frederick A. Soule Sr. 
Gervais & Santo DiFatta 
Gervais & Jim Garrfson 
Gervais & Harby S. Marks, Jr. 
Gcrveis, Jin Garrison, £■ 
Mrs. Jim Garrison 
Arlie G. Puckett* 
Joel J.%Lanoux 
Arlie G. Puckett 
Edmond J. Martin 
Irving Johnson 
Joel J. Lanoux 
Irving J. Johnson 
Arlie G. Puckett 
Arlie G. Puckett 
Joel J. Lanoux 
Edmond J. Martin 
Irving J. Johnson 
Arlie G. Puckett 
John H. Upshaw 
Edmond J. Martin 
Joel J. Lanoux 
Irving J. Johnson 
ArlIe G. Puckett 
Joel J. Lanoux 
John H. Upshaw 
Edmond J. Martin 
Irving J. Johnson 
Joel J. Lanoux 
Edmond J. Martin 
Arlie G. Puckett 
Pu.?i i ar.o Mn 1 teira i 
Edmond J. Martin 
Joel J. Lanoux 
Arthur J. Derbes 
Arlie G. Puckett 
Irving J. Johnson 
11

--- PAGE BREAK ---Johnson 
Joel J. Lanoux 
Edmond J. Martin 
Arlie G. Puckett 
Pu.?i i ar.o Mn 1 teira i 
Edmond J. Martin 
Joel J. Lanoux 
Arthur J. Derbes 
Arlie G. Puckett 
Irving J. Johnson 
11

--- PAGE BREAK ---

During the time that Internal Revenue Service Intelligence agents 
monitored and recorded Gervais’ conversations with others, whenever bribe 
money passed through Gervais' hands it was retained and kept as evidence 
and was replaced with funds whose serial numbers were recorded. Gervais 
was allowed to retain no part of any of the bribe money. 
(13) On January 4, 1971. Gervais met with Wall and Puckett, at 
which time Gervais expressed his concern that, in the event there could 
not be worked out any way in which to use the consensual tape recordings 
that were now being made with his coopera.t Ion, the tapes should be destroyed 
so as to lessen the chance of his being "burned11 as having cooperated with 
* . * * - 
the Government. Wall reminded Gervais that these tapes were,-being made with 
his consent and with the promise that they would not be used In any way that 
would compromise Gervais’ identity wi thout Gervais being consulted and 
agreeable to any use to which they might be put. Gervais was told by Vail 
that if it were apparent that all possible practical uses of the tapes to - 
the Department of Justice had been exhausted and Gervais v.*anted them destroyed 
because of his concern that his cooperation with the Government become known,•* 
Wall would comply with his request. 
. From January through April of 1971, discussions between Gervais, 
Wall, Puckett, and myself continued regarding conditions under which Gervais 
might give consent to the Government "surfacing" him and using the tape 
recordings that were being made, including the possibility of relocating 
him and his entire family in another country in a job which would allow 
his family to retain the standard of living to which they were accustomed 
and which would offer him an opportunity for a new future in a line of work 
in which he could be useful. V'e discussed different possibilities, includ- 
ing plant security and undercover Investigative work. During this period, 
preeminent in our discussions was a long-pending case before the United 
States Supreme Court, United States v. White. 401 U.S. 7^5, finally decided 
.* p r i I 5, 197** It vi a 9 explained to eei’Vrtiu iiuc t»iss V.»> ■ ^ 
decide cur ability to use the tape recordings from the consensual eaves- 
dropping in conjunction with the testimony of the monitoring agents without 
having to cill Gervais as a Government witness.decide cur ability to use the tape recordings from the consensual eaves- 
dropping in conjunction with the testimony of the monitoring agents without 
having to cill Gervais as a Government witness.

--- PAGE BREAK ---to use the tape recordings from the consensual eaves- 
dropping in conjunction with the testimony of the monitoring agents without 
having to cill Gervais as a Government witness.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

It was expressed to Gervais that l/hi tc could be decided in one of 
several ways; that if it were decided favorably to the Government and in 
conformance with what Y/all considered to be the present state of the law, 
Gervais might not be required to testify as a witness at all, in view of 
the nature of the Government*S evidence; that in any event, if he were 
outside the country he would not be subject to subpoena. Also discussed 
with Gervais on several occasions during this period was a provision of 
the Organized Crime Control Act of 1970 at Title 13 of the United States 
Code, Sect Ton 3503, entitled "Depositions to preserve testimony". After 
some discussion of the provision, Gervais agreed to submit to a pre-trial 
deposition, but not inside the State of Louisiana. Y/all explained that 
if his concern was being in Louisiana, a Louisiana federal court subpoena 
served on him personally would reach inta any State. Y/all also explained 
that if the deposition were held in another State and Garrison filed charges 
on him and had him extradited in conjunction with a district attorney fn* 
another State, he should be aware that there was little the Federal Gov- 
ernment could do about it. Once made aware of the above, Gervais said 
tfiat he would submit to a deposition in a foreign country only, and the 
possibility of a ship at sea or of Mexico as a convenient place was dis- 
cussed. • • 
'(14) On April 15, 1971, Gervais was introduced for the first 
time to Gerald -Shur, Attorney in Charge, Intelligence and Special Services 
Unit of the Criminal Division of the Department of Justice, at the Hilton 
Inn Motor Hotel in Kenner, Louisiana. Gervais and Shur were introduced in 
the presence cf Vail, Puckett, and myself. Shur discussed relocation and 
job poss ibi1ities with Cervais, including possible relocation in one of. 
several foreign countries as well as possible problems as to language, 
climate, types of employment, salary, and relocation expenses. 
Gervais had bacn told by Wall on a number of occasions in my 
presence and in Special Agent Puckett's presence, both before meeting Shur 
and after meeting Shur, that the Government, once it obtained a job for 
hin, could not guarantee indefinite employment; that he could quit any time 
and that the employer could fire him any time it was dissatisfied with his 
performance; but that as long as Gervais made a sincere effort to givee indefinite employment; that he could quit any time 
and that the employer could fire him any time it was dissatisfied with his 
performance; but that as long as Gervais made a sincere effort to give

--- PAGE BREAK ---ent; that he could quit any time 
and that the employer could fire him any time it was dissatisfied with his 
performance; but that as long as Gervais made a sincere effort to give

--- PAGE BREAK ---

satisfactory performance on his job, the Government would continue to moke 
efforts to seek other employment for him for on indefinite period should 
the initial job or jobs not work out for any reason. Ccrvois expressed 
concern that he should get a real job, one in which there would be an • 
opportunity to prove his ability as a plant security man or on investigator, 
undercover or otherwise. Ke seemed confident that he could be successful 
end v/as enthusiastic about a new life for himself and for his family. 
V • ^ 05) Following the April 15.. 1971, meeting with Gervals. Shur 
contacted representatives of a foreign government whose country v/as 
Gervais' first relocation preference. While these efforts v/erc being made 
and prior to Kay 13, 1971, Shur contacted a representative of the United 
States Chamber of Commerce (which organization has for some time cooperated 
* f • 
with the Department of Justice in matters of crime prevention and control ** . 
. and wh‘ch organization has previously assisted in the witness relocation 
program) and indicated the need for assistance in relocation of a witness-, 
giving Gervais* background but not.his identity, nor his location. The 
Chamber of Cop^erce representative contacted administraters of private 
businesses, one of whom told the Chamber representative to contact a named 
vice-president of a large American oil company, who, after discussion v/ith 
the Chamber of Commerce representative regarding the problem of placing 
witnesses, agreed to a meeting with a Justice Department representative. 
Pursuant to the foregoing, Gerald Shur met with an executive of the oil 
N I 
company on May 14, 1971, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, to outline the reloca- 
tion problem, following which conversation the executive said that the oil 
company would consider the matter; Subsequently, Shur was put in touch 
v/ith another representatIve of the oil company, by the executive whom he had 
met in Pittsburgh. Gn May 25, 1971, Shur met with two representatives of 
the oil company in a hotel In New Orleans. Shur'discusscd the relocation 
problems with the oil company representatives at that time, including the 
fact that it ...<— «\n_i c ... -i.^, f .. 
Ir.vecL i^ .L ic.-i-s o; criminal matters end that District Attorney Jim Garrison 
and soma New Orleans police officers were among the prospective defendants. 
After this disclosure to the representatives of the oil company and on the 
same day, Pershing Gervais was interviewed by the two oil company representa- 
tives in Shur1 s presence. Gervais told the represcnt.it ives about his back- 1 
ground as a pol and investigator. At that point the possibilities ' js interviewed by the two oil company representa- 
tives in Shur1 s presence. Gervais told the represcnt.it ives about his back- 1 
ground as a pol and investigator. At that point the possibilities ' j

--- PAGE BREAK ---two oil company representa- 
tives in Shur1 s presence. Gervais told the represcnt.it ives about his back- 1 
ground as a pol and investigator. At that point the possibilities ' j

--- PAGE BREAK ---

of a job with the oil company in several different countries were discussed, 
but the primary focus of the conversation was on a job location in Canada 
at a salary of $22,000 a year. Toward the conclusion of the meeting, 
the oil company representatives told Shur that they liked Gcrvais and that 
he might be of use in the security work of the organization. At this May 
24, 1971 meeting it was clearly established* at the interview that neither 
the oil company r.or Gervais was bound in any way to a long-time contract 
o» employment; that if the oil company were dissatisfied with Gervais1 
performance, it could ;terminate the employment at any time. Subsequently, * 
the oil company made a firm offer of employment to Gervais through Shur, 
at a salary of $22,000 a year, the job location being in Vancouver, Canada. 
’ . * (16) At a meeting with his superiors in Washington on May 20, • 
• % * 
1971, Wall briefed them on the background to the instant investigation, 
including the consensual eavesdrops and tape recordings on condition 
that no use of these recordings or disclosure of Gervais' identity be made 
without the latter's prior consent; that if he were to consent to the use 
of evidence obtained with his help it must be on condition that the Government 
assist him and his family in relocating and In obtaining new identities; that 
such location(s) and identities not be revealed to anyone without Gervais' 
consent; that he would not be called by the Government to testify in the 
case without his consent; and that since there was no likelihood of obtain- 
ing legally sufficient evidence of the instant crimes without agreeing to 
the above, the Government so agreed. 
Also discussed was the nature of the evidence so far obtained 
in the case, as well as the surrounding facts and circumstances, and the 
applicable law. It was concluded that the testimony of the monitoring 
agents in this case, together with the tape recordings and survei1 lances' 
made by them, arc independent evidence of the crimes committed without 
the legal necessity of producing Gervais as a Government witness, end that 
• ■1 - 11 * • 
-nt • '.'.'ii r-.n.ed in proo’i* ljp*,g a-ga ?; • t the r>ronoS'^sd defendant’s 
v ‘ •»* ■1 i v: ’• J up t o i ts co • ' i tr/wht s to . /e i s. 
fi* A. ' ’-is odv I iii'l by bill or the abev.: meeting, and again told, 
os he had previously been told in the discussions of the Whitc case and 
other relevant legal cases, that while the Government would not call him 
os a witness, the defendants or the court itself could call Gervais to 
the stand if a subpoena were served on him -within the United States.legal cases, that while the Government would not call him 
os a witness, the defendants or the court itself could call Gervais to 
the stand if a subpoena were served on him -within the United States.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ile the Government would not call him 
os a witness, the defendants or the court itself could call Gervais to 
the stand if a subpoena were served on him -within the United States.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

* I* 
} 
j i 
i 
j 
i 
i 
i 
j 
) 
. 
H- 
u 
■i'\ 
c 
<\\ \ 
(J7) Based on the above described commitment by the oil company, 
Ge4/ois agreed that his identity could be surfaced as having cooperated 
with the Government and that the tape recordings could oc used. Plans were 
begun for the preparation of arrest and search warrants, to be executed 
after Gervais had received and passed on the next payment of the pinball 
bribe money which was due in early July. Arrests of ten defendants were 
made and seizures were made of marked money at the home of Jim Garrison 
and on the persons of two Mew Orleans policemen on the morning of June 30, 
1971, shortly after Gervais had left New Orleans in the protective custody 
of United States Marshals. Gervais was to travel with his family under an 
assumed name to insure his anonymity end security until sometime in August, 
1971, at which time he would report for his job in Vancouver, Canada, as 
' * • * • 
Paul Mason. 
(18) On July 1, 1971, in Houston, Texas, Shur met again with 
representatives of the oil company, informed them that the anticipated. .. 
arrests and searches had been made and that Gervais had left New Orleans 
in protective custody of United State's Marshals. The employment of Gervais 
at $22,000 a year in Vancouver, Canada was again confirmed by the oil com-" 
pany and a tentative-appointment was made for Shur, Gervais, and the oil 
company employer representative to meet in Canada in the letter part of 
the summer. On or about September 2, 1971, one of the oil company repre- 
sentatives who had met with Gervais and Shur in Mew Orleans, and again 
with Shur in Houston, called Shur and asked Shur to contact the oil company's 
general counsel that there were some problems. Shur called the general 
counsel for the oil company and the latter explained his concern that the 
hiring of Gervais could be a politically damaging situation to both the oil 
'company and the Department of Justice; that the oil company has a lot of 
matters berore the Ccpartmant and that it might appear that the oil company 
were currying favor with the Department of Justice. The oil company's 
general counsel also said that the company has daily activities befa.-e 
a 'one ics in Lou i s i. MM, end that the company takes leases every day; th^t 
the company does more oil business in Louisiana chon any other State in’ 
the Union, and that if the company's Invaiversont in the natter became, 
known it could seriously affect their business, an eventuality the company 
16business in Louisiana chon any other State in’ 
the Union, and that if the company's Invaiversont in the natter became, 
known it could seriously affect their business, an eventuality the company 
16

--- PAGE BREAK ---na chon any other State in’ 
the Union, and that if the company's Invaiversont in the natter became, 
known it could seriously affect their business, an eventuality the company 
16

--- PAGE BREAK ---

did not want to risk. Moving made a firm cot;ani tmcnt to Gervais of a job 
v/ith a salary of $22,000 a year; Gervais having uprooted his family; 
Gervais' cooperation v/ith the Government having been surfaced by the 
execution of arrest and search warrants on June 30» 1971 and Gervais 
and his family having arrived in Canada and prepared to begin employment 
and a new life there in September of 1971, the oil company reneged on its 
firm commitment of employment to Gervais. 
(19) Shur subsequently told Gervais, who had arrived in Van- 
couver., Canada, that the oil company had becked cut of Its job commitment; 
that the Department was committed to attempt to find him another job, but 
that there could be no certainty of its ability to find a job in Vancouver. 
, Shur suggested that Gervais not buy a house the latter was interested in, 
since the job ccrrmitment by the oil company was not being kept. Gervais 
said he v/ould not move his family another mile; that he liked Vancouver 
and that he was staying there and buying a house he had looked at and liked, 
even if he didn’t have a job; that his bcinj there was the Department's 
responsibility and that the Department must find him a job in Vancouver 
since he flatly refused to move anywhere else. 
The Department of Justice acknowledged that it did have a re- 
sponsibility to Gervais and agreed to pay him subsistence while it at- 
tempted to locate a comparable job and salary to the one the oil company 
had reneged upon, but that it could not guarantee success in locating such 
a job in Vancouver. 
(20) After his arrival in Canada, Gervais expressed to me by 
' telephone and in strong terms his dissatisfaction v/ith the efforts anu 
performance of the United States Marshals' Service regarding arrangements 
for travel accommodations, security for his family, the care and boaromg 
of his wife’s show dogs pending Gervais' arrival .at Vancouver (including . 
the death of one adult and two puppies believed horn dead at a kennef), 
_... ?ojr ; ijrvice to hin. f iring subsequent telephone conversations 
Inns n? dissntisf.-.mtion inerrv.ed, ns did his complaints about 
.:■« jib ‘hat f«H through when the oil company r .raged on its roia.nltiront, 
living conditions in Canada, the cost of real estate, delays in getting 
his children's medical and school records in order, and delays in getting 
his furniture delivered from Mow Orleans to Vancouver, ail of which cul-Canada, the cost of real estate, delays in getting 
his children's medical and school records in order, and delays in getting 
his furniture delivered from Mow Orleans to Vancouver, ail of which cul-

--- PAGE BREAK ---real estate, delays in getting 
his children's medical and school records in order, and delays in getting 
his furniture delivered from Mow Orleans to Vancouver, ail of which cul-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

September, 1971, at which time he and I discussed his* dissat isfactions 
mentioned above. Vc also discussed at that time my grave concern for the 
physical safety of him and his family as long as he remained in Mew Orleans. 
(21) On Saturday, September 4, 1971, at approximately 1:00 p.m., 
Catherine Kimrey, Intelligence Operations Specialist, Intelligence and 
Special Services Unit, Organized Crime and Racketeering Section, Criminal 
Division, Department of Justice, received at her home in Arlington, Vir- 
ginia, the first of four telephone calls that day from Pershing Gervais, when 
he said that his furniture had not yet been delivered from Mew Orleans 
and that he wanted immediate delivery. A second call was received from 
Gervais shor.tly after the first call, at which time Gervai’s sard that he 
» » • • * * • 
-was furious, as he had now ascertained that his furriiwure would not be " • 
.\ 
delivered until at least the following Monday, two days away. Gervais 
further stated that he would not be available all the next week to receive 
the furniture and that would mean that the driver and the van would have' 
to wait all week and the Justice Department would have to pay the extra 
expenses. Gervais further told Miss Kimrey that in view of these develop-1 
ments the Department of Justice was going to have to pay additional ex- 
penses from the first of the month; that he had two house mortgages to 
pay, insurance on two houses, plus a hotel bill, and that the Department 
would have to pay it all; that he was going to be difficult from now on, 
even though he ftad not been difficult up to that point. Gervais said that 
he was "going to start living well" and the Government will have to pick 
up the bills or else start all over with him. Miss Kimrey said she would 
* attempt to contact appropriate Justice Department officials to get in 
touch with Gervais, who replied, that it was Labor Day weekend and there 
was no way he could reach anyone or anyone could reach him. A third call 
was received by Miss Kimrey from Gervais at approximately 2:00 p.m., Sat- 
urday. Gervais tolc hs that, he was leaving for Mew Orleans at 9:2? Sunday 
morn lug; that ha was roinq to leave his car in Seattle and o'* going to 
the Mi Iron Inn in Mew Orleans and he didn’t care whon he infuriated. A 
fourth call was received by Miss Kimrey late Saturday night from Seattle, 
in which Gervais repeated that he was going to Mew Orleans.Iron Inn in Mew Orleans and he didn’t care whon he infuriated. A 
fourth call was received by Miss Kimrey late Saturday night from Seattle, 
in which Gervais repeated that he was going to Mew Orleans.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ans and he didn’t care whon he infuriated. A 
fourth call was received by Miss Kimrey late Saturday night from Seattle, 
in which Gervais repeated that he was going to Mew Orleans.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(22) Cn September 7, 1971, Wall and I caught a plane for Wash- 
ington, O.C., where the two of us spent the next two days discussing 
Ccrvais' complaints with Wall's superiors at the Department of Justice, 
while Gervais remained in Hew Orleans with his family. Wall's superiors 
expressed grave concern over what they perceived to be an impetuous and 
unwarranted return of Gervais and family to Hew Orleans, resulting in-a 
serious breach of all the elaborate precautions taken to insure the physical 
Safety as wall as the new identity and location of Gervais and his family. 
In .this, regard. Wall's superiors were adamant that.they would pay no part 
of the round trip expenses from Vancouver to Hew Orleans and back, approxi- 
mately $800, and that if Gervais at any time again returned to the United 
States without the permission of the Government all agreements and pro- * ’ 
mises on the part of the Government would be cancelled. In Washington, ' • 
. the Department of Justice agreed to settle Gervais' claims on the following 
basis: dead-dogs - $1,700; loss on sale of automobile - $300; adjustment* 
on per diem for motel expenses while waiting for furniture to arrive in 
Vancouver - $110; two-months payment allowance on his mortage on his New 
Orleans house - $400. The Department of Justice also agreed to guarantee 
employment for two years at $22,000 with the Government making subsistence 
payments for any difference in actual wages. Wall and Moore met with Ger- 
vais at the Hilton Motor Inn upon their return from Washington in tho early 
morning hours of September 9, 1971. Gervais agreed to return to Canada 
- ' *>> 
on the terms set forth above, but expressed bitterness at the Department's 
rcrusal to pay his travel expenses for his unauthorized trip to New Orleans, 
and told Wall and me at that time that he was no longer willing to submit 
to a pre-trial deposition. At this meeting, also at Cervais' insistence, 
it was agreed that all future communication between Gervais and the Mar- 
shals' Service would cease-and that the Internal Revenue Service, through 
me, Floyd 0. Moore, would be the conduit of any problem. Gervais insisted 
Upon tbz terms of the :,re-^nt balng avid,need by a writing, to which 
, resulting in Wall's letter to Pershing Gervais dated Septem- 
ber 23, 1371. (Stee at Lcc.i»m.ent £ 1) 
(23) On September 7, 1971, Gerald Shur received an envelope 
addressed to him with a September 2, 1971, Canadian postmark, containing • 
a tape recording from Pershing Cervais, * r.n mart zing his complaints aboutmber 7, 1971, Gerald Shur received an envelope 
addressed to him with a September 2, 1971, Canadian postmark, containing • 
a tape recording from Pershing Cervais, * r.n mart zing his complaints about

--- PAGE BREAK ---Shur received an envelope 
addressed to him with a September 2, 1971, Canadian postmark, containing • 
a tape recording from Pershing Cervais, * r.n mart zing his complaints about

--- PAGE BREAK ---

those responsible for servicing him and his family. An excerpt of Cervais 
recorded statement to Shur reads os follows: 
"I guess i should repeat again here that if Hr. /the United 
States Marshal responsible for servicing Cervais/ feelings 
are hurt, if he gets to hear what I have to say here I 
meant .to hurt his feelings. I would like to tell him person- 
a ly '..‘.'.at I really think. It is at least equal to how he 
has made me feel in the impression he has given me of what 
he thinks. He has caused me to be convicncd I made great 
error committing myself in the manner that 1 did. lie has 
caused me to have my faith in the - in the - government, 
to say the least, challenged - waiting. He has caused me 
to have a lot of negative ideas from your side of the 
fence, Gerry; positive ideas from my side of the fence if 
.*• ; .'/ou understand what - what Mm trying to say. This whole 
.* *.’• thing has been one horrible experience. Somebody should . 
know and l think it should be well to point out here that 
Mrv V/all test i fied. very recently under, oath in federal court 
in Mew Orleans, Louisiana that the Internal Revenue Service 
* * an<^ the United States Government had investigated me 
thoroughly, completely, totally and came up with nothing. 
Absolute nothing. And so indicated to me that they came 
up with nothing before I ever agreed or considered - not 
agreed - but before I considered aiding the government. 
The point is that I am not an individual who is buying my 
own liberty by whatever by assisting the government." 
(*) 0n or about September 19, 1971, Shur and Gervais met \n. 
Toronto with executives of General Motors-of Canada, where they discussed 
Gervais1 background .and abilities. Gervais was hired by General Motors 
of Canada at $18,000 a year, underwent three weeks training near Toronto, 
Cani<b, but only began work in Vancouver on February 1, 1972, due in large 
part to a delay in the completion of administrative details. In view of 
the $4,000 discrepancy between the broken commitment of the oil company 
and his $18,000 salary with General Motors and Gervais1 having uprooted ' 
his family based on a firm $22,000 a year commitment by the oil company, 
the Department of Justice agreed to supplement Gervais1 salary for a 
two-year period so that it would be equal to that which had been promised 
by the oil company. 
C*n April 11, 1972, Deputy United States Marshal Hugh 
• .Cuonald, assigned to the office of Gerald Shur, Attorney in Charge* 
Intelligence 5- Special Services Unit, Organized Crime and Racketeerin«j 
s —:,,n* Criminal Division, Department of Justice, received a telephone 
e,’U ,"r. 'Shur1* rice from Pershing Gervais, who was making inquiry 
Aou: !i;s supplemental subsistence check for $136.6?, which had-been air- 
mailed on April 7, 1971, to Paul Mason, 1127 Skana Drive, Delta, British 
20e from Pershing Gervais, who was making inquiry 
Aou: !i;s supplemental subsistence check for $136.6?, which had-been air- 
mailed on April 7, 1971, to Paul Mason, 1127 Skana Drive, Delta, British 
20

--- PAGE BREAK ---ais, who was making inquiry 
Aou: !i;s supplemental subsistence check for $136.6?, which had-been air- 
mailed on April 7, 1971, to Paul Mason, 1127 Skana Drive, Delta, British 
20

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Columbia, Canada. Deputy Harshal McDonald said that he had no authority 
in this matter; that he had sHaply followed instructions in mailing the 
check; that any questions he had should be referred to Mr. Shyrv who was 
then in Miami, Florida on business. Gervais told Marshal McDonald that 
he owed a lot of bills and they were piling up; that he was having a money 
problem; that he had never said this before, but that he knew people who 
would be "delighted to pick up these bills". Gervais further said that 
although the Justice Department is big and powerful, he (Gervais) was not 
afraid of.them and would not tolerate anymore the treatment he was re- 
ceiving. Gervais said he was getting tired of It; that he was in the hole 
financially; and that "somebody will bail me out". 
(26) On April 14, 1972, Gerald Sbur talked by telephone with ’ 
Pershing Gervais, who reiterated his previous complaints about poor treaty' \ 
ment of him and threatened that he was quitting his job and returning to 
Mew Orleans because he had not been treated right by the Department of^ 
Justice. 
Gervais stated that he was not bound by the letter he had requested 
and received from John Wall, dated September 28, 197.1, as he had not signed 
it (referred to in paragraph (22) and attached hereto). 
Gervais charged that John Wall.had gotten him into the picture 
step by step by painting a rosy picture. Ha asked what would be in this 
for him a year from now. He complained that the $22,000 salary he would 
received in the .next year would be insufficient for him to live on. He 
maintained that he had lost money on the dogs that had been killed or died 
while being boarded in a kennel, on his furniture, on living in a rrotel, 
•in storage*of his wife’s fur coats, and on damages to his house in Metairie, 
Louisiana, and on plants and rose bushes which had been stolen. 
Gervais further charged that the Department of Justice, for 
pTTnitive reasons, made him pay for his unauthorized trip back to Mew 
Orleans in September. He repeated that he was unable to make a $5,000 
mortgage payment and that certain monies which he had formerly been receiv- 
ing from Mew Orleans had now stopped. He stated that he could move bac.< to 
jjcw Orleans, and there he could sit in the Fontainebleau Motor Hotel and 
r.ake twice the money for doing nothing. 
*1