t 
CBS NEWS 
2020 M Street, N. W. 
Washington, D. C. 20036 
FACE THE NATION 
t 
as broadcast over the 
CBS Television Network 
and the 
CBS Radio Network 
Sunday, August 29, 1976 -- 11:30 AM - 12:00 Noon, EOT 
Origination: Washington, D. C. 
GUEST; W. MARK FELT 
Former Associate Director 
Federal Bureau of Investigation 
REPORTERS: 
Marya McLaughlin, CBS News 
Ronald J. Ostrow, The Los Angeles Times 
Fred Graham, CBS News 
Producer: Mary 0. Yates 
Associate Producer: Joan Barone 
and copyright and right to copyright in this transcri 
® I’roadcast are owned by CBS. Newspapers and periodicals a 
Sf re^ar^nJf this^tJanscript^for thfpurpose 
than^tM®”'^^’ review. For permission to reprint more

--- PAGE BREAK ---ght in this transcri 
® I’roadcast are owned by CBS. Newspapers and periodicals a 
Sf re^ar^nJf this^tJanscript^for thfpurpose 
than^tM®”'^^’ review. For permission to reprint more

--- PAGE BREAK ---

1 
MCLAUGHLIN: Mr. Felt, you are a former number two man at the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation. Now you've admitted at least one 
break-in, aimed at the Weathermen, in 1972, without warrant. How can 
you legally and morally justify that action? 
MR. FELT: Of course, there's no question about the facts. I've 
admitted the facts. The question is whether or not it's legally and 
morally justified. And the answer is a rather long answer, and I would 
like to say, before getting into that question, which will take me a 
little longer t^ answer, is the fact that everybody advised me against 
coming on this show, which my wife and I watch every week, incidental- 
ly; but they they all said, you have everything to lose and nothing to 
gain--said the prosecutor will use anything you say against you. 
Everybody but two told me that, and they--they are two of my closest 
confidants, one is my wife, Audrey, and the other is Ladislas Farago, 
who IS writing a biography of Hoover. And both of them said no; they 
said, you have to do it, because somebody has to come forward and 
stick up for the FBI. It's cheap to criticize the FBI now. And 
actually, the FBI is a wonderful organization, a magnificent organiza- 
tion, filled with wonderful, wonderful people. And yet it's being 
attacked from eveiy angle. 
ANNOUNCER: From CBS News, Washington, a spontaneous and un- 
rehearsed news interview on FACE THE NATION, with former Associate 
Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, W. Mark Felt. Mr. 
Felt will be questioned by CBS News Law Correspondent Fred Graham, 
by Justice Department Correspondent for The Los Angeles Times, Ronald 
J. Ostrow, and by CBS News Correspondent Marya McLaughlin. 
MCLAUGHLIN: Mr. Felt, now that you are here in our clutches.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Department Correspondent for The Los Angeles Times, Ronald 
J. Ostrow, and by CBS News Correspondent Marya McLaughlin. 
MCLAUGHLIN: Mr. Felt, now that you are here in our clutches.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2 
against all the good advice you had, and now you have a little time, 
what about the break-ins in 1972 against the Weathermen without 
warrant? 
MR. FELT: I think you have to put things into their proper per- 
spective. In other words, you have to find out what the FBI was trying 
to do. And as I say, I'm not denying approving these. But I'd like 
to call your attention to this little publication, which is organized 
and prepared in Cuba. It's smuggled into the United States from New 
Orleans, and rej^roduced--copies are reproduced in Seattle and Oakland. 
This is called Osawatomie. (HELD UP MAGAZINE) This is the publica- 
tion of the Weathermen underground. They claim to be communists; of 
course, that's not too serious a charge in these days. But they claim 
responsibility for hundreds of bombings, for arson; they claim respon- 
sibility for the bombing of the Capitol, the bombing of the Pentagon, 
the bombing of HEW, and many others. Now you're either going to have 
an FBI that tries to stop the violence before it happens, or you're 
not. And I suspect that it will be up to Congress now to make a deci- 
sion. But personally, I think this is justified, and I'd do it again 
tomorrow. 
OSTROW: Well, on that legal-moral justification point, Mr. Felt, 
if it is justifiable for the police to decide themselves to break in 
without a warrant, why, then, did Mr. Hoover call off this practice in 
1966? 
MR. FELT: That is a rather involved question too. I think he 
felt that he didn't have the support of the Attorney G'eneral and the 
President. And of course, the break-ins involved much more than-- 
than what we're talking about here. I mean, the--actually, the bulk of

--- PAGE BREAK ---support of the Attorney G'eneral and the 
President. And of course, the break-ins involved much more than-- 
than what we're talking about here. I mean, the--actually, the bulk of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3 
the break-ins were in connection with a program called Anagram, which 
was the stealing of cryptographic material from foreign embassies and 
foreign consulates. This didn't benefit the FBI in any way at all. 
\ 
It helped the National Security Agency and the Central Intelligence 
Agency, and I think that Hoover felt, in the absence of any support 
from the White House and from the Attorney General, that he was going 
to stop it. 
GRAHAM: Well--but as I understand it, what you're telling us is 
that after Mr. Hpover died, and Pat Gray was then the Acting Director 
of the FBI, you took it upon yourself, I believe, to authorize at 
least one break-in, into the Weather underground premises in New York. 
How can you justify yourself making that decision? 
MR. FELT: On the basis of what I knew, I thought I was doing 
what Mr. Gray wanted. And you left out another one which I admitted, 
and that's the break-in of the Palestinian Liberation Organization 
down in Dallas. They were planning on all sorts of terrorism in the 
United States, and I think we stopped it because we took that action, 
McLAUGHLIN: I think we were trying to separate those two items-- 
MR. FELT: Why separate them? 
McLAUGHLIN: Well, because there has--is--there is real--I take 
it--I'm just going to say that--I take it from what you say that you 
consider the Weathermen to be controlled or to be involved very ser- 
iously with some foreign government which is trying to overthrow this-- 
MR. FELT: Yes--yes, I do. The big difference is, in one case 
you have citizens and in the other case you have foreign nationals. 
GRAHAM: Well, may I ask you about that? Do you think--let's say 
that the Weathermen or another group have no foreign connections--and

--- PAGE BREAK ---n the other case you have foreign nationals. 
GRAHAM: Well, may I ask you about that? Do you think--let's say 
that the Weathermen or another group have no foreign connections--and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4 
you knew that, but they were bombers. Would you say that the FBI 
people in your position should have the authority to authorize break- 
ins into their premises? 
MR. FELT: I think so, yes, yes. 
GRAHAM: Well, Mr. Felt, what does this do to the Fourth Amend- 
ment, which protects the people from unreasonable searches? 
MR. FELT: Why not look at the Ninth Amendment, which says that 
nothing in any of the other amendments shall in any way prejudice the 
rights of the people as a whole. And it's a question of the greater 
good. 
GRAHAM: So you're arguing that people like in your position-- 
MR. FELT: Somebody has to take the responsibility. 
GRAHAM: To violate the rights of a few to safeguard the rights 
of the whole? 
MR. FELT: I think you could put it that way, yes. 
GRAHAM: So you're saying that officials in the hierarchy of the 
FBI, as you were, should have the legal authority to decide for them- 
selves as to who is in a position that their rights should be the ones 
to be-- 
MR. FELT: No, no, I'm not saying that. I think what'll happen 
will be that laws will be passed making this sort of action acceptable 
if you have a court order. And this would be perfectly acceptable as 
far as I'm concerned. 
MCLAUGHLIN: Mr. Felt, you said that you did not think that Mr. 
Hoover had the support of the Attorney General, and therefore he said, 
you know, call it off. What--do you feel that Attorney Generals in 
general have not given support to this kind of thing throughout?

--- PAGE BREAK ---f the Attorney General, and therefore he said, 
you know, call it off. What--do you feel that Attorney Generals in 
general have not given support to this kind of thing throughout?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5 
MR. FELT: No, I’m not saying that at all. 
McLAUGHLIN: Tell me the Attorney Generals who have OK'd-- 
MR. FELT: Oh, I'm not going to name any names, but some Attorney 
% 
Generals have very strongly supported this sort of thing. Others have 
not. Ramsey Clark, for example, would not even authorize wiretapping 
when it was--when it was authorized in the Omnibus Crime Bill. 
OSTROW: You mean recent Attorneys General have supported break- 
ins? 
MR. FELT: ^o, I'm talking about Attorney Generals in the past. 
GRAHAM: Well, speaking of your specific case, you're arguing, 
really, for a law to-- 
MR. FELT: Yes. 
GRAHAM: --make legal what was done, the implication being that 
what you did was not legal. Does that follow? 
MR. FELT: I don't say it's not legal. I say it's extra-legal. 
GRAHAM: Well, sir, do you expect to be indicted? 
MR. FELT: I don’t know. I think they have to have a scapegoat, 
and- - 
GRAHA^^: Well, if you are indicted, what could be your defense? 
You've admitted it on Face The Nation. 
MR. FELT: If I am indicted, my defense would be that the national 
security interest of the country was paramount, and that these are 
national security cases. Just--for example, here, what this says on 
the back of it is, defend Cuba. And you're--what you're saying is that 
to not take action against these people, and know of a bombing in ad- 
vance, would simply be to stick your fingers in your ears and pro- 
tect your eardrums when the explosion went off, and then start the

--- PAGE BREAK ---t these people, and know of a bombing in ad- 
vance, would simply be to stick your fingers in your ears and pro- 
tect your eardrums when the explosion went off, and then start the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6 
investigation. 
OSTROW: But is the choice really that stark? Can't you go to an 
Attorney General and attempt to convince him? And certainly, the 
Bureau has had incredible contacts on the Hill. If it doesn't work 
with that Attorney General, then you go up on the Hill and you testify; 
you say, here's the danger, we've got to have more authority now--rather 
than police taking the authority in their own hands. 
MR. FELT: Well, I think you're right. I think there should be 
legislation. But I'm simply telling you that this is what's gone on 
over many, many years. 
GRAHAM: Well, let me ask you about that, sir. We have heard-- 
those of us that cover the Justice Department--that in the period 
about--that you were at the FBI, there were also break-ins into the 
premises of groups that were not violence^orientedr-wouldn't come under 
this thing that you just held up, this leaflet. Can you tell us if 
that happened? 
MR. FELT: I'm unaware of those. I don't know about those. I've 
read about them in the paper too, but I was unaware of them in an 
official capacity. 
GRAHAM. Well, then, let me ask you, were there, to your knowledge, 
break-ins--were there extra-legal, as you put it, wiretaps, perhaps 
kidnappings, other extra-legal activities by the FBI that you knew of? 
MR. FELT: Not to my knowledge, no. 
MCLAUGHLIN: Mr. Felt, you said--you just said, when talking about 
whether you would be indicted, you said, well, they have to find a 
scapegoat. That presupposes that there--they have to find somebody to 
punish because people get the impression that something is wrong when

--- PAGE BREAK ---d, you said, well, they have to find a 
scapegoat. That presupposes that there--they have to find somebody to 
punish because people get the impression that something is wrong when

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7 
it really isn't. Something has gone wrong at the FBI, at least if no 
more than in the public image. We are hearing every day of a breakdown 
at the FBI, of financial corruption among some of the people; I'm not 
including you in that in any way; but many things--illegal wiretaps, 
kickbacks--it--something has gone wrong at the FBI, and-- 
MR. FELT: Well, not necessarily, not necessarily. Why don't you 
wait until all the facts are on the table so far as these allegations 
of corruption are concerned? I think perhaps they're going to find 
some little pi4dling things here and there, but this is what disturbs 
me so much. Everything that anybody says about the FBI is bad. Why 
don't we talk about all the things that the FBI stands for that are 
good? The corruption issue-- 
McLAUGHLIN: Well, I think that everybody presupposes that the FBI 
is good, and that's why they're so stunned when there is even a hint 
that something is bad. That is what you're suffering from, not-- 
MR. FELT; I think so. 
McLAUGHLIN: I mean, you were the people that were going out and 
getting the big bad wolf, and the criminal with the gun, and the smug- 
gler, and the dope peddler, and you were doing all that, and suddenly 
we find that you're--that the FBI may be wiretapping your next door 
neighbor. I mean, that is what has happened, and if it's even in the 
public image, something has gone wrong. 
MR. FELT: Well, this is what the public image,c I think, con- 
sists of about the FBI now. My daughter-in-law was worried about 
somebody's neighbor's phone being tapped. Well, if she's worried about 
it, you can imagine what the average citizen thinks; and you're right, 
Marya, I think that the image of the FBI has suffered terribly. I think

--- PAGE BREAK ---apped. Well, if she's worried about 
it, you can imagine what the average citizen thinks; and you're right, 
Marya, I think that the image of the FBI has suffered terribly. I think

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8 
that the damage which has been done is going to take years to correct. 
McLAUGHLIN: Do you think Mr. Kelley has done anything to correct 
the image of the FBI? 
MR. FELT: I think he's trying to, yes. 
McLAUGHLIN: Has he succeeded? 
MR. FELT: I don't think so, no. 
GRAHAM: Could I ask you something about Mr. Kelley? A story came 
out in the press last week that indeed he, when he was a younger agent, 
asked permissionfto stage a break-in, in Birmingham, Alabama in the 
late fifties or early sixties. Do you have any personal knowledge as 
to whether that's true? 
MR. FELT: I have no personal knowledge about it, no. 
GRAHAM: But could I ask you this? Of the hierarchy--the present 
hierarchy of the FBI--the people at the top--do you know how many of 
them have been personally involved in the kinds of break-ins that you 
are now a target of? 
MR. FELT: No, I have no personal knowledge of that at all. The 
only thing that I could say that I know is what I've read in the papers. 
GRAHAM: Well,vhat's your belief, based on the way these things 
operate? 
MR. FELT: I suspect that they probably didn't stop them when 
Hoover said to stop them. This is what I suspect, but I can't prove it. 
OSTROW: Who is they, on that, Mr. Felt? 
MR. FELT: Well, agents working security cases. 
OSTROW: Without authority from Washington? 
MR. FELT: I think so, yes. 
OSTROW: Did they--agents on their own would do this? I've always

--- PAGE BREAK ---FELT: Well, agents working security cases. 
OSTROW: Without authority from Washington? 
MR. FELT: I think so, yes. 
OSTROW: Did they--agents on their own would do this? I've always

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9 
\ •• 
thought that the Bureau was such a highly centralized-- 
MR. FELT: I know-- 
OSTROW: --responsible, almost military organization. 
MR. FELT: I know, I know. And thats why--that's why it's so hard 
for me to realize that some of these things were going on while I was 
there that I didn't know about. But this is the case. 
OSTROW: Well, there does seem to be a difference emerging between 
what you and former Assistant Director Miller recall about whether Mr. 
Gray--L. Patrick/Gray--had a role in authorizing the '72-'73 break-ins. 
Mr. Miller seems to have a clear recollection that Mr. Gray said, we're 
going to resume the practice. 
MR. FELT: Yes. 
OSTROW: And you don't have any such recollection. Yet you were 
Mr. Gray's number two man, his principal aide. How can that be? 
MR. FELT: Well, it is. I really have no strong, clear recollec- 
tion of conversation with Gray where he specifically said yes, this is 
all right. My conversations were with Miller, and Miller told me of 
his conversations with Gray. However, you'd have to understand what was 
happening in the FBI at that time. Believe me, you were lucky to get 
Mr. Gray's ear for five minutes, because he was extremely busy. He was 
traveling all over the country. So perhaps one Assistant Director would 
talk to him for a few minutes today, another tomorrow, and much of what 
I got was second-hand. 
(MORE)

--- PAGE BREAK ---as 
traveling all over the country. So perhaps one Assistant Director would 
talk to him for a few minutes today, another tomorrow, and much of what 
I got was second-hand. 
(MORE)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10 
MCLAUGHLIN: Mr.Gray (SIC), did you ever say no to something you 
were asked to do at the FBI because you felt that it was illegal? 
MR. FELT: Yes, several times. 
MCLAUGHLIN: Can you give me as a general example of that kind 
of thing? A wiretap or something? 
MR. FELT: Well, for example, the White House asked -- called and 
asked me to have their report in the Dita Beard memorandum case soften- 
ed and modified, and I told him no. 
GRAHAM: Whp at the White House called you? 
MR. FELT: John Dean. 
McLAUGHLIN: Who should, do you feel, have sort of the ultimate 
administrative authority at the FBI? I mean, does it come from the 
Justice Department, does it come from the White House, which may, you 
know, put politics into it? Where do you think it should ultimately 
come from? 
MR. FELT: I think that the Justice Department should be a com- 
pletely independent department, completely removed from politics. The 
positions should all be career positions, then the FBI and the other 
bureaus in the Department of Justice would be under a career-type 
individual and not under a politician. This man would be somewhat the 
same as a special prosecutor, because he would have no one telling him 
what to do from, you know, from the White House or anywhere else. 
GRAHAM: Mr. Felt, a minute ago you said that you thought Clarence 
Kelly was trying to restore the image of the FBI, but that you didn't 
think that he had succeeded. Do you think that Clarence Kelly is in 
command over there or is it out of hand? 
MR. FELT: I know nothing about it that you don't know, Fred.

--- PAGE BREAK ---didn't 
think that he had succeeded. Do you think that Clarence Kelly is in 
command over there or is it out of hand? 
MR. FELT: I know nothing about it that you don't know, Fred.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11 
\ - • 
GRAHAM: Well, then, let me make it more specific. He was on 
Face the Nation in recent weeks, and he told us that he had been de- 
deived by people beneath him, who told him that there had been no 
break-ins' since 1966, and then it turned out later there had been. 
Can you imagine -- and that he didn't know who deceived him, doesn't 
to this day -- but can you imagine that J. Edgar Hoover would not have 
been able to find out who deceived him? 
MR. FELT: I think he did find out who was deceiving him, and that 
person left thf Bureau after a big squabble with Hoover, but I can very 
easily see that Mr. Kelly wouldn't know about some of these break-ins 
because they apparently occurred while I was there and 1 didn't know 
about them. 
GRAHAM: Do you think there is a post-Watergate morality going 
into effect here that's making people take a harsher look at some of 
• these things than they did earlier? 
MR. FELT: Definitely, definitely. 
OSTROW: Jumping off the break-ins for a second, you've denied 
a number of times being Deep Throat, the source that Bob Woodward and 
Carl Bernstein credited for many of their Watergate disclosures, but 
there remains in some of us the notion that maybe you were a piece of 
it, say a hxink of the larynx or something. And what I'm wondering is 
whether you want to take credit at this time for helping unmask any of 
the Watergate cover-up? 
MR. FELT: No, no, I am not Deep Throat, and the only thing I can 
say is that I wouldn't be ashamed to be because I think whoever helped 
Woodward, helped the country, no question about it. 
McLAUGHLIN: Mr. Felt, there was a recent speech made by Edward J.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t I wouldn't be ashamed to be because I think whoever helped 
Woodward, helped the country, no question about it. 
McLAUGHLIN: Mr. Felt, there was a recent speech made by Edward J.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12 
\ • • 
Tulley to some sheriffs; he asked them to fight against bureaucrats 
and new intelligentsia, and he said that everybody had been honing 
their knives for years to get the FBI, and that, you know, this whole 
% 
business about difficulties in the FBI was sort of a tempest in a 
teapot except that he used stronger language than that. Who do you 
think Mr. Tulley was speaking for? 
MR. FELT: I have no idea. That's the first I've heard of the 
remarks that are attributed to him. 
GRAHAM: Wo^ld you think that that's prevailing opinion among 
people at the FBI, that attitude toward their role? 
MR. FELT: I have no way of knowing. I've been away from the 
Bureau for three years, and I have very little contact there. 
MCLAUGHLIN: Mr. Felt, earlier, in response to a question by 
Fred Graham, you were talking about some new legislation. Do you 
think there is any need for an upgrading in agents so they are better 
able to understand really tricky, legal questions, so that they can 
act on their own without, you know, any doubt that they know legally 
what is wrong? I mean, do you think maybe the FBI ought to encourage 
more lawyers to enter in the service, maybe not as the ultimate end 
career, but as a middle ground. I mean, is that one of the problems, 
a lack of -- 
MR. FELT: No, I don't think so. I think that for years and years 
the Bureau has made a very definite point of trying to educate agents 
along those lines, and you'll find that it was the FBI that years and 
years ago started very strict observance of constitutional rights. 
We're talking about the criminal field. And I think the Bureau has the 
training and the experience and the quality of agents to handle that.

--- PAGE BREAK ---observance of constitutional rights. 
We're talking about the criminal field. And I think the Bureau has the 
training and the experience and the quality of agents to handle that.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13 
We re dealing with a very small percentage of the Bureau's work when 
we re talking about this Cointelpro, which the average agent out in 
the field probably never heard of until all this started. I hadn't 
heard of it. We're talking about a -- perhaps a four or five per cent 
of the Bureau's investigative effort, and of that four or five per cent 
there were, I think, 3,000 actions which were investigated by the 
Attorney General -- he found a few, of those objectionable; in fact, 
I think Saxbe said they were abhorrent. Somebody else said some of 
them were foolisK. But we're talking about just a fraction, less than 
one per cent, of the Bureau's investigative effort over the years that 
IS now being criticized, so we have to put things in that perspective. 
GRAHAM; Well, speaking of investigative effort being criticized 
by the FBI, we interviewed last week another former FBI official, 
Edward Morgan, who is an attorney here now, and represented Johnny 
Ros.selli the gangster who was murdered recently, and he told us that 
Rosjselli was murdered because he had been involved in these CIA plots 
to kill Castro, and that the FBI didn’t begin to find out who really 
killed President Kennedy and that even to this day, if there was an 
FBI investigation, it might turn up the real story, as he put it, of 
who killed President Kennedy. Based on -- when you were there -- do 
you think the FBI came out with the right answer there? 
MR. FELT. I think they came out with the right answer, yes. 
GRAHAM: Well, isn't it true though that there were intense 
pressures from J. Edgar Hoover and from Nicholas Katzenbach, who was 
then Attorney General, to very quickly pin it all on Lee Harvey Oswald? 
MR. FELT: I’m unaware of it. If there was that pressure, I 
certainly never heard of it.and from Nicholas Katzenbach, who was 
then Attorney General, to very quickly pin it all on Lee Harvey Oswald? 
MR. FELT: I’m unaware of it. If there was that pressure, I 
certainly never heard of it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14 
OSTROW: Following up an earlier question by Marya, you said 
you had rebuffed, rejected a White House order. I'm wondering about 
orders within the FBI itself during Mr. Hoover's years, the years that 
there was a campaign to destroy Martin Luther King, the years when the 
evidence in the Kennedy assassination was destroyed. Did any of you 
assistant directors ever at any meeting throw up your hands in that 
policy table outside Mr. Hoover's office and say we can't do this, 
s wrong for the interest of the country? Or was it just run from 
the top, and that didn't -- 
MR. FELT: I think that everybody spoke their piece. I mean, the 
image of the Bureau top officials being sycophants is not true at all. 
They had very strenuous arguments on policy consideration, but when 
Mr. Hoover made the decision, that was it, and when he made a decision 
we accepted it. 
OSTROW: Wouldn't we have been better off had somebody, though, 
on some of these, on Martin Luther King, or on the Kennedy evidence, 
for example, said we can't do it, we've got to stop, and resigned in 
protest? 
MR. FELT: I think that with regard to Martin Luther King, it 
would have been better, but here again, as long as you've brought that 
up, I'd like to point out that there are two or three things that are 
extremely annoying to me about the publicity; in the first place, the 
press knew about Martin Luther King and the FBI and the problems be- 
tween them a decade ago, and now all of a sudden everybody is talking 
about It as if it had been just discovered. One of the worst things 
that was done to Martin Luther King was the so-called suicide letter. 
I don't think it was a suicide letter. I'm convinced Hoover didn't

--- PAGE BREAK ---just discovered. One of the worst things 
that was done to Martin Luther King was the so-called suicide letter. 
I don't think it was a suicide letter. I'm convinced Hoover didn't

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15 
know about that. 
McLAUGHLIN: Mr. Felt, could yju in any way bring yourself to 
say that the FBI suffered from too much of Mr. Hoover? In other words, 
that he became the FBI. I mean, it is an agency of the people; it is 
not a person. Can you say today that maybe there was too much Mr. 
Hoover? 
MR. FELT: Well, let me qualify it a little bit. First, let me 
say that I respected and admired Mr. Hoover tremendously. I think he 
was a great man;f I think in history he'll be one of our great leaders, 
no question about it. But I do think that he stayed too long, yes. 
OSTROW: Are there any more bombshells smoldering in the wings 
that you might know of that are -- 
MR. FELT: None that I know of, and I sure hope there are none. 
GRAHAM: We've been treated to some stories recently, a book 
called No Left Turn about J. Edgar Hoover and about a lot of supposed 
craziness that he did in his latter years. To your knowledge, is 
that true? 
MR. FELT: Some of it is true. That man, Joseph Schott, would 
have written a similar book had he been in the Department of Agricul- 
ture all his life; he's a comic, he always was; and some of the 
things are true, like the SAC walking on his hands in his office 
while he had a conference -- that's true -- I know the man. 
GRAHAM; Well, are you telling us then that J. Edgar Hoover 
wasn't quite in control of his own -- 
MR. FELT: No, I'm not saying that at all, I'm not saying that 
at all. 
McLAUGHLIN: Mr. Felt, we have about 25 seconds -- do you still

--- PAGE BREAK ---oover 
wasn't quite in control of his own -- 
MR. FELT: No, I'm not saying that at all, I'm not saying that 
at all. 
McLAUGHLIN: Mr. Felt, we have about 25 seconds -- do you still

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16 
oppose women as agents with the FBI? 
MR. FELT: Do I still oppose it, you say? 
McLAUGHLIN: Well, I'm under the impression you did originally. 
% 
MR. FELT: I did originally, and I think that the 30 or 40 
agents who came into the Bureau, female agents, are doing an excellent 
job. 
McLAUGHLIN: Thank you very much, Mr. Felt, for being with us on 
Face the Nation today. 
ANNOUNCERt Today on FACE THE NATION, former Associate Director 
of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, W. Mark Felt, was interviewed 
by CBS News Law Correspondent Fred Graham, by Justice Department 
Correspondent for The Los Angeles Times, Ronald J. Ostrow, and by CBS 
News Correspondent Marya McLaughlin. Next week another prominent 
figure in the news will FACE THE NATION.