Is appeal no more than a meuns of offectuating non-compliance? Is long delay, if fo!-
Uen
Jowed by uny compliemce at alll, othe:r than non-conpliance? Is it right and proper for
covering up tBl violations of tlu: Act, or, if presented to the Court, mislead the Court?
While your letter state:s honontly that I an responsible for whatevelcompliance
A
will bu: forthcouing (and I apiavciate this) why should the requester h:
If the WHI's wi tltoldings were accidental, as they were not, once l.:iBI was
do thia?
then necesmury to involve the uuder-sitaffed and overworked appeals authority to do
no more thuui provide copiea of records already procegsed for another? If this also
not an lWI meaun of negziting all coupliance on appeal by creating long delaya in
appeala-and ofenonmuilyirlatingall costa?
What inthufuuction of Depurtiment counsel in Department and FBI FOLA cases?Is
Department woumaul uy lenu al vilicer of the court or without the I believe tradi-
tionaltwapualbil:liea of coumsel?
What yo now report iui this self-aerving letter was kmown to Department counsel
a yeur ago.Did Depurtment counsel have no rosponsibility under the Act to effectuate
coupliunce by thu: l'lil pronptly, particularly because the records,were already processed
and requlred no more than xeroxing? Or did Department counsel, once you were involved
uy the ourt, havo no responsibility about informing you?
Aro thoae wlwne rosponsibilitioo include enforcing the laws not themselves to live
within the luwu? lt thoy do not,wlutever their response, can they be trusted to en=
foms lawa or to pronucute those thuy believe have violated other laws?
rce
In uy lars lmuwaucracy it. is always easy for angone to pretend that responsi-
bility lles wlamhamra elaeuhere but if in fact each doTeg not meet his responsibllity..
fully; can any huuoauoracy keep within the laws?
Thia ia uot the first rccent occasion Ive had to draw attention to gelf-Berving
lettars thut uu to miauned to mipksathe Court and it is not the only recent case
lead
It would, I bolieve, bxe much better aind could do much toward approaching & correct end
tothis and othor cauou ifstraightlovard letters are used rather than those that.aro
not fqithful to fact,are Misleadiny and are susceptible df miausee,whether in files
forthefuturogfforyresentation to a.court.
 hopu you wi.ll gcive this Bone thought mnd substituto a letter that isaocord
withthoaotualitiuu
Sinceroly,
rC!!
Harold Weisberg