There's rew evidence that Oswald's killer was involved with :: ane of
America's most powerful mobsters--the same ones used by the CIA in
several attempts to kill Fidel Castro
By William Scott Malone
THE SECRETLIFEOF
JACKRUBY
William Scott Malone.aWashington-based
the same ones used by he (C1A in sever-
free-lance wriler,huworkedforthe(anadi
anBroadcasting (orporation's Fifth Es-
al unsuccessful attempts to kill Cuban
Premier Fidel Castro.
te.IVneus shou.In researching this
articleover thelast18months.Maione
The House Select Commitee on As-
loggedtiousandsofmiles conducting50
sassinations has discovered new evi-
housof tapedintervneus and examining the
dence about Jack Ruby's activities,por-
tionsofwhich have been made available
rrcordis ofvarionus courtcases across the
toNeu Times.This evidence, together
country.Heaisospent hundredofhoursat
with a review of housands of pages of
theNational Arhives,reviewung FBI and
FBI. CIA and federal court documents,
（1A documents on the JFK assassination.
and interviews with law-enforcement
officials and others,also indicates:
1January 1967Jack Ruby.the
'T'hat Ruby met secretly with Johnny
man who killed lee Harvey Os-
wald. sat in a Dallas jail ell, dying
Roselli in Miami two monthsbefore
of cn r. Bu he was less trobied
President Kennedy was killed.Roselli
bv his circumstanes than by one
was a powerfui gangster and had been a
onsuming
major participan in the CIA piots to kil
fear:
thatpeopie
wold find out abu hi,because
(astro;
That Ruby was invoived in snug-
here was still mu: t learn.He
toid a visitor,
gling guns to Castro before the Cuban
Ihev're going to find out
abot my trips to(ba
Revoiution:
and the
guns and evervthing." 1'hat's what wor-
Ihat Ruby helped set ure the reiease
ried Jac k R:by most n,the months be-
ofa top American mobster imprisoned
fore he died: that they would fmd out.
by (astro.offering Cuba money and
jeeps in exchange for a pardon;
In the derade smce his death. the se-
●That in 1959, at the same time he was
（rets Raby guarded have temained well
kept But now is possibie t piece sone
arranging·shady deals in (uba.Ruby
of then togerher. And wha: cmerges is
was an FBI informan prox iding the Bu-
Up from Anonymity:
reau with useless information:
alunasoidableconclusion:(ontraryto
the fidigs of rhe Wrren (onmission,
Jack Ruby (inset) makes his
‘Ihat Ruby mav have made secret
Jack R:bv was invoived with sone of 1he
televisiondebut
tape recordings of his dcalings with
members of the mob(See boxon
ostprominetmohstcrsinAmerica,
49)
46
NEW TMES1/23/78
Hances:
9hermade secret
Jack R:bv was invoived with sone of 1he
televisiondebut
tape recordings of his dcalings with
members of the mob(See boxon
ostprominetmohstcrsinAmerica,
49)
46
NEW TMES1/23/78
Hances:
9her

--- PAGE BREAK ---Although the FB!

has just released
40.000 pages of its Kennedy assassina-capper's tip sheets at Santa Anita race-the money was and that was where the
geles in:1933 and began selling handi-
for all things Cuban.T'hat was where
:ion filewith another 40.oo0 pages totrack.

Johnny Roselli testified to theKe-Mafia was.

lt was through his Cuban in-
come the miidle of this month-officialsfauver Crime Commitee in 1951 that trigues that Ruby's trail crossed those of
say that more than 10 percent of the file
he.too.hadmoved from Chicagoto Lossome of the mostpowerful organized-
willstill be withheld from the public.Angeles in 1933-to oversee gambling
Bu the nost pertinent FBI documents at Santa Anita for the Chicago mob.

crime bxosses in America.

Cuba was the
unco by Neu Times were not in the
By1939, Ruby was back in Chicago as
connecting thread.

assasstia..

file and were not provided
to the Warren Conmission.Mu hof theHe was once arrested in connection with
a secretary to the waste handlers union.

Cubaand theMob
new evidence abou Ruby isto be found
During the late 1950s, the Mafa fol-
in the FBI's files on Cuba and on organ-
the murder of the serretary-treasurer of
lowed a curious strategy in Cuba.

The
the loxal,although he was released for
ized crime.

lackof evidence.That murder enabled
sane American mobsters who wouid lat-
This new evidence does not reveal
er join with the CIA in a conspiracy to
1he mob, and eventuallv the Teamsters,
whether Ruby or his mobstcr friends
kill Castio were aciually supplying his
ttake over the union.(Robert Ken-
played a role in the Kennedy assassina-
rebel army with guns.

I: wasn't that the
nedy.inhis book1he Enemy Within,
tion.

But that possibility so intrigued the
cailed this episode akey step in the
American gangsters wanted Castro ro
House comminee that last March it
(verthrow Fulgencio Batista's govern-
mob's riseto domination over the
called mob leade Santos T'rafficante to
ment.I: wasn't that the
nedy.inhis book1he Enemy Within,
tion.

But that possibility so intrigued the
cailed this episode akey step in the
American gangsters wanted Castro ro
House comminee that last March it
(verthrow Fulgencio Batista's govern-
mob's riseto domination over the
called mob leade Santos T'rafficante to
ment.

(The corrupt Batista was a good
I'eamsters.)
Washington forblic testinony.He
friend of the mob.) They were merely
was the mobste huse freedom fion a
Lis Kutner.a （hicago lawyer who
buying themselves some insurance.1f
Cuban jail had apparently been ar-
they helped （astro.they reasoned，he
ranged by Ruby.Ihe commitee's ques-
Jack Ruby's story, as it
would protect their considerabie inter-
tioning of Iraffhcante was pointed:
ests should he ever come to power.

"Mr.

Iraffiante, dii  eve disc ss
is now emerging, is the
One of the major participants in the
with any indivicduais plans to assassinate
syndicate's attempt to hedge its bets in
President Kennedy ptsor to his assassi-
story of a man who tried
the explosive (Cuban political siuation
nnition?"
was Norman "Roughhouse”Rothman.

all his life to ingratiate
Prior to Nvember 22.1963, cticdou
Beginning in 1958,Rothman, a strap-
know jack Rulv?

himself to powerful
ping Havana-based mobster and one of
"While you were in prison in (aba.

Santos ‘Trafficante's closest assoxiates,
were you visited byJack Rubv?

mobsters--and who, to
(oordinated the smuggling of arms to
ThegrandfaheriTratin ante.

（astro.(Simultaneously,Rothnan was
acompanied bvhilawver.had oniy
some extent, eventually
splitting his take from Cuba's siot ma-
(nerespouse crvihing hewas
(hines with Batista's brother-in-law.)
asked: "| respectlull refuse to answer
succeeded
Iheavailable evidence indicates that
that question pursuant to my constinu
Ruby helped in Rothman's gun smug-
lional righs under the First.

Fourth
gling.Afier Ruby captured national at-
worked wiih the Kefauver Committee,
Fifth and Fourtcenth.

Amendments.Fourth
gling.Afier Ruby captured national at-
worked wiih the Kefauver Committee,
Fifth and Fourtcenth.

Amendments.

says Ruby hobnobbed with （hicago inob
tention in 1963,two women cane for-
ward to identify him to the FBI as a man
Ioss San Giancana and his crowd dur-
Jat k Raby's storv, as it is now emerg-
they had met in June 1958,in the Flori-
ing this period.

Then, after a brief stint
ing, is the story of a man who tried all
dia Keys.Ihey were introduced to Ruby
in the army,Ruby moved to Iexas in
his lite to ingratiate himself to men like
bythebrother ofone of the women，
1947 as part of a Chicago mob move a confirmed Cuban gunrunner.The
Santos Iraificante-and who,t some
into the luerative Dallas rackets.

extent,suceeded.

Ruby boreabsoutely
no resemblance to the prcture ot a patri-
A: that time, Ruby was investigated by
to"run some guns toCuba.One of
the Federai Bureau of Narcotics,after
oticnighte lub owner painted by the
several friends who had accompanied
Warren (ommission.

He was bori ani
trunk full of guns," and that she was
him from Chicago were arrested with 40 told that “more guns were hidden in the
raised on (hicago's tough West Side.

where he became kanown to police as a
poundsof
fopium.Ruby,though,marshes which wouid be sold to the Cu-
lcarned fast-from his first days in Dal- bans.The other woman recalled that
brawler, a seller of hot merchandise and
las.he was careful to become friendlyshe was led to believe that “Jack.”who
a general troubiemaker.As a teenager
with the lox al police.He was bori ani
trunk full of guns," and that she was
him from Chicago were arrested with 40 told that “more guns were hidden in the
raised on (hicago's tough West Side.

where he became kanown to police as a
poundsof
fopium.Ruby,though,marshes which wouid be sold to the Cu-
lcarned fast-from his first days in Dal- bans.The other woman recalled that
brawler, a seller of hot merchandise and
las.he was careful to become friendlyshe was led to believe that “Jack.”who
a general troubiemaker.As a teenager
with the lox al police.

Later he became owned a nightclub in Dallas, was a mem-
he ran umbe:s for Al (apone.Ihe
known as "the pay-off man for the Dai-ber of the“syndicate."
Warren （ommission knew ihis about
las Police Deparument."and a man who
Jack Ruby.but thought it little more
"had the fix with the county authori-rectly to Rothman's operation by a Mi-
Ruby was connerted even more di-
than an adolescn firtation.i'he com-
ties."according to FB1 documents quot-aini FBl informant named Blaney Mack
mission knew.

as well, that Ruby con-
ing members of the Dallas underworld.

tinued t assor iate with criminals,but
Johnson.Johnson toidthe FBl that
By 1956.aFederal Bureauot Narcot-Ruby was “active inarranging illegal
believed that these assoxiations were
is informant had named Ruby as thefightsof weapons fron Miamito Castro
with lonv-level gamblers.Based on its
(ontact for a “large narcotics set-up op-
caination of the reuord." said the War-
forces in Cuba.

and that he was report-
erating between Mexico,Texas and the
ren Report."the commission believes
edlypart-owner oftwo planes used1o
Fast." FBl reports contained in the makethe figits.

that he cvidene does inet establish a
Warren Commission files also indicate
signifean link lxrween Ruh and or-
Johnson named Eddie Browder as a
that Ruhy was heavily involved in ari-
ganized crime."
gunrunning pikot involved with Raby in
us gambling operations in the area.

Bv
Io reati ihat conc dusin, the conmis.--- PAGE BREAK ---

that he cvidene does inet establish a
Warren Commission files also indicate
signifean link lxrween Ruh and or-
Johnson named Eddie Browder as a
that Ruhy was heavily involved in ari-
ganized crime."
gunrunning pikot involved with Raby in
us gambling operations in the area. Bv
Io reati ihat conc dusin, the conmis. the operation.Browder.a fambovan! almostll acounts.whether it was nar-
sion had t gore menoranda fe is
Miani arns dealer,was Rothman's
oti s.gambing, prostitution or bribery. staf.wnh knaixut someof Rv's
main operative in the gun snuggling. Jack Ruby was the man to see in Dallas. li  activitie; nd the siaff was, in tarn,
Yet Ruby didn't limit himself to Dal-ments.Biowier's FB: ile,which has
cording to various feeieral court doxu-
kcpt in thecark ef BI an (IA. las.Bythe late 1950s,according to his no been released by the Burcau,is
whih knewye m
own Warren Commission testimonv.more than a thousand pages thick.Yet
R:ihs noAeei Iron: (hiago to Lxos An-
Ruby had devcloped a particular affinitythe FBl turned cver cnlv three innou-
/23/78NEWIMES

--- PAGE BREAK ---D)
The Line-Up: (Left to right) Santos Trafficante respectfully refusing to answer questions; Norman“Roughhouse” Roth-
months after he testified before the Senate; and his boss,Sam Giancana,who took seven bulletsin the face aweek before
his scheduled testimony
(us reports to the Warren (ommission.

theState Departmentin a 1963fle
One ofthe nore interesting nahes
Meyer Lansky,left quickly for Miami
search,is inexplicably missing from the
that pops up in Browder's FBI file isf
Iansky，described by knowledgeable
files today.And a 1959 Army Intelli-
that of Frank Sturgis.beuer known as
crime reporters as the chairman of the
gence report on U.S.arms dealers list-
one of the Watergate burgiers.

Sturgis
board of the national crime syndicate, a
ing a“Jack Rubenstein"also cannot be
was then a swashbuckling'soldier of for-
loose confederation of America's top or-
ganized-crime families,was forced to
tune,a gunrunner for (astro and.

ac-
cording to several sources.

a elose associ-
Hee because of his conspicuous friend-
It was through his Cuban
ate of Normie Rothman.Anothe of
ship with Batista.

He left bxhind his
intrigues that Ruby's
good friend Trafficante to make sure
Browder's （olleagues in the Rothinan
that business continued as usuai.

arns-smuggling operation,as revealed
in the FBI file.was Efren Pichardo, a
trail crossed those of
But Fidel Castro was determined to
long-time friend ot Sturgis.

rid Cuba of the American Mafia.Shortly
some of the most
The gun smuggling began in mid-
after taking power.

he announced to a
May 1958,and continued full-throttle
powerful organized-crime
small group of his advisers that he in-
that sumner,with Browder.

Sturgis.

Pi-
tended to nationalize the casinos and
hario and others traveling up to Alex-
bosses in America.

other American businessinterests.

andria.Virginia.other American businessinterests.

andria.Virginia.

to buy rifles and ma-
One of those who attended that meet-
Cuba was the
ing in the Havana Hilton,Castro's tem-
chine guns from the International Ar-
mament Corporaton (then a CIA pro-
porary headquarterswasFrank Sturgis,
connecting thread
by then a trusted aide.

Sturgis quotes
prietary) with crisp hundred-dollar bilis.

They transported the arms in station
Castro as saying,"I'm going to run all
wagons and small rucks to seeret drop-
these fascist mobsters.all these Ameri-
loxcated,although it,too,Army Intelli-
off points in the Florida Keys.There.

can gangsters,out of Cuba.

I'm going to
gence clerks found, was around in 1963.

the guns were stored until they couid be
nationalize everything.Cuba for Cu-
Exactly how much Ruby's efforts may
picked up and smuggled into Cuba.

bans."
have contributed to the success of the
When questioned, Pichardo confirms gunrunning operation is not clear-
Sturgis,whom Castro put in charge of
that the arms were hidden in the mar-probably lintle.Although Ruby's in-
Cuba's casinos.says he had actually been
shes of the Florida Keys (where Ruby volvement in the gunrunning was mi-
working undercover for the（CIA all
was seen by the two women in June nor.he later told his psychiatrist and
along;and,after the meeting.he sayshe
1958).and he recalls running guns with lawyers that he feared his role would be
informed several American casino own-
Browder and Sturgis--but his memory
ers, as well as the American Embassy, of
revealed and he would be considered
grows vague when asked abou Ruby or unpatriotic,even communistic.Ruby
Castro's intentions.

Rothman.Sturgis'memory.too,seems
Sturgis says he specificaily warned
was not alone.

(Of all the Americans who
quic kiv to fade at the mention of Ruby
I'raffcante.known to American au-
helped Castrobefore the revolution,
and Rothman.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Rothman.Sturgis'memory.too,seems
Sturgis says he specificaily warned
was not alone. (Of all the Americans who
quic kiv to fade at the mention of Ruby
I'raffcante.known to American au-
helped Castrobefore the revolution,
and Rothman. and documents relating
thorities as the kingpin of narcotics in
very few talk openiy of their involve-
to Rubv's gun rafficking have mysteri-
the Caribbean.of Castro's plans.But
ment. Most simply deny it. ously disappeared from federai govern-
Trafficante did not heed the warning,
Ihe: reason,of course,is that their
ment files. A 1958 lete: fron a Jack Ru-
telling Sturgis,“Not in this world; you
cfforts
wereenormously
benste (Rubv's real name, whicl he of-
successful. think he's going to close up a hundred
American guns made the revoiution
len sed in conmetion wi his Cuban
million dollars' worth of businesses that
succeed.T'hey started arriving in the
ativities)to the State Department's
we got?We generate over ten thousand
summer of 1958.and a few months lat-
Ofhice of Munitions Comtrols. "request-cr.on New Year's Day, 1959, Fidel Cas-
people working.He's going to put all
ing permission tonegotiate th pur-
these Cubans out of workHe'll never
tromarched into Havana.Batista was
chase of frearms and nmu:ition from
oxerthrown and fled to the Doiminican
io it. n Italian frn,ihough dis overed by
Bu:Santos Trafhicante was soon to
Republic,and his patron,mob chieftain
learn otherwise. Sturgis, on (astro’s or-
48NEWTIMES1/23/78

--- PAGE BREAK ---ders.

losed down the gambling casinos
for ten days as a warning of what was in
store.

Ihe Maiia began to get the mes-
Ruby told the Warren
the CIA supplying the necessary money
sage.And,while Castro reopened the
and weapons.As the plorting pro-
(asinos ona limited basis in March
Commission he made
gressed.Roselli quickly realizedhe
1959, the underworld knew that it was
would needi the assistance ofTraff.

in for 1ough times in Cuba.

The crown-
only one trip to Cuba-
cante, who sill had many of his under-
ing biow came in April.when Castro
world henchmen in Havana.

Roselli
a pleasure trip in 1959.

had Traffit ante, the undisputed bxoss of
contacted Giancana,his boss in Chicago,
thc
na underworld,arrested and
But he may have
to arrange a meeting with Trafficante,
throwr  prison.

who promptly put several of his lieuten-
Soon afterward.

traveled to Havana six
ants-including Rothman-—at Roselli's
、according to FB!

sourres,at a meeting of the nationa!

disposal.

T'rafficante and his men would
（rine syndicate, Meyer Lansky placed a
times or more ---on mob-
hecome the main operatives in the CIA-
$1 million contract on the life of Fidei
connected errands
Mafa assassination attempts.

Castro.

Present at the meeting was the
It was around this time thatJack Ruby
rotund gangland txss of Chicago.

Sam
apparently became a frequent visitor to
Giancana,who was to become a central
Rothman's efforts continued but they
Cuba,developing connections to several
figure in the CIA plors aganst Castro.

now had the ofhicial sanction of the
of‘Irafficante's lieutenants, as well as to
Sturgis saysthatini959several
United
States
Central
Trafficante himself.

Agency.According to two newly uncov-
Intelligence
prominent gangsters offerred him be-
The Warren Report,though,merely
Iween $100.000andi $1 million to elimi-
cred FBI reports, Rothman was one of
reiterated Ruby's story that he made
nate Castro.

(One of them was Normie and the Mafia.Agency.According to two newly uncov-
Intelligence
prominent gangsters offerred him be-
The Warren Report,though,merely
Iween $100.000andi $1 million to elimi-
cred FBI reports, Rothman was one of
reiterated Ruby's story that he made
nate Castro.

(One of them was Normie and the Mafia.

He was soon joined by
the original liaisons between the CIA
only one trip to Cuba-a pleasure trip in
Rothman,who sent an emissary to
1959.But FBIreports indicate that
Sturgis with an assassination plan.

others.

Ruby may have traveled to Havana six
Sturgis says that he refused the offers
The Senate Intelligence Committee,
ormoretimes.Itwasn'thardtovisit
but relayed the mob's interest in assas-
which investigated the CIA-Mafia con-
(Cuba secretly in those days, leaving be-
sinating Castro to his CIA contact in Ha-
nections,reported that Johnny Roselli,
hind no records of the journey.

The
vana.The CIA-Mafia plots were initiat-
the ambassador to Las Vegas for the
only documentrequired to enter Cuba
ed shortly thereafter.

（hicago mob,was chosen to actually or-
was a $2.50"tourist card” that could be
ganize the assassination of Castrowith
filled in with any name one chose.

RUBYGATE
Indeed,Ruby knew more about Cuba
April of that year.The saleswoman
whowaitedonRuby toldSecretServ-
what he does remember and the re-
ice agents after Kennedy's:assassina-
ports he fled with the Bureau) Flynn
In a letter to theWarren Conmission
tion that Ruby had bought“a wrist-
denies any knowledge of Ruby's.safe
only declassified in 1975,J.

Edgar
watch which helda microphone for
deposit box,his expensive spy equip-
Hoover disclosedthaton March 11,
the equipment,and alsoaninstrument
ment,his trips to Cuba,or his associa
1959,as Jack Ruby was about to em-
to bug a telephone,” as well as a “tie
tionwithTrafficante and McWillie.

bark on his most audacious Cuban ex-
clip and attache case."Professional spy
Ruby certainlywas not trying to hide
ploit-the attemptto secure the re-
equipment.

his Cuban trips from the FBl.bark on his most audacious Cuban ex-
clip and attache case."Professional spy
Ruby certainlywas not trying to hide
ploit-the attemptto secure the re-
equipment.

his Cuban trips from the FBl.

Before
lease of mobster Santos Trafficante
AnFBIagent interviewed the sales-
embarking on one of his jaunts in
from jail--hewas contacted by special
womanimmediatelyaftertheSecret
1959,Ruby was overheard by an air-
agent Charles W.Flynn of the Dallas
Service did but he filed a meager two-
line ticket agent talking to one of his
ofice.Flynn asked if Ruby would be-
paragraph report,leaving out most of
employees on the phone.Ruby told
come an informant for the Bureau.

the important details.

the empioyee not to tel anyoneofhis
According to Hoover's letter,Ruby
In any event,onApril27,1959,the
whereabouts except for the Dallas.po-
"expressed a willingness to furnish in-
day before he was to meet with agent
lice or any other "law enforcement
formation."(Ruby had long been an
Flynn,Ruby rented a safe deposit
official”who might be interested.And
informer for the Dallas Police Depart-
box,perhaps as a repository for the
Flynn toid areporter several years ago
mentthe police，in return,would
tapes he intended to make.Before and
thatRuby did tell him of at leastoneof
then stay out of his way.

But his status
after every trip to Cuba,Ruby would
his Cuban excursions.

was relatively low.)
enter his safe deposit box and then
If Flynn and the Bureau are telling
Flynn says he hoped Rubywouid
visit his FBI contact.

the truth,it makes Hoover's.FBI look
know something about crimein Dallas
In total, theFBi dealt with Ruby on
likemodern-day Keystone Cops.If
(burglaries,bank robberies and the
nine occasionsbetween March 11 and
Flynn and the Bureau are lying,it is
like).In fact,Ruby knew very little
October2,1959,during theheightof
oneof themore significant coverups in
about such activities at the time, be-
his Cuban activities.

The FBI main-
the FBI'shistory.the truth,it makes Hoover's.FBI look
know something about crimein Dallas
In total, theFBi dealt with Ruby on
likemodern-day Keystone Cops.If
(burglaries,bank robberies and the
nine occasionsbetween March 11 and
Flynn and the Bureau are lying,it is
like).In fact,Ruby knew very little
October2,1959,during theheightof
oneof themore significant coverups in
about such activities at the time, be-
his Cuban activities.

The FBI main-
the FBI'shistory.

cause he was up to his neck in Cuban
tainsit received absolutelyno useful
After Ruby was arrested for mur-
intrigue with some of America's top
iniormation from Ruby，but several
dering Oswald,his safe deposit box
mobsters--apotential goldmine of in-
present and former FBl agents, in-
was opened by the Dailas police.Ac-
telligence infomation for theFBl.But
cluding RepresentativeDon Edwards
cording to an FBl report,“when
Fiynn says he didn't know about
(D-Calif.),saythe Bureau neverinter-
opened,this box was completely emp-
Ruby's Cuban connection.

views an informant nine times if he is
ty." The last time it had been entered
After their initial contact in March,
providing worthless information.

was August 20, 1962, over a year ear-
Ruby and Flynn's next substantive
Special agent Flynn,who retired.in
lier.The FBI report noted that“the
meeting was to be April 28,1959.--- PAGE BREAK ---

views an informant nine times if he is
ty." The last time it had been entered
After their initial contact in March,
providing worthless information. was August 20, 1962, over a year ear-
Ruby and Flynn's next substantive
Special agent Flynn,who retired.in
lier.The FBI report noted that“the
meeting was to be April 28,1959. Ap-
1962.says he was new at the job in
identity of thepersonopeningthebox
parently in preparation for thismeet-
1959, and that his .inexperience ex-
at this time is not reflected.”Yet it is
ing and his subsequent work for the
plains the repeated contacts with an
impossibletoenterasafe deposit
Bureau,Rubypurchased over five
unproductive.informant.Flynn also
boxwithout being the authorizedrent-
hundred dollars’worthofminiature
insists that he'can remember nothing
er,showing proper identifcation and
tape-recordingequipment in March or
of substance about his dealings with
signing a name card.Unless,of course,
Ruby.(But there are conficts between
youhappentobea.federallaw-
enforcementofficial. W. S. M. 1/23/78NEWTIMES

--- PAGE BREAK ---vefcgc Dallas
said that while in jail he “}
nightiuo ewner naght have been.

ex-
bling-gangster type namedCans who,
in-
pxcted to kuow.

At a news conference
he said,"was visited frequently by
hours afie: Kennedv was killed,Dallas
DistrictAitornev Henrv Wade errone-
anotherAmerican gangster-type named
ously toici the assembied press that Os-
Ruby."
wald was a member of the Free (uba
A further indication that Ruby visited
Cuba frequently comes from an FB!

re-
Commitee.avioleny anti-Castro r-
port.The report saysa Ruby einployee
ganization with CIA ties.A voice arose
from the back of the press roon, polite-
managed Ruby's Vegas club during the
three summer months,during which peri
ly infrnny Wade that Oswald was a
od Ruby vacationed in Cuba."(Empha-
mem
 pro-(astro Fair Play for
Cuba (onminee.and that “there is a
sis added.) Ruby's frantic activity actual
iice on Alert
ly began in May,when, after meeting
grcat difference”berween the two.1 he
1O KILL CASTRO!

with McKeown,Ruby passed amessage
voice belonged to Jack Ruhy
of some sort--in code-toMcWillie in
Ruby told ihe Warren (Conmission
that his “one”trip to Cuba was purely a
Havana.The woman who carried the
message couid remember only oneword
soxcial visit at the invitation of his best
of it whenquestioned fouryears later by
friend.Lewis J.McWilie.As Ruby
the FBI.re-
Commitee.avioleny anti-Castro r-
port.The report saysa Ruby einployee
ganization with CIA ties.A voice arose
from the back of the press roon, polite-
managed Ruby's Vegas club during the
three summer months,during which peri
ly infrnny Wade that Oswald was a
od Ruby vacationed in Cuba."(Empha-
mem
 pro-(astro Fair Play for
Cuba (onminee.and that “there is a
sis added.) Ruby's frantic activity actual
iice on Alert
ly began in May,when, after meeting
grcat difference”berween the two.1 he
1O KILL CASTRO!

with McKeown,Ruby passed amessage
voice belonged to Jack Ruhy
of some sort--in code-toMcWillie in
Ruby told ihe Warren (Conmission
that his “one”trip to Cuba was purely a
Havana.The woman who carried the
message couid remember only oneword
soxcial visit at the invitation of his best
of it whenquestioned fouryears later by
friend.Lewis J.McWilie.As Ruby
the FBI.

The word was“arriving."
testifed.he"idolized”McWillie--and
McWillie, in turn, toid thc FBI that he
By June,according to Gerry Patrick
Don't light that cigar!:Fidel Castro
Hemming,a huiking, six-foot-six sol-
treated Ruby as"one wouid a brother.”
chuckles about something he read in
dieroffortunewhowasamemberof
EnterMcWillie
the afternoonpaper
Castro's rebel army,Ruby was in Cuba
Tounderstand Ruby's Cuban in-
attending ameeting at thehome of re-
and death matter,”Jack Ruby tracked
trigues it is necessary to understand the
bel Captain William Morgan.Morgan,
down Robert McKeown,a convicted
tangled affairs of his friend McWillie.A
an American,was a hero of the revolu-
former girifriend described McWillie to
gun smuggler andan intimateofFidel
tion and a man with considerable pull in
Castro.According to FBI interviews,
the FBI as “a big-time gambler, who has
Cuba.He was also an acquaintance of
Ruby told McKeown that he was at-Lewis McWillie.Hemming says he does
ated top gamblingestabishmentsin theCuban prison.He said thatif McKeown
anotknowthepurposeoroutcomeof
United States and Cuba.Healways had
Ruby's meeting with Morgan,but it was
icouldfacilitatetheirrelease，hewould
a‘torpedo'[bodyguard] livingwith him
apparentlyinconnectionwith the effort
be paid $5,000 per person, adding that
for protection."
to secureTrafficante'sreleasefromjail.with McKeown,Ruby passed amessage
voice belonged to Jack Ruhy
of some sort--in code-toMcWillie in
Ruby told ihe Warren (Conmission
that his “one”trip to Cuba was purely a
Havana.The woman who carried the
message couid remember only oneword
soxcial visit at the invitation of his best
of it whenquestioned fouryears later by
friend.Lewis J.McWilie.As Ruby
the FBI.

The word was“arriving."
testifed.he"idolized”McWillie--and
McWillie, in turn, toid thc FBI that he
By June,according to Gerry Patrick
Don't light that cigar!:Fidel Castro
Hemming,a huiking, six-foot-six sol-
treated Ruby as"one wouid a brother.”
chuckles about something he read in
dieroffortunewhowasamemberof
EnterMcWillie
the afternoonpaper
Castro's rebel army,Ruby was in Cuba
Tounderstand Ruby's Cuban in-
attending ameeting at thehome of re-
and death matter,”Jack Ruby tracked
trigues it is necessary to understand the
bel Captain William Morgan.Morgan,
down Robert McKeown,a convicted
tangled affairs of his friend McWillie.A
an American,was a hero of the revolu-
former girifriend described McWillie to
gun smuggler andan intimateofFidel
tion and a man with considerable pull in
Castro.According to FBI interviews,
the FBI as “a big-time gambler, who has
Cuba.He was also an acquaintance of
Ruby told McKeown that he was at-Lewis McWillie.Hemming says he does
ated top gamblingestabishmentsin theCuban prison.He said thatif McKeown
anotknowthepurposeoroutcomeof
United States and Cuba.Healways had
Ruby's meeting with Morgan,but it was
icouldfacilitatetheirrelease，hewould
a‘torpedo'[bodyguard] livingwith him
apparentlyinconnectionwith the effort
be paid $5,000 per person, adding that
for protection."
to secureTrafficante'sreleasefromjail.

someone inLas Vegas would finance
According to FBl reports,McWillie.

(Hemming'stestimony has not always
the operation.someone inLas Vegas would finance
According to FBl reports,McWillie.

(Hemming'stestimony has not always
the operation.

had run several illegal gambling houses
proved reliable,but this account has
In mid tolateMay1959,amanwhom
in the Dallas area before moving toMcKeown later identified to the FBI as
beenpartially confirmedbyseveral
Cuba in.the summerof 1958-about theJack Rubyappeared at McKeown's
sources，including federal court docu-
same time Ruby was seen in the Florida
ments.)
store in Houston,and the two men ad-
Keys with his trunk full of guns.

Arriv-
Ruby was seen again in Havana dur-
journedto a back room todiscuss de-ing the Labor Day weekend(September
ing in Havana,McWillie was promptly
tails.Ruby's_plan was simple:make a5-7) at McWillie's Tropicana,by two
hired by Rothman as a pitboss in Traf-
trade with Castro.He told McKeown
ficante's Sans Souci·casino.In Sep-
Chicago lawyers and an architect.Flight
that he had an option on some jeeps in
tember1958,McWillie movedtothe
manifests reveal that Ruby was in Miami
Louisiana that he could use in the ex-after Labor Day,and fewto Havana on
Tropicana casino,described at the time
change.Ruby said he was willing to doSeptember 12.He returned to themain-
as“the largest nightclub in the world."almost anything to get these people out
Itwasin Havana that McWilie becameaof Cuba:and to secure the deal,Ruby
land the next day.

close associate of what were,according
Trafficante was ordered deported in
offeredMcKeown$25,000foraletter
July,but was actually released in Sep-
to the FBI, some of the most prominent
ofintroduction to Fidel Castrowhich
tember,and was still in Havana, accord
gambling hoodlums inthe U.S.Arriv-
Ruby was seen again in Havana dur-
journedto a back room todiscuss de-ing the Labor Day weekend(September
ing in Havana,McWillie was promptly
tails.Ruby's_plan was simple:make a5-7) at McWillie's Tropicana,by two
hired by Rothman as a pitboss in Traf-
trade with Castro.He told McKeown
ficante's Sans Souci·casino.In Sep-
Chicago lawyers and an architect.Flight
that he had an option on some jeeps in
tember1958,McWillie movedtothe
manifests reveal that Ruby was in Miami
Louisiana that he could use in the ex-after Labor Day,and fewto Havana on
Tropicana casino,described at the time
change.Ruby said he was willing to doSeptember 12.He returned to themain-
as“the largest nightclub in the world."almost anything to get these people out
Itwasin Havana that McWilie becameaof Cuba:and to secure the deal,Ruby
land the next day.

close associate of what were,according
Trafficante was ordered deported in
offeredMcKeown$25,000foraletter
July,but was actually released in Sep-
to the FBI, some of the most prominent
ofintroduction to Fidel Castrowhich
tember,and was still in Havana, accord
gambling hoodlums inthe U.S.

would“clearlyindicate that thebearer
Amongthem wereSantosTrafficante
ing to news dispatches,on September
was responsible and reliable."
and the Lansky brothers,Meyer and
13.By early September，FBIreports
A short time later,Ruby visited
say,Normie Rothman was also making
Jake.During the course of severalinter-
McWillie in Cuba.And onJuly 8,1959,
views conducted over the last year,
plans to slip back intoHavana.

Castro ordered thedeportation of three
McWillieadmittedtoknowingRoth-
His campaign to free Santos Traff-
prisoners: Loran Hall, Henry Saavedra
man,who,he said,“had something to
cante placed Ruby in some fast compa-
and Santos Trafficante.

dowith the slot machines”at theTropi-
ny.Castro ordered thedeportation of three
McWillieadmittedtoknowingRoth-
His campaign to free Santos Traff-
prisoners: Loran Hall, Henry Saavedra
man,who,he said,“had something to
cante placed Ruby in some fast compa-
and Santos Trafficante.

dowith the slot machines”at theTropi-
ny.

Others who wanted Trafficante re-
Accordingtoinformation obtained by
cana.but he denied knowing Traf-
leased included Johnny Roselli and his
congressional investigators and outlined
boss,Sam Giancana--both of whom,
ficante or theLansky brothers.

ina confidential House Assassinations
However,an FBi document that in-Committeebriefing memorandum,"Le-
says a House Assassinations Committee
trigued theSenate Intelligence Commit-wisJ.

McWillie,a close friend of Ruby
memorandum,visited Trafficanteinjail
tee reports that “McWillie solidified his and a man with many contacts among
in1959.A close friend of both Roselli
and Giancana,who testified before the
syndicate connections through his as-organized-crime figures,indicates that
Senate Inteiligence Committee,says
soxiations inHavana,Cuba,with Santos in 1959Jack Ruby traveled to Cuba and
Trafficante,well-knownsyndicate
Roselli told him，“Ruby was hooked
evisited Santos Trafficante in jail.Andaup with Trafficante in the rackets in
member fromTampa,Florida:Meyerrecently declassified CIA cable,dated
and Jake Lanski[sic];Dino Cellini and
Havana."
November 27,1963,reports that a Brit-
McWillie was still working in one of
others who were members or associates
ish
journalisttoldtheAmerican
Trafficante'sHavanacasinoswhen the
of'the syndicate."
Embassy in London that he had been in CIA-Mafia plots were initiated.In 1960,
McWillie's boss,Irafficante,was ar-
Cuba in 1959,and that he was briefly
McWillie left his job as manager of the
rested in Havana in April 1959.

In late
jailed by Castrobefore being deported.--- PAGE BREAK ---

McWillie,a close friend of Ruby
memorandum,visited Trafficanteinjail
tee reports that “McWillie solidified his and a man with many contacts among
in1959.A close friend of both Roselli
and Giancana,who testified before the
syndicate connections through his as-organized-crime figures,indicates that
Senate Inteiligence Committee,says
soxiations inHavana,Cuba,with Santos in 1959Jack Ruby traveled to Cuba and
Trafficante,well-knownsyndicate
Roselli told him，“Ruby was hooked
evisited Santos Trafficante in jail.Andaup with Trafficante in the rackets in
member fromTampa,Florida:Meyerrecently declassified CIA cable,dated
and Jake Lanski[sic];Dino Cellini and
Havana."
November 27,1963,reports that a Brit-
McWillie was still working in one of
others who were members or associates
ish
journalisttoldtheAmerican
Trafficante'sHavanacasinoswhen the
of'the syndicate."
Embassy in London that he had been in CIA-Mafia plots were initiated.In 1960,
McWillie's boss,Irafficante,was ar-
Cuba in 1959,and that he was briefly
McWillie left his job as manager of the
rested in Havana in April 1959. In late
jailed by Castrobefore being deported. April or early May, saying it'was a “life
Tropicana casino tobecome a pitboss at
The journalist,John Wilson-Hudson,
the Capri casino.The Capri was then
NEWTIMES1/23/78

--- PAGE BREAK ---ixit-g
hraete by Charhiethe twomonths preceding the Xennedy
IheBlarne,whose mistress
crak-town onh
ckRub
assassination on Novemhxr 22,1963.

onfuas that she was assisting Frank
was crdered ro elina ivald.

Beginning in the sunmer of 1963.

Sturgis in an attempt to slip Castro sone
Ruby's own version of cvents seems co
and continuing inu Noveinber,Roselli coincide with Roselis.While in jail in
(lA poisor.

i he poison pkof was appar-
was under FBl surveiliance.

An FBI 1965.

Ruby toid his psythiatrist,Dr.

cily +he mcis's first CIA-santioned as-
agent familiar with the case says that Ro-
Warner Teuter, that he had been part
sassination antempt.

(Giaucana was over-
hrare disusiny the pians.bragging
selli was indeed in Miami when the
of a onspiracy to kill Kennedy that in-
neetings wirh Ruby are supposed to
har he Had met with the“assassin,”
volved "high governmen agencies." Al-
have xcurred.The FBl's surveillance
though Ruby roid others the same thing.

Sttrgis.

who hadi been making the ar-
ofRoseli explains how investigators
Dr.

Teuter doubted the truth oi the sto
nts.ording toa1960 FB1
were abie toidentifvthe exact motel
ry: Ruby ofeen followed such admissions
11!

lrxoms 14 years later.

After the psoning faied late in
with fts of ranting and raving.

Coiumnist Jack.Anderson says that
198.MeWilie ntmued to work a tht
Ruby had aiwavs feared his role in
Capri throrugh December.

ustii he was
Roselli admitted knowing Ruby."One
running guns to (astro.if it ever be
ofour boys"is howRoselli described
came known, would be seen as unpatri-
finaily fore co feeanuary 2.

1961,
him toAndersoi.And a Roselli.friend
to avoid arrest.

Aecording to Jac k Ruby
otic.He toid Dr.Teuter that he was
says that in the course of various conver-
and others, M willie was one of the las!

blackmaied into shooting Oswald by
sations over the years,Roselli often re-
Anerican gatnttes toleave Cuba.Aecording to Jac k Ruby
otic.He toid Dr.Teuter that he was
says that in the course of various conver-
and others, M willie was one of the las!

blackmaied into shooting Oswald by
sations over the years,Roselli often re-
Anerican gatnttes toleave Cuba.

people who threatened to reveal his gun
ferred to Ruby as"the razy Jew."
Ruby was n constant contact by
Y'etit is still not clear what relation-
phone with Me willie atter he fed Ctba.

(n ine,” Ruby said.

ship.if any,exists between Ruby's n-
Ihis was ciuring the height of the Castro
Inlooking for pxossibie connections
yolvementwith the likes ofJohnny Ro-
bxerween the mob and Kennedy's assassi-
issassinatiol1
ploting.

when Roseli.

selli and Santos Trafficante,and his
Gian ana,I:afhante and the CIA iwere
nation,it is worth remembering that
one of Sam Giancana's majur obsessions
meeting io Mani.

Mewillie was aiso in
Miani.

where he remained for the first
was the Kennedy assault on organized
six nonhs fi961,until shortly after
Ruby said he would do
（rime.Atorney General Robert Ken-
the failurftheBt Pigsinvasion
nedy is reported to have placed Gian-
almost anything to get
and the first iwo CIA-Mafia assassina-
cana at the top of his “hit list”of those
tion attempts agaist Castro,He then
slatedfor specialprosecutorial atten-
these people out of jail.

tooka jol as fioor manager at Lake
tion, right below Jimmy Hoffa.

Iahox's Cal-Neva Lodge.

To secure the deal, he
T'heWashington Post recentiy report-
ed a chilling conversation between San-
According io Gerrv Hemning.by
offered $25,000 for a
then the leader of an anti-fastro Cuban
tos Trafficante and a young Cuban ex-
exile group.“Roselli was using Mc Wilie
ile.Iahox's Cal-Neva Lodge.

To secure the deal, he
T'heWashington Post recentiy report-
ed a chilling conversation between San-
According io Gerrv Hemning.by
offered $25,000 for a
then the leader of an anti-fastro Cuban
tos Trafficante and a young Cuban ex-
exile group.“Roselli was using Mc Wilie
ile.

Jose Aleman, that allegedly occurred
letter of introduction to
inSeptember 1962.Aleman says it
just prior to the Bav of Pigs,n the hit
job [against (astoi and some other in-
Fidel Castro
started as a business discussion,but
telligence stul:
when itturnedto the subject ofJohn
.related to some
high officiais(Castro's government
Kennedy,I'rafficante's relaxed mood
with heavy nsh) connettions."
quickiy changed.

murder of Lee Harvey Oswald on No-
"Have you seen how_his brother is hit-
Re-cnier Ruby
vember 24,1963.What is known is that
ting Hoffa,a man who is a worker, who
in the month before the assassination,
In1962.the(:IA renewed its Castro
is not a millionaire,a friend of the biue
Ruby,according to the Warren Com-
assassination piotuing with its Mafia
collars?"Trafficante said.“He doesn’t
nission, was in close contact with a num-
friends.partiulaniy Trafficante.In
know this kind of encounter is very deli-
berofhighly·interesting“friends":
April、while Irafiante was meeting
cate.

Mark my words,this man Kennedy
Dusty Miller,head of the Teamsters
winh the (IA in Florida,Ruby showed
is in trouble, and he will get what is com-
Union's Southern Conference;Paul ing to him."Aleman argued that Ken-
up there.

ailegerilv to rec ruit strippers.

“Red”Dorfman,a Hofa intimate.bxoss
He visited several bars in Tampahe
nedy would get re-elected.whereupon,
of the Teamsters'mob-riddled Central he says,Tralficante toli him,“No, Jose,
sameones frequenied byTrafficante.

States Pension Fund,and one of the he is going to bxe hin."Aleman says he
Ihe (IA and the Mafia decided to have
most powerful organized-crime figurestold the FBi about Trafhcante's ittle in-
another go.“Red”Dorfman,a Hofa intimate.bxoss
He visited several bars in Tampahe
nedy would get re-elected.whereupon,
of the Teamsters'mob-riddled Central he says,Tralficante toli him,“No, Jose,
sameones frequenied byTrafficante.

States Pension Fund,and one of the he is going to bxe hin."Aleman says he
Ihe (IA and the Mafia decided to have
most powerful organized-crime figurestold the FBi about Trafhcante's ittle in-
another go.

in the country; Irwin S.Weiner,a senior
B like the earlier effors, this assassi-
discretion before Kennedy was gunned
Ieamster bondsman withclose ties to
down in Dallas.

'Ihe FB1 has yet to com-
natron atterpt was thwarted by Castro's
the Chicago mob,who was acquitted of
securitv officials.And after the (uban
fment on the matter.

allegedly defraudingtheTeamster pen-
missil crisis in (tober 1962.rhe Ken-
But House Assassinations Committee
sion fund of $1.4 million.

after the gov-
neiv Adninistration lost enthusiasin
investigators say Aleman is sticking to
crnment's star witness was shotgunned
for the (IA's il-fated attenpts to “liber-
his story.And Santos Trafhnte is noi
to death; and Barney Baker, describedtaking it very well.House investigators
aeCuba.

fhe last CIA-Mafa plot ap-
by Robert Kennedy as "Hoffa's roving say that when they arrived to serve
prently canne io a cnet  early March
1organizer and ambassador of violence."
1963,whe one of Roselli's hit squacis.

‘Trafficante with his subpoena last
Baker,in turn,called another of Ruby's March, he was actually trembiing.

And
cipped wil high-powered rifes and
friends.Dave Yaras.a Cuban gun run-with god veason.In June 1975, Sam
waikie-taikies.

was picked up on a Hava-
ner and menber of the Chicago mob.Gianan was killed by seven bullets in
a roxfto).

on the eve of the assassination.--- PAGE BREAK ---

was picked up on a Hava-
ner and menber of the Chicago mob.Gianan was killed by seven bullets in
a roxfto). on the eve of the assassination. In late ths,here was an intriguing
the fare one week bxfore he was slated
And Roselli's version of the Kennedy
delmeu fowhih here is still n
to testif before the Senate Inteligence
assassination,as told to Jack Anderson,
(xptati. eleai s s close to the
Conmutee.[hen.in Api1976.John
is worth noting:"When Oswald was
Florid investgauion oi jolnoy Roseli's
ny Roscli testifed secreily beforethe
pic ked p, Roseli suggested, the under-
nde: >av th.t two Miani tootel roxoms
Senate lntelligetc sulxoonittee inves
world conspiratorsfeared he would
iave xe idetihe as he io ations of
tigatingthe Kennedssassinaton.Two
(rack anddisclose information thatmonths laterhis mutilated body was
wo metings iwc Roselli andjak
might lead to them.This aimost certain-found Hoating in:Miami's Dunfoun-
Rulahunetngs ocarred during
iy would have brought a massive U.S. dling Bay. stuffed iu an oil drure. $
SWMNB/