****** Washington 
Hunt 
BY BERT ANDREWS 
Random House . New York

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ONE 
★ ★ ★ ★ ★ 
The Hunters and the 
Hunted

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE war to protect civil liber- 
ties—your civil liberties—is never-ending. As the central 
figure in one of the newest and fiercest battles of that 
war there is a man who has come to be known by the 
all-disguising name of “Mr. Blank.” 
He is a real man. He is not a character in a weird 
novel or a bad dream. He is so real, in fact, that he could 
be you or me, and the things that happened to him—and 
are still happening to him—could befall you or me. 
[3]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
This begins, then, as the story of Mr. Blank. 
But it is a story of many ramifications. 
... of how Mr. Blank was discharged from the De- 
partment of State of the United States of America as 
potential security risk” without ever being informed of 
the nature of the charges against him and without ev 
being confronted by his accusers. 
... of how a witch hunt, once it begins, can strike 
anyone, no matter how innocent he might be. 
... of the incident that made me angry enough about J 
Mr. Blank’s case to want to do something about it, 
only for the sake of Mr. Blank but also for your sake! 
and for my sake. 
... of how the greatest of the bureaucratic ager 
of the mightiest government in the world was made 
back down when the cold, bare facts were exposed tc 
public view. 
But there is much more to it than the mere case 
tory of one individual. 
For the study *>f this case history leads directly into 
consideration of the larger factors involved; the 
that explain why the Department of State and other 
ernment agencies “got this way” during the aftermath 
World War II. 
It leads to consideration— 
... of the part played by J. Edgar Hoover and tl 
Federal Bureau of Investigation, which he heads. 
... of the case of Ring Lardner, Jr., and oth

--- PAGE BREAK ---r II. 
It leads to consideration— 
... of the part played by J. Edgar Hoover and tl 
Federal Bureau of Investigation, which he heads. 
... of the case of Ring Lardner, Jr., and oth

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
Hollywood figures who were cited for contempt by the 
House Committee on Un-American Activities. 
... of the case of veiled charges and innuendoes 
against Dr. Edward U. Condon, Director of the Bureau 
of Standards. 
... of the strange professions of loyalty to the 
United States made by William Z. Foster, chairman of 
the Communist party, U. S. A. 
... of how those professions stacked up when com- 
pared with statements made by Josef Stalin, Viacheslav 
Molotov and Andrei A. Zhdanov, the Russian leaders. 
Then, reverting to Mr. Blank, there are the additional 
accounts— 
... of what can be accomplished against a witch 
hunt when the triple-throated voice of the people and 
the press and the radio join in shouting: “This is wrong! ” 
... of the troubles that beset a man who goes 
job-hunting with the words “potential security risk” 
plastered on his name and reputation, even though the 
triple-throated cry has led to a correction of the general 
situation. 
... of the worries that beset a man who blandly par- 
ticipated in the “no-hearing” case of Mr. Blank when 
he, himself, was thrust into a situation where he very 
much wanted a hearing. 
There were four men present in a State Department 
room on the morning of November i, 1947. 
[5]

--- PAGE BREAK ---en 
he, himself, was thrust into a situation where he very 
much wanted a hearing. 
There were four men present in a State Department 
room on the morning of November i, 1947. 
[5]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Three were State Department officials. 
One was this reporter. 
The case of Mr. Blank was being discussed. 
The talk revolved generally around the ethics and 
decency and fairness of dismissing any individual with- 
out letting him in on the secret of who accused him of 
what, and without granting him the right of appeal. 
There wasn’t any argument about whether the State 
Department had the right to do all this. 
It definitely had the right by act of Congress. 
The argument was whether it was the American way 
of proceeding. 
Finally, weary of the talk, one of the State Depart- 
ment men said words that shocked the reporter. There 
were no stenographers present, so there is no exact rec- 1 
ord. But this was the sense of what he said: 
“Why beat around the bush on a matter like this? It ; 
is entirely conceivable thaP any one of us in this room 
could be made the victim of a complete frame-up, if he 
had enough enemies in the Department who were out j 
to get him.” (He was talking about himself and the ’ 
other two State Department men.) 
“Yes,” he continued, “such a thing would be perfectly 
conceivable. And we would not have any more recourse 
than Mr. Blank, even though we were entirely innocent.” I 
The reporter was astonished, and a bit frightened. 
“What did you say?” the reporter asked, coming ) 
down hard on the word “what.” 
•i • rift; 
WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT

--- PAGE BREAK ---innocent.” I 
The reporter was astonished, and a bit frightened. 
“What did you say?” the reporter asked, coming ) 
down hard on the word “what.” 
•i • rift; 
WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The postwar climate was not new. An earlier hunt had 
begun in the same atmosphere more than a quarter of a 
century ago. It was history repeating itself—without re- 
gard for past lessons. 
Men old enough to remember, students of history, 
fathers and mothers of today’s government workers saw 
the new open season develop just as it had after W orld 
War I. Then, though, it was first the executive branch 
which felt compelled to clean house. Now it was the 
legislative demanding scalps of the executive. 
One needed to turn back the pages of history but a 
quarter of a century to appreciate the danger. In the 
Wilson era the administration persisted in exercising 
stringent controls over private thinking, though any 
justification for it had ended with the armistice. 
Woodrow Wilson’s Postmaster General, Albert S. 
Burleson, continued to keep a rigid but no longer justified 
watch over the press and the mails. With similar presi- 
dential blessing, the Attorney General, A. Mitchell 
[ 7 1 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
The State Department man repeated his statement. 
The reporter said words that amounted to these: 
“If a man of your intelligence can say a thing like that 
without being shocked at what you are saying and with- 
out a feeling of personal peril, then something is wrong. 
And it’s high time the story of Mr. Blank was told to the 
people of the United States to let them decide what was 
done right and what was done wrong in his case.

--- PAGE BREAK ---thing is wrong. 
And it’s high time the story of Mr. Blank was told to the 
people of the United States to let them decide what was 
done right and what was done wrong in his case.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
Palmer, launched a one-man crusade against “Reds.” 
Arrests on mere suspicion were wholesale. Entrapment 
was encouraged. “Seditious meetings” were provoked 
and aliens were rounded up for deportation. Congress 
considered new and more drastic sedition laws. 
When the pendulum had swung too far, as it was do- 
ing now, vehement protests arose from everyone who 
knew what was at stake. 
Charles Evans Hughes, concerned for constitutional 
rights, spoke up before the Harvard Law alumni. 
“We may well wonder, in view of the precedents now 
established,” the former Supreme Court Justice said 
gravely, “whether constitutional government as hereto- 
fore maintained in this republic could survive another 
great war even victoriously waged.” 
Now, that other great war had been victoriously 
waged. The period of Justice Hughes’ fears had arrived. 
Twelve years of liberal government under Franklin 
Delano Roosevelt had given rise to recurrent and con- 
tinuing charges that the Federal establishment was perme- 
ated with “Communists, pink Socialists, and fellow trav- 
elers.” The charges had been generally discounted and 
brushed aside by the American public. 
But public confidence waned with the collapse of the 
illusive wartime friendship between Soviet Russia and 
the Western Democracies. With the renewed war of the 
ideologies, with American capitalism the principal target 
of Russian communism, the possible presence of Com- 
[8]

--- PAGE BREAK ---ussia and 
the Western Democracies. With the renewed war of the 
ideologies, with American capitalism the principal target 
of Russian communism, the possible presence of Com- 
[8]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
munists and fellow travelers- in government took on new 
and seemingly sinister importance. 
Then the first climax came: A Canadian Royal Com- 
mission, during the summer of .1946, disclosed that a 
Soviet spy ring, its agents camouflaged as diplomats, had 
worked hand in fist with leftists in the Canadian govern- 
ment to pry out atomic secrets shared by Canada and the 
United States. 
The floodgates were open. With a burst of indigna- 
tion, members of Congress demanded effective measures 
to guard government offices against infiltration by ad- 
herents of foreign ideologies. A Gallup poll, published 
August 25, 1946, indicated wide support of proposals to 
bar Communists from Federal offices. The question was 
how. 
Congressmen recalled that Patrick J. Hurley had 
resigned the preceding November as United States 
Ambassador to China with a blast charging that the 
President’s policy in Asia was being sabotaged by for- 
eign-service career men in Washington and at the Em- 
bassy in Chungking. The saboteurs, General Hurley said, 
sided with “the Chinese Communist armed party” and, 
paradoxically, with “the imperialist bloc of nations,” 
which he identified as Great Britain, the Netherlands 
and France. 
Hurley’s broadside took on new meaning now. The 
House Un-American Activities Committee went to 
work with increased vigor; the House Post Office and 
[9]

--- PAGE BREAK ---Netherlands 
and France. 
Hurley’s broadside took on new meaning now. The 
House Un-American Activities Committee went to 
work with increased vigor; the House Post Office and 
[9]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
Gvil Service Committee became restive; conservatives 
in the Senate Foreign Relations and Appropriations 
Committees became alarmed. Their principal concern 
was the State Department, but they agreed that all offices 
of government had to be purged. 
Conflicting stories of State Department vigilance were 
heard in the House. Representative Edward Eugene Cox, 
Democrat, of Georgia, reported that the Department 
had been “exerting itself to the limit” to eliminate unde- 
sirable employees. He said that a security committee, 
established within the Department, had purged “hun- 
dreds of people and they are going out daily.” 
Representative Bartel J. Jonkman, Republican, of 
Michigan, had a different version. He said that Dean 
Acheson, Under Secretary of State, had informed him 
that recent wholesale dismissals had been due solely to 
reasons of economy. Referring to lists of permanent em- 
ployees suspected 'of disloyalty, which had been for- 
warded to the Department from various sources, Ache- 
son had told Jonkman that “accusations against but one 
employee have been substantiated and this person has 
been discharged.” 
That summer-1946-James F. Byrnes, then Secretary 
of State, went before the Appropriations Committees to 
press the Department’s budget requests for the next fiscal 
year. He was caught between a crossfire of inquiries on 
the extent of the Department’s purge of disloyal em- 
ployees. It had gone no further, he explained, than the 
[ 10 ]

--- PAGE BREAK ---scal 
year. He was caught between a crossfire of inquiries on 
the extent of the Department’s purge of disloyal em- 
ployees. It had gone no further, he explained, than the 
[ 10 ]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
civil-service law permitted. If it was the consensus of 
Congress that the Department should have a freer hand, 
Congress should say so. 
Congress did. It said it in a special rider to the State 
Department’s appropriation bill. The provision came to 
be known as the McCarran rider because its author was 
Senator Pat McCarran, Democrat, of Nevada, chairman 
of the sub-committee which handled the supply measure. 
The rider permitted summary discharge of any State 
Department employee by the Secretary “in his absolute 
discretion . . . whenever he shall deem such termina- 
tion necessary or advisable in the interests of the United 
States.” 
Similar arbitrary power of dismissal had been granted 
the Navy and War Departments in World War II legis- 
lation, and later to the hypersensitive Atomic Energy 
Commission. The new provision, which remains on the 
books for the three Departments and the Commission, 
has the effect of waiving the normal statutory protection 
against discharge accorded permanent-status civil-service 
employees. 
Employees of the three Departments and the Commis- 
sion found themselves on an island alone among civil- 
service employees. Unlike the others they could be 
turned out summarily without learning any charges, 
without having an opportunity to reply, and, in the case 
of removal, perhaps for political or religious reasons, 
without the usual appeal to the Civil Service Commission. 
[ II 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---without having an opportunity to reply, and, in the case 
of removal, perhaps for political or religious reasons, 
without the usual appeal to the Civil Service Commission. 
[ II 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
The State Department, though, was cautious with its 
new power. No instances of misuse—or, in fact, use—of 
the McCarran rider were reported at first. But early in 
the summer of 1947 State Department officials returned 
to the Senate Appropriations Committee for money for 
the fiscal year of 1948. 
The pressure for scalps was greater this time. The De- 
partment had the power but had not used it. Inexcusable! 
The cost would be severe cuts in appropriations, particu- 
larly for the important cultural and information program 
(Voice of America) which Congressmen had convinced 
themselves was a bee-hive of left-wing holdovers from 
the war agencies. Department officials hurried back 
downtown and made a quick search for likely scalps. 
Presently they were served up—those of Mr. Blank and 
nine others. Committee.members now “understood” the 
Department’s financial requirements better. 
Other committees of Congress looked to other De- 
partments. They were interested in the entire roll of 
2,200,000 Federal employees. Congressman Edward H. 
Rees, Republican, of Kansas, later chairman but then 
ranking minority member of the House Post Office and 
Civil Service Committee, led the initial drive in 1946 for a 
legislated government-employee loyalty probe. It was 
necessary, he argued, not only to purge the disloyal, but to 
protect the loyal from suspicion. There was good reason 
to suspect, he maintained without contradiction, that the 
[12]

--- PAGE BREAK ---cessary, he argued, not only to purge the disloyal, but to 
protect the loyal from suspicion. There was good reason 
to suspect, he maintained without contradiction, that the 
[12]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
Canadian spy ring had not been confined to Canada. He 
vas far from being alone in this belief. 
In July, 1946, Rees was constituted a sub-committee 
:hairman to investigate these matters. Eighteen days later, 
hortly before adjournment, the sub-committee reported, 
t said that testimony at secret sessions was “sufficient to 
ndicate the immediate necessity for certain action, 
dowever, no detailed plan was advocated; nor was the 
estimony made public. 
The sub-committee recognized, however, “the impos- 
sibility of adequately protecting the government (with 
existing appropriations) from the infiltration of persons 
vvhose primary loyalty is to other governments. ’ The 
Civil Service Commission, the committee also found, had 
ilready begun to draw up instructions to be issued to 
)ther Federal agencies for stop-gap steps. 
“The only way to afford complete protection to 
our government,” the sub-committee concluded, is to 
require all persons who apply for positions to be thor- 
oughly investigated and fingerprinted in advance of em- 
ployment.” This would require an immediate increase in 
appropriations from loyalty investigations by the Civil 
Service Commission and the Departments. But no action 
was taken by Congress prior to adjournment. 
Chairman Rees, meanwhile, finding himself a minority 
in his own sub-committee, recommended that the com- 
mittee hold further hearings and make a “full and com- 
plete investigation.” He put in a bill to set up a full 
[13]

--- PAGE BREAK ---minority 
in his own sub-committee, recommended that the com- 
mittee hold further hearings and make a “full and com- 
plete investigation.” He put in a bill to set up a full 
[13]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

' 
I III * 1 
WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
loyalty probe. It passed the House. It never got through 
the Senate because President Truman set to work to keep 
the problem an administrative one, which he thought it 
The first step, in November, 1946, was the appom - 
ment of a six-man Temporary Commission on Employee 
Loyalty, its membership drawn from top officials m the 
Civil Service Commission, Army, Navy, State Depart- 
ment and Justice Department. Its conclusions, after four 
months of intensive study and investigation, were: 
“1 Although the vast majority of federal employees 
are loyal, some are subversive or disloyal. Because of the 
secretive manner and method of their operation, it is diffi- 
cult to assess the numerical strength of the disloyal group. 
Whatever their number, the internal security of the gov- 
ernment demands continuous screening, scrutiny, and 
surveillance of pre*ent and prospective employees. 
“2. The presence-within the government of any dis- 
loyal or subversive persons presents a problem of such 
importance that it must be dealt with vigorously and 
effectively. . . . , ■ 
“3. In addition to the emphasis properly placed on 
Communist and Communist-front organization activities, 
attention should be directed to the resurgence of native 
Fascist movements. # -4 * 
“4. Even if all the specific recommendations contained 
in this report are adopted and effectuated, there is still a 
distinct need for aggressive and uninterrupted counter- 
[ Hi

--- PAGE BREAK ---“4. Even if all the specific recommendations contained 
in this report are adopted and effectuated, there is still a 
distinct need for aggressive and uninterrupted counter- 
[ Hi

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
ntelligence, particularly in its counter-espionage phases. 
A clear example of the need is presented in the recent 
Canadian experience with Communist espionage activi- 
ties. It would be unrealistic to assume that foreign powers 
ire not maintaining intelligence networks in this country. 
“5. A guarantee of full and complete protection to the 
government is a commendable objective, but is rendered 
difficult of achievement by the fact that public funds are 
not unlimited and must be made available for many other 
necessary and vital purposes. 
“6. There are compelling reasons for authorizing the 
Secretaries of State, War and Navy Departments and the 
Atomic Energy Commission to remove summarily any 
employee in the interest of national security. These more 
sensitive agencies require this specific authorization to 
safeguard the government from the destructive influence 
of disloyal or subversive persons.” 
With the general conclusions there were extensive 
specific conclusions, outlining the commission’s idea of 
how a continuing administrative loyalty check should 
function. On March 22, 1947, the President, issued the 
requisite Executive Order. Necessary appropriations 
were not at once forthcoming. Some men in Congress 
still hoped to defeat the President’s order and force adop- 
tion of probe by statute. 
Eventually the President won. The check started, care- 
fully directed by a loyalty review board of eminent citi- 
zens, administered on the lower levels by the departments 
[15]

--- PAGE BREAK ---Eventually the President won. The check started, care- 
fully directed by a loyalty review board of eminent citi- 
zens, administered on the lower levels by the departments 
[15]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

i 
WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
and agencies themselves, aided by a financially fortified 
Federal Bureau of Investigation. Except possibly for the 
island of summary authority, it would be no witch hunt. 
Mr. Blank was one of ten State Department employees 
trapped on that island. 
The ten were dismissed as “potential security risks” on 
June 23, 1947. . 
The State Department swiftly backed down in the 
cases of three when it developed that the suspicions 
against them were, to say the least, greatly exaggerated, 
and when it began to appear that the Department would 
be made to look ridiculous if the stories of the three were
aired. 
These three were allowed to resign “without preju- 
dice.” 
What was the difference between such dismissals ant
such resignations? 
Imagine yourself an employer receiving an applicatior
from job-hunters. You like their work records. But yoi 
check references and former places of employment. Or 
one, you get back a report that he resigned voluntarily 
On another, you receive word from the State Depart 
ment that he was fired as a “potential security risk. 
Would you hire the latter? The answer is obvious. 
That, then, was the position of the seven whose name 
had not been cleared. 
And so, as a group, they turned to the law firm o 
Arnold, Fortas & Porter, whose members are:

--- PAGE BREAK ---bvious. 
That, then, was the position of the seven whose name 
had not been cleared. 
And so, as a group, they turned to the law firm o 
Arnold, Fortas & Porter, whose members are:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
Thurman Arnold, former Assistant Attorney General; 
Abe Fortas, former Under Secretary of the Interior, and 
Paul A. Porter, former head of the Office of Price Ad- 
ministration and one-time emissary of President Truman 
to Greece with the rank of Ambassador. 
No subversives there! 
These men, to their eternal credit, took the case with- 
out fee because of the issue of civil liberties involved. 
They began at once to use the battering rams of their 
legal lore and their knowledge of government, gained 
from the inside, against the stone walls of bureaucracy. 
They had so little luck that Mr. Porter, in a July con- 
versation with this reporter, said words something like 
these: — - 
“Look, this is an outrageous case. We want to try to 
solve it without publicity. Obviously, our clients do not 
want their names made public if they can avoid it. If their 
names do become known, they will be tarred forever, 
even though they may be innocent-and we believe they 
we innocent of any real wrongdoing.” 
Mr. Porter paused there. 
“But,” he continued, and it turned out to be a big 
“but,” “it may be necessary to turn on the spotlight of 
public opinion, and if so, I’ll ask your help.” 
The help was promised, but before it was asked there 
were such intervening steps as these taken by the law 
firm: 
*• A letter from the law firm to John E. Peurifoy, 
[ 17 ]

--- PAGE BREAK ---lp.” 
The help was promised, but before it was asked there 
were such intervening steps as these taken by the law 
firm: 
*• A letter from the law firm to John E. Peurifoy, 
[ 17 ]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
Assistant Secretary of State, on July 9, 1947. It said in 
part: * 
“Secretary of State George C. Marshall, in a press 
conference, stated that the dismissals were because of in- 
direct association with representatives of foreign powers. 
The affidavits (of the clients) specifically deny any asso- 
ciation, directly or indirectly, with any one known or 
suspected by them of being a representative of a foreign 
power. 
“If there is no basis for charges against them, as the 
attached affidavits state, I am sure you will agree that a 
serious and grave injustice has been done. < 
“If there is any basis for the charge, justice to the em- 
ployees as well as public confidence in the Department of 
State requires that they be confronted with specific 
charges and given an opportunity to meet them.” 
2. A letter from Mr. Porter to Mr. Peurifoy, on Sep- 
tember 2, 1947. It said in part: 
“I have had two conferences with you on this matter 
and on both occasions I advised you that we had agreed 
to represent these employees on the express condition 
that their affidavits were accurate and that they did not 
fail to disclose any material fact. 
“I requested further that you furnish us with any evi- 
dence of disloyalty on the part of these employees or 
with any data that the Department has which raises ques- 
tion as to the accuracy or completeness of the affidavits 
submitted. 
[18] 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
“No such information has been received. 
“I desire now to repeat this request and will be avail- 
able to discuss the matter further with you at your early 
convenience.” 
3. A letter from the law firm to Secretary Marshall on 
October 4, 1947. It said in part: 
“We are addressing to you this appeal on behalf of 
seven employees of the Department of State whom this 
office represents to ascertain whether you have had the 
opportunity to review the action of the Department be- 
fore we give further advice to these aggrieved indi- 
viduals. 
“We have today received a letter from Mr. Peurifoy 
in which he transmits the recommendation of the Per- 
sonnel Security Board that none of the remainder ‘be 
now permitted to resign without prejudice’ and states 
‘that the Department proposes to take no further action 
with respect to the employees concerned.’ ” 
The letter insisted that the Department’s own statement 
on its security principles had been completely ignored in 
three particulars: 
No charges had been submitted to the individuals or 
their counsel. 
No hearing had been given any of these individuals in 
the accepted sense that a hearing means an opportunity 
to appear and submit evidence in response to charges. 
No response had been made to the affidavits submitted 
by these employees denying the general and vague accu-hat a hearing means an opportunity 
to appear and submit evidence in response to charges. 
No response had been made to the affidavits submitted 
by these employees denying the general and vague accu-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
sations that they associated “directly or indirectly” with 
representatives of foreign powers. 
The letter to Marshall concluded: 
“We submit that the procedure followed with respect 
to these employees is unfair and un-American. On their 
behalf we have asked that they be permitted to resign 
without prejudice in order that their economic future 
would not be jeopardized by the stigma of disloyalty or 
in the alternative that they be provided with charges and 
an opportunity to confront their accusers and rebut such 
charges. This we feel is their fundamental and simple 
right as American citizens. 
“The procedure that has been followed is tragically 
analogous to the tactics employed in the police states 
dominated by communists and fascists and has no place 
in the American system where standards of civil liberties, 
fair play and tfie inalienable principles of the Bill of 
Rights are the privilege of the humblest without regard 
to race, color or creed.” 
The letter was written in vain. Exactly nothing hap- 
pened until Sunday morning, November 2, 1947. On 
that day the New York Herald Tribune carried in all its 
grim detail the story of “Mr. Blank.” 
It was an account that shocked the nation and com- 
pelled the State Department to retreat from its stub- 
bornly held position. 
It encouraged those who had been too timid to fight 
for civil liberties to rally their forces and say: 
[20]

--- PAGE BREAK ---the State Department to retreat from its stub- 
bornly held position. 
It encouraged those who had been too timid to fight 
for civil liberties to rally their forces and say: 
[20]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
“This witch hunt has gone far enough.” 
It revived the fundamental belief of Americans that a 
man is innocent until he has been proven guilty. 
For these reasons, and because it is a case which may 
be studied in the future when the atmosphere of Amer- 
ica in 1947-1948 is under discussion, the essential facts 
are repeated here. 
Mr. Blank had been summarily dismissed from his 
State Department job. 
He was regarded by the department, on the basis of a 
report from the F.B.I. on the results of eight months of 
shadowing him, as a bad security risk. He was not ac- 
cused of disloyalty. Because the Department did not re- 
veal the nature of the charges against him, there was no 
way for anyone outside the top echelon of the Depart- 
ment to know just what he did or was accused of having 
done. 
There was no way for anyone outside the top echelon 
to know whether he was a victim of a “witch hunt” or a 
man guilty of offenses that might warrant even greater 
punishment than dismissal: 
The State Department took the position that in such 
cases it could not reveal the charges lest it “give away” 
all it might have learned about the accused and thus tip 
off other persons with whom the individual might have 
associated. 
One State Department source acknowledged it was en- 
tirely conceivable that an entirely innocent man might 
[21]

--- PAGE BREAK ---ff other persons with whom the individual might have 
associated. 
One State Department source acknowledged it was en- 
tirely conceivable that an entirely innocent man might 
[21]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
be made the victim of a frame-up, granting the unlikely 
possibility that sufficient enemies ganged up on him. The 
source acknowledged something even more important: 
that under the procedure such an innocent man would 
have no more recourse, no more chance of demanding 
and getting the charges against him, than would an in 
vidual guilty of disloyalty and violation of security. 
The Department said it would be very glad if some 
system of review could be established which would in- 
sure any accused individual of the right to have a real 
review made of his case-a review that would satisfy 
everyone that no violation of civil liberties had been 
committed. 
Some of the facts that emerged about Mr. Blank were: 
He worked for the government from February, 1942, 
to the date he was “severed,” June 23, 1947- He worked 
successively for the Office of Price Administration, the 
War Production Board, the War Department, the For- 
eign Economic Administration and the State Department. 
In the late summer of 1946 the F.B.I. put two agents 
on him. They kept close watch on his “daily comings and 
goings.” They learned the identities of people he talked 
to. They took a picture of him one day as he crossed the 
street with a woman employee in the office in which he 
worked at the time. Subsequently they showed the pic- 
ture to his wife-in his presence. 
In April, 1947, the agents visited him and his wife. 
They questioned them closely about their past years and 
[ 22 ] 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
the people they knew. That was when they showed her 
the picture. 
In June, 1947, he was dismissed “without any state- 
ment of charges.” 
He received a “hearing” in July before four State De- 
partment superiors. He was told then that it was not in 
the nature of an appeal, that the case was closed as far as 
the Department was concerned, but that the law did not 
prohibit his employment by any other agency of the 
government. 
He insisted he was not a Communist, as the F.B.I. 
agents alleged, and that his only “association with repre- 
sentatives of foreign powers” was in the course of his 
official duties at the State Department. 
He felt he was entitled to learn the charges against 
him and have an opportunity to answer them. He offered, 
at the “hearing,” to send additional information, and 
was told to go ahead—“you send it over and we 11 slap it 
in the file.” 
He was denied the right to resign. 
He was denied the right to see George C. Marshall, 
Secretary of State. 
There were two major documents in Mr. Blank’s case. 
One was his affidavit given to his lawyers. The other was 
the transcript of the State Department “hearing.” 
His affidavit to his counsel told of the visit to his home 
on the evening of April 15, 1947* of wo FJB L agents' 
They were there two hours.They charged his wife and 
[ 23 ]te Department “hearing.” 
His affidavit to his counsel told of the visit to his home 
on the evening of April 15, 1947* of wo FJB L agents' 
They were there two hours.They charged his wife and 
[ 23 ]

--- PAGE BREAK ---ng.” 
His affidavit to his counsel told of the visit to his home 
on the evening of April 15, 1947* of wo FJB L agents' 
They were there two hours.They charged his wife and 
[ 23 ]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
him with having been members of the Communist party 
in Harlem, N. Y., some time about the year 1935, and 
stated that he was a “high official.” (He had not met his 
wife in 1935.) They gave no indication as to the source 
of their information save that they knew it from paid in- 
formers. He told them he never had spent any time in 
Harlem. They recited his daily comings and goings for 
eight months. They knew with whom he had lunch, who 
visited his home and whom he visited. 
They questioned him about many acquaintances, about 
a couple who had gone to a concert with him and his 
wife, about a man who had received mail at his home 
and about a check which they saw him receive. He ex- 
plained he had borrowed some money to make an ad- 
vance payment for nursery school for his child. 
They said he had been photographed with a girl from 
his office while crossing the street for coffee. They pulled 
this picture out and showed it to his wife. 
The day following the F.B.I. visit, he reported it to 
his supervisors, offering to resign if this accusation should 
result in a lack of confidence in him. He told one of his 
superiors about being shadowed. The superior bluntly 
told him that, based on his long experience as an adminis- 
trator, he was a dead duck whether innocent or guilty, 
because of the widespread hysteria in Washington at this 
time. 
His offer to resign was countered with an expression of 
complete confidence. 
[ 24] 
’iW *#•*••«* itrtit 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
The State Department security officers examined him 
for a total of twelve hours at intervals during May and 
June of 1947. They questioned him on his opinions, 
friends, interests, jobs, associates, etc. He offered twenty- 
nine specimens of his published and unpublished writings 
from 1933 on. Nothing in these interviews appeared to 
incriminate him in any way. 
During the period from April to June, when he was 
undergoing questioning, the office had so much con- 
fidence in him that steps were taken for his promotion. 
He was even given a private office, with a staff and secre- 
tary. 
However, on June 23, 1947, at 5:30 P.M., he was 
handed a letter by an administrative officer to the effect 
that as of that moment his services were terminated “in 
the interest of the United States.” Thus he was sum- 
marily fired without a hearing or knowledge of charges 
or accuser. 
When he returned the following morning to collect his 
personal belongings, he was forbidden entry to his office. 
He sent a letter on June 30, 1947, protesting the action 
and asking for a fair hearing. 
A few days after the dismissal, Arch K. Jean, of the 
personnel division of the Department, telephoned him to 
appear within a day before a committee of four, includ- 
ing Mr. Jean, to make a statement. When he appeared 
before the panel and asked for the charges, they said they 
would neither ask nor answer questions. He was to say 
[25]committee of four, includ- 
ing Mr. Jean, to make a statement. When he appeared 
before the panel and asked for the charges, they said they 
would neither ask nor answer questions. He was to say 
[25]

--- PAGE BREAK ---WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
anything he pleased which he believed relevant.

He 
spoke for about a half hour stating that he was innocent 
of anything which could reflect on his loyalty.

He also 
requested an interview with Mr.

Marshall.

This weird “hearing” was held on July 2, 1947.

The 
four-man panel was headed by Hamilton Robinson, di- 
rector of the Office of Controls of the State Department.

On it also were three of his subordinates, Mr.

Jean, Saxton 
Bradford and Thomas E.

Hoffman.

The transcript of the proceedings is a document umque 
in the annals of the long struggle for the preservation of 
civil liberties in the United States.

It is offered in its 
entirety, except for the omission of certain names, men- 
tion of which would serve no purpose.

In such star- 
chamber inquiries, the accused remains defenseless to 
the point of complete bewilderment.

The nature of the 
charges, the identity of his accusers and his constitutional 
rights to prove his innocence are all denied him.

The “hearing”: 
MR.

ROBINSON: Well, I think we’ll start, if we may, by 
making a little, brief statement to start the record off, 
which I will read.

Mr.

Blank, the basis for your termina- 
tion from the Department was explained in the Depart- 
ment’s press release on June 27 and, for the sake of the j 
record, I think I’ll read the pertinent part of the release: 
“The State Department has terminated the services of 
ten employees against whom derogatory information has 
[ 26 ] 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
been developed through investigation.

In taking this ac- 
tion, the Department followed its policy of dropping 
employees from its rolls where substantial doubt exists as 
to their security.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Blank, the basis for your termina- 
tion from the Department was explained in the Depart- 
ment’s press release on June 27 and, for the sake of the j 
record, I think I’ll read the pertinent part of the release: 
“The State Department has terminated the services of 
ten employees against whom derogatory information has 
[ 26 ] 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
been developed through investigation. In taking this ac- 
tion, the Department followed its policy of dropping 
employees from its rolls where substantial doubt exists as 
to their security. In a few of these cases, other adminis- 
trative considerations entered into the decision to termi- 
nate the employees concerned.” 
However, in order to give you an opportunity to be 
heard on the question and to assure that your record will 
be as complete as you care to make it, this Committee 
was established for the purpose of hearing any statement 
that you wish to make, either verbally or taking any 
written statement you care to insert in your record. That 
is partially for the purpose of permitting you to have a 
complete record, as complete a one as you care to make,, 
since the McCarran Rider does not prohibit your em- 
ployment by any other agency of the government. I 
want to make it clear, however, that this is not a legal 
proceeding, this hearing, and it is not in the nature of an 
appeal. The proceedings which were taken are final SO' 
far as the Department is concerned and, under those cir- 
cumstances and under its terms of reference, the Com- 
mittee is not going to ask you any questions, except such 
as we may feel helpful to your presentation for explana- 
tory purposes, nor are we able to answer any questions, 
and so we are delighted to listen to any statement that 
you care to make on that basis. MR. BLANK: AS I told Mr. Jean when he phoned me yes- 
terday, it is very difficult to make a statement as I am 
[ 27 1 
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---.•I** 
-r e 
WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
completely bewildered by what it’s about.

\ ou gentlemen 
can appreciate the press release doesn’t say very much 
anyway in any one specific case.

I did have the oppor- 
tunity of being called by the Department security 
people, I think, for about twelve hours of detailed ques- 
tioning at which I believe I supplied most of the informa- 
tion.

I think it came out, I know Mr.

Hoffman will verify 
this, that a great deal of it hadn’t come to the Depart- 
ment’s attention and that I brought most of it to the 
pepartment’s attention.

I, really, frankly, don’t know 
what to say, since I don’t know what the charges are be- 
cause of the result of those hearings—I don’t think any- 
thing came out that I would consider to be a charge.

I 
mean, I can make a general statement as to what I think 
my own loyalty position is, I have no doubt in my own 
.mind as to my own loyalty, 1 don’t think 1 have ever been 
tempted in that direction or ever committed any act that 
would be considered disloyal to the government.

I have 
never jeopardized the security of the Department or the 
government.

I came down here over five years ago to 
work for the government to help the war effort.

I found 
the kind of work that I was interested in; the encourage- 
ment I got from my superiors, in other jobs and my 
present one, indicated their willingness to see me con- 
tinue and at no time did any question ever arise as to my 
loyalty.

I worked for the War Department in the middle 
of the war in Materiel Command of the Army Air Forces 
as a civilian, which had, in my personal opinion, much 
[ 28 ] 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
more secret data than I have ever touched in the Depart- 
ment.

In the middle of the war, not only did I handle 
production data, but I handled design data of not only the 
contemporary aircraft but of' future aircraft.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I worked for the War Department in the middle 
of the war in Materiel Command of the Army Air Forces 
as a civilian, which had, in my personal opinion, much 
[ 28 ] 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
more secret data than I have ever touched in the Depart- 
ment. In the middle of the war, not only did I handle 
production data, but I handled design data of not only the 
contemporary aircraft but of' future aircraft. I think I 
was cleared by G-2,1 have never been questioned by any- 
body, I was cleared by FEA, I have always been cleared, 
so that I have no idea of anything concrete. I don’t know 
whether you want me to go into all the information that 
I gave the security people. . • * 
MR. ROBINSOJ^: Since this is for your own benefit, yofi’dU 
better decide about that. We’ll listen to .anything you 
want to say. " 
MR. BLANK: I wondered if you gentlemen had read that 
record—am I allowed to ask that question? MR. ROBINSON: What record are you referring to? MR. BLANK: That the security people took, the question- • 
ing which gave in great detail my whole past history. MR. ROBINSON: Yes, I think the answer is yes, that it cer- 
tainly has been read and considered. MR. BLANK: SO you do have this detailed knowledge of 
what I have done in the past. I don’t know whether I 
brought the attention of the Department or whether they 
had the information themselves, as to the fact that—I 
forget the date, about two months ago—the F.B.I. visited 
me and I gave the Department all the details, but there 
was nothing concrete brought out in any of that in- 
formation. I thought I had satisfied every question they 
brought up. [ 29 ]

--- PAGE BREAK ---I gave the Department all the details, but there 
was nothing concrete brought out in any of that in- 
formation. I thought I had satisfied every question they 
brought up. [ 29 ]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

i 
WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
MR. ROBINSON: Well, we realize the difficulty you are in, 
in this position; on the other hand, I’d suggest that you 
might think back over your own career and perhaps in 
your own mind delve into some of the factors that have 
gone into your career which you think might have been 
subject to question, and see what they are and see 
whether you’d like to explain or make any statement 
with regard to any of them-that is about the best I 
can do as far as helping you along that line. 
MR- BLANK: Well, as you appreciate, I have been think- 
ing about anything in my career in the past that could 
be subject to question and I, frankly, don’t see anything. 
I think there is something going on in Washington which 
the F.B.I. is interested in of which I have no idea. I have 
heard they have seen from forty to sixty people, they are 
after something, they questioned me in detail about 
certain people 1 knew, people I had worked with, mainly, 
at FEA and WPB. What they are after I don’t know, 
there is something that is bothering them and I am be- 
wildered by what they are after. Perhaps there is some- 
thing going on. I feel if there is, I am outside the picture. 
By some accident or quirk, 1 have worked with some of 
these people whom I didn’t even see socially. 1 happened 
to get into a car club with somebody whom a question 
came up about. I am at a loss to go into any detail. They 
accused me, as I pointed out to the Committee, of being a 
Communist, but, as I pointed out to the Committee, 
mean the security people, I have denied that point, there 
[ 3°1o into any detail. They 
accused me, as I pointed out to the Committee, of being a 
Communist, but, as I pointed out to the Committee, 
mean the security people, I have denied that point, there 
[ 3°1

•*. 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
was no evidence raised. I admitted, when I went to the 
University, when I taught there, I attended all kinds of 
meetings that were held on the campus, but never joined 
any organization. The security people made me swear to 
that fact under oath, that I was not a Communist nor was 
I affiliated to a long list of organizations which they asked 
me questions about. All I know is that this action taken 
is_well, the punishment doesn’t fit the alleged crime. I 
mean, I don’t krlow whether you gentlemen realize what 
you have done to me, not you personally, but what the 
Department has done-completely blackballed me from 
earning a living in the future. I don’t know where to 
turn. 
MR. ROBINSON: I think you can be assured that the De- 
partment was not unaware of those aspects of it. 
MR. BLANK: On what basis has the Department done 
something like that, without even telling me? I am just 
bewildered about it. I am trying to be as frank as I pos- 
sibly can. 
MR. ROBINSON: The only way I can suggest helping you 
is that you just go ahead and spill your feelings about all 
the things that you might think might have been in- 
volved. 
MR. BLANK: It’s very difficult. I mean, I once helped edit 
a pamphlet on “What Price Milk?” which criticized milk 
companies for their large profits. My whole career has 
been in teaching and working, it is extremely difficult 
for me to make any statement. I wish you gentlemen 
[3i]

--- PAGE BREAK ---ized milk 
companies for their large profits. My whole career has 
been in teaching and working, it is extremely difficult 
for me to make any statement. I wish you gentlemen 
[3i]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
could help me by asking me questions. 1 realize you are 
tied down by a law. 
MR. JEAN: YOU mentioned that you were associated, 
through a car club, with some people. 
MR. BLANK: Well, I don’t know. I am not associated, 1 
don’t know whether they came out of a car club. They 
asked me about certain people I worked with at FEA. 
There is a rumor going through Washington that they are 
after Treasury people and people who worked on the 
so-called “Morgenthau Plan.” I am just in the dark about 
this, I wish somebody would tell me what it is about. I 
don’t mean—I am just bewildered about this whole thing. 
Perhaps there are some people I have met and know 
whose reputations aren’t exactly the best, according to 
certain people, but there is nothing in my actions to- 
ward them or toward anything else that would indicate 
any question of loyalty or anything that 1 can see. I mean, 
my very work in the Department should be some indica- 
tion of that and, as I understand it, nobody whom I have 
worked with or worked for, has been called in on this— 
people I worked with day and night and Saturdays and 
Sundays and every day on problems, people with whom I 
have shared a room and gone to lunch with. 
MR. ROBINSON: Well, who would you say were those 
MR. BLANK: (Mentioning six associates) All those peo- 
ple are my superiors. I worked with all those people 
steadily and closely. They know exactly what I have 
[ 32 1 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
been working on, what I have been thinking, how I have 
reacted in the Department on those things. I don’t know 
whether you gentlemen know what I have been doing, I 
have worked on the post-UNRRA Relief Program and 
they gave me the job of programming it. The day after 
I got the dismissal note, at 5:30, the stuff I had prepared 
was taken up to the Taber Committee-stuff for which I 
was responsible. I was the one who prepared the first ma- 
terial on the Gjeek stuff. They took my material, they 
know exactly what I have done since I have been in this 
Department, and I am positive they are willing to testify 
as to that. They are as mystified as 1 am about it. I have 
shared an office with a colleague now since last Decem- 
ber, we have argued about and discussed things, they 
know what is on my mind and how I have reacted toward 
the United States policy and what we have been involved 
in. 
MR. JEAN: What would you say your reaction is? 
MR. BLANK: Completely in accord with what our gov- 
ernment has been doing, not only that, but working day 
and night toward those ends. The F.B.I. followed me 
and they admitted that they had to come Saturdays and 
Sundays and nights, they were a little disturbed about 
my working on these programs. 
MR. JEAN: YOU say you number among your friends 
people who are frowned upon by others. 
MR. BLANK: Well, I don’t know whether they are 
frowned upon, the investigation brought out that I knew 
[33]MR. JEAN: YOU say you number among your friends 
people who are frowned upon by others. 
MR. BLANK: Well, I don’t know whether they are 
frowned upon, the investigation brought out that I knew 
[33]

--- PAGE BREAK ---you number among your friends 
people who are frowned upon by others. 
MR. BLANK: Well, I don’t know whether they are 
frowned upon, the investigation brought out that I knew 
[33]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
somebody whom I see occasionally, who works for Rus- 
sian War Relief, but I knew him because we lived in the 
same house, but I knew many other people m the same 
house and I gave the names of other people whom I saw 
more often than I saw him. As I pointed out to these 
people, it is not a question of the few people certain . 
people may have some doubts about, but it is a question of 
all the people I know that should be taken into considera- 
tion. But, apparently, the interest is just for the few who 
are not thought of well and I don’t know why these 
people aren’t. Mrs. , I think they questioned me a lot 
about her—I knew her because she was in the office and 
came to my house once or twice and I was in her house 
once or twice, it was a purely social thing. Why they 
questioned me about her, I don’t know. They questioned 
me about giving things to certain people. In every case I 
pointed out it was on my thesis. I finished my Doctor’s 
thesis and went around visiting economists in Washing- 
ton who could read it. Once they asked me why I got 
a check, for example, at lunch. My little boy went to 
nursery school and I had to pay a $60 bill three days be- 
fore pay day, and I called a friend of mine and I bor- 
rowed $100 and I paid him back a week later. It’s things 
like that that just seem to me to be silly, that are im- 
portant to other people. I’d like to know what all that 
means. I think I brought aU this out, didn’t I, Mr. Hoff- 
man, in the long questioning? 
MR. HOFFMAN: I think most of it, yes. 
[ 34] 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
MR. BLANK: I am trying to recall these things that were of 
interest to the F.B.I. I have no idea why they questioned 
me about them. 
MR. JEAN: DO these people you mention, to your knowl- 
edge, express an ideology that differs from American 
philosophy? 
MR. BLANK: I frankly have never got that far with them. 
You know the situation we were in at FEA. Mr.  
went to Japan, Mr. went to Germany, and I ran 
that whole shop. So, in relation to business, Mrs.   
sent me a whole slew of letters, they are in my file, on her 
observations in Paris, and I would give those to you if 
you’d let me get into it. We saw her a few times socially 
when she came back because she had a great many in- 
teresting things to tell about her trip abroad. 
MR. JEAN: Have you seen her recently? 
MR. BLANK: Yes, her husband got fired and I called her up 
and she said they were leaving and I invited them for 
dinner before they left for New York. I told the security 
people I was calling her up because I had heard she had 
gone to the hospital when she heard her husband was 
fired. Why that happened, I don’t know. I just think it is 
unfortunate that I have come in contact over the last year 
with certain people that I know nothing about. 
MR. ROBINSON: Now, you have said several times “cer- 
tain people” but so far you have only mentioned one or 
two. 
MR. BLANK: Well, Mrs. 
, thenyear 
with certain people that I know nothing about. 
MR. ROBINSON: Now, you have said several times “cer- 
tain people” but so far you have only mentioned one or 
two. 
MR. BLANK: Well, Mrs. 
, then

--- PAGE BREAK ---people that I know nothing about. 
MR. ROBINSON: Now, you have said several times “cer- 
tain people” but so far you have only mentioned one or 
two. 
MR. BLANK: Well, Mrs. 
, then

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
 f 1 don’t know if he is the man that the check affair 
took place with, why they questioned him about me I don t 
know. They questioned me about very com- 
pletely, why, I don’t know; then some complete strangers, 
somebody I had mentioned , a friend of mine who 
stayed in my house, he worked for OPA and now teaches 
at the University of , I don’t know why they men- 
tioned his name-that other name I always forget, 1 met 
him once at a luncheon at the Federal Reserve Board on a 
problem he had been working on in relation to something 
we had been doing in the Department and, well, — 
came up and my pamphlet business came up that I helped 
on, and my connection with , who is now 
dead. She was ’s previous assistant and I got the 
job after she left through her, and she went down to this 
Milk Consumers Protective Committee and asked me to 
help her and I had been very grateful for the opportunity 
I got, because this job I got which was supposed to last 
for two weeks lasted for five years, which included my 
teaching at college and work at the National Bureau, 
and when she asked me to help her 
MR JEAN: What was the full name of that Bureau? 
MR. BLANK: National Bureau of Economic Research. 
MR. ROBINSON: You said a few minutes ago that most of 
the people you seem to be questioned about are the ones 
that are apparently undesirable from the point of view 
of the questioners. If you think that only half the picture 
was shown, would you care to put in the record some 
[36] 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
names of people, other than your supervisors, who would 
present a fair picture of your associations? 
MR. BLANK: Yes, the fact is, I gave the security people a 
terrific list of names and everybody called me back in 
town—you didn’t miss seeing anybody. I’ll try— 
MR. ROBINSON: No, if you have already given it—I just 
wanted to give you the chance to say that if you wanted 
to. 
MR. BLANK: Tfie fact is, I brought in a typewritten list, 
not only that, I brought in copies of everything, not 
everything, but nineteen specimens of what I wrote since 
1933, at least two pieces for each year which I believed 
would be an indication of the way I thought over the 
period of years. I believe the security people analyzed 
those documents I brought in, beginning with 1933, did 
you not? 
MR. ROBINSON: Well, you can be sure everything you 
have submitted has been considered. 
MR. BLANK: So that is why I am completely bewildered 
about the whole situation. Did I leave anything out that 
you think I ought to bring up? We are trying to get the 
facts out in this, I presume. Do you think I ought to men- 
tion anything else? I assume you gentlemen are trying to 
get at the facts. 
MR. ROBINSON: I don’t think we can suggest to you things 
that you ought to discuss. I think it’s up to you to decide. 
As I say, we are trying to help by making suggestions to 
you, in a general way, which may make your record 
[ 37 ]suggest to you things 
that you ought to discuss. I think it’s up to you to decide. 
As I say, we are trying to help by making suggestions to 
you, in a general way, which may make your record 
[ 37 ]

--- PAGE BREAK ---s 
that you ought to discuss. I think it’s up to you to decide. 
As I say, we are trying to help by making suggestions to 
you, in a general way, which may make your record 
[ 37 ]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
more complete when it all comes together. But so far as 
saying you ought to talk about this or you ought to talk 
about that, I don’t see how we can do that. This is your 
opportunity to say anything that you want. 
MR. BLANK: Gentlemen, it’s my “opportunity to say 
anything, but really, to be frank—you gentlemen arent 
responsible—it’s really not an opportunity. I don’t know 
what to talk about. I mean, I am— 
MR. ROBINSON: All right, I withdraw the statement it was 
an opportunity, if you prefer. 
MR. BLANK: I am not blaming you gentlemen, you are 
held within certain rules and regulations, but I d like to 
know what to talk about and what to say. It’s extremely 
difficult in such a situation. I don’t know who said any- 
thing about me or what has been said about me and the 
press release makes it even worse, I mean, the kind of 
statement where nothing has been developed. I mean, I 
am not trying to get mad or anything, I appreciate the 
situation, but I am involved in a very disastrous way in 
this. You mentioned about having an opportunity to m- 
sert additional stuff-will I get an opportunity after this? 
MR. ROBINSON: Anything you want to put in. 
MR. BLANK: Does that include my bringing statements by 
my colleagues and people I worked for? Could I have 
them insert statements in the record for me? 
MR. ROBINSON: Sure, I don’t see any reason why not. 
After all, as I said in the beginning, the purpose of this 
[38] 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
is to give you as complete a record, as far as your case is 
concerned, as you can make it or care to make it. 
MR. BLANK: Well, I care to make it as complete as pos- 
sible. This whole thing, the way it developed was that I 
came to the Department. The fact is, I came the very next 
morning that the F.B.I. visited me and went to my su- 
periors, I called and and went to their office 
and told them the complete story. They immediately got 
in touch with T , who was sick, and they went to see 
 . he was the top man that day because Mr. 
 was abroad and was out of town. They went 
to ’s office; he was out and I think they saw . 
They told him the story and I gave them all the details 
I later repeated to the security people. They came back 
to me and told me this, this is my interpretation, which 
I verified later— 
MR. ROBINSON: “They,” meaning who? 
MR. BLANK: , mainly. He came back and said I would 
have nothing to worry about in this thing, that the charges 
in this consideration were not true, that the security peo- 
ple would look into it, that I should cooperate with the 
security people, and that if anything did arise I would be 
called before them. The fact is, I even offered my resig- 
nation that very first day, for two reasons: One, I asked 
the advice of some people and they said with the present 
state of things in Washington, whether you are right or 
wrong, once this thing gets started you are out; and 
secondly, I was in the midst of some very delicate nego-and they said with the present 
state of things in Washington, whether you are right or 
wrong, once this thing gets started you are out; and 
secondly, I was in the midst of some very delicate nego-

--- PAGE BREAK ---WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
tiations with gentlemen on the geographic desks, and I 
told them I didn’t want this charge hanging over me to 
hurt the Division in our relations with the geographic 
people, and they had my resignation and they told me 
no, they refused to accept it because they felt the charges 
were unwarranted and if there were anything that 1 
would be given time to resign and you can verify t at.

MR.

BRADFORD: Who told you that?

MR.

BLANK: Mr.

and I told that to the security peo- 
ple.

I mean, most of the information.

I don’t know, you 
people won’t answer my questions, so I don’t know, but 
1 assume from the kind of questions and answers and 
things, that most of the information about me came from 
me and not from the F.B.I.

to the Department.

Most of 
mv writings and everything I have come with, everything 
I know, assuming that the deal would be fair and I am 
not trying to blame anybody around here for it, and un- 
der those circumstances you can appreciate the way 
feel about the situation-being told to go back and not to 
worry that I’d be notified if they had anything on me, 
being given plenty of chance to resign if they had any- 
^ROBINSON: Just to clarify the record, wasn’t your dis- 
cussion with Mr.

Hoffman and the people in the security 
office after you talked with the F.B.I.?

MR.

BLANK: Yes, sure, because I immediately reported 
the next day, the next morning as soon as I got in, the 
complete details of the conversation.

Mr.

has a 
[40] 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
memo on that in which he wrote down when I reported 
everything to him.

I think I have been reasonable and 
fair and tried to turn over every bit of information avail- 
able to you, but I can only go so far.

You must admit 
that it is entirely possible that some of the information 
gotten about me may be wrong; it may be wrong or mis- 
construed, so all I ask is a chance to know what it is.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I think I have been reasonable and 
fair and tried to turn over every bit of information avail- 
able to you, but I can only go so far. You must admit 
that it is entirely possible that some of the information 
gotten about me may be wrong; it may be wrong or mis- 
construed, so all I ask is a chance to know what it is. Anybody who has come down and devoted themselves 
the way I have, and especially what I have done in the 
last year when we have been completely understaffed- 
day and night and Saturdays and Sundays working on 
this; why, just a week before this all happened they were 
pushing me into a promotion, I get a private office and 
an executive desk, I get three people to work for me, in 
line with everybody else being cut down in the Depart- 
ment; for the kind of work I have been doing. They take 
the stuff up I prepared a day after I get kicked out, hav- 
ing complete confidence in the material I prepared. MR. ROBINSON: I think I might just say for the record 
here one thing which I believe is worth pointing out, and 
that is that it is fairly clearly indicated in die press release 
that this action was taken on the ground of a doubt as 
to security, and what I would like to say for the record 
is that we carefully bear in mind in all these cases that 
there is a very definite difference between the word ‘ se- 
curity” and the word “loyalty.” I just want that to be on 
the record.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e carefully bear in mind in all these cases that 
there is a very definite difference between the word ‘ se- 
curity” and the word “loyalty.” I just want that to be on 
the record.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
MR. BLANK: May I ask what the difference is? It’s not 
dear to me. 
MR. ROBINSON: There’s a vast difference between security 
and loyalty. . 
MR. BLANK: I think-may I ask that question. ^ 
MR. ROBINSON: Yes. .1 
MR. BLANK: TO clear up the difference between them, I 
mean to me, I think one— . 
MR. ROBINSON: Well, I’ll point out a difference. I think 
loyalty must necessarily be a conscious proposition. Se- 
curity, or lack of it, might be conscious or unconscious^ 
And I think that probably serves the purpose of what 
am trying to do, but I am making that statement for he 
record without any implication as to any conclusion 
you should draw from that statement, but you ma e sev 
eral statements about that and I just want to make cleat 
that this action was based, as the press release stated, as a 
matter of security. # .1 J 
MR BLANK: You mean that the punishment for an alleged 
violation of security is more severe than questions o 
loyalty’ What I mean is, assume this whole thing is true 
about my security, isn’t the punishment to deprive n» 
literally of a livelihood in the future one of the severest 
penalties you could pay? What have I done, assuming- 
and I’ll assume that you are correct in what you state I 
mean, you have completely deprived me of the ony 
things I can do, either working for the government 
going back to teaching, or working for private industry 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
—what am I going to tell employers? You are not going 
to find me lying about it because they would catch up 
with me and I wouldn’t lie about it either. Could I ex- 
plain this difference between security and loyalty to some 
kind of college where I am trying to get a teaching job? 
MR. ROBINSON: I am not suggesting that. I am not even 
suggesting the distinction is proper in your case, I am 
merely suggesting one is not necessarily synonymous 
with the other. I think if you feel that, I don’t know 
whether yfou feel there is anything you wish to add to 
this as a statement. 
MR. BLANK: You say I have the opportunity in the future 
to add things? 
MR. ROBINSON: Yes, you send it over and we’ll slap it in 
the file. 
MR. BLANK: NO indication—I wish I had some indication. 
Will I be given an opportunity to read this statement? 
MR. ROBINSON: Sure. 
MR. BLANK: Because I was told I could read the other 
statement, I never called about it to check on my previous 
statement. 
MR. ROBINSON: How are we going to make it available? 
Are you going to be here in Washington or would you 
rather come in and pick it up? I don’t know how long it 
will take, two or three days, presumably, to get it. 
MR. BLANK: I’ll be around. 
MR. ROBINSON: I want to make clear this is your statement, 
we are not asking you questions, you are malting this 
[43] 
1take, two or three days, presumably, to get it. 
MR. BLANK: I’ll be around. 
MR. ROBINSON: I want to make clear this is your statement, 
we are not asking you questions, you are malting this 
[43] 
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---days, presumably, to get it. 
MR. BLANK: I’ll be around. 
MR. ROBINSON: I want to make clear this is your statement, 
we are not asking you questions, you are malting this 
[43] 
1

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
statement for yourself, therefore, you can do any dam 
ST;"U want with it. If you don’t like it when you ge 
tough, you can tear it up and rewrite ,t, you can do 
anything you want to ^ reas0„able 
MR. BLANK: I understand the Secretary is a 
man. Is it possible for you gentlemen to make an appoin 
ment for me to see him? 
MR. ROBINSON: I'm afraid that isn't out function. 
MR. BLANK: Well, l am making a request -I 
not casting aspersions, of course, on anybody here, but 
rd Uke to get in touch with the final authority on tins 
r—: Well, certainly, there is no reason in the 
world why you shouldn't, but 1 am afraid we are not 
a position to^be able to do anything about thaL Jus.: as a 
suggestion, you might wan, to get some of th. people 
you say have confidence in you, and so fort 
L BLANK: Well, they are attempting to see cenainpe- 
ple. I know that I am trying to do something on my own, 
of course. Are there any questions? 
MR. ROBINSON: Do you have anything further, Arc . 
MR. JEAN: I have nothing further, no. 
MR. ROBINSON: DO you have any phase of it. 
MR. BLANK: Well, I’d just like to close by reiterating 
aeain what I have said before that, in my own mmd and 
in my own conscience, I have no question as to my own 
loyalty and my own responsibility to the security o t is 
government. I have a clear conscience completely, so 
[44] 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
can only state my sincerity. This whole thing has me 
completely bewildered. 
MR. ROBINSON: Well, I’ll just add that if, at any time, you 
want to add anything further to this, just get in touch 
with Tom Hoffman and send anything over to him you 
want to incorporate in the record, that will be all right. 
MR. BLANK: Well, I think they wrung me dry in twelve 
hours of questioning which I asked for myself. 
MR. ROBINSON: O. K. 
MR. BLANH: Thank you. 
(Hearing adjourned at 3:40 P.M.) 
The accused had denied all suggestions that he was a 
security risk or disloyal. 
“I have never done anything to merit the destruction 
of my reputation, and have always been completely de- 
voted to my country and the State Department,” he 
insisted. 
That was the note on which the first story about Mr. 
Blank ended. 
f It undoubtedly would have been the end of Mr. Blank, 
too, so far as getting out from under the shadow of sus- 
picion was concerned, had it not been that three voices 
were raised. 
They were the voices of the press, of the radio-and 
of the people. 
The voice of the press was the first to be heard. 
Led by the New York Herald Tribune, the newspapers 
[45 ]voices 
were raised. 
They were the voices of the press, of the radio-and 
of the people. 
The voice of the press was the first to be heard. 
Led by the New York Herald Tribune, the newspapers 
[45 ]

--- PAGE BREAK ---. 
They were the voices of the press, of the radio-and 
of the people. 
The voice of the press was the first to be heard. 
Led by the New York Herald Tribune, the newspapers 
[45 ]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
of the nation began to hammer away at the star-chamber 
aspects of the case of “Mr. Blank”—and of the six others 
who shared his sufferings. 
On this issue—as on similar major issues—the press of 
the country was practically unanimous. 
From the New York Herald Tribune, November 3, 
1947: 
“Why the individual in this case was not allowed to 
resign is very hard to understand. It is not the principle 
that is defective here—for some rather grim principles are 
being forced upon us—but the procedure. And if the 
nation, driven to protect itself from disloyal and Com- 
munist infiltration, is not in turn to lose itself in police 
purges, drumhead courts, liquidations and all the cata- 
strophic evils they bring with them, the utmost care in 
procedural fairness and justice is imperative. It is not 
evident here.” 
From the St. Louis Post-Dispatch, November 3, 1947: 
“The hearing was a farcical affair.” 
From the Washington Evening Star, November 4,, 
1947: 
“Nobody can validly question the State Department’s 
right and its duty to rid itself of all employees regarded 
by competent authority as unfit for duty in this ‘sensitive’ 
department. But unless disloyalty is involved, certainly 
the right of resignation without prejudice should be 
open.” 
From the Washington Daily News, November 4,1947: 
[ 4« ] 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
“Discharge from Government service, on charges or 
suspicion of disloyalty, could be cruel punishment to 
innocent persons denied the opportunity to defend them- 
selves which they would have if they were tried for 
crimes. The American people want the disloyal ejected 
from Federal jobs. But they also want the utmost possible 
assurance of protection for the loyal.” 
From the Washington Post, November 8, 1947: 
“It is of the utmost importance for the future of Gov- 
ernment employment that the present confusion between 
discharges for disloyalty and discharges for security rea- 
sons be dispelled. The State Department and other offices 
such as the Central Intelligence Agency have abetted this 
confusion.” 
Thus spoke the voice of the press. 
The voice of the radio was just as firm. 
Here are some of the arguments commentators carried 
to their millions of listeners: 
Elmer Davis, over the American Broadcasting Com- 
pany network: 
“There is hysteria, in Washington and in the country; 
the Thomas Committee has helped whip it up, so has the 
not very well-informed clamor of some Congressmen 
outside that committee; and the result is that we are mak- 
ing ourselves ridiculous in the eyes of the world.” 
Martin Agronsky, over the American Broadcasting 
Company:d clamor of some Congressmen 
outside that committee; and the result is that we are mak- 
ing ourselves ridiculous in the eyes of the world.” 
Martin Agronsky, over the American Broadcasting 
Company:

--- PAGE BREAK ---gressmen 
outside that committee; and the result is that we are mak- 
ing ourselves ridiculous in the eyes of the world.” 
Martin Agronsky, over the American Broadcasting 
Company:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
“This kind of action is not the American way, it is the 
way of the police state. All American editors who believe 
with Thomas Jefferson that ‘the price of freedom is eter- 
nal vigilance’ might note and comment.” 
That was the voice of the radio. 
How about the voice of the people? 
Hundreds of letters poured in, and two—only two- 
attempted to defend the State Department procedure. 
One denouncer said in part: 
“If this man is innocent, he has simply given his repu- 
tation, not his life nor his character, in his country’s serv- 
ice. He should not try to gain public sympathy for his 
plight. In this personal trial he has the best possible oppor- 
tunity to show the stuff of which he is made.” 
Here are excerpts from two of the hundreds of letters 
condemning the star-chamber proceedings: 
From Wellsville, New York: 
“On the face of it, the procedure has all the elements 
of out-Russianing the Russians.” 
From Chicago: 
“I have read it with growing horror. Nevertheless— 
when I sat down to writfc to Secretary Marshall, urging 
him to remedy the situation that obtains in Washington, 
I realized that because of my wife and children I dared 
not write to him. I am a schoolteacher and although I 
am not a Communist, I could be smeared as was the Mr. 
Blank of whom you wrote.” 
[48] 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
The three voices—of the press, of the radio, and of the 
people—began to get results. 
The results were of vital interest to Mr. Blank and the 
six who were accused with him. They were of equal 
importance to all the other civilian employees of govern- 
ment. Indirectly, they had significance for every Amer- 
ican. For, within a little more than two weeks, the “im- 
possible” was achieved, in that a great bureaucratic agency 
of the mammoth and slow-moving government machine 
was compelled to back down completely and to eat words 
it had uttered with smug confidence that they would 
be accepted as final. 
There was a running fight before this was achieved. 
On November 3rd, three developments indicated the 
wind was shifting. 
Arnold, Fortas & Porter received a new letter from 
Acting Secretary Lovett. It was postmarked 6 P.M. Sat- 
urday, November 1st. It arrived at the law firm’s office on 
Monday morning. It was in answer to the letter that had 
been sent to Secretary Marshall by the law firm as long 
before as October 4th! 
The law firm believed, and so did most of Washington, 
that there never would have been an answer if the State 
Department had not learned on the morning of Novem- 
ber 1st from this reporter that the New York Herald 
Tribune intended to publish the pertinent documents 
concerning Mr. Blank. 
[ 49 ]the State 
Department had not learned on the morning of Novem- 
ber 1st from this reporter that the New York Herald 
Tribune intended to publish the pertinent documents 
concerning Mr. Blank. 
[ 49 ]

--- PAGE BREAK ---nt had not learned on the morning of Novem- 
ber 1st from this reporter that the New York Herald 
Tribune intended to publish the pertinent documents 
concerning Mr. Blank. 
[ 49 ]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
Mr. Lovett, in his letter, was still stubborn. 
He rejected the law firm’s appeal that the seven men 
be allowed to resign without prejudice or be given a 
complete statement of the charges and a hearing. He said 
they could appeal to the Civil Service Commission. He 
made it clear that, even on appeal, the charges would not 
and could not be made known to the accused. He said, 
“When a reasonable doubt is raised as to whether the 
continued employment of an individual would constitute 
a security risk it is the policy of the department to resolve 
such doubt in favor of the government.” 
The law firm fired back an answer the same day. 
The reply assailed Mr. Lovett’s use of the words “rea- 
sonable doubt.” 
Did a “reasonable doubt” as to the reliability of an 
individual justify the Department in publicly accusing 
him and at the same time withholding the evidence which 
was the basis of its accusation? ^ 
“That is exactly what the Department has done,” the 
firm’s letter said. . . f 
“The purpose of the State Department in ridding itselt 
of suspected members is. fully served when such men 
terminate their employment. We had not thought it was 
the duty of the Department to pursue such men into pri- 
vate life with unproved accusations. 
“We earnestly request that you change your present 
policy of pursuing them into private life with charges 
[ 5°1 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
against which you give them no opportunity to defend 
themselves.” 
Then, on this November 3rd, came the first hint that 
the White House was interested. Harold B. Mitchell, 
president of the Civil Service Commission, called on Pres- 
ident Truman. They talked about the case. Afterwards, 
Mr. Mitchell merely announced that the President had 
approved nominations for membership on the Loyalty 
Review Board for Federal employees. Subsequently it was 
learned they talked of the necessity of setting up safe- 
guards. 
November 4th passed without action. 
On November 5th Secretary Marshall held a press con- 
ference. He seemed uncomfortably aware that he would 
be asked about the case of Mr. Blank; about the whole 
loyalty investigation set-up. He had a mimeographed 
statement ready. 
Secretary Marshall insisted the Department had never 
intended to make public the names of the accused or the 
charges against them. (He acknowledged that die names 
had “leaked.” They could only have leaked from some- 
one within the Department. Only one newspaper—and 
that in Washington-published the names. All others re- 
frained, lest innocent men be smeared.The others would 
have published the names had the Department officially 
stood behind issuance of the list. They did not fall for a 
“leak.”) 
Secretary Marshall had an excuse for not releasing the 
[5i]others would 
have published the names had the Department officially 
stood behind issuance of the list. They did not fall for a 
“leak.”) 
Secretary Marshall had an excuse for not releasing the 
[5i]

--- PAGE BREAK ---WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
charges.

He said the State Department’s action was based 
in large part “on highly classified material not under its 
control.” This was tantamount to saying the material had 
been supplied by the Federal Bureau of Investigation or 
other investigating arms of the government, and that the 
State Department could not disclose it, even though inno- 
cent men might have been hurt.

Secretary Marshall emphasized two points: 
That the Civil Service Commission had the right to 
determine the eligibility of the dismissed persons for em- 
ployment in other government agencies.

(This in support 
of the rather strange argument that a man dismissed from 
a “sensitive agency” as a bad security risk would be harm- 
less if allowed to work in a non-sensitive agency.) 
That the Loyalty Review Board which was in the proc- 
ess of being established could consider an appeal “to per- 
mit the employee affirmatively to establish his loyalty.

But he emphasized again that information supplied to 
the State Department by other agencies would not be 
given to the Commission or the Board unless the Commis- 
sion or the Board was able to persuade the other agencies 
to come through with it.

It is only fair to Secretary Marshall to say that few ob- 
servers believed he had any hand in directing the case 
against the seven men.

Most observers believed die respon- 
sibility lay with underlings and that the Secretary knew 
little or nothing about it until the storm of public opinion 
began to make itself felt.

[52] 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
Secretary Marshall's statements brought sharp comment 
from Thurman Arnold.

“The Secretary is now merely passing the buck to two 
agencies outside the State Department,” Mr.

Arnold said.

“We still stick to one simple request—that the individuals 
be given a hearing in the American way or be allowed to 
resign.” , 
The wheels of government began to move—backwards.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Arnold said. “We still stick to one simple request—that the individuals 
be given a hearing in the American way or be allowed to 
resign.” , 
The wheels of government began to move—backwards. On November 8th the makeup of the new Loyalty Re- 
view Board was announced. Nineteen men and one woman 
were appointed to it. It was headed by Seth W. Richard- 
son, Assistant Attorney General under former President 
Herbert Hoover and former attorney for the Congres- 
sional Committee which investigated Pearl Harbor. The new Board, created under President Truman’s Ex- 
ecutive Order, could hear appeals on all cases of employees 
dismissed after October 1,1947. It was not at once certain 
whether it would have jurisdiction over the cases of the 
seven, who were dismissed prior to October 1st. Mr. Richardson and Mr. Mitchell, both outspoken op- 
ponents of “witch-hunting,” made some things clear. They said the Civil Service Commission would have 
the right to hear the cases of the seven—if they filed 
appeals. But this hearing would deal only with their right 
to employment in non-sensitive agencies. It would not 
meet the allegation that they were security risks. They said the Commission would ask the State Depart- 
ment for all documents under its control. [53]

--- PAGE BREAK ---tive agencies. It would not 
meet the allegation that they were security risks. They said the Commission would ask the State Depart- 
ment for all documents under its control. [53]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
They said the Commission would ask the F.B.I. and 
other government investigating agencies for any addi- 
tional documents. . . . 
Mr Mitchell said that the Civil Service Commission, if 
it deemed it necessary, might even ask the new Loyalty 
Review Board to consider the cases of the seven, even 
though they arose before October ist. 
Most important of all-and in direct conflict with Sec- 
retary Marshall’s intimation that this couldn’t be done 
it became certain that the Civil Service Commission or 
the Loyalty Review Board could obtain material devel- 
oped by the F.B.I. For J. Edgar Hoover said: 
“The Federal Bureau of Investigation will lend its full- 
est co-operation to the Civil Service Commission and the 
Loyalty Review Board. 
“This will include making available to the Commission 
and to the Review Board the contents of its files where 
„ i 
pertinent. 
Thus one safeguard was established. 
Mr Richardson announced others when he told of the 
procedure the Loyalty Review Board would use He said: 
An accused employee would first come before an 
agency loyalty board appointed by the head of his De- 
^i^He would be served with written notice of the na- 
ture of the charges in sufficient detail to enable him to 
prepare his defense. . , , 
3 If the agency board recommended his removal, the 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
employee would be entitled to appeal to the head of his 
Department. 
4. If the Department head accepted his board’s recom- 
mendation, the employee could appeal to the Loyalty 
Review Board. 
5. The Loyalty Review Board, on completion of its 
hearing, would make an appropriate recommendation to 
the Department head. 
All this-and the many other provisions-would not 
prevent “sensitive” agencies from getting rid of un- 
wanted employees. Under the McCarran rider they still 
had the power to fire anybody. But it did mean they could 
not dismiss an employee on grounds of being a bad se- 
curity or loyalty risk without producing evidence to back 
up the charges and without giving him a chance to defend 
his name. 
The actions of Mr. Richardson and Mr. Mitchell put 
the State Department still further on the defensive in the 
cases of the seven who had been given none of the pro- 
tection now accorded to other employees as a matter of 
right. 
Secretary Marshall, his Department on the run, held 
another press conference on November 12th. 
He was asked five questions. 
He was asked whether, in view of Mr. Hoover’s state- 
ment, the State Department would now make available 
to the Civil Service Commission or the Loyalty Review 
Board the material it had obtained from the F.B.I. Sec- 
[55]n view of Mr. Hoover’s state- 
ment, the State Department would now make available 
to the Civil Service Commission or the Loyalty Review 
Board the material it had obtained from the F.B.I. Sec- 
[55]

--- PAGE BREAK ---’s state- 
ment, the State Department would now make available 
to the Civil Service Commission or the Loyalty Review 
Board the material it had obtained from the F.B.I. Sec- 
[55]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
retary Marshall replied that that would be a matter be- 
tween the F.B.I. and the other two bodies. He reminded 
the questioner that he had not said that all the material 
not under the State Department’s control had come from 
the F.B.I. 
Did it come from Army or Navy intelligence services? 
Secretary Marshall did not answer. 
He was told that the Loyalty Review Board appeared 
to have no jurisdiction over the cases of the seven, since 
they occurred before the date designated for board 
authority. “We will study that matter,” he said. 
“You mean there will be a reconsideration of these 
cases?” 
Secretary Marshall said no; that he merely meant he 
would study them. 
“Do you expect to talk personally to the men who 
were dismissed?” (This from a reporter who knew that 
some of the seven had complained that they had been 
unable to see the Secretary.) 
Secretary Marshall said he had no comment. 
His statements left things up in the air. 
Next day the law firm again hammered at the State 
Department for failing to take some definite action. 
“Remove this terrible stigma,” the firm said. “The re- 
sponsibility to provide a speedy and an adequate remedy 
is squarely upon the State Department. 
“We are completely at a loss to understand the reluc- 
tance of the Department to grant this request. It is our 
[56] 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
firm conviction that the principle here in issue is of fun- 
damental importance to this nation.” 
The heat was really on! 
On November 14th both President Truman and the 
State Department had something to say. 
President Truman, at a press conference, said em- 
phatically that no “witch hunt” would be allowed. He 
said that all persons suspected of disloyalty would be 
given written notice of the charges in sufficient detail 
to enable them to prepare a defense. He added: 
“In some unusual situations, security considerations 
may not allow full disclosure of charges. I realize fully 
the stigma attached to a removal for disloyalty. 
“Accordingly, I have ordered the agencies of the gov- 
ernment, except where a few agencies find it necessary 
to exercise extraordinary powers granted to them by 
Congress, to give hearings to persons who are charged 
with disloyalty.” 
A State Department press attache said for the first 
time that the Department hoped the new Loyalty Re- 
view Board would take appeal jurisdiction over the cases 
of the seven. He said-and this was a complete reversal— 
that the Department would make available to the 
Loyalty Review Board all material upon which the 
Department’s action was based. He acted as if the State 
Department would be very happy indeed to get this 
headache off its mind once and for all. 
But the Loyalty Review Board could not accept juris- 
[57]ent’s action was based. He acted as if the State 
Department would be very happy indeed to get this 
headache off its mind once and for all. 
But the Loyalty Review Board could not accept juris- 
[57]

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed. He acted as if the State 
Department would be very happy indeed to get this 
headache off its mind once and for all. 
But the Loyalty Review Board could not accept juris- 
[57]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
diction in the cases of the seven. It told the State De- 
pattment so. It explained that its powers were no, 
retroactive to the date the seven were dismissed. 
That put it squarely up to the State Department to 
stick to its guns or to beat a retreat. 
The retreat-it was, in fact, a rout-came on November 
17 Five months after the seven had been dismissed, and 
a little more than two weeks after the cases had been ex- 
posed to public view, the State Department suddenly 
announced that the seven would be allowedI to1 res^n 
without prejudice “in order to avoid a possible injustice 
t0 (tTaM nothing of the effects of that "possible injur, 
tice” on the individuals during the five months they had 
suffered under the stigma placed upon them by danussal 
Department pointed out that *eLoyalty 
Review Board could not take pinsdicnon. The State 
DC‘ln view of that determination, the dismissed employ- 
ees have no way to appeal the Departments findings in 
*'se“enSof the former employees have requested that 
they be permitted to resign if no appeal ,s possible 
‘inasmuch as the only remedy presently uvatlable w 
them (that of obtaining clearance for employment else- 
where in the Federal government) is no, effeettve be- 
t S® 1 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
cause they do not intend to seek such employment, the 
Department has concluded that, in order to avoid a 
possible injustice to them, they should be permitted to 
resign without prejudice. 
“Furthermore, in view of the great importance which 
the Department attaches to the right of appeal for its 
employees, it is taking all steps to insure that its em- 
ployees will have the right of appeal to the Loyalty 
Review Board in the future.” 
Here, then, was complete victory—a victory won 
against odds by the power of the press, the radio and 
the people. 
There was still an unanswered question pertaining 
to future cases. It was: “Should the Loyalty Review 
Board reverse the decision of the State Department in 
a security case, would the State Department restore 
the employee to his old job?” 
Hamilton Robinson answered for the State Depart- 
ment. He said: “The State Department will accept the 
recommendation of the Loyalty Review Board insofar 
as the employee’s loyalty is concerned, but reserves 
the right to determine for itself whether or not, for 
security reasons, the employee is to continue in his 
old job.” 
That was the stand most observers believed should 
have been taken in the first place by the State De- 
partment. 
Literally no one had disputed the fact that the Stateto continue in his 
old job.” 
That was the stand most observers believed should 
have been taken in the first place by the State De- 
partment. 
Literally no one had disputed the fact that the State

--- PAGE BREAK ---old job.” 
That was the stand most observers believed should 
have been taken in the first place by the State De- 
partment. 
Literally no one had disputed the fact that the State

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
Department should be allowed to rid itself arbitrarily 
of employees it believed it could not trust. What was 
disputed was the right of any government agency to 
accuse an employee of disloyalty, dismiss him on s^ch 
grave grounds and refuse him a chance to establish that 
he was a good, true American. 
It was not until December 20, 1947, that the seven 
employees received Department letters which iiccepted 
their resignation. The words “without prejudice were 
conspicuous by their absence. 
The letters read: 
“My dear Mr.—£ 
“Your resignation from the Department o 
State effective June 23, 1947, “ hereby ac' 
cepted. 
r | Sincerely yours, 
“ARCH K. JEAN 
“Chief, Division of De- 
partmental Person- 
nel.” 
Mr. Jean was asked why the words “without preju- 
dice” were omitted from the new letter. 
“Inadvertently, if anything,” he said. 
“What?” he was asked. 
"Inadvertently would be the only answer to that, 
he said. 
[ 60 ] 
1 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
“If they request a letter with that phrase in it, will 
they get it?” he was asked. _ < n 
“Sure,” he said. “That was the announced intention. 
There were still, of course, some unanswered ques- 
tions about Mr. Blank. How did he fare? Did the State 
Department’s charges “pursue him into private life ? 
Was he able to get a job? 
The best source on such queries was Mr. Blank. 
He has put down, in his own words, the story of the 
months immediately after his dismissal. 
His account reveals what could happen to any Federal 
employee discharged on such grounds. 
It is offered here in full because of the grim picture 
of what arbitrary dismissal under such circumstances can 
do to the heart and soul and livelihood of an individual. 
This is Mr. Blank’s own story: 
“Ever since June 23, 1947, when I ‘resigned from the 
State Department, I have faced the task of finding a job 
to support my wife and two young children. To date, al- 
most eight months later, I still find myself unemployed. 
“To say that these months have been trying is an un- 
derstatement. During the first four months, before the 
dismissal was changed to resignation, my interviews for 
jobs centered chiefly around the reason for my dismissal 
from the State Department instead of my qualifications 
for a job. Hence I was continually pressed to explain 
what 1 could not explain-why I was fired. To most 
people to whom I spoke it was unconceivable that the 
[ 61 1ent instead of my qualifications 
for a job. Hence I was continually pressed to explain 
what 1 could not explain-why I was fired. To most 
people to whom I spoke it was unconceivable that the 
[ 61 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
State Department would fire anyone so arbitrarily and 
abruptly, without a statement of charges and with no 
opportunity to utter a word in self-defense.

This had 
to constitute my ‘explanation’ for having been dismissed 
from the Department.

“After my clearance, even though I can now say I 
have resigned instead of having to say I was dismissed, 
the shadow of the circumstances of my resignation still 
pursues me in my quest for a livelihood.

“During the past eight months I have seen very little 
of my family.

I could not have looked for a job more 
diligently.

Still stunned by the dismissal notice, I left 
town immediately after June 23rd to look for a job.

I 
have been out of town practically every week since, 
spending only week-ends at home.

Even during the sum- 
mer, when it was difficult to see people, I did not spend 
one consecutive week with my family, in spite of my 
wife’s exhortations to take a little rest.

My older child is 
quite perplexed and disturbed at my erratic comings and 
goings and despite our efforts to shield him from the 
reality of my unemployment, he is old enough to sense 
the anxiety and indignation we are experiencing.

No one 
in the house can miss the eagerness with which we an- 
swer the telephone or the expectancy with which the 
mailman is awaited in the hope that each message may at 
long last bring news of a job.

So far the hope has not 
materialized and the let-down feeling can be appreciated 
[62] 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
only by someone who has similarly yearned anxiously 
and incessantly over a long period of time.

“In preparing to look for a job, I consciously thought 
of every possible source of approach.

Accordingly I 
wrote to my college professors, the college employment 
office, former business associates, friends, business per- 
sons who were suggested to me, newspaper advertise- 
ments, public employment agencies, and the like.--- PAGE BREAK ---

“In preparing to look for a job, I consciously thought 
of every possible source of approach. Accordingly I 
wrote to my college professors, the college employment 
office, former business associates, friends, business per- 
sons who were suggested to me, newspaper advertise- 
ments, public employment agencies, and the like. “Toward the latter part of June, I visited an Army 
officer with whom I had worked in one of my govern- 
ment jobs, whose brother is an important official in one 
of the country’s leading advertising firms. I asked for an 
introduction to his brother, knowing that his firm em- 
ployed persons with my abilities. The Army officer was 
very frank in saying that, much as he desired to send me 
to his brother, he considered it inadvisable since he knew 
from experience that his brother’s firm had previously 
refused employment on the grounds of prejudice to 
someone he had formerly recommended. He felt certain 
that the same prejudice plus the circumstance of my 
separation from the State Department would prevent 
my getting a job with that firm. The matter was there- 
fore dropped at this point. “Early in the summer of 1947, armed with letters of 
introduction from persons in Washington, including 
State Department officials, I went to New York to see 
among others an executive of a large textile firm. Since 
his firm already employed an economist, he sent me to 
[63]

--- PAGE BREAK ---WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
the economist for one of the wealthiest families in the 
country.

Although this man expressed sympathy, he 
stated candidly and categorically that under the circum- 
stances of my dismissal from the State Department, he 
would not do anything for me.

Subsequently, when mat- t 
ters were cleared and I was permitted to resign, I again 
contacted him, but nothing came of the interview.

“During the summer I saw quite a few people, num- 
bering about ten to fifteen per week.

Most of the time 
in interviews I found myself explaining why I was look- 
ing for a job instead of being able to discuss my job 
qualifications.

By this time my college professors were 
taking an interest in me, but fall teaching jobs were al- 
ready filled.

Their efforts on my behalf, therefore, were 
to write to the State Department in an endeavor to un- 
cover the nature and substance of the reason for my dis- 
missal.

“The Department knew that I was trying to get a 
teaching job as well as a business connection and when 
one of the professors at the University wrote to the State 
Department requesting that I be given a hearing, he 
received a most interesting reply.

It stated that I had 
already had two hearings and that although I did not 
know the specific charges, I knew them in a general 
way.

The letter ended by saying that the dismissal did 
not involve any question of loyalty and did not render 
me ineligible for other government employment.

The 
professor confronted me with the State Department let- 
[64] 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
ter and asked me to explain my statement that I had 
had no hearing when the letter said I had had two hear- 
ings.

I explained to him to the best of my ability the 
nature of the State Department ‘hearings.’ And when the 
situation was finally exposed in the New York Herald 
Tribune, the nature of those ‘hearings’ was disclosed in 
all its worthlessness.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The 
professor confronted me with the State Department let- 
[64] 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
ter and asked me to explain my statement that I had 
had no hearing when the letter said I had had two hear- 
ings. I explained to him to the best of my ability the 
nature of the State Department ‘hearings.’ And when the 
situation was finally exposed in the New York Herald 
Tribune, the nature of those ‘hearings’ was disclosed in 
all its worthlessness. Despite the fact that the professors 
were willing to take my word for the nature of those 
‘hearings’ it can well be imagined what a black cloud 
accompanied me in my quest for a job. “In August, 1947, I saw the head of an international 
economic agency whom I had previously known. After 
talking to him, he indicated he would hire me on the 
basis of my experience alone. I was about to tell him 
of my special predicament when he told me, curiously 
enough, a story in which the Nazis had involved a man 
in a security case. This served as the transition to my 
particular case, after which he then stated that under 
these circumstances he would have to check with the 
State Department and other references before he could 
definitely hire me. When in Washington, he went per- 
sonally to visit the persons I had worked with on eco- 
nomic problems in the State Department. Despite the 
highest recommendations from my colleagues in the De- 
partment and from other sources, he felt he required a 
letter from the Department stating there was no ob- 
jection to his hiring me. The nature of the response 
[65]

--- PAGE BREAK ---WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
from the administrative office of the Department was 
such that I was turned down completely.

“My next substantial job lead came through an intro- 
duction to one of the country’s large textile houses.

I 
had several interviews with the vice president and comp- 
troller.

These interviews were concerned with the role 
of an economist in business.

I spent a great deal of time 
studying the industry and planning an outline of die 
functions and usefulness of an economist.

The question 
of why I had left the State Department did not arise, 
although I presumed they knew the story from the per- 
son who introduced me to the firm.

Matters secme to 
progress in a very satisfactory manner, and finally in 
October it was agreed that they would consider me to 
work on a special problem for the firm with a view 
toward a permanent attachment pending the successful 
outcome of the special assignment.

All that remained to 
be setded were salary, hours, office help and other such 
conditions of employment, when I was notified that the 
firm had changed its mind.

I do not know what 
prompted the reversal.

“By this time my savings and annual leave money 
were exhausted and I applied for my retirement fund.

Fortunately for me, the Jones Bill had recently become 
law, permitting persons with less than ten years’ em- 
ployment to take their money from the Federal retire- 
ment system upon leaving the Federal government.

During the interval between applying for the pension 
[66] 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
and receiving it, I lived on borrowed money, which I 
later repaid from the retirement money.

“About this time I really began to feel stymied.

The 
expense of traveling weekly from Washington to places 
of greater job opportunities began to be oppressive.--- PAGE BREAK ---

“About this time I really began to feel stymied. The 
expense of traveling weekly from Washington to places 
of greater job opportunities began to be oppressive. I was 
(and still am) torn between bearing the expense of travel 
and the alternative of staying put in Washington where 
job opportunities for professionals outside the Federal 
government are practically nil. Another possibility is to 
move with my family to some place like New York 
where advertisements for professionals in the newspapers 
are of much greater frequency. The housing situation, 
however, is such as to deter me from moving before I 
have found a job. “When the President’s Committee on Civil Rights 
published its report, it occurred to me in view of the 
nature of the report that the members might be appre- 
ciative of my situation. Accordingly, I wrote to a leading 
member of the committee, telling him of my circum- 
stances and enclosing a resume of my education and ex- 
perience. Several weeks later I received a reply from 
his secretary noting receipt of my letter and stating my 
resume had been filed in the personnel office of his firm. There the matter rests. “Several prospects seemed to bud during the fall of 
1947. I was introduced to one of the district vice presi- 
dents of a quasi-public banking institution. He was sym- 
pathetic to my plight but said he was unable to find an 
[ 67 ]

--- PAGE BREAK ---WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
opening for me.

At about the same time, I received an 
urgent call to rush to New York to meet someone who 
might have something for me.

I flew there, met a small- 
businessman, and after a few conversations he decided 
that my background was too broad for the type of job 
he had.

I lost another job opportunity with a publishing 
house, at about this time, because, in this case, they 
thought the job requirements were beneath my skill and 
abilities.

“During this period, I was in touch with members of 
organizations of my own religious background.

No job 
resulted from them, although one organization was very 
kind in permitting me to use its office facilities and sten- 
ographic help.

In the case of another one, its Washington 
representative, to whom I was introduced, told me that 
because of the similar religious backgrounds, the Board 
of Trustees was interested in the cases of the seven per- 
sons who were dismissed from the State Department and 
expressed a desire to help these persons in a concrete 
way at an executive board meeting.

This Washington 
representative said he would contact the board, in view 
of its expressed positive interest, and give them my back- 
ground so that they could assist me in obtaining a job.

Nothing resulted.

“All this transpired before the separation from the 
State Department became a resignation.

The State De- 
partment finally reversed its position and permitted us 
to resign without prejudice.

Now, in November, 1947,1 
[68] 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
could say in my job hunting that I had resigned, though 
it was still difficult to explain why I resigned.

“After this clearance, a number of prominent and in- 
fluential persons became interested in my case and tried 
to help me get a job.

Despite this, several leads that I 
had did not materialize.--- PAGE BREAK ---

“After this clearance, a number of prominent and in- 
fluential persons became interested in my case and tried 
to help me get a job. Despite this, several leads that I 
had did not materialize. “One day in early December I received a telegram 
stating I was one of several persons recommended for a 
job as an economist for an agency of a large municipal- 
ity. During the interview, I found that the job was ex- 
actly what I wanted and felt that my background in 
experience and education was custom-made for the job. I was asked to furnish letters of recommendation directly 
to the person in charge. These I secured from prominent 
persons, including three former top Washington admin- 
istrators and two State Department officers and others 
with whom I worked or had in some way been asso- 
ciated. Some of the people sent me unsolicited carbon 
copies of the letters of recommendation they had written 
for me. It may be of interest to illustrate by three ex- 
cerpts the kind of letters written by some who were my 
immediate superiors in the State Department: 
‘“Mr. Blank worked with me from approximately 
June, 1946, to June, 1947, in the Department of State. His position, which was one of wide responsibility, in- 
volved primarily (a) the laying out and supervision of 
difficult economic analysis projects concerned with the 
industrial and economic recovery, and reconstruction 
[69]

--- PAGE BREAK ---ty, in- 
volved primarily (a) the laying out and supervision of 
difficult economic analysis projects concerned with the 
industrial and economic recovery, and reconstruction 
[69]

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
and financial needs of European countries; and (b) work 
as economic adviser in relation to the State Depart- 
ment’s programs and policies of economic aid to Euro- 
pean countries. 
“ ‘Mr. Blank has unusual ability and did his job in an 
unusually competent, energetic and creative manner. 
He works well with people of all kinds and has con- 
siderable facility in expressing himself and getting ideas 
over to others. His work always showed not only the 
result of good theoretical and technical background but 
of considerable practical sagacity born of wide expe- 
rience. 
“ ‘Mr. Blank has been working fairly directly under 
my supervision for the past year, and I would unhesitat- 
ingly recommend him for any position which he himself 
felt capable of handling. 
“ ‘I have found Mr. Blank’s work to demonstrate an 
unusual ability. He not only has a good background of 
economic theory and history, but, more important, he 
is able to use his achievements in the theoretical field in 
actual practical everyday industrial economic problems. 
He has had engineers on his staff, and as you may know, 
engineers often do not work willingly for economists. 
But Mr. Blank had far less difficulties than one would 
normally expect, and he succeeded in having people of 
different walks of life and backgrounds work very suc- 
cessfully together on solutions of rather complex prob- 
lems. 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
“ ‘I am sure that if his assignment in your department 
would parallel the type of work he has done within my 
knowledge, he will discharge those duties to your satis- 
faction and gratification. In so far as I can visualize his 
function on your staff, this would be the case, and I am 
more than usually happy to recommend him to you.’ ” 
Mr. Blank’s story continues: 
“I made a determined effort to obtain this job with the 
municipality because I was so suited for it, and although 
I was told I would hear one way or the other directly 
from the person in charge, to this day he has not com- 
municated with me. Indirectly, however, I learned that 
I was to be disqualified on a technicality. Upon hearing 
of this technicality, I wrote to the person in charge, 
stating my view that I did not feel the technicality barred 
me from favorable consideration. A reply was never 
received. Again I am not sure why I did not receive 
this job. 
. “In another case, the economics department of my col- 
lege attempted very diligently to obtain for me the only 
decent teaching job that was available for the February 
semester. Again I lost out on a technicality which, how- 
ever, had no relation to my State Department experience, 
although I was very seriously considered. 
“Concurrently with the above, since my clearance, I 
answered newspaper advertisements, and visited employ- 
ment agencies, but nothing ever developed along these 
lines.s very seriously considered. 
“Concurrently with the above, since my clearance, I 
answered newspaper advertisements, and visited employ- 
ment agencies, but nothing ever developed along these 
lines.

--- PAGE BREAK ---WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
“On a Sunday morning in the middle of January, 
1948, I received a telephone call asking me if I would 
like a few days’ work, to begin immediately.

Naturally 
I accepted.

The job, which lasted four days and nights, 
was to prepare an economic report for a prominent in- 
dustrialist.

This was the only employment I had in the 
eight months after I left the State Department.

“At present a number of persons have written to sev- 
eral industrial and merchandising concerns to inquire 
about the possibility of their utilizing the services of an 
economist.

It has also occurred to me to try to obtain 
funds to write some articles on various economic prob- 
lems with which I am acquainted.

“By now all my liquid funds are exhausted.

I have 
spent my savings, annual leave and pension funds.

For- 
tunately, when I first came to Washington, I bought the 
house I am now living in.

I have recently mortgaged it 
to the hilt to obtain the money necessary to feed my 
family.

When the blow first fell, several persons very 
generously offered to lend me money for an indefinite 
period.

At that time, however, I wanted to use my own 
funds before resorting to borrowing.

When it became 
necessary to borrow, however, I discovered that the only 
source from which I could borrow was to mortgage the 
house.

Although a few personal friends and our personal 
families would be more than willing to give us all they 
have, they are in no position to support a family of four.

“The above account of day-to-day job hunting is not 
[ 72 ] 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
a complete picture of what happens to a man out of 
work.

The anxiety, uncertainty, tension and suspense 
that are borne every moment of every day telescope into 
a severe burden over a protracted period of time.

The 
constant strain of worry over financial insecurity de- 
velops short-tempers and impatience, making it difficult 
to withstand the outburst of energy and noise so natural 
to children.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The anxiety, uncertainty, tension and suspense 
that are borne every moment of every day telescope into 
a severe burden over a protracted period of time. The 
constant strain of worry over financial insecurity de- 
velops short-tempers and impatience, making it difficult 
to withstand the outburst of energy and noise so natural 
to children. They dierefore become at times the unfair 
outlet for their parents’ anxiety. “To all this must be added my realization that I was 
unjustly deprived of my job, a job which I thoroughly 
enjoyed and in which I was doing exceedingly well. I 
have been very much heartened, however, by the wide- 
spread expressions of indignation at the State Depart- 
ment’s action, the public pressure which finally forced 
the reversal from dismissal to resignation and the numer- 
ous personal messages of sympathy and expressions of 
confidence in my character and ability. This has been a 
fight on two fronts—one, to get cleared, which was ac- 
complished when the State Department reversed itself; 
the other, to find a job in my own field to support my 
family. I am confident that I shall be successful in the 
second as I was in the first.” 
There was a happy ending. Early in 1948 Mr. Blank 
got a post in which he could make a new beginning. The truncated justice finally won for Mr. Blank and 
his fellow “risks” was not, of course, to end the hunt.

--- PAGE BREAK ---y in 1948 Mr. Blank 
got a post in which he could make a new beginning. The truncated justice finally won for Mr. Blank and 
his fellow “risks” was not, of course, to end the hunt.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
As the pursuit continued the nation was given a 
dramatic, if ironic, demonstration of how far it might 
go. The demonstration came exactly eight months and 
seventeen days after Mr. Blank got his peremptory notice 
on orders from Hamilton Robinson. This time there 
were charges, fuzzy and synthetic—but charges which 
could be met and answered. This time the accused was 
none other than Hamilton Robinson himself! 
Robinson, scion of an old and fine family, a ten-year 
member of the New York Republican Club, a Taft 
School, Princeton, Oxford and Yale Law School man, 
was not, to be sure, charged by the Department whose 
chief purge officer he was. The demand that he be purged 
came from a member of Congress, just as had the original 
cry for scalps. The reason: Representative Fred E. Bus- 
bey, Republican, of Illinois, was dissatisfied with the new 
caution shown by Robinson in cleaning out the Depart- 
ment. Busbey learned that Robinson had an allegedly 
leftist second cousin. Robinson’s scalp was called for. 
The protests raised in November against the Depart- 
ment’s disregard for human and civil rights now were 
joined by strong new voices. The new tones, strangely, 
emanated from the State Department. To the clamor of 
the press, radio and the people were added the strong 
voices of Secretary Marshall and Assistant Secretary John 
Peurifoy. 
In March an echo of the accusations directed at them 
in November came from the State Department itself. In- 
[ 74] 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
dignant at the attack on his key subordinate, Robinson, 
Marshall demanded “fairness and decency.” He affirmed 
now that, in probing loyalty, care must be taken to “avoid 
action based on spiteful, unsupported or irresponsible 
allegations.” 
Peurifoy, too, had seen the light. He denounced the 
open season on “character assassination” and “gossip mon- 
gering.” 
“I am also, quite frankly, disturbed,” Peurifoy told 
the House sub-committee investigating Mr. Robinson’s 
loyalty and qualifications, “by the present tendency to 
extend the highly questionable theory of ‘guilt by asso- 
ciation’ to lengths that amount to a travesty of the tradi- 
tional American justice.” 
When the hunters became the hunted, the cycle was 
completed. Mr. Robinson, who had refused to give Mr. 
Blank the slightest hint of the allegations against him, 
went before the sub-committee. He, however, demanded 
and was given a full hearing. Like Mr. Blank he insisted 
that the charges be openly stated. Unlike Mr. Blank, his 
request was acceded to without hesitation. 
Not even Mr. Robinson could miss the irony of the 
scene. He had an F.B.I. report on Mr. Blank. Representa- 
tive Busbey had an F.B.I. report on Mr. Robinson. So 
far as was ever learned there was no evidence that Mr. 
Blank was cither disloyal or any of the softer hues of red. 
Mr. Blank was nevertheless summarily discharged, and 
the reason was never divulged. Mr. Robinson’s dischargeere was no evidence that Mr. 
Blank was cither disloyal or any of the softer hues of red. 
Mr. Blank was nevertheless summarily discharged, and 
the reason was never divulged. Mr. Robinson’s discharge

--- PAGE BREAK ---that Mr. 
Blank was cither disloyal or any of the softer hues of red. 
Mr. Blank was nevertheless summarily discharged, and 
the reason was never divulged. Mr. Robinson’s discharge

--- PAGE BREAK ---

WASHINGTON WITCH HUNT 
was demanded, and the reason was he had a second 
cousin. 
Mr. Blank had complained to Mr. Robinson: “I don’t 
know whether you gentlemen realize what you have 
done to me—completely blackballed me from earning a 
living in the future. I don’t know where to turn.” 
Mr. Robinson had replied: “I think you can be assured 
that the Department was not unaware of those aspects of 
it.” 
When it came Robinson’s turn, he and Peurifoy irately 
fought the implications and charges leveled by Repre- 
sentative Busbey. 
Representative Busbey replied on the floor of the 
House: “Mr. Robinson, as well as Mr. Peurifoy, seems 
to be laboring under the impression that this is an attack 
on the personal reputation and character of Mr. Robin- 
son. . . . Nothing is further from the truth.” 
But the sharpest parallel and yet the greatest difference 
between the Blank and Robinson cases was in the manner 
and latitude with which the two men were able to de- 
mand the charges. 
Mr. Blank humbly went before Mr. Robinson and his 
three associates for a secret session. Told to make a state- 
ment, he replied: “I am completely bewildered by what 
it is about ... I really frankly do not know what to 
say, since I don’t know what the charges are. . . .” He 
got no help from his examiners. 
With little delay, Mr. Robinson got an open hearing 
THE HUNTERS AND THE HUNTED 
before the House sub-committee. Flanked by his chief, 
Peurifoy, Robinson demanded: “Let us start out with 
what the charge is. What is the charge? You made a 
charge, Mr. Busbey, in which you said there were certain 
facts known to my superiors, because of which I should 
have been removed from my office months ago. ... I 
think, in all fairness, Mr. Chairman, it would be a good 
thing to let Mr. Busbey come out with everything he has 
instead of dragging out the business from one time to an- 
other. If he has any more let us have him say it now.” 
Mr. Robinson’s request was met promptly. The result: 
Representative Busbey produced his information. The 
sub-committee chairman, Representative J. Edgar Cheno- 
weth, Republican, of Colorado, listened tolerantly but 
impatiently to the Busbey dossier on Mr. Robinson. When 
it was over, Representative Chenoweth closed the hear- 
ings and dropped the matter. Representative Busbey com- 
plained on the House floor about this abrupt ending. 
Mr. Robinson went back to his work of checking the 
loyalty and security of the State Department’s 20,000 
employees. It was a safe assumption that the rights of the 
20,000, so far as he had anything to do with them, would 
be respected and defended in the future. 
But it was too much to expect that Mr. Robinson would 
be permitted to continue his own hunt without harassment 
by the Congressional huntsmen. It was only a matter of 
time before Mr. Robinson gave up. He submitted his 
resignation and it was accepted. 
[77]