3 July 1966
Mr. Jacob Cohen
Department of History
Branbeis University
Waltham, Massachusetts
Dear Mr. Cohen,
Your article ''The Vital Documents" in the current (July 11, 1966) issue
of The Nation was most interesting. One must hope that the authorities
will heed, your appeal and produce the mysterious photographs and x-rays
taken during the autopsy. Although X am by no means persuaded by your
theory of "innocent" alteration of the autopsy report, I do congratulate
you sincerely for your resourcefulness in coming up with an imaginative
explanation to counter the serious charges implicit in Edward Jay Epstein’s
book Inquest. Is it not arresting that, although that book has been in
the headlines for some seven weeks now, not one official spokesman for the
Warren Commission or the FBI has come forward with facts which might, be
said to constitute a responsive refutation of the challenge to the
Commission’s findings in general and to the authenticity of the autopsy
report in particular?
You have properly focussed on the withheld photographs and x-rays
as essential to a precise scientific determination of the nature and
location of the wounds sustained by the President and, therefore, to
the number and source of the shots. However, I am at a loss to understand
how you can have omitted from your analysis a discussion of the stretcher
bullet—which in itself vitiates the single-missile hypothesis, by virtue
of the testimony of each and every competent medical witness—and of the
bullet holes in the President’s garments. I will not argue the position
of the hole in the coat, although I find the "explanation" that the coat
was raised or bunched at the time of the shot highly implausible and
wholly unsupported by photographic or other evidence. But what about
the hole in the shirt? Even belatedly-produced photographs purporting
to show a wound in the baek of the neck, if they are forthcoming, would
leave unresolved that most crucial discrepancy—the position of the hole
in the shirt some inches below the collar. I do not believe that that
problem can be dismissed without an accounting, whether or not the autopsy
photographs are made available.
I am delighted to see that you Interpret Epstein’s line of questioning
as tantamount to a charge that the autopsy was falsified and that the evidence
of falsification was collusively suppressed. Epstein has been unjustly
criticized by some of his fellow-critics on the ground that he was timid
in challenging the Commission. I am glad that others are getting the
message, which despite the reserve of Epstein’s language seems to be
crystal-clear.llow-critics on the ground that he was timid
in challenging the Commission. I am glad that others are getting the
message, which despite the reserve of Epstein’s language seems to be
crystal-clear.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ground that he was timid
in challenging the Commission. I am glad that others are getting the
message, which despite the reserve of Epstein’s language seems to be
crystal-clear.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2,
„ +Y°!f.sfy th?t t,he eyevatness testimony on the nature of the wounds is
contradxGtory.' But consider the eyewitness testimony on the site of the
thTtaliiT”?*-*!, S®Jre^Serrice a§ent Glen Bennett reported that~saw
^®kbull®t ^f1?® tbe President in the back about four inches below the
hamL_ Secret bervice agent Clinton Hill, who was called into the autopsy
chamber expressly to witness the condition of the body, testified that the
wound was situated about six inches below the neck. And the oSer lay
witnesses, without exception if ay recollection is correct, invariably7
called this wound a wound in the shoulder or in the back; never did those
witnesses refer spontaneously or naturally to a wound in the neck (see
(5H 175)J Kellerffian <»**>* Orse?(m2?‘
'7T * Those persons are trained observers by profession and
neck, despite all the contrary evidence, may or may not be disinterested.
nn r,a^C^entailyJ tW° °f the citations ^ your article are incorrect.
P3! column one, at the end of the penultimate paragraph, you
cite Volume I p. 5S1. I believe that the correct refeSnffisVfp. 81.
In the same column, m the final paragraph, !‘¥, p. 71" should be ¥, p. 6l.
, , JJow We. CO!f to a cardlnal question: the date on v&ich the FBI first
«*»***■ not that access pmceSf
or followed the FBI Reports of December 9, 1963 and Januaiy 13, fcjg
^ ^fiS AdSmS not only disclaimed ttestatements
fntSS? ^ by ^Pstein but .insinuated that he had never even been
hpD°f Adass> °r an3rone els®s suggest that Epstein
invented.. the ^feole tiling? Surely noti
any, ?ase> what Adams has withdrawn, Fletcher Xnebel has supplied.
oh. ^ his recent LOOK article, was good enough to tell us that he had
renSrifSi?1? T£s&snxr ^rtment a Precise date on which the autopsy
d to. have Dsen transmitted to the FBI~December 23, 1963,
fi^_ three weeks before the FBI submitted the Januaiy 13, 1964^Reoort
K Th ^ documentation" which you demanded from Epstein ha^
already been provided, by one of Epstein's most venomous critics.
I notice that you consider the (undated) Dallas Police Report "well
detailed." Perhaps! but that
contains some appalling misrepresentations. It attributes a
lde^tiflGation °T Oswald to one witness (McWatters) who in fact
failed to make such an identification; and it omits entity JS Sntion
of Howard Brennan who also failed to make a positive identifiStSn!
us hope that those two "errors" were also innocent, and unique.
iMi+nr>^rn"^n^ +° rur ^hSeuious hypothesis of the innocent alteration of the
^ tG T1? diselosure of adrenal insufficiency, and your statement
hat that curious omission had not yet received public comment, you may berur ^hSeuious hypothesis of the innocent alteration of the
^ tG T1? diselosure of adrenal insufficiency, and your statement
hat that curious omission had not yet received public comment, you may be

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3.
interested to know that the omission was the subject of severe criticism
in the publication Current Medicine for Attorneys not too long ago, and
was the subject of critical comment in the Journal of the American Medical
Mg<?.?.l,ation, whose editor tried but failed to obtain clarification from
Admiral Burkley, I believe.
I admire the adroitness of your adrenal theory; I am almost affected
by your sturdy faith in the Commission’s innocence of heart; and I applaud
your readiness to concede that something sinister may be afoot and, if so
mist be exposed. After intensive study of the radical and autopsy *
evidence, I concluded more than a year before seeing Inquest and the
astonishing FBI descriptions of the wound that the autopsy findings
had been influenced—if not fabricated—by the need to accomodate a
rixed hypothesis. I will reconsider that conclusion only if we now
receive .not onlg the missing photographs and x-rays but also cogent and
sfy*^clt explanations for the incongruous position of the hole in the
shirt and many similar anozaalies or conflicts in the medical evidence.
And even if all those wonders come to pass, the Commission will still
have to account for an imposing list of misrepresentations and defects in
^ts Report as compared with the corresponding evidence in the Hearings and
exhibits, which I have documented in a 500-page manuscript which I hope
will make a contribution to the establishment of the truth about Dallas.
With good wishes.
Yours sincerely.
Sylvia Meagher
302 .'/est 12 St
New York NT 10014
Area Code 212—Chelsea 2-4293