HE ZETETIC
lomal d fcm0^ra]^ljkal ^tieita.

E D i ™ B Y B.

CHAS.

BEOUGH.

“ h e w h o e e s o l v e s to b e j u s t a n d y e t w il l h e a k o n l y o n e s id e , w il l b e u n j u s t in
S P IT E O F H IS r e s o l u t i o n .

” ---- L O C K E .

No.

I.

STAFFORD, JULY, 1872.

O ne H a l f p e n n y .

CONTENTS.

A ddress to the Header.

A Few W ords about the Scientific
The Bedford Level ExperimentB ; 
L etter to A lfred B.

Wallace, 
Esq., F.E.G.S.

Proofs th a t E arth is a Plane.

N o.L
Epitonae of News.

Correepondence.

H istory of Cosmography.

The Theories of Newton.

N ew tonian Astronomy.

Mode of 
Computation.

The A ccredited B ate of Curvature.

ADDRESS TO TH E READER.

I f any explanation were necessary for the appear­
ance of The Zetetic in the ranks of journalism, it 
might be found in the fact that'-while almost every 
phase of scientific, political, and social problems has 
its own particular organ, and medium of commu­
nication, those who have been led to believe in the 
principles of Zeteticism have been hitherto totally 
Mftrepresented; and, owing to the partiaKty and 
intolerance of the press, frequently nizsrepresented.

But the growing interest with which this all-im­
portant question of the shape and mobility of 
Earth is being I’egarded, and the numbers that are 
daily espousing the cause which we advocate, seem, 
in themselves, a sufficient guarantee for the belief 
that the time cannot be'far distant when public 
opinion will unanimously demand its speedy and 
final settlement.

No one, who has, for a single 
moment, directed his attention to the subject, can 
fail to see its importance.

Astronomy, Geology, 
Navigation, and all the arts and sciences which 
follow in their train, essentially depend upon a 
knowledge of the true figure and condition of our 
world.No one, who has, for a single 
moment, directed his attention to the subject, can 
fail to see its importance. Astronomy, Geology, 
Navigation, and all the arts and sciences which 
follow in their train, essentially depend upon a 
knowledge of the true figure and condition of our 
world. Zeteticism affirms that it is not a Globe hut a 
Plane— vast, irregular^and immoveaUe, '■'■founded on
the seas, and established in the floods 
that the celes­
tial bodies are not worlds and mighty globes, but lights 
subordinate to, and created for the service of Earth ; 
that there is but one material world in the universe— 
the one on which we live and have our being; that there 
is an inseparable connection between Theology and 
Science ; and that order and simplicity are the chief 
characteristics o f the tuorhs of God. On the contrary, Newtonian Astronomy divests 
the Earth of its attribute of fixity, and conceives it 
as a rapidly-moving globe—possessing three sepa­
rate and distinct motions, and influenced by other 
disturbing causes—a mere speck or atom amidst the 
endless congeries of suns, systems, and revolving 
worlds, which, from their very nature, become 
“ ghostly from infinite.” 
The following represen­
tation, given by a German philosophical poet, of the 
path of a mortal called by God (ivho coidd not exist 
if this Newtonian theoi'y luere true) to view the 
dimensions of his realms, fully describes this hypo­
thetical doctrine :—“ Without measures were the 
architraves, past number were the archways, be­
yond memory the gates. Within were stairs that 
scaled the eternities below ; above Was below—be­
low was above, to the man stripped of gravitating 
body: depth was swallowed up in height insur­
mountable, height was swallowed up in depth un­
fathomable. Suddenly, as thus they rode from in­
finitude to infinitude— suddenly, as thus they tilted 
over abysmal worlds, a mighty ciy arose,—th a t 
systems more mysterious, th a t worlds more billowy

--- PAGE BREAK ---THE ZETETIC.

— other heights and other depths—were coming, 
were nearing, were at hand—^for end there is none, 
to the universe, and lo !

also there is no beginning.” 
W e read that the man sighed, and stopped, shud­
dered, and w ept; that his spu’it ached with this in­
finity.

So we have universe after universe, system 
after system, in countless throngs, for ever succeed­
ing one another in the endless realms of space.

Grandeur, but without order; complication, mys­
tery, and confusion !

Reader !

this is Newtonian 
Astronomy.

Who but the most infatuated dreamer, 
who but the most bewildered enthusiast, could 
credit a theory like this ?

In ages past, various 
speculations were raised.

Bubble after bubble was 
created, existed for a moment, and burst.

Some 
sought for the philosopher’s stone, others for the 
charm that would di-ive away death and all the Uls 
of life.

Superstition produced many fancies, but 
never was dream so mad, so foolish, so self-arrogant 
as tliis !

The persecutive spirit with which it was 
originally met, the mysteries attached by the igno­
rant to its founders in those dark epochs of the 
world’s history, served only to attract for it an at­
tention, which otherwise it would never have gained.

Infidelity eager for support took it up ; men of abil­
ity, who found it close at hand, adopted it un­
questioned.

To-day it is the modern Diana which 
its votaries abjectly venerate.

But, be it as it may, 
it will be oiu’ endeavora’, to the best of our humble 
ability, to resist it.

In conchision, we would ask oiu’ readers to con­
sider the question w ell; to study, examine, and to 
test for themselves.

It is not a problem of little 
importance—a problem to be left “ for others to 
solve.” 
It is one which demands immediate and 
careful inquiry.

It concerns equally the atheist, 
Christian, and man of science.

And we would bid 
those who are preparing to take a part in the struggle 
to dibregai’d the ridiciile and abuse of the world.It concerns equally the atheist, 
Christian, and man of science.

And we would bid 
those who are preparing to take a part in the struggle 
to dibregai’d the ridiciile and abuse of the world.

You have to stem the tide of prejudice and error ; 
to check the progress of that torrent of infidelity 
which is now flooding the length and breadth of the 
land.

Of this you may rest assui’ed, that the time 
is rapidly approaching when your efforts will be
crowned with success, and when your labours, now 
disregarded, will receive their reward.

“Truth crush’d to earth, shall rise again,—
The eternal years of God’s are hers ;
But Error, vanquished, ivrithes in pain,
And dies amid her worshippers.”
A FEW W OEDS ABOUT T H E SCIENTIFIC 
W AGER.*
In the month of Januaiy, 1870, the following 
challenge was published by Mr.

J.

Hampden:— 
“ The undersigned is willing to deposit from £60 to 
£500, and defies all the philosophers, divines, and 
scientific professors in the United Kingdom to prove 
the rotundity and revolution of the world from.

Scripture, from reason, or from fact.

He wiU 
acknowledge that he has forfeited his deposit if his 
o^oponent can exhibit, to the satisfaction of any in­
telligent referee, a convex railway, river, canal, or 
lake.—J o h n H a m p d e n .

”
After some little delay, Mr.

Alfred R.

Wallace, a 
Fellow of the Royal Geogi’aphical Society, offered 
to comply with the requisite conditions, and to prove 
by ocular demonstration the convexity of a length 
(six miles) of inland water.

An agreement was 
entered into by both parties ; Mr.

J.

H.

Walsh, 
editor of the Fields was chosen as referee for Mr.

Wallace, and JNIr.

W.

CaqDenter for Mr.

Hampden.

A t the suggestion of Mi\ Wallace, that portion of 
the “ Old Bedford,”!

between Old Bedford Bridge 
and Welney Bridge—a distance of six mUes—was 
selected as the place for observation.

On the 16th 
February Mr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

between Old Bedford Bridge 
and Welney Bridge—a distance of six mUes—was 
selected as the place for observation. On the 16th 
February Mr. Wallace proposed the following ex­
periment which was at once assented to by his 
opponent, who expressed his satisfaction with it, 
and his belief that “it could not fail to be thoroughly 
convincing one way or the other 
—
“ The test I am going to use is very simple and conclu­
sive. I hare prepared half-a-dozen signal posts, each 6 feet 
long, and with red and black circles attached to them, so as 
to be distinctly seen at a long distance. I shall set these 
up a mile apart on the ivate>-’s edge and then look along them 
■with a powerful telescope. If the water-line is straight and 
flat, the top of these poles will of course be straight and flat 
too; but it the earth and water has a curvature of 4000 
miles radius, then the tops of the poles will be equally convex, 
and they will be secnrisinghigher andhigher to themiddlepoint, 
and then sinking lower and lou'er to the furthest one.”
On Monday, February 2Sth, Messrs. Wallace and 
Carpenter set out for the Bedford Canal, and on 
the following day the signal posts were duly set up. Subsequently they were found inconvenient, and 
Mr. Wallace expressed Ms opinion that “ a good
* The above carefully prepared statem ent of facts ia not intended 
to prejudice tlie m inds of our readers, l)ut sim ply to explain the critic­
isms, w hich may, a t any future tim e, be made upon the experim ents 
to •which they refer.—Ed. Zetetic
t The 
Old Bedford ” is an artificial river or canal, some 20 miles ia 
length, which passes in a straight line through th a t part of the reria 
called th e “ Bedford LeveL”

--- PAGE BREAK ---THE ZETETIC.

signal at each end, and one tlie same height in the 
centre, would answer every pui-pose.” Accordingly 
“ an oblong signal, 6ft.

by 3ft.

was placed on Old 
Bedford Bridge, its centre being 13ft.

4in.

above 
the water.

A t tlu-ee miles distance along the canal 
a staff was erected, having a red disc of wood 1ft.

in diameter affixed thereto, the centre of which was 
also 13ft.

4in.

above the water; and on Welney 
bridge, three miles further, a third signal was 
placed, reaching the top of the bridge, 13ft.

4in.

likewise above the water.

“But although three signals 
were erected, it must nevertheless be remembered 
that the telescope, being placed cibove the first, only 
exhibited the apparent position of two!

On the 
centre signal staff there was a red disc already at­
tached, which was allowed to remain 9ft.

4in.

above 
the water, or 4ft.

lower than the other.

The obser­
vations were made by means of a large telescope 
(4 in.

object glass), and also to and fro, according 
to agreement, by means of a level, by Stanley, Hol- 
born, and were carried out from bridge to bridge 
the full six miles.” Commenting upon the arrange­
ments, the editor of the Field (March 5th, 1870) 
says
“ The experiment, which is now in course of trial on the 
Bedford Level in Norfolk, is carried out by fixing three 
discs at equal distances (12 feet) from the surface of this 
level, one being at each end, and the tliird in the middle.

According to the received theory, the middle disc ought to 
range 5 feet (in round numbers) above the level of the ter­
minal discs; while Mr.

Hampden risks his £300 on the 
assumption that the three will range in a straight line.

We have satisfied ourselves by ocular inspection that the 
instruments and the locality are sufficiently well adapted to 
bring out a true issue; and we hope next week to lay be­
fore our readers the decision of the referees.”
Pi’evious to this, and while the experiments were 
being conducted, Mr.Hampden risks his £300 on the 
assumption that the three will range in a straight line.

We have satisfied ourselves by ocular inspection that the 
instruments and the locality are sufficiently well adapted to 
bring out a true issue; and we hope next week to lay be­
fore our readers the decision of the referees.”
Pi’evious to this, and while the experiments were 
being conducted, Mr.

Walsh was compelled to re­
turn to London, and Mr.

M.

W.

B.

Coulcher, a 
local surgeon, was appointed in his stead.

After 
the experimentation was concluded, this gentleman 
declared “ on oath” that Mr.

Wallace had demon­
strated the convexity of the water, but as his co- 
referee, Mr.

Carpenter, was of the opposite opinion, 
Mr.

Walsh was appointed umpire, and on the 18th 
of March he decided that, “ taking into considera­
tion the theory of the earth’s rotundity,” Mr.

Wal­
lace was entitled to the stakes, which were duly 
handed over to that gentleman on the 1st of April, 
1870.

T H E “ BED rO R D LEV EL” EXPERIM ENTS.

To Alfred Bussell Wallace, Esq., FeUow of 
the Royal Geographical Society, &c.

SiE—Although some two years have now elapsed 
since your celebrated experimentation on the ‘‘Old 
Bedford” Canal attracted so much attention in the 
scientific world; although Mr.

W a l s h as an intel­
ligent “ referee ” awarded you, on the 1st of April,
1870, the sum of £1000 for having proved to his 
satisfaction “ the cm’vature to and fro ” of the 
“ Bedford Level River,” between Welney Bridge and 
Welche’s Dam, in Canrbridrje, and Dr.

Coulcher as 
an “ umpire ” declared “ on oath” that by the same 
experiment, the convexity of water between Welney 
Bridge and the “ Old Bedford” Bridge, in Xorfollc, 
had been proved entirely to his satisfaction; al­
though Mr.

Westlake, in his endeavours to justify 
the award, mathematically demonstrated that Euclid 
was a blunderer; yet, strange to say, Zeteticism 
progresses.Coulcher as 
an “ umpire ” declared “ on oath” that by the same 
experiment, the convexity of water between Welney 
Bridge and the “ Old Bedford” Bridge, in Xorfollc, 
had been proved entirely to his satisfaction; al­
though Mr.

Westlake, in his endeavours to justify 
the award, mathematically demonstrated that Euclid 
was a blunderer; yet, strange to say, Zeteticism 
progresses.

The ?)3se dixit of an umpire is after all 
merely the expression of an individual opinion ; and 
it is only by a careful and dispassionate review of 
the exper’iments themselves, and of the appearances 
they presented, that their true bearing on the c[ues- 
tion of the shape of standing water—and therefore 
of the earth—can be ascertained.

The importance 
of this question, and the courage you have invari­
ably exhibited in your efforts to prevent the pro­
gress of Zetetic opinions, induce me to express a 
hope that you will not reject an opportunity of dis­
cussing it, and therefore of dispelling the cloud 
wliich has hitherto rested over your experimenta­
tion.

The questions to be decided might thus be 
expressed;—W hat were the appearances presented?

Were they consistentwith ahorizontal, or inconsistent 
with a convex, surface of the water ?

or vice versa.

I say, “ consistent with a horizontal surface of 
the w ater;” because, although if it can be shown 
that they were inconsistent with the opiposite sup­
position, it follows that the decision was faulty, aud 
the question still undecided, yet it is necessary, from 
the position I take, that I should be prepared to 
demonstrate the former proposition; and this I will 
endeavour to do.

If we erect on a horizontal surface, three or more 
signals, of equal lengths, and at equal distances 
apart, and place a telescope, accurately levelled, 
near to the first, we shall find the tops of the three 
to range in a perfectly straight line.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I say, “ consistent with a horizontal surface of 
the w ater;” because, although if it can be shown 
that they were inconsistent with the opiposite sup­
position, it follows that the decision was faulty, aud 
the question still undecided, yet it is necessary, from 
the position I take, that I should be prepared to 
demonstrate the former proposition; and this I will 
endeavour to do. If we erect on a horizontal surface, three or more 
signals, of equal lengths, and at equal distances 
apart, and place a telescope, accurately levelled, 
near to the first, we shall find the tops of the three 
to range in a perfectly straight line. So in the 
“ Old Bedford” experiments; if the conditions, pre­
viously agreed on, had been carried out, and the sur­
face of the water was flat, “ the tops of the poles 
would have been level and flat also.” 
Of this there 
__n be no doubt. But this was not done. The 
signal which should have been placed near the tele­
scope was omitted. Hence the appearances pre­
sented were necessarily changed; the telescopic 
view was altered; and we have the signals appear­
ing lower and lower, the nearer apparently higher 
than the one more remote. But methinks I hear 
you say, “ place three objects at equal distances 
apart in a true straight line (three oranges on the 
parapet of Waterloo Bridge, for instance), and then 
with the telescope at either end, in place of one ob­
ject, make the centre object considerably raised 
above the distant one.” 
Probably you may not do

--- PAGE BREAK ---THE ZETETIC.

go, for tlie simple reason that tlie distance referred 
to is inappreciable, and that they rest immediately 
upon a continuous surface.

Make the conditions 
analagous, and the appearances referred to are pre­
sented.

Hence, then, I faU to see the slightest ob­
jection to the belief that the smiace of standing 
water is perfectly horizontal.

And here I am constrained to conclude without 
alluding as I intended to the inconsistency between 
the appearance referred to and the suj^position that 
the surface of the Bedford Canal is an arc of a cii'cle 
of the accredited dimensions.

B.

CHAS.

BEOUGH.

PEOOFS THAT EAETH IS A PLANE.

No.

1.

The marine horizon, from whatever position it 
is viewed, always ajipears to be, and is, in fact, a 
jjerfeotly level line, and since this appearance is 
the same in all parts of the world, its surface must 
fee level; and therefore the E arth is a Plane.

This may be proved to be the case, by erecting 
at a suitable elevation on the sea shore, a duly- 
levelled board, or a string—at right angles to a 
plumb-line—tightly stretched between two verti­
cal poles.

On looking towards the sea, the hori­
zontal line for a distance of 20 miles may be easily 
observed, and throughout its entire length it wall 
be found to coincide with the straight-edgo, or 
string: but if the earth were a globe, the horizontal 
line would form an are ©f twenty miles in length, 
curvating both, ways froni'the centre, at the rate 
of eight inches, multiplied by the square of the 
distance.

Hence the horizontal line at either end 
of the distance ought to be depressed some 66 feet 
below the horizon in the centre.

But as no such 
appearance is ever presented, it necessarily follows 
that the earth cannot be a globe, or other than a 
plane.

In om next we propose to examine the 
objections urged against the above arg-ument.

THE TH EO EIES OF NEWTON.In om next we propose to examine the 
objections urged against the above arg-ument.

THE TH EO EIES OF NEWTON.

When the claims of any man to infallibility are 
set up and the prestige of his name constantly made 
use of by those who have adopted his views, it is 
not inappropriate to enquire whether the whole of 
his scientific opinions have been accejited.

New­
ton founded his philosophy on definitions, most, if 
not all, of which have been disputed by those who 
hold the same general notions as himself.

He as­
serted that each ray of light consists of seven pri­
mary colours, but it has since been demonstrated 
that it consists of two only, and “ scientific ” men 
are sceptical as to the existence of two.

His know­
ledge of the sun’s distance was of the most hazy 
description; “ it didn’t matter whether it was 28
or 54 millions of mUes, for either would do w ell!” 
“ it wasn’t worth while to alter his figmes.” 
His 
opinion of the exact shape of the eaiih is different 
from that of his followers of the present day.

He 
believed that comets existed for the purpose of 
sujjpljing the sun with heat, and this belief he 
persistently climg to ; biit what Ne-wtonian astron­
omer believes it now ?

He predicted that the 
comet of 1680 would fall into the sun and render 
its heat so gi-eat that the earth icould inevitably he 
consumed.

He attemj^ted to account for the orbital 
motion of the earth on the suj^position that “ the 
Creator thi-ew the p>lanets iato space, and that they 
would have moved on for ever by such propulsion, 
in a straight line, but for the attraction of the sun, 
which force, acting in another direction, prevented 
the planet from moving in either, and so produced 
a curvilinear path.” 
Do astronomers believe this 
now-a-days ?

He invented a chronological system 
which is oijposed to that of everyone else.

His 
opinion of the Divine authority was of the most 
irreverent nature.

He openly disavowed his belief 
in the epistles of St.

John and St.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He openly disavowed his belief 
in the epistles of St. John and St. Paul, and in 
other parts of the Bible. As regai-ds the former, 
he suggested that verses had been cut out, others 
mutilated or changed, and many added thereto. At his death, many of his MSS. were found to be 
of such an infidel description, that they were sup­
pressed as being imfit for publication. Their 
names are the following;— Church History—Pro­
phetic Style— Temple of Solomon— The Sanctuai'y—■ 
CorriqMons o f Scripture— Paradoxical questions con­
cerning Athanasius— Worhing of the Mystery of In­
iquity— Theology of the Heathen— Account of the 
Contest between the Hosts o f Heaven and the Trans­
gressors of the Covenant— History o f the Prophecies. D’Holbach, the atheist, sj>eaks of the “ chiLdish- 
ness ” of some of his theological views, but openly 
praises him for others. In an early portion of hiB 
life he was deranged for a year, and frequently 
issued the most absurd orders, such as asking his 
servants to carry out a red-hot stove I 
His bio- 
gi-apher, M. Biot, states, that a misfortune at the 
age of fortjr-five brought on madness, from which, 
he never recovered. The misfortune consisted of 
the destruction of a number of his papers by his dog 
Diamond, which knocked do\ra a lighted candle 
amongst them. This dog could scarcely have been 
a “ diamond of the first water,” or instead of put­
ting fire into Newtonian philosophy, he would 
have attemjjted to exting-uish it. I5ut it would be 
an endless task to adduce all his scientific failings; 
and we conclude with this remark, that the con­
duct of his followers in relying on his n a s i b is es­
sentially short-sighted. His claims to t r u e gi-eat- 
ness depend upon the correctness of his views; 
and the putting him forward as an infallible being is 
simply a species of begging the question. Every

--- PAGE BREAK ---THE ZETETIC.

system has its own followers.

Alchemy can dis­
play a long roll of great names, and amongst them 
stands that of Newton himself.

Atheism can point 
to men of undoubted ability and erudition; and 
go can every speculative opinion.

That the founder 
of the Newtonian philosophy was a great man, in 
the ordiaary sense of the word, is admitted on all 
hands ; but in many of his views he was mistaken, 
and if in some, why not in others ?

Let us accord 
him the praise which belongs to him ; but it should 
fee remembered, that but for him Atheism would 
probably have become a thing of the past.

He 
should not be disfignired by pretensions to which 
no man can aspire.

His epitaph vwould best de­
scribe him as
“ A vision throned as a solemn mark 
Of the fraility of h u m a n greatness.”
THE ZETETia
JULY, 1872.

The Office o f T h e Z e t e t i c is at Castle Ten'ace, Staffoi'd, vshcre all 
Comnmnications should he addressed.

TO EEADEKS AND CORRESPONDENTS.

In our next issue will "be com m cnced a series of articles on “ Zotetie 
A stro n o m y -Its Origin and ProgresB,” byitBfoundm* “ P arallax.”
O.D., A W e l l - w is h e b , an d otliers, are of opinion th a t T ub Z e t e t ic 
Bhould be issued fortnightly, instead of, as a t present, on the first 
of each month,
JOHN T a y lo r , F.ILS.

(Shrew 8buiy)-W e have been favoured w ith a 
courteous com munication from this gentlem an, w ho is good enough 
to in fo rm n s th at we are “ a rank and vile im postor,” “ fouU gnor- 
am iis,” “ an arran t an d boasting sw aggerer,” “ a sneering upstart,” 
a n d “ a candidate for th e Old Bailey,” &c., &c.

These poUte expres­
sion are fuUowcd by a som ew hat vague threat of personal violence, 
a n d a statem ent to “ ro o t” us out, “ tooth and branch.” "We thank 
th is soi-disant “ gentlem an by birth, education, and positiob,” for his 
com plim entary, letter, an d beg of nim to be m erciful tow ards us.

W e cannot call Mr.These poUte expres­
sion are fuUowcd by a som ew hat vague threat of personal violence, 
a n d a statem ent to “ ro o t” us out, “ tooth and branch.” "We thank 
th is soi-disant “ gentlem an by birth, education, and positiob,” for his 
com plim entary, letter, an d beg of nim to be m erciful tow ards us.

W e cannot call Mr.

Taylor an “ up start,” because ho is so low as to 
ren d er any other idea th an th a t of his having journeyed backw ards 
quite inappropriate.

B ut as he is said to be thoroughly well versed in 
“ im pudence,” and “ boasting,” &c., wo cannot express our alarm a t 
th e rest of his ex cathedra denunciation.

The only favour we would 
ask of Ml*.

T.

ia, th a t he will express his future epistles (if he will 
compel us to receive them , by sending from various localities, and ad­
dressed in handw riting o ther than his own) in a m ore gram m atical 
an d intelligible form, an d th at w hen n ext he attem pts the produc­
tion of an ugly picture he will stand in some other position than in 
fro n t of his V enetian m irror.

EPITOME OF NEWS.

Barnum is after the earth’s rotundity !

"We hope he may 
get it.

A drunken man, on being told the world was round, said 
that it was probably the cause of ills rolling so.

The elevation of the Astronomer-Eoyal to the dignity of 
K.C.B.

is officially notified in the London Gazette.

It now appears certain that the iiiformation received 
relative to the safety of Dr.

Livingstone, the great African 
explorer, is tolerably authentic.

The Wellington Journal has the following :—“ Our Shrop­
shire savans are getting exercised in their minds as to the 
rotundity of the earth.

Too much importance, we fear, has 
been attached to the arguments adduced by the non- 
revolving pianist, 5Ir.

Brough, of StafiEord.”
Three “ new ” planets have been recently discovered.Too much importance, we fear, has 
been attached to the arguments adduced by the non- 
revolving pianist, 5Ir.

Brough, of StafiEord.”
Three “ new ” planets have been recently discovered.

They belong to the Asteroids, a group wljich contains some 
116 of these “ miniature bodies.” These are the “ broken 
bits ” of a world that is said to have “ burst.” 
Our astro­
nomical friends will probably forgive us when we say that 
it must have been a tolerably large one.

In reply to certain wicked persons who object to the 
“ nothings” which “ disinterested "astronomers obtain, the 
three following resolutions have been passed by the occu­
pants of Flamstead House :—1.

Resolved that the earth is 
the Lord’s and the fullness thereof.

2.

Resolved tiiat the 
Lord has given His inheritance unto the saints.

3.

Resolved, 
that we are the saints.

Eddowe’s Shrewsbury and Salopian Journal, in a favour­
able report of a recent debate, informs its readers that we 
are an “ attorney’s clerk.” AVe are indebted to our con­
temporary for the compliment it pays us although it is 
quite undeserved.

The statement would create some sur­
prise in our mind did we not know that it was made at the 
suggestion, and on the inspiration, of a ci-devant school- 
usher, whose statements are always as destitute of truth as 
they are of even the commonest politenesss.

SLetterd tu tftc iSaitffr,
W HAT IS THE FORM OF THE EARTH?

SiK,—In this enlightened nineteenth century, such a 
q^uestion as “ What is the form of the Earth ?

” may well 
arrest the attention of every one ; not only of the learned 
but also of the ilhterate man, who depends upon his more 
educated brother for the solution of problems which are toa 
difficult for his untutored mind.

But what if the former 
be deceived ?

What if owing to the false representations 
of “ those who know b est” (1) he is led to believe that 
which is untrue ?

And what if the pomt upon which he is 
misled be one of vital importance for him to know ?What if owing to the false representations 
of “ those who know b est” (1) he is led to believe that 
which is untrue ?

And what if the pomt upon which he is 
misled be one of vital importance for him to know ?

Space 
would forbid me here to enlarge upon the duty which every 
man owes to himself to be fully determined in his own mind 
as to the above question.

Ninety-nine people out of a hundred would give the same 
answer to the interrogation; and that same answer would 
be to the effect that “ the earth is a globe whicli revolves 
round the sun.” The ninety-nine who makes this reply 
would do it because they “
k n o w it is the case.” (!!!) 
“ H o w do they know it ?” Let this cxuestion be put to 
them, and they will bestow upon you a withering smile of 
pity at what they conceive to be an imbecihty of mind on 
your part, and answer you in something like the following 
style : 
“ It always has been so.

We learnt it at school.

Clever men say so ; and look how astronomers can foretell 
eclipses •" and then lose their temper at “ the very idea ” 
of the globular theory being incorrect, and a haughty 
“ there can’t be a doubt about it,” will close aU they have 
to say on the subject.

Now, if the ears of these ninety- 
and-nine could only be gained, they would be she\vn in an 
irresistible manner that the piiilosophy wliich would speak 
of a round and revolving world was a false piiilosophy.

For 
the planar system is fast gaining ground.

Men begin to 
turn again to the old theory which was taught before the 
time of Copernicus, when astronomers’ calculations were as 
correct as at the present day; thus proving clearly that 
astronomy does not depend upon any theory of the shape 
f the earth.

With false suppositions to start with, what fanciful ideas 
suggest themselves to the mind !

Alas !

for the plurality 
of worlds!

Alas !--- PAGE BREAK ---

for the plurality 
of worlds! Alas ! for many other “ learned ” ideas in re­
lation to the works of God which doubtless were “ foolish­
ness with Hion.” The Zetetic school would fain check the 
infidel tendencies of science if improperly applied to the

--- PAGE BREAK ---THE ZETETIC.

Tvorks of the Almighty.

It is doing this, and from the 
man}' publications anyone may gather the true philosophy 
respecting the form of the Earth.

The latter is shoivn to 
be a plane, and that it “ shall never be m o r e d t h a t it is 
“ stretched out upon the w a t e r s t h a t it is 
standing in 
and out of the w a t e r s t h a t the centre of tliis vast plane 
is the magnetic or North Pole, towards which the magnetic 
needle alwaj'S points in a straight line; and that it is sur­
rounded by a barrier of ice wluch no navigator has hither­
to been able to approach.

But the system will be fully explained in your paper, and 
I trust that many will flock to the standard of the pianists.

Tor my own part, it lias ever been my desire, during the 
past eighteen months, in all my writings on the subject, not 
only to bring the public to think on the matter, but to in­
duce the philosophical societies to crush (if it be possible) 
this flagrant scandal on their most treasured science.

Yours, &c.,
E dward H.

E iches, LL.D., E.E.A.S.

EXPEEIMENT versus THEOEY.

D eak Sik,—It is needless for me to assure you of theintense 
interest and satisfaction with which I regard your deter­
mination more openly to take up the work I was compelled 
to abandon two years ago.

It is nothing else than a 
religious duty for every truly Christian man to uphold you 
in the strife in which you are engaged.

I do not think you 
will meet with the disgraceful oppositionwhieh attended my 
efforts when first I attempted to establish a monthly peri­
odical in refutation of the Newtonian theory.

But, of 
course, you are prepared to receive your full share of ridi­
cule and abuse for daring to maintain the teachings of 
Scripture against man’s poor puny reason.

Yet it is a 
glorious work, and one on whieli we can ask God’s especial 
favour, which our opponents dare not do !But, of 
course, you are prepared to receive your full share of ridi­
cule and abuse for daring to maintain the teachings of 
Scripture against man’s poor puny reason.

Yet it is a 
glorious work, and one on whieli we can ask God’s especial 
favour, which our opponents dare not do !

I will not now 
intrude oh your space further than by saying to those who 
would gladly see you retire at the end of the first three 
months, that they may most effectually accomplish their 
purpose, and cover us all with the most insupportable con­
fusion, by succeeding in demonstrating to us, or any honest 
men they choose to select, a portion of water having the 
prescribed curvatiire of eight inches per mile multiplied by 
the square of the distance.

The entire Newtonian theory 
depends upon this.

A five-pound note will pay for it, and 
six hours suffice to place this question beyond dispute.

This 
is the one single experiment ou which hangs the whole of 
their boasted theory.

Let them imderstand clearly what 
they have to do—To choose any ten, twenty, or fifty miles 
of water, and from the centre to show a continuous incline 
and decline such as can be shown on every globular body.

When they can do this to the satisfaction of any honest 
man, I, for one, will certainly promise never to put a baton 
my head, or shoes on my feet, again, as long as I live.— 
Yours, &c.,
J ohn Hasipden.

ASTEONOMY OE THE BIBLE?

Sib,—If error is opposed to truth, if darkness is opposed 
to light, then I ivill show that, in spirit and in letter, mod­
em astronomy and the Bible are opposed to each other.

The mfidel knows this as a fact, and plumes Mmself upon
it.

But it is logically maintained that the truths of science, 
if pursued upon purely zetetic principles, and the truths of 
the Bible do not controvert each other, but, side by side, 
like telegraph wires, they run in parallel lines.The mfidel knows this as a fact, and plumes Mmself upon
it.

But it is logically maintained that the truths of science, 
if pursued upon purely zetetic principles, and the truths of 
the Bible do not controvert each other, but, side by side, 
like telegraph wires, they run in parallel lines.

But it is 
asked by some, “ What has astronomy to do with the 
Bible ?” This extraordinary question is answered thus: 
Inasmuch as astronomy treats of God’s creation, by so much 
the Bible claims the right to criticise astronomical teach­
ing.

The Book of Genesis states that the earth was 
created in the “ deep.” 
Psalm xxiv says, that it was 
“founded upon the seas and established upon the floods.” 
Psalm civ.

declares that it “ should not be removed for 
ever.” And the second epistle of Peter, c.

iii., v.

5.

speaks 
of it as “ standing out of the water and in the water.” On 
the contrary, Newtonian astronomy conceives the earth a 
globe, and hurls it out into infinite space, there to .tf5,vel 
round the sun at a rate of over a thousand miles a minute I 
Now, since these two classes of ideas are contradictory of 
each other, it is evident they cannot both be true.

And 
Satan uses these conflicting statements to damage simple 
souls ; to agitate their minds ; to diminish their comfort, 
and to shake if not destroy, their accustomed confidence in 
the Word of God.

And here I cannot help deeply regret­
ting and expressing surprise that really pious and intelli­
gent Christians should be so mistaken as to countenance .

a theory—a declared ignorance of which is made the sub­
ject of attack upon the personal divinity of their Lord him­
self.

To show that this is so, I give a quotation, from a 
lecture delivered in the Masonic Hall, Birmingham (and 
reported in the Daily Gazette, May 2nd, 1871).--- PAGE BREAK ---

a theory—a declared ignorance of which is made the sub­
ject of attack upon the personal divinity of their Lord him­
self. To show that this is so, I give a quotation, from a 
lecture delivered in the Masonic Hall, Birmingham (and 
reported in the Daily Gazette, May 2nd, 1871). Tha 
lecturer says:—“ A being so necessarily unacquainted m th 
the laws of Nature as Christ was, could not have been the 
Lord of Nature; and one that did not even know that the 
earth was a globe could scarcely have been its Omnipotent 
Creator.” 
Such sentiments as these, to say the least of 
them, shock the sensibilities of that divine nature which 
every tnie Christian possesses, Psalm exxxvi., v. 6, de­
clares that, “ the Lord stretched out the earth above the 
waters.” And this language is inconsistent with the notion 
of the earth being a revolving globe, but it is quite con­
sistent with the idea of it being a motionless i:lane. Which 
then, gentle reader, will you decide for—Astronomy or the 
Bible ?—Yours, &c. June 10th, 1872. E. P. A VOICE FEOM THE P A S T ! Sir,—Understanding from one of our principal spiritual 
intelligences or “ mediums,” commissioned to report mun­
dane proceedings to departed spirits, that it is your inten­
tion to promulgate the theory of a motionless and planar 
earth,—of which earth, be it observed, I am no longer a 
denizen—in a new monthly periodical, under the above title, 
I should like to know upon what tack you intend steering to 
arrive safely at the port for which you have taken your 
departure. Since going to Davy Jones’s Locker there appears to 
have been such a precious rumpus kicking up on earth, that 
it brings to my ghostly recoUeetion the racket on deck of a 
squally night, caused by all hands being piped up to shorten

--- PAGE BREAK ---THE ZETETIC.

sail, or close-reef topsails, so that I cannot rest quietly in 
the hammock in which my mortal remains were committed 
to the deep.

You must know, by way of premise, that I serycd his 
Majesty, King William the Fourth, of glorious and pious 
memory, for a period of more than 35 years, m all parts of 
the world, in the capacity of Navigation Master of the 
Koyal Navy, on board the Seramis, Racehorse, Echo, Express, 
Curacoa, and Sea-Gull, and other craft, a post for which I 
could not have been qualified unless thorouglily versed in 
the science of nautical astronomy, as well as in practical 
navigation and seamanship; and therefore, during' my long 
period of service, it was inevitable that I should acquire a 
vast amount of experience in every branch connected with 
my profession, as also a knowledge of the causes of various 
terrcstial and celestial phenomena—such as tides, moon’s 
changes, evolutions of heavenly bodies, &c., &c., Ac.

At 
first I never for a moment entertained a doubt of the motion 
of the earth, for the simple reason of its being taken for 
granted without any critical examinafion ; but as I became 
acquainted with many things that an orbital revolution 
round the sun could not possibly account for, I became so 
sceptical as to the truth of the Copernican theory, that at 
last I arrived at the conclusion, from which there was no 
escape, that the said orbital revolution was a complete 
myth, which I shall illustrate in a future paper, and that 
the earth, whether a sphere or a plane, was the largest body 
in creation ; that the sun, moon, and stars were all subser­
vient to its existence, created exclusively for the service of 
the earth by the great Arcliitect of the Umverse; that the 
sun, instead of being 95 miUions of miles distant, was not 
many thousand miles from u s; and that, in short, the New­
tonian theory was utterly false and untenable, as I shall en­
deavour to prove in the sequel.You must know, by way of premise, that I serycd his 
Majesty, King William the Fourth, of glorious and pious 
memory, for a period of more than 35 years, m all parts of 
the world, in the capacity of Navigation Master of the 
Koyal Navy, on board the Seramis, Racehorse, Echo, Express, 
Curacoa, and Sea-Gull, and other craft, a post for which I 
could not have been qualified unless thorouglily versed in 
the science of nautical astronomy, as well as in practical 
navigation and seamanship; and therefore, during' my long 
period of service, it was inevitable that I should acquire a 
vast amount of experience in every branch connected with 
my profession, as also a knowledge of the causes of various 
terrcstial and celestial phenomena—such as tides, moon’s 
changes, evolutions of heavenly bodies, &c., &c., Ac.

At 
first I never for a moment entertained a doubt of the motion 
of the earth, for the simple reason of its being taken for 
granted without any critical examinafion ; but as I became 
acquainted with many things that an orbital revolution 
round the sun could not possibly account for, I became so 
sceptical as to the truth of the Copernican theory, that at 
last I arrived at the conclusion, from which there was no 
escape, that the said orbital revolution was a complete 
myth, which I shall illustrate in a future paper, and that 
the earth, whether a sphere or a plane, was the largest body 
in creation ; that the sun, moon, and stars were all subser­
vient to its existence, created exclusively for the service of 
the earth by the great Arcliitect of the Umverse; that the 
sun, instead of being 95 miUions of miles distant, was not 
many thousand miles from u s; and that, in short, the New­
tonian theory was utterly false and untenable, as I shall en­
deavour to prove in the sequel.

It would be quite useless for me to endeavour to give you 
any idea of m y present impressions of modern scientific sub­
jects, since it is not permitted to disembodied spirits to un­
fold any mysteries to mortals, the knowledge of which, as 
spirits, they may hare become possessed since their depar­
ture from earth.At 
first I never for a moment entertained a doubt of the motion 
of the earth, for the simple reason of its being taken for 
granted without any critical examinafion ; but as I became 
acquainted with many things that an orbital revolution 
round the sun could not possibly account for, I became so 
sceptical as to the truth of the Copernican theory, that at 
last I arrived at the conclusion, from which there was no 
escape, that the said orbital revolution was a complete 
myth, which I shall illustrate in a future paper, and that 
the earth, whether a sphere or a plane, was the largest body 
in creation ; that the sun, moon, and stars were all subser­
vient to its existence, created exclusively for the service of 
the earth by the great Arcliitect of the Umverse; that the 
sun, instead of being 95 miUions of miles distant, was not 
many thousand miles from u s; and that, in short, the New­
tonian theory was utterly false and untenable, as I shall en­
deavour to prove in the sequel.

It would be quite useless for me to endeavour to give you 
any idea of m y present impressions of modern scientific sub­
jects, since it is not permitted to disembodied spirits to un­
fold any mysteries to mortals, the knowledge of which, as 
spirits, they may hare become possessed since their depar­
ture from earth.

But it is not prohibited to state the im­
pressions wluch were produced when in the body; and I 
therefore purpose, occasionally, to give you a few of my 
nautical experiences, as they occurred in my earthly career 
as a Master of the Koyal Navy of Great Britain.

But as 
the “ watch ” is now being summoned for duties wliich can 
neither be divulged to mortals, nor postponed, I am com­
pelled to close this prehminary yarn, and to sign myself 
T h e G h o s t o f T o m H e d s e c o o k ,
Hades.

Late Master R.N.

HISTORY OF COSMOGRAPHY.Late Master R.N.

HISTORY OF COSMOGRAPHY.

The subject of Cosmography, for obvious reasons, 
is one that has naturally attracted the attention of 
man from the earliest ages, and it may possibly in­
terest some of onr readers to trace out a fe-w of the 
speculations which have arisen as to the shape and 
mobility of Earth.

The ancients, it may be asserted with no degree 
of inaccuracy, universally adopted the planar system.

In the Scriptural writings, whenever and wherever 
allusion is made to the earth, it is always spoken of 
as a perfectly motionless plane, and this remark ap­
plies equally to the New, as well as the Old, Testa­
ment.

The Mosaic cosmogprahy is correct only on 
such a supposition ; and the numerous instances of 
mira.culous interference with the laws of nature 
are entirely dependent upon the planar system.

Josephus ascribes to Seth and his posterity a 
considerable degree of cosmographical and astro­
nomical knowledge.

And it is evident that the 
great length of life before the flood was eminently 
conducive to the progress of cosmography; for 
which purpose, says the Jewish historian, that 
longevity was bestowed upon them.

The inspired 
David, Solomon—the wisest of men, the'Apostles, 
and the majority of the Christian Fathers such as 
Lactantius, St.

Augustine, &c., together with such 
men as Homer and Herodotus, adopted the idea 
of a planar earth.

Pythagoras, a Greek philos­
opher was the first to start, some 500 years before 
the bu’th of Christ, in a crude form, the globulir 
theory.

Aristarchus of Samos, Plato, Archimedes, 
and Philolaus are said to have adopted and im­
proved upon i t ; but othei^'notions were started in 
opposition and it soon became disregarded.

The 
idea of a cylinder was suggested, and espoused by 
Anaximander, Leucippus, and others.

Ptolemy 
originated the idea of a fixed globular body.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The 
idea of a cylinder was suggested, and espoused by 
Anaximander, Leucippus, and others. Ptolemy 
originated the idea of a fixed globular body. He 
made the heavenly bodies revolve round the earth, 
and his system was adhered to until the time of 
Copernicus, who boldly asserted that the earth is 
one of the planets which revolve round the sun. He was followed by T^cho Brahe, a Danish noble­
man, who to a certain extent revived the Ptolomaic 
system, but conceived the sun, which itself moved 
round the earth, as the centre of the planetaiy 
system. Galileo, Kepler, Laplace, Newton, and 
others, improved the Copernican theory. A t the 
commencement of the eighteenth century, the Cas­
sini attempted to prove that the earth was ob­
long. Bernouilli and De Mairan adopted similar 
views. These supported their opinions by geo­
metrical demonstrations, and several measurements 
of degrees made both at the time and since, have 
favoured them. Tlie Tychonean system has again 
been set up, but has received but little attention. The Copernican theoiy is fast tottering to the 
ground, and the old planar system, which, during 
the six thousand years of the world’s history 
has never been discarded, is again being con­
sidered, and bids fair to become the accepted 
theory.

--- PAGE BREAK ---8
■ THE ZETETIC.

NEW TONIAN A STE0N 05IY .

M OD E O F CO M l’U TA TIO N .

(From Modern Science and the .BiWe, published by E.

Banks.)
By a true knowledge of tlie sun’s distance from 
the earth, we might acquii-e the supposed dimen­
sions of the solar system.

But who can remain 
satisfied with the mode by which this angle of par­
allax is obtained.

The ease with which such 
measurements are received by different astronomers 
shows the credulity of the human mind upon those 
things which are agreeable to preconceived hypo­
thesis.

I have given this subject much considera­
tion, arid among the most eminent authorities can 
find .nothing like satisfaction.

If you will give 
yourself the trouble to make a fair examination of 
the case, I think your doubts will increase in exact 
proportion to the extent or, depth of your inquiiies.

The mode of obtaining the angle of parallax must 
be liable to continual variations from known and 
unknown causes; and this is agreeable to fact and 
experiment.

The process wiU not bear a strict ex­
amination.

I t is exposed to every puff of wind, 
and to every change in thfeTattnosphere, and some­
times made dependant upon the distance of the eye 
from the glass of the telescope.

You will please 
to observe that the measurement of this angle re­
quires great delicacy, and very few persons can or 
wUl undertake it.

A ^ngle second makes a differ- 
,ence of about twelve million miles.

You wUl ob­
serve likewise the twofold motion of the earth, and 
according'to Dr.

Chalmers, it is moving at the in­
conceivable velocity of a million and a half mUes 
a day.

You recollect also , that the body upon 
which the angle of parallax terminates is exposed 
to a similar m^otion.

.

Add to these difficulties the 
changes in the atmosphere, of light and heat, and 
refraction and aberration, and then endeavour to 
persuade yourself, if possible, that such an angle 
can be taken with anything like tolerable accuracy..

Add to these difficulties the 
changes in the atmosphere, of light and heat, and 
refraction and aberration, and then endeavour to 
persuade yourself, if possible, that such an angle 
can be taken with anything like tolerable accuracy.

If we, however, appeal to fact and experiment, the 
cause is at once decided.

Instead of being demon- : 
strated as certain and infallible, it is ever changing, 
according to the caprice or skill of different astro­
nomers, 
Such as been the state of the su i^ :P^% -
lax—from 9 seconds to 32, or from 26 millions of 
miles to 95.

From such opposite extremes the 
general result is found.

We have no means by 
which we can rectify these mistakes ; and they all 
tend to confute the random assertions that these 
great calculations are denaonstrable by the powers 
of a most rigid and infallible geometiy.

(To be contimued in our next.')
THE ACCEEDITED EATE OF CTJRVATUEE.

“ If a line which crosses the plumb-line at right angles be 
continued for any considerable length it will rise above the 
earth’s surface (the earth being globular), and this risine; 
will be as the square of the distance to which the said right 
line is produced ; that is to say, it is raised 8 inches, very 
nearly, abore the earth’s surface at 1 mile distance ; four 
times as much, or 32 inches, at the distance of 2 miles; nine 
times as much, or 72 inches, at the distance of 3 miles, &c., 
&c.” , 
.

.

“ The preceding remarks suppose the visual ray to be a 
straight line, whereas on account of the unequal densities 
of the air at different distances from the earth, the rays of 
light are incurvated by refraction.

The effect of this is to 
lessen the difference between the true and apparent levels, 
but in such an extremely variable and uncertain manner 
that if any constant or fixed allowance is made for it in 
formula or tables, it will often lead to a greater error than 
what it was intended to obviate.--- PAGE BREAK ---

“ The preceding remarks suppose the visual ray to be a 
straight line, whereas on account of the unequal densities 
of the air at different distances from the earth, the rays of 
light are incurvated by refraction. The effect of this is to 
lessen the difference between the true and apparent levels, 
but in such an extremely variable and uncertain manner 
that if any constant or fixed allowance is made for it in 
formula or tables, it will often lead to a greater error than 
what it was intended to obviate. For though the refraction 
may at a mean compensate for about a seventh of the cur­
vature of the earth, it sometiines. exceeds a fifth, and at 
otlier times does cot amount to a fifteenth. W e have there­
fore made no allowance for refraction in the foregone for- 
vrm\!e.”—Encyclopcedia Brittanica, article, ’ “ Levelling 
se0 
also 
“ Encycl<mcedia Londinensis” p. '695, vol. 12,'; and 
“ C^ayniers’.-Mathematicdl Tables,’’ p. 36 ; &c., &c. Will be ready on July Ifith, 1872, Second Edition, greatly 
Enlarged and profusely illustrated, price, 7s. 6d. ^ E T E T I C ^ S T R O N O M Y ,
An Experimental Enqui^into the True Figure and Condi­
tion of the Earth, proving it a Plane without orbital or 
axial motion, its comparatively recent formation, and rapidly 
approachiug Destruction by Fire ; with all the logical Con­
sequences. . . ' 
‘ 
■
BY “ PAEALLAX.”
Author of Several Scientific Works, and Founder of the 
Modern Zetetic Philosophy. '
Also preparing for the Press, by the same Author,
T
h e L IF E A N D T E A C H IN G S
OF JESUS CHRIST Z e t e t i o a l l y C o n sid e r e d . Shewing the Foundations of Religion and the Eealities of 
Christianity. Will shortly appear, Tliird Edition, Eevised and Enlaaged, 
• Price Threepence. W
H A T IS T H E S H A P E O F T H E 
E A E T H .,
BY B. CHAS. BEOUGH. Printed and Published by S a m u e l P a l m e r , 335, Strand, 
London, W .C —July 1, 1872. I 1 7 NO 73