breakthru2.html atshell.rmi.net
Page1of3
JFK Breakthrough?
Text by John Kelin; photograph Copyright 1998by Mike Blackwell
A Texas-based assassination research group has identified a man believed to
have left a previously unidentified fingerprint on a box making up the
alleged "sniper's nest”on the sixth floor of the Texas School Book
Depository, from which President Kennedy was allegedly assassinated in
1963.
Researcher Walt Brown, speaking on behalf of the Texas group, said at a
May 29 press conference in Dallas that the fingerprints belong to Malcolm
E."Mac"Wallace, a convicted killer with ties to Lyndon Baines Johnson.
WaltBrownpresentingfingerprintdata
Brownpresenteddata showinga14-pointmatchbetweenWallace's
fingerprint card, obtained from the Texas Department of Public Safety, and
the previously unidentified print, a copy of which was kept in the National
Archives. The match was made by A. Nathan Darby, an expert with
certification by theInternational Association of Identifiers.

--- PAGE BREAK ---tified print, a copy of which was kept in the National
Archives. The match was made by A. Nathan Darby, an expert with
certification by theInternational Association of Identifiers.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

breakthru2.html atshell.rmi.net
Page2of3
10. Little Finger/
According to members of the research group, this new evidence has been in
the hands of the Dallas Police Department since May 12. The DPD passed it
on to theFederal Bureau of Investigation.
Malcolm Wallace,convicted in a1951 murder and suspected in others,was
reportedlykilled in anautomobile accidentin1971.Hehasbeenlinked to
said tobe close to uncoveringfelonious behaviorbyBillySol Estes and
Lyndon Johnson.
The fact of Wallace's fingerprint in the so-called "sniper's nest” does not, of
course, mean he pulled a trigger that day.Brown cited FBI fingerprint expert
Sebastion Latona's testimony to the Warren Commission, in which Latona
stated that fingerprints can onlybe taken from a surface like cardboard
within 24 hours of its origin.
Furthermore, "Wallace's print at the crime scene is hard evidence that
corroborates thecircumstantialevidenceofLoyFactor'seyewitnessaccount
of Wallace's presence,"said Texas researcher Richard Bartholomew.Loy
Factorhasclaimed thathe,Wallace,Lee Oswald,and awoman identified as

--- PAGE BREAK ---

breakthru2.html at shell.rmi.net
Page3 of 3
team.
According to Bartholomew, the same question was raised by the Dallas
police on May 12."The FBI's own textbook on fingerprint science teaches
the basic concept of fingerprint evidence used in criminal investigation," he
said. "Those who have an innocent reason to have handled the objects in
question are eliminated from suspicion if their latent prints are present. Did
Wallace have an innocent reason?No."
Return to Main Page
***