U.S. Department of Justice


Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco,
Firearms and Explosives


Washington, DC 20226
www.atf.gov


SEP 1 9 2005


REFER TO: PJC/05-1498


Ernie Lazar

577 S. Thornhill Road #6
Palm Springs, CA 92246-7884

Dear Mr. Lazar:

This is in response to your Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request for access to
documents maintained by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). During their
review, they recovered documents that were found to have originated with this agency, as
well as FBI documents that contained information that was provided by this agency.

They were forwarded to this office for disclosure determination and direct response to
you.

Your request is granted in part. We are releasing the disclosable portions of the
documents that contain exempt information and withholding portions of the documents
for the reasons cited on the attached Document Cover Sheet.

Insofar as your request has been partially denied, and deletions have been made, you may
submit an administrative appeal by following the instructions outlined on Part III of the
attached form.


Sincerely,


Senior Disclosure Specialist


Enclosure


DOCUMENT COVER SHEET: EXEMPTIONS LIST AND APPEAL RIGHTS


Part I - Document cover sheet


1. Requesters’ name

2. File no.

os- ins

3. Requested documents were referred by
the following agency:

4. Documents are being released:

[ ] at cost [ ] without cost

5. Package ends with
documents no.:

6. Total no. of documents denied:

1


7. Exemptions cited for information withheld on pages released: (See Part 11 of explanations of exemptions)
[ ] (b) (1) [ ] (b) (2) cM (b) (3) 1C [ ] (b) (4) [ ] (b) (5) [ ] (b) (6)

[ ] (b) (7) (A) [ ] (b) (7) (B) (b) (7) (C) [ ] (b) (7) (D) [ ] (b) (7) (E) [ ] (b) (7) ( F)

$. Documents completely withheld:

Document no.-Exemption Document no.-Exemption Document no.-Exemption


9. The records identified above have been determined to be most directly responsive to your request. Other records, described
below are available upon payment of ten (10) cents per page (or at no cost if a fee waiver is granted). These records generally
consist of similar or repetitive information that restates information contained in the package being released. A sample of
index of these records is included in this released. The following records are available upon written request:

No. of pages


(a) Exhibits to Report (See index on page_)

(b) Surveillance Reports (See sample page_)

(c) Interagency Telegrams and Messages (See sample page_)

(d) Property Disposition records (See sample page )

(e) Newspaper or magazine article (See sample page_)

(f) Miscellaneous (See sample page)


Note: To obtain copies of these records, identify which records you want count the pages and multiply by ten (10) cents.
Send a check or money order payable to Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) and mail to Chief,
Disclosure Division, ATF; 650 Mass. Ave., Rm 8400, Washington, DC 20226. Request promptly for best service, as files
are returned to field offices fifteen (15) days after this notice is mailed to you. _


(Parts II and III on reverse side)


¥-


OTTIONAU FORM Na 10

MAT IMS DITKn

OSA FFMK (41'em) MI-114


UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT

Memorandum,


ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED

DATE 07-2S-2005 BY 60309 auc/tam/mlt/Ijm


1008036


SAC, PHOENIX


date; 3/8/73


om :


SAC, LOS ANGELES (157-NEW)


subject: sons of LIBERTY

EM - WHG /

00:. Phoenix


Enclosed for each of the Phoenix and San Diego
Offices is a copy of certain material received from the
■ Department of the Treasury, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and
Firearms, P. 0, Box 1991* Main Office, Los Angeles, Cali¬
fornia. The material consists of 13 pages.■

r ^

■Enclosures concern Sons of Liberty which has been
active in the Phoenix, Arizona, area. The organization re¬
portedly has some affiliation with the Secret Army Organi¬
zation and consequently a set of the materials is enclosed
for San Diego^j

. ; The captioned organization is not identical with

an organization which has been investigated in Los Angeles
under the caption "SONS OF LIBERTY, EM - WHG, 00: Los Angeles
Bufile 157-17217* LA File 157-5253 .


; No further action being taken in Los Angeles relative

to captioned matter. Los Angeles is retaining the original
material received.


Phoenix (Ends. 13
2 - San Diego (Ends.

1 - Los Angeles


)(RM)


ANQ/jah

( 5 )


SEARCHED—HjrfWDtAtu—
SERI AUZEDi-J-Ci-^ LE D -

mar 121973


11

Buy U.S. Savings Bonds Regularly on the Payroll Savings Plan


<D


omoHAi- row* no. u

MAtwomoH

C*A FFMR (4t CF*) Ml-114


UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT

Memorandum


ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED

DATE 07-25-2005 BY 60309 auc/tam/mlt/1jm


1008036


SAC, PHOENIX (157-1342) (P)


date: 2/15/73


FROM :


subject: SONS OF LIBERTY

EM - WHO


On 2/9/73, ATF, advised that a

source who has furnished him reliable information in the
past had stated that there has been no organizational activity
on the part of the SONS OF LIBERTY since last summer, and
ROBERT MATHEWS has since gone to California and Texas. Source
advised that MATHEWS is presently residing in Texas, but his
address is unknown..


RECOMMENDATION: It is reco
granted to interview^
members of captioned <
identity ofBlB HHHI
oraanizationT^^^^Bi s cur


is recommend ed that SAC authori
orqanTzaTxon, concerning MATHE1


•entl:


l, concerning
and the/stati
r residing at!


rity be
H known
HEWS, the
f the_


Ekoenix

Op- 157-1342) (SOL)

XI - 157-1401) (MATHEWS
(1 -
(1 -
(1 -


^ FORM 0-1

date RECEIVE D J2-JLA-7 4
D/ g£ RETURNED 2 - - 7 3


'Lj <Q


iEARCHED-

lERIAUZED


FEBl5'y It

FBI — PHOENI]


Buy U.S. Savings Bonds Regularly on the Payroll Savings Plan


SQHS OF LIBERTY (SOL)


^vised that Sober t Jay Mathews
had been Associated with Thorpe and Bremer, Meeting then at
Arizona State University (ASU), Tempo, Arizona, j

On March 8, 1973,BHHB^vised that Mathews and
Thorpe frequented the desert to practice *CKierrilla Warfare"
in the Spring of 1972, and it was believed, but not sub¬
stantiated, that Thorpe and Brewer vers participants with
the SOL in the desert Interview of July 5, 1972.j


On Ksreh 8, 1973 ,HHH*dvised that the primary
association of the SOL during thw Spring of 1978 w as with

K :est groups in the Phoenix area, led by

Slnoe that time, three members of the tax protear
ive been convicted for filing fraudulatr^M-4 (with¬
holding) forms. One of the convictedvho ia
currently inactive duetolegal probleSsresfflflngfroo his
conviction, furnishedHHHl Informatian^MjMrtantlve to the
fact that the SOL is no longer active. ^^H|alsD I


yH'K


I 5*7- JiW- 3o \


SONS OF LIBERTY (SOL)


stated that the threats against IRS Agents
meant seriously.


£HX


fAcx


\ 51 - 13 ^ 1 >


THE DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms

p, 0. Box 1991, Main Office
Los Angeles, California 90053

February 12, 1973


RIKR TO

W:C:LA:EED/pk


gent in Charge
Federal Bureau of Investigation
11000 Wilshire Blvd.

Los Angeles, California 90O2H-

Attention: Militant Section


Attached for your information and whatever investi¬
gation you deem adviseable is a copy of an investi-
ga-Hon report from our Special Agent Julius Wachtel
of Bhoenix, Arizona Post of Duty regarding the
S oria of Libe rt y._ _

If any other informatioh is needed regarding this
matter, please feel free to contact this office#

ResceutfullY^-v ^


ILL FBI INFORMATION CONTAINED
IEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED

)ATB 07-25-2005 BY 60309 auc/tam/mlt/ljm


1008036


Attachment - as stated


Edpir E. Dillon, Acting
Special Agent in Charge

S£AJ!CHED-

SERIAJJ7EH_i^_FJtn)_

Mm21973


■


SEARCHEDu

sehauzedV


4 '■V C


0*A CCN. KCO. NO. V


I UNITED STATED GOMMINMENT

! Memorandum


to : Special Agent in Charge
Los Angeles, California


ALL FBI INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN 13 UNCLASSIFIED

DATE 07-25-2005 BY 60309 auc/tam/mlt/1jm

1008036 ■ :

date: February 2, 1973


from Special Agent, ATF

Phoenix, Arizona

subject: UI 3907 0173 0028F

The Sons of Liberty — Secret Army Organization


This Memorandum will summarize the information received as result of
the captioned investigation.


Origin of the Investigation


Jl^^jivgs^^tion commenced when a confidential source stated that
^ had boasted of belonging to a right-wing paramilitary
organization which stockpiled T-II weapons. In further conversations,
JOHNSTON stated that he had acquired grenades and other ordnance while
in the Army, and stored these items' at his residence.


Organization and Goals


Confidential sources have disclosed that THE. SONS OF LIBERTY is a
small, irregular organization, which was created in 1971 by
ROBERT J. MATTHEWS. The name THE SONS OF LIBERTY has been previously
used by other individuals in similar, earlier groups, in Arizona.
jo members of an oldergroup wh ich used the same n ame are

It

ancnHf becsBBBPaintec^n rough p olitical
groups at Arizona State university, Tempe, but that and

have since become, largely inactive.


Ths goals of THE SONS OF LIBERTY, according to statements made by
MATTHEWS , are to prepare for a counter-revolution against left-wing
and Communist elements. According to MATTHEWS, these subversibes are
currently gaining control of the Government, especially in the Federal
bureaucracy. In order to prepare themselves, MATTHEWS has urged pros¬
pective members of THE SONS OF LIBERTY to stockpile food, clothing and
medical supplies, to acquire a four-wheel drive vehicle, weapons and
ammunition, and to become familiar with desert survival techniques.

It has been suggested by MATTHEWS that the desert would provide a last
line of defense for THE SONS OF LIBERTY in their fight against
Communists.


UI 3907 0173 0028F


Page 2


The main connection among .the individuals mentioned as possible
members of TlffiSOh^OF^IIERTY has been a tax-protest group, whose
leader is This group, active in the Phoenix area,

has publisnec^^Etrg^volume of anti-income tax brochures and pam¬
phlets. Much of this material also contains attacks against the
Federal bureaucracy, in general, and cautions against infiltration
of the Government by Communists and left-wing radicals.


On June 29> 1972,'mH^^^H was convicted in Federal Court of
filing fraudulent W-J 4 . (withholding) forms with his employer, by clai¬
ming an excessive number of deductions. He.received a nine-month
prison sentence, which is currently under appeal. Other members of

who have been convicted of this offense include


tigation for similar offenses.


and'
among ot


lers, are curren


ROBERT J *
y under inves-


Confidential sources have stated that THE SONS' OF LIBERTY was most'
active in Spring, 1972. At that time, MATTHEWS was attempting to
recruit membership, by contacting students at Arizona State University,
Tempe, through various political clubs, including the YOUNG REPUBLICANS
and the COLLEGE REPUBLICANS. Also mentioned as an organization which
was contacted by MATTHEWS is the YOUNG AMERICANS FOR FREEDOM (YAF.)
According to sources, the YAF was a common meeting-ground for all the
individuals who eventually associated themselves with THE SONS OF
UBERTY. •


Two persons^fh^iojnied with MATTHEWS at that time were GREGORY LYNN
THORPE andfmH THORPE was a student at the University, and
owned a four-wheel drive vehicle. He and MATTHEWS reportedly frequented
the desert and practiced ''guerilla warfare." They bought Army Field
Manuals and a number of T-I fireara^ including rifles and pistols, which
were kept at their residences. aHb;as asked by MATTHEWS to train other
individuals in desert survival anefflarksmanship, but it does not appear
that this actually took place. MATTHEWS advised other prospective mem¬
bers that they should also purchase firearms and ammunition, preferably
from private sources so that no record remains of the transaction. It
is believed that a few other unidentified persons also were actively in¬
volved with MATTHEWS in THE SONS OF LIBERTY, at that time.


On July 6, 1972, a group of men, dressed in fatigue-type uniforms, and
with faces disguised, were interviewed by KOOL-TV, Phoenix. One of
these persons, reportedly the spokesman, was MATTHEWS. The meeting
occured in the desert, assertedly while the men were conducting guerilla


• vt-* vr.vr.-■ •MV T-av —*’-—a —


/


training exercises. They were armed with conventional rifles and
•what appeared to be one It—lU rifle. The spokeman made a general
warning to all '‘enemies of the Constitution," and particularly
chastized the Internal Revenue Service, ATF v;as mentioned by way
of the shooting incident in Maryland. (See Exhibit No. 1, att.)

A number of groups were mentioned in the above interview, as being
allied with THE SONS OF LIBERTY in their struggle against
Communism. These groups were the MINUTEMEN, the SECRET ARMY
ORGANIZATION, ALFrIA-66, the ARIZONA and CALIFORNIA HOME DEFENSE
CORPS, and the.CALIFORNIA RANGERS.

f Confidential sources have stated that MATTHEWS had distributed
brochures from the SECRET ARMY ORGANIZATION while recruiting for
THE SONS OF LIBERTY. No positive connection has been made between
these two organizations, although it was stated that MATTHEWS was
associated with the SECRET ARMY ORGANIZATION and had made at least
one trip to San Diego, Calif., in that regard.


Recent Developments


In the late Summer months, 1972, Internal Revenue ID Agents began
to receive harrassing telephone calls, allegedly from the tax pro¬
testors. Also received was one threatening letter, believed to be
written by MATTHEWS. As result, IRS-ID Agents began to closely
follow MATTHEWS' movements, and their close surveillance caused
MATTHEWS to switch vehicles with GREGORY THORPE, in an attempt to
elude the Agents. This eventually resulted in causing MATTHEWS to
leave Arizona. THORPE assisted MATTHEWS in moving to .California,
Sources have reported that MATTHEWS is now in Texas,

«

Since that time, it appears that THE SONS OF LIBERTY has not been
active. A confidential source reported that this was confirmed by
NEIL JOHNSTON, who also stated that the threats against the IRS-ID
Agents were never meant seriously, JOHNSTON is also inactive, ap¬
parently due to the legal problems as result of his conviction.


A National Firearms Registration check, made in August, 1972^ty>-
closed that the following two firearms were registered toS


(J)


UI 3907 0173 0028F


Page k


Due to information re ceived fr om a co nfidential source, it -was re¬
vealed that'_

At that time , the Mauser was
without the connectinrr lugs or shoulder stock.


Lverside Arms weapon made from a shotgun is allegedljMpossessed by
MATTHEWS, to whom THORPE delivered it for safe-keeping. This firearm
has been observed to be carried in MATTHEWS * jeep, prior to his
departure for California. (See Exhibit No. 2, att.)


On December 20, 1972, GREGORY THORPE died as result of apparently
self-inflicted gunshot wounds. According to the Phoenix Police
report, THORPE, in an apparent fit of rage, shot and killed his wife,
a friend, the friends wife, and then himself. The weapons used in
this incident were a shotgun and a 9MM pistol, neither being of the
type to require registration.

Due to this incident, a number of individuals who had been associated
with THORPE and knew of his activities came forward with. additional
information. They corroborated what had already been learned of
THORPES interests in a right-wing paramilitary movement, and stated
that he had frequently talked of his interests in weapons and desert
survival. THORPE had occasionally, displayed his firearms, none of
which were described to be T-II weapons. MATTHEWS was also known by
another of these sources, who identified some of his weapons to be
"survival" rifles, conventional in nature.


Conclusion


%

Although a considerable amount of intelligence information has been
gained through this investigation, no firm evidence has been gained
that T-II firearms or explosives are being stockpiled by THE SONS OF
LIBERTY or its alleged membership. One registered firearm has been
traced from GREGORY THORPE to its current owner, and appropriate-
notice of this has been made in Memorandum, form (Exhibit No. 2.) It
appears that, currently, THE SONS OF LIBERTY is not a viable organi¬
zation, in the Phoenix, Arizona, area.'

ATF, Phoenix, will continue to monitor the activities of. this group,
and further significant information will be reported, as received.

contains identifying information regarding
ORY LYNN THORPE (deceased,) ROBERT J. MATTHEWS, and


The following page


b3- Wd {,101


Soc. Sec. No.


Brn, 9-2-50. Last residence (with


ROBERT J, MATTHEWS : 1‘5/C, 5-6, 160, Bm/Bm, 1-16-53.
Soc. Sec. No. 527-0l;-287O. Last known residence (with father
John J. Matthews): 21(01 E. Southern Av.j Tempe, Ariz.

5-10, 180, Ern/Brn, 2-2l;-U0. Soc. Sec
Residence j


pecial Agent


’ttCC.ZTd7' '"''"‘IS'.'T- T—'•* "'?> -----•• .


(n) b<vc


TRANSCRIPT OP KCOL M E:15 TV FILM & RECORDING
' DATED JULY 6, 1972

ALL FBI INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED

What is the purpose of ycur being here? DATE ° 8 -° 1-2005 BY 60309 auc/tam/mit/ijm

1008036 '

The purpose is to raise funds and also to appeal to the broad segment of the
' American people, the freed cm loving American people, in the struggle against
Communists around the world.

Well, what do you feel - do you feel there's a danger of Communist takeover
here in the United States? ’


Pretty much so, there’s constant supervision in the American way of life today
and it’s pretty much around up until this minute, yes.

Well, what do you do with the funds you collect, what are they specifically,
aimed for? -

Vie try to find ways and means to have the legitimate and the free people or
the Cuban people and all the people in the world to have their freed cm and
the dignity as a free people back* • ''' :v ” ’'

Now, ycu say you’re a member of Alpha 66?

I am a member of Alpha 66, I’m also a commander of the International Anti-
Communist Long Range Penetration Forces. Our main objective is the destroy¬
ing of the Communists in the United States and in the world today, in parti¬
cular these areas which is considered a trouble spot today. ;


Now, ycu have — the name Alpha 66 has been connected with recent — fairly
recent invasions of the Cuban area and also it has been mentioned in seme sky
jacking incidents. YThat do ycu have to say about that?

It is true that there was a movement connected with Alpha 66 in the coordina¬
ting the plan in come back to the Cuban homeland and liberate us from the —
to give the people back the spirit back of the Revolution of Jose Marie, but
the organization disclaims any connection with the hijackings whatsoever so
far as that regard*

Why has ycur organization been outlawed here in the United States?


Tiiat is reason unknown* We have the seme principle of the other legit im ate
group, The Free Friends for example, and the straggle against the Nazis in
World War U and the Lithuanian Movement in Eastern Europe and many other
Communist occupied countries and we feel that it was a misguided attempt by
the Federal Government and the bureaucracy existing within the administration
to put us in that spot in that regard.


Okay, ycu want to turn it off?


•' EXHIBIT NO. 1


Transcript of KOOL Mews TV Film & Recording
Page Two


Person might be me and it might not.


I would like to introduce you to one of my t nterican friends,
fellow freedom.....


Reverend _

This is
Is that going?

I’ve got to press it, I borrowed this tape recorder*
Okay, ycu've got to start it because,*...

Do ycu have a flashlight ycu can put on that?


hew do you do.


Watch cut.

Is this one running?


Yeah, he put it on.

*■

The Cassette, there's no Cassette in it.

American people. To the Communist radicals on the other end attempting to do
the same thing. Included in this warning ore all enemies of the Constitution,
all enemies of the Constitution, whether they be Nazi, Fascist, Socialist, or

Communist. Gentlemen, included in this warning are all people __ »

As a commanding officer of the Arizona Brigade of the Sons of liberty, I have
•just met with the coraaanding officers of all the other brigades of SOL along
with the cccmanding officers of all of the major and most of the minor patriotic
resistance movements in the United States. Also included in this emergency
stragety meeting ware representatives from foreign resistance movements, repre¬
sentatives of cur good friends and ally Alpha 66 vara also there. The ccramand-
ing officers at this meeting have decided that no longer can v/e bid more time
to words and petitions. I have been given the impression that the other resis¬
tance movements are taking the same course. I knew that cur brigade has been *
put on emergency sceuidy. Cur squad has been picked because of its excellent
record in the past to have the privilege of relaying this information cut to
the news media. I'm sure that the Secret Array organisation, the Minutemen,
the Arizona Heme Defense Corps, the California Kerne Defense Corps, the Colorado
Heme Defense Corps, the California Rangers and all the other patriotic resis¬
tance movements are taking the same action. Our squad has been asked to meet
with a reporter and give cn behalf of the A rizena Brigade of the Sons of liberty
one grand last warning to the enemies of the Constitution, both foreign and


(p) W-c


'Transcript of KCOL New!
Page Tliree


Film e< Recording


domestic, to put them on notice that they had better cease their attack upon
the Constitution and the individual liberties of the American people, that
they had better repent and cease their attack immediately or in the near
future we’ll be forced to take the same measures that our forefathers took
--approximately 1S5 years ago*. This warning is directed mainly at cur domestic
enemies for first we must cleanse our inward vessel. This warning goes spe¬
cifically to the Federal bureaucracy, the bureau that for years has trampled
upon the individual rights of the American people, the bureaucracy that grows
bolder and bolder day by day in its at tasks upon the Constitution and the
rights of the little people. Specifically in the Federal bureaucracy we are
warning the Internal Revenue Service for they represent, more than any other
bureau, the bold and arrogant attacks that have been taking place on the Con¬
stitution by the Federal bureaucracy. Specifically in Arizona we are warning
the Special Agents of the Internal Revenue Service. To name just a few of the
man^^nan^aoents they have here to spy upon and harrass Arizona citizens,
mammam Ch^- 2 * Of intelligence for Internal Revenue Service, and cne
ne^aaents^aman responsible for h arras sing many small people in this
state, We are warning you men directly <.hat ycu had better cease

your harrassing attacks upon the citizens of Arizona. This is a last grand
warning we are going to take. Cur warning is also issued not only at a state
level, not only at this brigade level, but at a National level to Internal
Revenue Service. Also, especially to the agents, tha 29 agents who attacked
the patriot Maryland Bellow who put a bullet in his head, a sad, unfortunate
incident that the National news media failed to report. Had Bellow been a
Black Panther or a Communist we knew for sure the National news media would
have had -story after story of hew Internal Revenue Service raided his house
at night and with an 85 pound battaring ram busted down his door. Bellow, upon
hearing the commotion, jumped cut of the bathtub with no clothes on. He pro¬
ceeded to his alley coor and there the agents entered and upon entrance to this
man’s house they put a bullet in his head. We are warning Internal Revenue
Service they had better repent for this act and all ether acts and had better
quit their jobs and find decent work instead of being tsamites boring into the
heart q£ American freedom. We are also warning the Black Panthers, the Brcwn
Berets, the Communist Party, the SDS, and all the scum of the earth for the
American- people axe caught in a vise with the Federal bureaucracy in one end
intent in turning this country into a socialistic dictatorship and the Commun¬
ist radicals on the other end.

Tape recorder’s on, go ahead.

Sir, ycu indicated tonight that the purpose of this meeting with the news media
was to issue a 'warning, not only to the American people, but to Arizonans.

Would you give this warning ycu had now?

This warning is not yet a declaration of war of any sort, it’s a warning to
Arizonans, it’s a warning to people of this country, it’s a warning*to the
world that if we do not act soon and I mean real soon, this whole v;orld could
be caught in one of the most brutal socialistic dictatorships the world has
ever seen.


Tcenscra.pt of
Pcge Four


KOOL New.


Film & Recording


Okay, nw, you — in giving this warning yen specified some things that ycur
organisation was concerned ah cut and ycu issued some more warnings, you talked
about Federal bureaucracy among them, what does that concern^

Yes, the Federal bureaus have been unwittingly and ofttimes the instruments of
this conspiracy. This conspiracy is many branches and many facets. To name a
few of the elements of it one would have to include the CFR, would have to in¬
clude the Black Panthers and other 1 such groups. Now, there exists in this
society a vise. On the top you have the International Bankers, the CFR end
others and then at the bottom ycu have the Black Panthers and the 3rcwn Berets
and others and they are closing this vise in on the American people. Secret
communication goes down from these conspirators to the radical groups that
cause trouble and give the conspiracy, the bureaucracy vrlthin the conspiracy,
the excuse to pass repressive lev/s that flop the Constitution and we — cur
purpose is .to preserve this Constitution. We are.not advocating the violent
over threw of' cur Constitutional form of Government, .v/e are advocating the
preservation of it. 1

Yeah, but how can ycu — what steps are you prepared to take, what are ycu
going to do if things don't materialize the way you want than to? Then what
steps is your organisation going to take?

Well, V/instcn Churchhill said that v/e had better keep our eyes open and better
keep vigilant because there comes- .a time in history when ycu can. preserve ycur
freedon by words and there comes a time in history that if veu don't act seen
enough that veu have to fight to preserve ycur liberty and there cernes a time
in history if ycu wait too long, it' s better to die than to live under this
socialistic dictatorship.

In other v/ords you're saying that it could come to in this country, it could

cxe*o**.

• • ' • • v * '■ . ■

Yes, it could came to that. . .. 1

It could cone to the point of armed conflict and ycu mentioned too earlier
that ycur organisation nationally had met in secret, and formulated some plans.
Is there anything you'd like to say? •

Our organisation has many branches, many groups acting in concert, they don't
have a central leadership, it's just that they all have the came idea and they
' act upon it.

Okay, think that will about do it?

And the Communist radicals on the other end attempting to do the same thing.
Included in this warning are all enemies of the Constitution, all enemies of
the Constitution, whether they be Nasi, FascistSocialist or Communist.
Gentlemen, included in this warning are all people regardless of their nation¬
ality or their, occupat ion..who, are. trying,, to. destroy the. Ccnstiiv.ticn, nnd.tha..


Document #17 (Consisting of 2 pages)
Completely withheld under Title 5 U.S.C. 552(b)(3)
Records specifically exempted from statute -

Title 26 USC 6103 (Tax Information)
