The Kissinger Tapes

Published: Mar 19, 2026 | Briefing Book # 919 | Edited by Peter Kornbluh

New Book by Tom Wells Features Kissinger ‘Telcons’ Obtained by Archive
Secretly Recorded Phone Conversations Shed Light on Kissinger’s Foreign Policies, Strategies, Personality and Efforts to Deceive Colleagues and Journalists
Transcripts Detail Nixon White House Abuses, Wiretapping and Watergate

[On the eve of Indonesia’s full-scale invasion of East Timor, Kissinger accompanied President Ford to Jakarta to meet with General Suharto. The meeting focuses on wider U.S.-Indonesian security cooperation. In the middle of a discussion of guerrilla movements in Thailand and Malaysia, Suharto raises the issue of East Timor and his plans to take “rapid or drastic action” against the newly independent former colony of Portugal. This memorandum of conversation records both Ford and Kissinger supporting the invasion. “We will understand and will not press you on the issue. We understand the problem and the intentions you have,” Ford responds. [See pages 8,9, and 10 of the memcon.] Kissinger stresses that “the use of US-made arms could create problems,” but then adds, “It depends on how we construe it; whether it is in self-defense or is a foreign operation.” In any case, Kissinger states: “It is important that whatever you do succeeds quickly.” Suharto deploys his troops into East Timor the next day, with an understanding of approval from the Ford White House.]

Tom Wells

Archive Senior Analyst William Burr led the project to obtain the Kissinger telcons

The Kissinger Transcripts: The Top-Secret Talks with Beijing and Moscow Feb 1, 1999

Washington, D.C., March 19, 2026 - On August 10, 1973, National Security Advisor Henry Kissinger placed a call to Secretary of Defense Melvin Laird to complain about U.S. officials who were participating in congressional hearings to investigate the secret bombing of Cambodia. As the Nixon administration’s cover up was unraveling, Kissinger was angry that “these @*%&* over there are acting as if it happened on the moon”; he demanded that Secretary Laird defend the original Nixon/Kissinger decision to launch clandestine attacks on Cambodia. “I mean, we saved American life,” Kissinger argued in a phone conversation he was secretly tape recording. “There were North Vietnamese troops there. The government of the country we were bombing were asking us to do it. What the hell—one sometimes thinks we are in a madhouse.”

The candid and revealing Kissinger-Laird conversation is one of hundreds included in The Kissinger Tapes: Inside His Secretly Recorded Phone Conversations, an edited selection of Kissinger telephone conversation transcripts—known as “telcons”—by historian Tom Wells. Washington, D.C., March 19, 2026 - On August 10, 1973, National Security Advisor Henry Kissinger placed a call to Secretary of Defense Melvin Laird to complain about U.S. officials who were participating in congressional hearings to investigate the secret bombing of Cambodia. As the Nixon administration’s cover up was unraveling, Kissinger was angry that “these @*%&* over there are acting as if it happened on the moon”; he demanded that Secretary Laird defend the original Nixon/Kissinger decision to launch clandestine attacks on Cambodia. “I mean, we saved American life,” Kissinger argued in a phone conversation he was secretly tape recording. “There were North Vietnamese troops there. The government of the country we were bombing were asking us to do it. What the hell—one sometimes thinks we are in a madhouse.” The candid and revealing Kissinger-Laird conversation is one of hundreds included in The Kissinger Tapes: Inside His Secretly Recorded Phone Conversations, an edited selection of Kissinger telephone conversation transcripts—known as “telcons”—by historian Tom Wells.The government of the country we were bombing were asking us to do it. What the hell—one sometimes thinks we are in a madhouse.” The candid and revealing Kissinger-Laird conversation is one of hundreds included in The Kissinger Tapes: Inside His Secretly Recorded Phone Conversations, an edited selection of Kissinger telephone conversation transcripts—known as “telcons”—by historian Tom Wells. Published this month by Oxford University Press, the 620-page book provides an essential history—as told in Kissinger’s own words—of his tenure as national security advisor and secretary of state during the Nixon years—1969 to mid-1974. An early review of the book in Foreign Affairs said it offers “unparalleled insight into the premier diplomat of the twentieth century,” bolstering Kissinger’s “reputation for brilliance, wit, and strategic thinking” while also revealing “his proclivity to backstab and battle nonstop with senior colleagues; his manipulation of and lying to journalists; his mistrustful relationship with Nixon, an equally facile liar; [and] his self-described preference for ‘brutal’ behavior.” In Wells’ telcon selection, Kissinger literally speaks to those issues, providing hundreds of pages of revealing evidence into his policies, strategies, personality and the rampant abuses of power that defined his stewardship of U.S. foreign policy during the Nixon years. Among the key themes that emerge from the telcons: ** Kissinger and Nixon’s complete disregard and indifference to human rights and human suffering: The book includes numerous conversations, particularly between Kissinger and Nixon, on human rights abuses committed with U.S. support. In a March 1971 conversation, for example, Kissinger and Nixon discussed a cable sent by U.S.The government of the country we were bombing were asking us to do it. What the hell—one sometimes thinks we are in a madhouse.” The candid and revealing Kissinger-Laird conversation is one of hundreds included in The Kissinger Tapes: Inside His Secretly Recorded Phone Conversations, an edited selection of Kissinger telephone conversation transcripts—known as “telcons”—by historian Tom Wells. Published this month by Oxford University Press, the 620-page book provides an essential history—as told in Kissinger’s own words—of his tenure as national security advisor and secretary of state during the Nixon years—1969 to mid-1974. An early review of the book in Foreign Affairs said it offers “unparalleled insight into the premier diplomat of the twentieth century,” bolstering Kissinger’s “reputation for brilliance, wit, and strategic thinking” while also revealing “his proclivity to backstab and battle nonstop with senior colleagues; his manipulation of and lying to journalists; his mistrustful relationship with Nixon, an equally facile liar; [and] his self-described preference for ‘brutal’ behavior.” In Wells’ telcon selection, Kissinger literally speaks to those issues, providing hundreds of pages of revealing evidence into his policies, strategies, personality and the rampant abuses of power that defined his stewardship of U.S. foreign policy during the Nixon years. Among the key themes that emerge from the telcons: ** Kissinger and Nixon’s complete disregard and indifference to human rights and human suffering: The book includes numerous conversations, particularly between Kissinger and Nixon, on human rights abuses committed with U.S. support. In a March 1971 conversation, for example, Kissinger and Nixon discussed a cable sent by U.S. support. In a March 1971 conversation, for example, Kissinger and Nixon discussed a cable sent by U.S. consul Archer Blood in East Pakistan detailing the massive slaughter of hundreds of thousands of civilians being committed by the U.S.-backed Pakistani military dictatorship in what is now called Bangladesh. “We’ve had a bleeding [bleating] cable from our consul in Dacca who wants us to put out a statement condemning what the West Pakistanis are doing. But of course, we won’t consider it,” Kissinger tells Nixon. “Oh, for Christ’s sake,” responds the President. “Well, he’s just one of these pansies,” Kissinger states disparaging his own diplomat. “And he says condemning them?” Nixon asks. “Yeah, for genocide,” Kissinger responds. “Well, now, remove him,” Nixon orders. “I want him out of the job.” support. In a March 1971 conversation, for example, Kissinger and Nixon discussed a cable sent by U.S. consul Archer Blood in East Pakistan detailing the massive slaughter of hundreds of thousands of civilians being committed by the U.S.-backed Pakistani military dictatorship in what is now called Bangladesh. “We’ve had a bleeding [bleating] cable from our consul in Dacca who wants us to put out a statement condemning what the West Pakistanis are doing. But of course, we won’t consider it,” Kissinger tells Nixon. “Oh, for Christ’s sake,” responds the President. “Well, he’s just one of these pansies,” Kissinger states disparaging his own diplomat. “And he says condemning them?” Nixon asks. “Yeah, for genocide,” Kissinger responds. “Well, now, remove him,” Nixon orders. “I want him out of the job.”

The candid and revealing Kissinger-Laird conversation is one of hundreds included in The Kissinger Tapes: Inside His Secretly Recorded Phone Conversations, an edited selection of Kissinger telephone conversation transcripts—known as “telcons”—by historian Tom Wells.The government of the country we were bombing were asking us to do it. What the hell—one sometimes thinks we are in a madhouse.”

The candid and revealing Kissinger-Laird conversation is one of hundreds included in The Kissinger Tapes: Inside His Secretly Recorded Phone Conversations, an edited selection of Kissinger telephone conversation transcripts—known as “telcons”—by historian Tom Wells. Published this month by Oxford University Press, the 620-page book provides an essential history—as told in Kissinger’s own words—of his tenure as national security advisor and secretary of state during the Nixon years—1969 to mid-1974.

An early review of the book in Foreign Affairs said it offers “unparalleled insight into the premier diplomat of the twentieth century,” bolstering Kissinger’s “reputation for brilliance, wit, and strategic thinking” while also revealing “his proclivity to backstab and battle nonstop with senior colleagues; his manipulation of and lying to journalists; his mistrustful relationship with Nixon, an equally facile liar; [and] his self-described preference for ‘brutal’ behavior.”

In Wells’ telcon selection, Kissinger literally speaks to those issues, providing hundreds of pages of revealing evidence into his policies, strategies, personality and the rampant abuses of power that defined his stewardship of U.S. foreign policy during the Nixon years.

Among the key themes that emerge from the telcons:

** Kissinger and Nixon’s complete disregard and indifference to human rights and human suffering: The book includes numerous conversations, particularly between Kissinger and Nixon, on human rights abuses committed with U.S. support. In a March 1971 conversation, for example, Kissinger and Nixon discussed a cable sent by U.S.The government of the country we were bombing were asking us to do it. What the hell—one sometimes thinks we are in a madhouse.”

** Kissinger and Nixon’s complete disregard and indifference to human rights and human suffering: The book includes numerous conversations, particularly between Kissinger and Nixon, on human rights abuses committed with U.S. support. In a March 1971 conversation, for example, Kissinger and Nixon discussed a cable sent by U.S. support. In a March 1971 conversation, for example, Kissinger and Nixon discussed a cable sent by U.S. consul Archer Blood in East Pakistan detailing the massive slaughter of hundreds of thousands of civilians being committed by the U.S.-backed Pakistani military dictatorship in what is now called Bangladesh. “We’ve had a bleeding [bleating] cable from our consul in Dacca who wants us to put out a statement condemning what the West Pakistanis are doing. But of course, we won’t consider it,” Kissinger tells Nixon. “Oh, for Christ’s sake,” responds the President. “Well, he’s just one of these pansies,” Kissinger states disparaging his own diplomat. “And he says condemning them?” Nixon asks. “Yeah, for genocide,” Kissinger responds. “Well, now, remove him,” Nixon orders. “I want him out of the job.”

** Kissinger was a pathological liar and veteran manipulator: In his introduction, Wells cites a top Kissinger aide, Helmut Sonnenfeldt, as stating that “Henry does not lie because it is in his interest. He lies because it is in his nature.” The book contains dozens of examples of Kissinger’s efforts to deceive colleagues, friends and especially journalists to influence their coverage. “The man lied the way most people breath,” as Wells quotes Seymour Hersh who, as a New York Times reporter, was on the receiving end of Kissinger’s duplicity. In one July 1973 conversation where Hersh sought information on the falsified official reports designed to hide the secret Cambodia bombing, Kissinger repeatedly denied knowing anything about them. The telcon transcripts reveal that three hours later Kissinger called his deputy, Alexander Haig, to basically brief him on how he had attempted to deceive Hersh.

** Kissinger spent considerable time attempting to influence the press: The Kissinger Tapes record numerous conversations with the leading journalists of Kissinger’s era—CBS reporter Marvin Kalb, Time magazine’s Hugh Sidey, columnist Rowland Evans, and ABC News celebrity Barbara Walters. At one point Kissinger called Walters to seek public relations advice on a “nightmare” book by a French journalist who had become smitten with Kissinger. “I read it and I thought, you didn’t kiss her, you didn’t touch her. You were as nice to her as you are to me or any reporter,” Walters told him. “I am a hell of a lot nicer—I like you,” Kissinger responded. More than any other collection of documents, his recorded conversations with leading journalists reveal how the top tier of the U.S. media related to those in power.

“Henry Kissinger’s phone transcripts touch on every important issue of his day and provide a panoramic view of his tenure in power,” notes Wells, who sifted through thousands of pages of transcripts to compile the book. “They shed new light on the many controversies of Kissinger’s era while throwing his personality and character into sharp relief,” Wells added. “Kissinger never intended for his phone transcripts to be public, and it was only due to the prolonged legal efforts of the National Security Archive that he was forced to relinquish them.”

Kissinger falsely designated the government-created telcons as his “private papers” and took them when he left office in late 1976; he subsequently used them extensively to write his three-volume memoirs. In January 2001, the National Security Archive presented a legal complaint to both the State Department and the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) demanding that they recover the 20,000 pages of Kissinger telephone conversation transcripts. Facing a potentially successful lawsuit, lawyers from the State Department approached Kissinger and negotiated the return of those papers in mid 2001 and early 2002.

Led by Kissinger project director Bill Burr, the Archive then filed a comprehensive set of FOIA petitions for the declassification of the records. Our FOIA requests resulted in the declassification of over 15,000 pages of transcripts in August 2004, generating headlines around the world when the Archive began posting them on our website. Dr. Burr subsequently edited a major digitalized, indexed, collection of the telcons, The Kissinger Transcripts: A Verbatim Record of U.S. Diplomacy, 1969-1977 , that was published as part of the award-winning Digital National Security Archive series.

“One of Bill’s many great legacies is the recovery of the Kissinger files,” Archive director Tom Blanton emphasized in a memorial to Dr. Burr who died on December 11, 2025. “Thousands of Kissinger memcons and over 15,000 of his telcons are now on the public record, all because of Bill Burr. A permanent scholarly tribute. A permanent accountability tribute.”

Burr’s colleague Peter Kornbluh said The Kissinger Tapes book is proof that the telcons are an invaluable gift to history that keeps on giving. The book “provides an incomparable compilation of Henry Kissinger in his own words,” Kornbluh said, “and a verdict of history on his controversial foreign policies.”

Tom Wells Collection

In this conversation, Kissinger advises President Nixon that he has received a cable from the consul in Dacca, Archer Blood, reporting on the slaughter of hundreds of thousands of civilians in East Pakistan (now Bangladesh), by the U.S.-backed Pakastani military regime. In a now famous dissent channel report known as “the Blood telegram,” the consul recommended that the Nixon administration condemn the repression which he suggested could be “genocide.” Referring to Blood’s message, Kissinger says, “We’ve had a bleeding [bleating] cable from our consul in Dacca who wants us to put out a statement condemning what the West Pakistanis are doing. But of course, we won’t consider it.” “Oh, for Christ’s sake,” responds the President. “Well, he’s just one of those pansies,” Kissinger states disparaging his own diplomat. Nixon then orders Kissinger to fire Blood.

National Security Archive Suite 700, Gelman Library The George Washington University 2130 H Street, NW Washington, D.C., 20037

Archive Hails Turnover of Kissinger Papers


support our work - donate

The National Security Archive is committed to digital accessibility. If you experience a barrier that affects your ability to access content on this page, let us know via our Contact form

Contents of this website (c) The National Security Archive, 1985-2025 For educational or noncommercial use, contact the Archive using the form above for permission

III. KISSINGER AND HUMAN RIGHTS Secretary Kissinger’s abject embrace of the Pinochet regime, and disregard for its repression, contributed to a broad public and political movement to institutionalize human rights as a priority in U.S. foreign policy. As Congress began passing laws restricting U.S. assistance to regimes that violated human rights, Kissinger’s distain for the human rights issue escalated. His willingness to endorse, support and accept mass bloodshed, torture and disappearance by allied, anti-Communist military regimes, is reflected in various declassified documents.

Secretary Kissinger’s abject embrace of the Pinochet regime, and disregard for its repression, contributed to a broad public and political movement to institutionalize human rights as a priority in U.S. foreign policy. As Congress began passing laws restricting U.S. assistance to regimes that violated human rights, Kissinger’s distain for the human rights issue escalated. His willingness to endorse, support and accept mass bloodshed, torture and disappearance by allied, anti-Communist military regimes, is reflected in various declassified documents.

As a follow up to a meeting they held in Santiago in June, Secretary of State Henry Kissinger and Argentine Foreign Minister César Guzzetti meet again at the Waldorf Astoria Hotel in New York City and discuss the Argentine military regime’s repressive campaign to eradicate the left. Kissinger offers U.S. support: “Look, our basic attitude is that we would like you to succeed. I have an old-fashioned view that friends ought to be supported. What is not understood in the United States is that you have a civil war. We read about human rights problems but not the context. The quicker you succeed the better.”

U.S. Ambassador Robert Hill sends this protest to Secretary of State Henry Kissinger that he has emboldened the Argentine military by not giving Foreign Minister Guzzetti a strong disapproval from Washington for their human rights violations. ”Guzzetti's remarks both to me and to the Argentine press since his return are not those of a man who has been impressed with the gravity of the human rights problem as seen from the U.S.” Ambassador Hill reports. “Both personally and in press accounts of his trip Guzzetti’s reaction indicates little reason for concern over the human rights issue. Guzzetti went to US fully expecting to hear some strong, firm, direct warning of his govt’s human rights practices. Rather than that, he has returned in a state of jubilation. Convinced that there is no real problem with the USG over this issue.” Hill concludes that “While that conviction lasts it will be unrealistic and unbelievable for this embassy to press representations to the GOA over human rights violations.”

IV. KISSINGER AND OPERATION CONDOR Kissinger’s resistance to pressing the Southern Cone military regimes on human rights extended to their international assassination operations known as Operation Condor. In early August 1976, Kissinger was briefed by his deputy on plans, under Condor, “to find and kill terrorists … in their own countries and in Europe.” His aides convinced him to authorize a demarche that would be delivered to General Pinochet in Chile, General Videla in Argentina, and junta officers in Uruguay—the three Condor states most involved in transnational murder operations. But when the U.S. ambassadors to Chile and Uruguay raised objections to delivering the demarche, Kissinger simply rescinded it, ordering that “no further action be taken on this matter.” Five days later, Condor’s boldest and most infamous terrorist attack took place in downtown Washington, D.C., when a car bomb planted by Pinochet’s agents killed former Chilean ambassador Orlando Letelier and his young colleague, Ronni Moffitt.

Kissinger’s resistance to pressing the Southern Cone military regimes on human rights extended to their international assassination operations known as Operation Condor. In early August 1976, Kissinger was briefed by his deputy on plans, under Condor, “to find and kill terrorists … in their own countries and in Europe.” His aides convinced him to authorize a demarche that would be delivered to General Pinochet in Chile, General Videla in Argentina, and junta officers in Uruguay—the three Condor states most involved in transnational murder operations. But when the U.S. ambassadors to Chile and Uruguay raised objections to delivering the demarche, Kissinger simply rescinded it, ordering that “no further action be taken on this matter.”

Five days later, Condor’s boldest and most infamous terrorist attack took place in downtown Washington, D.C., when a car bomb planted by Pinochet’s agents killed former Chilean ambassador Orlando Letelier and his young colleague, Ronni Moffitt.

V. KISSINGER AND THE SOUTH ASIA CRISIS Kissinger’s indifference to human rights extended to what the head of the U.S. Consulate in Dacca, Archer Blood, called “genocide” in East Pakistan, committed by Pakistan’s military dictator, General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan (Yahya). Estimates of mass murder range as high as three million civilians in East Pakistan in the spring of 1971; but Nixon and Kissinger’s policies tacitly supported Yahya, who played a secret role in the administration’s efforts to negotiate an opening with China. Archive analyst Sajit Gandhi created a comprehensive dossier, “ The Tilt and the South Asian Crisis of 1971 ” that contains dozens of documents recording reports of the genocide and the Nixon/Kissinger policies. The famous “Blood Telegram” and an example of Nixon and Kissinger’s positions are below:

Kissinger’s indifference to human rights extended to what the head of the U.S. Consulate in Dacca, Archer Blood, called “genocide” in East Pakistan, committed by Pakistan’s military dictator, General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan (Yahya). Estimates of mass murder range as high as three million civilians in East Pakistan in the spring of 1971; but Nixon and Kissinger’s policies tacitly supported Yahya, who played a secret role in the administration’s efforts to negotiate an opening with China. Archive analyst Sajit Gandhi created a comprehensive dossier, “ The Tilt and the South Asian Crisis of 1971 ” that contains dozens of documents recording reports of the genocide and the Nixon/Kissinger policies. The famous “Blood Telegram” and an example of Nixon and Kissinger’s positions are below:

VI. KISSINGER, SUHARTO AND EAST TIMOR U.S. support for the repressive Indonesian dictatorship of General Suharto and his regime’s murderous invasion of East Timor in December 1975 is another documented example of Kissinger’s polices of indifference to human violations and national sovereignty. The declassified records obtained by the National Security Archive record more than “a tilt” toward Suharto’s aggression; they reveal a clear green light from the highest level of the U.S. Government, given to Suharto only hours before Indonesian troops launched an incursion and occupation that cost an estimated 100,000 to 180,000 Timorese lives. An East Timor Truth Commission report completed years later stated that U.S. “ political and military support were fundamental to the Indonesian invasion and occupation. ”

U.S. support for the repressive Indonesian dictatorship of General Suharto and his regime’s murderous invasion of East Timor in December 1975 is another documented example of Kissinger’s polices of indifference to human violations and national sovereignty. The declassified records obtained by the National Security Archive record more than “a tilt” toward Suharto’s aggression; they reveal a clear green light from the highest level of the U.S. Government, given to Suharto only hours before Indonesian troops launched an incursion and occupation that cost an estimated 100,000 to 180,000 Timorese lives. An East Timor Truth Commission report completed years later stated that U.S. “ political and military support were fundamental to the Indonesian invasion and occupation. ”

VII.

VII. KISSINGER AND CUBA In mid-1974, Secretary of State Kissinger initiated protracted historic and secret diplomatic talks to normalize relations with Cuba — which included furtive meetings between U.S.

In mid-1974, Secretary of State Kissinger initiated protracted historic and secret diplomatic talks to normalize relations with Cuba — which included furtive meetings between U.S.

VII. KISSINGER AND CUBA In mid-1974, Secretary of State Kissinger initiated protracted historic and secret diplomatic talks to normalize relations with Cuba — which included furtive meetings between U.S. and Cuban emissaries at La Guardia airport and an unprecedented three-hour negotiating session at the five-star Pierre Hotel in New York City.KISSINGER AND CUBA In mid-1974, Secretary of State Kissinger initiated protracted historic and secret diplomatic talks to normalize relations with Cuba — which included furtive meetings between U.S. and Cuban emissaries at La Guardia airport and an unprecedented three-hour negotiating session at the five-star Pierre Hotel in New York City. At the time, this secret back-channel diplomacy marked the most significant and promising effort to bring about a Caribbean détente and end what Kissinger called “the perpetual hostility” in U.S.-Cuba relations. But his diplomatic initiative unraveled after Fidel Castro decided to send Cuban troops to support the anti-colonial struggle in Angola in the fall of 1975. In Oval Office meetings with President Ford, Kissinger angrily referred to the Cuban leader as a ”pipsqueak” whose bold deployment of military forces on the African continent threatened U.S. geopolitical strategies in the Third World. Concerned that Castro would eventually broaden his military incursion beyond Angola, Kissinger counseled Ford that they would have to ”crack the Cubans.” ”If they move into Namibia or Rhodesia, I would be in favor of clobbering them,” Kissinger told the president. Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger, with President Gerald R. Ford, was angered by Fidel Castro’s 1975 incursion into Angola (Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library). In the March 24 meeting with an elite national security team known as the Washington Special Actions Group, Kissinger expanded on the domino scenario. ”If the Cubans destroy Rhodesia then Namibia is next and then there is South Africa,” Kissinger argued.

In mid-1974, Secretary of State Kissinger initiated protracted historic and secret diplomatic talks to normalize relations with Cuba — which included furtive meetings between U.S. and Cuban emissaries at La Guardia airport and an unprecedented three-hour negotiating session at the five-star Pierre Hotel in New York City.KISSINGER AND CUBA In mid-1974, Secretary of State Kissinger initiated protracted historic and secret diplomatic talks to normalize relations with Cuba — which included furtive meetings between U.S. and Cuban emissaries at La Guardia airport and an unprecedented three-hour negotiating session at the five-star Pierre Hotel in New York City. At the time, this secret back-channel diplomacy marked the most significant and promising effort to bring about a Caribbean détente and end what Kissinger called “the perpetual hostility” in U.S.-Cuba relations. But his diplomatic initiative unraveled after Fidel Castro decided to send Cuban troops to support the anti-colonial struggle in Angola in the fall of 1975. In Oval Office meetings with President Ford, Kissinger angrily referred to the Cuban leader as a ”pipsqueak” whose bold deployment of military forces on the African continent threatened U.S. geopolitical strategies in the Third World. Concerned that Castro would eventually broaden his military incursion beyond Angola, Kissinger counseled Ford that they would have to ”crack the Cubans.” ”If they move into Namibia or Rhodesia, I would be in favor of clobbering them,” Kissinger told the president. Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger, with President Gerald R. Ford, was angered by Fidel Castro’s 1975 incursion into Angola (Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library). In the March 24 meeting with an elite national security team known as the Washington Special Actions Group, Kissinger expanded on the domino scenario. ”If the Cubans destroy Rhodesia then Namibia is next and then there is South Africa,” Kissinger argued.

In mid-1974, Secretary of State Kissinger initiated protracted historic and secret diplomatic talks to normalize relations with Cuba — which included furtive meetings between U.S. and Cuban emissaries at La Guardia airport and an unprecedented three-hour negotiating session at the five-star Pierre Hotel in New York City. At the time, this secret back-channel diplomacy marked the most significant and promising effort to bring about a Caribbean détente and end what Kissinger called “the perpetual hostility” in U.S.-Cuba relations.

But his diplomatic initiative unraveled after Fidel Castro decided to send Cuban troops to support the anti-colonial struggle in Angola in the fall of 1975. In Oval Office meetings with President Ford, Kissinger angrily referred to the Cuban leader as a ”pipsqueak” whose bold deployment of military forces on the African continent threatened U.S. geopolitical strategies in the Third World. Concerned that Castro would eventually broaden his military incursion beyond Angola, Kissinger counseled Ford that they would have to ”crack the Cubans.” ”If they move into Namibia or Rhodesia, I would be in favor of clobbering them,” Kissinger told the president.

Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger, with President Gerald R. Ford, was angered by Fidel Castro’s 1975 incursion into Angola (Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library).

In the March 24 meeting with an elite national security team known as the Washington Special Actions Group, Kissinger expanded on the domino scenario. ”If the Cubans destroy Rhodesia then Namibia is next and then there is South Africa,” Kissinger argued.

In the March 24 meeting with an elite national security team known as the Washington Special Actions Group, Kissinger expanded on the domino scenario. ”If the Cubans destroy Rhodesia then Namibia is next and then there is South Africa,” Kissinger argued. To permit the ”Cubans as the shock troops of the revolution” in Africa, he argued, was unacceptable and could cause racial tensions in the ”Caribbean with the Cubans appealing to disaffected minorities and could then spillover into South America and even into our own country.” Moreover, the lack of a U.S. response to the global exercise of military power by a small Caribbean island nation, Kissinger feared, would be seen as American weakness. ”If there is a perception overseas that we are so weakened by our internal debate [over Vietnam] so that it looks like we can't do anything about a country of eight million people, then in three or four years we are going to have a real crisis.”

Warfare planning papers, obtained by Archive Senior Analyst Peter Kornbluh through a mandatory declassification review request to the Gerald Ford Presidential Library, revealed that Kissinger ordered the Washington Special Actions Group to draft contingency options that ranged from economic and political sanctions to acts of war, such as mining Cuba's harbors, a naval quarantine, and strategic airstrikes ”to destroy selected Cuban military and military-related targets.” “If we decide to use military power it must succeed. There should be no halfway measures,” Kissinger instructed General George Brown of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The contingency planners warned Kissinger, however, that any act of aggression could trigger a superpower confrontation. Unlike the 1962 missile crisis, stated one planning paper, ”a new Cuban crisis would not necessarily lead to a Soviet retreat.”

VIII.

VIII. THE KISSINGER TELEPHONE CONVERSATIONS (TELCONS) In 2001, the National Security Archive drafted a legal complaint directed at the State Department and the National Archives for abdicating their duty under the Federal Records Act to recover the Kissinger “telcon” documents, which were produced on government time with government resources.

In 2001, the National Security Archive drafted a legal complaint directed at the State Department and the National Archives for abdicating their duty under the Federal Records Act to recover the Kissinger “telcon” documents, which were produced on government time with government resources.

VIII. THE KISSINGER TELEPHONE CONVERSATIONS (TELCONS) In 2001, the National Security Archive drafted a legal complaint directed at the State Department and the National Archives for abdicating their duty under the Federal Records Act to recover the Kissinger “telcon” documents, which were produced on government time with government resources. “Most, if not all, the telephone transcripts are agency records as defined by federal law,” the suit stated, “and Mr.THE KISSINGER TELEPHONE CONVERSATIONS (TELCONS) In 2001, the National Security Archive drafted a legal complaint directed at the State Department and the National Archives for abdicating their duty under the Federal Records Act to recover the Kissinger “telcon” documents, which were produced on government time with government resources. “Most, if not all, the telephone transcripts are agency records as defined by federal law,” the suit stated, “and Mr. Kissinger had no authority to remove them under the governing federal statutes and regulations.” A previous legal effort by reporters using the FOIA two decades earlier had failed to force Kissinger to return thousands of pages of transcripts his secretaries produced from listening to and recording his phone calls; Kissinger had resisted earlier efforts by the U.S. government to access these important records. “Mr. Kissinger,” the Archive’s draft lawsuit stated, “who has no legal authority to restrict access to agency records by federal officials charged with preserving such records, continues to assert unbridled discretion to control access to and maintain the secrecy of the telephone transcripts.” The State Department Legal Adviser William Howard Taft IV agreed with the Archive’s legal arguments; he asked the Archive to postpone filing its legal action; Taft then formally notified Kissinger that he was required to return the documents or complete copies thereof and sent a team of lawyers to arrange the transfer. When Kissinger finally relinquished the records in August 2001—almost 24 years after he had misrepresented U.S. government documentation as “personal” papers and taken them—the Archive promptly filed a FOIA request for the telcons.

In 2001, the National Security Archive drafted a legal complaint directed at the State Department and the National Archives for abdicating their duty under the Federal Records Act to recover the Kissinger “telcon” documents, which were produced on government time with government resources. “Most, if not all, the telephone transcripts are agency records as defined by federal law,” the suit stated, “and Mr.THE KISSINGER TELEPHONE CONVERSATIONS (TELCONS) In 2001, the National Security Archive drafted a legal complaint directed at the State Department and the National Archives for abdicating their duty under the Federal Records Act to recover the Kissinger “telcon” documents, which were produced on government time with government resources. “Most, if not all, the telephone transcripts are agency records as defined by federal law,” the suit stated, “and Mr. Kissinger had no authority to remove them under the governing federal statutes and regulations.” A previous legal effort by reporters using the FOIA two decades earlier had failed to force Kissinger to return thousands of pages of transcripts his secretaries produced from listening to and recording his phone calls; Kissinger had resisted earlier efforts by the U.S. government to access these important records. “Mr. Kissinger,” the Archive’s draft lawsuit stated, “who has no legal authority to restrict access to agency records by federal officials charged with preserving such records, continues to assert unbridled discretion to control access to and maintain the secrecy of the telephone transcripts.” The State Department Legal Adviser William Howard Taft IV agreed with the Archive’s legal arguments; he asked the Archive to postpone filing its legal action; Taft then formally notified Kissinger that he was required to return the documents or complete copies thereof and sent a team of lawyers to arrange the transfer. When Kissinger finally relinquished the records in August 2001—almost 24 years after he had misrepresented U.S. government documentation as “personal” papers and taken them—the Archive promptly filed a FOIA request for the telcons.

In 2001, the National Security Archive drafted a legal complaint directed at the State Department and the National Archives for abdicating their duty under the Federal Records Act to recover the Kissinger “telcon” documents, which were produced on government time with government resources. “Most, if not all, the telephone transcripts are agency records as defined by federal law,” the suit stated, “and Mr. Kissinger had no authority to remove them under the governing federal statutes and regulations.” A previous legal effort by reporters using the FOIA two decades earlier had failed to force Kissinger to return thousands of pages of transcripts his secretaries produced from listening to and recording his phone calls; Kissinger had resisted earlier efforts by the U.S. government to access these important records. “Mr. Kissinger,” the Archive’s draft lawsuit stated, “who has no legal authority to restrict access to agency records by federal officials charged with preserving such records, continues to assert unbridled discretion to control access to and maintain the secrecy of the telephone transcripts.”

The State Department Legal Adviser William Howard Taft IV agreed with the Archive’s legal arguments; he asked the Archive to postpone filing its legal action; Taft then formally notified Kissinger that he was required to return the documents or complete copies thereof and sent a team of lawyers to arrange the transfer. When Kissinger finally relinquished the records in August 2001—almost 24 years after he had misrepresented U.S. government documentation as “personal” papers and taken them—the Archive promptly filed a FOIA request for the telcons.

The telephone conversations record Kissinger’s conversations with U.S. presidents, with several CIA directors, other cabinet members, foreign ministers and diplomats, including Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, as well as celebrities such as Frank Sinatra. They also capture his many conversations with major reporters who actively sought information from him, and who Kissinger sought to influence for advantageous press coverage. As a collection of records, the telcons remain a unique treasure trove of history. Since obtaining them, the Archive has made a maximum effort to call international attention to these papers that record the conversations, policies, actions and attitudes that are a profound and revealing part of Henry Kissinger’s historical legacy.

Documents

White House, Telcon, Kissinger and Secretary of Defense Melvin Laird, 21 November 1969, 3:50 p.m.
Nov 21, 1969 | Source Nixon Presidential Materials Project, Henry A. Kissinger Telephone Conversations Transcripts, Chronological File, Box 3, File 3, 083-084
A week after investigative reporter Seymour Hersh broke the story of the My Lai massacre in the New York Times , Kissinger calls Secretary of Defense Melvin Laird to make sure they have a “unified line” to respond to the scandal. Laird has gruesome photographs that were appearing in the press; he and Kissinger agree the Pentagon will not distribute the photos in their possession to the press. Plainly appalled by the massacre but anxious to avoid having the Pentagon tarred by an atrocity, Laird was inclined to sweep it “under the rug.” Kissinger warns him that cannot be done.

White House, Telcon, Kissinger-Nixon conversation on Archer Blood “Genocide” Cable, March 28, 1971
Mar 28, 1971 | Source Tom Wells Collection

White House, Telcon, Kissinger Conversation with President Nixon about Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin, bombing North Vietnam, and Planned Summit in Moscow, April 15, 1972
Apr 15, 1972 | Source The Kissinger Transcripts: A Verbatim Record of U.S. Diplomacy, 1969-1977
After a visit from Soviet Ambassador Anatoli Dobrynin, Kissinger calls Nixon to report on their conversation. He repeatedly disparages Dobrynin for “slobbering over me,” even as the U.S. is bombing North Vietnam. “He was slobbering so much,” Kissinger gloats to Nixon. “Here we are bombing the capital..of one of their close allies. According to the peacenik textbook, he should be yelling and screaming.”

White House, Telcon, Kissinger Conversation with Barbara Walters, June 17, 1972
Jun 17, 1972 | Source Tom Wells Collection
Kissinger holds a lengthy conversation with high-profile ABC News journalist Barbara Walters. During their discussion he asks her for media advice on how to respond to a newly published “tell all” book, Dear Henry , by French reporter Danielle Hunebelle, who claims that Kissinger romantically told her “I am your slave.” Kissinger refers to Hunebelle as “a nightmarish girl,” and Walters calls the book “the worst piece of crap I have ever read.” “I read it and I thought, you didn’t kiss her, you didn’t touch her. You were as nice to her as you are to me or any reporter,” Walters tells him. “I am a hell of a lot nicer—I like you,” Kissinger replies.

White House, Telcon, Kissinger conversation with Nixon advisor Leonard Garment about the unfolding scandal of Watergate, April 21, 1973
Apr 21, 1973 | Source Tom Wells Collection
As the Watergate scandal unfolds, Kissinger talks to White House advisor Leonard Garment about the cascading scandal. “This is without a doubt the most depressing period that I know in our history,” Kissinger tells him. “It was almost beyond my belief. It was beyond my emotional belief. Because another thing that is bound to come out now—one has to assume Watergate could not have been an isolated incident.” According to Garment, “it was part of a long, wide range of events,” some of which Kissinger is aware.

White House, Telcon, “The President/Mr. Kissinger 7:00pm., June 1, 1973 [Discussing wiretap scandal]
Jun 1, 1973 | Source DNSA, Nixon Presidential Materials Project, Henry A. Kissinger Telephone Conversations
After the FBI wiretap scandal breaks into the media, Nixon orders a report on wiretapping under previous administrations. He calls Kissinger in anger to tell him: “Let’s get away from the bullshit. Bobby Kennedy was the greatest tapper.” He accuses the former attorney general of tapping the phones of 300 people in 1963 and tells Kissinger that he is going to publish the names of the individuals Kennedy had placed under surveillance. “And let the[se] assholes know that they’re going to get this, Henry.” Kissinger responds: “I think you should.” “They started it,” Nixon reiterates. “They want to have a g[ood] fight; they’re going to get one, Henry, you understand.”

White House, Telcons, Kissinger conversation with Seymour Hersh, July 17, 1973
Jul 17, 1973 | Source Tom Wells Collection
New York Times reporter Seymour Hersh calls Kissinger to find out if he has authorized a set of falsified military reports on the secret bombing of Cambodia. Despite Hersh’s efforts to cajole Kissinger into admitting his involvement, Kissinger repeatedly claims ignorance. “The first time I heard of false reporting was in a Monday newspaper,” Kissinger tells Hersh—mendaciously denying prior knowledge of an operation for which he was responsible.

White House, Telcons, Kissinger conversation with Alexander Haig, July 17, 1973
Three hours after attempting to deceive Seymour Hersh about his involvement in the falsified military reports on Cambodia, Kissinger calls his deputy, Alexander Haig, to brief him on the sham story he told Hersh. “Why should we even tell Seymour Hersh anything?” Haig declares. “Well, you can take that attitude, but I can’t,” Kissinger replies. “I knew about the [falsification] operation. Well, anyway, if he calls you, at least you know what he wants.”

White House, telcon, Kissinger Conversation with William Safire and John Crewdson of the New York Times regarding the FBI wiretap on Safire, August 3, 1973

White House, Telcon, Kissinger Conversation with Secretary of Defense Laird on Cambodia Bombing, August 10, 1973
Aug 10, 1973 | Source Tom Wells collection
As the U.S. Congress holds hearings to investigate the secret bombing of Cambodia, Kissinger makes an effort to browbeat Secretary of Defense Melvin Laird into publicly defending the White House’s controversial decision to expand the war in Indochina. He calls Laird to complain about the lack of support from other U.S. officials who are testifying during the hearings. “I mean, we saved American life,” as Kissinger tries to convince Laird. “There were North Vietnamese troops there. The government of the country we were bombing were asking us to do it. What the hell—one sometimes thinks we are in a madhouse.”

NSC, Telcon, Kissinger Discussion with Nixon on the coup in Chile, September 16, 1973
Sep 16, 1973 | Source The Kissinger Transcripts: A Verbatim Record of U.S. Diplomacy, 1969-1977

Department of State, Memorandum of Conversation, "U.S.-Chilean Relations," [Kissinger conversation with Pinochet], SECRET, June 8, 1976
Jun 8, 1976 | Source National Security Archive U.S.-Chile Relations collection
In Santiago for an Organization of American States (OAS) meeting, Kissinger meets privately with General Pinochet. Despite being briefed by his aides that the regime’s rampant human rights violations have made Chile “a symbol of rightwing tyranny” and advised to press Pinochet on that issue, Kissinger takes a decidedly solicitous approach. “My evaluation is that you are a victim of all left-wing groups around the world and that your greatest sin was that you overthrew a government which was going communist,” he tells Pinochet, avoiding any pressure on human rights or a return to civilian rule. “We want to help, not undermine you."

NSC, Telcon, Conversation between Kissinger and Assistant Secretary of State for Latin America, William D. Rogers, June 16, 1976
Jun 16, 1976 | Source DNSA.
Following his visit to Chile and his meeting with Pinochet, Kissinger read an article in the Washington Post reporting on remarks made by Robert White, a member of the State Department delegation to the OAS conference (and later U.S. Ambassador to El Salvador). White criticized the Pinochet regime for rejecting the OAS report on ongoing human rights abuses in Chile. Unbeknownst to White, only a few days earlier, Kissinger privately told Pinochet that ”we want to help, not undermine you.” Now, Kissinger is angry that a U.S. official has publicly challenged Pinochet on his human rights record. ”This is not an institution that is going to humiliate the Chileans,” he states. ”It is a bloody outrage.” Kissinger tells Rogers, the State Department’s top official for Latin America, that they should fire White.

State Department, Telcon, [Kissinger conversation with Assistant Secretary, Harry Shlaudeman ,on Argentina], June 30, 1976
Jun 30, 1976 | Source DNSA.
In this brief conversation, Henry Kissinger berates his aide after learning that the State Department’s Latin America bureau has issued a demarche to the Argentine military junta for escalating death squad operations, disappearances and reports of torture following the coup in March 1976. The demarche was recommended by Ambassador Robert Hill and conveyed by him to Foreign Minister Guzzetti on May 27. A similar message was given to the Argentine ambassador in Washington, D.C., by one of Shlaudeman’s deputies, Hewson Ryan. But the demarche appears to contradict a message that Kissinger had personally given to Guzzetti during a private meeting in Santiago on June 10; to act ” as quickly as possible ” to repress leftist forces in Argentina. Now Kissinger demands to know ”in what way is it [the demarche] compatible with my policy.” He tells Shlaudeman: ”I want to know who did this and consider having him transferred.”

State Department, memorandum of conversation, “Secretary's Meeting with Argentine Foreign Minister Guzzetti,” SECRET, October 7, 1976

Department of State, memo, “Foreign Minister Guzzetti Euphoric over visit to United States,” October 19, 1976
Oct 19, 1976 | Source U.S. State Department, Argentina Declassification Project (1975-1984), August 20, 2002 . Transcription

Department of State, Action Memorandum for Kissinger, “Operation Condor,” SECRET, August 30, 1976
Aug 30, 1976 | Source National Security Archive FOIA request
In his memo to Kissinger dated August 30, 1976, Assistant Secretary for Inter-American Affairs Harry Shlaudeman advises him on the U.S. position on Condor assassination plots: ”What we are trying to head off is a series of international murders that could do serious damage to the international status and reputation of the countries involved.” Shlaudeman’s memo requests approval from Kissinger to direct the U.S. ambassador to Uruguay, Ernest Siracusa, to proceed to meet with high officials in Montevideo and present the Condor demarche.

Department of State, Cable, “Actions Taken,” CONFIDENTIAL, September 16, 1976
Sep 16, 1976 | Source Department of State FOIA website
In this cable, sent from Lusaka where Kissinger was traveling, the Secretary of State refuses to authorize sending a telegram to U.S. ambassador to Uruguay Ernest Siracusa instructing him to proceed with the Condor demarche. Kissinger then broadens his instructions to cover the delivery of the demarche in Chile, Argentina and Uruguay: ”The Secretary has instructed that no further action be taken on this matter.” These instructions effectively end the State Department initiative to warn the Condor military regimes not to proceed with international assassination operations, since the demarche has not yet been delivered in Chile or Argentina. Five days later, former Chilean ambassador Orlando Letelier and his colleague, Ronni Moffitt, are assassinated by a car bomb in Washington, D.C., planted by Chilean secret intelligence operatives.

State Department, U.S. Consulate (Dacca) Cable, "Dissent from U.S. Policy Toward East Pakistan," CONFIDENTIAL April 6, 1971
Apr 6, 1971 | Source NARA, RG 59, SN 70-73 Pol and Def. From: Pol Pak-U.S. To: Pol 17-1 Pak-U.S. Box 2535
In one of the first ”Dissent Cables,” Consul General Archer Blood transmits a message denouncing U.S. policy towards the South Asia crisis. The transmission suggests that the United States is ”bending over backwards to placate the West Pak [sic] dominated government and to lessen likely and deservedly negative international public relations impact against them.” The cable goes on to question U.S. morality at a time when “unfortunately, the overworked term genocide is applicable.”

White House, Memorandum for the President, "Policy Options Toward Pakistan," SECRET, April 28, 1971
Apr 28, 1971 | Source NARA, Richard Nixon Presidential Materials Project (NPMP), NSC Files, Country Files: Middle East, Box 625
Kissinger presents Nixon with U.S. policy options directed towards the crisis in East Pakistan. Nixon and Kissinger both feel the third option is the best, as Kissinger writes, because it "would have the advantage of making the most of the relationship with Yahya, while engaging in a serious effort to move the situation toward conditions less damaging to US and Pakistani interests." At the end of the last page Nixon writes, " To all hands: Don't squeeze Yahya at this time. “

State Department, Embassy Jakarta, Telegram, [Text of Ford-Kissinger-Suharto Discussion], SECRET, December 6, 1975
Dec 6, 1975 | Source Gerald R. Ford Library, Kissinger-Scowcroft Temporary Parallel File, Box A3, Country File, Far East-Indonesia, State Department Telegrams 4/1/75-9/22/76

DOS, Kissinger Aide-Memoire to Cuba, January 11, 1975
Jan 11, 1975 | Source National Security Archive Cuba Dialogue collection
This conciliatory message approved by Secretary of State Kissinger was given to the Cuban side at the first furtive meeting between U.S. and Cuban representatives in January 1975, which took place at a cafeteria in La Guardia airport. ”We are meeting here to explore the possibilities for a more normal relationship between our two countries,” it begins. The objective is to ”determine whether there exists an equal determination on both sides to settle the differences that exist between us.” While the ideological differences are wide, Kissinger expresses hope that such talks will ”be useful in addressing concrete issues which it is in the interest of both countries to resolve.” As a gesture to the Cubans, the U.S. will permit Cuban diplomats (accredited to the UN) to travel from New York to Washington and may begin granting additional visas to Cubans for cultural, scientific and educational meetings. For Kissinger, ”no purpose is served in attempting to embargo ideas.”

DOS, Memorandum of Conversation, “Cuba Policy: Tactics Before and After San Jose,” June 9, 1975
Jun 9, 1975 | Source National Security Archive Cuba Dialogue collection
As a vote in the OAS to end the multilateral trade sanctions against Cuba looms in the summer of 1975, Kissinger instructs his top aides to make another attempt to set up a negotiating session on normalizing relations. “It is better to deal straight with Castro,” he instructs them. “Behave chivalrously; do it like a big guy, not like a shyster. Let him know: We are moving in a new direction; we’d like to synchronize…steps will be unilateral; reciprocity is necessary.” The effort to reach out to Cuba leads to the first serious set of negotiations to normalize relations since the Cuban revolution, held secretly a month later at the Pierre Hotel in New York city between Kissinger and Castro’s top aides.

White House, Memorandum of Conversation between President Ford and Kissinger, February 25, 1976
Feb 25, 1976 | Source National Security Archive Cuba Dialogue collection
After Castro decides to send Cuban troops to Angola, Kissinger sours on pursuing talks to normalize relations. During a conversation with President Ford in the Oval Office, Kissinger raises the issue of Cuba’s military incursion into Angola, implying that Latin American nations are concerned about a ”race war” because of Cuba’s efforts in Africa. ”I think we are going to have to smash Castro. We probably can't do it before the elections.” The president responds, ”I agree.”

White House, Memorandum of Conversation between President Ford and Kissinger, March 15, 1976
Mar 15, 1976 | Source National Security Archive Cuba Dialogue collection
In another Oval Office conversation, Kissinger raises the Cuban military involvement in Africa and expresses concern that Castro may deploy troops elsewhere in the region. ”I think sooner or later we have to crack the Cubans … I think we have to humiliate them.” He continues to argue that, ”If they move into Namibia or Rhodesia, I would be in favor of clobbering them. That would create a furor … but I think we might have to demand they get out of Africa.” When President Ford asks, “what if they don't?” Kissinger responds, ”I think we could blockade.”

State Department, Meeting Minutes, Washington Special Actions Group Meeting, Cuba, SECRET, March 24, 1976
Mar 24, 1976 | Source National Security Archive Cuba Dialogue collection
Kissinger convenes The Washington Special Actions Group—a small, elite team of national security officials—on March 24 to discuss a range of options and capabilities to move against Cuba. ”We want to get planning started in the political, economic and military fields so that we can see what we can do if we want to move against Cuba,” he explains. “In the military field there is an invasion or blockade.” Kissinger shares his domino theory of Cuban military involvement in the region. ”If the Cubans destroy Rhodesia then Namibia is next and then there is South Africa. It might only take five years,” Kissinger argues. In discussing military options, he states, “if we decide to use military power it must succeed. There should be no halfway measures - we get no reward for using military power in moderation.” Kissinger orders the group to secretly draw up plans for retaliation if Cuban troops go beyond Angola.

WSAG, Cuban Contingency Plan Summary, SECRET (ca. April 1976)
Apr 1, 1976 | Source National Security Archive Cuba Dialogue collection
This document is a summary of the Cuban Contingency survey considering the possible U.S. diplomatic, economic and military responses to continued Cuban and USSR "Angola style" intervention. Among the options are “a series of military actions on a graduated scale of seriousness which would involve the possibility of hostilities and would be considered acts of war.”

National Security Archive, Draft Complaint, “National Security Archive v. The Archivist of the United States and The Secretary of State of the United States, February 13, 2001.
Feb 13, 2001 | Source National Security Archive
Rather than sue Henry Kissinger, in early 2001 the National Security Archive targeted the two U.S. government agencies that “failed to initiate action…as required by federal law, to recover the telephone transcripts.” The draft complaint, written by Archive general counsel Kate Martin and the Archive’s pro-bono counsels Lee H. Rubin and Craig Isenberg from Mayer, Brown, & Platt, proved so compelling that U.S. Government lawyers acted upon its arguments to regain possession of the Kissinger telcons before it was ever filed. The complaint contains a statement of facts that reveals how Kissinger stored the transcripts in a set of “personal” files, removed U.S. government records, some of them clearly classified, and selectively used them for personal gain in violation of federal regulations and to the detriment of accurate history for over two decades when they were in his possession.

State Department, Telcon, “Ken Fried/HAK 4/29/1975 – 10:31 p.m.” [Kissinger receives the news of the fall of Saigon and end of the Vietnam war]
Apr 29, 1975 | Source DNSA, Nixon Presidential Materials Project, Henry A. Kissinger Telephone Conversations
In one of the most dramatic conversations recorded by Kissinger’s secret taping system, he receives a late-night call from wire service reporter Ken Fried who informs him that Saigon has fallen and General Duong Van Minh (”Big Minh”) had unconditionally surrendered to the "VC" (Viet Cong), a reference to North Vietnam's People's Liberation Armed Forces. “Is it true?” Kissinger asks initially, before attempting to disguise the fact that he had not yet heard this history-changing news that the Vietnam war was finally over and that the U.S. had lost.

State Department, Telcon, “Sec Kissinger/Ted Koppel, 7/9/76; 12:30 p.m.
Jul 9, 1976 | Source DNSA, Nixon Presidential Materials Project, Henry A. Kissinger Telephone Conversations
In this wide-ranging telephone conversation, journalist Ted Koppel converses with Kissinger about the prospects for the November 1976 election and whether Kissinger will remain in office or not. Koppel bets Kissinger five dollars that Ford will lose, but Kissinger insists “I think Carter is beatable.” At one point, Kissinger jokes that Jimmy Carter, who is leading President Ford in the polls, might actually keep him on as secretary of state. Koppel tells Kissinger that he is going to take a break from journalism to write a political novel in which the central figure “resembles you—you will be terribly pleased.” The fictional Kissinger-esque character will be named “Vanderburg.”

Department of State, Kissinger Telephone Conversation with Ambassador Anatoli Dobrynin, 9 December 1975, 6:06 p.m.
Dec 9, 1975 | Source Digital National Security Archive [DNSA]
As Kissinger prepares to leave for Moscow for Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT), he calls Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin about a difficult subject—the Moscow Signal. For decades, the Soviets have been transmitting microwave energy beams at the U.S. Embassy building in an apparent effort to recharge listening devices planted in the walls. The current U.S. ambassador is threatening to brief the staff about the health issues related to the constant microwave exposure. “Maybe you could turn it off until I get there,” Kissinger presses, attempting to use a bit of humor to impress Dobrynin with the gravity of the situation. “And then you could switch it back on again,” Dobrynin responds. “You could give me a radiation treatment,” Kissinger banters. “Then you will be radioactive,” Dobrynin concludes. Worried about a leak which could cause an uproar in U.S. relations with the Kremlin, Kissinger warns Dobrynin that “We really are sitting on it here but too many people know about it.”

State Department, Telcon, Rumsfeld-Sec. Kissinger December 23, 1974, 9:35 a.m. [Conversation about New York Times exposé on the CIA’s domestic operations]
Dec 23, 1974 | Source DNSA, Nixon Presidential Materials Project, Henry A. Kissinger Telephone Conversations
After Seymour Hersh’s front page New York Times story on December 22, 1974, reveals CIA domestic operations against U.S. anti-Vietnam war movements, Kissinger calls White House Chief of Staff Donald Rumsfeld about the revelations. Kissinger denounces Hersh as a “son-of-a-bitch,” but claims he did not know about the activities himself. Kissinger agrees with Rumsfeld that Colby should prepare a report for the President. Eventually the CIA’s internal investigation compiles a slew of domestic spying operations and other illegal activities that become known as “the family jewels.”

State Department, Telcon, “Frank Sinatra/Secretary Kissinger January 16, 1976, 8:09 pm,” [Conversation about arrangements for major diplomatic dinner in Los Angeles]
Jan 16, 1976 | Source DNSA, Nixon Presidential Materials Project, Henry A. Kissinger Telephone Conversations
Kissinger's friendship with Frank Sinatra dated back to Nixon's first term, and reflected his famous hob-knobbing with major celebrities. Sinatra’s call is about arrangements for a major dinner for Israeli Prime Minister Itzhak Rabin being held at the Beverly Hilton in Los Angeles. But the conversation begins and ends with Sinatra joking “do you want me to straighten out Angola for you?” With the U.S. Congress barring CIA intervention in Angola, Kissinger responds that he needs some of Sinatra's "enforcers" to solve the Angola problem. Sinatra asks Kissinger to speak at the Rabin event after the band plays and tells him “I will bring the formula for Angola.”
