Sfog ln Jaerazhi l
11/10/73
Dear Congregsman Waldie,
part and yesterday's hearing before Judge Gossell.It relates to Jaworski rather
than Cox anditmay suggestmotive for selectingJaworaki。
Juvorsli handled clandestine CIA money as a member of the board of the Anderson
fund。Ho has rofused to rosim this post。I suggest it confronts him vith a major
confliotforhewillhavetodecidewhethertoinvest血gateCIAinvolvementandthen
whether to seek an indiotmentor indictments。Iam without doubt thereshould besuch
indictments fronwork on a book Iamwriting。ho has lied about this record。
Jaworgki held a post similar to his present obligation as special counsel to
tho Tezas Court of Inquiry when President Kennedy was aasassinated。I looked into the
record of that Texas investigation as part of my work on this assassination。It is the
biggestandmostdeliberatewhitewashofall。
Knowing these things and having the proof in my files,Itold a number of newspapers
and roporters。Initially, there was reluatance。 Art Kevin, reporter for KMPC,Los
Angeles,did follow theleadsIprovided him andhisstation and othcrswith thesame
owmership did an honest job of reporting after interviews he conducted by phone。There
was confirmation fron John H。Freeman,Jaworaki's partner and from a man on a companion
CIA condult in liowYork,Eli Whitney Debevoise
John Hanrahan of The Washington Postalso ppoke to these men and others and
Was given virtually the identical confirmation。What is interesting in this case and
oneotheris thatbetweenthe time oftheKevin andHanrahaninterviews there were
identical shifts in the dates of this CIA activity,the later accounts in each case
having itend earlier。
Itis my understahding thatatfirstJaworskiissueda denialofany CIA connection
or knowledge of having had any CLA connection and then fudging this by pretending 8
hazy rocollection。In fact there was so much publicity when this front-page story broke
f he had been ignorant,his ignorance then had to have ended。In fact he handled the
extensive funds personally accordiing to one account,thatif the recipiente
Jaworsiki,personally,handled one of the more sigmificant coverings up in the
JFK investigation。Should this interest you, I can provide the proof in the form of
unpublished official correspondence。His record was not that of an impartialinvesti-
gator but of a partisan。He expregsed displeasure at the publication of theunwelcome
reportand then covered it up. as the reporter who then vrote the story told two
reporters,Kevin and Hanrahan,thisweek。
Because of the sigmificance of prosent events I give you these nanes。However,
should you desire to make any uae,I would ask that you get thoir assent because I
do notwantKevin or Hanrahan to face any problems with their employers。
If you or your colleagues wants anything fron my filess please let me knowe
Thanks toyou allfor your efforts。
Sincerely,
35
Haroh