I 
FBI Exempt From Order 
Secrets 
B/GBORGE LARDNER JR. 
Washington Post Staff Writer 
When President Clinton announced 
three years ago that he was ordering 
automatic declassification of millions of 
the government’s oldest secrets, he didn’t 
mention the blanket exemption for the 
FBI. 
“We knew it was somewhat risky," 
Steven GarfinkeL director of the govern- 
ment's Information Security Oversight Of- 
fice, said of the arrangement, “but at the 
same time we were very anxious to get the 
executive order signed by the president." 
FBI officials defended the previously 
undisclosed exemption, saying it was es- 
sential because of the mammoth size of its 
files—6.5 million cubic feet—where both 
classified and unclassified records are min- 
gled together, often without any Top 
Secret," “Secret" or “Confidential" labels 
to show which ones were supposed to deal 
with national security. Everything from 
the bureau's oldest foreign counterintelli- 
gence files to musty stolen car and bank 
robbery records is covered. 
No other government agency—not the 
CIA or even the super-secret National 
Security Agency—won such a pass. In fact, 
officials said, these agencies are still wait- 
ing for Clinton to give formal approval to 
narrower exemptions for them. “It sounds 
like we pulled a real coup," one FBI agent 
said. 
When he signed the order in 1995, the 
president promised it would “lift the veil 
on millions of existing documents, keep a 
great many future documents from ever 
being classified, and still maintain neces- 
sary controls over information that legiti- 
mately needs to be guarded in the interests 
of national security." 
Clinton’s decree was widely hailed as 
See SECRETS, A2l,Col. 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---SECRETS, From A1 
the most significant step in reducing gov- 
ernment secrecy since the beginning of the 
Cold War.

It put limits pn the classification 
of new documents and prescribed sanc- 
tions for violations of the order, but the 
automatic declassification of old records 
by 2000 was the centerpiece.

The plan envisioned exemptions for the 
government’s most sensitive records, such 
as the millions of pages detailing the CIA’s 
covert actions, but these were to be 
granted after a complex process that calls 
fcfr*^ specific date or event” when the 
exemptions are to end.

Only the FBI was 
given blanket immunity without any cutoff 
date.

The arrangement first came to light in 
court papers last month and was laid out in 
detail in a memo obtained by The Wash- 
ington Post last week under the Freedom 
of Information Act.

"Informed of the special treatment ac- 
corded the FBI, critics of government 
secrecy said in recent interviews that the 
exemption was legally questionable be- 
cause it has no cutoff date and because the 
FBI used federal privacy law rather than 
any national security concerns to justify it.

“I never heard of this before,” said Kate 
Martin, who took part in discussions 
leading up to the order as director of the 
Center for National Security Studies, a 
dvil rights advocacy group.

“Everybody 
was under the impression that the execu- 
tive order applied to the FBI.

Now it turns 
out that the key provision doesn’t.” 
One of the main signatories to the plan, 
Garfinkel said it was "a negotiated agree- 
ment whereby the FBI would get a very 
broad exemption [from the automatic 
declassification rule] in return for a very 
broad commitment” to review and declas- 
sify its old records on a document-by-docu- 
ment basis.“Everybody 
was under the impression that the execu- 
tive order applied to the FBI.

Now it turns 
out that the key provision doesn’t.” 
One of the main signatories to the plan, 
Garfinkel said it was "a negotiated agree- 
ment whereby the FBI would get a very 
broad exemption [from the automatic 
declassification rule] in return for a very 
broad commitment” to review and declas- 
sify its old records on a document-by-docu- 
ment basis.

FBI officials insist they are making 
progress on that score, having declassified 
“hundreds of thousands of pages” since 
Clinton’s order went into effect and they 
predict “enormous” strides in the months 
ahead with a projected quadrupling of 
their declassification staff.

Among the records declassified so far 
are more than 40,000 pages from the 
Bureau’s “anti-riot” files from the 1960s 
and 70s on the Black Panther Party, the 
American Indian Movement, Students for 
a Democratic Society and anti-war pro- 
tests including the tumult at the 1968 
Democratic National Convention.

“Director [Louis J.] Freeh is absolutely 
committed to the spirit of the executive 
order and to declassifying documents as 
fast as our resources permit,” said Assis- 
tant FBI Director John E.

Collingwood.

In 
addition, Collingwood said he recently 
initiated bulk declassification of many 
records despite the exemption.

Garfinkel remains to be convinced.

He 
said that in the two fiscal years since 
Clinton signed the order the FBI actually 
declassified a “very minuscule” amount of 
records that are 25 years old or more— 
less than 200,000 pages.

“Right now the 
jury is still out on whether the results are 
going to justify this broad exception,” he 
said.He 
said that in the two fiscal years since 
Clinton signed the order the FBI actually 
declassified a “very minuscule” amount of 
records that are 25 years old or more— 
less than 200,000 pages.

“Right now the 
jury is still out on whether the results are 
going to justify this broad exception,” he 
said.

Washington lawyer James Lesar said he 
discovered the deal' last month in the 
course of litigation against the FBI for 
records on three women involved in left- 
wing causes dating back to the 1930s, 
To counter his efforts, the Justice De- 
partment presented him with an Oct 12, 
1995, “Memorandum for the President" 
from Attorney General Janet Reno.

It 
states that “the automatic release of re- 
cords in the FBI’s Central Records System 
and Electronic Surveillance Indices would 
almost invariably violate the Privacy Act of 
1974.

Accordingly ...

these two records 
systems are exempt from the automatic 
declassification provisions of Executive 
Order 12958.” 
“It’s preposterous,” Lesar said.

‘This 
covers hundreds of millions of pages that 
have nothing to do with national security 
at all—every piece of paper they’ve got, 
except maybe payroll records.

FBI field 
office records would be covered, too.

They're included in the Central Records 
System.

What the FBI has done is take 
away with the right hand what the left 
hand has given.” 
There remains some uncertainty about 
how and why the special arrangement for 
the FBI came about.

Lesaris lawsuit turned 
up the memo from Reno to Clinton sum- 
marizing the deal but when told of it, one 
former NSC staffer said he never saw it 
and called it “inconsistent with our under- 
standing” with the bureau when the order 
was signed.

“The understanding was that there was 
a distinction between making something 
public and removing any classification 
from it,” said former NSC staff member 
Morton Halperin.

“These files were not 
going to be automatically put in a public 
library after 25 years.“The understanding was that there was 
a distinction between making something 
public and removing any classification 
from it,” said former NSC staff member 
Morton Halperin.

“These files were not 
going to be automatically put in a public 
library after 25 years.

They would still be 
subject to law enforcement and privacy 
reviews.

So therefore this [automatic de- 
classification] was not a big threat to 
them.” 
White House press secretary Michael 
McCurry was not familiar with details, but 
he said the FBI “had the chop” on the 
executive order at the Justice Department, 
meaning that determined resistance from 
the bureau could have prevented its issu- 
ance.

“Of course, the president can overrule 
any department or agency,” McCurry said.

“But it’s almost a veto." 
Clinton signed the executive order on 
April 17,1995.

It was a major reform, to be 
accomplished over a five-year period.

Pre- 
viously, documents remained classified 
indefinitely.

But the fine print of the order 
provided for nine seemingly narrow excep- 
tions to the automatic declassification 
process.

It gave agency heads the authori- 
ty to hold back “specific information” that 
would, for instance, “assist in the develop- 
ment or use of weapons of mass destruc- 
tion,” compromise a “a human intelligence 
“Everybody was under 
the impression that the 
executive order applied 
to the FBI.

Now it turns 
out that the key 
provision doesn’t” 
—Kate Martin, 
director of Center for National Security Studes 
source” in a way that would “clearly and 
demonstrably damage” national security 
or “violate a statute, treaty or interna- 
tional agreement.” 
The FBI’s blanket exemption was offi- 
cially confirmed a few months later in a 
memorandum of understanding signed 
by Freeh on July 25,1995.

But Garfinkel, 
who signed it six days later, said the 
matter had actually been settled before 
Clinton issued the executive order.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Now it turns 
out that the key 
provision doesn’t” 
—Kate Martin, 
director of Center for National Security Studes 
source” in a way that would “clearly and 
demonstrably damage” national security 
or “violate a statute, treaty or interna- 
tional agreement.” 
The FBI’s blanket exemption was offi- 
cially confirmed a few months later in a 
memorandum of understanding signed 
by Freeh on July 25,1995. But Garfinkel, 
who signed it six days later, said the 
matter had actually been settled before 
Clinton issued the executive order. “This 
executive order was ready to go six 
months earlier than the president’s issu- 
ance of it, but it took those last six 
months to negotiate with Justice over 
the provisions of the order and the 
impact on the FBI,” Garfinkel said. Obtained last week under the Free- 
dom of Information Act, the two-page 
memo was reviewed and “concurred in” 
by Clinton’s national security adviser at 
the time, Anthony Lake, “on behalf of the 
President.” It appears to equate “auto- 
matic declassification” with “automatic 
release.” 
“This agreement,” the memo says, “is 
based upon the parties’ [Freeh and Gar- 
finkel] determination that the Privacy 
Act would preclude substantially the 
automatic release [emphasis supplied] 
• ,'vr M:.V '■'> rr, - vr*? i

--- PAGE BREAK ---of declassified information contained [in 
the bureau’s two main records systems]; 
that due to the nature of these filing 
systems, there is a relatively small pro- 
portion of classified information which is 
contained throughout voluminous re- 
cords; that it is impractical to review all 
such records within the [five-year] time 
period specified in the new Order; and 
that substantial harm to the national 
security could result from the inadver- 
tent automatic declassification [em- 
phasis supplied] of certain information 
contained in those systems." 
Garfinkel noted that the FBI has a 
special problem when it comes to declas- 
sifying documents: Very few of its older 
files are marked “Top Secret," “Secret," 
or “Confidential," even when they should 
have been.

“Until the death of J.

Edgar Hoover [in 
1972], they never marked anything as 
classified," Garfinkel said.

“Hoover al- 
ways took the position that their files 
were closed.

It wasn’t until the Freedom 
of Information Act amendments of 1974" 
that FBI files became subject to legal 
demands for disclosure.

As a result, FBI 
declassifiers now may be setting aside 
some old records as classified even as 
they are declassifying others.

Declassification, moreover, does not 
mean disclosure.

But it does mean, as 
Garfinkel put it, that unclassified records 
are “held hostage" to the process.

The 
“anti-riot" files on dissident groups from 
the 1960s illustrate both points.

It took 
the FBI’s review team 18 months to go 
through the “New Left" and related 
documents, declassify 42,119 pages and 
decide that another 11,993 needed to 
remain partly or wholly classified.

There were almost 200,000 more pag- 
es that were “unclassified." The entire 
264,000-page package was delivered to 
the National Archives last September, 
but that doesn’t mean it is publicly 
available yet.

Since these are “law en- 
forcement" records.

Archives officials 
say.Since these are “law en- 
forcement" records.

Archives officials 
say.

they must still be reviewed at the 
Archives, page by page, to determine if 
public disclosure would constitute “an 
unwarranted invasion of personal priva- 
cy," reveal the “the identity of a confiden- 
tial source," or run afoul of other exemp- 
tions set out in the Freedom of 
Information Act.

It is this second review that Lesar and 
other critics say should have thwarted 
the FBI’s blanket exemption.

“It’s dis- 
honest for them to assert national securi- 
ty shields when their legitimate interests 
are privacy and law enforcement con-« 
cerns and those are still protected,"1 
Martin said.

* 
In return for the exemption, Freeh" 
promised to set up the historical review; 
team with a staff of 14 people and make 
the files concerning “possible violations^ 
of the anti-riot provisions of the Civil 
Rights Act of 1968" their first priority r 
Collingwood said the staff has now^ 
grown to 22 and will increase by as many* 
as 55 more later this year when the FBI’s 
work compiling records on President 
John F.

Kennedy’s assassination is com- 
pleted.

“This is a huge project,” Collingwood 
said.

In addition to the “anti-riot" files, it 
has declassified records more than 25 
years old on bank robberies, unlawful 
flights to avoid prosecution, interstate 
thefts and fingerprint matters.

And it has 
decided it can submit about 150 other 
categories to automatic or bulk declassi- 
fication because they rarely contain clas- 
sified information.

“We are actually quite proud of this," 
Collingwood said, “and our quarterly 
reports show we’re getting progressively 
better." In the first half of fiscal 1998, the 
FBI says it reviewed almost 460,000 
pages under the executive order, sifted 
through another 380,000 pages in re- 
sponse to the Freedom of Information 
Act and other requests and “declassified” 
532,000—although many of them were 
records that were never classified to 
begin with.--- PAGE BREAK ---

And it has 
decided it can submit about 150 other 
categories to automatic or bulk declassi- 
fication because they rarely contain clas- 
sified information. “We are actually quite proud of this," 
Collingwood said, “and our quarterly 
reports show we’re getting progressively 
better." In the first half of fiscal 1998, the 
FBI says it reviewed almost 460,000 
pages under the executive order, sifted 
through another 380,000 pages in re- 
sponse to the Freedom of Information 
Act and other requests and “declassified” 
532,000—although many of them were 
records that were never classified to 
begin with. It Is still only a small dent in the 
mountain. The bureau has 6.5 million 
cubic feet of records, a staggering vol- 
ume that Collingwood said includes ev- 
erything from laboratory specimens to 
trial exhibits. “My guess is that half of it 
is paper," he said. Even so, archivists say, that would 
translate into 7.8 billion pages. Colling- 
wood said no more than 10 percent, 
probably closer to 5 percent, is classified, 
and most of the records at FBI headquar- 
ters are duplicative of files in FBI field 
offices, which are almost as voluminous. But with all those caveats, that would 
atill amount to at least 207 million pages, 
a total he finds difficult to accept. “We don’t know precisely how many 
classified documents we have, but no- 
body here thinks it’s in the hundreds of 
millions," Collingwood said. Whatever 
the count, no one knows how many are 
more than 25 years old and no one can 
tell how much older they'll be before they 
see the light of day.