Research and the War Effort 
V Α Ν Ν Ε V A R 
B U S H 
F E L Κ O W 
A I Ε K 
T
O a democracy, nothing is more important in the 
conduct of a war than the working out of smooth 
relationships between civilian organizations and military 
organizations in all aspects of the war effort.

I wish that 
I might go into this broad subject at length, but in this 
discussion I must confine myself to one phase of the 
matter, namely, the relation-
ship between scientists and 
engineers and the military 
services in connection with 
the 
development, 
produc-
tion, and use of weapons.

No one can read the ac-
counts coming back from the 
battle fronts without recog-
nizing that it matters a great 
deal what sort of weapons we 
are using and what skill we 
employ in their disposition.

It is not sufficient to be pos-
sessed of good weapons; 
it 
is essential to be possessed of 
weapons that are better than 
those in the hands of the 
enemy and to use them with 
greater skill.

The attainment of this objective involves 
the closest sort of collaboration between military men 
on one hand and civilian scientists and engineers on 
the other, and it is a part of this relationship that I 
propose to trace.

It is well, I feel, that we should study 
carefully into this relationship, not only because it is es-
sential to our effectiveness in this war, but also because 
I hope and trust that the lessons we are learning currently 
will not be forgotten when we again return to peace.

CIVILIAN C O L L A B O R A T I O N W I T H A R M Y A N D NAVY 
One of the advantages of a democracy is that when 
it is engaged in a war, no one feels that everything should 
be controlled by the military.

There are great areas 
where civilian organizations can operate to better ad-
vantage, and this is and has been our accepted policy.CIVILIAN C O L L A B O R A T I O N W I T H A R M Y A N D NAVY 
One of the advantages of a democracy is that when 
it is engaged in a war, no one feels that everything should 
be controlled by the military.

There are great areas 
where civilian organizations can operate to better ad-
vantage, and this is and has been our accepted policy.

The joints may creak at times, and there is bound to be 
confusion simply in view of the enormous magnitude of 
the j o b involved, but in general we get along faster when 
civilian organization produces the weapons with which 
the Army and Navy fight.

The same advantages may 
be cited for civilian research and development, collabo-
rating closely with the armed services, and meeting their 
An address delivered at the "get-together" dinner of the A I E E national technical 
meeting, New York, Ν.

Y.

January 26, 1943.

The relationship between scientists, engi-
neers, and the armed services in the develop-
ment, production, and use of weapons is of 
great importance in meeting the exigencies of 
war, says the director of the Office of Scientific 
Research 
and Development, 
an agency 
charged with co-ordinating the efforts of 
technical men to evolve instruments of war in 
collaboration with the Army and Navy.

The 
interrelated work of this and other agencies, 
which are concerned 
with 
development 
rather than procurement, is contributing 
toward filling the vast need of the armed 
services for the adaptation of war implements 
to changing conditions.

Vannevar Bush is director of the Office of Scientific Research and Dev 
and president of Carnegie Institution of Washington (D.

C ) .

Ίορπι 
needs as far as is physically possible, but acting with that 
flexibility 
and freedom which come from 
independent 
organization.C ) .

Ίορπι 
needs as far as is physically possible, but acting with that 
flexibility 
and freedom which come from 
independent 
organization.

I believe, and I know that I am joined in this belief 
by most of the men with whom I have worked closely in 
the past three years, that we have gotten on more 
rapidly and more effectively 
during this present war in 
the development and intro-
duction 
of 
new 
weapons 
under the form of organiza-
tion whereby civilian groups 
supplement the work of the 
Army and Navy 
than we 
would have had the entire 
affair 
been 
closely 
under 
military control.

There are 
many reasons for this.

O n e 
of them is the fact that the 
Army and Navy are exceed-
> ingly busy with the imme-
diate.

It would be difficult 
indeed for a military organi-
zation to provide adequately 
for the long range view while 
at the same time carrying its enormous responsibilities 
in regard to the battle which may come in the next few-
months.

I feel sure that new and valuable ideas are much more 
likely to come to fruition if they can develop their forma-
tive stages among groups of independent scientists and 
engineers before being subjected to the rigors of military 
association.

W e are engaged with skillful and resourceful 
enemies, and we should not at any point underestimate 
them.

Germany in particular has too long a history of 
scientific and technical accomplishment for us to be 
tempted to underrate its possibilities in applying its skill 
to the conduct of war; and Germany has been fully 
engaged in the development of war techniques for a much 
longer time than have the democracies.W e are engaged with skillful and resourceful 
enemies, and we should not at any point underestimate 
them. Germany in particular has too long a history of 
scientific and technical accomplishment for us to be 
tempted to underrate its possibilities in applying its skill 
to the conduct of war; and Germany has been fully 
engaged in the development of war techniques for a much 
longer time than have the democracies. Nevertheless, 
I believe that the present rigid military regime in Ger-
many is at a disadvantage, when it comes to the de-
velopment of really new ideas, as compared with the 
United States, with its ingenuity and resources; 
and I 
believe that is especially true in view of the fact that the 
organization under which we operate gives full rein to 
the independent efforts of some of the finest scientists 
and engineers that the country has produced, under 
conditions in which they can work substantially in their 
own way and in accordance with their chosen methods, 
but toward a common end. 96 
Bush—Research 
and the War 
E L E C T R I C A L 
ENGINEERING

--- PAGE BREAK ---But a democracy in wartime has certain handicaps 
also.

Unfortunately, from one point of view, our own 
country has a striking difficulty in adapting itself to 
modern war which is not generally realized.

W e are a 
people who think in terms of mass production.

This is 
excellent, and it constitutes one of our greatest factors of 
strength.

It has, however, the distinct liability that we 
are likely to think in terms of freezing of designs and 
production of great masses of standardized equipment, 
and we think much less readily in terms of a rapidly 
changing technical situation.

In modern war it is a 
serious thing to be inflexible in this regard.

The weapons 
that are being used are 
continually 
changing.

Some years ago I used to meet military men 
who took the point of view that once war was entered 
upon the fighting would have to be done by utilizing the 
instrumentalities available at the beginning of the con-
flict.

I have not heard this view expressed for quite a 
long while "now.

Every phase of warfare is changing 
and is changing radically, and the change is coming about 
primarily because the methods used are vastly different.

The central problem, therefore, in the effective conduct 
of the war from this standpoint is to be sure that our 
weapons are thoroughly up to date.

This involves a long 
chain of endeavor, beginning with scientific 
research 
and engineering development, and proceeding through 
tests, 
procurement, 
installation, 
and 
the 
training 
of 
personnel, to the final use in combat.

If any one of 
these steps is not thoroughly and carefully taken, the 
end result will not be sufficient.

But the process must be swift also, and mass minded-
ness is a dangerous state for us unless we also keenly 
realize its dangers.

Under ordinary peacetime circumstances the progress 
from a brand new idea to its use in quantity by the public 
occupies at least five years.

There has to be research, 
development, and engineering design.Under ordinary peacetime circumstances the progress 
from a brand new idea to its use in quantity by the public 
occupies at least five years.

There has to be research, 
development, and engineering design.

There has to be 
design for production and user experience obtained under 
carefully controlled conditions.

Out of this can come a 
well-engineered device adapted for production in quan-
tity to meet a mass need in an economic manner.

Under 
ordinary peacetime conditions a company that is intro-
ducing a new product will short-circuit this proper and 
deliberate method at its peril, for large indeed are the 
penalties of plunging into quantity production before all 
of the loose ends are tucked in.

Yet in time of war we are 
faced with the dilemma of shortening this process or else 
being dangerously behind the times.

Under the stress 
of war it is possible to compress the time scale somewhat.

If it is compressed too much and proper engineering is not 
accomplished, the results may be very sad.

O n the other 
hand, delay in getting new devices into operation in time 
may have consequences that are disastrous.

The 
at-
tainment of a proper balance in this regard is one of the 
most difficult problems confronting 
the industry 
that 
produces the devices and the military groups that utilize 
them.

I feel that on the whole we have done a re-
markable j o b of attaining a just balance, but I do wish 
to emphasize strongly that the matter can never receive 
too much consideration and attention in a country such 
as ours, where all our normal peacetime habits lie along 
the lines of standardization and large-scale production.

F O R M A T I O N AND FUNCTION OF THE OSRD 
In 
the 
progress of 
a 
new 
weapon, from 
the 
first 
idea, to the final use, engineers and scientific men of 
professional grade enter at many points.I feel that on the whole we have done a re-
markable j o b of attaining a just balance, but I do wish 
to emphasize strongly that the matter can never receive 
too much consideration and attention in a country such 
as ours, where all our normal peacetime habits lie along 
the lines of standardization and large-scale production.

F O R M A T I O N AND FUNCTION OF THE OSRD 
In 
the 
progress of 
a 
new 
weapon, from 
the 
first 
idea, to the final use, engineers and scientific men of 
professional grade enter at many points.

Notably they 
appear as a part of the personnel of the armed services 
themselves, 
and they appear also in industry in the 
manufacture of equipment, and also in those services 
which are auxiliary to manufacturing effort, but none 
the less essential if the whole scheme is to function ade-
quately.

I shall not attempt to trace all aspects of this 
matter by any means.

I feel, however, that it will be 
worth while to trace the phase that is concerned pri-
marily with the development of the new weapon from 
the standpoint of the governmental organization which 
has been charged with this responsibility in this present 
war.

It is now nearly three years since the scientists and 
engineers of this country were organized under govern-
mental auspices for the development of new weapons.

In June 1940 there was formed the National Defense 
Research Committee, charged by the President with the 
duty of research and development on new weapons and 
instruments of war.

The initial organization was rela-
tively small, but it has grown to a considerable scale.

In June 1941 a reorganization occurred and the Office 
of Scientific Research and Development was formed by 
executive order.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The initial organization was rela-
tively small, but it has grown to a considerable scale. In June 1941 a reorganization occurred and the Office 
of Scientific Research and Development was formed by 
executive order. The O S R D was given the broad task 
of co-ordinating the efforts of scientists and 
technical 
men in connection with many phases of the war effort, 
but it was also given the definite charge of pursuing 
aggressively the work that had already been started by 
the N D R C ; 
and for this purpose N D R C 
was incor-
porated into its organization. At the same time O S R D 
also was charged with the carrying on of medical re-
search which is closely associated with the prosecution of 
the war, and it does so through the efforts of the Com-
mittee 
on 
Medical 
Research 
which 
is a part of its 
organization. The entire history of this medical effort is 
well worth the telling. At the present time the O S R D is making expenditures 
at the rate of about $100,000,000 a year. In terms of 
the over-all war cost this is not a large amount of money. It is, however, a substantial sum when considered in 
terms of research and development. The O S R D oper-
ates entirely by contracts with existing academic insti-
tutions, industrial organizations, and government agen-
cies. This method is designed to utilize to the utmost 
available facilities and personnel and to avoid, as far as 
it can be accomplished, the construction of great new 
laboratories. About 2,000 contracts for the carrying on 
of research have now been entered into and of these about 
MARCH 1943 
Bush—Research 
and the 
War 
97

--- PAGE BREAK ---1,400 are currently active.

Approximately 200 industrial 
laboratories and 
100 colleges and universities are at 
work on O S R D projects, and the number of men in-
volved of professional grade is in the neighborhood of 
6,000.

These men have assistants of various types.

The way in which the organization functions will, I 
think, be of interest.

There is the closest sort of inter-
relationship with the Army and Navy at all levels.

The 
N D R C is broken down into 18 major divisions concerned 
with various phases of war research, and in many cases 
these in turn are subdivided into sections.

Each section 
is composed of scientists and engineers who are special-
ists on some phase of the enormous range of war instru-
ments.

Working closely with them are officers from the 
Army and Navy who are also specialists in the field con-
cerned, but who bring in addition the war experience 
and the contact with tactical reasoning which is es-
sential for sound planning.

T h e research projects arise in these sections, usually 
by reason of round-the-table discussion of the current 
situation and the needs for improvement.

Out of such 
discussions comes usually a definite request from either 
the Army or the Navy that the O S R D 
undertake a 
development along a certain line.

The section is charged 
with the duty of finding the best laboratory for the con-
duct of the work and the best personnel to carry it on.

After these considerations have been met, the section 
then recommends a contract for the accomplishment of 
the work.

This recommendation is reviewed by the 
N D R C , 
and if the committee approves, it passes the 
recommendation together with its endorsement to the 
director, who authorizes the work to proceed.

The 
N D R C 
examines 
the 
operations 
of 
divisions 
through the medium of small subcommittees, and by 
bringing before it the chiefs of the several divisions.This recommendation is reviewed by the 
N D R C , 
and if the committee approves, it passes the 
recommendation together with its endorsement to the 
director, who authorizes the work to proceed.

The 
N D R C 
examines 
the 
operations 
of 
divisions 
through the medium of small subcommittees, and by 
bringing before it the chiefs of the several divisions.

The manner in which the N D R C operates in this con-
nection is of great importance since it is the central 
reviewing agency which ties together the entire program.

Doctor James Conant, president of Harvard University, 
Boston, Mass., is the chairman of N D R C , and its mem-
bers are as follows: 
Doctor Roger Adams, head of the department of chemistry of the 
University of Illinois, Urbana; Doctor Karl T.

Compton, presi-
dent of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
Mass.

; Doctor Frank B.

Jewett, president of the National Academy 
of Sciences; Doctor Richard C.

Tolman, dean of the graduate 
school of the California Institute of Technology, Pasadena.

These are the men who primarily represent American 
science and engineering.

T h e Honorable Conway P.

Coe, 
commissioner of patents, is also a member 
and 
brings to the committee his wide knowledge of inventions 
and their appropriate handling.

The Army is repre-
sented by Major General C.

C.

Williams, whose office in 
the Services of Supply is in touch with developmental 
work throughout the Army, and is also in touch with the 
needs of the Army.

Captain Lybrand P.

Smith repre-
sents the Navy Department, where he serves in the Office 
of 
the 
Co-ordinator 
of 
Research 
and 
Development.

Once a project has been authorized, the office of the 
chairman of N D R C is charged with the duty of adminis-
tering the project from its scientific and technical stand-
point.Smith repre-
sents the Navy Department, where he serves in the Office 
of 
the 
Co-ordinator 
of 
Research 
and 
Development.

Once a project has been authorized, the office of the 
chairman of N D R C is charged with the duty of adminis-
tering the project from its scientific and technical stand-
point.

For this purpose the line of authority flows from 
the director, through the chairman of N D R C , to the 
divisions, and members of these divisions become the 
authorized representatives of the office in the guidance 
of the contractors in their scientific and technical re-
search, in order that their efforts may be directed along 
the lines that have been approved by N D R C as best 
adapted to the needs of the services.

In this way also 
adequate reports of progress are made available promptly 
to the interested parties in the services.

Since the O S R D is concerned with many broad as-
pects of the relationship between the military services and 
the civilian organizations, the director of O S R D 
also 
has the benefit of an advisory council, which is representa-
tive of many points of view.

The council comprises: 
Harvey H.

Buhdy, special assistant to the secretary of war; Rear 
Admiral J.

A.

Furer, co-ordinator of research and development of 
the Navy; 
Doctor James Conant, representing the 
N D R C ; 
Doctor A.

Newton Richards, chairman of the Committee on 
Medical Research ; and Doctor J.

C.

Hunsaker, chairman of the 
National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics.

It has also recently included in its discussions Doctor 
Harvey N.

Davis, director of the Office of Production 
Research 
and 
Development 
of 
the 
W a r 
Production 
Board.

By special direction of the President, the director 
of O S R D has the benefit also of the advice of the presi-
dent of the National Academy of Sciences, who joins in 
many council deliberations.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Davis, director of the Office of Production 
Research 
and 
Development 
of 
the 
W a r 
Production 
Board. By special direction of the President, the director 
of O S R D has the benefit also of the advice of the presi-
dent of the National Academy of Sciences, who joins in 
many council deliberations. All of these various or-
ganizations will be mentioned later, for their interrela-
tion in the technical phases of the war effort is of much 
importance. T o continue, however, with the actual functioning of 
the O S R D , I wish to mention several other phases of its 
activities and some of the problems that it has faced. The business affairs, concerned with contracts and the 
like, are handled by the executive secretary of O S R D , 
Doctor Irvin Stewart, who also conducts relations with 
other 
governmental 
agencies 
on 
financial 
and 
legal 
matters. It has been a task of no small magnitude to fit the 
O S R D 
into the framework 
of the government, so it 
could operate in a smooth and effective fashion. T h e 
office is a part of the Office for Emergency Management, 
which is in the executive office of the President. T h e 
O S R D has attempted, and I believe with extraordinary 
success, to carry on its affairs strictly within the frame-
work as laid down by Congress, and in accordance with 
the regulations for the conduct of government business 
with which these various agencies are charged. Throughout the rapid growth of O S R D it has had ex-
ceedingly effective support from all of the agencies with 
which it has necessarily come into contact, notably with 
the Bureau of the Budget, the General Accounting Office, 
98 
Bush—Research 
and the 
War 
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

--- PAGE BREAK ---the Civil Service Commission, and many other groups 
with which it is concerned as an independent agency 
within the executive office of the President.

It is a 
pleasure to report that in two and one-half years of ex-
perience as the head of a new and vigorous government 
agency, I have never met with anything but the most 
helpful attitude on the part of the agencies with which I 
have been called upon to deal, and with the committees 
of Congress that have had to do with the affairs of the 
office.

This has been in no small degree due to the excel-
lent support of the executive secretary and his office.

The organization includes also a liaison office, re-
porting to the director, and charged primarily with the 
duty of conducting appropriate technical interchange 
with the allies of the United States.

Under specific 
instructions from the President, there was instituted very 
early a close interchange with the British on technical 
fipàtters, and this relationship has continued in a cordial 
SÈnd effective manner.

I feel sure that this interchange 
has expedited the work of scientists and technical men 
ίη England in their magnificent efforts for the protection 
of the British Isles, and I am sure that it has benefitted 
the United States in its war effort.

T h e liaison office, 
under Doctor Caryl P.

Haskins, maintains a London 
office through which there are contacts with the British 
Government at all times.

The close interrelationship of science and engineering 
is essential in the early aspects of the development of a 
new weapon.

T h e divisions of N D R C accordingly are 
made up of men chosen from 
both 
fields, 
working 
closely in collaboration.

Incidentally, these men are 
selected both from universities and from industry, from 
large colleges and small colleges, and from private labora-
tories, anc( they are drawn from all over the country.T h e divisions of N D R C accordingly are 
made up of men chosen from 
both 
fields, 
working 
closely in collaboration.

Incidentally, these men are 
selected both from universities and from industry, from 
large colleges and small colleges, and from private labora-
tories, anc( they are drawn from all over the country.

M a n y of them serve without remuneration on a part-
time 
basis; 
others are on the government 
payroll, 
while on leave of absence from 
their 
organizations.

TThey serve in every case, of course, as individuals, and 
φ hey are chosen for their individual qualifications.

In the introduction of a war weapon into use there is, 
h owever, a special problem which is unique and which is 
ngDt encountered in the same form by industry in the 
c<f>urse of its development of new devices.

During the 
ccfturse of the introduction of a new weapon it passes 
ärom the hands of O S R D directly into the hands of the 
alined services.

O S R D is charged with the research and 
development, 1 but it is not charged with procurement and 
us>e, which are in the hands of the armed services them-
selves.

T h e armed 
services themselves directly and 
through contract carry on a great deal of research and 
development, and many of their new devices 
come 
through this channel.

This again I will mention later.

However, at the present time I wish to trace the handling 
of the problem which occurs by reason of the transition 
of devices from the laboratory into the hands of the 
military.

In order to co-ordinate this aspect of its work, 
N D R C maintains two special pieces of organization.

O n e is what is called an engineering panel, made up of 
engineers who are at the same time members of the 
various divisions, together with certain other engineers 
chosen for their over-all grasp.In order to co-ordinate this aspect of its work, 
N D R C maintains two special pieces of organization.

O n e is what is called an engineering panel, made up of 
engineers who are at the same time members of the 
various divisions, together with certain other engineers 
chosen for their over-all grasp.

This panel is charged 
with the duty of seeing to it that appropriate engineering 
skill is made available to the divisions and sections in an 
effective way at such timers a new device approaches the 
period in its development where it begins to be adopted 
for actual production and use.

T h e other special piece of organization is the so-called 
transition office, which is charged with the responsibility 
of following the progress of devices, in order to make 
certain that the problem of scarce and strategic materials 
is considered in sufficient time.

T h e transition office also 
arranges with the armed services for initial production in 
order to carry the device through the transitional phase, 
in which it has emerged from the laboratory but has not 
yet appeared in quantity.

At this point there is usually 
involved the production of a sufficient number of pieces 
of equipment, often produced by hand methods, for 
purposes of extended tests in the field.

There is involved 
also the selection and indoctrination of an appropriate 
manufacturer.

CONFIDENTIAL W O R K OF T H E O S R D 
In order to appreciate the way in which the O S R D 
operates, it is necessary to realize that practically every-
thing it does is highly secret, and that it is not possible 
to carry on its work under conditions of great secrecy 
with the same dispatch which is possible when no such 
conditions obtain.

For reasons of security, appointment 
of personnel in any capacity throughout the organiza-
tion is made only after careful investigation.

A ruling 
principle, and one which is observed by the Army and 
the Navy, is that secret matters are held carefully in 
compartments.--- PAGE BREAK ---

For reasons of security, appointment 
of personnel in any capacity throughout the organiza-
tion is made only after careful investigation. A ruling 
principle, and one which is observed by the Army and 
the Navy, is that secret matters are held carefully in 
compartments. This means 
that no member of the 
organization will learn of secret matters except to the 
extent that is necessary for his appropriate functioning 
in the particular position which he occupies in the or-
ganization. Knowledge 
concerning 
especially 
secret 
matters is restricted to decidedly small groups within 
O S R D and within the services themselves. This leads me to mention one other matter. Ever 
since this organization was formed, I have encountered 
the question many times as to why it needs to be or-
ganized on a national and vertical basis in accordance 
with subject matter, and why it cannot be decentralized 
geographically to obtain the benefit of the many indi-
viduals in the country who are highly capable in tech-
nical ways, but who must necessarily operate on matters 
of the war effort in their own localities. T h e necessity 
for secrecy and compartmentalization is the reason. In 
many cities in this country, it would be quite possible 
to form very strong technical and scientific groups locally, 
composed of men who would put in part of their time, 
in the evenings and on week ends, on technical matters 
connected with the war. These groups could represent 
MARCH 1 9 4 3 
Bush—Research 
and the War 
9 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---many sciences and many types of engineering, and they 
would be made up of decidedly effective 
individuals.

However, this scheme is not compatible with necessary 
restrictions on the work of O S R D .

It would hardly be 
possible to assign one subject to each group in a locality.

Neither would it be possible to give to such a group the 
knowledge of the entire range of the development of 
weapons which would be essential in order to use ef-
fectively the diverse characteristics such a group would 
have.

Hence we have felt reluctantly that such groups 
could not be utilized in the affairs of O S R D .

I do feel, 
however, that they could have real value in other con-
nections, where the conditions of secrecy are not nearly 
so stringent, and this possibility is being explored.

O n the other hand, while O S R D 
is organized na-
tionally, 
drawing 
its membership 
from 
all over 
the 
country, 
its sections are made up of men 
especially 
adapted for the problems before them and these men are 
given full knowledge of the technical and tactical phases 
of the particular weapons with which they deal.

They 
are kept closely in touch with the progress being made 
in introducing weapons of this particular type in practice, 
and they form teams which are able to enlist the services 
of large numbers of men in many universities and indus-
tries for the accomplishment of their purposes.

All this 
is done in such a manner as to keep the secret information 
as closely confined as is consistent with rapid progress.

As previously mentioned, not all of the research and 
development on weapons in this country is carried on by 
O S R D .All this 
is done in such a manner as to keep the secret information 
as closely confined as is consistent with rapid progress.

As previously mentioned, not all of the research and 
development on weapons in this country is carried on by 
O S R D .

It is the duty of O S R D to relieve the armed 
services as far as possible in this regard, and indeed as 
the war proceeds and as the officers in the services be-
come more and more burdened with immediate matters 
concerning the conduct of the war, the load in regard to 
research and development has shifted quite naturally, 
so that O S R D is carrying a greater share of the burden.

However, both armed services maintain large labora-
tories in peace and 
in war for 
the development 
of 
weapons, and they also further development by direct 
contract with industry.

The mention of this matter gives me an opportunity to 
state definitely a fact on which I think there is a great 
deal of misunderstanding.

It has been publicly known 
for a long time now that when Germany started its 
all-out air attack on Britain in the summer of 1940, the 
attack was repelled not only on account of the mag-
nificent equipment and fighting qualities of the Royal 
Air Force, but also because the British had and effectively 
used certain radio-warning devices which took the sur-
prise out of the Germans' attacks and assured that their 
bombers were promptly met by fighter squadrons.

It is 
also known that the British had this device because of 
the effective work of a group of British scientists and engi-
neers over a considerable period of time.

I am also very 
glad to be able to state that at the same time the Army 
and Navy of the United States had equally effective de-
vices for this purpose, well developed and in hand.It is 
also known that the British had this device because of 
the effective work of a group of British scientists and engi-
neers over a considerable period of time.

I am also very 
glad to be able to state that at the same time the Army 
and Navy of the United States had equally effective de-
vices for this purpose, well developed and in hand.

This 
had been accomplished during years of peace, in spite 
of the fact that the United States had failed to support 
its military departments to an extent which rendered 
research and development in peacetime possible on any-
where near an adequate scale.

In particular, I know 
personally of the early work in this field by a small 
group of keen naval officers, and there were undoubtedly 
other groups at work elsewhere.

I am looking forward 
to the day when due tribute can be paid to those officers 
who very early saw the possibilities of devices of this sort 
and worked assiduously to the end that they might be 
practically available.

I also wish to emphasize strongly 
that this work was done long before Europe went to war, 
still longer before there was any such thing as N D R C .

Certainly since its advent, N D R C has worked along these 
same lines.

It has been proud to collaborate with the 
Army and Navy in so doing, and to work in partnership 
for the further development of devices on which they 
had already pioneered, and to share in all of the various 
possibilities 
flowing 
out of that early work.

The full 
story of this development, when it can be told, will in-
volve many scientists and engineers, and its roots go far 
back for many years.

At the present time we are alto-
gether too busy to think much about credit.

RECEPTIVITY T O CHANGE 
This leads me to a statement that I have pondered for 
some time.

I am occasionally met by the old accusation 
that military men are hidebound and reactionary, and 
that they are generally resistant to the introduction of 
new ideas.--- PAGE BREAK ---

RECEPTIVITY T O CHANGE 
This leads me to a statement that I have pondered for 
some time. I am occasionally met by the old accusation 
that military men are hidebound and reactionary, and 
that they are generally resistant to the introduction of 
new ideas. As applied to the present Army of the 
United States, such a statement is of course absurd on 
its face, since 24 out of 25 officers in the present Army 
were in civilian life only a short time ago, and the com-
munity of officers in the Army is therefore nearly a cross 
section of the general public. However, the statement is 
made usually with respect to the regular officers of the 
Army and Navy, men who have made military matter** 
their profession. I have been working very closely indeed with a largue 
number of those officers for three years now. Prior t-o 
that time I had had long association with the engineers 
in the United States, with college faculties, and wirçh 
businessmen. In every one of these groups, I have m\et 
individuals whose receptivity to new ideas was absolutely 
zero. I shall not single out any particular group fcfor 
comment, but in every one of these great sections of o u r 
population in this country I have been struck at times 
by an unwillingness to recognize the changing nature of 
the technical world to an extent that annoyed me exceed-
ingly. I have seen it among college teachers and in 
groups of engineers, and I have certainly seen it among 
businessmen. I have also seen the same thing among 
military officers. I say to you categorically, however, and I think I am 
in a position to know, that the men who lead the Army 
and Navy of the United States in this fight are no less 
100 
Bush- 
Research and the 
War 
E L E C T R I C A L 
ENGINEERING

--- PAGE BREAK ---open to new ideas than is the general public of the 
United States; and if we as a country are overconserva-
tive and disinclined to try new things, then I do not 
know what the words mean.

True, the officers who have 
seen service are hard-boiled.

They have a keen apprecia-
tion of what will and will not work—at sea under diffi-
cult conditions and various types of weather, on land 
in the dust and mud of battle.

They are intensely prac-
tical men, and at the present time they are exceedingly 
busy men, but they are not reactionary.

In two and one-
half years of close association with them in the develop-
ment of new weapons, I have as yet to see the instance 
where an idea or a device which has come to the atten-
tion of the O S R D and which in my opinion had out-
standing merit was turned down arbitrarily and blocked 
permanently by any military officer or any group of 
military officers.

The merit of new ideas has to be 
proved.

Ideas have to go through their growing periods 
and meet their stresses.

This has to occur in business 
in time of peace and in military affairs in time of war, 
but the atmosphere is no more hostile in one case than it 
is in the other.

O T H E R DEVELOPMENT 
AGENCIES 
But 
to return 
to civilian 
organizations, 
there 
are 
several as ects of the development of new weapons which 
very defii cely do not come under the control of O S R D , 
although 
he council of O S R D functions in an advisory 
capacity 
order to provide a unitary approach to prob-
lems of common interest and to prevent overlap and 
duplication.

Notable in this connection is the National 
Advisory 
Committee for Aeronautics.

I do not need to trace the 
position of this organization, as it has been done else-
where.

Founded by Congress over 25 years ago, it has a 
long and notable record of accomplishment.I do not need to trace the 
position of this organization, as it has been done else-
where.

Founded by Congress over 25 years ago, it has a 
long and notable record of accomplishment.

Inasmuch 
as the problems of flight are being attacked adequately 
by the N A C A , they are not again attacked by the N D R C , 
although the latter often carries on work on military 
devices which become incorporated in airplanes.

It is a 
fortunate thing for the United States that it has had for 
many years an active research organization in the field of 
aeronautics.

It has worked in close collaboration with 
the Army and Navy and with industry.

A short time 
ago there was a great deal of discussion as to whether 
American airplanes were comparable with those of the 
enemy.

Since the records have been coming in from 
England, Africa, and the South Pacific, this discussion 
seems to have become resolved.

Because of the interaction of many factors, but par-
ticularly because of the fact that we have long had an 
active independent research organization, working on a 
basis of excellent interchange with the A r m y and Navy, 
and supplying the fundamental basis for the advance 
design of aircraft, this country has not lagged in the sub-
ject, and its position at the present time can best be 
understood by reading the recent comments of General 
Arnold, commanding general of the A r m y Air Forces.

The ideas that finally become incorporated in new 
military devices originate in a great variety of ways.

M a n y of them come directly from officers of the armed 
services, and this is increasingly true, as our combat 
indicates to officers at the front the needs and opportuni-
ties.

Some ideas come from the scientific and military 
groups assembled as sections of N D R C as a result of their 
conferences and discussions.

A large number are sub-
mitted by the general public.Some ideas come from the scientific and military 
groups assembled as sections of N D R C as a result of their 
conferences and discussions.

A large number are sub-
mitted by the general public.

These require a great 
deal of review, for the percentage of valuable suggestions 
coming in this spontaneous way will always be small.

This review is provided by the National Inventors Coun-
cil, located in the Department of Commerce.

Again, I 
do not need to review the manner in which this organiza-
tion operates in order to bring to bear on suggestions 
from the public the judgment of competent scientists and 
engineers, and to forward to the armed services for their 
review the interesting ideas that emerge.

There are, 
however, one or two points in regard to their work upon 
which I feel it is well to elaborate.

It should be emphasized that the N I C is the official 
reviewing agency, and that its function is fully performed 
when it has brought a valuable suggestion to the ap-
propriate attention in the armed services.

At the same 
time it is essential to emphasize that the O S R D does not 
have the duty of reviewing suggestions submitted by the 
general public.

W h e n the armed services find that an 
idea warrants development, they may turn to the O S R D 
in order to have such development 
performed.

Re-
search and development are the functions of O S R D , and 
it attempts to stay strictly within those bounds.

How-
ever, the sections that are making plans for the develop-
ment of new weapons receive many ideas from the mem-
bers of the group itself, from engineers and scientific 
men working with contractors who are carrying out 
research under the supervision of the section, from the 
officers and men of the armed services, and through the 
armed services from the Inventors Council.

Unfortunately, the independent inventor is at a very 
considerable disadvantage when it comes to the matter of 
making valuable suggestions in connection with military 
devices.--- PAGE BREAK ---

How-
ever, the sections that are making plans for the develop-
ment of new weapons receive many ideas from the mem-
bers of the group itself, from engineers and scientific 
men working with contractors who are carrying out 
research under the supervision of the section, from the 
officers and men of the armed services, and through the 
armed services from the Inventors Council. Unfortunately, the independent inventor is at a very 
considerable disadvantage when it comes to the matter of 
making valuable suggestions in connection with military 
devices. In the nature of things, he cannot be told the 
entire state of the art to which he is attempting to con-
tribute, so that he works very largely in the dark. This 
is unfortunate, for the same reasoning is unduly gone 
through over and over, but it is inevitable in view of the 
necessity for security. W h e n a man who has placed a 
great deal of effort on the development of an idea finally 
submits it, he would like to know whether his idea is 
new, whether it is considered valuable, and especially, 
he would like to know if it is being used. Yet in general 
he cannot be told; 
in fact, he cannot be told unless he 
occupies a position in which he is entitled to secret and 
confidential information in the field of this inquiry. If 
this principle were not strictly adhered to, the enemy 
might find out a great deal by simply putting in sugges-
MARCH 1 9 4 3 
Bush-—Research 
and the 
War 
1 0 1

--- PAGE BREAK ---tions and thus learning the general state of the art and 
the status of development of various military weapons.

I mention this because I believe there has been a 
great deal of misunderstanding on the matter, and many 
individuals in the United States have become distinctly 
annoyed because they were not told of the outcome of 
review when they made suggestions.

It is strange that 
this situation is not more fully appreciated than it is at 
the present time.

As an example, there was recently 
published in a prominent magazine an article which 
described in detail a military device which had been 
submitted to the armed services, and the article com-
plained bitterly that no serious attention was paid to the 
suggestion.

As a matter of fact, the inventor in this par-
ticular instance had visited me personally and described 
his device.

At the time he described it to me, I knew 
that a better device than the one he suggested was al-
ready in use.

This I could not tell him.

O f course, if 
his suggestion really had been new and highly valuable, 
the publication of it with full details would have been of 
great service to the enemy.

There is another phase of the work of scientists and 
engineers on developmental matters which also needs to 
be mentioned.

There are broad problems of substitute 
and strategic materials, and many technical questions 
involved in the reorientation of industry to the war ef-
fort.

The development of substitute materials and sub-
stitute processes is of enormous significance as the war 
proceeds.

The task of conducting research and develop-
ment along these lines is not within the scope of O S R D , 
the activities of which are directed to the development of 
new weapons and their methods of utilization.

O n the 
other hand, the W a r Production Board has long been 
deeply concerned with these very matters.The task of conducting research and develop-
ment along these lines is not within the scope of O S R D , 
the activities of which are directed to the development of 
new weapons and their methods of utilization.

O n the 
other hand, the W a r Production Board has long been 
deeply concerned with these very matters.

In some of its 
approaches 
to the problems of materials it has 
been 
strongly supported by the National Research 
Council 
with scientific and technical advice.

Recently, a new 
office within the W P B has been formed, called the Office 
of Production Research and Development, and Doctor 
Harvey N.

Davis, president of Stevens Institute of Tech-
nology, Hoboken, N.

J., is director of this new office.

M a n y auxiliary problems arise in connection with the 
technical and scientific effort, 
and prominent 
among 
these is the problem of trained personnel.

Fortunately, 
we have had for a long time now the Roster of Scientific 
and Specialized Personnel, conducted under the chair-
manship of Doctor Leonard Carmichael, president of 
Tufts College, and his office is now attached to the W a r 
Manpower Commission, where it is rendering excellent 
service.

The rapid survey of the organizational set-up would 
not be complete, however, without final mention of the 
National Academy of Sciences and the National 
Re-
search Council.

The National Academy 
of Sciences 
was formed at the time of the Civil W a r and operates 
under Congressional charter.

It is charged with the 
broad duty of advising agencies of government with re-
gard to their scientific and technical problems.

Doctor 
Frank B.

Jewett, president of the Academy, has recently 
described in some detail the enormous burden which has 
been carried by the Academy and Council in the per-
formance of this obligation.

The O S R D leans on the 
Academy and Council for scientific and technical advice 
on many matters.Jewett, president of the Academy, has recently 
described in some detail the enormous burden which has 
been carried by the Academy and Council in the per-
formance of this obligation.

The O S R D leans on the 
Academy and Council for scientific and technical advice 
on many matters.

Notably in the medical and metal-
lurgical fields, the organization of the N R C has provided 
committees of eminent 
men who have advised 
con-
tinuously and effectively on programs in these fields.

T o one who has not worked closely with the govern-
mental organization for the conduct of research and de-
velopment in time of war, this rapid survey of the or-
ganization may seem to indicate a great deal of com-
plexity.

It is true that it is complicated, but research 
and development are themselves necessarily complex.

However, the various aspects of the over-all 
problem 
now are provided for adequately by the organizations 
that are operating in the field, and these are tied to-
gether as closely as necessary for co-operation by the 
council of O S R D .

The armed services themselves are 
concerned with procurement, installation, testing, and 
use.

T h e review of suggestions, the conduct of research 
and development in the aeronautical field, in the matter 
of substitute materials, and directly in the development 
of new weapons are provided for by appropriate groups.

RESULTS OF RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
But what of results?

In wartime the work of the 
laboratory is meaningless unless it finds its way into the 
field of action.

The most tangible expression of the 
success of scientific effort 
in the present war is to be 
found in the attitudes of the armed services.

Both the 
Secretary of W a r and the Secretary of the Navy have 
indicated to me their satisfaction over what joint efforts 
have accomplished in terms of operations.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The most tangible expression of the 
success of scientific effort 
in the present war is to be 
found in the attitudes of the armed services. Both the 
Secretary of W a r and the Secretary of the Navy have 
indicated to me their satisfaction over what joint efforts 
have accomplished in terms of operations. At the close 
of the last fiscal year, the W a r Department pointed out 
that it had placed orders amounting to approximately 
$560,000,000 for items developed by one section alone 
of the N D R C . As a result of a new process for making 
an important military material developed 
by another 
section, the Army placed orders for plant and product 
amounting 
to about 
$270,000,000. In 
this 
instance 
there was an anticipated initial saving of $100,000,000 
in 
plant-construction 
costs and 
additional 
savings of 
many thousands of dollars a day in operating costs, as 
compared with previous methods. These figures are now some months old, and a great 
deal has happened since then. W h e n the story can be 
told, it will be dramatic, and it will reflect the vigorous 
efforts of a great group of men, employing the best of 
teamwork in the common cause. Until then we cannot 
talk 
of 
results. The 
evidence 
accumulates 
rapidly, 
however, that the devices being developed by American 
scientists and engineers will play an important part in 
bringing the war to successful conclusion in a shorter 
time than might otherwise have been the case. 102 
Bush—Research 
and the 
War 
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING