6 / THE AMERICAN PRESIDENCY

Greenwood Press • 5 1 Riverside Avenue. Westport. CT 06880


*

1

5



A Comprehensive Historical and Legal
Bibliography, 1963-1979


apf

Compiled by DeLloyd J. Guth and
David R. Wrone

A

Facts about the assassination of President John F. Kennedy
on November 22. 1963 arc still a mystery today, seven-
teen years after the event. The endless investigations and
reports, each in conflict with the others, have reduced the
issue to the common denominator of credibility, to faith
or doubt in government, to distrust for police investiga-
tion rather than to matters of evidence.

This bibliography strives to open to the reader the
abundance of historical evidence, some still classified but
much that is available. The first section is a thorough
introduction to that evidence and its locations. The
second section includes books and articles published
about the event — from the shamelessly sensational to
scholarly contributions. A third section, arranged chrono-
logically, references all reportsappearing in Thetieiv York
Times between 1963 and 1978 and those appearing in
The Washington Post in 1978 when the Times suffered a
lengthy printers' strike. Anyone concerned with the events
of the assassination must find this an invaluable guide and
reference.


CONTENTS — Part 1 : The Evidence and the Litigants:

Unpublished Sources • Published Sources excluding the Warren
Report • Local Judicial Records • Federal Judicial Records •
Photographic Evidence • Part 2: Published Books and Peri-
odicals: Bibliographies and Research • The Action • The »

Reaction • Later Inquiries • Related Topics • Part 3: TheNciv
York Times Daily Reports. 1963-1978 • Supplemented by 77te
Washington Post. 1978 • Index of Names • Index of Corre- f
spondents

Available in August 1980.

Guth. DeLloyd J. and Wrone, David R. (comps.) THE ASSAS-
SINATION OF JOHN F. KENNEDY: A Comprehensive
Historical and Legal Bibliography.

(Westport. Conn.. I §00). Approx. 500 pages, maps. GJK/

ISBN 0-313-21274-0. $35.00


|


V


1


This Greenwood Press catalog Includes books about
the men who have held the office of President of the
United States, their policies, the parties that elected
them and the electoral process itself. Also included
are theoretical works about the office of the presi-
dent: who should be president; what are the limits of
presidential power; how should the president be
elected or removed from office; etc

Featured in this catalog are five new or forthcoming
titles:

Presidential Primaries by James W. Davis
Prelude to the Presidency by Gary M Fink
Truman's Crises by Harold F. Gosnell
The Assassination of John F. Kennedy compiled
by DeLloyd J. Guth and David Wrone
Presidential Secrecy and Deception by John M.
Orman


, Greenwood Press *
f 51 Riverside Avenue

Westport* Connecticut 0 S 83 G


All titles listed are available at the time of Issuance of this catalog
unless otherwise noted.

All editions are sturdily bound, hardcover books which will
provide long use with normal care. Except es noted, all are
available for immediate delivery.

If you have a manuscript in American history or political science,
please write to us. Do not submit a reading copy of the manu-
script until we con respond to your letter.


Credit Card Orders

Call toll free 1-800-257 7850
(In Mew Jersey coll 1-800-322-8650)

24 hours a day. 7 days a w etk. with your Master Charge,
Visa or American Express cord you can order the books
you want right now! Greenwood Press pays postage and
handling!

Ptease have your credit card ready along with the ISBN's
(International Standard Book Number) of the titles you
wish to order. Sorry . . . credit card orders only to this
special toll free number. All other orders and inquiries
should be directed to our Westport, Connecticut office.
