3
THE RUNES AND
THE PATH OF
INITIATION
JUAN RICARDO CÉSPEDES

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5
I am grateful to my father for being the first person in my life to teach me
about realities beyond the exclusively human and materialistic.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
-INTRODUCTION
8
PART ONE: THE RUNES AND THEIR MEANINGS
10
-COMMENTARY ON THE HISTORY OF RUNIC LANGUAGES
11
-VERTICALITY IN RUNES
14
-RUNIC SYSTEMS
NUMEROLOGICAL CORRESPONDENCES
19
ANCIENT FUTHARK
23
WISDOM OF THE ANCIENT FUTHARK
29
ANGLO-SAXON FUTHORC
48
WISDOM OF THE ANGLO-SAXON FUTHORC
50
NEW FUTHARK (SCANDINAVIAN)
56
WISDOM OF THE NEW FUTHARK
59
RUNIC CODES OF THE MIDDLE AGES
62
ARMANEN FUTHARK
65
WISDOM OF THE ARMANEN FUTHARKH
73
UTHARK
78
WISDOM OF THE UTHARKH
79
-CONCLUSIONS ABOUT THE ORIGINAL SERIES OF 16 RUNES
81
PART TWO: THE RUNES AND INITIATION
91
-ODIN AND THE RUNIC INITIATION
92
-RUNA UR AND THE ORIGIN
97
-RUNA IS AND TANTRIC ALCHEMY
98
-RUNA BERKANO AND THE TRIPLE GODDESS
99
-RUNA DAGAZ AND TRANSMUTATION
101
-RUNA EHWAZ AND THE MAGICAL MARRIAGE
102
-RUNA ODAL AND THE IMPENETRABLE WALL
103
-RUNA YR: INITIATIC DESCENT OF THE SPIRIT
105
-RUNA ELHAZ AND THE PATH OF RETURN
107
-RUNA HAGALL AND TOTALITY
109
Derivations of the Hexagon-Hagall in the Old Futhark
112
Derivations of the Hexagon-Hagall in the Futharkh Armanen
117

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7
Derivations of the Hexagon-Hagall in the Anglo-Saxon Futhorc
119
PART THREE: RUNIC PRACTICES
123
-MEDITATION WITH RUNES
124
-INTONATION OF THE RUNES
125
-RUNA STHÖDUR
133
-RUNEN GRIFF
146
-RUNIC POWER ACCUMULATION
158
Life Force
159
Hvelir/Chakras
159
Sexual Energy and Astral Projection
164
PART FOUR: RUNIC VESTIGES IN AMERICA
170
-THE LEGENDARY MEMORY OF ATLANTIS AND HYPERBOREAN
SYMBOLISM
171
-RUNIC INSCRIPTIONS AND THE VARIOUS DISCOVERIES IN AMERICA
174
-BOCHICA, VIRACOCHA AND QUETZALCOÁTL
185
-EL DORADO AND THE CITY OF THE CAESARS
192
-THE STONES OF TUNJO IN FACATATIVA
199
BIBLIOGRAPHY
209

--- PAGE BREAK ---D THE VARIOUS DISCOVERIES IN AMERICA
174
-BOCHICA, VIRACOCHA AND QUETZALCOÁTL
185
-EL DORADO AND THE CITY OF THE CAESARS
192
-THE STONES OF TUNJO IN FACATATIVA
199
BIBLIOGRAPHY
209

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8
INTRODUCTION
The intention of this book is to address the study and practice of magical runic
symbols from a Gnostic and initiatory point of view. Specifically, it requires the
gnosis of someone who possesses the attitude of a Kshatriya1, the initiated
warrior-magician who is governed by values such as courage and honour in the
midst of a process of constant awakening and mutation.
We are talking about the man called Virya by the Hindu Samkya philosophical
system2, that person who, through the image of his inner beloved and the
melody played by the gods, has remembered that he is much more than a
specimen bound to the animal and gregarious instincts and forces characteristic
of the earthly man called Pasú. That person who fights furiously without giving
in to the wheels of eternal return in order to deify himself and transmute into a
divine and immortal Siddha, someone who is no longer a finite creature,
insufficient in himself and dependent on the exchange of energies and emotions
with external entities of the material universe or maya (world of illusion), but has
become his own universe and complete creation in himself.
It is not the intention of this book to reveal exclusively "völkish"(3)   or"identitarian"
content, so readers who adhere to those respectable ideologies are warned not
to be upset if they find that the content of this book is not very purist in the
sense that it is not based solely and exclusively on the folk traditions of a
particular ethnological group, in this specific case the Indo-European ethnic
groups of Northern Europe.
This book approaches runic knowledge and practice from the perspective of an
esoteric science that gradually produces an inner and transcendental
transformation similar to what happens with alchemy and Shivaist tantrism.
Therefore, throughout this book, it will be common to find references and
analogies made from the realm of the runes to terms and symbols specific to
other initiatory practices.
Some chapters explain certain practices for managing and awakening internal
and external runic forces, but it is important to note that, as the Taoist sages
say, "when pointing a finger at the moon, one must avoid looking only at the tip
of one's own finger." These practices are a means to increase a subtle power
that should be used strategically in daily life, but in themselves these practices
are not the ultimate goal. The goal is spiritual transmutation.
The main interest of this book is to let yourself be guided by Ariadne's thread
and retrace the path that leads us through the song of the gods and the memory
of blood to the rather forgotten and distant divine origins of our current
existence.
1  Belonging to the royal warrior caste of the ancient Hindu civilisation.
2  Hindu dualistic system that contrasts two principles: Purusha (being) and Prakriti (matter).
3  Folkloric roots and values of an ethnic group in a specific territorial and historical context.tion.
2  Hindu dualistic system that contrasts two principles: Purusha (being) and Prakriti (matter).
3  Folkloric roots and values of an ethnic group in a specific territorial and historical context.

--- PAGE BREAK ---stic system that contrasts two principles: Purusha (being) and Prakriti (matter).
3  Folkloric roots and values of an ethnic group in a specific territorial and historical context.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9
It is an approach to the primordial tradition of heroic and mythical civilisations
whose essence is completely beyond the comprehension of modern man, as
they lived their historical cycles under the influence of another reality and higher
planes. Therefore, this is not a book focused on a historical or eminently
rationalist and theoretical discourse; it is a work focused on the discernment of
symbols, which should be allowed to speak for themselves.
With one of the tools that has perhaps been least diluted culturally over the
centuries, namely runes, it is possible to embark on a journey of transmutation
and return to the origin of one's own being. It is even possible that, for a few
moments, one may perceive and understand the legendary "language of birds,"
that root language-science that only coldly ignites the blood of those men and
women with a spiritual heritage from another world.
Finally, it is important to emphasise that this book seeks to decipher the most
basic and primary essence of runic wisdom. Therefore, in certain chapters, the
different runic series best known and used in the last 2200 years are compared
and analysed. This does not mean downplaying or taking lightly each particular
runic system. In any case, many books have been written about each of these
runic systems or alphabets, which can be consulted by anyone who wishes to
delve deeper into their respective symbolism and structure.
The book is divided into four parts. The first three parts address runic wisdom
from a symbolic, esoteric, magical, and initiatory point of view, although the first
part reviews some historical and archaeological data related to the different
futharks or runic alphabets/systems. The fourth part is practically an 'appendix
chapter' in which the different runic remains in the north, centre and south of the
American continent are reviewed and compiled. These remains may well be
archaeological or historical (although the author of the text does not subscribe
to the modern materialistic scientific approach) or they may also be eminently
mythical and legendary.
This book compiles and interprets different esoteric symbols related to runic
wisdom, as well as some archaeological evidence and elements from different
historical and cultural contexts. The book represents the result of the author's
inner search, and it is not his intention to divulge a single "revealed" truth.
The authornd elements from different
historical and cultural contexts. The book represents the result of the author's
inner search, and it is not his intention to divulge a single "revealed" truth.
The author

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
PART ONE: THE
RUNES AND
THEIR MEANINGS

--- PAGE BREAK ---result of the author's
inner search, and it is not his intention to divulge a single "revealed" truth.
The author

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
PART ONE: THE
RUNES AND
THEIR MEANINGS

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11
COMMENTARY ON THE HISTORY
AND MEANING OF RUNIC
LANGUAGES
Guido Von List stated in his book "The Secret of the Runes" that in ancient
times, many centuries before the advent of Christianity, the original runic series
of the Indo-Germanic peoples consisted of 16 symbols1. This series could be
considered to have been made up of what several writers refer to as ideographs
or runic glyphs, knowledge of which was preserved during the Copper and
Bronze Ages. At that time, the runes mainly referred to a hidden and Gnostic
meaning, and were used for magical, ritual and divinatory purposes.
Later, as contact between Germanic tribes and Mediterranean civilisations
increased, the runic series gradually expanded to 24 symbols, which acquired a
more defined linguistic and phonetic use for secular purposes, alongside a
secret use and meaning known only to certain groups of initiates.
This series of 24 symbols is what is currently known as the Old Futhark and was
commonly used between the 2nd century BC and the 8th century AD. It is
curious that in many levels of academic research, this Futhark is considered to
be the oldest chronologically speaking and therefore deduced to be the most
primary and original. However, these researchers do not take into account the
fact that the lack of stone or metal artefacts carved with complete runic series
prior to the 2nd century BC does not necessarily mean that they did not exist as
an initiatory tradition for a small group of a race in which the development of
mass writing was not the focus of their existence. This is without considering the
possibility that runes were often carved on pieces of wood, which rot and do not
withstand the passage of centuries very well. Even so, many very ancient
pieces have been found with symbols or glyphs (not referring to a letter or root
syllable but to an idea) such as the solar cross or the swastika, all of which
shows that these eternal symbols were known and survived in the collective
unconscious despite the cultural and historical circumstances that these
peoples had to endure.
In stark contrast to the mindset of modern Western man, who perceives history
and time as an infinite linear progression, ancient traditional civilisations had a
cyclical conception of ages and events in their worldview. Accordingly, when we
consider the historical and cultural development of the runes, it is difficult for us
to appreciate the Old Futhark as the only and most original of the runic systems,
and even more difficult to understand its subsequent variations as less 'pure'
traditions simply because of their chronological order. Apart from scientific
circles
1  LIST, GUIDO VON, "The Secret of the Runes". Santiago: Ediciones Armanen (first edition in Spanish,
translated by Roberto Jaras), 2000. Page 37.chronological order. Apart from scientific
circles
1  LIST, GUIDO VON, "The Secret of the Runes". Santiago: Ediciones Armanen (first edition in Spanish,
translated by Roberto Jaras), 2000. Page 37.

--- PAGE BREAK ---12
and academics, many neo-pagan groups seeking to recover and revive the
original European folk traditions continue to make the same mistake of
perceiving historical development in a totally linear fashion, only they do so in
reverse, looking exclusively backwards chronologically speaking.

Let us remember that the runic tradition is eternal and lies beyond temporal and
spatial measurements; it can shine, disappear or be reborn here and there in
different eras and with different forms and intensities.

If we frame our search for origins in a cyclical conception, it would not be
unreasonable to see as very possible the fact that the so-called "New Futhark"
o r "Scandinavian Futhark" of 16 runes used since the 9th century AD was not
really "new" at all, but rather a return to the truly original and primordial runic
system thanks to the renewing impulse that the Viking race brought to that era.

The same can be said of the 16+2-rune Armanen Futhark deciphered by the
Austrian occultist Guido Von List in the early 20th century.

In the historical and esoteric conception currently in vogue, it is assumed that
the original Ancient series had 24 runes and that the variation and derivation
(not to say degradation) occurred from the beginning of the Middle Ages
onwards into two runic series: the Anglo-Saxon series of 33 runes and the
Scandinavian series of 16 runes.

In the former, it is possible to denote a
degradation, as will be analysed later in this book, but this is not the case with
the Scandinavian series.

In reality, based on a broader worldview, it can be deduced that the so-called
"Old Futhark" of 24 runes itself corresponded to a linguistic-cultural expansion
and variation of another earlier Futhark of 16 runes that had existed for several
centuries or millennia prior.

It is important to note that we are referring to and starting from a purely
symbolic and meaningful level rather than a simply cultural and linguistic one.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In reality, based on a broader worldview, it can be deduced that the so-called
"Old Futhark" of 24 runes itself corresponded to a linguistic-cultural expansion
and variation of another earlier Futhark of 16 runes that had existed for several
centuries or millennia prior. It is important to note that we are referring to and starting from a purely
symbolic and meaningful level rather than a simply cultural and linguistic one. Therefore, it is of little relevance whether a runic system is supposedly more
perfect the more runes it has or the more it is adapted to a language or dialect. What is really important is to resolve the inner and outer psychological and
emotional labyrinths and reach the essence of the symbols in their purest and
most transfiguring state. Finally, let us not forget that the work of some authors, such as Rudolf John
Gorsleben and Arthur Kemp, takes us even further back in time than the official
Western historical chronology, referring to a post-Atlantean race related to Cro-
Magnon man, which was the founder of all European civilisations, some Asian
civilisations and even some American civilisations. This primordial Aryan race
was said to possess knowledge and magical runic science, and after the
planetary catastrophe that sank the legendary island-continent of Atlantis, it
decided to migrate to various continents, causing its main trunk to split into a
large number of peoples and tribes. Among these peoples were the

--- PAGE BREAK ---island-continent of Atlantis, it
decided to migrate to various continents, causing its main trunk to split into a
large number of peoples and tribes. Among these peoples were the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13
original founders of the Copper Age civilisations of the Mediterranean, which
would eventually give way to Greco-Roman culture and the forgotten civilisation
of Tartessos in what is now the region of Andalusia in Spain.
Therefore, along with the Germanic peoples, other Mediterranean civilisations in
their early stages inherited the Atlantean runic knowledge, which gradually
diluted until it became, to the untrained eye, simply the alphabets and syllables
that by inertia formed their native language and writing.
In the decline of the once majestic and marvellous Greek culture, the degraded
runic roots of its linguistic writing were already difficult to recognise (just as in
the Futhark, each Greek letter is designated by a root word). A similar case
occurred with the sages of the dying Roman Empire, after it was precisely the
Latins and the descendants of the Trojans who closed the cycle of Hellenic
decline and renewed the impulse of primordial wisdom.
It is a tradition that endlessly undergoes cycles of generation, apogee, decline
and rebirth, beyond cultural appearances and historical cycles. After the decline
of the spiritual and warrior initiative of the Mediterranean civilisations, it was the
Indo-Germanic races, also descendants of the great original Aryan racial stock,
who renewed on a large scale the contact with the transcendental forces and
primordial runic wisdom.
It is useless to engage in endless and vain dialectical discussions framed within
the modern progressive view of history, which is why many researchers of our
era cannot agree on the theory of whether the Nordic runes are derived from
Latin or Greek, or whether, on the contrary, these languages were influenced in
their structuring by older glyphs from the Bronze Age. This academic and
scientific knowledge may be useful to us at some point, but what is really
important is to unveil the eternal gnosis beyond the circumstantial socio-cultural
and historical structures, the language of the birds whose origin is Atlantis,
Hyperborea and the eternal and infinite.rtant is to unveil the eternal gnosis beyond the circumstantial socio-cultural
and historical structures, the language of the birds whose origin is Atlantis,
Hyperborea and the eternal and infinite.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14
VERTICALITY IN THE RUNES
In all runes, the vertical line-IS symbolises the uncreated or unconditioned
spiritual principle that descends or ascends and is crossed by the horizontal
telluric line, which represents creation, the earth and the feminine-material
forces. At this intersection, right angles and vertices are formed, supported by a
centre that is the intersection between two realities or states of being, or it can
refer to the reception of the influence of one world on another, the exchange
between gods and men, the recreation of the divine in the human.
Some symbols that denote the intersection between the vertical and the horizontal:
Cross: "Crucifixion" of the spirit in matter, the infinite projected and reflected
upon finite created matter. In Indo-European pagan cultures, it was associated
with the solar cross, symbolising the process of a repetitive cycle of fourfold
manifestation unfolding over the months, seasons, ages and eras. For this
reason, the ancient Greeks celebrated their Olympic Games every four years,
and the three stone circles at Stonehenge have 48 (months), 30 (days in each
month) and 21 units (days in an additional month in a leap year) respectively,
which when added and multiplied ((48*30)+21) give almost exactly the total
number of days in four solar years of 365 days (1460 days).
Decomposed cube forming a cross: The eternal and uncreated spirit-sphere
has been 'carved' and fixed in a material form in the middle of a three-
dimensional field.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s (1460 days).
Decomposed cube forming a cross: The eternal and uncreated spirit-sphere
has been 'carved' and fixed in a material form in the middle of a three-
dimensional field.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15
Thor's hammer: Action of the spirit and the gods of Asgard in the earthly
world. Ray of power of the god Donar/Thor. Hammer Mjöllnir
Hungarian Cross: Two horizontal lines crossing a vertical line
symbolising the double action of the eternal in both heaven and earth.
Hagall Rune: The vertical line crosses a cross, thus reflecting the spirit and
infinite Vril centre within itself, which is found in the middle of the four elements
and four cardinal points representing the manifested universe.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16
From the above, we can derive the swastika and its spinning motion on an axis,
which is actually a Hagall rune "in motion". The spiritual centre-axis that remains
immutable and impassive in the face of the cosmic cycles of the material
universe (four ages of the Greeks and four yugas of the Hindus(1) ),as well as
between the entropy of the four elements and the rotation of the four cardinal
points:
Some Hyperborean myths tell us of Thule as an island at the North Pole that
was central to the four others that surrounded it: the fifth kingdom, the axis of
the world, the mountain-centre of the universal empire.
This transversal or perpendicular element refers to an uncreated divine essence
that lies beyond the material universe, but is equally reflected or mirrored in the
manifested world and drives many of its processes.
1  The Greek ages: Golden Age, Silver Age, Bronze Age, Iron Age. Eras of Hinduism that make up a
manvantara: Satyayuga, Treta Yuga, Dwaparayuga, Kaliyuga.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s many of its processes.
1  The Greek ages: Golden Age, Silver Age, Bronze Age, Iron Age. Eras of Hinduism that make up a
manvantara: Satyayuga, Treta Yuga, Dwaparayuga, Kaliyuga.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

17
Similarly, this transverse element that forms an angle can also be observed in
the science of palmistry:
It is no coincidence that the thumb, perpendicular to the other four fingers, is
called the finger of Venus. Hyperborean myths tell us that the uncreated spirit
descended into matter through the "portal of Venus", a planet that serves
symbolically, spiritually and physically as a bridge to infinity. It is not surprising
that several initiates of antiquity and great heroes such as Gaius Julius Caesar
called themselves "sons of Venus" or "descendants of Venus".
Rune of Venus: Infinity expressed in the manifested. Reflection of the
uncreated in the created. The impassive infinite unfolds its power and potency
in the horizontal and material.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e of Venus: Infinity expressed in the manifested. Reflection of the
uncreated in the created. The impassive infinite unfolds its power and potency
in the horizontal and material.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

18
The rune of Venus can also be formed by one cross next to another oblique
cross. This symbol is found on the flag of Great Britain. It is difficult to specify to
what extent its meaning has been damaged or distorted, but we must not forget
that long before the modern era, the island of England was considered Albion or
Engeland - land of angels.
+
This oblique cross is found in the Old Futhark under the name of the rune
GEBO.
We see the rune of Venus in the body position of Leonardo Da Vinci's famous
drawing called 'Vitruvian Man', which shows a man with four arms and four legs.
The man on the cross (who projects his spirit onto the earthly world) adopts a
more 'oblique' position and finds a bridge to infinity, a point of intersection where
the world of the gods and the earthly world, Asgard and Midgard(2),meet.
=
The rune of Venus can also be formed by adding an auxiliary line Tel (telluric
line) to a Hagall.
+
2  These are part of the nine worlds of the Yggdrasil tree in Norse mythology.

--- PAGE BREAK ---The rune of Venus can also be formed by adding an auxiliary line Tel (telluric
line) to a Hagall.
+
2  These are part of the nine worlds of the Yggdrasil tree in Norse mythology.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

19
 RUNIC SYSTEMS
 NUMEROLOGICAL CORRESPONDENCES
Before addressing in detail each of the most widely used runic series or
systems in the last two millennia, it is worth briefly referring to the meaning of
the respective numbering of each symbol, since the different order and
sequence of the runes in a series denotes a certain vibration and symbolism
that must be taken into account.
Below, reference is made up to the number 33, since the most extensive runic
system is the Anglo-Saxon Futhroc, which precisely contains that number of
runes.
1- Number of the original unit, the beginning of everything, vibration of a
masculine nature. Related to primordial fire, active energy and leadership.
Individuality, individuation, being complete and self-sufficient in oneself.
2- Number indicating duality, division, polarity and separation derived from a
previous unity, vibration of a feminine nature, related to primordial water and a
passive attitude. Being in need of completion with something external because it
must find that which was "usurped" from it.
3- A masculine number that in Hermeticism has always been related to a return
to unity, reintegrating within itself both principles that were separated by the
number 2; Hegelian thesis, antithesis and synthesis. Vibration of the three
Norse Norns (Urd, Werdandi and Skuld), the three Greek Fates (Clotho,
Lachesis and Atropos) and the three temporal projections ( Past, Present and
Future).
Related to the element of air and the objectives to be achieved. The Vedic trinity
related to the process of birth, life and death, as well as creation, maintenance
and destruction. The Christian trinity related to the Father, Son and Holy Spirit,
as well as Father, Son and Mother. The Germanic trinity of Wodan, Wili and Vé,
which corresponds to Odin, Höener and Loeder.
4- Related to the earth, practicality and a realistic view of things. Capacity for
schematisation and organisation, application of spiritual influences in the strictly
"earthly" realm. The four elements, the four cardinal points: Deployment of a
cycle of manifestation: the four Greek ages and the four Vedic yugas. The four
increases duality and division: Father. Mother, son and daughter. In Norse
mythology, it is related to the four dwarves who hold up the world: Nodhri,
Sudhri, Austri, Westri.Vedic yugas. The four
increases duality and division: Father. Mother, son and daughter. In Norse
mythology, it is related to the four dwarves who hold up the world: Nodhri,
Sudhri, Austri, Westri.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ur
increases duality and division: Father. Mother, son and daughter. In Norse
mythology, it is related to the four dwarves who hold up the world: Nodhri,
Sudhri, Austri, Westri.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20
5- Related to ether, the element beyond the four elements that is also found
within them. The number 5 also symbolises that force which functions as a kind
of impassive and uncreated centre or Divine Motor on which creation is
sustained and which sets the cycles of manifestation in motion. Five fingers on
a hand. The number 5 also refers to the perpendicular line that can bridge the
gap to a higher reality and lead to the divine spiritual origin.
6- The number of sex, the cosmic creative act that occurs through the contact
between archetypal fire and water, or according to Norse mythology, between
primordial fire (Muspellheim) and ice (Nifelheim). That which manifests itself or
"exists." Opposition of the triads of male Hindu gods (Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva)
with the female triad (Swaravasti, Lakshmi, Kali). Six also serves as the basis
for the sexagesimal mathematical system developed by the Sumerian
civilisation: 60 seconds in each of the 60 minutes of an hour.
7- Number of happiness, fulfilment and acquired wisdom. Related to the highest
step or level in evolutionary cycles or planes of manifestation. A number related
to musical and cosmic harmony between different forces and archetypes that
interact with each other: the seven notes of the musical scale, the seven planets
of astrology and Hermeticism, all of which are related to each other by a
"cosmic" harmony or music of the spheres related to Pythagoreanism and
ancient Greek Orphism.
It is also 4+3, the four elements plus the divine trinity. The 'seven liberal arts' of
the Middle Ages: Trivium (grammar, rhetoric and dialectic) and Quadrivium
(astronomy, geometry, arithmetic and music). The seven eternal Hyperborean
arts, which are subdivided into four minor individual arts (sculpture, painting,
music and rhetoric) and three major group arts (architecture, war and politics).
In Norse mythology, the seven colours of the rainbow are related to the Bïfrost
bridge that connects the earthly world with the world of the gods.
8- Number of infinity. Eight represents one at a higher stage, similar to the
higher musical "octave". However, it is considered feminine in nature as it
represents infinity unfolded on the horizontal plane, the uncreated reflected in
creation, which is why the symbol for infinity appears to us as a horizontally
folded eight. In this way, it can signify separation or reintegration into the
uncreated, as well as resistance and clash between material forces.
9- Number of perfection, three times the trinity. Complete completion of a
journey: the nine nights that Odin hung from the tree Yggdrasil. Concretisation
of a process of gestation or transmutation: nine months of pregnancy. The nine
worlds of Yggdrasil in Norse mythology. All calculations made on the duration of
the yugas in Hinduism always add up to nine when all their digits are added
together. Also, if you add up the digits of all multiples of nine, the result will be
this same number.n the duration of
the yugas in Hinduism always add up to nine when all their digits are added
together. Also, if you add up the digits of all multiples of nine, the result will be
this same number.

--- PAGE BREAK ---he yugas in Hinduism always add up to nine when all their digits are added
together. Also, if you add up the digits of all multiples of nine, the result will be
this same number.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

21
10- Number of totality and unity that contains itself in its different parts and
patterns, 1+2+3+4=10. The ouroboros serpent that bites itself, "the Alpha and
the Omega," the beginning and end of the same wheel, the end that is a new
beginning of the same. In Kabbalah, the 10 Sephiroth of the tree of life and its
shadow, the 10 Qliphoth of the tree of death and knowledge. The ten fingers of
both human hands.
11- Number related to emptiness, the invisible, darkness and the powers of
chaos and destruction. The will to create something new. The eleventh hidden
sephiroth "Daath". All the terrorist attacks at the beginning of the 21st century
coincide in their dates and numerical references with the number eleven.
12- 2+1=3. Twelve is also three times four. The totality of archetypes and forces
in the cosmic solar wheel and the wheel of initiation: the twelve knights of the
round table in the legend of King Arthur, the twelve Christian apostles, the
twelve signs of the zodiac, the twelve months of the year, twelve hours of the
day or night. Reflection of the macrocosm in the microcosm.
13- Number related to death and rebirth, to fertilisation. It symbolises that
which surpasses and lies beyond everything contained in 12: the 13th apostle or
knight who occupies 'the dangerous seat', the one who takes the most risks but
is indispensable to the other 12. Number of power for invocations and magical
rituals.
14- 4+1=5, related to compliance with the law of life and the movement of
cycles in the universe. It is also 7+7, the seasons and obstacles that must be
overcome with determination to achieve fulfilment in heaven and on earth.
15- 5+1=6. Ability, administration, correct handling of situations and other
people, royalty, creativity, artistic ability.
16- 6+1=7. The 16 runes of the New Futhark (Scandinavian). It is also 8+8=16,
the descent into infinity and the resulting oblivion that must be overcome in
order to return once again to the origin of the spirit.
17- 7+1=8, unification, reintegration into the infinite and uncreated. Overcoming
the highest and fullest states that still belong to the conditioned world.
18- 8+1=9. It is also twice 9, perfection achieved by integrating and surpassing
the different planes and tensions of duality. Three times 6 creative capacity in
the three realms of being (spirit, soul and body) and in the management of the
three temporal projections. The 18 runes of the Futharkh Armanen.
19- 9+1=10, 1+0=1. Return to the beginning and origin after a journey of
perfection and mutation.
20- 2+0=2. Number related to duality and the feminine. Polarity in tension with
emptiness.Armanen.
19- 9+1=10, 1+0=1. Return to the beginning and origin after a journey of
perfection and mutation.
20- 2+0=2. Number related to duality and the feminine. Polarity in tension with
emptiness.

--- PAGE BREAK ---, 1+0=1. Return to the beginning and origin after a journey of
perfection and mutation.
20- 2+0=2. Number related to duality and the feminine. Polarity in tension with
emptiness.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

22
21- 2+1=3. It is also three times 7, fullness and wisdom interacting in spirit, soul
and body.
22- 2+2=4. High capacity for leadership, organisation and administration in
collective and community affairs.
23- 2+3=5. Duality and trinity together, uncreated motor and force reflected in
opposites and in the underworld, the middle world and the upper world.
24- 2+4=6. It is also twice 12, the union of opposite extremes, day and night,
masculine and feminine, the 12 signs of the zodiac in their conscious and
unconscious parts, in their visible part and in their shadow part. It is also three
times eight, infinity reflected in spirit, soul and body. The 24 runes of the ancient
Futhark and the Uthark.
25- 2+5=7. Wisdom, sacred spaces and objects.
26- 2+6=8. Infinity reflected in human matter.
27- 2+7=9. It is also three times 9, perfection and transmutation achieved in the
three realms of spirit, soul and body. Perfection that returns to the primordial
being and forces.
28- 2+8=1= The infinite unity that integrates duality within itself and is its own
creation.
29- 2+9=11, 1+1=2, the tension of extremes and opposing forces that must be
resolved in the course of events.
30- 3+0=3. Spiritual light that comes from the void.
31- 3+1=4. Trinity and unity. From the understanding of earthly structures,
glimpse the unconditional infinite.
32- 3+2=5. Direction of forces and currents knowing the cosmic rhythms.
33- 3+3=6. Integration of the forces of fire and water, of the currents of
expansion and contraction. The 33 runes of the Anglo-Saxon Futhorc.
In this way, each runic series described below in its exoteric and esoteric
meaning must also be related to its numerical vibration and the tensions that
this dynamically generates between each rune in relation to all the others.described below in its exoteric and esoteric
meaning must also be related to its numerical vibration and the tensions that
this dynamically generates between each rune in relation to all the others.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

23
ANCIENT N FUTHARK
FEHU
F
URUZ
U
THURIZAS
T
ANSUZ
A
RAIDHO
R
KENAZ
K
GEBO
G
WUNJO
W
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
HAGALAZ
H
NAUDHIZ
N
ISA
I
JERA
J (Y)
EIHWAZ
EI
PERTHRO
P
ELHAZ
Z(R at the
end)
SOWILO
S
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
TIWAZ
T
BERKANO
B
EHWAZ
E
MANNAZ
M
LAGUZ
L
INGWAZ
NG
DAGAZ
D
OTHALAZ
O
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

--- PAGE BREAK ---24
By observing the equivalencies of the first six letters of the runic system, one
can understand where the name "Futhark" comes from.

This is the most
commonly used runic system today.

Archaeological and philological research
suggests that from the very beginning of the Bronze Age, Indo-Germanic tribes
began to carve symbols similar to hieroglyphics on stone, wood, metal and
bone, which were used for ideographic and magical purposes.

The current
official "academic" theory tells us that in a gradual process that lasted from
approximately 200 BC to 100 AD, the runic alphabet was consolidated through
contact between Germanic tribes and the Greek, Etruscan and Latin peoples of
northern Italy.

In other words, the glyphs already used by the Germanic and
Celtic peoples were merged and adapted to the already consolidated and
structured written languages of the European Mediterranean civilisations, thus
the symbols previously used for magical and initiatory purposes ended up giving
shape to a phonetic and written dialect.

It is not the intention of this book to
delve into or refute this scientific theory, but it is important to bear it in mind in
order to form a historical and cultural frame of reference.

The ancient 24-rune Futhark reached its peak at the end of the 8th century AD.

Three centuries before this, two other systems began to derive from this
alphabet: the 16-rune New Futhark (also called Scandinavian or Nordic Futhark)
and the 33-rune Anglo-Saxon Futhorc (also called Frisian).

The former was
definitively consolidated around 800 AD, and the latter developed and was
completed between the 5th and 10th centuries AD, but from the 7th century AD
onwards, it began to undergo a process of Christianisation.

Even during that
period of marked transition (650 to 800 AD), there was occasionally a mixture of
the old Futhark and the new Futhark in writing, as evidenced by the stone
inscriptions at Björketorp(circa 650), Stentoften (ca.The former was
definitively consolidated around 800 AD, and the latter developed and was
completed between the 5th and 10th centuries AD, but from the 7th century AD
onwards, it began to undergo a process of Christianisation.

Even during that
period of marked transition (650 to 800 AD), there was occasionally a mixture of
the old Futhark and the new Futhark in writing, as evidenced by the stone
inscriptions at Björketorp(circa 650), Stentoften (ca.

650), Snoldelev (ca.

800)
and Rök (ca.

800) found in Scandinavia1 .

Curiously, knowledge of how to read
the Old Futhark was lost well into the Middle Ages, but in 1865 the Norwegian
Sophus Bugge managed to re-decipher it and linguistically linked it to Proto-
Germanic, Proto-Norse and Gothic(2)  .The oldest stone inscription found to
contain the complete Old Futhark series is the so-called Kylverstone from
approximately 400 AD on the island of Gotland (Sweden).

Other inscriptions,
such as the bracteates (3)of Vadstena and Mariedamm from the 6th century AD,
show us the division of the series into three rows of eight runes each.

These
rows are commonly referred to as "Aettir".

The Kylverstone inscription shows
the runic series as illustrated in this book, but in other artefacts from later
centuries, the runic series has been found inscribed with the runes Dagaz and
Othalaz in reverse order, i.e.

with Dagaz as the last rune in the series.

This variation of the Old Futhark is also used by many occultists and illustrated
in some books, but the fact that
1  The first two denote a transition from one futhark to another, while the last two use both Futharks in a differentiated
manner.

2The findings and theories of this philologist can be found in the books Honen Runerne fra Ringerike (1902) and
Runerne Paa en Solving fra senjen (1906), published by A.W.

Broggers, Bogtrykkeri (Kristiania), Norway.

Also in "Der
Runenstein Von Rök in östergötland, Schweden" (1910), Stockholm, Haeggström.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Broggers, Bogtrykkeri (Kristiania), Norway. Also in "Der
Runenstein Von Rök in östergötland, Schweden" (1910), Stockholm, Haeggström. 3Gold coin inscribed on one side only, commonly used in the peoples of northern Europe during the Migration Period (300 AD to
700 AD). Silver coins were also used in the Middle Ages.

--- PAGE BREAK ---25
Given that there is an alphabetical correlation between Germanic runes and the
Latin, Etruscan and Greek languages, the shape of the rune Othalaz (also
called Odal) has been compared to the shape of the letter Omega, the last in
the Greek alphabet, so it would not be unreasonable to place Othalaz as the
last rune of the Futhark.

It should also be remembered that the runic series
originally had mainly magical and occult uses, so strictly alphabetical or
linguistic considerations were incorporated at a later stage.

In 'academic' circles, it is believed that the Old Futhark descends from the
ancient Italic alphabets, specifically the Etruscan or Raetic alphabets.

Other
theories indicate that it descends from Latin itself, and there has even been talk
of a possible Greek descent due to the Goths' contact with the Byzantine
Empire.

However, inscriptions have been found in the Vimose bog (4)dating from
the 2nd century AD (approx.

160 AD) containing the word Harja (warrior in the
Proto-Germanic language), which would contradict this theory, as it is known
that the Goths first came into contact with the Greeks in the 3rd century AD.

Interestingly, the Gothic alphabet derived from Greek in the 4th century did
incorporate two letters derived from the Jera and Uruz runes belonging to the
Futhark.

Other theories have been put forward regarding the angular and
rectilinear shape of the runes, including their ease of carving in stone or metal.

However, all of this actually contains a profound esoteric meaning, which is to
confer on these symbols a character of representation of the uncreated in the
midst of the created material universe, which naturally possesses only curved,
serpentine and spiral forms.

Thus, the runes a n d their angular vertices would
serve as a contact between the created world and the uncreated infinite, the
world of the gods reflecting their light in the world of the illusory becoming of
humans.--- PAGE BREAK ---

However, all of this actually contains a profound esoteric meaning, which is to
confer on these symbols a character of representation of the uncreated in the
midst of the created material universe, which naturally possesses only curved,
serpentine and spiral forms. Thus, the runes a n d their angular vertices would
serve as a contact between the created world and the uncreated infinite, the
world of the gods reflecting their light in the world of the illusory becoming of
humans. Runic inscriptions from the 1st century AD have been found in northern Italy: the
one known as "the Negau helmet" is written in northern Etruscan and contains a
name of Germanic origin: Hariagastiz. On the other hand, the Meldorf inscription
from 50 AD seems to reflect the writing of Latin words by Indo-Germanic
people. The Novel spearhead from 200 AD shows a runic mixture of Gothic and
Old Italic. In the Old Futhark, the runes equivalent to the letters F, A, G, I, T, M,
and L are considered the same as those of Old Italic. These same runes would
also correspond to the Latin letters F, A, X, I, T, M, L. The runes U, R, K, H, S,
B, O correspond to the letters V, R, C, H, S, B, O. As for the other runes, their
origins are uncertain. Some researchers classify them as original Germanic
contributions, while others refer to them as obscure derivations from Latin: TH,
N, W, J derive from the Latin D, Q, P, G. The derivation of the runes P, E, N
from some Italic language is even more uncertain. (The letters Y and Z were
introduced in Rome by Augustus). 4  Located on the island of Funen in Denmark.

--- PAGE BREAK ---on of the runes P, E, N
from some Italic language is even more uncertain. (The letters Y and Z were
introduced in Rome by Augustus). 4  Located on the island of Funen in Denmark.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

26
Archaic Latin (6th-5th century BC):
Between the 2nd and 4th centuries AD, no evidence has been found of the use
of the runes P and N. During this same period, the rune Ehwaz was used in the
form of two vertical lines joined at the top by a horizontal line, while from the 5th
century AD onwards, its common spelling of M began to be used. Similarly, the
rune Sowilo was written differently with three, four or five lines, and it was only
from the 5th century AD onwards that its three-line form became commonly
defined. In the period from the 6th to the 7th century AD, runes tended to be
formed by a vertical line plus two diagonal lines, whereas in previous centuries it
was more common to use horizontal lines, as in the case of the runes E, T, L, N,
and H. The rune Algiz or Elhaz corresponds to the letter Z in the Proto-
Germanic language, but in Proto-Norse and Icelandic, the phoneme acquired a
sound close to the letter R. This rune, together with Ingwaz, never uses its
corresponding letter at the beginning of a word.
The representative names of the runes have not been "historically" verified, but
they have been reconstructed in the Proto-Germanic language based on
references from runic poems preserved over the last few centuries and names
related to the letters of the Gothic alphabet. These names also coincide with
Anglo-Saxon and Norse names referring to mythology and everyday activities,
such as the names of the gods Tiwaz, Thurizas and Ingwaz, which are also
runes. The contributions made between the 1940s and 1980s by Danish writers
and runologists Erik Moltke and Lis Jacobsen(5)have been fundamental to this
"scientific" research.
Artefacts with Old Futhark runic ideographs have been found in the Carpathians
and Lapland6, with Denmark being the country with the highest concentration of
these pieces with inscriptions made especially on jewellery, weapons and
utensils and found mainly in tombs and bogs. A variation of the Old Futhark is
known as the "Gothic Futhark" as it is related to the runic language used by the
Germanic Goths of the east until the 4th century
AD, when it was replaced by the well-known Gothic language based on the
Greek alphabet.
5Moltke, Erik. "Runes and Their Origin: Denmark and Elsewhere." Copenhagen: Nationalmuseets Forlag
(1985). Jacobsen, Lis; Erik Moltke "Danmarks runeindskrifter." Copenhagen: Ejnar Munksgaards Forlag.
(1942).
6Sweden's northernmost province, covering a quarter of the country's territory.ts Forlag
(1985). Jacobsen, Lis; Erik Moltke "Danmarks runeindskrifter." Copenhagen: Ejnar Munksgaards Forlag.
(1942).
6Sweden's northernmost province, covering a quarter of the country's territory.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

27
Gothic Runes:
It should also be noted that another variation of the ancient futhark is the
addition of the 25th rune, known as the "Wyrd rune", "Odin rune" or "Blank
rune", which is simply an empty space. This "rune" was made known mainly by
the writer Ralph Blum in his 1980 book "Book of Runes", however there is no
reference to it in any writing or book by any magician, occultist or runologist
prior to that year, and even less archaeological or historical evidence. When
writing different words in a runic text, they were separated by a blank space, a
dot or two dots arranged vertically. None of these ever referred to a supposed
"invisible" 25th rune, although any magician can place and invoke it if they find
that it fits a particular symbolic, ideological or philosophical orientation.
Among the most common magical words of power used in ancient Futhark runic
inscriptions are:
ALU
Divine intoxication, intoxicating drink, beer, magical power, inspiration, wisdom,
health, protection. It can also be written inverted as ULA
LATHU
Contains the same runes as the ALU formula, but its meaning is enhanced by
the uninhibited and active force of Thurizas, which directs an action or meaning
towards its execution.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Contains the same runes as the ALU formula, but its meaning is enhanced by
the uninhibited and active force of Thurizas, which directs an action or meaning
towards its execution.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

28
LAUKAZ
Leek, garlic, growth, well-being, fertility, to bend, to wrap, to lock, growth of one's own
power and hidden strength.
ERILAZ
One who possesses magical power and runic wisdom.
The longest inscription found is on the Eggium stone 7from the 8th century AD,
which contains 200 letters, some of which form verses or 'stanzas' in Old Norse.
In the British Isles, the oldest runic inscription found is the Caistor by Norwich
astragalus from 400 AD (8),on which the word 'raihan' can be read, meaning
deer, and which does not yet show the modifications that a century later would
give way to the formation of the Anglo-Saxon Futhorc.
The oldest preserved inscriptions, dating from before the 5th century AD, are
divided into two groups: the North Sea coast area, Holland and northern
Germany, regions associated with the Frisians and Saxons. The second group
consists of inscriptions found between the Oder River and south-eastern
Poland, including the Carpathian Mountains. This region is associated with the
Eastern Germanic tribes, who migrated to other regions in the 5th century AD
when the Goths invaded the faltering Roman Empire and later converted to
Christianity. In any case, runic writing continued to develop there during the 6th
century AD. In the western region before the 5th century AD, the use of runes
was apparently not so common, and from the 6th century AD onwards, in the
Alemannic region(9),symbols began to be carved on weapons, fibulae(10)and belt
buckles.
This
script
continued
during
the
7th
century
AD
despite
Christianisation.
Around 350 artefacts with Old Futhark inscriptions have been preserved, of
which around 80 correspond to Germany, Austria and
7  Like the golden horn of Gallehus, it belongs to the Norman period from the 3rd to the 9th century AD.
8  Roe deer astragalus found in the Norfolk region of England.
9  Confederation of Germanic tribes on the Rhine who were rivals of the Roman emperor Caracalla.
Alemannic dialects were spoken in the regions near the Black Forest in south-western Germany: Baden-
Württemberg, western Bavaria, Vorarlberg (Austria), Alsace (France) and German-speaking Switzerland.
10  Brooches used in the ancient and medieval world to fasten dresses and cloaks, they would be
replaced by pins and buttons.a, Vorarlberg (Austria), Alsace (France) and German-speaking Switzerland.
10  Brooches used in the ancient and medieval world to fasten dresses and cloaks, they would be
replaced by pins and buttons.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ia), Alsace (France) and German-speaking Switzerland.
10  Brooches used in the ancient and medieval world to fasten dresses and cloaks, they would be
replaced by pins and buttons.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

29
Switzerland in continental Europe, approximately 270 have been found in
Scandinavia, mostly dating from the final period of this language between the
6th and 8th centuries AD.
Around 133 bronze inscriptions have been found in Scandinavia and only two in
continental Europe. There are 65 stone inscriptions in Scandinavia and none in
the continental region, which has 43 examples of fibulae compared to 15 in the
northern countries.
It should be noted that these archaeological figures are considered very
relative, firstly because many of these finds are believed to be fakes, others
have not been reported, and many others were stolen or burned during the
repressive periods of the Catholic Middle Ages. On the other hand, it is
understood that a very tiny fraction of all artefacts with runic inscriptions made in
Europe have survived the passage of time and have been preserved to this day.
WISDOM OF THE FUTHARK ANCIENT
Returning to the Aettir, each of these is governed or influenced by the meaning
of the first rune:
The first Aett begins with the rune FEHU, which is related to Frey and Freya,
the Vanir brother and sister gods of fertility, growth and harvests, as well as
sexuality and magic.
The second Aett begins with the rune HAGAL, which is related to Heimdallr, the
Aesir god of warriors, poets, magicians, and transformation. This Aett is also
considered to be related to the natural elements.
The third Aett begins with the rune Tiwaz, related to Tyr, god of justice, honour
and sacrifice. This Aett also represents conflicts and difficulties and how to
resolve them.
Aett 1
Aett 2
Aett 3
Frey/Freya
Heimdallr
Tyr
(8 runes)
(8 runes)
(8 runes)
Below is a list, name and description of each rune of the ancient Futhark. Due to
its common use in this book, it is the system that is most specified:eya
Heimdallr
Tyr
(8 runes)
(8 runes)
(8 runes)
Below is a list, name and description of each rune of the ancient Futhark. Due to
its common use in this book, it is the system that is most specified:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

30
1-Fehu rune: The upright spirit strategically tames and manages man's goods
and riches. It projects its intention into the phenomenal world. Primordial wild
fire. Expansive energy. Fire with the power to create but also to destroy.
Rune associated with fertility. Power, material goods and riches gathered and
earned in fair competition. Reward for a successful process. Ability to project
forces and energies that can be applied to magic and everyday life.
2-Rune Uruz: The upright spirit descends to the deepest depths to find and see
the origin of things and events. This rune represents the primordial source prior
to creation and the cosmic cow Audhumbla, source of sustenance for the giant
Ymir.
Unmanifested essence, the formative force that would produce cosmic ice.
Original void, the womb from which creation springs.
Audhumbla licked an ice-covered salt stone from which the gods and the
primitive androgyne emerged. This stone is analogous to crystal and its six-
pointed star shapes in which all the runes can be found.
3-Rune Thurizas: From the spirit, a decisive and fearless action is taken. This
action is like a "thorn" that wounds opposing and evil forces. Thorn in English
means precisely thorn. Uninhibitedness, power of destruction and defence.
Management of opposing and extreme energies. Thorn that breaks down
barriers and obstacles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---in English
means precisely thorn. Uninhibitedness, power of destruction and defence.
Management of opposing and extreme energies. Thorn that breaks down
barriers and obstacles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

31
This rune is associated with Mjöllnir, or Thor's hammer, as a weapon protecting
Midgard and Asgard. The Aesir, through Thor and his enormous strength,
counteract the Thurs giants, although this rune is actually associated with both
groups.
4-Ansuz rune: The inner voice. Odin's runic whisper descends to guide us to
victory and to express wisdom and divine intoxication through heroic poetry.
The Aesir Odin as the god of wind who gives his breath for inspiration and
magical ecstasy.
Ansuz is a vessel in which the spiritual power that gave life to the first human
couple, Ask and Embla, is received and preserved. This rune also refers to the
whisper or runic breath of the gods of Asgard (Önd) which is heard in Midgard.
It is important to note that in Norse mythology, the gods did not create humanity.
First, the world was formed from Ymir, the chaotic ice giant. Ask and Embla
were two pieces of wood (one rough and one smooth), and the gods Odin,
Höener, and Loeder granted them spirit, reason, and feelings, respectively.
5-Rune Raidho: This rune represents the chariot of the cosmos, the wheel of
cosmic-solar cycles, and the uncreated element that transcends them. Rune of
rhythm, dance, cycles, and the laws that lead to a good outcome. Advice,
rituals, correct ordering and combination of forces and energies.
It is no mere coincidence that the Hindu Vedic deity Varuna is a symbol of the
celestial force associated with RITA (another name used for the rune), law and
supernatural order11. A phrase that could define the correct use and channelling
of the power of this rune is 'act at the right moment' or 'wait for the right situation
and moment for each action'.
11Referred to in EVOLA, JULIUS "The Doctrine of Awakening (1943)". Mexico: Editorial Grijalbo S.A.
de C.V., (translated by Manuel Arbolí Gascón), 1998. page 45.ituation
and moment for each action'.
11Referred to in EVOLA, JULIUS "The Doctrine of Awakening (1943)". Mexico: Editorial Grijalbo S.A.
de C.V., (translated by Manuel Arbolí Gascón), 1998. page 45.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

32
Raidho can also be perceived as an Is rune attached to an inverted Sieg: the
power of the gods that, in the midst of eternal return, brings us back to the
spiritual axis.
+
6-Rune Kenaz: Artistic enlightenment and sublimated sexual fire. The
horizontal line "rises" towards spiritual verticality. Rune of Capacity, of the
strong and capable. Kenaz is associated with the Goddess of sexuality Freya in
the sense of using human desires and passions to build something positive.
Rune of the creation and maintenance of a lineage of kings, ascending
procreation. Rune of fire as knowledge and as a torch, that is, as controlled
power that manifests itself in the correct union of opposites for the generation of
something new. Fire also used for sacrifices and the cremation of the dead so
that they may be re-created in a higher state and plane.
Sometimes a composite or binding rune (Binde-rune), also known as a tryfos, is
used to represent the Kenaz rune. Its shape is drawn as follows.
Horn/Fire of Death
Horn/Fire of Life
The Kenaz rune can have a negative meaning if used in reverse. Instead of
corresponding to the fire of artistic and aristocratic creation, it can correspond to
a force of destruction, negation and dissolution, death of artistic or biological-
material capacity and creativity, and descending procreation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---tic creation, it can correspond to
a force of destruction, negation and dissolution, death of artistic or biological-
material capacity and creativity, and descending procreation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

33
7-Rune Gebo: As a cross, it symbolises the exchange of gifts with the gods, the
meeting point between the human and the divine. The vertical seeks to express
itself in the universe, it becomes partially 'horizontal'. The horizontal human
seeks to reflect the divine, it becomes partially 'vertical'.
Gifts, sacrifices and exchange with the gods. Communication between above
and below and their intersection in the middle (Midgard). The best gift is self-
sacrifice, just as Odin did to acquire knowledge of the runes.
A force present since before material manifestation and in which there were no
opposites.
Rune related to the creative psychic and sexual exchange that occurs in a
magical context between a man and a woman who is symbolically and
spiritually his sister.
The Gebo rune can also be seen as the opposition between two Kenaz runes,
leaving a space or intermediate point between the energies of creative fire and
destructive fire, between positive and negative currents, one face looking back
and the other looking forward. All of this can also be related to the symbolism of
the Roman god Janus.
8-Rune Wunjo: Rune of the son (also called the rune Pard). Half of the rune
Berkano. A spirit that, in order to be born as a human, must break apart and
manifest itself as part of a half.
Wunjo also refers to the synchronicity and harmony between forces and people
who come from the same origin. Camaraderie and goodwill between
companions and brothers.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t of a half.
Wunjo also refers to the synchronicity and harmony between forces and people
who come from the same origin. Camaraderie and goodwill between
companions and brothers.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

34
In magical practices, the rune can be used to link symbols or concordant
energies.
Rune of the ability to win and also of happiness or a place that represents it.
Wunjo is associated with Frey, Vanir God of grain, peace and pleasure.
One of the most important Christian symbols shows the reinterpretation of the
Hagall rune combined with a Wunjo rune.
+
=
9-Hagalaz rune: Rune of ice. The hail that falls from the sky represents the
strength and wisdom of the gods descending upon humans in Midgard. Crystal
and diamond represent the frozen fire that comes from a plane even higher than
the last heaven of the created universe.
The snowflake, like the stone or hailstone, represents the seed of Ymir, the frost
giant formed from the union of cosmic fire and ice. The potential structure of
manifestation.
This rune is number nine in the futhark and carries deep symbolism in
mythology, referring to the nine worlds of Yggdrasil and the nights that Odin
hung from that tree. This number is related to the completion of a journey or trial
that precedes the birth of a new force and power: nine months of gestation in
the womb, the sum of the digits of the duration of each Hindu Yuga always adds
up to nine, the cycles of life in numerology are nine years, etc.
Hagalaz can also be related to the goddess Hel of death and coldness. Hel is
the world where the souls of the dead go, but it is also the place where
Odin/Wotan descended to receive the secrets of the runes, therefore it is a
place of obligatory journey of initiation and acquisition of runic wisdom. In this
way, humans, through their spirit, face the mystery of death and dissolution to
establish a bridge to infinity.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ory journey of initiation and acquisition of runic wisdom. In this
way, humans, through their spirit, face the mystery of death and dissolution to
establish a bridge to infinity.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

35
10-Rune Naudhiz: Rune of the Norns who weave the threads of destiny from
the depths, a rune that the virya must face because he must fight against the
descending forces that fill him with need. However, this rune is associated with
need as a force of negation that hinders, but also with the power to overcome
and resolve it.
Need must be overcome and reversed by penetrating the gaze of the Norn
Werdandi, the eternal present.
Naudhiz is friction and resistance to the Virya's material and spiritual desires
and requirements, generating a force of will and wisdom to understand the
principle of cause and effect and the fabric of human and divine destiny.
Runic initiation grants the ability to navigate or "swim" with control of oneself
and events between the currents of destiny, as opposed to being brutally swept
away by them. Likewise, the mysteries of time and death are understood.
According to Rudolf John Gorsleben, the rune Not is the sum of the rune Is and
the auxiliary rune Balk, which represents death and negative opposing forces 12.
+
11-Isa rune: This is precisely the basic rune that represents spiritual verticality,
return and concentration towards one's own axis and centre, focus and
concentration. "I" in English means ME. Curiously, this rune is sometimes
related to the feminine but in other cases to the masculine.
12  Referred to in GORSLEBEN, RUDOLF JOHN, "Die Hoch-zeit der Menscheit". Leipzig: Koeler &
Amelang, 1930. Page 449.

--- PAGE BREAK ---related to the feminine but in other cases to the masculine.
12  Referred to in GORSLEBEN, RUDOLF JOHN, "Die Hoch-zeit der Menscheit". Leipzig: Koeler &
Amelang, 1930. Page 449.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

36
This rune works very well to begin and end a ritual or a routine of meditation,
visualisation and sthödur (runic body positions) as it focuses and brings
concentration back to the person's own inner being. It also serves to channel
the runic forces and direct them outwards or inwards, upwards or downwards,
depending on the intention of an invocation.
This rune is also related to ice, winter, coldness, calmness, the force of
attraction, antimatter, hibernation, and death preceding rebirth. Rune of the
Jungian self and clarity of thought and inner vision.
In Norse tradition, ice represents the fifth element, the frozen regions of
Nifelheim and the frost giants hrimthursar.
Isa can be used on people who need to "get their feet on the ground" because
they suffer from hallucinatory, psychotic, or schizophrenic states. This rune is
highly recommended for addressing and resigning subconscious content,
promoting self-knowledge and self-control.
Isa represents the spirit that remains impassive in the face of the turmoil and
entropy of the external phenomena of the created material universe.
12-Jera Rune: Clash and succession of opposing forces, ascending and
descending, positive and negative. It represents the seasons of the year, the
coming and going between one extreme and the other of the duality of the
phenomenal world (winter/summer). The vertical line is invisible because the
unknowable is beyond everything and transcends the synthesis between dual
forces; it cannot be fully expressed in terms of the world of the senses.
Jera represents the cyclical journey of the year and the horizontal process of
being born, becoming and dying. Jera refers to the material and spiritual
rewards and harvests that are received for having previously sown good seeds,
so good luck may or may not come to us depending on whether we have
brought it about. This rune is related to the Vanir god Frey of fertility.
It is formed by the contrast between two creative kenaz runes, which is why it
also symbolises harvests, cycles and the seasons of the year: one positive
ascending rune (spring and summer) and one negative descending rune
(autumn and winter).
+ve kenaz runes, which is why it
also symbolises harvests, cycles and the seasons of the year: one positive
ascending rune (spring and summer) and one negative descending rune
(autumn and winter).
+

--- PAGE BREAK ---h is why it
also symbolises harvests, cycles and the seasons of the year: one positive
ascending rune (spring and summer) and one negative descending rune
(autumn and winter).
+

--- PAGE BREAK ---

37
13-Rune Eihwaz: Spiritual axis that descends and knows death in order to
overcome it, but must also overcome worldly life. From a higher beginning, the
power to fight and the willpower to resist the onslaught of events are increased.
Eihwaz represents the tree Iggdrasil, the axis of the world or Odin's "steed", as it
is through this tree that the initiate travels to the world of the dead to receive
runic knowledge and from there can depart to visit and communicate with the
nine worlds of Norse mythology. This rune is related to the yew tree, which can
live for over two thousand years and also produces a hallucinogenic toxin used
in shamanic experiences. Its wood is used to make talismans, magic wands and
bows. Bows are also related to the god of archery, Ullr. The yew tree is called
"needle ash" and is also associated with death, cemeteries, and the celebration
of Yule(13)  ,eternal life, endurance, and protection against any magic performed
by an enemy. The Eihwaz rune inverted and rotated 90 degrees corresponds to
the glyph EIF, which symbolises care and enthusiasm for carrying out tasks
entrusted to one or performed out of one's own conviction.
14-Perthro rune: (also called perthra). Rune symbolised by stone and rock.
Retention of forces in a stone matrix to generate transformation and change.
Womb from which new life emerges, that is, petrification of waters that must
flow again. Mountain or mother earth from which life emerges.
In divination, perthro can represent a container in which the runes or dice are
kept, which after being shaken can show and symbolise luck or an event in the
game of destiny. Predestination and primary archetypal forces of an individual
formed according to the acts of their past lives, something like the "cards" that
have been dealt to them.
13Yule: Pagan festival of the winter solstice, which in the northern hemisphere begins on 21 December.
The 22nd represents the longest night of the year, and from then on the length of the day increases over
the following months.inter solstice, which in the northern hemisphere begins on 21 December.
The 22nd represents the longest night of the year, and from then on the length of the day increases over
the following months.

--- PAGE BREAK ---h in the northern hemisphere begins on 21 December.
The 22nd represents the longest night of the year, and from then on the length of the day increases over
the following months.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

38
They are bestowed upon a Virya at birth and with which he must play the "game
of life".
Rune related to divination, synchronicity, and the principle of cause and effect.
Pertho complements and can balance the force of denial and resistance of the
Naudhiz rune in the fabric and web of destiny.
Just as Pertho represents birth, it also represents death and can symbolise the
return of the current, initiatory death to stop or petrify the waters and to return to
the same womb-cave through which a rebirth can be gestated by finding the
chalice of transmutation and liberation. In a tantric sense, it reveals a symbolism
similar to the Yoni (vulva) of Kali.
15-Rune Elhaz: Increase in power and vital force. Vertical axis that rises in the
middle of a descending female matrix and "flies" towards the divine. Tree that
rises and dominates life.
A person capable of leading others because they receive and channel an
influence from the eternal, superior and unknowable.
It symbolises man as the bearer of an ascending spiritual principle, overcoming
the bonds of the material world.
A symbol of the sacred tree of knowledge and exalted consciousness, the tree
also magically symbolises the axis that interconnects the different spheres of
reality. Through this axis, journeys can be made between worlds and more
subtle planes, as well as between different temporal planes.
The shape of the Rune is related to the antlers of the elk and the deer, the
masculine, sacred places and sanctuaries, forests or protected areas dedicated
to contact with the gods.
Elhaz represents the connection between gods and men, the man who, through
his spirit, rises to access Asgard by crossing the Bïfrost bridge, the "rainbow"
bridge that connects the upper world, middle earth and the underworld; in the
spelling of the rune, the bridge would coincide with the central vertical line.ossing the Bïfrost bridge, the "rainbow"
bridge that connects the upper world, middle earth and the underworld; in the
spelling of the rune, the bridge would coincide with the central vertical line.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

39
Asgard is protected by the god Heimdallr using the rune Elhaz, which contains
the protective power of the divine twins Alcis, referred to by Tacitus as part of
the gods of the Germanic tribes (the rune Elhaz is also called Algiz)14.
This rune is widely used for protection, and the quadruple rune Elhaz
"Aegishjalmur" or "helmet of terror" is a very good example of this.
The Triple Rune Elhaz symbolises elevation in the three realms of being (spirit,
soul and body). Three times three equals 9, the number of perfection and
complete transmutation:
16-Sowilo rune: Success and victory, virility, willpower. Lightning that zigzags
to avoid obstacles and difficulties in order to achieve its goal.
Rune of the archetypal Sun and the divine force underlying it beyond death.
Sowilo is related to Baldur, the sun god who dies when the sun descends into
the realm of the dead and is later resurrected.
A powerful and destructive force similar to that of the solar giant Sutr of
Muspelheim, the world of primordial fire in Norse mythology.
14  This is written in the well-known book Germania from the 1st century AD, in which the writer also refers
to signs that were cut from walnut trees and grouped in threes to apparently function as an oracle of
divination.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ermania from the 1st century AD, in which the writer also refers
to signs that were cut from walnut trees and grouped in threes to apparently function as an oracle of
divination.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

40
In Norse antiquity, the sun was called Sunna, that is, with a feminine gender
indication, as the spiritual solar force was considered to be of a feminine
essence. This force serves as a connection between Asgard and Midgard and is
a guide for warriors and magicians who are simultaneously heading towards the
world of the gods.
The Sieg ray is discharged by those who achieve a legitimate victory, as their
actions and strategies are supported by forces beyond the human realm. It
symbolises the power of bold and resolute actions, performed with quick and
light but equally forceful movements, similar to birds.
It is common to combine the rune Sieg with a Tyr to form a binding rune (Binde-
rune) called Sig-Tyr. The virile runic powers of honour, discipline, action, victory
and success are combined.
17-Tiwaz rune: Power of Tyr, sun and sky god. Struggle, courage, bravery,
leadership, self-sacrifice and self-discipline to rise spiritually. The spear and
phallus representing the vertical axis pointing towards the celestial ceiling.
Ability to administer justice: The vertical axis that remains impassive and
impartial in judging events amid two opposing forces.
Rune of balance (scales), law, divine order and social regulation. Rune of the
leaders of the Thing (assembly of wise men of the Germanic peoples).
The god Tyr sacrifices himself by losing his hand to a bite from the wolf Fenris
when the god tied him to chains so that he would not destroy the Aesir. The god
Tyr is very similar to the Greek Zeus, the Roman Jupiter and the Hindu Dyaus.
Uranian gods of victorious light, strength and splendour.
Tyr is the god of war because, for the ancients, military campaigns were a
transcendental way of resolving material and spiritual judgements. The side that
emerged triumphant did so because a superior transcendental force had
accompanied it and therefore its victory was just and legitimate.of resolving material and spiritual judgements. The side that
emerged triumphant did so because a superior transcendental force had
accompanied it and therefore its victory was just and legitimate.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

41
The Tyr rune can also be perceived as the sum of a Laguz rune and a reversed
Laguz. The virya who, through honour and the code of the Aesir, knows how to
deal with the positive and negative currents he will encounter on his path to
victory.
+
18-Berkano rune: Feminine rune of nourishment. It symbolises a woman's
breasts. It is associated as a shield rune in all kinds of activities that require
protection. Passive, conservative and protective force.
Berkano refers to the great mother of all manifestation, the goddess Nerthus in
her aspects of mother earth who gives gifts of peace and fertility, but also Hel
as the dark mother who rules death and dissolution.
Rune of life and generation, reproduction and growth (its shape can also
illustrate a pregnant woman seen from the side). But it can also symbolise the
rune of death that brings about an initiatory rebirth. Berkano is therefore
associated with initiation rites and the hidden caves or caverns where they are
performed.
Rune of the birch tree, the ancient Norse believed that the souls of female
ancestors inhabited that tree.
The birch is also related to magic and the "sejd" or transcendental ecstatic
trance, rebirth and the goddesses Frigga and Freya. The bristles of the brooms
of "witches" (magicians of the Middle Ages) were made from birch branches.
19-Ehwaz rune: Rune of the horse and the power of cooperation between the
gods and the twin kings Alcis. Trust, camaraderie and loyalty between
companions, spouses and friends, in the same way that a rider develops a
spiritual connection with his horse.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ods and the twin kings Alcis. Trust, camaraderie and loyalty between
companions, spouses and friends, in the same way that a rider develops a
spiritual connection with his horse.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

42
Combination of two related but different entities, harmony between the duality of
forces, defensive power directed outward. This combination also occurs with the
"Fylgia", known in Norse tradition as the totemic animal that guides and protects
a person during their life and death. This animal is related to Vanaheim, the
world of the Vanir.
Rune of Sleipnir, Odin's eight-legged steed and the magical protection it
represents. It also represents Iggdrasil and the axis of the world, as it is also
called "Odin's steed" through which the God travels between the different
worlds. Ehwaz is also related to the horse of the nine underworlds that make up
the "heldrasil".
A fundamental rune in the initiatory process, it symbolises the force opposite to
the Naudhiz rune, precisely meaning to reverse the opposing and descending
forces of destiny, to reverse the course of the river of becoming, to elevate life
on earth in order to consolidate inner strength and return to the world of the
gods.
In its M shape, it is actually made up of two Laguz runes facing each other,
simulating two people seen from the side holding hands. Two lives that unite in
a MAGICAL, ALCHEMICAL AND SPIRITUAL MARRIAGE.
+
20-Mannaz Rune: Consolidation and realisation of the balance between two
principles: spiritual and material, masculine and feminine. Taking the
transmutation of the Ehwaz rune to a new level of transcendence and solidity.
Mannaz represents the person in balance but also the intersection and
harmonious contact between above and below, the world of the gods and that
of men. The above can be deduced from the X – Gebo – inside the Mannaz
rune and the two outer vertical lines – Isa – which represent two forces that
converge and perfect themselves in a unity:that
of men. The above can be deduced from the X – Gebo – inside the Mannaz
rune and the two outer vertical lines – Isa – which represent two forces that
converge and perfect themselves in a unity:

--- PAGE BREAK ---ove can be deduced from the X – Gebo – inside the Mannaz
rune and the two outer vertical lines – Isa – which represent two forces that
converge and perfect themselves in a unity:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

43
Mannaz is related to the god Heimdallr, who provides the structure of the world
of men in the likeness of Asgard: Farmers-Providers (Ingaevons), wise
instructors (Irminons) and conquering Warriors (Istaevons) 15. This is an
archetypal structure similar to that of all ancient Germanic societies. Mannaz
defines the Germanic and Indo-European peoples as descendants of the gods
a n d also denotes the runic wisdom intrinsic to their intelligence, memory and
traditions. Similar to the mysteries of the Aryan-Iranian Mithra, Mannaz
represents the total, complete, initiated and perfected man who has acquired a
nature close to that of a God.
This rune can also be seen as a wunjo rune attached to another reversed wunjo
rune: the incomplete half that finds what it needed to achieve balance and
wholeness. Reaching one's own centre-Vril either solely internally or through
the synchronicity of an event and/or being from the outside world.
+
Likewise, Mannaz connotes the balance between spiritual and material success.
It is quite difficult to carry out a process of spiritual transmutation if the Virya in
his personal daily life cannot break out of a vicious circle of material and
emotional misery. To transmute spiritually, it is necessary to start from a firm
and solid foundation on earth.
21-Rune Laguz: Rune of water (lake), unconditioned principle that descends,
procreates and fertilises. Waters and fluids of becoming that can become
waters of pain unless the uncreated and spiritual principle dominates them
(concept related to the shape of the rune representing a whip striking
downwards).
Waters of Nifelheim that are necessary for the gestation of life, and which
materialise in ice and are energised by the fire of Muspelheim. Water is also
related to the moon, which influences menstruation, blood, and all bodily and
natural fluids. Laguz acts on feelings and dreams (astral plane) and is ruled by
the fertility goddess Nerthus.
15  This is pointed out by GUIDO VON LIST in "The Secret of the Runes" on pages 75 to 78, where he
also refers to the writings of Tacitus, Pliny and Pytheas of Marseille on the Germanic tribes.thus.
15  This is pointed out by GUIDO VON LIST in "The Secret of the Runes" on pages 75 to 78, where he
also refers to the writings of Tacitus, Pliny and Pytheas of Marseille on the Germanic tribes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---inted out by GUIDO VON LIST in "The Secret of the Runes" on pages 75 to 78, where he
also refers to the writings of Tacitus, Pliny and Pytheas of Marseille on the Germanic tribes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

44
Laguz represents the waters of the Germanic pagan birth rite called Vatni Ausa
or the baptism of the mysteries of Mithras, later copied in Judeo-Christianity.
Laguz is also generally associated with all the dissolving or transforming waters
of any initiation and rites of passage 16. Waters are also part of the passage to
another world after death. We need only remember the Greek Styx and Charon,
the ferryman who carries souls to the other side of the river. In Norse
mythology, Odin occupies this role as ferryman of souls.
Three laguz runes joined together form the Triskel, the three temporal levels
(past, present and future), birth, becoming and death; creation, maintenance
and destruction, the three realms of virya (Spirit, soul and body).
The magic formula Laukaz is connected to Laguz, which means leek and
symbolises fertility and growth. Likewise, herbal magic is also related to the
meaning of this rune.
Laguz represents the vertical axis with a descending auxiliary line: the formation
of life, feelings and life itself. Rune of the law to control the difficulties and
instability inherent in life, which must be overcome in order to overcome life
itself.
22-Ingwaz rune: A seed-shaped rune. The rune of fertility, the earth, and
balanced ownership and dominion of it. It also symbolises spring, semen, and
the capacity for reproduction.
16  Term commonly used since the writings of researcher Vab Genep. These rites are related to the
affirmation and legitimisation of social change or a change in role and status for an individual. They also
function as harbingers of good omens for the new stage. Rites can be consolidated in several ways:
separation from a previous internal state, marginalisation and isolation, integration into a new internal
state. Catholic sacraments represent the most common rites of passage in the Western world in recent
centuries. In other societies, they can be related to sexual initiations and warrior initiations.state. Catholic sacraments represent the most common rites of passage in the Western world in recent
centuries. In other societies, they can be related to sexual initiations and warrior initiations.

--- PAGE BREAK ---raments represent the most common rites of passage in the Western world in recent
centuries. In other societies, they can be related to sexual initiations and warrior initiations.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

45
Ingwaz is related to the earth god Ing, who acts in parallel with the great mother
Nerthus. In regions near the North Sea, the term Ingaevones referred to the
priests who accompanied the rites to the Goddess, and the same term as a
caste was assigned to the supplier farmers.
Freyr, the Vanir god of fertility, is also associated with this rune and the rites
performed for him and Nerthus, driving his ritual chariot during a procession.
In these rites, the feminine telluric principle seemed to dominate and consume
the masculine cosmic principle, as the goddess needed to replenish her
energies and strength in winter after having released in spring the same
masculine potential energy that she had consumed earlier to grant a good
harvest to the population.
Its exaggerated form can be linked to the quality of phallic cults within
matriarchal clans, although Ingwaz is clearly related to virility, focused above all
on potency and the ability to fertilise.
Process of gestation, accumulation of potential strength that will later manifest
or germinate. In an initiatory sense, the rune should be related to the cold stone
seed that conceives a new being from the potential of something pre-existing.
23-Rune Dagaz: Rune of enlightenment, inspiration and rebirth. Overcoming
and transcending conflicts between duality in order to see a new and true light
after an initiatory death and a period of darkness. Spiritual perception of rational
paradoxes. Point of perfect union between the twin gods, alchemical resolution
of two seemingly contradictory opposites. It symbolises the butterfly that
germinates from a previous state of chrysalis. Rune of transmutation and of
man acquiring a nature similar to that of a god.
Rune of dawn and dusk, of awakening and clarity of thought that form wisdom
and the light of magical action. Rune of the successful completion of an arduous
journey. It is associated with a high point and climax similar to the summer
solstice. It can also be used for protection against enemy magic. It is also highly
recommended to meditate or perform magical practices with Dagaz during dawn
and dusk.limax similar to the summer
solstice. It can also be used for protection against enemy magic. It is also highly
recommended to meditate or perform magical practices with Dagaz during dawn
and dusk.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

46
Much like the Mannaz rune, Dagaz can be seen in its spelling as a development
of the Gebo rune, as two ISA runes on either side would close or complete it
into a new rune: The transformation and enlightenment produced after
awakening the memory of the eternal spirit reflected in the self and the human
body are known in Norse mythology as Ek (higher self) a n d Lik (body).
Completing an initiatory process after having had contact with the gods or
having received a call from Asgard that influences and completely transforms
one's own existence. The two triangles in Dagaz look at each other, because
the paradox of duality has been resolved, thus awakening unity and a new
principle of Trinitarian transcendence.
Daggaz can be seen as the resolution of duality and the paradox of the Berkano
rune. That is, Berkano represents woman, and in turn, woman represents
duality, the principle of separation, the loss of unity that must be reintegrated,
hence the two triangles of Berkano's feminine duality.
Transcendence of: Duality
and Separation
24-Rune Othalaz: Rune of Blood, ancestors, race, heritage, family, property,
boundaries, borders and tradition. It is also associated with the honour and
courage with which all these characteristics are defended against dangers and
intruders. Othalaz is also related to the leader who has the spiritual gift of
providing well-being and guiding his clan justly, as he channels the voice of his
ancestral blood.

--- PAGE BREAK ---intruders. Othalaz is also related to the leader who has the spiritual gift of
providing well-being and guiding his clan justly, as he channels the voice of his
ancestral blood.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

47
The original mystical homeland is reflected in the world created by the rune
othalaz, in a kingdom made up of comrades who share the same race and
spiritual blood, a kingdom in which external and internal enemies are defeated
and a common infinite centre projects its own space and time to detach itself
from the conditioning of the world of becoming.
Othalaz can be seen as the rune Ingwaz held firmly by two lines or columns on
which it rests:
Rune of innate abilities inherited within a lineage or clan, although this influence
should not be understood as purely biological or genetic, but also spiritual and
related to what the ancient Romans called "genius," the collective soul of
ancestors that is precipitated and reflected in the blood and in the work and
style of a particular caste or lineage.
Rune of free and noble men with the ability to own and administer a territory.
Rune of nobility, hereditary rights and respect for ancestors and ancestral
places, also of the Virya who must find and know his own deepest spiritual and
racial roots.
In Norse tradition, it was believed that the souls of ancestors lived in trees, in
the magical objects they used and in the places they inhabited.
Othalaz is complemented by the Fehu rune of material goods, although the
latter rune refers more to solid but mobile wealth (livestock, riches), while
Othalaz focuses more on the totally stable. Othalaz speaks to us of the freedom
gained by belonging to and respecting the law in a group of peers on a spiritual
and physical level.

--- PAGE BREAK ---halaz focuses more on the totally stable. Othalaz speaks to us of the freedom
gained by belonging to and respecting the law in a group of peers on a spiritual
and physical level.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

48
ANGLO-SAXON (FRISIAN)
FUTHORC
FEOH
F
ÚR
U
THORN
T
ÓS
A
RÁD
R
CÉN
K
GYFU
G
WYNN
W
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
HOEGL
H
NÝD
N
ÍS
I
GÉR
J (Y)
ÉOH
EI
PEORDH
P
EOLH
Z(R at the
end)
SIGIL
S
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
TÍR
T
BEORC
B
EH
E
MANN
M
LAGU
L
ING
NG
DAEG
D
ÉTHEL
O
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
ÁC
A
AESC
A
ÝR
U
IOR
IO
ÉAR
AO (EA)
CWEORTH
QU
CALC
K
STÁN
ST
GÁR
G
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33

--- PAGE BREAK ---15
16
TÍR
T
BEORC
B
EH
E
MANN
M
LAGU
L
ING
NG
DAEG
D
ÉTHEL
O
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
ÁC
A
AESC
A
ÝR
U
IOR
IO
ÉAR
AO (EA)
CWEORTH
QU
CALC
K
STÁN
ST
GÁR
G
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33

--- PAGE BREAK ---

49
This runic system began to be used from the 5th century AD onwards. It is
derived from the Old Futhark and its structure can vary between 26 and
33 runes. In its early stages, it was phonetically related to the languages of Old
English and Old Frisian.
There are two theories about its origin: the first suggests that it was originally
developed in Frisia and later spread to England. The other theory indicates that
the original futhark used in Scandinavia was brought to England, where the
series of 24 runes was modified to form the Anglo-Saxon Futhorc, and finally
this latter system was exported to Frisia.
The original Anglo-Saxon futhorc was identical to the ancient futhark except for
the tripartite division of the letter A into three runes - Ós (4), Ác (25) and Aesc
(26) - meaning that this first version consisted of 26 runes. The separation of the
A's was done to differentiate between short and long pronunciations according
to the needs of the Ingaevonic dialect of that time:
Ós (4)
Ác (25)
Aesc (26)
The Hagalaz rune with a single transverse line was originally used in this
system, but from the end of the 7th century AD it was replaced by the new
Hoegl version with two transverse lines:
Hagalaz
Hoegl
This system was later expanded to 28 and finally 33 symbols so that runic
writing would be parallel to Latin writing, due to the Christianisation of the Anglo-
Saxons that began in the 7th century AD. Finally, in the 9th century AD, the
runic alphabet began to be replaced by Latin, and by 1066, when the Normans
invaded the British Isles, runic writing was practically obsolete, disappearing
completely a few decades later.

--- PAGE BREAK ---habet began to be replaced by Latin, and by 1066, when the Normans
invaded the British Isles, runic writing was practically obsolete, disappearing
completely a few decades later.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

50
To date, just under 200 artefacts with inscriptions in this runic system have been
found, which remained in use for almost 500 years. The database of these
nearly 200 archaeological pieces is compiled at the Catholic University of
Eichstätt-Ingolstadt in Germany(1)  ,and their number exceeds the nearly 80
pieces with inscriptions from the Old Futhark found in the Scandinavian region
and corresponding to the period from 400 AD to 700 AD. However, it does not
exceed the 260 pieces of Old Futhark found in continental Europe during its
heyday (200 AD-800 AD).
A runic language mixing Anglo-Saxon Futhorc and Old Futhark developed
during the 8th and 9th centuries AD in the southern region of the Carolingian
Empire (Bavaria). A manuscript called De inventione litteratum refers to the
"Marcomanni, quos nos Nordmannos vocamus", which is why this language has
been called "Marcomannic Runes" even though it had nothing to do with the
Marcomanni people2  On the contrary, they represented an attempt by
Carolingian scholars to reinterpret the Latin alphabet in its runic equivalents.
Marcomannic Runes:
WISDOM OF THE ANGLO-SAXON FUTHORC
In the Anglo-Saxon Futhorc, there are four Aettir, the first three of which
coincide in meaning with those of the ancient Futhark: the first relates to fertility
and growth, the second to the elements, and the third to the honour of
overcoming obstacles. However, we also have a fourth Aett made up of the final
nine runes in the series (25 to 33), which refers to the spirit of the ancestors and
delves deeper into the symbolism of death and cyclical rebirth:
1  In the province of Bavaria, its campus is located in the middle of the Altmühltal nature reserve.
2  Germanic tribes related to the Suebi, their name derives from Marcus Romani, who deserted Drusus the
Elder's legions in 13 BC to join them. Drusus forced them to retreat to Bohemia. In the 2nd century AD,
they formed a confederation with the Vandals, Quadi and Sarnaci. They were fought for three years by
Emperor Marcus Aurelius in the region of Carnuntum, Pannonia (until 180 AD).the 2nd century AD,
they formed a confederation with the Vandals, Quadi and Sarnaci. They were fought for three years by
Emperor Marcus Aurelius in the region of Carnuntum, Pannonia (until 180 AD).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

51
Aett 1
Aett 2
Aett 3
Aett 4
Frey/Freya
Heimdallr
Tyr
Ác
(8 runes)
(8 runes)
(8 runes)
(9 runes)
The following refers to the symbolism of runes 25 to 33 of the Anglo-Saxon
Futhorc. Runes 1 to 24 are identical in meaning to those of the Old Futhark. The
same is not true of the graphic forms of some of them, as they were slightly
varied, as can be seen if runes 1, 4, 6, 9, 12, 22 and 24 are compared between
the two systems:
Graphic variations of the Anglo-Saxon Futhorc (A) compared to the Old Futhark
(B)
(A)
FEOH
F
ÓS
A
CÉN
K
HOEGL
H
GÉR
J (Y)
ING
NG
ÉTHEL
O
1
4
6
9
12
22
24
(B)
FEHU
F
ANSUZ
A
KENAZ
K
HAGALAZ
H
JERA
J (Y)
INGWAZ
NG
OTHALAZ
O
1
4
6
9
12
22
24

--- PAGE BREAK ---to the Old Futhark
(B)
(A)
FEOH
F
ÓS
A
CÉN
K
HOEGL
H
GÉR
J (Y)
ING
NG
ÉTHEL
O
1
4
6
9
12
22
24
(B)
FEHU
F
ANSUZ
A
KENAZ
K
HAGALAZ
H
JERA
J (Y)
INGWAZ
NG
OTHALAZ
O
1
4
6
9
12
22
24

--- PAGE BREAK ---

52
Runes 25 to 33 of the Anglo-Saxon Futhorc:
25- RUNA ÁC (A)
Oak. This type of tree is sacred to the people of northern Europe, representing
strength and durability. Food offerings were often left at its base, and
assemblies of wise men and community leaders were held in its shade.
The oak is also associated with magical and healing powers. The ÁC rune is
considered a "trial" rune, as it requires the Virya to demonstrate their character
and inner and outer strength.
26- AESC (AE)
Human. Rune related to resolution, constancy, determination and immutability.
AESC is also related to the oak and ash trees, representing the axis of the world
and the tree from which the first human couple, Ask and Embla, were made. Its
wood is used in spells and magical protection work. AESC indicates the
importance of remaining firm in one's centre through willpower.
27- ÝR (U, Y)
Primary being, primordial forces. It means 'bow', to bow down or curtsey. It is
related to that "aura" that brings joy, honour, dignity and worth to nobles. This
rune seems to be a derivation of the rune 2-URUZ of the Old Futhark, as
phonetically it also corresponds to the vowel U and, furthermore, both its
spelling and meaning are quite similar, with the exception that in ÝR a short
vertical line is added in the centre of the graphic form.

--- PAGE BREAK ---to the vowel U and, furthermore, both its
spelling and meaning are quite similar, with the exception that in ÝR a short
vertical line is added in the centre of the graphic form.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

53
28- IOR (IO)
The Midgard serpent. Although its meaning is somewhat obscure and
indecipherable, it has been associated with the waters that produce fertility, as
well as with the satisfaction of being in one's own home, in one's primordial
homeland.
29- ÉAR (AO, EA)
Tomb, cave or place of ritual seclusion. ÉAR is related to death and the
mortality of flesh and the human body. For the ancient Norse, the best death
was one that occurred quickly or unexpectedly: in war, in an accident, or from a
heart attack while working in the fields. Conversely, the worst death is one that
is slow, such as prolonged illness or a burdensome old age. In the famous
"Anglo-Saxon runic poem"(3)  this rune refers to black earth as a nod to Odin's
followers who preferred that their remains be cremated at the time of their death
rather than buried underground, a tradition common to most Indo-European
warrior peoples.
30- CWEORTH (QU, KW)
Ritual fire, rotation of fire as a flame of power and life. Since the Anglo-Saxon
poem mentioned above only contains stanzas referring to runes up to number
29, the meaning of Cweorth is somewhat uncertain, so it has been deduced that
this rune was only used for writing. However, Cweorth has an identical spelling
to the Binde-rune Sig-Tyr, mentioned above.
3  Poem from the 8th or 9th century AD preserved in the 10th-century manuscript Cotton B.X Fol 165a-
165b, which was in the Cotton Library in London, England.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Tyr, mentioned above.
3  Poem from the 8th or 9th century AD preserved in the 10th-century manuscript Cotton B.X Fol 165a-
165b, which was in the Cotton Library in London, England.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

54
31-CALC (KK)
Ritual chalice or cup. Related to the earthly matrix and feminine forces.
32- STÁN (ST)
Stone or stone altar. Rune related to stone, walls, hardness and protection. Its
spelling shows a Peordh (perthro) rune completed with a vertical line-IS on its
right end: the stone (or stone man) that preserves its wall and guards and
maintains its energies in potential form.
33- GÁR (G)
Odin's spear as a sacred weapon that the ancient Norse threw at enemy sides
before a battle as a symbol of sacrifice to the God. Its meaning is also related to
that of the Tyr rune, which also refers to the spear, victory in battle and self-
sacrifice for the common good.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

55
In the spelling of the runes Feoh and Ethel of the Anglo-Saxon Futhorc, the
inclusion of curved shapes can be seen, which may be an indication of a certain
degradation of the primordial runic symbolism, probably caused by the gradual
Christianisation of the Anglo-Saxon people between the 7th and 10th centuries
AD.
All runes are formed by straight lines that induce righteousness, virility, and
spiritual verticality. Likewise, at the intersections between the lines, vertices and
angles are formed that denote the union of two worlds, that of humans and that
of the gods. The straight lines contrast with the serpentine and spiral curves that
visually make up the entire structure of nature and the material universe.
Straight runes in the Old Futhark:
1-FEHU
24-OTHALAZ
In contrast, the same runes in curvilinear form in the Anglo-Saxon Futhorc:
1-FEOH
24-ETHEL

--- PAGE BREAK ---f nature and the material universe.
Straight runes in the Old Futhark:
1-FEHU
24-OTHALAZ
In contrast, the same runes in curvilinear form in the Anglo-Saxon Futhorc:
1-FEOH
24-ETHEL

--- PAGE BREAK ---

56
NEW FUTHARK ( )
FÉ
F
UR
U (V,W)
THURS
TH (D)
ÁSS
O
REIDH
R
KAUN
K (CH, Q)
1
2
3
4
5
6
HAGALL
H
NAUDHR
N
ÍSS
I (J)
ÁR
A (E)
SÓL
S(Z)
7
8
9
10
11
TÝR
T
BJARKAN
B(P)
MADHR
M
LÖGR
L
YR
Y( X, Ü, Ö)
12
13
14
15
16

--- PAGE BREAK ---V,W)
THURS
TH (D)
ÁSS
O
REIDH
R
KAUN
K (CH, Q)
1
2
3
4
5
6
HAGALL
H
NAUDHR
N
ÍSS
I (J)
ÁR
A (E)
SÓL
S(Z)
7
8
9
10
11
TÝR
T
BJARKAN
B(P)
MADHR
M
LÖGR
L
YR
Y( X, Ü, Ö)
12
13
14
15
16

--- PAGE BREAK ---

57
The Old Futhark of 24 runes gave rise to the New Futhark of 16 runes. In
common use since 800 AD, it was related to the change from the Proto-Norse
dialect to Old Norse, which paradoxically had a greater number of phonemes. It
was not customary to write the same rune twice in a row, so the distinction
between short and long vowel pronunciations was lost. In the Middle Ages, this
runic system was widely used in Scandinavia and in the various Viking
settlements, where there is evidence that they used this runic system from the
9th century AD onwards.
From the period of migration of Germanic tribes throughout Europe (3rd to 9th
centuries AD), some 350 artefacts with manuscripts in Old Futhark have been
found. At that time, this system was known and used only by an educated elite.
The New Futhark, on the other hand, was taught to the majority of the
population already settled in Scandinavia. Some 6,000 inscriptions in stone
have been found using this runic system, and in continental Central Europe it
was known as the "language of the Nordic men", which is why it was studied by
scholars and leaders of those countries in order to maintain diplomatic and
commercial contacts.
Other runic languages were also derived from the New Futhark: the best known
and most original is the New Futhark with long lines, used for inscriptions on
stone in both Denmark and Norway; Another variation was the short-line New
Futhark – rök runes – (Swedish and Norwegian) used for everyday use and
official inscriptions on wood. Its characteristic was simply that in this system, the
lines of nine runes of the Swedish and Norwegian New Futhark were simplified,
while the other seven runes were written in the same way.
Danish Futhark (long lines):
Norwegian Futhark (long lines):e
lines of nine runes of the Swedish and Norwegian New Futhark were simplified,
while the other seven runes were written in the same way.
Danish Futhark (long lines):
Norwegian Futhark (long lines):

--- PAGE BREAK ---

58
Rök runes:
Other variations included the system of so-called Hälsinge runes or Staveless
runes, first found in the Hälsingland region of Sweden. These runes were used
between the 10th and 12th centuries AD and were another simplification of the
Swedish and Norwegian system, as their symbols were similar except that in
this variation the vertical lines were eliminated.
Hälsinge runes:
In the so-called "medieval runes," new symbols were added for vowels and to
denote silent consonants in the language (letters written but not pronounced).
Some letters, such as S, C, and Z, were interchangeable in writing with the
same rune. These runes were used until the 15th century AD, and their use can
be seen in most of the runic inscriptions found in Norway. In the region near
Bergen (Norway's second largest city) alone, more than 600 inscriptions on
wood have been found since the 1950s, indicating that, alongside Latin, this
runic system was used in writing, and some runic inscriptions even reproduced
words and phrases from the Latin language.
Medieval Runes:

--- PAGE BREAK ---s, indicating that, alongside Latin, this
runic system was used in writing, and some runic inscriptions even reproduced
words and phrases from the Latin language.
Medieval Runes:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

59
The last variation of the New Futhark was the Dalecarlian Runes, which were a
new derivation of the medieval runes. They originated in the province of Dalarna
in Sweden and were actually a mixture of runes and Latin letters. Their use
began in the 16th century AD and continued to some extent until the 20th
century AD.
The characters of the Dalecarlian runes are similar to those of the modern
Swedish language, and around 200 artefacts with inscriptions in this runic
language have been found on pieces of wood, furniture and containers.
Dalecarlian Runes:
WISDOM OF THE NEW R FUTHARK
In the New Futhark, the names of the three Aettir correspond to those of the Old
Futhark, but the number of runes in each varies due to the new distribution
required by the change from 24 to 16 runes.
Aett 1
Aett 2
Aett 3
Frey/Freya
Heimdallr
Tyr
(6 runes)
(5 runes)
(5 runes)
The following table lists the runes that match in spelling and meaning between
the New Futhark and the Old Futhark. In most cases, there are also slight
phonetic variations for a similar linguistic root:

--- PAGE BREAK ---the runes that match in spelling and meaning between
the New Futhark and the Old Futhark. In most cases, there are also slight
phonetic variations for a similar linguistic root:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

60
New Futhark
Old Futhark
1-Fé
corresponds to
1-Fehu
2-Ur
“
2-Uruz
3-Thurs
“
3-Thurizas
4-Ace
“
4-Ansuz
5-Rád
“
5-Raidho
6-Kaun
“
6-Kenaz
7-Hagall
“
9- Hagalaz
8-Naudhr
“
10-Naudhiz
9-Íss
“
11-Isa
11-Sol
“
16-Sowilo
12-Týr
“
17-Tywaz
13-Bjarkan
“
18-Berkano
15-Löegr
“
21-Laguz
14-Madhr
“
15-Elhaz
The following describes the other runes of the New Futhark that differ in spelling
from those of the Old Futhark, indicating their corresponding meanings:
6-Rune Kaun: Its meaning corresponds to that of the rune Kenaz in the Old
Futhark, but its spelling is different.
This same rune in the Futharkh Armanen is called ka.
10-Rune Ar: The virya reconnects with its spirit in a similar way to how a falcon
soars towards the highest peaks. It represents man who is oriented towards his
infinite centre, living and acting in the world according to a higher law.
As the Ar rune is related to the sun and therefore to the solar cycles that
generate the solstices and seasons, its meaning may also be related to that of
the Jera rune of the Old Futhark.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rune is related to the sun and therefore to the solar cycles that
generate the solstices and seasons, its meaning may also be related to that of
the Jera rune of the Old Futhark.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

61
16-Rune Yr: Meaning similar to the rune Eihwaz of the Old Futhark, although in
the New Futhark and in the Armanen its symbolism towards spiritual descent
into the naturalistic and phenomenal is also emphasised. Rune of death, lies,
deception, matter. The feminine as a symbol of virile a n d spiritual obscuration
when falling and becoming totally attached to earthly impulses, uncontrolled
hedonism and all that is unstable, contrary to the Uranian and stable.
The exclusively solar orientation of Armanen writers such as Von List and
Gorsleben leads them to refer to Yr as the 'rune of error', the rune of the
feminine represented in the crescent moon as opposed to the full moon of the
rune MAN (the same Elhaz of the ancient futhark) which, despite being
considered masculine, is still related to the active full moon as a symbol of the
generation and propagation of humanity.
The negative meaning of Yr can be reversed and approached from the point of
view of death as initiation, as the descent into the deepest abysses to acquire
runic wisdom, which will be referred to later.
The rune YR, which represents initiatory death and the search for wisdom in the
depths, was completely distorted in its form as a Hippie Symbol of the 1960s,
representing since then a supposed "freedom" to live according to the
naturalistic perceptions offered by the runaway senses in the world of illusion
(maya). It is man attached only to the momentary satisfaction of base earthly
and subterranean instincts without integrating within himself a higher and
transcendent principle.

--- PAGE BREAK ---(maya). It is man attached only to the momentary satisfaction of base earthly
and subterranean instincts without integrating within himself a higher and
transcendent principle.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

62
RUNIC CODES OF THE MIDDLE AGE
In the Middle Ages, runic messages and symbols were codified using a
numerical technique based on the aettir: a formula was given to represent a
rune, for example 1:3, which would be equivalent to the rune Thurs, since the
first digit indicates the aett and the second digit the rune in order of placement
from left to right.
1:3
THURS (First Aett, third rune)
2:3
ÍSS (Second Aett, third rune)
3:1
TÝR (Third Aett, first rune)
Interestingly, during the Middle Ages, when the New Futhark was used to write
these secret codes, another auxiliary "trick" was used, and the order of the
Aettir was reversed:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

63
To write people's names and magic formulas, other codes were created for
numbering, such as Isruna (is runes), Lagoruna (Laguz or Löegr runes),
Hahalruna, Kvistrúnar (rune-tent), tjaldrúnar (rune-branch), among others:
Isruna
= 1:4
(First Aett, fourth rune)
Lagoruna
=   1:2
(First Aett, second rune)
Hahalruna
= 3:1
(Third Aett, first rune)
Kvistrúnar
= 1:4, 2:5
and
Kvistrúnar is deciphered clockwise, in this case meaning:
-First Aett. Fourth rune, letter L
-Second Aett, fifth rune, letter S
If a word is to be written, several Kvistrúnar are used in succession, each
indicating two consecutive letters.

--- PAGE BREAK ---irst Aett. Fourth rune, letter L
-Second Aett, fifth rune, letter S
If a word is to be written, several Kvistrúnar are used in succession, each
indicating two consecutive letters.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

64
3:4
and 3:3
2:3
and2:2
O
D
I
N
Tjaldrúnar
= 3:2
(Third Aett. Second rune, letter U
(V))
If two words are written in succession, all the letters in the first word must use all
the lines to the left of the vertical in the same ascending direction, but in the
second word, each letter must have the direction of all the lines on the left
reversed. If more than two words are written, the ascending or descending
direction is interspersed between each of them.
DIE RUNE:
3:3
2:3
2:4
3:5
3:2
2:2
2:4
D
I
E
R
U
N
E
These methods have also been applied to all other known Futharks and to the
New Futhark with the normal order of its three Aettir.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

65
FUTHARKH ARMANEN1
FA
F
UR
U (W)
THORN
TH (D)
OS
O
RIT
R
KA
K (CH, Q)
1
2
3
4
5
6
HAGALL
H
NOT
N
IS
I (J)
AR
A
SIG
S
TYR
T
7
8
9
10
11
12
BAR
B (P)
LAF
L
MAN
M
YR
Y(Ü, Ö)
EHE
E
GIBOR
G
13
14
15
16
17
18
1  The Armanen Futhark may be the most controversial of all runic languages, although curiously, after the Old
Futhark, it has been the most widely used in the last century.

--- PAGE BREAK ---66
This system of 18 runes is actually the 'creation' of Guido Von List, an Austrian
poet, writer, playwright, mountaineer, merchant and occultist whose life
unfolded between the late 19th and early 20th centuries, closely linked to what
was known as the Runic and Germanic revival movement.

After contributing
articles of his own authorship to various newspapers (compiled in 1891 in the
book Deutsch-Mythologische Landschaftsbilder), belonging to various literary
associations
such
as
Iduna
and
the
Literarische
Donaugesellschaft,
miraculously saving his life in 1871 in an accident while mountaineering, and
finally writing four books and three dramatic librettos(all of a mystical-racialist-
Pan-Germanic nature), in 1902 he had to endure the rigours and difficulties of
temporary blindness for 11 months caused by cataract surgery.

But it was
precisely during this period of forced spiritual retreat that List claimed to have
awakened his transcendental "inner" vision and deciphered the mysteries of the
runes.

It is impossible not to point out this circumstantial fact as a total
coincidence with the myth of Odin, who hung for nine nights from the tree
Yggdrasil and sacrificed one of his eyes to see the total darkness within
himself and thus, through his inner beloved, managed to find the runic
wisdom that gave him the secret of life and death.

List claimed to have unravelled the encrypted code hidden in stanzas 138 to
165 of the Hávamal song from the Poetic Edda.

Specifically, stanzas 147 to 165
refer to 18 songs of wisdom which, according to List, correspond exactly to the
18 runes of the Armanen system that he had just rediscovered.

The word
Armanen refers to what Tacitus, in his book Germania, describes in Latinised
form as the Hermiones (Irminones) of the 'barbarian' tribes of the north, that is,
the priest-magicians initiated into the mysteries of the runes, who had magical
powers and guided the destinies of their people.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Specifically, stanzas 147 to 165
refer to 18 songs of wisdom which, according to List, correspond exactly to the
18 runes of the Armanen system that he had just rediscovered. The word
Armanen refers to what Tacitus, in his book Germania, describes in Latinised
form as the Hermiones (Irminones) of the 'barbarian' tribes of the north, that is,
the priest-magicians initiated into the mysteries of the runes, who had magical
powers and guided the destinies of their people. As this is a work that focuses primarily on the study of runes from the
perspective of a Virya warrior-magician, Von List's 'priestly' ideology may seem
somewhat reprehensible. However, it is important to note that the Austrian's
Aryan priestly notion differs greatly from what we have come to know in recent
times in the Judeo-Christian West. Hermiones should be seen more as a type of
ancient wise instructor and legislator rather than as priests routinely attached to
rituals, sacrifices, and the worship of a God, which is a common and recurring
prototype in times of decline in any civilisation. Nor is it advisable to confuse
Von List's work with a certain pantheistic tendency towards dissolution into the
cosmic whole, denoted by the act of passively serving as a representative and
mediator of God on earth, an attitude that is opposed to individuation
( separation from the whole while inhabiting the whole) and the most notorious
self-deification in the aforementioned type of warrior and/or magician who seeks
to reach a level even higher than that of the last heaven of the creator god,
farther than the stars in the sky, seeking not only to serve a God but also to
transmute his inner nature into one similar to that of a God.

--- PAGE BREAK ---f the last heaven of the creator god,
farther than the stars in the sky, seeking not only to serve a God but also to
transmute his inner nature into one similar to that of a God.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

67
Von List referred to the "I" as possessing a divine and eternal essence which,
despite having to fulfil a function within the cosmos and the natural order, is
nevertheless separate from them, as they are in themselves an illusion. Most
likely, the path to a process of individuation was only travelled by a small inner
circle of initiates in Von List's order (the Hoher Armanen order, whose writings
and practices were never made public), while his books were marketed as a
work aimed at an exoteric outer circle and a semi-profane audience. In any
case, this "new" series of 18 runes was actually a very similar variation of the
New Scandinavian Futhark. Apart from slight phonetic differences, as can be
seen in the illustrations, the symbolic differences between the two systems are
as follows:
-The spelling of the Armanen rune OS is the reversed form of the Áss rune of
the N.Futhark. Its meaning is identical:
Armanen
N. Futhark
4-OS
4-ÁSS
-The spelling of the Ar rune in the Armanen system is different from that of the
N. Futhark, but its symbolic meaning is similar. Interestingly, in the N. Futhark,
the so-called Ar rune has the same spelling as the Ehe rune in Armanen.
Armanen
N. Futhark
Armanen
10-AR
10-ÁR
17-EHE
-Runes 14 (madhr) and 15 (löegr) of the N. Futhark exchange their numerical
positions in the Armanen System, where they are called 14 (laf) and 15 (Man).
Armanen
Armanen
N. Futhark
N. Futhark
14-LAF
15-MAN
14-MADHR
15-LÖEGR
Despite everything, List declared that his series of 18 runes was not a novel
invention, but that in reality the Armanen System was the true, original and
primordial runic series from the forgotten millennial origins of the Aryan race,
and that all other historical runic languages (and those referenced in this book)
were derived from the Armanen Futhark.mordial runic series from the forgotten millennial origins of the Aryan race,
and that all other historical runic languages (and those referenced in this book)
were derived from the Armanen Futhark.

--- PAGE BREAK ---68
List created his own order in 1908, called the Guido Von List Gesellschaft, to
support his research.

In the same year, he published his classic book Des
Geheimnis der runen (The Secret of the Runes) in which he explained his
revelations.

In that book, List also referred to the fact that "in ancient times, the
runic futharkh (runic ABC) consisted of sixteen symbols".

Likewise, within the order, he would form an inner circle called the Hoher
Armanen Order (HAO), which would be entirely dedicated to the study of the
runes in their Gnostic aspect, while for the outer circle of the order, writings with
exoteric content would be compiled, focusing mainly on aspects of folk wisdom
and Norse-Germanic mythology related to Wotanism.

Regarding this Wotanism,
List claimed that the conversion of the Aryan-Germanic peoples to Christianity
was discreetly controlled by the Skalds (wise men-magicians-poets) who
concealed and preserved all the traditional festivities, customs and names
under a Christian veneer.

In this way, it was only necessary to decipher the
degraded Christian symbols in order to return to the original pagan spirituality.

All these thoughts were finally compiled in the 1914 book Die Ursprache der
Ario-Germanen und ihre Mysteriensprache.

When List died in 1919, his work and the development of his Armanen runic
system were continued in the 1920s and 1930s by Friedrich Bernhard Marby
and Siegfried Adolf Kummer.

The former introduced the concept of
runengymnastik (runic gymnastics), i.e.

associating runes with body positions,
dances, songs a n d astrological sequences.

In addition to the Armanen
system, Marby also applied his theories to the runic series of the Anglo-Saxon
Futhorc and the New Futhark.

S.A.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In addition to the Armanen
system, Marby also applied his theories to the runic series of the Anglo-Saxon
Futhorc and the New Futhark. S.A. Kummer took Marby's work a step further, in
1927 he founded an institute of runic studies in Dresden called simply "Runa",
where he performed rituals in the middle of magic circles with candlesticks on
which the names of the Germanic gods were written. In addition, the runic
forces were invoked while simultaneously describing the respective symbols in
the air with the hand. Some time later, inspired by Marby's ideas, he
systematised a whole series of body positions which he called Runic Yoga. The
final results of his experiment were published in the books Heilige Runenmacht
(1932) and Runenmagie (1933). It is important to note that although many runic
magicians accuse these authors of indiscriminately mixing Germanic tradition
with Orientalist and Hindu influences and practices introduced to the West in the
19th century through the theosophical doctrine initiated by the Russian medium
H.P. Blavatsky, the golden horns of Gallehus feature drawings in which human
bodies imitate the shape of certain runes, and for a time it was even common in
Iceland for children to perform runic body postures to facilitate language
learning. Therefore, although the science of runic gymnastics or yoga was never
fully systematised, it was always used in a semi-unconscious way for magical
invocation or as an educational tool.

--- PAGE BREAK ---69
The writer and occultist who perhaps took the doctrine of the Armanen system
furthest was Rudolf John Gorsleben, who, after maintaining contact with
members of the Germanenorden2,founded his own order called The Edda
Society to continue exploring the spiritual traditions of Indo-Germanic origin.

In
his 1930 masterpiece Die Hoch-zeit der Menschheit (The Zenith of Humanity),
Gorsleben takes the Armanen thesis even further by relating the runes to
magical and initiatory knowledge bequeathed by the legendary Atlantean
ancestors
of
the
Aryan
race,
and
also
associating
the
phonetic
correspondences of the runes with the syllables of a primordial language lost in
the mists of time, from which the languages of the great civilisations of history
derived centuries or millennia later.

Upon Gorsleben's death in August 1930, his
disciple Werner von Braun took over the leadership of the Edda Society and
designed a runic clock in which the runes were related to the signs of the zodiac
and the gods of the months.

In the post-war period, Karl Spiesberger was responsible for reviving the
"tradition" of Armanen in Europe by publishing the books Runenmagie (1955)
and Runenexerzitien für jedermann (1958), in which he incorporated new
hermetic elements into what had already been written by all his predecessors,
although he eliminated all traces of racist and nationalist ideology from his
writings, perhaps due to his contacts with the Fraternitas Saturni of Soviet
communist sympathiser Gregor Gregorius.

Spiesberger operated in a very
eclectic ideological environment.

He himself claimed that runes were just one of
many means of revealing occult knowledge, whereas for his predecessors such
as List or Gorsleben, runes were THE ONLY MEANS of revealing the primordial
tradition.

In the following decades, other men such as Karl Hanz Welz, Victor Ordell
Kasen, and Adolf Schleipfer continued to spread the Armanen runic magical
system.--- PAGE BREAK ---

He himself claimed that runes were just one of
many means of revealing occult knowledge, whereas for his predecessors such
as List or Gorsleben, runes were THE ONLY MEANS of revealing the primordial
tradition. In the following decades, other men such as Karl Hanz Welz, Victor Ordell
Kasen, and Adolf Schleipfer continued to spread the Armanen runic magical
system. Even Scheilper himself, together with his wife in the 1960s, refounded
the High Armanen Order on his own initiative, in which all of Guido Von List's
work was compiled and safeguarded. Despite all the controversy generated and not being supported by solid
archaeological or traditional references (except for the song of the Havamal),
the Armanen system has proven to be effective on a magical and operational
level. It is not unreasonable to say that after the ancient Futhark, it is the most
widely used runic system in Europe. Even writers of recent decades such as
Jan Fries, Edred Thorsson, and Thomas Karlsson have adapted the Galdr
(mantras) a n d runic yoga postures (Sthödur) of Kummer and Spiesberger,
which were originally designed for the Futharkh Armanen, to their own systems. 2  An organisation based in Munich from which the Thule Society would derive, and which in turn would
serve as the first support for the DAP and finally the NSDAP, initially led by Anton Drexler and finally by
Adolf Hitler. 3Austrian resident in the United States who founded the Knights of Runes order, now led by Larry E. Camp.

--- PAGE BREAK ---70
Speaking specifically about the 1930s, it should be noted that beyond the use of
runes during the Third Reich, runic wisdom is eternal and has been reflected for
millennia in the symbols and traditions of most Indo-European cultures and
even in some Asian and American cultures (as reflected in the use of the
swastika by Native American tribes).

With the arrival of the Nazi Party to power
in Germany in 1933 and its absorption of all levels of political, social, and
cultural life in the Third Reich, esoteric, spiritual and ancestral research was
commissioned and carried out primarily by the Ahnenerbe Institute, directed by
Wolfram Sievers, and by the inner circle of the SS order, led by Heinrich
Himmler, assisted by Karl Maria Wiligut, who is credited with developing the
runic symbolism and some rituals for the elite of that order.

In this way, the
various esoteric associations and orders of all kinds, independent of the NSDAP
party, were forced to cease their activities.

All kinds of speculations have been
made about Marby and Kummer.

Apparently, Karl Maria Wiligut disagreed with
Marby's anti-racist concepts, so he sent a note to Himmler denouncing him.

From 1936 onwards, Marby spent 99 months in the concentration camps of
Flossenburg, Welzheim and Dachau, ending his confinement in 1945.

He finally
died in Germany in 1966.

Kummer had a more racist view, comparable to that of
Guido Von List or Lanz Von Liebenfels(4)  ,but Wiligut did not seem to agree with
his theories either, so he apparently decided to emigrate to South America and
nothing is known to this day about his fate and date of death.

In reality, Wiligut seemed to profess a belief in a type of Manichaean "Irmin-
Christianity" that drew a clear opposition and difference between a higher
principle of spiritual redemption and another related to naturalistic paganism.Kummer had a more racist view, comparable to that of
Guido Von List or Lanz Von Liebenfels(4)  ,but Wiligut did not seem to agree with
his theories either, so he apparently decided to emigrate to South America and
nothing is known to this day about his fate and date of death.

In reality, Wiligut seemed to profess a belief in a type of Manichaean "Irmin-
Christianity" that drew a clear opposition and difference between a higher
principle of spiritual redemption and another related to naturalistic paganism.

Therefore, he considered dangerous the concepts of some of the defenders of
the Armanen system, such as Marby and Kummer, who, despite declaring
themselves Wotanists, pan-Germanists and racists, nevertheless denoted a
pantheistic and monistic inclination in their writings.

From all this, it is obvious
that Wiligut saw these inclinations as possible deviations from the only
spirituality that should govern the destiny of the Reich.

It is thus understandable
that the inner circle of the SS and the men who actually directed the destiny of
the Third Reich disagreed ideologically with many Germanic religious circles
and organisations, despite agreeing with them on racist or völkish worldviews,
which could function very well in an exoteric context for the majority of the
German people or for the majority of the members of the NSDAP as a primarily
political-state entity.

This can be demonstrated by the fact that the high-ranking
members of the SS supported the research of the writer Otto Rahn on the
dualistic heresy of the Cathars in the 12th and 13th centuries AD.

The Cathars claimed that matter was actually the satanic work of a demiurge
who ruled creation from the fifth heaven downwards.

They identified this
demiurge as the same God Jehovah of the monotheistic Judeo-Christian
religion.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Cathars claimed that matter was actually the satanic work of a demiurge
who ruled creation from the fifth heaven downwards. They identified this
demiurge as the same God Jehovah of the monotheistic Judeo-Christian
religion. Thus, the only valid spiritual work that a "man" should perform
4  Founder of the Ordo Novi Templis and the magazine Ostara in the first decade of the 20th century, as
well as being credited with the doctrine of Theozoology and spreading "Aryan Christianity".

--- PAGE BREAK ---71
pure" man was liberation from material chains and from Jehovah himself.

The
SS order could admire different Völkish writers and give free rein to their works
to be published and distributed in all the bookshops of the Reich, since in order
to fulfil the objective of giving the collective a spirituality appropriate to its
interests, the nationalist, racialist, pagan, folkloric and identitarian concepts
professed by these writers could work very well.

However, the worldview of
Himmler's inner circle, or Wiligut, was somewhat different, as they possessed or
had acquired another type of doctrine and sought to go beyond all collectivist
and naturalist parameters.

Some pagan occult writers of recent decades, such as Edred Thorsson, have
reviled Himmler and his circle of initiates, reproaching them for not being truly
'pagan' as might be inferred from the fact that they used ancient runic symbols
in all their ceremonies.

Thorsson also argues that, on the contrary, they were
actually recalcitrant monotheistic Christians(5) .This may be partly true, but it
should be noted that Himmler and his circle did not profess a typical Judeo-
Christian priestly belief, but rather oriented themselves towards a type of
chivalrous-imperial Christianity very similar to medieval Catholic Ghibellinism,
whose greatest representatives were the emperors and members of the
Hohenstaufen dynasty of Sicily.

In this sense, the inner circle of the SS could be described as "Christian" as
opposed to simply monistic paganism, a Christianity with elements in common
with the ancient Germanic and Nordic mysteries, which are related to the
fundamental symbol of the Hyperborean Kristos, which has elements far
removed from Judeo-Christian morality.Thorsson also argues that, on the contrary, they were
actually recalcitrant monotheistic Christians(5) .This may be partly true, but it
should be noted that Himmler and his circle did not profess a typical Judeo-
Christian priestly belief, but rather oriented themselves towards a type of
chivalrous-imperial Christianity very similar to medieval Catholic Ghibellinism,
whose greatest representatives were the emperors and members of the
Hohenstaufen dynasty of Sicily.

In this sense, the inner circle of the SS could be described as "Christian" as
opposed to simply monistic paganism, a Christianity with elements in common
with the ancient Germanic and Nordic mysteries, which are related to the
fundamental symbol of the Hyperborean Kristos, which has elements far
removed from Judeo-Christian morality.

For this very reason, Karl Maria Wiligut
spoke of "Irmin-Christianity" in reference to the legendary Irminsul tree in the
German Teutoburg Forest, which for the Saxons symbolised the pillar of the
world that functioned as the centre of Gnostic radiation.

At no time did National
Socialism seek to completely eliminate the Christian religion and abruptly
paganise the German people.

The plan was to 'Aryanise' Christianity, gradually
purifying it until it finally corresponded to a spirituality akin to the Aryan-Indo-
European blood and race.

Some aspects of Ghibellinism have been described as similar to and inductive
of a kind of "Hellenic Christianity", a spirituality with many points in common with
some ancient pre-Christian, heroic and pagan traditions of European peoples
and represented by a way of life far removed from many moral paradigms
common to the West in recent centuries.

In contrast, Guelphism would fully
represent the monotheistic and papal Judeo-Christian morality prevailing in the
current Catholic institution.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Some aspects of Ghibellinism have been described as similar to and inductive
of a kind of "Hellenic Christianity", a spirituality with many points in common with
some ancient pre-Christian, heroic and pagan traditions of European peoples
and represented by a way of life far removed from many moral paradigms
common to the West in recent centuries. In contrast, Guelphism would fully
represent the monotheistic and papal Judeo-Christian morality prevailing in the
current Catholic institution. 5  This thesis is explored in depth in the book "The Secret King: Karl Maria Wiligut -- Himmler's Lord of the
Runes" (2001) published by Dominion Press-Runaraven Press and translated and prefaced by Edred
Thorsson himself under his real name, Stephen Flowers.

--- PAGE BREAK ---gut -- Himmler's Lord of the
Runes" (2001) published by Dominion Press-Runaraven Press and translated and prefaced by Edred
Thorsson himself under his real name, Stephen Flowers.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

72
It seems that for today's pagan occultists, all types of Christianity are exactly
identical to Guelph Judeo-Christianity, and they have not bothered to investigate
the subtle but profound symbolic differences that might exist, for example, with
Russian Orthodox Christianity. Much less have they researched the historical
struggle that took place within the Catholic Church in the Middle Ages between
the Ghibellines and the Guelphs: the former fought for the divine, royal and
sovereign authority of the emperor and were structured around a warrior-
chivalric ethic, while the latter fought for the sovereignty of the pope as supreme
pontiff and were structured around a priestly ethic (the well-known phrase
"render unto God what is God's, and unto Caesar what is Caesar's" could
perfectly define the Guelph ideology); the latter would ultimately win the battle,
and thus their idiosyncrasies and doctrine would permeate the Church of Rome
from long before the end of the Middle Ages.
All modern occultists of the second half of the 20th century have done their
utmost to dissociate the Futharkh Armanen from racist content, as Vön List's
runic system and ideology have always been associated with the fact that they
were one of the main ideological influences for the advent of National Socialism
in Germany. However, neither the NSDAP nor the SS (which had Wiligut as its
"official runologist") placed exclusively Armanen runes on their insignia. Some
runes such as Man, Yr, or Hagall were used, but in other cases composite
symbols such as the double sieg and the Heilschinzen were used. Several
runes from the Old Futhark were also used, some little-known runes such as the
Wolfsangel, and finally, glyphs (ideographs) such as the sun wheel a n d the
hakenkreus, which refer to runic symbols known since at least the Bronze Age:
Heilschinzen: Binde-rune of Tyr and inverted fehu, symbol of well-being and
good luck, self-sacrifice despite material wealth, placed in a circle representing
prosperity, it was inscribed on the SS death's head rings (Totenkopfring).
Siegel: sieg und sal, double victory in heaven and on earth, redemption coming
from the victory of lightning and the archetypal sun, also placed in a circle
representing prosperity and inscribed on the SS death's head rings
(Totenkopfring).ven and on earth, redemption coming
from the victory of lightning and the archetypal sun, also placed in a circle
representing prosperity and inscribed on the SS death's head rings
(Totenkopfring).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

73
Hakenkreus: Hooked cross or swastika, a word that comes from the Hindu
Sanskrit "swasti," meaning well-being. Power of the god Donar/Thor of thunder.
The centre/axis that, remaining impassive, dominates and controls the
manifestation of the universe.
Sonnenrad: Swastika in the shape of a sun wheel, a Nordic representation of
the power of the archetypal sun, emblem of the Thule Gesellschaft
WISDOM OF THE FUTHARK R ARMANEN
In Armanen, the three Aettir differ from other runic systems, although the first
two Aettir coincide with those of the new Futhark.
These first two Aettir refer to Frey and Heimdallr through the runes FA and
HAGALL, however, the third Aett begins with the rune BAR, which corresponds
to Frigga, the goddess of life and death who promotes rebirth. Likewise, in this
system, the three Aetiir are related to the Trinitarian concept of Birth, Being and
Death, as well as to the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, or Father, Son and Mother.
Aett 1
Aett 2
Aett 3
Frey/Freya
Heimdallr
Frigga
(6 runes)
(5 runes)
(5 runes)
The following list shows the runes of the Futharkh Armanen which, apart from
having a very similar name, have a spelling and meaning that correspond
exactly to other runes of the New Futhark.

--- PAGE BREAK ---list shows the runes of the Futharkh Armanen which, apart from
having a very similar name, have a spelling and meaning that correspond
exactly to other runes of the New Futhark.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

74
It should be remembered that the New Futhark is almost identical to the
Armanen, so the following concepts and correspondences also apply to that
system.
Guido Von List claimed that in ancient times the runic series consisted of 16
symbols. A very close approximation to this original series could be the first 16
runes of the Armanen or all of those in the New Futhark. The Armanen has 18
symbols because List decided to add the runes Ehe and Gibor to perfect his
system and to match the number of the 18 stanzas of the Havamal song
mentioned above.
Armanen
New Futhark
1-Fa
is the same
1-Faith
2-Ur
“
2-Ur
3-Thorn
“
3-Thurs
5-Rit
“
5-Rád
6-Ka
“
6-Kaun
7-Hagal
“
7-Hagall
8-Nod
“
8-Naudhr
9-Is
“
9-Iss
11-Sieg
“
11-Sol
12-Tyr
“
12-Týr
13-Bar
“
13-Bjarkan
14-Laf
“
15-Löegr
15-Man
“
14-Madhr
These are the other runes of the Armanen Futhark that differ in spelling from
those of the Old Futhark. Their corresponding meanings are indicated below:
4-Rune Os: Its meaning corresponds to that of the rune Ansuz in the Old
Futhark. This same rune in the New Futhark is called Áss. In Armanen, its
spelling is different because the shape of the rune is reversed.
In Armanen, this rune also refers to the earthly plane and the power to act upon
it from the spirit, therefore its meaning could also correspond to that of the
Othalaz rune of the Old Futhark, but for the Armanen series this rune is
specifically called Odal and could replace the Os rune while maintaining its
numerical value of four.

--- PAGE BREAK ---he
Othalaz rune of the Old Futhark, but for the Armanen series this rune is
specifically called Odal and could replace the Os rune while maintaining its
numerical value of four.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

75
10-Rune Ar: Its shape resembles an ascending platform through which the
Virya is propelled to fly like an eagle and with its claws dominate the serpent,
the karmic forces of creation and the world of illusion with its unstable currents
that cause the emotional pendulum to swing back and forth between hope and
disappointment.
Curiously, in the New Futhark, the Ár rune has the same meaning, but its
spelling is the same as that of the Ehe rune in the Armanen.
17- Rune Ehe: It has a meaning that corresponds to that of the rune Ehwaz in
the Old Futhark, but its spelling is different.
In the Armanen system, the Ehe rune can be seen as the sum of the AR and KA
runes, both of which have an "ascending" meaning, warrior-aristocratic capacity
and Gnostic orientation through which the course of the waters of becoming is
reversed towards the eternal and unknowable, transcending the wheel of
eternal return.
+

--- PAGE BREAK ---c capacity
and Gnostic orientation through which the course of the waters of becoming is
reversed towards the eternal and unknowable, transcending the wheel of
eternal return.
+

--- PAGE BREAK ---

76
The vertical axis reverses the meaning of the auxiliary line Balk-Death of the
rune Nod and turns it into the line Bar of life and ascent.
+
18-Rune Gibor: It has a meaning that corresponds to that of the rune Gebo of
the ancient Futhark, but its spelling is different.
The Gibor rune can be broken down into a Sieg rune attached to the is rune: by
maintaining its own centre/axis and spiritual verticality, Virya achieves victory,
which is equivalent to acquiring the divine ray, the gift and natural state of the
gods.
+
+
As a swastika, it symbolises the impassive and immovable axis in the midst of
the turning of time and the cosmos, beyond the path of the solar wheel. In the
Armanen, it is considered the eighteenth "mysterious" rune and is also called
Fyrfos, Hakenkreutz or Hook Cross. The swastika can be left-handed (return to
the origin) if it turns counterclockwise, o r

--- PAGE BREAK ---

77
dextrogyrous (evolution of manifestation) if it turns clockwise to the right.
If the shorter Is rune is placed, a runic symbol known as wolfsegel or "wolf trap"
is obtained. It provides protection against enemies and wolves, but its meaning
also connotes acquiring the boldness and power of the wolf for one's own
benefit in battle or heroic deeds.
Another form of the wolfsegel symbol is as follows:
If only the Sieg rune from the previous symbol is used, it forms the rune known
as Ger, which represents the community spirit. The IS line of the "I" is not found,
but it could be said that this symbol denotes a horizontal Sieg rune, the victory
achieved through collaboration between equals.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nity spirit. The IS line of the "I" is not found,
but it could be said that this symbol denotes a horizontal Sieg rune, the victory
achieved through collaboration between equals.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

78
UTHARK
UR
U
THURS
T
AS
A
REID
R
KEN
K
GIFU
G
WYNJA
W
HAGAL
H
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
NAUD
N
IS
I
JARA
J (Y)
PERTRA
P
EIHWAZ
EI
ALGIZ
Z(R at the
end)
SOL
S
TYR
T
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
BJARKA
B
EH
E
MANNAZ
M
LAGU
L
ING
NG
ODAL
O
DAGAZ
D
FEH
F
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

--- PAGE BREAK ---AUD
N
IS
I
JARA
J (Y)
PERTRA
P
EIHWAZ
EI
ALGIZ
Z(R at the
end)
SOL
S
TYR
T
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
BJARKA
B
EH
E
MANNAZ
M
LAGU
L
ING
NG
ODAL
O
DAGAZ
D
FEH
F
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

--- PAGE BREAK ---

79
In the 1930s, Swedish writer Sigurd Agrell wrote several books, including
Lapptrummor och Runmagi, Runornas talmystik och dess antita förebild, and
Senantik mysteriereligion och nordisk runmagi. In these texts, he proposed that
the true runic series, known only to the most initiated, consisted of the 24 runes
of the Old Futhark, but with the first rune, Fehu, moved to the last position.
According to Agrell, this would completely change the numerical meaning and
symbolism of the entire runic system.
A few decades earlier, Guido Von List had expressed that all runes contained a
triple meaning: the first was purely exoteric, given to a novice or ordinary
person; the second was a meaning understood by the members of a semi-
external esoteric circle; and the third was the deepest meaning, which only the
highest Armanen initiates of the innermost circle could perceive. In accordance
with this, Agrell argued that only the highest initiates knew this trick or trap in the
runic series.
Contrary to this, there is no archaeological evidence to corroborate the Swedish
writer's claims, except for some artefacts found in Sweden in which it is not
entirely certain whether the rune Ur is actually at the beginning of the row simply
because the rune Fehu was omitted, either intentionally or unintentionally.
 WISDOM OF THE UTHARK
The meanings of most of the runes seem to coincide with the corresponding
vibrations and numerical symbolism in the Uthark, and it seems logical to think
that UR could function as the first rune in the series and FEHU as the last, since
UR represents the origin, the ox and the primordial and wild forces, while, on
the contrary, the rune FEHU symbolises gains and acquired material goods,
'tamed' and controlled livestock, that is, the successful conclusion of the runic
initiation process that begins by immersing oneself in the most primordial and
wild waters.
In the Uthark, the name of each Aett would also be modified, which is deduced
from the name of each of its first runes:
The first Aett would correspond to the rune Ur representing Audhumbla, the cow
that fed the first androgynous ice giant Ymir.
The second Aett would correspond to the rune Naud, representing the three
Norns Urd, Werdandi and Skuld who weave the threads of destiny.
Finally, the third Aett begins with the rune Bjarka, representing Frigga, goddess
of creation, life and death. In each case, the first rune marks a specific vibration
for the entire Aett:f destiny.
Finally, the third Aett begins with the rune Bjarka, representing Frigga, goddess
of creation, life and death. In each case, the first rune marks a specific vibration
for the entire Aett:

--- PAGE BREAK ---the third Aett begins with the rune Bjarka, representing Frigga, goddess
of creation, life and death. In each case, the first rune marks a specific vibration
for the entire Aett:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

80
Aett 1
Aett 2
Aett 3
Audhumbla
Norns
Frigga
(8 runes)
(8 runes)
(8 runes)
It does not go unnoticed that the three Aettir are ruled by female entities and
forces which, mythologically, can represent the dark and chaotic aspect of the
universe in accordance with the Qliphoth and the descending tree of death and
knowledge, which would personify "the shadow" or the opposite of the Sephiroth
and the ascending tree of life in the Qabalah.
The meaning of each rune in the Uthark is identical to that of each rune in the
Old Futhark, but it is important to note the variation in runic symbolism in terms
of the entire alphabet seen as a structure or system, since the numerological
achievement and its corresponding vibrations would change completely, as
would the relationship between the three Aettir and their different runes, as
already pointed out.
Beyond its archaeological and historical validity or invalidity, this system is
currently practised by some occult groups in Sweden and neighbouring
countries, especially in circles that adhere to an antinomian ideology1 and
perform magical practices related to the so-called "Left Hand Path"2 .
These magical systems, which can be entirely valid and effective, seek inner
transmutation through the control, integration, and mastery of the primordial,
chaotic, destructive, subterranean, dark, and uncontrolled forces of the
universe. Therefore, it is highly recommended that those who have unresolved
or unresolved emotional or psychological issues refrain from engaging in these
practices altogether, as they would run a very high risk of summoning totally
self-destructive currents and forces.
1  Refusal to comply with moral law. Antinomianism is related to Gnosticism of the 1st and 2nd centuries
AD, which advocated non-compliance with the precepts of Christian love and the laws of God.
2  The path or trail on the left hand (also called the woman's path), characterised by the inversion of
established values, self-deification, and the separation of the practitioner from the universal order.path or trail on the left hand (also called the woman's path), characterised by the inversion of
established values, self-deification, and the separation of the practitioner from the universal order.

--- PAGE BREAK ---left hand (also called the woman's path), characterised by the inversion of
established values, self-deification, and the separation of the practitioner from the universal order.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

81
CONCLUSIONS ON THE ORIGINAL 16-
RUNE SERIES
We have given a general overview of the most widely used and well-known
runic systems of the last two thousand years. Now we want to shed some light
on the controversy regarding which of these would represent the most "original"
or "legitimate" system.
Let us begin by inferring that this original system must somehow be the most
basic and simplified, since the others must have different variations,
combinations, and additions made to the primary symbols, just as happens with
a spoken language or artistic language, in which, due to the almost automatic
process and entropy of the universe, a simple cell or motif tends to be repeated
infinitely with multiple variations and combinations until it reaches enormous
levels of complexity and structure, adding more and more instances or elements
to an endless process that seems to never reach final perfection. Musically
speaking, the contemporary minimalist style of composers of the last decades of
the 20th century, such as Phillip Glass and Steve Reich, can illustrate this
reproductive process of the universe, which develops from and towards cell
multiplication. And speaking on an economic level, one only has to observe the
way in which finance and usury unfold in monumental and unmanageable
exponential instances in the modern world.
Likewise, a runic language, even if it is the language of birds that reflects other
infinite and uncreated worlds on our plane of existence, is not exempt from
undergoing these processes and being moulded to universal archetypal
mechanics and constructive dynamics. Therefore, the fact that a system is more
complex or "evolved" does not necessarily mean that it is the best or the purest.
Thus, if we are looking for the most basic and elementary runic system of all, we
will find two options: the New Futhark (Scandinavian) and the Futharkh
Armanen. This does not mean that the other systems are not valid and effective
in magical and initiation practices; we are simply referring to the most primitive
and least 'developed' and varied system.
The New Futhark contains sixteen runes, which coincides with what Guido Von
List said about the original series in mythological times containing precisely that
number of symbols. Furthermore, in a previous chapter, we already mentioned
the possibility that the New Futhark was not actually "new" at all.series in mythological times containing precisely that
number of symbols. Furthermore, in a previous chapter, we already mentioned
the possibility that the New Futhark was not actually "new" at all.

--- PAGE BREAK ---82
This number also coincides with what is stated in the books of Gnosis
Hiperbórea by the writer Nimrod de Rosario, which refer to the 13+3 "vrunas"
known to the initiates of the Tartessos civilisation before the Carthaginian
invasion and the arrival of the Christian era.

The book El misterio de Belicena
Villca (The Mystery of Belicena Villca) also indicates that the leaders of
Tartessos formed an alliance with the Pelasgian Lydians of Asia Minor so that
part of their population could move to their country (what is now the region of
Andalusia in southern Spain, from the Guadiana River in the east to Cape Nao
in the west) and thus form a warrior regiment to face a possible invasion by the
Phoenician contingents that were already threateningly settled in the Balearic
Islands.

The novel also recounts how the initiates of the Lydians had a runic-linguistic
system very similar to that of Tartessos, with the exception that theirs had 13+5
symbols, i.e.

18 runes that could well be very similar to the 18 runes of Guido
Von List's Armanen system.

The two additional runes of the Lydians
corresponded to the vowels E – U (Y), thus indicating that the original sixteen
runes corresponded in their phonetic equivalents to thirteen consonants and
three vowels (- I, O, A - which also represented the secret name of the moon
goddess, Belisana).

Curiously, EHE, the 17th rune of the Armanen system, is
equivalent to the letter E, and List himself states that this letter/rune has the
character of being added to the first sixteen.

This would also clarify why in the
New Futhark the same runic spelling appears in tenth place but corresponds to
the name Ar and phonetically to the vowel A, although it could also function in
the second instance for the vowel E.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Curiously, EHE, the 17th rune of the Armanen system, is
equivalent to the letter E, and List himself states that this letter/rune has the
character of being added to the first sixteen. This would also clarify why in the
New Futhark the same runic spelling appears in tenth place but corresponds to
the name Ar and phonetically to the vowel A, although it could also function in
the second instance for the vowel E. With the exception of the rune EHE and the rune GIBOR, the Armanen system
deciphered by Von List has almost identical symbols to the New Scandinavian
Futhark, which curiously began to appear slowly from the 5th century AD with
the invasions of the Gothic races in Western and Southern Europe, and then
became predominant from the 9th century
AD, parallel to the invasions and spread of the Vikings, a warrior race allied with
the Hyperborean Gods. For this reason, the first chapter of this book refers to
the cyclical concept of history in which, once every certain number of centuries,
the eternal and primordial tradition is reborn, albeit briefly or circumstantially,
and despite the fact that for several millennia now we have been in what the
Greeks called the Iron Age and Hinduism calls Kaly-yuga, the most decadent
and materialistic era of all, in which men have lost contact with the gods and
with the Transcendent. The "emergence" of the New Futhark coincides with the renewal that the Goths
and Vikings brought to the decadent Roman Empire, leading to what would later
be known as the Holy Roman Empire. Similarly, the Futharkh Armanen spread
in the early 20th century, parallel to the emergence of some esoteric
movements that had deep roots in the eternal Hyperborean traditions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Similarly, the Futharkh Armanen spread
in the early 20th century, parallel to the emergence of some esoteric
movements that had deep roots in the eternal Hyperborean traditions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

83
The Armanen rune EHE has the same spelling as the tenth rune ÁR of the New
Futhark, and if we look at the AR rune in the Armanen system, we will see that
both symbols are similar and represent a very similar concept in terms of
referring to returning the dissolving and decadent current of the waters of
becoming and rising "like an eagle" towards the heavens through an honourable
life framed by the ethics of the gods, as well as fulfilling an inner and/or outer
magical marriage that resolves the paradoxes of duality and opposing extremes.
Rune AR(10) in the Futharkh Armanen
Rune AR(10) in the New Futhark and EHE (17) in the Armanen
The spelling of the two runes is not contradictory, despite the fact that in the first
rune the ascending auxiliary line (Bar) is half as long as that of the second rune.
On the other hand, it has already been mentioned that the rune Gibor, also
known as the Swastika Glyph, actually represents a Hagall rune in motion seen
from "above" its vertical axis. Therefore, both Hagall and Gibor can be
considered as the rune of Origin that contains the other runes, the "mother" of
all runes.
Gibor emphasises the aspect of the contrasting tension between the impassive,
unmanifested and unconditioned spiritual central axis that lies at the centre of
the movement of the material universe and the incessant rotation of time-space
and the four cardinal points with the four elements. In short, it is the immovable
menhir stone in the midst of the hustle and bustle and entropy of the universe:
Rune Hagall (7) in Armanen

--- PAGE BREAK ---ur cardinal points with the four elements. In short, it is the immovable
menhir stone in the midst of the hustle and bustle and entropy of the universe:
Rune Hagall (7) in Armanen

--- PAGE BREAK ---

84
The spelling of Gibor shows us a central point that would actually be the vertical
axis of a Hagall in motion seen from above:
In terms of numerological vibrations, we find correspondences between Hagall,
Gebo and Gibor: The Gebo rune is number seven in the Old Futhark, and the
Hagall rune is number seven in both the Armanen and the New Futhark.
The Gibor rune referring to the Swastika is number 18 in the Armanen system,
1+8 gives us nine, in the Old Futhark the number nine rune is Hagalaz which,
despite having a deformed spelling in H, has an almost identical meaning to
Hagall.
In this way, we can understand the addition of these two additional runes (EHE
and GIBOR) in the Armanen system. Inscriptions of the Swastika have been
preserved for millennia in different cultures around the world, yet this glyph was
never part of the known runic series unless it is considered a variation of Gebo
in the Old Futhark and/or a development of Hagall, which does appear in other
systems except the Anglo-Saxon.
If, on the other hand, specific mention is made of phonemes and voices, it
would seem that Armanen represents them in their most basic and primitive
form, since the names of the runes in this system are almost always only one
root syllable, while in the Old Futhark, for example, most names have two or
three syllables that appear to be derivations or prolongations.
In all these aspects, the Anglo-Saxon Futhorc does not generate much need for
investigation, since, as mentioned in a previous chapter, this system actually
represented an aggregation and elaboration of something that had already been
reworked from an original source. On the other hand, we can consider the
Uthark as a system that reinterprets the symbols of the Old Futhark for a new
and different predetermined initiatory and magical purpose.
Likewise, the Old Futhark and its 24 runes could be understood as a derivation
and variation of the original series of 16 runes. This does not eliminate or
obscure the fact that the Old Futhark is actually a very powerful and effective
system on a magical level and that its symbols possess true initiatory value. The
rune Dagaz, for example, despite not being present in the original series, also
has great power of illumination and Gnostic transformation.el and that its symbols possess true initiatory value. The
rune Dagaz, for example, despite not being present in the original series, also
has great power of illumination and Gnostic transformation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

85
The runes of the Old Futhark that would not correspond to the original series as
proposed by Von List and the New Scandinavian Futhark would be Wunjo,
Hagalaz, Jera, Eihwaz, Perthro, Mannaz, Ingwaz, and Dagaz.
Below, we will relate all of these runes as derivations of other more primary
ones:
Wunjo actually represents half of the rune B:
Half of:
It is no coincidence that in the phonetic correspondences of Armanen and the
New Futhark, the rune B can also be equivalent to the letter P, which as a single
rune is not found in those two systems. In fact, in the early formation of
European languages, the letter P is considered to be a derivation of the letter B.
On the other hand, Hagalaz is actually a later variation of Hagall, and its
phonetic and symbolic meaning is the same in both spellings. Even authors
such as Edred Thorsson, who have published books on the Old Futhark,
recognise this derivation1:
Variation of:
As mentioned above, Jera represents two opposing Kenaz runes:
Derived from
+
Eihwaz represents two laguz runes, one normal and one inverted, joined by
their central vertical line, one laguz of the ascending waters of life and the other
laguz of the descending waters of death. Furthermore, all this coincides with the
meaning of Eihwaz as the tree-axis that connects the different planes from the
underworld to the overworld:
Derived from
+
1  Referred to in THORSSON, EDRED, "Futhark. A handbook of Rune Magic". York Beach, 1984
Translation Amalia Peradejordi Ediciones obelisco, Barcelona 2006. Page 54

--- PAGE BREAK ---Derived from
+
1  Referred to in THORSSON, EDRED, "Futhark. A handbook of Rune Magic". York Beach, 1984
Translation Amalia Peradejordi Ediciones obelisco, Barcelona 2006. Page 54

--- PAGE BREAK ---

86
Perthro can be seen as an IS with two opposing Kenaz at the ends, the
unmanifested that freezes (petrifies) to materialise and manifest itself.
Furthermore, the waters of Nifelheim are energised by the fire of Muspelheim,
which can act constructively or destructively, expanding to cause life or death:
Derived from
+
+
Mannaz has already been referred to as a rune that completes and develops
the Ehwaz rune to a higher level. It can also be perceived as the union of two
opposing Wunjo runes or a Gebo rune between two vertical Is lines, and even
as the extension of the descending lines of two opposing Laguz runes.
It develops into:
Derived from:
+
Derived from:
Derived from:
+
Ingwaz can easily be seen as a simplification, derivation or variation of Odal
Variation/simplification of:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

87
The form of Dagaz is actually a derivation of a Binde-rune (compound rune) in which
two thuriz runes are juxtaposed:
The Gebo rune is related to Gibor (swastika) from Armanen, which in turn is
related to Hagall. Gebo can be seen as a static form of Gibor's movement:
 In static form it would be:
=
The Ehwaz rune symbolises the same thing as the Ehe rune of the Armanen.
Ehwaz is formed by the sum of two Laguz runes facing each other.
=
It derives from:
+

--- PAGE BREAK ---form it would be:
=
The Ehwaz rune symbolises the same thing as the Ehe rune of the Armanen.
Ehwaz is formed by the sum of two Laguz runes facing each other.
=
It derives from:
+

--- PAGE BREAK ---

88
Odal is related to the meaning of Ansuz (Os in Armanen). Likewise, odal itself is
formed by the union of two Laguz or two Sowilo.
It corresponds to:
Derived from:
+
Derived from:
+
From all of the above, we can infer that many of the known runes are actually
derivations or combinations of other more basic runes.
THE FUNDAMENTAL REQUIREMENT OF BASIC AND PRIMARY RUNES IS
THAT EACH ONE HAS A VERTICAL AXIS OR STRAIGHT LINE IN ITS
GRAPHIC FORM.
In this way, an approximation of the mythical original series of 16 runes would
be very close to the complementation of the symbols and phonemes of the New
Scandinavian Futhark and the Armanen Futhark:
1- FA or FE (F)
2-UR (U-V)
3-THORN or THURS (TH-D)
4-AS or OS (O) Its meaning
corresponds to ODAL

--- PAGE BREAK ---

89
5-RIT (R)
6-KA (K-Q-C)
7- HAGALL (H-G) Its meaning
8-NOT or NAUDHR (N)
corresponds to
GIBOR and GEBO
9-IS (I-J)
10-AR (A)
It could also be
11-SIG or SOL (S)
12-TYR (T)
13-BAR (B-P)
14-LAF or LÖEGR (L)
15-MAN or MAUDHR (M)
16-YR (Y-X)

--- PAGE BREAK ---NOT or NAUDHR (N)
corresponds to
GIBOR and GEBO
9-IS (I-J)
10-AR (A)
It could also be
11-SIG or SOL (S)
12-TYR (T)
13-BAR (B-P)
14-LAF or LÖEGR (L)
15-MAN or MAUDHR (M)
16-YR (Y-X)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

90
The order of the runes Laf and Man could be reversed, as suggested by the
New Futhark.
The vowel U (associated with the rune UR) derived from the Greek Ypsilon and
the Latin V, and therefore was not part of the three original vowels "IOA"
mentioned above.
Archaeological evidence does not support or prove the approximations to the
original series of 16 runes denoted in the New Futhark and the Armanen
Futhark, but it goes without saying that, for example, there is also no 100%
reliable scientific evidence for the names of the runes of the Old Futhark as they
were actually used between the 2nd and 8th centuries AD, since the words
currently used for this system are only reconstructions made in the mid-19th century.
The Old Futhark is today the most widespread series and, to a certain extent, is
seen as the "official" runic system, as if it had more scientific and historical
support and evidence. The reality of this is highly debatable, as there are fewer
than 500 artefacts found with Old Futhark inscriptions, while there are more
than 6,000 pieces found (regardless of whether they are from the Middle Ages)
with New Scandinavian Futhark inscriptions.
It bears repeating that the attitude with which this book approaches the series of
16 original runes is that of a Virya Warrior/magician who heroically transmutes
and contains the divinity within himself without relying solely and exclusively on
the help of an external God. It should be remembered that Guido Von List's
Armanen runic series was almost entirely based on the New Scandinavian
Futhark, which spread in its purest form during the heyday of the Viking
warriors, approximately between 850 AD and 1050 AD. (Hispanic Muslims
referred to the Vikings as mayus - magicians).
2Reference is made to Sophus Bugge's reconstructions, which were already mentioned in a previous
chapter.between 850 AD and 1050 AD. (Hispanic Muslims
referred to the Vikings as mayus - magicians).
2Reference is made to Sophus Bugge's reconstructions, which were already mentioned in a previous
chapter.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

91
PART TWO: THE
RUNES AND
INITIATION

--- PAGE BREAK ---magicians).
2Reference is made to Sophus Bugge's reconstructions, which were already mentioned in a previous
chapter.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

91
PART TWO: THE
RUNES AND
INITIATION

--- PAGE BREAK ---

92
ODIN AND INITIATION RUNIC
From the descent into the darkest depths, the Virya transmutes and rises to the
farthest heavens.
The profane uses of runes as phonemes that constitute the structure of a
spoken and written language are already well known. On a more esoteric level,
their uses for divination or synchronistic relationship of events are known;
likewise for activities in the field of magic relating to protection, defence and
attack against rivals; for rituals invoking well-being, health and wealth; for the
invocation or evocation of forces that bring victory and success in battles,
journeys and conquests.
However, all of the above would fall within the framework of minor magic, or
small work, or more accurately, small war, as it would be called in Shiite Islam,
the war entrenched in the phenomenal outside world. But in a different sphere,
we would find everything related to the great work or great war unleashed within
each virya and rune magician. Guido Von List spoke to us about this when he
referred to the triple meaning of the runes: one exoteric meaning of profane and
common knowledge, another more specialised meaning referring to an outer
esoteric circle, and finally a third meaning for a more inner circle only accessible
to those who follow a path of initiation and true gnosis, a complete inner
mutation.
The awakening and invocation of the runic forces can gradually generate a
process of transformation and inner hardening similar to that experienced in
certain esoteric sciences such as Alchemy and Tantrism or sexual magic. It is
called hardening because the goal in these practices is to create a subtle but
powerful force, concentrated and impenetrable, similar to a diamond or crystal.
The goal is to form and consolidate a "hard" spiritual essence that not only
serves as a support to cope with events in daily life but also survives the crisis
of the death of the human body (microcosm) and the subsequent moment when
the elements linked to the soul and the "double" or astral body are diluted in the
waters of the macrocosm, like a drop of water that is reabsorbed into a psychic
ocean.the subsequent moment when
the elements linked to the soul and the "double" or astral body are diluted in the
waters of the macrocosm, like a drop of water that is reabsorbed into a psychic
ocean.

--- PAGE BREAK ---93
This subtle body or double of the physical body is known as "Linga Sarira" in
Sanskrit, "anima" in Latin and "psyche" in Greek; in the Nordic tradition it has
been called "Vard".

The subtle body is attached to the emotions and feelings of
the soul, which, if not sufficiently controlled and transformed from a higher
spiritual centre and principle, acquires a feminine character in a harmful sense,
entering into a mechanism designed to feel pleasure through suffering
(masochism).Starting from an unconditioned and perennial principle, superior to
the soul, both alchemy and tantrism seek to generate an inner marriage, in
which the initiate recreates himself, giving birth to a new being whose gaze is
fixed on a Vril centre analogous to his original partner lost in the mists of time
and in the precipitation of the divine spirit into the material universe governed by
the law of duality.

The original partner can be synchronistically reflected in a
person or event in the outside world as a support or anchor for the work of inner
transfiguration.

The virya must pass through the stages that in alchemy are called Nigredo,
Albedo and Rubedo (referring to the colours black, white and red).

The first
relates to the initiatory death of Odin, in which the virya crucifies himself and
voluntarily enters the regions of Hel, the world of the dead and its dissolving
waters, to understand the mystery of life and death and recover divine power
and wisdom: the runes.

Although in reality he recovers only one rune, the rune
of spiritual origin, which contains all the other runes.

At this stage, the virya
recklessly faces the gaze of the goddess, who embodies the archetype of
dissolution, sex, and death.

In a way, he relives the moment of spiritual descent
into matter, only this time he travels the path in the opposite direction.--- PAGE BREAK ---

At this stage, the virya
recklessly faces the gaze of the goddess, who embodies the archetype of
dissolution, sex, and death. In a way, he relives the moment of spiritual descent
into matter, only this time he travels the path in the opposite direction. After
going through this crisis or trial, the virya enters the stage of Albedo, in which he
ceases to project his gaze outward (which is like a seed generating Vanaheim,
the world of the Vanir, fertility and magic) and begins to project it inward,
'impregnating' himself and acquiring true vision, the eye of Shiva, an
understanding that is not entangled in dialectical or intellectual labyrinths (in
early Buddhism, this quality of seeing according to reality is called "Yhata
Bhutam"(1) ). The waters of life and death rise through the alchemical athanor, and thus the
initiate unveils the hidden meanings, controls his unconscious part, tames and
rides his horse, no longer thought and acted upon by the external and internal
archetypal psychic and emotional complexes of the macrocosm and microcosm,
ceases to be a "robot" programmed by external software to react according to a
certain number of conditioning variables, destroys the aggregates that make up
a false personality. The virya takes possession of his microcosm and begins to
truly think "his" thoughts and act according to his own spiritual will. In short,
Albedo could be described as seeing the true light and integrating the self after
facing one's own infinite emptiness and absolute darkness, which are not tied to
any defined form or archetype. 1  A common term in Buddhist texts such as Majjhima-nikayo and Anguttara-nikayo.

--- PAGE BREAK ---94
It should be remembered that several gods in Norse mythology (including Odin)
have the ability to change their appearance; they can mould their "Hamr" (form
projected by individuality) as they need.

Finally, Rubedo is reached, in which the
infinite centre, the vril, is attained.

He becomes a Siddha because he himself is
his own universe, his own creation and a macrocosm in himself.

His thirst and
hunger are ended, his longing for "something" that he always sought outside
himself, consciously or unconsciously, because of an urgent need of the soul
that was actually driven and set in motion by his spirit to obtain that essence
that he lacked in order to feel truly complete.

In a man, that centre is actually analogous to a cold feminine presence, it is an
icy fire from another world, the grail, his original partner, from whom he
separated when his spirit descended into the material universe.

Perhaps that is
why the ancient Norse called the sun Sunna and the Japanese called it
Amaterasu, that is, they attributed a feminine rather than a masculine character
to the star, because it symbolised the memory of a primordial state and they
also referred to it as an 'inner sun' (the black sun) instead of simply worshipping
it as a pantheistic outer sun, the latter being a common sign in the distorted
priestly cults of the stages of decline of many civilisations.

The path of Odin, the
way of the true Hyperborean Kristos, seeks precisely to recover that diamond-
like inner centre, which does not imply for a man to feminise his behaviour and
outward appearance, nor to attach himself submissively and sentimentally to the
warmth and instability of the love of an earthly woman, as this would mean
looking with both eyes 'outwards'.

and it must also be remembered that in the
myth, Odin looks outwards with one eye and inwards with the other eye, which
he sacrificed.

The cold woman will never really be possessed outside, but inside
oneself.--- PAGE BREAK ---

and it must also be remembered that in the
myth, Odin looks outwards with one eye and inwards with the other eye, which
he sacrificed. The cold woman will never really be possessed outside, but inside
oneself. The Taoist symbol of yin and yang has a dot or tiny circle in each of its halves
that relates precisely to the centre described above. It is the feminine within the
masculine and the masculine within the feminine, tension in relaxation and
relaxation in tension. For a man, finding the centre does not mean 'softening
up'; on the contrary, it means becoming more masculine in a spiritual sense. The centre is activated by alchemical mercury related to a fragility that causes
sulphur to react, which precisely causes that liquid metal to "boil" so that it rises
through the athanor. The fuel that ignites the fire of the spirit must not be wasted
in order to consolidate the work of the absolute man and the absolute woman. The Swiss Carl Jung refers to the centre as the self, and during the process of
inner transmutation of a Virya-Man, this can be reflected on the outside by
means of a Valkyrie, a valiant woman who, in the Norse tradition, accompanies
warriors to Valhalla after a heroic death. At an intersection of wills, each infinite
spirit (analogous to a sphere) projects outward toward the reality of another. The intersection between both spheres forms an ellipse or "eye," which is the
graphic form that represents the cavities of the body responsible for connecting
it to the outside world: mouth, eyes, nostrils, female sex (the Pythagoreans
referred to the symbol of intersection as "Vesica Piscis").

--- PAGE BREAK ---95
The Virya must remain focused on his centre, otherwise he will become
attached and the cold woman will cease to be cold and, through the
intersection, he will be absorbed by the illusory Maya aspect of that woman.

In
both Alchemy and Tantrism, a relationship can be developed with a woman "of
flesh" who reflects or mirrors the inner transmutation.

Similar to the Flamen
magician of ancient Rome, for whom the company of his Flaminia was
necessary, she followed him in his activities, yet she was the source of power
for him.

Without the transmission of her subtle magical energies, the Flamen's
actions became inert (in the same way that Shiva is represented without
Parvati).

It is important to note that on this path of initiation, the Maternal or
Paternal complex must first be purified and transcended,since, for example, a
man who is emotionally dominated by his mother will find it very difficult to go
beyond the awakening of a telluric and volcanic fire without achieving the runic
or alchemical transformation of this sulphur, and therefore the work will remain
half-finished.

It is also possible that he will not be able to overcome a virility that
is pigeonholed solely in the phallic aspect related to fertility.

The Rune Tyr, the
spear and phallus of power that penetrates and stabs, must be directed towards
the infinite, not only towards its natural environment.

The initiate who has achieved transmutation, that is, a diamond-like body of red
vajra, can continue to inhabit the different planes of the material universe, but
will possess characteristics similar to those of Odin after his self-crucifixion on
the world tree: In the myth, Odin sacrifices his left eye to access the source of
Mimer in Jotunheim (world of giants) and thus recover his memory (Minne) in
order to learn the wisdom of the runes in Helheim (world of the dead and of Hel,
goddess of life and death).The Rune Tyr, the
spear and phallus of power that penetrates and stabs, must be directed towards
the infinite, not only towards its natural environment.

The initiate who has achieved transmutation, that is, a diamond-like body of red
vajra, can continue to inhabit the different planes of the material universe, but
will possess characteristics similar to those of Odin after his self-crucifixion on
the world tree: In the myth, Odin sacrifices his left eye to access the source of
Mimer in Jotunheim (world of giants) and thus recover his memory (Minne) in
order to learn the wisdom of the runes in Helheim (world of the dead and of Hel,
goddess of life and death).

The sacrificed eye actually began to look inward,
toward his spirit, toward his infinite centre, which in relation to the material
outside world appears as absolute darkness.

The material eye sacrificed itself to
become a spiritual eye.

The other eye that he kept is looking at the outside
world, but it always does so by referencing and discerning from its centre all the
information it receives through the senses.

Odin lives and looks simultaneously
towards two worlds: with the eye he lost, he looks towards the infinite origin, and
with the eye he kept, he looks towards the material world.

From the first eye, he
relies on acting according to the influence and ethics of the unknowable and
eternal world.

One half of Odin is in eternity and the other is in the conditioned material
universe.

Odin rides the steed Sleipner, which has eight legs because half of
them are the shadow or material reflection of what is true and eternal, similar to
Plato's myth of the cave in which ordinary men see images they believe to be
real but which are only the projected shadows of the true world.--- PAGE BREAK ---

One half of Odin is in eternity and the other is in the conditioned material
universe. Odin rides the steed Sleipner, which has eight legs because half of
them are the shadow or material reflection of what is true and eternal, similar to
Plato's myth of the cave in which ordinary men see images they believe to be
real but which are only the projected shadows of the true world. Therefore, Odin
lives in two universes simultaneously, one that is infinite, uncreated, and is in
reality himself, his own creation; and the other that is finite, created, and
governed by laws that unfold in the process of the manifestation of time and
space. 2In a vulgar and debased way, a first stage of this is referred to in psychoanalysis as the Oedipus complex
and the Electra complex.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

96
Each rune in itself has an initiatory value; all runes contain a part of the great
secret, the great mystery, gnosis and initiation. Likewise, each virya finds its
runes, reaches its infinite centre by one path or another, by one rune or another,
although in reality all runes are the same rune, they refer to the same mystery:
the mystery of the Grail, the elixir of eternity. It is analogous to an ancient
primordial civilisation of Hyperborean heritage in which, from a well-
differentiated and characterised part, one accessed the whole and from there
perceived the infinite. The totality reflected in the spiritual race as a whole was
similarly reflected and experienced in each caste and in each person. Later in
this chapter, a brief reference is made to the symbolism of only nine runes, but
in reality, everything described always refers to the same rune, the same runic
whisper, the same song of the gods.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ief reference is made to the symbolism of only nine runes, but
in reality, everything described always refers to the same rune, the same runic
whisper, the same song of the gods.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

97
RUNA UR AND THE ORIGIN OF THE
This rune can be asked magically if one wishes to know one's own intimate
nature or that of another person.
UR reveals the origin and ancestry of beings, the soil that nourished them and
the mother who fed them. It unveils the marks deeply rooted in the soul.
The UR rune is not fooled by rational musings or pretended appearances.
UR transparently shows what one is and has been, just as a mirror does not lie
to its observer.
One's origins will be revealed by projecting UR onto a mirror and visualising
one's own image or that of another person. One will know whether one comes
from a humble or privileged background, whether spiritual influence comes from
the paternal or maternal lineage.
If you do not immediately hear its whispering voice when meditating with this
rune, the answers to your questions will come to you in your dreams over the
next few days.

--- PAGE BREAK ---lineage.
If you do not immediately hear its whispering voice when meditating with this
rune, the answers to your questions will come to you in your dreams over the
next few days.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

98
RUNA IS AND ALCHEMY TANTRICA
The rune Is is commonly associated with the element of ice, that is, with that
spiritual principle that remains firm, hard, impassive and imperturbable in the
face of the flow of worldly destiny.
It represents the hardening or freezing of the waters that flow incessantly and
generate the becoming and instability of the illusion of maya, as well as the pain
and eternal thirst of Samsara.
The stone of cold fire in opposition to the heart of hot fire ready to make a soul
suffer and enjoy a succession of seven calvaries, its painful evolution towards
the dissolution of the spirit.
The mercurial waters boil because of the sulphur and their flow is reversed,
flowing upwards instead of downwards to solidify saltily.
Similar to the rune TYR, the rune IS is also analogous to Shiva's lingam-menhir,
the sceptre of spiritual virility, the diamond ray, the vajra with which God creates
and destroys worlds through his power of mental concretion.
But we must not forget that Shiva's lightning bolt owes its power and hardness
to the chalice with the red elixir given by the priestess Kali-Parvati.
The woman who can never be possessed outside marks runically the stone-
child that is gestating inside the Virya.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e chalice with the red elixir given by the priestess Kali-Parvati.
The woman who can never be possessed outside marks runically the stone-
child that is gestating inside the Virya.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

99
RUNA
BERKANO
Y
THE
TRIPLE GODDESS
Berkano in a horizontal position denotes mountains rising above the horizontal
telluric line. Mountains that protect and guard a treasure. Mountains that in their
deep caves consolidate a process of creation, death and rebirth.
We should remember the medieval legends about King Arthur or Emperor
Frederick II of Hohenstaufen, who were said to have never actually died but
were sheltered in a mountain cave, waiting for the right moment to be reborn
and return to the world to establish a universal empire, the return of the Grail:
Three mountains in a row represent the Norns Urd, Werdandi and Skuld, references
to THE TRIPLE GODDESS:
Spiritual transmutation is facilitated by transcending dual illusory manifestations and
enduring the gaze of the middle Goddess:
-The Norse Norn of the eternal present, Werdandi
-The Greek Fates Lachesis.
-The Greek grace who, standing in the middle of her two companions, turns and
looks back
-The Cretan priestess Koria, her breasts uncovered, holding two snakes tightly in her
hands.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
0
The contact and transcendence of the goddess of the middle leads to a return to the
origin, to the centre and to the original couple, who are reintegrated.
The trinity of triangles forms a large equilateral triangle with an inverted triangle
inside it.
The large ascending triangle symbolises the masculine spirit that rises, and the
descending inner triangle represents Vril, the centre, the self, the original couple
recovered and reintegrated. The potency and power of manifestation within
oneself to be one's own creation, to exercise one's absolute will:

--- PAGE BREAK ---centre, the self, the original couple
recovered and reintegrated. The potency and power of manifestation within
oneself to be one's own creation, to exercise one's absolute will:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

101
RUNA DAGAZ AND TRANSMUTATION
The Dagaz rune is shaped like butterfly wings, as it represents the
enlightenment that gives way to inner transfiguration, the change of inner
spiritual state, the chrysalis that transforms into a higher state in which one can
fly to unthinkable heights.
The Dagaz rune symbolises the integration of two into one, that is, reversing the
separation from the origin, the descent of the spirit into matter, reintegrating the
original centre-pair. The dual masculine-feminine element that is transcended
and gives way to the three, to the stone son who remembers the god he has
always been. Father, mother and son in one.
The man "fertilised" by the seed of eternity gives birth to his spiritual son and
ceases to be an ordinary man; he is an infinite Siddha, complete in himself, his
own creation.
The eternal thirst and insatiability end, and there is no longer any need to
search with longing, nostalgia and despair amid the illusion of maya for the
hidden wisdom and power/potency of generation represented by the feminine.
Dagaz is the understanding of the runic paradox, a stage higher than the
opposite extremes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---aya for the
hidden wisdom and power/potency of generation represented by the feminine.
Dagaz is the understanding of the runic paradox, a stage higher than the
opposite extremes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
2
RUNA EHWAZ AND THE MAGICAL
MARRIAGE
+
Ehwaz, in its M shape, is actually formed by two Laguz runes facing each other.
Two lives that unite in a MAGICAL, ALCHEMICAL AND SPIRITUAL
MARRIAGE, personifying in creation the unity of the original uncreated couple.
The life of a king and queen, lord and lady of themselves, who unite on a single
path to dignify and spiritualise life and the family lineage.
Likewise, this rune of magical marriage is linked to the symbol of the horse:
libido (the driving force of the world) and sexual reproductive power that is
elevated, dominated and sublimated both in heaven and on earth.
This double re-signification (resignation, assigning a new meaning) can be
represented by the eight-legged horse or also by the symbol of the two horses
in which a white horse is pursued in parallel by a black horse, its shadow.
This rune is very powerful and produces strong effects if meditated upon or
performed in stadha (body position) between a couple of lovers who have a
genuine spiritual bond and not just a circumstantial or material one.

--- PAGE BREAK ---trong effects if meditated upon or
performed in stadha (body position) between a couple of lovers who have a
genuine spiritual bond and not just a circumstantial or material one.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

103
RUNA
ODAL
Y
THE R
UNBREAKABLE
In Odal, two Laguz runes come together to form a circle, not of a marriage but
of a collective clan. A group of "similar" people on an internal and external level,
spiritually and physically. The "marriage" between the clan generates the
upbringing of an aristocratic elite that guides and carries out the interests of the
group inside and outside the kingdom. The meaning of this rune can also be
associated with the symbol of the two horses and double resignation.
+
Odal can also be perceived as the sum of two Sieg runes, the double rune of
victory, the double celestial ray symbolising the triumph of the eternal in this
world and the 'other world', simultaneous victory in the illusory reality of maya
and in the unknowable world of infinity.
+

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
4
A similar meaning can be gleaned from an odal rune with a central axis: formed
by a Raidho rune attached to another reversed Raidho rune, although this
symbol is more oriented towards understanding and mastering the rhythms and
cycles of cosmic time, realising and consolidating a stable realm-enclosure amid
the opposing positive and negative forces involved in the passage of time and
becoming.
+
=
This runic form gives way to various Binde-runes (compound runes), such as
the Tyr-odal rune, in which we have the Odal rune of the enclosure on earth,
which rises towards infinity by means of the vertical Tyr axis.
Another Binde-rune is formed by an Odal rune and a double Algiz rune,
representing heavenly protection and prosperity reflected on earth, Asgard
reflected in Midgard.

--- PAGE BREAK ---l Tyr axis.
Another Binde-rune is formed by an Odal rune and a double Algiz rune,
representing heavenly protection and prosperity reflected on earth, Asgard
reflected in Midgard.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

105
YR RUNE: DESCENT OF THE SPIRIT
Similar to the Naudhiz rune (Nod in Armanen or Naudhr in the New Futhark),
the negative meaning of this rune can be reversed into a positive one, by seeing
the YR rune as the symbol of the higher spiritual principle that voluntarily
descends to put down deep roots that germinate and bear fruit in higher
knowledge and self-transformation: Mastery of the uncreated spirit(Nous in
Greek – Mens in Latin) over the microcosm linked to the conditioned world and
made up of the soul (Psyche-Anima) and the body (Soma-Corpus). To do this,
the spirit must first "die", since for the eternal uncreated spirit, being born into
the world of material entropy is equivalent to death.
To be reborn and become an Aryan or an Ariya, that is, twice-born, one must
descend into the deepest darkness and depths of oneself to recover the runes
in the midst of the realm of death and thus understand the veil of illusion, Maya.
It is no coincidence that in the myth of Odin, he crucifies himself upside down
on the tree Iggdrasil to find runic wisdom and the secret of life and death:
After overcoming the test of death, man is reborn and rises as a whole man,
reintegrated, victorious over death and matter. This is represented by the Rune
Hagall: the union of the rune YR with the rune Elhaz (the same Man in Armanen
or Maudhr in the New Futhark):
+
=

--- PAGE BREAK ---victorious over death and matter. This is represented by the Rune
Hagall: the union of the rune YR with the rune Elhaz (the same Man in Armanen
or Maudhr in the New Futhark):
+
=

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
6
Triple Hagall: Union of Triple Elhaz and Triple YR, male trinity and female trinity,
Wotan, Wili, Ve in constant tension with Urd, Werdandi, Skuld
The virya has seen and recognised the runes in the world of illusion. The runes
are the reflection of the uncreated in the created, and through them he awakens
and, through the grace of his beloved Grail, remembers his divine origin. In this
way, he accesses the vertex/angle that connects him from the temporal and
finite to the eternal and infinite.
The two lower realms of being (body and soul) are mutated by the spirit, and the
virya is no longer subject to the orders and functions of the great mechanism of
entropy and dissolution of the illusory world of maya. He is master and lord of
himself, and through the runes he rules his own kingdom.
The rune YR gives us wisdom about the feminine principle, which can liberate
and deify the virya as much as it can bind him further and be the source of his
downfall. The feminine is also reflected in the hermetic symbols of water and
earth:
The waters of life and death, dissolution (Hel), fertilisation (Freya) and rebirth
(Ostara). Water is related to the undines who guard the gold of the Rhine, the
treasure that emerged from the deepest depths. It can also be associated with
the lady of the lake who gives King Arthur a new sword, a symbol of spiritual
virility with which he renews his "kingdom".
The earth is associated with the Matrix of the earthly world (Maya, Mara, Ama,
Demeter) and takes on the role of creator/mother of a God-Man. It is also
related to the mountains and caves that protect, to the earth that gives its goods
and fruits and gives power to giants, but which can also become the earth that
binds and devours.

--- PAGE BREAK ---lated to the mountains and caves that protect, to the earth that gives its goods
and fruits and gives power to giants, but which can also become the earth that
binds and devours.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

107
RUNA ELHAZ AND THE PATH OF THE
RETURNING
Rune of spiritual elevation, overcoming the comings and goings of events and
obstacles in the material world.
It represents humanity, which, like a tree, tries to rise to the highest peaks, man
who, through a titanic struggle, must return to his divine origin and his place
"beyond the stars" or the last heaven created in the universe.
But paradoxically, in order to rise to the highest heavens, Virya must descend to
the underworld and, like a giant tree, must sink deep roots into the darkest
underground. We must also remember the Greek myth that places the Elysian
Fields beyond the inn of Hades and Persephone in the underworld.
Through the matrix of the material world, the eternal spirit must descend to face
the initiatory test. The further it descends, the higher it will rise.
Matrix:
Spirit:
Initiatory descent:
The Virya, like Odin, crucifies himself to face and defeat death. Through gnosis
and runes, he recovers his weapons and rises victorious, travelling in reverse
along the path of the matrix through which he descended.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
8
The priestess, the initiated Hetaira, delivers the key to transmutation, the elixir
to take flight like an eagle and raise the waters, reversing their current. When
the initiate passes through the womb or belly of Kali, the Elhaz rune becomes a
trident:
KALI YANTRA - MATRIX/WOMB OF THE INITIATIC DESCENT THAT
PRECEDES THE PATH OF RETURN:

--- PAGE BREAK ---hen
the initiate passes through the womb or belly of Kali, the Elhaz rune becomes a
trident:
KALI YANTRA - MATRIX/WOMB OF THE INITIATIC DESCENT THAT
PRECEDES THE PATH OF RETURN:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

109
RUNA HAGALL AND THE TOTALITY
Inside me I hear a song of nostalgia I
remember being a God, being a Hagall rune
The original unity that broke into pieces
Returns to wholeness at the source of the
grail.
The Hagall rune contains all the runes. Everything that surrounds us in nature
and in the created material universe reminds us of a part or the totality of this
rune, because there is always something in the world of men that reflects and
reminds us of the world of the gods.
The song of our original, inclement partner calls to us and demands us,
repeating the same melody over and over, which takes us to the edge between
madness and genius. The echo of her voice remains intact, and does not stop
the infinite longing and eternal search.
Despite hearing her warnings, attracted by the daughters of men, eight eternal
lineages descended to this theatre to play a role in the midst of a tragicomedy.
They tore themselves apart and detached from their centre. They lost the
certainty of being emptiness and the potential to be everything. At the moment
of descent into matter, the rune Hagall gradually changed from an infinite
sphere t o a finite three-dimensional cube.
The Hagall rune represents the whole, the archetypal puzzle that must be
reassembled to restore lost inner unity by reintegrating into oneself the pieces
or fragments of infinity that are reflected and scattered throughout the universe.
Hagall is everything and nothing at the same time, all archetypes and none
simultaneously, beyond them in a void/fullness of absolute will.

--- PAGE BREAK ---and scattered throughout the universe.
Hagall is everything and nothing at the same time, all archetypes and none
simultaneously, beyond them in a void/fullness of absolute will.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11
0
Paradox
of
the Rune
Hagall
by
the union of
runes with
opposing
meanings:
Rune Yr
Rune Elhaz
+
Hagall
Naudhiz rune
Ehwaz rune
+
Hagall
Isa Rune
Balk Line (Death)
Bar Line (Life)
+
+
Hagall
Reversed Tywaz rune
Tywaz rune
+
Hagall
Isa rune
Gebo rune
+
Hagall

--- PAGE BREAK ---

111
The Hagall rune, referring to the hexagon-cube, reminds us of the moment
when the spirit descends into the conditioned and material world. Likewise, its
centre, which is the point of contact between the uncreated and the created, can
serve as a vertex through which a bridge is built from the finite to the infinite.
We see Hagall in the structure of quartz crystals, petrified water that
corresponds to ice and snow. In this symbol of Hagall are found all the runes
that reflect the uncreated in the created and connect both realities through their
vertices and angles:
Hagall hexagon in continuous reproduction and expansion, similar to falling hail:
Below are illustrations of all the runic signs whose shape is derived from the
Hagall Hexagon. It is highly recommended to use these graphic forms as the
main focus for a runic meditation or visualisation practice:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11
2
Derivations of the Hagall Hexagon in the Old n
Futhark
1-FEHU
2-URUZ
3-THURIZAS
4-ANSUZ
5-RAIDHO

--- PAGE BREAK ---

113
6-KENAZ
7-GEBO
8-WUNJO
9-HAGALAZ
10-NAUDHIZ

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11
4
11-ISA
12-JERA
13-Eihwaz
14-PERTHRO
15-ELHAZ

--- PAGE BREAK ---

115
16-SOWILO
17-TYWAZ
18-BERKANO
19-EHWAZ
20-MANNAZ

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11
6
21-LAGUZ
22-INGWAZ
23-DAGAZ
24-OTHILA

--- PAGE BREAK ----ISA
12-JERA
13-Eihwaz
14-PERTHRO
15-ELHAZ

--- PAGE BREAK ---

115
16-SOWILO
17-TYWAZ
18-BERKANO
19-EHWAZ
20-MANNAZ

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11
6
21-LAGUZ
22-INGWAZ
23-DAGAZ
24-OTHILA

--- PAGE BREAK ---

117
Derivations of the Hexagon-Hagall in the Futharkh
Armanen and the New Futhark.
These are the runes of the Armanen Futhark that correspond in their spelling to
other runes of the Old Futhark:
Armanen
Old Futhark
1- Fa
1-Fehu
2- Ur
2-Uruz
3- Thorn
3-Thurizas
5-Rit
5-Raidho
8- Nod
10-Naudhiz
9- Is
11-Isa
11- Sieg
16-Sowilo
12- Tyr
17-Tywaz
13- Bar
18-Berkano
14- Laf
21-Laguz
15- Man
15-Elhaz
Below are the derivations of the Hexagon-Hagall in the other runes of the
Futharkh Armanen. It should also be noted that this system, with the exception
of the runes OS, AR, EHE and GIBOR, is identical in its spelling to the New
Futhark.
The rune 4-ÁSS of the New Futhark is identical in its spelling to the rune 4-
ANSUZ of the Old Futhark.
4-OS
6-KA/KAUN

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11
8
7-HAGALL
10- AR
16- YR
17- EHE (10-AR IN THE NEW FUTHARK)
18- GIBOR

--- PAGE BREAK ---

119
Derivations
of the
Hexagon-Hagall
in
the
Anglo-Saxon
Futhorc
Let us recall the runes of the Anglo-Saxon Futhorc that correspond in their
spelling to other runes of the Old Futhark:
F. Anglo-Saxon
Old English
2- Ur
2-Uruz
3- Thorn
3-Thurizas
5-Rad
5-Raidho
7- Gyfu
7-Gebo
8- Wynn
8-Wunjo
10- Nýd
10-Naudhiz
11- Ís
11-Isa
13-Éoh
13-Eihwaz
14-Peordh
14-Perthro
15-Eolh
15-Elhaz
16-Sigil
16-Sowilo
17-Tír
17-Tiwaz
18-Beorc
18-Berkano
19-Eh
19-Ehwaz
20-Mann
20-Mannaz
21-Lagu
21-Laguz
22-Ing
22-Ingwaz
23-Doeg
23-Dagaz
26-Aesc
4-Ansuz
31-Calc
This rune is identical in spelling to rune 16-Yr in both
the Futharkh Armanen and the New Futhark.
These are the derivations of the Hexagon-Hagall in the other runes of the Anglo-
Saxon Futhorc...
4-ÓS

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12
0
6-CÉN
9- HOEGL
12- GÉR
22-ING

--- PAGE BREAK ---

121
25-ÁC
27-ÝR
28-IOR
29-EAR

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12
2
30-CWEORTH
32-STAN
33-GÁRrunes of the Anglo-
Saxon Futhorc...
4-ÓS

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12
0
6-CÉN
9- HOEGL
12- GÉR
22-ING

--- PAGE BREAK ---

121
25-ÁC
27-ÝR
28-IOR
29-EAR

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12
2
30-CWEORTH
32-STAN
33-GÁR

--- PAGE BREAK ---

123
PART THREE: RUNIC
PRACTICES

--- PAGE BREAK ---9- HOEGL
12- GÉR
22-ING

--- PAGE BREAK ---

121
25-ÁC
27-ÝR
28-IOR
29-EAR

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12
2
30-CWEORTH
32-STAN
33-GÁR

--- PAGE BREAK ---

123
PART THREE: RUNIC
PRACTICES

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12
4
MEDITATION WITH RUNIC
A very simple way to begin to internalise the runes is to do a routine of body
postures without saying or intoning a single word. Simply adopt each posture for
30 or 40 seconds, trying to stop your thoughts and leave your mind 'empty', until
you have completed the entire series of the ancient futhark or any other runic
alphabet/system. If you are going to perform a ritual to invoke the runic forces, it
is advisable to first establish an external "realm" and an internal realm. Although
different writers who have published books on runic magic propose various
methods, the essential point in most of them refers to establishing an external
realm by placing a circle/ring/fence of runes on the ground around oneself for
protection and isolation.
The runes can be carved into small or medium-sized pieces of wood, stone, or
clay, and it is preferable that these have been made by the warrior-mage
themselves (if possible, avoid buying those rune packs sold in esoteric
bookshops) and it would be even better if their straight lines could be coloured
with one's own blood. This is easier for women to do because they can use
their own menstrual blood, while a man usually has to cut the outer edge of the
palm of one hand or one of his fingers several times to get enough blood to
colour the entire set of runes.
To establish the inner realm, the Virya must first stand inside the circle to
carefully observe each rune, and then proceed in several ways:
-After looking at a rune on the ground, close your eyes for a few seconds
and mentally visualise the same rune. Continue in the same way until you
have visualised all the runes in the circle.
-After looking at a rune on the ground, close your eyes for a few seconds,
visualising and feeling that YOU ARE THE RUNE. Continue in the same way
until you have completed the circle.
-While looking at each rune on the ground one by one, visualise another
"imaginary" circle of runes forming parallel to it around your waist, with the
solar plexus as its centre. These imaginary runes can be any colour
(depending on the intention of the ritual), but red is commonly used.
It is not absolutely necessary to establish the external and internal realms. If
you are only going to work with the runes to do a short meditation or
visualisation, intonation of Galdr (names) as well as a series of body and hand
positions.the external and internal realms. If
you are only going to work with the runes to do a short meditation or
visualisation, intonation of Galdr (names) as well as a series of body and hand
positions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ernal realms. If
you are only going to work with the runes to do a short meditation or
visualisation, intonation of Galdr (names) as well as a series of body and hand
positions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

125
INTONATION OF THE RUNES
Runic meditation or visualisation practices can be accompanied by the repeated
intonation of the syllables that give each rune its name (the Norse term is
Galdr).
At the beginning of the practice, only the Galdr of each rune can be chanted, but
gradually these intonations can be varied by interspersing the five vowels with
the runes that linguistically correspond to consonants. This deepens the
perceptible internal effects of the runic forces.
For example, the rune Gebo, corresponding to the consonant G, could initially
be chanted "gebo, gebo, gebo..." the desired number of times.
After this, and when the person considers it necessary, they can begin to
intonate a combination such as "ga, ge, gi, go, gu", also repeating thes   ,
these   , five   syllables   , the   number   of   times   desired.
This method is truly effective. When the Galdr are chanted in this way, there is a
noticeable difference in energy compared to simply reciting the name of the
rune. The release and accumulation of internal power is greater when the five
vowels are combined with a specific consonant.
In esoteric circles in Latin America, some of these Galdr have become known
through the books of the writer Samael Aun Weor. However, it is important to
understand that this gentleman DID NOT INVENT OR SCHEMATISE THE
GALDR OR "RUNIC MANTRA", but simply
took the runic root words and syllables already developed by other authors such
as Kummer, Gorsleben, and Spiesberger and copied them into his work without
giving the slightest credit to their source, something that this writer apparently
used to do in many of his books, that is, "borrowing" information from other
authors to make it appear as his own.
Although there is no definitive and unique model for the order of the five vowels,
some of the following combinations are commonly used. For greater effect, they
can be intoned in a very high or very low tone:
1-
O
E
I
A
U
For example, for the rune Gebo, intone "go, ge, gi, ga, gu". (From now on, the
vowel forms of this rune will always be used as examples).
The above vowel series can also be used in reverse:
U
A
I
E
O
Sing "gu, ga, gi, ge, go".ebo, intone "go, ge, gi, ga, gu". (From now on, the
vowel forms of this rune will always be used as examples).
The above vowel series can also be used in reverse:
U
A
I
E
O
Sing "gu, ga, gi, ge, go".

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12
6
2-
A    E    O     I    U
Intonate "ga, ge, go, gi, gu".
Reverse form:
U
I
O
E
A
Sing "gu, gi, go, ge, ga".
3-
I
E
A
O
U
Sing "gi, ge, ga, go, gu".
Reverse form:
U
O
A
E
I
Sing "gu, go, ga, ge, gi".
4-
A
I
E
O
U
Sing "ga, gi, ge, go, gu".
Reverse form:
U
O
E
I
A
Intone "gu, go, ge, gi, ga".
These vowel series can be chanted in any order: for example, by doing a
different one in each meditation/visualisation/invocation session, or by repeating
each one for a month or a week, or by combining two or more vowel series,
chanting the same rune, or by using only one vowel series within the same
session to chant one rune and then another series for a different rune, etc.
Intuition is your guide.
It goes without saying that, just as in the recitation of mantras in the Hindu
tradition, when pronouncing the Galdr it is advisable to lengthen the sound of
both vowels and consonants. An example of this would be as follows:
ggggggeeeeeebbbbbooooo
gggguuuu, ggggaaaaa, ggggiiiii, ggggeeeee, ggggooooooo
When using all the vowel series, it is possible to reverse the consonant-vowel
order as follows: ggggggeeeeeebbbbbooooo
and instead of intoning gggguuuu, ggggaaaaa, ggggiiiii, ggggeeeee, ggggooooooo,
change to Uuuuuggggg, aaaaggggg, iiiiiigggggg, eeeeggggg, oooogggggg

--- PAGE BREAK ---ollows: ggggggeeeeeebbbbbooooo
and instead of intoning gggguuuu, ggggaaaaa, ggggiiiii, ggggeeeee, ggggooooooo,
change to Uuuuuggggg, aaaaggggg, iiiiiigggggg, eeeeggggg, oooogggggg

--- PAGE BREAK ---

127
It is also possible to intone the Galdr with an extra final consonant, that is, the
root consonant is intoned, followed by a vowel and finally the next consonant of
the rune's name. For example, in the Gebo rune, we use the root consonant G,
followed by a vowel and finally the next consonant in the rune's name, which in
this case would be the letter B. Applying this to the five vowels, we would have:
ggggggeeeeeebbbbbooooo
gggguuubbbb, ggggaaaabbbb, gggggiiiiiibbbbb, gggggeeeebbbb,
ggggoooobbbb
In these galdr, it is also useful to lengthen the pronunciation of only the
consonants and, conversely, to pronounce the vowels in an accentuated but
sharp and cut manner, similar to a musical "staccato":
Gggggubbbb, gggggabbbbb, gggggibbbbbb, gggggggebbbbbb,
gggggobbbbbb.
Each person can choose the order, combinations and number of repetitions to
intone these forms of Galdr. Intuition is the guide. Likewise, with constant
repetition of the practice, the person will feel an increasing accumulation of
energy.
In any case, below is a model of Galdr to be applied with the complete ancient
futhark. As stated at the beginning of this chapter, the vowel series of the Galdr
only apply to runes that are linguistically equivalent to consonants; for runes that
are equivalent to vowels, it is customary to intone their basic names.
In the Old Futhark runic series, the runes equivalent to vowels would be URUZ
(U), ANSUZ (A), ISA (I), EHWAZ (E) and OTHILA (O). The Galdr of these
runes would not be subject to the variations with vowel series explained in the
previous pages.
In the Armanen Futhark runic series, the runes equivalent to vowels are UR (U),
OS (O), IS (I), AR (A) and EHE (E). In the New Scandinavian Futhark, the
vowels would correspond to UR (U), ÁSS (O), ÁR (A, E) and ÍSS (I). In the
Anglo-Saxon Futhorc, the vowels are ÚR (U), ÓS (A), IS (I), EOH (EI), EH (E),
ÉTHEL ( O), ÁC (A), AESC (A), ÝR (U), IOR (IO), and ÉAR (AO, EA). Finally,
in the
Uthark, the vowels are UR (U), AS (A), IS (I), EIHWAZ (EI), EH (E) and ODAL
(O). The variations with vowel series explained in the previous pages would not
apply to the galdr of all these runes either.ark, the vowels are UR (U), AS (A), IS (I), EIHWAZ (EI), EH (E) and ODAL
(O). The variations with vowel series explained in the previous pages would not
apply to the galdr of all these runes either.

--- PAGE BREAK ---UR (U), AS (A), IS (I), EIHWAZ (EI), EH (E) and ODAL
(O). The variations with vowel series explained in the previous pages would not
apply to the galdr of all these runes either.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12
8
In the model proposed below for runes corresponding to consonants, the basic
name of the rune can be intoned three times first, then some variation of the
vowel series is intoned three times, and finally the name of the rune is repeated
one last time. For runes corresponding to vowels, the basic name can be
intoned any number of times. Eight repetitions are suggested because this
number symbolises infinity. It is always recommended to chant a Galdr or magic
formula at least three times, because if it is done only once, it may not penetrate
the deep subconscious.
After three repetitions, the number of repetitions is up to each person, but a limit
of nine times may be appropriate, since if we apply them to any complete runic
series, the practice may become tedious and too lengthy if we do more than
nine repetitions for each rune, especially if this is approached as an introduction
or "warm-up" for a subsequent ritual. It is also well known that the number nine
has magical significance, as it is three times the trinity and the number of nights
that Wotan-Odin hung from the tree Iggdrasil.
It is important to breathe well when chanting the galdr: first take a deep breath
through your nose, trying to let the air rise and rest in your abdominal region
and not just in your lungs. One way to feel and understand this is to mimic a
sneeze; unconsciously, when you do this just before the abrupt expulsion of air,
your breath rests in your abdominal region and diaphragm. After inhaling, hold
your breath for about 3 or 4 seconds and then exhale while pronouncing the
Galdr.
The Galdr of each of the runes are intoned while looking at them on the ground
or visualising them mentally, also performing the respective Stadha (body
posture) or Runen Griff (hand position). This intonation model combines several
forms of the vowel series used for the Galdr. The model is based on the Old
Futhark but can be applied in the same way to the Armanen Futhark or any
other runic series. It is worth repeating that this model is only a frame of
reference, as each person can vary it according to their own intuition and
experience:
(F) – Fehu, Fehu, Fehu….....Fu Fi Fo Fa Fe; Fu Fi Fo Fa Fe; Fu Fi Fo Fa Fe;
................Fehu
1Occultists and writers such as G.I. Gurdjeff have pointed this out.eir own intuition and
experience:
(F) – Fehu, Fehu, Fehu….....Fu Fi Fo Fa Fe; Fu Fi Fo Fa Fe; Fu Fi Fo Fa Fe;
................Fehu
1Occultists and writers such as G.I. Gurdjeff have pointed this out.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

129
(U) – Uruz, Uruz, Uruz, Uruz, Uruz, Uruz, Uruz, Uruz
The pattern continues in a similar manner with the other runes…………
(Th) - Thurizas (x3)… Thor Ther Thir Thar Thur (x3)…..Thurizas
(A) - Ansuz (x8)
(R) - Raidho (x3)….Ru Ro Ra Re Ri (x3)……Raidho
(K) - Kenaz (x3)…. Ken Kan Kon Kin Kun (x3)…..Kenaz
(G) - Gebo (3)…..Gu Ga Gi Ge Go (x3)……Gebo

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13
0
(W) - Wunjo (x3)……. Win Wen Wan Won Wun (x3)…..Wunjo
(H) - Hagallaz (x3)…..Hu Hi Ho Ha He (x3)…….Hagallaz
(N) - Naudhiz (x3)…… No Ne Ni Na Nu (x3)……Naudhiz
(I) - Isa (x8)
(J) - Jera (x3)……Jur Jor Jar Jer Jir (x3)……Jera
(Ei) - Eihwaz (x8)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

131
(P) - Perthro (x3)…… Pert Part Port Pirt Purt (x3)……Perthro
(Z) - Elhaz (x3)……. Zu Za Zi Ze Zo (x3)…......Elhaz
(S) - Sowilo (x3)…… Sil Sel Sal Sol Sul (x3)…… Sowilo
(T) - Tywaz (x3)……Tu Ti To Ta Te (x3)…......Tywaz
(B) - Berkano (x3)…… Bork Berk Birk Bark Burk (x3)… Berkano
(E) - Ehwaz (x8)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13
2
(M) - Mannaz (x3)……Mu Mo Ma Me Mi (x3)……Mannaz
(L) - Laguz (x3)…… Leg Lag Log Lig Lug (x3)…….Laguz
(NG) - Ingwaz (x3)…….Ung Ang Ing Eng Ong (x3)….......Ingwaz
(D) - Dagaz (x3)……. Di De Da Do Du (x3)…......Dagaz
(O) - Othalaz (x8)
The pronunciation should be close to that of Old Norse. One way to achieve this
is to apply the pronunciation used in modern English to the consonants b, d, f, k,
l, m, n, t and the vowel U. For the other consonants and vowels, a pronunciation
close to that of modern German can be used. In any case, it is not necessary to
get bogged down in exaggerated phonetic specifications, and intuition can also
serve as a guide in this case.

--- PAGE BREAK ---at of modern German can be used. In any case, it is not necessary to
get bogged down in exaggerated phonetic specifications, and intuition can also
serve as a guide in this case.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

133
 RUNES STHÖDUR
The different body positions (Sthada) for the Old Futhark are illustrated below,
showing two or three different possibilities for some runes. Using one Sthada for
each rune, the completion of the entire futhark can be concatenated in a
manner similar to the choreography of a dance or a martial arts kata.
It is important to note that when adopting each position, one must maintain a
straight and upright posture that represents the spiritual vertical axis related to
the ice rune ISA, with the legs and arms representing the different auxiliary and
adjacent lines.
Traditionally, in positions that do not involve the use of the feet to illustrate the
shape of the rune, they can be placed straight and perpendicular to the legs in a
manner similar to a natural martial arts stance. However, another position used
for the feet suggests turning them slightly outwards to place them in a V shape,
thus illustrating a right angle between the heels, which also refers to the vertex
that connects the world of the gods with the earthly world. In most illustrations,
the feet are shown in the second position, although in reality both positions are
valid for channelling runic forces. It is also recommended to perform these body
positions facing north, symbolically heading towards the Hyperborean island of
Thule, the original homeland of the spirit.
The following Runasthödur contains a summary of different proposals
developed by various writers1such as S.A. Kummer, Edred Thorsson and
Thomas Karlsson (the author of this book has also added positions of his own
invention):
1Specifically in the books: KUMMER, S. A., "Heilige Runenmacht". Hamburg: Uranus, 1932. THORSSON,
EDRED, "Futhark. A handbook of Rune Magic". York Beach, 1984. KARLSSON, THOMAS, "Uthark,
Nightside of the runes". Sunbyberg-Sweden: Ouroboros Produktion, 2002.cht". Hamburg: Uranus, 1932. THORSSON,
EDRED, "Futhark. A handbook of Rune Magic". York Beach, 1984. KARLSSON, THOMAS, "Uthark,
Nightside of the runes". Sunbyberg-Sweden: Ouroboros Produktion, 2002.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13
4
1-FEHU
Standing upright, bend both arms upwards and forwards, the left
arm slightly above the right. The palms of the hands can face downwards or forwards if the
hands are placed perpendicular to the arms.
2-URUZ
Keeping your legs straight, bend your torso horizontally and parallel
to the ground. Your arms and hands should be straight and pointing towards the ground.
3-THURIZAS
Sthada 1: Standing upright, the left arm bends inwards at the elbow to form a spine shape, with
the hand resting on the hip. The right hand remains straight and rests on the torso.
Stadha 2: Standing, the arms are bent completely forward, with the palms facing upwards. The
left arm is placed under the right arm, so that both palms are facing each other.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rso.
Stadha 2: Standing, the arms are bent completely forward, with the palms facing upwards. The
left arm is placed under the right arm, so that both palms are facing each other.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

135
4-ANSUZ
Stadha 1: Standing, the left arm and leg are extended completely to the side in a parallel
position. The back of the hand can face forward or upward. The right arm is kept straight and
resting on the torso. Both limbs are positioned at approximately 45 degrees to the body.
Sthada 2: Standing, bend both arms forward and slightly downward, the left arm slightly lower
than the right. The palms of both hands face downward.
Stadha 3: Standing, bend your right arm and right foot forward and slightly downward without
the latter touching the ground. Arm and foot are placed parallel to each other, the palm of the
hand can face downwards or forwards if the hand is placed perpendicular to the arm. The left
arm is kept straight and resting on the torso.
5-RAIDHO
Sthada 1: The left arm is bent at the elbow inwards and the hand rests on the hip, the left foot is
tilted sideways outwards without touching the floor and forming an angle of approximately 45
degrees to the floor.
Sthada 2: The right arm is bent at the elbow upwards and forwards, with the palm close to the
head on the right side. The right foot is tilted downwards and forwards without touching the floor.
Sthada 3: Both arms are bent forward with the palms facing each other and the elbows slightly
bent, the left arm is placed under the right. The right foot is placed on the floor and positioned
one step forward from the body.

--- PAGE BREAK ---palms facing each other and the elbows slightly
bent, the left arm is placed under the right. The right foot is placed on the floor and positioned
one step forward from the body.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13
6
6-KENAZ
Both arms lean forward with their respective hands
continuing the straight line. The right arm is placed above and the left below, each forming a 45-
degree angle with the shoulders.
7-GEBO
Form an X with your feet and arms extended to the sides
at approximately 45 degrees. The palms of your hands should face upwards.
8-WUNJO
Sthada 1: The right arm is bent at the elbow upwards, with the fingers touching the crown of the
head. The left arm remains straight, resting on the torso.
Sthada 2: This position is similar to the second stadha of Thurizas, except that in Wunjo both
elbows are bent slightly further outwards. The palms should also be facing each other.
Sthada 3: Bend the right arm at the elbow upwards and forwards, the hand should approach the
head on the right side. The left hand remains straight, resting on the torso.

--- PAGE BREAK ---h other.
Sthada 3: Bend the right arm at the elbow upwards and forwards, the hand should approach the
head on the right side. The left hand remains straight, resting on the torso.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

137
9-HAGALAZ
Standing upright, the right arm is held close to the
abdominal region and bent downwards at an angle of approximately 45 degrees. The left arm is
held close to the chest and bent upwards at an angle of approximately 45 degrees. Both arms
are parallel. The palms of the hands are held against the body.
10- NAUDHIZ
Sthada 1: Both arms form a straight diagonal line descending, the right arm tilts to the side and
up, the left arm to the side and down. Both limbs are positioned at approximately 45 degrees to
the shoulders.
Sthada 2: A straight diagonal line is formed between the right arm, which is tilted sideways
upwards, and the left foot, which is tilted sideways downwards.
11- ISA
Sthada 1: Standing upright, both arms are held straight and resting on the torso. The palms of
the hands face inwards.
Sthada 2: Both arms rise in a straight line. The hands are above the head and both palms face
inwards.

--- PAGE BREAK ---eld straight and resting on the torso. The palms of
the hands face inwards.
Sthada 2: Both arms rise in a straight line. The hands are above the head and both palms face
inwards.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13
8
12- JERA
Sthada 1: The left arm is bent sideways upwards at the elbow and the palm faces downwards
with the fingers approaching the head without touching it. The right arm is bent sideways
downwards, the palm faces upwards and the fingers approach the hip.
Sthada 2: The right arm is bent at the elbow upwards and forwards, the hand should approach
the head on the right side. The left arm is bent at the elbow backwards and downwards, the
hand touches the hip.
13- EIHWAZ
Sthada 1: Both arms are bent downwards and forwards with palms facing downwards. The left
leg is bent at the knee and lifted backwards.
Sthada 2: The right arm is bent downwards and forwards with the palm facing downwards. The
left foot takes a short step backwards and rests on the floor. The left arm is bent at the elbow
slightly backwards and downwards, with the hand resting on the hip.
14- PERTHRO

--- PAGE BREAK ---e
left foot takes a short step backwards and rests on the floor. The left arm is bent at the elbow
slightly backwards and downwards, with the hand resting on the hip.
14- PERTHRO

--- PAGE BREAK ---

139
Sthada 1: Sitting with your back straight, bend your knees and keep the soles of your feet flat on
the floor. Lean your arms forward, resting your elbows on your knees, with your forearms tilted
upwards and your palms facing inwards.
Sthada 2: Standing upright, the right leg leans forward, keeping the thigh slightly raised, and the
leg bends at the knee and leans downwards. The right arm leans slightly upwards and forwards,
keeping straight, and the arm bends at the elbow, leaning the forearm upwards and forwards.
15- ELHAZ
Standing upright, both arms are bent sideways
upwards, each forming a minimum angle of 45 degrees with the shoulders, palms facing the
sky.
16- SOWILO
Sthada 1: Squatting, the buttocks rest on the heels, the back remains straight and the arms lean
forward and rest on the thighs, the hands rest on the upper part of the knees.
Sthada 2: Standing upright, both arms are placed straight down and resting on the torso. The
right thigh is tilted slightly upwards, from the knee the front of the leg is tilted downwards and
forms another line parallel to the body.
Sthada 3: The left foot is placed behind on the floor a short step away, the right arm is bent
completely straight upwards, forming a minimum angle of 45 degrees to the shoulder. The left
arm is kept straight, resting on the torso.

--- PAGE BREAK ---a short step away, the right arm is bent
completely straight upwards, forming a minimum angle of 45 degrees to the shoulder. The left
arm is kept straight, resting on the torso.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14
0
17- TYR
Standing upright, the arms are bent sideways
downwards without coming close to the torso, each forming a minimum angle of 45 degrees
with respect to the shoulders, palms facing the floor.
18- BERKANO
Sthada 1: The right arm is kept straight and supported on the torso. The left arm is bent at the
elbow sideways inwards, with the hand resting on the hip. The left leg is bent at the knee
sideways inwards, with the left foot placed straight and supported on the lower front part of the
right leg.
Sthada 2: The right arm is bent at the elbow upwards and forwards, the hand should be brought
close to the head on the right side. The right thigh is bent forwards and downwards and the right
leg is bent at the knee inwards. The right foot, without touching the ground, is kept straight and
perpendicular to the left foot. The left arm is kept straight and resting on the torso.
19- EHWAZ
Sthada 1: Both arms form a straight diagonal line upwards, the left arm is bent sideways
upwards and the right arm is bent sideways downwards. Both limbs are positioned at
approximately 45 degrees to the shoulders.

--- PAGE BREAK ---diagonal line upwards, the left arm is bent sideways
upwards and the right arm is bent sideways downwards. Both limbs are positioned at
approximately 45 degrees to the shoulders.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

141
Sthada 2: A straight diagonal line is formed between the left arm, which is tilted sideways
upwards, and the right foot, which is tilted sideways downwards.
Sthada 3: A position similar to riding or sitting on a horse is performed, with the legs slightly bent
outwards and forwards, and both hands placed parallel to the hips with the fists closed.
Sthada 4: Looking at each other, a couple consisting of a man and a woman must each perform
the Laguz rune posture. Both touch each other's fingertips.
20- MANNAZ
Standing upright, the arms are raised straight and
perpendicular to the shoulders, with the forearms crossed in front of or behind the head.
21- LAGUZ
Standing upright, both arms are bent straight forward and
down, palms facing the floor.
22- INGWAZ
Sthada 1: Both elbows are bent outwards and the forearms are directed downwards and
inwards. The fingers and palms of the hands rest on top of the genitals.
Sthada 2: Both elbows are bent outwards and the forearms are directed upwards and inwards.
The palms of both hands face downwards and the fingertips touch and are placed a few
centimetres above the head.

--- PAGE BREAK ---bent outwards and the forearms are directed upwards and inwards.
The palms of both hands face downwards and the fingertips touch and are placed a few
centimetres above the head.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14
2
23- DAGAZ
Sthada 1: Both forearms are crossed over the chest, each forming an angle of approximately 45
degrees to the torso. The palms and fingers of both hands rest on the shoulders.
Sthada 2: This position is similar to that of the Gebo rune, except that in Dagaz the palms of the
hands face downwards.
Sthada 3: As Dagaz is a derivation of a Binde-rune formed by two opposing Thurizas runes, its
Stadha can also be performed by a couple in which the man performs the normal Thurizas body
position and, to his left, the woman performs the reversed position of the same rune
(representing the spine with her right arm), In this way, the woman's right elbow touches the
man's left elbow.
24- OTHALAZ
The legs are placed apart and projected to the
sides, each forming an angle of approximately 45 degrees to the ground. Both elbows are bent
sideways outwards and the forearms are directed upwards and inwards. The palms of both
hands face downwards and the fingertips touch and are placed a few centimetres above the
head.

--- PAGE BREAK ---eways outwards and the forearms are directed upwards and inwards. The palms of both
hands face downwards and the fingertips touch and are placed a few centimetres above the
head.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

143
The following illustrates the Runa Sthödur of the other runes belonging to the
Armanen system and the New Futhark:
4-OS (ARMANEN) (In the New Futhark, the rune 4-ÁSS is identical to the rune 4-ANSUZ of
the Old Futhark)
Standing, the right arm and leg are extended
completely to the side in a parallel position. The back of the hand may face forward or upward.
The left arm is kept straight and resting against the torso. Both limbs are positioned at
approximately 45 degrees to the body.
6- KA (ARMANEN) or KAUN (NEW FUTHARK)
Both arms are bent straight forward and upward at an
angle of approximately 45 degrees to the shoulders, with the palms facing the ground or forward
if the hands are placed perpendicular to the arms.
7-HAGALL (ARMANEN AND NEW FUTHARK)
In the Armanen system, the Sthada of Hagall is
performed identically to that of rune 23-Dagaz of the Old Futhark.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ced perpendicular to the arms.
7-HAGALL (ARMANEN AND NEW FUTHARK)
In the Armanen system, the Sthada of Hagall is
performed identically to that of rune 23-Dagaz of the Old Futhark.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14
4
Another widely used way of physically representing Hagall is to
perform the Sthödur of the runes IS, NOT and EHE quickly and consecutively; followed by the
Sthada of the cross (both arms are extended to the sides forming a straight line, the palms of
the hands can face forward or downward), and finally we also quickly and consecutively perform
the Sthödur of MAN, TYR and IS.
10-AR (ARMANEN) (In the New Futhark, the rune 10-ÁR corresponds to 17-EHE of the
Armanen).
Standing upright, the right leg is extended
sideways downwards without the foot touching the ground, forming an angle of approximately
45 degrees to the ground. Both arms are kept straight, resting on the torso. The right hand rests
on the upper part of the right thigh.
16-YR (ARMANEN AND NEW FUTHARK)
Sthada 1: The arms are directed downwards and the upper part of the arms rest on the torso.
From the elbows, the forearms project sideways outwards. The palms of the hands face
downwards or forwards.
Sthada 2: Assume a body position similar to that of the rune Elhaz (which is the same as the
rune Man in the Armanen system and the rune Madhr in the New Futhark), only now its
direction is reversed and the body is placed upside down with the arms and hands serving as
support on the sides.

--- PAGE BREAK ---anen system and the rune Madhr in the New Futhark), only now its
direction is reversed and the body is placed upside down with the arms and hands serving as
support on the sides.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

145
18-GIBOR (ARMANEN)
From the knees, the whole body leans back to form an angle of approximately 45 degrees to the
ground. The feet are kept together and the arms are projected straight forward and upward with
the palms facing downwards.
Depending on whether the swastika is left-handed or right-handed, the Sthada is performed with
the arms pointing to the left or right side, respectively.
Runa-Sthödur can also be used for different Binde-Runes. Two examples are illustrated below:
SIG-TYR (BINDE-RUNE)
Standing
upright,
the
arms
are
bent
sideways downwards without coming close to the torso, from the elbows the forearms are
directed upwards and the palms of the hands face upwards or forwards.
TYR-ODAL (BINDE-RUNE)
Body position similar to that of the Othalaz
(Odal) rune, except that in tyrodal, the Tyr rune is formed with a dagger or sword held by its hilt
with the hands clasped above the head.

--- PAGE BREAK ---position similar to that of the Othalaz
(Odal) rune, except that in tyrodal, the Tyr rune is formed with a dagger or sword held by its hilt
with the hands clasped above the head.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14
6
 RIFF RUNES
The following illustrates the series of Runen Griff (also known as Hand Signs or
Runic Mudras) for the Old Futhark. In most cases, the hands should be placed
at chest height, within the range of the distance between the shoulders and the
solar plexus. The palms of the hands always face forward unless otherwise
indicated.
The following Runen Griff series is a compilation of proposals developed by
various writers1such as S.A Kummer and Jan Fries (the author of this book has
also added some positions of his own invention):
1-FEHU
Griff 1: In the left hand, the index, middle and little fingers are held upright, representing the
vertical axis ISA. The ring finger and thumb are bent parallel to each other, forward and upward
at an angle of approximately 45 degrees.
Griff 2: In the left hand, the middle, ring and little fingers are held upright, representing the
vertical axis ISA. The index finger and thumb are bent parallel to each other at an angle of
approximately 45 degrees.
1Specifically in the books: KUMMER, S. A., "Rune magic (Edred Thorsson Translation)". Texas: Yrmin-Drighten
The rune gild, 1993. FRIES, JAN, "Helrunar: A Manual of Rune Magic". Oxford: Mandrake, 1993.

--- PAGE BREAK ---books: KUMMER, S. A., "Rune magic (Edred Thorsson Translation)". Texas: Yrmin-Drighten
The rune gild, 1993. FRIES, JAN, "Helrunar: A Manual of Rune Magic". Oxford: Mandrake, 1993.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

147
2-URUZ
All fingers on the left hand are bent downwards. The thumb is separated and placed parallel to
the other fingers to represent a shape similar to an inverted "U".
3-THURIZAS
Griff 1: On the left hand, the middle, ring and little fingers are held upright, representing the
vertical axis ISA. The index finger and thumb are bent forward, resting on their upper phalanges
to represent the shape of the spine.
Griff 2: On the left hand, the index, middle and little fingers are held upright, representing the
vertical ISA axis. The ring finger and thumb are bent forward, resting on their upper phalanges
to represent the shape of the spine.
4-ANSUZ
In the right hand, the middle, ring and little fingers are bent downwards and remain upright,
representing the vertical ISA axis. The index finger and thumb are bent parallel to each other
forwards and downwards at an angle of approximately 45 degrees. The palm of the hand can
face forwards or towards the left side of the body.

--- PAGE BREAK ---thumb are bent parallel to each other
forwards and downwards at an angle of approximately 45 degrees. The palm of the hand can
face forwards or towards the left side of the body.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14
8
5-RAIDHO
Griff 1: In the right hand, the ring and little fingers bend downwards and remain upright,
representing the vertical axis ISA. The index finger and thumb are bent forward, resting on their
tips to represent the upper circular shape of the letter R. The middle finger is bent downwards
and forward at an angle of approximately 45 degrees to represent the diagonal straight line of
the same letter. The palm of the hand may face forward or to the left side of the body.
Griff 2: In the left hand, the index finger and thumb lean forward, resting on their tips to
represent the upper circular shape of the letter R. The middle, ring and little fingers lean
downwards in parallel to represent the diagonal straight line of the same letter.
6-KENAZ
In the left hand, the index, middle, ring and little fingers are held upright, representing the
vertical axis ISA. The thumb is bent forward and upward at an angle of approximately 45
degrees.
7-GEBO
Griff 1: Both hands are held at chest height, with the palms facing each other, placed straight
diagonally at an angle of approximately 45 degrees, the thumbs resting on their upper
phalanges and the other fingers crossed in the middle.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ms facing each other, placed straight
diagonally at an angle of approximately 45 degrees, the thumbs resting on their upper
phalanges and the other fingers crossed in the middle.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

149
Griff 2: Both hands are closed into fists. At chest height, the index fingers are projected and
crossed at the middle in a straight diagonal line at an angle of approximately 45 degrees.
8-WUNJO
In the right hand, the middle, ring and little fingers are bent downwards and held upright,
representing the vertical axis ISA. The index finger and thumb are bent forward, resting on their
upper phalanges to represent the upper circular shape of the letter P. The palm of the hand can
face forwards or towards the left side of the body.
9-HAGALAZ
Griff 1: Both hands are held at chest height with the palms facing each other. The index and
little fingers are held upright, representing the vertical axis ISA. The middle finger of each hand
is bent forward and upward at an angle of approximately 45 degrees. The ring finger of each
hand is bent forward and downward at an angle of approximately 45 degrees. Two straight
diagonal lines should be formed that intersect to represent the shape of the Hagall rune.
Griff 2: Both hands are held at the level of the solar plexus with the palms facing each other.
The index, middle, ring and little fingers are held upright, representing the vertical ISA axis. The
thumbs are tilted forward at a perpendicular angle of approximately 90 degrees to the other
fingers, and the thumbs touch and join at their tips.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nting the vertical ISA axis. The
thumbs are tilted forward at a perpendicular angle of approximately 90 degrees to the other
fingers, and the thumbs touch and join at their tips.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15
0
10- NAUDHIZ
Griff 1: Both hands above the head, the index finger of the right hand remains straight,
representing the vertical ISA axis. The index finger of the left hand crosses it from behind or in
front to form the diagonal line of the rune. In this Griff, the shape of the rune is seen by a
hypothetical spectator in front of us.
Griff 2: Left hand at chest height, index finger held straight representing the vertical axis ISA.
Middle finger crosses it from behind or in front to form the diagonal line of the rune. In this Griff,
the shape of the rune is seen by a hypothetical spectator in front of us.
11- ISA
Griff 1: At chest height in the left hand, all fingers are placed in a position similar to that of a fist,
with the index finger held straight and upright to represent the shape of the rune.
Griff 2: At chest height in the right hand, all fingers are placed in a position similar to that of a
fist, with the index finger held straight and upright to represent the shape of the rune.
12- JERA

--- PAGE BREAK ---ght in the right hand, all fingers are placed in a position similar to that of a
fist, with the index finger held straight and upright to represent the shape of the rune.
12- JERA

--- PAGE BREAK ---

151
Griff 1: Both hands are held at chest height with the palms facing each other. The index fingers
and thumbs are held upright while the middle fingers wrap around their upper phalanges. The
ring fingers and little fingers of both hands are intertwined, resting their middle and upper
phalanges on the upper part of the back of the opposite hand.
Griff 2: Both hands are held at solar plexus level with palms facing each other. The index,
middle, ring and little fingers are held upright. The thumbs are tilted forward and upward at an
angle of approximately 45 degrees to the other fingers. This figure can be seen as the Griff of
the rune Kenaz in the left hand next to another inverted Griff of the same rune Kenaz in the right
hand. Both hands can be placed at the same height, or the left hand can be placed slightly
above the right hand.
13- EIHWAZ
At chest height, the left hand (or the right hand) shows its back forward and parallel to the body.
The thumb and little finger are hidden behind the palm and the other fingers point towards the
ground.
14- PERTHRO
At chest height, all the fingers of the left hand bend and fold at the joints of the phalanges. This
represents a figure similar to the shape of a female uterus. The palm of the hand can face
forward or towards the right side of the body.
15- ELHAZ

--- PAGE BREAK ---joints of the phalanges. This
represents a figure similar to the shape of a female uterus. The palm of the hand can face
forward or towards the right side of the body.
15- ELHAZ

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15
2
At chest height or solar plexus height, the thumb, middle finger and index finger of the right
hand are pointed upwards. The palm of the hand faces forward and the ring finger and little
finger are placed on top of it.
16- SOWILO
Griff 1: Both hands at the level of the solar plexus. In the left hand, the palm faces the right side
of the body and the index, middle, ring and little fingers are held upright, representing the
vertical axis ISA. The thumb is tilted forward and upward at an angle of approximately 45
degrees to the other fingers. The right hand is placed with the palm facing forward and all
fingers held straight and upright. The tip of the thumb of the left hand touches and rests on the
tip of the index finger of the right hand.
Griff 2: At chest or solar plexus level, the thumb and index finger of the left hand are held
upright, representing the vertical ISA axis. The lower phalanges of the middle, ring and little
fingers are placed forward in a straight line perpendicular to the hand. The middle and upper
phalanges of the same fingers are bent downwards in a straight line or slightly diagonally but
parallel to the hand.
17- TYR
Griff 1: At the level of the solar plexus in the right hand, the thumb, middle finger and index
finger are bent downwards. The back of the hand faces forward and the ring finger and little
finger are hidden behind the palm.
Griff 2: Both hands are placed at the level of the solar plexus, palms facing each other. The
index fingers and thumbs are kept straight and upright, representing the vertical ISA axis. The
middle, ring and little fingers of both hands are intertwined, resting their middle and upper
phalanges on the upper part of the back of the opposite hand.

--- PAGE BREAK ---vertical ISA axis. The
middle, ring and little fingers of both hands are intertwined, resting their middle and upper
phalanges on the upper part of the back of the opposite hand.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

153
18- BERKANO
Griff 1: At chest level, the index finger and thumb of the left hand lean forward, resting on their
tips to form the lower circular shape of the letter B. The other fingers are placed higher up and
lean forward, bending at their joints and forming the upper circular shape of the same letter. The
palm of the hand can face forward or to the right side of the body.
Griff 2: Both hands above the head. In the right hand, the tips of the thumb and index finger
touch and rest on each other, forming the upper circular shape of the letter B. The other fingers
of that hand imitate the position of the index finger. In the left hand, the index finger leans
forward and its tip rests on the base of the metacarpal bone of the thumb of the right hand. The
thumb of the left hand rests on the wrist of the right arm. The lower circular shape of the letter B
is formed between the thumb and index finger of the left hand. The other fingers of the left hand
are bent and folded over the top of the palm of the hand.
19- EHWAZ
Both hands at the level of the solar plexus are projected completely forward, brought together
and rested on the side of your palm and your little fingers. All your fingers should be bent slightly
inwards, forming an angle of approximately 90 degrees between both palms. The thumbs and
index fingers of both hands touch at their tips, forming a circular shape. The other fingers
remain straight.
20- MANNAZ

--- PAGE BREAK ---proximately 90 degrees between both palms. The thumbs and
index fingers of both hands touch at their tips, forming a circular shape. The other fingers
remain straight.
20- MANNAZ

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15
4
At the level of the solar plexus, the palms of both hands face each other. The thumbs and index
fingers remain straight and are projected completely forward. The other fingers are bent at their
joints and their tips rest on the upper part of each palm. These fingers touch and rest on each
other through their middle phalanges.
21- LAGUZ
At chest level, the thumb of the left hand is kept straight and upright, as are the lower phalanges
of the other fingers. The middle and upper phalanges of all fingers except the thumb form a
straight line almost perpendicular to the hand (they can also form a slightly downward diagonal
line from the upper phalanges). The palm can face forward or toward the right side of the body.
22- INGWAZ
Both hands at chest height, solar plexus, or spleen. The index fingers are projected diagonally
upwards, resting on their tips, and the thumbs are projected diagonally downwards, also
touching and resting on their tips. The other fingers of both hands are bent at their joints and
folded back, resting their tips on the upper part of the palm of their respective hands.
23- DAGAZ

--- PAGE BREAK ---ting on their tips. The other fingers of both hands are bent at their joints and
folded back, resting their tips on the upper part of the palm of their respective hands.
23- DAGAZ

--- PAGE BREAK ---

155
Both hands at chest or solar plexus level with palms facing each other. The middle, ring and
little fingers bend their middle phalanges forward and bend their upper phalanges diagonally
and downward. The thumbs are tilted diagonally upwards at an angle of approximately 60
degrees to the wrists. The thumbs touch and rest on the sides of their tips and also touch the
tips of the index fingers. Except for the thumbs, all the fingers of both hands touch at the tips of
their nails.
24- OTHALAZ
Both hands are held at chest or solar plexus level with the palms facing each other. The middle,
ring and little fingers are bent straight back slightly. The thumbs cross diagonally at the middle,
each forming an angle of approximately 45 degrees to the wrists, with the tips of the thumbs
resting on the middle joint of the index fingers. The index fingers also bend diagonally at an
angle of approximately 45 degrees to the wrists, but they touch and rest on their tips.
The following illustrates the Runen Griff for the other runes belonging to the
Armanen system and the New Futhark:
4 – OS (ARMANEN) (In the New Futhark, the rune 4-ÁSS is identical to the rune 4-ANSUZ
of the Old Futhark)
The left hand is at chest height. The tips of the thumb and index finger touch and rest on each
other, forming a circular shape equivalent to the letter O. The other fingers of that hand mimic
the position of the index finger.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e thumb and index finger touch and rest on each
other, forming a circular shape equivalent to the letter O. The other fingers of that hand mimic
the position of the index finger.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15
6
6- KA (ARMANEN) or KAUN (NEW FUTHARK)
In the left hand, the thumb, index finger, middle finger and little finger are held upright,
representing the vertical axis ISA. The ring finger is bent forward and upward at an angle of
approximately 60 degrees from the wrist.
7-HAGALL (ARMANEN and NEW FUTHARK)
They are performed in the same way as the Runen Griff of the rune 9-Hagalaz of the Old Futhark
10-AR (ARMANEN) (In the New Futhark, rune 10-ÁR corresponds to 17-EHE of Armanen).
On the right hand, the index, middle, ring and little fingers are held upright, representing the
vertical axis ISA. The thumb is bent perpendicularly forward at an angle of approximately 90
degrees to the other fingers.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

157
16- YR (ARMANEN AND NEW FUTHARK)
At chest height, the left hand shows its back forward and parallel to the body. The ring and little
fingers are hidden behind the palm and the other fingers point towards the ground.
17-EHE (ARMANEN)
Griff 1: Both hands above the head, the index finger of the left hand is held straight,
representing the vertical axis ISA. The index finger of the right hand crosses it from behind or in
front to form the diagonal line of the rune. In this Griff, the shape of the rune is seen by a
hypothetical spectator in front of us.
Griff 2: Right hand at chest height, index finger held straight representing the vertical axis ISA.
The middle finger crosses it from behind or in front to form the diagonal line of the rune. In this
Griff, the shape of the rune is seen by a hypothetical spectator in front of us.
18-GIBOR (ARMANEN)
It is performed in the same way as the Griff of the rune 7-Gebo of the Old Futhark.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ff, the shape of the rune is seen by a hypothetical spectator in front of us.
18-GIBOR (ARMANEN)
It is performed in the same way as the Griff of the rune 7-Gebo of the Old Futhark.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15
8
PRACTICES FOR ACCUMULATING
RUNIC POWER
There are various ways to accumulate strength and inner runic power
associated with what is known in Norse tradition as Hamingja, which represents
luck, destiny, and the subtle power that accompanies Virya and promotes
resistance and victory.
In any case, when practising runic magic, it is important to bear in mind the
warning not to remain stuck in a strictly naturalistic and pantheistic plane, since
runic forces are part of the subtle essence of the universe but simultaneously
these forces are outside of creation and beyond the ultimate limit of the
universe, representing the uncreated and eternal that is reflected or mirrored in
the nature that surrounds us. Developing a higher connection with the runes
through different practices or rituals will gradually deepen physical and psychic
abilities, as well as the capacity to be more sensitive to cosmic currents and
energies, all of which form part of a minor work or struggle for virya. but one
must not lose sight of the goal of the great work: inner transmutation and
spiritual liberation, overcoming and mastering oneself through control of the
instincts and biological and psychic functions of one's own body a n d soul.
It is important to understand what is described in Sanskrit as the opposition
between the two principles of inner transmutation: Nirvana (Samadhi) and
Kaivalya. In the first, the subtle body unites and dilutes with the totality of the
outer cosmos, losing all possibility of absolute individuation and differentiation;
in the second, the virya can use archetypes and cosmic forces with a strategic
intention to free himself from the bonds of the outer cosmos itself, becoming his
own creation, his own universe, like a being equal to a God, developing his own
will. This was the intention of many of the practices and initiations of the pagan
cultures of antiquity. When accessing the runic initiation, the Virya sought to
transmute his inner essence into a nature similar to that of a God, and the final
result of this entire operation ultimately depended on the Virya himself.
Very different from all this is the initiatory path that began to spread not only
with the monotheistic religions of the current era but also in previous centuries
with derivations and developments of Hinduism and some other supposedly
polytheistic spiritualities in which, apart from seeking salvation solely through an
external agent, subordination and sentimental devotion to a single creator God
infinitely superior to whom could be equalled or surpassed in nature.h, apart from seeking salvation solely through an
external agent, subordination and sentimental devotion to a single creator God
infinitely superior to whom could be equalled or surpassed in nature.

--- PAGE BREAK ---g salvation solely through an
external agent, subordination and sentimental devotion to a single creator God
infinitely superior to whom could be equalled or surpassed in nature.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

159
The only master of a runic initiate is precisely himself; he is not a sheep of a
shepherd nor a creature of any creator. He is a spiritually free man who, at a
certain moment and given the circumstances, may adhere to a code of honour
and loyalty whereby he must cooperate with others of his own kind and also
obey a chief or leader. however, he must make this decision of his own free will
a n d without corrupting or questioning his convictions and his deepest inner
essence.
 r Vital Force
To begin the practices of awakening and growing your inner runic strength, you
can strengthen your own power of radiation and aura. To do this, you can
perform runen griff (mudras or hand signs) with your left hand ( the receiving
hand) and chant the Galdr (mantra-magical root word) of the rune several times
while imagining that the runic currents are coming from outside towards you
through this hand. Simultaneously, place your right hand on your solar plexus
and
visualise
that
the
attracted
energy
is
stored
the
re.
Then, to project the collected energy, slowly move the palm of your right hand
over another region of your body or a specific part that you want to energise. It
is advisable to place your hand at a distance of approximately three to eight
centimetres from the skin, and you can also continue chanting the Galdr of the
rune. This projection stage    also    can    be    performed    with
a    dagger.
Although any rune works depending on the objective in mind, it is recommended
to use the Uruz and Isa runes in particular: The first has always been
associated with life force, the roots of food, health and the healing of any organ
in the body. The second is related to ice and iron, that is, it refers to hardness,
resistance and indolence; in addition, it promotes the power to reverse
accidents and injuries.
Hvelir/Chakras
The chakras of the Virya microcosm can also be vitalised in a runic way. In the
Nordic esoteric tradition, these wheels of vital energy are called HVELIR. The
aim of the practice is to rename and re-signify with runic forces the main vital
and psychic points of concentration of the physical organism and the subtle
body, taking control over the contents and structures of the Hvelir themselves
and, if desired, accessing the akashic records1  of previous lives and the
possible future evolutionary processes already implicit in these energy centres.
1  Akasha: memory/ocean of light and psychic energy that functions as a great memory of the different planes of the
universe and their processes and events.already implicit in these energy centres.
1  Akasha: memory/ocean of light and psychic energy that functions as a great memory of the different planes of the
universe and their processes and events.

--- PAGE BREAK ---these energy centres.
1  Akasha: memory/ocean of light and psychic energy that functions as a great memory of the different planes of the
universe and their processes and events.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16
0
It is important to note that chakras traditionally operate in such a way that they
rotate clockwise and generate an explosive energy which is conditioned to the
rhythms and energy fields of the universe, the latter grouped under the well-
known names of Prana, Ki or Chi.
In practices related to Nordic magic, each wheel or Hvel is operated so that it
rotates counterclockwise, generating an implosive frozen fire energy that is
directed towards a centre. This energy and the centre towards which it is
directed are commonly referred to as Vril.
Therefore, it is very important to keep in mind the objective of the practice, since
the conditioning and synchronisation of the chakras awakens the fiery force of
the subtle human body, also known as the Kundalini serpent. Thus, if one
wishes to awaken this force in order to use it in the process of individuation and
transmutation, one must redefine and grasp the serpentine fire/word strongly
with one's own will, similar to how the Roman imperial eagle grasped the
serpent tightly in its claws. The opposite would mean being devoured by the
serpent and dissolving into the archetypal becoming and entropy of the forces
that govern material creation. Virya does not seek to merge with the
macrocosm, but rather to transmute one's own microcosm into a separate,
absolute and complete macrocosm in itself.
A basic exercise to awaken the energy of the Hvelir begins by standing upright,
performing the Stadha of the rune and breathing slowly. During the exhalation,
the respective Galdr of the rune is intoned. Repeat this five or more times.
Then continue standing and now with one hand make the respective Runen
Griff, breathe slowly and during each exhalation chant the name of the rune.
Repeat this six or more times.
Then repeat the breathing process and maintain the Runen Griff, but now during
the INHALATION, chant the galdr. This step is essential for the effectiveness of
the exercise. First, exhale without saying anything and feel that all the air in your
lungs and abdominal region is expelled, then prolong that position and feeling of
being "out of breath" for three or four seconds.
Then inhale air while pronouncing the Galdr, but it is advisable to direct this step
of the exercise towards a sensation similar to singing "inwardly". In addition,
visualise the runic force entering the body through the mouth and moving
towards the Hvel, concentrating on it. The entire exercise can also be supported
by mental or graphic visualisation of the rune, as well as visualisation of the
Hvel spinning in the desired direction. Repeat this entire process seven or more
times.xercise can also be supported
by mental or graphic visualisation of the rune, as well as visualisation of the
Hvel spinning in the desired direction. Repeat this entire process seven or more
times.

--- PAGE BREAK ---supported
by mental or graphic visualisation of the rune, as well as visualisation of the
Hvel spinning in the desired direction. Repeat this entire process seven or more
times.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

161
It is also optional to mention the name of the chakra together with the Galdr of
the rune if even greater precision and specificity is desired in the practice. In this
way, a formula such as Laguz-Svadhishtana or Svadhishtana-Laguz can be
chanted. However, runic magicians who feel uncomfortable combining Norse
names with Sanskrit words may prefer to chant the five vowels I, E, A, O, U for
the different Hvelir, using the vowels and energy centres proposed by Caoist
magician Peter Carroll in his Gnostic Ritual of the Pentagram used for cleansing
and banishment. The vowel I is used for the head, E for the throat, A for the
heart and lungs, O for the stomach and spleen, and U for the perineum. Below
is a complete routine for this practice, applying it to the runes of the Futharkh
Armanen:
Hvel Coronario - Rune HAGALL:
1- In the Stadha, chant the galdr of the rune five times.
2-With the runen griff, chant "iiiiiiiiiiii HAAAGGGGAAAALLLLL" with each exhalation. Six times
3-With the runen griff, intone "HAAAAGGGGGAAAAALL iiiiiiiiiiii" with each inhalation. Seven times
Hvel Between the Eyebrows - Rune GIBOR:
1- In the Stadha, chant the galdr of the rune. Five times
2-With the runen griff, intone "iiiiiiiiiiii GGGGGIIIIIBBBBOOOORRR" with each exhalation.
Six times
3-With the runen griff, intone "GGGGGIIIIIIBBBBOOOORRR iiiiiiiiiii" with each inhalation.
Seven times
Hvel Throat – Rune THORN:
1- In the Stadha, chant the galdr of the rune. Five times
2-With the runen griff, chant "eeeeeeee TTTTHHOOOORRRNNN" with each exhalation. Six
times
3- With the runen griff, chant on each inhalation "TTTHHHHOOOORRRNNN eeeeee". Seven
times (It is important to remember here that the TH is pronounced almost like a "D", similar to
saying the article THE in English).
Hvel Heart - Rune ODAL:
1- In the Stadha, chant the galdr of the rune. Five times
2-With the runen griff, chant on each exhalation "aaaaaaaaa OOOODDDAAAALLLLL". Six
times
3-With the runen griff, chant "OOOODDDDAAALLLLL aaaaaaaaa" on each inhalation.
Seven times
Hvel Solar Plexus - Rune SIEG:
1- In the Stadha, chant the galdr of the rune. Five times
2-With the runen griff, intone "oooooooooo SSSSSSIIIIIIEEEGGGG" with each exhalation.
Six times
3-With the runen griff, intone with each inhalation, "SSSSIIIIEEEEGGGGG ooooooooo."
Seven times.
Hvel Bazo - Rune KA:
1- In the Stadha, chant the galdr of the rune. Five times
2-With the runen griff, chant on each exhalation "ooooooooooo KKKKKAAAAAAAA". Six
times
3-With the runen griff, chant "KKKKKAAAAAAAAA ooooooooooo" with each inhalation.
Seven timesrune. Five times
2-With the runen griff, chant on each exhalation "ooooooooooo KKKKKAAAAAAAA". Six
times
3-With the runen griff, chant "KKKKKAAAAAAAAA ooooooooooo" with each inhalation.
Seven times

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16
2
Hvel Perineum - Rune BAR:
1- In the Stadha, chant the galdr of the rune. Five times
2- With the runen griff, intone "uuuuuuuuu BBBBBBAAAAARRRRR" with each exhalation.
Six times.
3- With the runen griff, intone "BBBBAAAAARRRRR uuuuuuuuuu" with each inhalation.
Seven times
The entire routine can be done in order from top to bottom or bottom to top,
although the former is highly recommended since the energies of the higher self
descend, transmute and "crystallise" runically into the emotional, instinctive and
pseudo-animalistic energies of the three lower Hvelir/chakras. In both cases,
you should try to have a moderately empty stomach or not eat immediately after
performing the routine, as this may cause discomfort.
It is also advisable to perform the practice without combining the explosive or
implosive direction described above, as this could generate a certain
"schizophrenic" imbalance in the psyche and physical body of the Virya.
Below are other runes recommended for use with each of the Hvelir. You can
do the practice by choosing one rune for each of the energy wheels or more
than one rune for each wheel, although the latter may make the exercise more
extensive and laborious. Where applicable, the names of each rune are written
according to the Old Futhark or the Armanen Futhark, although it is valid to use
the equivalent Galdr from any runic system for each rune:
Seventh Hvel / Crown Chakra (Sahasrara)
GIBOR
ELHAZ
FEHU
HAGALL
Sixth Hvel / Brow Chakra (Ajna)
GIBOR
LAGUZ
KENAZ
KA
MANNAZ

--- PAGE BREAK ---he equivalent Galdr from any runic system for each rune:
Seventh Hvel / Crown Chakra (Sahasrara)
GIBOR
ELHAZ
FEHU
HAGALL
Sixth Hvel / Brow Chakra (Ajna)
GIBOR
LAGUZ
KENAZ
KA
MANNAZ

--- PAGE BREAK ---

163
Fifth Hvel / Throat Chakra (Vishuda)
ANSUZ
OS
EHWAZ
EHE
THURIZAS
Fourth Hvel / Heart Chakra (Anahata)
ODAL
WUNJO
DAGAZ
Third Hvel / Solar Plexus Chakra (Manipura)
SOWILO
RAIDHO
JERA
Second Hvel / Sexual Chakra and Spleen (Svadhisthana)
URUZ
KENAZ
KA
TYWAZ
First Hvel / Root Chakra and Perineum (Muladhara)
BERKANO
YR
EIHWAZ
FEHU

--- PAGE BREAK ---kra (Manipura)
SOWILO
RAIDHO
JERA
Second Hvel / Sexual Chakra and Spleen (Svadhisthana)
URUZ
KENAZ
KA
TYWAZ
First Hvel / Root Chakra and Perineum (Muladhara)
BERKANO
YR
EIHWAZ
FEHU

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16
4
Sexual energy and astral projection
For Viryas who follow the tantric path, working with sexual energy and invoking
goddesses such as Lilith, Kali or Ishtar will also multiply this force and increase
one's sexual magnetism, but it will also increase the risk of degradation of vital
energies. Therefore, anyone who embarks on this path must have a very high
degree of self-control. In the words of Italian writer Julius Evola, they must be
able to 'ride the tiger', that is, keep their emotions and sensations on the
periphery of a wall surrounding their vril centre.
The accumulation and enhancement of this sexual energy works very well for
those who, through astral projection techniques, already have considerable
experience in astral and mental plane travel and have also observed their own
akashic records.
To encourage this type of experience, it is very useful at any time of the day to
visualise the currents of sexual energy flowing upwards from the lower Hvelir to
the upper Hvelir.
The second energy centre of the genitals and spleen contains potential sexual
energy, and this chakra essentially represents the waters of life.
This second Hvel/Chakra is related and linked to the fifth energy centre, which
is located in the throat and is related to the voice.
Let us remember that the most powerful force capable of shaping the direction
of events in the universe is found in the voice and the word, with which designs,
invocations and other magical acts are performed.
The power of the voice and the word is symbolised as a fire that in turn
produces a fertilising seed.
Thus, at the moment when one is ready to leave the body, that is, to astral
project (an experience also called OBE - out of body experience -), one can
visualise the connection between both chakras:
-
The energy of the second Hvel rises to merge with that of the fifth Hvel.
-
The energy of the fifth Hvel descends to merge with that of the second Hvel.
Preliminarily, this visualisation practice can also be performed for a few minutes
during the day or shortly before going to sleep, thus condensing the energy and
predisposing the mind and body for the subsequent experience.isation practice can also be performed for a few minutes
during the day or shortly before going to sleep, thus condensing the energy and
predisposing the mind and body for the subsequent experience.

--- PAGE BREAK ---also be performed for a few minutes
during the day or shortly before going to sleep, thus condensing the energy and
predisposing the mind and body for the subsequent experience.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

165
During this exercise, it can be very helpful to place one hand over your mouth
and slowly move it towards your spleen and/or vice versa, visualising the
current being transported from one part to another. If you already have
experience and mastery of the astral plane, you can also do all this while out of
the body, and the connection between the Hvelir can also be made with the
"astral hand", the hand of the subtle body (linga-sarira according to the Hindu
Samkhya system), visualising that it carries the energy from one Hvel to the
other.
This union of currents can be sealed by visualising different runic symbols. For
example, you can visualise the rune Tywaz slowly descending in your throat
and forming a Binde-rune (linked rune) with the rune Uruz in your spleen, or
vice versa. In any case, the visualisation of these Binde-runes (which can
function similarly to a sigil) can be done during the day while awake or also
during astral projection, obviously if you already have very good control over
this type of experience. Below are different runes recommended for
visualisation in each Hvel:
RECOMMENDED RUNES TO VISUALISE AND PROJECT IN THE HVEL OF
THE THROAT
TIWAZ
RAIDHO
ANZUS
OS
ELHAZ
RECOMMENDED RUNES FOR VISUALISING AND PROJECTING INTO THE
HVEL OF THE SPLEEN
URUZ
KENAZ
KA
LAGUZ
YR
When beginning astral travel, it is common practice to call upon or invoke an
entity, or to say mentally or with our "astral" voice where we want to go or which
space-time akashic record we want to observe. With the reinterpretation
provided by the runes, the voice-fire will become a weapon of protection, fully
empowered by the runic force combined with the fertilising sexual fire. Our
words will be more forceful and the magic formulas we chant will become more
effective.ome a weapon of protection, fully
empowered by the runic force combined with the fertilising sexual fire. Our
words will be more forceful and the magic formulas we chant will become more
effective.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16
6
Similar to the previous chapters, possible options have been presented here.
Each person can use and create the Binde-Runes according to their own criteria
and experience.
In any case, it is advisable to perform this practice the first few times with
moderate intention and intensity and gradually increase them, because if you do
not control this energy at the beginning and it gets out of hand, the astral
experience may be very lucid and vibrant, but then when you wake up you may
feel nauseous and even have a headache, similar to an enthusiastic experience
with wine and the terrible hangover that follows the next morning.
Below are illustrations of possible Binde-runes formed by the runes
recommended above for visualisation in each Hvel. These Binde-runes
represent the union of the two runic currents, one ascending and one
descending:
URUZ and TIWAZ: FROM THE DEEP DARKNESS OF THE ORIGIN, THROUGH
STRUGGLE AND COURAGE, THE VIRYA HEADS TOWARDS THE INFINITE.
ELHAZ AND URUZ: THE VIRYA KNOWS ITS ORIGIN AND INTEGRATES ITS
DEEPEST ROOTS INTO ITSELF TO PROTECT ITSELF AND RISE TO THE WORLD
OF THE GODS.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

167
ANSUZ-YR: ODIN'S INSPIRATION AND DIVINE MAGIC DESCENDS AND
MANIFESTS ITSELF IN THE VIRYA.
KA AND RIT: SPIRITUAL FIRE IS USED TO TRANSCEND COSMIC LAWS AND
CYCLES THROUGH THE CHANNELLING AND MOBILISATION OF RUNIC
CURRENTS.
WEDENHORN: BY THE SUM OF THE RUNES ELHAZ-YR. REPRESENTS THE
TOTAL AND ABSOLUTE TENSION GENERATED BY THE CHANNELLING OF BOTH
ASCENDING AND DESCENDING RUNIC CURRENTS.
HAGALL: TOTALITY. RESOLUTION OF THE TENSION BETWEEN THE ELHAZ-YR
CURRENTS REFERRED TO IN THE BINDE-RUNE WEDENHORN.

--- PAGE BREAK ---HE CHANNELLING OF BOTH
ASCENDING AND DESCENDING RUNIC CURRENTS.
HAGALL: TOTALITY. RESOLUTION OF THE TENSION BETWEEN THE ELHAZ-YR
CURRENTS REFERRED TO IN THE BINDE-RUNE WEDENHORN.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16
8
HAGALL REPRESENTS THE VIRYA WHO, IN AN EXTREMELY RECKLESS
ACT, TRAVELS TOWARDS HIS HVEL/LOWER CHAKRAS, REACHING THE
DEEPEST AND MOST UNDERGROUND CAVES, AND WITHOUT STOPPING
THERE, HE RETAINS HIS HARDNESS AND REMAINS INTEGRITY IN
HIMSELF BECAUSE HE DOES NOT ALLOW HIMSELF TO BE TEMPTED BY
THE DISSOLVING FORCES, THUS MANAGING TO ORIENT HIMSELF
TOWARDS THE INFINITE.
HAGALL IS THE VYRYA WHO, GUIDED BY HIS WALKIRIA, CROSSES
HELHEIM AND ANNIHILATES ALL INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL DEMONS TO
FIND THE WAY OUT TO THE TRUE HEAVEN.
ANSUZ AND LAGUZ: THE FLOW OF EVENTS IS CONTROLLED BY THE
MAGIC AND RUNIC POWER OF THE VIRYA. THE MYSTERIES OF DEATH
AND THE DISSOLVING WATERS ARE KNOWN THROUGH THE WISDOM
OF ODIN.
TRIPOD OF LAF AND OS: REPRESENTS THE THREE REALMS OF BEING
(SPIRIT, SOUL AND BODY) AND THE THREE TEMPORAL LEVELS (PAST,
PRESENT AND FUTURE) UNDER THE DOMINION OF ODIN'S WISDOM.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

169
RAIDHO AND QUADRUPLE KENAZ: REPRESENTS THE AMPLIFICATION OF THE
MAGICAL AND CREATIVE POWER OF THE RUNE KENAZ THROUGH GOOD
JUDGEMENT AND THE CORRECT CHANNELLING AND DIRECTION OF THE
RUNIC FORCES.
RAIDHO AND ANZUS AT THE TOP: THE RHYTHMIC LAW AND
INSPIRATION. LAGUZ AND KENAZ AT THE BOTTOM: THE WATER AND
FIRE OF CREATIVE SEXUAL ALCHEMY. NOTE THAT ALL THE RUNES ARE
UNITED BY AN INTERMEDIATE GEBO RUNE THAT REPRESENTS THE
UNION OF THE HUMAN WITH THE DIVINE, THE EXCHANGE OF GIFTS
BETWEEN MEN AND GODS, THE KINGDOM OF ASGARD REFLECTED IN
THE KINGDOM OF MIDGARD, THE EARTHLY WORLD.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

17
0
PART FOUR: RUNIC
VESTIGES IN
AMERICA

--- PAGE BREAK ---171
THE LEGENDARY MEMORY OF ATLANTIS AND
HYPERBOREAN SYMBOLISM
The great ancient traditions and a wide variety of myths from different cultures
tell us of the legendary times when the civilisation of Atlantis existed on an
island-continent located in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean1.

This island also
bordered western Europe, northern Africa, and the central region of the
American continent.

This civilisation possessed science and wisdom far
superior to that of modern civilisation, mainly due to the "divine origin" of this
knowledge, as it involved contact with planes higher than the material world and
synchronicity between the subtle magical forces of man and his natural
environment.

Several traditions from different continents also tell us that Atlantis was a
derivation or irradiation of a previous island near the North Pole, the legendary
Hyperborean Thule, an absolutely primordial kingdom that in that remote era
had a tropical climate very suitable for making the northern island a paradisiacal
and perfectly habitable place.

This Hyperborean kingdom was in turn a
reflection or representation of another 'extraterrestrial' Hyperborea, an
uncreated world that is not part of the material universe and was the place of
origin of the lords of Venus, beings who are called this because they entered
the universe created by the 'origin' or gate of Venus.

Despite the divine
influence on which the Atlantean civilisation was founded, it was destroyed
approximately 12,000 years ago in a single night due to a natural catastrophe
apparently caused by a war between two different factions that formed among
the ruling gods and which also encompassed the different races of men who
followed their commands(2) .

That civilisation, which had Cro-Magnon men as its heroic, semi-divine
descendants, developed contacts with different external centres, which it
maintained as strategic allies, whether spiritual and warrior-like, or simply as
suppliers of raw materials.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Despite the divine
influence on which the Atlantean civilisation was founded, it was destroyed
approximately 12,000 years ago in a single night due to a natural catastrophe
apparently caused by a war between two different factions that formed among
the ruling gods and which also encompassed the different races of men who
followed their commands(2) . That civilisation, which had Cro-Magnon men as its heroic, semi-divine
descendants, developed contacts with different external centres, which it
maintained as strategic allies, whether spiritual and warrior-like, or simply as
suppliers of raw materials. Among these can be counted the pre-Tartessian
civilisation located in what is now known as Andalusia in southern Spain, a
region where the Atlanteans extracted metals such as copper and silver, which
were quite abundant in its mountains and rivers. In that ancient Atlantean and
post-Atlantean era, many of the inhabitants of the Iberian Peninsula were
physically similar to modern Germans. 1This statement is based on what is suggested in Plato's dialogues Timaeus and Critias, which were
written around 350 BC and recreate a conversation between Socrates and his students. It recounts how
the ancestor Solon had access to the records of the history of that vanished continent from some Egyptian
initiates. 2  In the myths of most Mesoamerican cultures, in the story of Noah in the Christian Bible, in the
Mesopotamian legend of Ziuzudra and Utnapishtim, and in the Greek myth of Deucalion, reference is
made to the fury unleashed by the gods that caused a gigantic flood that sank and destroyed the world,
from which only a small group of men were saved, who gradually repopulated the earth over the following
centuries.

--- PAGE BREAK ---that caused a gigantic flood that sank and destroyed the world,
from which only a small group of men were saved, who gradually repopulated the earth over the following
centuries.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

17
2
Likewise, various independent researchers (conveniently ignored by scientists
adhering to the current official materialist-progressive history), such as Arthur
Posnasky, calculated the construction of the Kalasasaya temple in the
Tiahuanaco civilisation to be 17,000 years old. For this reason, men such as
Hermann Wirth, who carried out anthropological and archaeological projects
(but linked to the esoteric), have suggested that Tiahuanaco was actually a
centre adjacent to and subordinate to the island of Atlantis.
In this way, it could be suggested that in the era prior to the planetary
catastrophe (known as "the flood" in the myths and cosmogonies of different
religions around the world), there was a metaphysical bridge between the
Tiahuanaco civilisation, Atlantis and southern Spain, which in later millennia
would be the seat of the Tartessos civilisation. After the destruction of the
island, Cro-Magnon men migrated to different parts of the planet, preserving
their magical knowledge. Some of this knowledge was transferred to different
peoples and tribes they encountered along the way, mainly benefiting the Indo-
European Caucasian peoples and their descendants, although some Asian and
American cultures also had contact with them.
Among the magical wisdom bequeathed by the Atlanteans was a set of signs
known as the 'language of birds', which also corresponded to sounds and body
positions related to different movements that make up a 'dance' similar to that of
some birds. This language possessed magical power and maintained the
memory of the divine origin of the descendants of the uncreated worlds. These
signs actually represent archetypal forces of creation that behind them or in
their deepest essence reflect or approximate a higher infinite source that lies
beyond the material universe.
Runes would be the name later given to the derivations of these signs, which
have undergone different cycles of degradation and renewal and have
sometimes served as evidence of the existence or passage through a region at
a certain historical moment of a racial group influenced by the Hyperborean
memory, although on many occasions the runes were only known and used by
small groups of initiates and kings who sought to leave no written evidence of
their runic codes so that their own people or informants from enemy countries
would not discover and misinterpret them.
In South America, the passage of these peoples and their runic traces and
vestiges have been researched and deciphered by various writers, among
whom the French anthropologist Jacques de Mahieu, based in Argentina,
stands out in the last decades of the 20th century. who, in his various books,
has presented evidence found relating to the passage through this continent of
different groups and elites who arrived from other regions of the planet in view
of different needs or for spiritual or strategic purposes.ce found relating to the passage through this continent of
different groups and elites who arrived from other regions of the planet in view
of different needs or for spiritual or strategic purposes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---173
In examining all these vestiges, it is important to deduce that Hyperborean
symbolism is truly "polar" and not stubbornly "solar" as some authors have
suggested (including perhaps De Mahieu himself).

In an animistic context, and
as will be seen later, the extreme excess of orientation towards the "external"
solar may have been the cause or symptom of a kind of misogyny and self-
repulsion of the feminine, which paradoxically has led to a sodomitic sexual
deviation common in times of decadence of the priestly castes that worship and
sacrifice to the external sun.repulsion of the feminine, which paradoxically has
led to a sodomitic sexual deviation common in times of decadence among
priestly castes that worship and make sacrifices to the external material sun, as
has been reported in the chronicles referring to the final stage of the cycle of the
pre-Columbian Aztec and Muisca cultures (Egyptian civilisation in its final
stages could also be a good example of this).

The opposite extreme, total
orientation and dissolution in the telluric-chthonic lunar, can generate something
similar, although apparently contradictory.

These orientations can be illustrated both in the masochistic, misogynistic priest
who represses himself sexually and in the liberated sexual pervert who never
finds a limit to his practices.

For all these reasons, the Greeks, Romans and
Norse peoples, with their great mythologies and ancient worldviews that
reflected the frozen fire of Hyperborea, maintained a balance between the
masculine and the feminine with a pantheon made up of gods and goddesses.

In the purest periods of these cultures, their contact with the divine did not occur
through a single, solitary male god, nor through an exasperated matriarchal cult
that was either emasculating or totally hedonistic.For all these reasons, the Greeks, Romans and
Norse peoples, with their great mythologies and ancient worldviews that
reflected the frozen fire of Hyperborea, maintained a balance between the
masculine and the feminine with a pantheon made up of gods and goddesses.

In the purest periods of these cultures, their contact with the divine did not occur
through a single, solitary male god, nor through an exasperated matriarchal cult
that was either emasculating or totally hedonistic.

Just as solar symbols were
part of ancient heroic civilisations, other symbols were included, such as the
crescent moon, which represented the soul, the depths, the origin, the past, the
occult and the unconscious(3) .For example, the reclining crescent moon of
Shivaite iconography and the one found at the bottom of many Roman legion
banners represent precisely the deep forces that are dominated and made
conscious, as well as the balance that surpasses the full moon and the sun as
extreme references of fertilisation and proliferation of the human species.

This
union of polarities does not signify a culturally misunderstood androgyny, but
rather the transcendence of cosmic paradoxes, a wisdom referring to the
different forces that, by attracting and repelling each other, maintain the
dynamics of the created and manifested universe, which itself copies or reflects
the unknowable, eternal and uncreated multiverse.

The language of birds, the
runes, represent this wisdom and the secrets whispered to us by the gods in our
blood.

3The crescent moon above the head of an initiate is also analogous to the sigil (a symbol that invokes
forces that penetrate the subconscious) of Mercury and occult wisdom.

The crescent moon also refers to
the helmet (Tarnhelm) of invisibility obtained by Siegfried in the Germanic-Norse mythological story of the
Ring of the Nibelung, recreated as an opera by the 19th-century German composer Richard Wagner.--- PAGE BREAK ---

3The crescent moon above the head of an initiate is also analogous to the sigil (a symbol that invokes
forces that penetrate the subconscious) of Mercury and occult wisdom. The crescent moon also refers to
the helmet (Tarnhelm) of invisibility obtained by Siegfried in the Germanic-Norse mythological story of the
Ring of the Nibelung, recreated as an opera by the 19th-century German composer Richard Wagner. The
god of the underworld, Hades, has also been linked to the one who delivers this helmet.

--- PAGE BREAK ---17
4
RUNIC INSCRIPTIONS AND THE VARIOUS
DISCOVERIES OF AMERICA
The Viking sagas (the Saga of Eric and the Saga of the Greenlanders) are well
known, recounting how between the end of the 10th century AD and the
beginning of the 11th century AD, Leif Eriksson, son of Eric the Red, decided to
travel from his settlement in Greenland with a group of men to a supposed land
sighted in the west.

In 1960, Norwegian researchers Helge and Anne-Stine
Ingstad found archaeological evidence of Viking settlements built around 1000
AD on the east coast of present-day Canada.

From all this, it has been deduced
that Eriksson reached what is now known as Baffin Island in northern Canada,
which he named Helluland.

He also reached the Labrador region, which he
called Markland, and Newfoundland, which he named Vindland.

These lands
would become a place of refuge during the harsh winters, and the Viking groups
also had to deal with various violent clashes with the indigenous tribes already
established there.

Although they emerged victorious from these skirmishes, they
decided to leave f o r other regions due to the constant hostility shown to them
by the natives.

Researchers have also suggested possible Viking traces in the
provinces of New Brunswick and Nova Scotia, practically on the current border
with the United States (1).

Canadian writer Luice Defresne suggests in her book "Quetzalcoatl, the
Hurricane Man"2that Ce Acatl, the legendary ruler of the city of Tula in the
Mexican Toltec culture, was actually a Viking who was shipwrecked on the
coast of Veracruz in the 11th century AD.

(possibly after his people's voyages
along the east coast of Canada), because Viking chronicles mention that their
voyages took them to lands where they found no animals to hunt, which
coincides with the characteristics of the Caribbean islands.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Canadian writer Luice Defresne suggests in her book "Quetzalcoatl, the
Hurricane Man"2that Ce Acatl, the legendary ruler of the city of Tula in the
Mexican Toltec culture, was actually a Viking who was shipwrecked on the
coast of Veracruz in the 11th century AD. (possibly after his people's voyages
along the east coast of Canada), because Viking chronicles mention that their
voyages took them to lands where they found no animals to hunt, which
coincides with the characteristics of the Caribbean islands. Jacques de Mahieu, in his books "The Great Journey of the Sun God, The
Vikings in Mexico and Peru," "The Viking King of Paraguay," and "The Secret
Geography of America Before Columbus," presents findings of runic inscriptions
in the city of Tacuatí and the hills of Guazú and Corá in the middle of the
Paraguayan jungle, as well as pointing out illustrations that resemble animals
typical of northern Europe. The French writer based in Argentina points out that
a Viking named Ullman descended from the land of the Aztecs to the south of
the continent, where he established a kingdom in Tiahuanaco. These Viking
kingdoms would be referred to in legends about Viracocha as a white, blond
man and in the linguistic features similar to the Nordic languages of Quechua
and Aymara. Thus, the word Viracocha would have its roots in Wirth-Goth,
White-God. 1  Archaeologists Helge Ingstad and Anne Stine Ingstad investigated a small fishing village in
Newfoundland in 1960. They found Viking ruins and the outlines of eight houses, three of which were used
as dwellings with a capacity for about 35 people. They also found a certain type of nut from walnut trees
that are abundant in New Brunswick. 2  Lucie Defresne, Quetzalcoatl, El hombre huracán (Quetzalcoatl, The Hurricane Man). Mexico: Grijalbo
Publishing House, 2008.

--- PAGE BREAK ---om walnut trees
that are abundant in New Brunswick. 2  Lucie Defresne, Quetzalcoatl, El hombre huracán (Quetzalcoatl, The Hurricane Man). Mexico: Grijalbo
Publishing House, 2008.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

175
At the end of the Tiahuanaco civilisation cycle, its ruling elite, made up mostly of
an endogamous Viking racial group, moved to the northwest and founded the
Inca empire, which would dominate the region for more than 200 years. The
word Inca or "inga" itself has its roots in the word ING (descendant), which is
also related to rune 22 of the Old Futhark. Similarly, in recent decades,
excavations have been carried out in the Paracas region of Peru, near the city
of Cuzco, where blond-haired mummies have been found, causing indifference
or astonishment among the current scientific community.
De Mahieu also reviews the astonishing coincidences between the Inca and
European zodiacs, the weapons and uniforms of Norman warriors and those of
the Aztecs, and the socio-economic structure of the monarchies and military
orders of Mexico and Peru with those of the European Middle Ages.
In 1978, de Mahieu published the book "Drakkares in the Amazon, the Vikings
in Brazil" in which he explains that in the current Brazilian state of Pará, south of
the Amazon, the settlement of Seven Cities served as a sacred place for the
Vikings. He also compares it to the Extersteine of Teutoburg in Saxony because
of its stones and runic inscriptions and drawings of drakkars. The mouth of the
Amazon River served as the starting point of a maritime route used by the
"Danes" of Tiahuanaco. And in the interior of the Amazon rainforest and the
Guianas, there are tribes of white Indians who are possible descendants of
Nordic men (similar to the Guayakis and Comechingones in Paraguay and
northern Argentina) who also have similarities in their names and writings with
Scandinavian languages and runic ideographies.
As if all this were not enough, on the island of Cuba, people who have nothing
to do with De Mahieu have carried out archaeological research suggesting the
presence of Vikings in the north of the province of Matanzas and the south of
the province of Cienfuegos3.
Throughout this Viking journey, it is important to note a radical difference from
the Judeo-Christian colonisation that began with Christopher Columbus'
supposed 'discovery': although a group of Vikings fought and dominated various
hostile indigenous tribes they encountered along the way, in no case did this
mean the extermination of their race or the total elimination of their culture,
religion and customs due to the shift towards a new absolutist religion
generated by evangelisation. The Viking elite educated the different American
peoples, and even their different pagan gods and myths were adapted to each
other (the Toltec city of Tula has already been mentioned, in which there is a
clear reference to the mythical Hyperborean Nordic Thule). The same would
happen with the runic language, although it is very likely that only an elite
maintained it in its pure form, without syncretism or derivations.
3  As reported by a television news programme in that country.ith the runic language, although it is very likely that only an elite
maintained it in its pure form, without syncretism or derivations.
3  As reported by a television news programme in that country.

--- PAGE BREAK ---17
6
Apart from the swastikas found on artefacts belonging to indigenous North
American populations, several stones with runic inscriptions have also been
found in the United States of America whose origin is unknown or whose
authenticity is questioned by the scientific community.

Among these, it is worth
highlighting those found in Kensington (Alexandria, Minnesota), Heavener
(Oklahoma), Shawnee (Oklahoma), Vérendrye (Minoth, North Dakota), Spirit
Pond (Phippsburg, Maine) and the so-called "Leif Eriksson stones" found on a
small island off the coast of Massachusetts.

The discovery of runic inscriptions on a stone slab in Kensington has been
mired in controversy, as several researchers and archaeologists consider it a
19th-century hoax, while others attribute it to individuals from Scandinavian
villages in the 14th century.

The inscription was found in the rural village of
Solem (Douglas County, Minnesota) in 1898 by Swedish-American farmer Olof
Öhman.

The stone was found face down on top of a hill in the middle of a
swamp and was surrounded by the roots of a poplar tree.

A copy of the
inscription was sent to the University of Minnesota, where Scandinavian
language professor Olaus J.

Breda paid little attention to it.

Nevertheless, he
translated it and, after declaring it a forgery, sent it to other linguists in
Scandinavia.

At the same time, the original inscription was sent to Northwestern
University in Chicago, where, after being dismissed by the academic
community, it was returned to farmer Olof, who is said to have placed it face
down near the door of his barn.

In 1907, researcher Hjalmar Holland, a graduate of the University of Wisconsin,
located and purchased the inscription from the farmer, renewing interest in it,
which was reflected in various articles published in academic circles around
1910.--- PAGE BREAK ---

At the same time, the original inscription was sent to Northwestern
University in Chicago, where, after being dismissed by the academic
community, it was returned to farmer Olof, who is said to have placed it face
down near the door of his barn. In 1907, researcher Hjalmar Holland, a graduate of the University of Wisconsin,
located and purchased the inscription from the farmer, renewing interest in it,
which was reflected in various articles published in academic circles around
1910. Holland travelled to Europe and for the next 40 years fought for the
academic community to pay attention to him and validate the authenticity of the
inscription, but despite the fact that in 1949 it was briefly exhibited at the
Smithsonian Institution, most Swedish and Scandinavian linguists quickly
rejected the idea of granting it historical validity. The inscription is currently in a
museum in Alexandria, Minnesota. Changing location and time period, reference should be made to the Icelandic
bishop Gisli Oddson, who attempted in 1637 to compile the history of the Viking
Arctic colonies. According to these records, in 1342 the Greenlanders began to
"desert" the Christian religion and many of them migrated to America. Likewise,
according to other historical records, in 1354 Magnus Erikkson, King of Sweden
and Norway, wrote a letter to an officer named Paul Knutson, who was leading
an expedition to Greenland to investigate rumours of defection from Christianity. On the other hand, a writer named Jacob Cnoyen reported that in 1364, eight
men returned to Norway from the Arctic regions, one of whom was a bishop
named Ivar Bardarsson, who provided the king with abundant and novel
geographical information.

--- PAGE BREAK ---64, eight
men returned to Norway from the Arctic regions, one of whom was a bishop
named Ivar Bardarsson, who provided the king with abundant and novel
geographical information.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

177
These documents, republished and compiled by Scandinavian researchers in
the 19th century, have served as evidence for those who believe that the
Kensington Stone dates back to the 14th century AD, suggesting that Knutson
managed to travel to America in search of the "rebel" Greenlanders and, after a
long journey that may have ended in Minnesota, returned with only eight men to
his native Norway.
In the 1980s, Italian language professor Robert Hall and Texas engineer and
amateur linguist Richard Nielsen contradicted the criticism levelled at the
inscription, stating that the strange runes (apparently derived from medieval
runes) and linguistic anomalies attributed to the Kensington Stone are also easy
to find in many European runic inscriptions from the Middle Ages, which have
been "officially" accepted as valid by academic circles. Geochemical analyses
have suggested that the inscription was buried in a period prior to the
"documented" first arrival of European colonisers on the continent in 1492.
Geologist Scott Wolter has provided evidence of the inscription's authenticity by
finding degradation in the stone's crystals that must have taken at least 200
years (which would rule out the supposed theory that farmer Olof wrote the
inscription himself at the end of the 19th century). He also pointed out the
coincidence that the chiselled dots in the middle of the R runes on the
Kensington Stone were only common practice in runic writing on church tombs
on the island of Gotland in Sweden during the 14th century AD.
According to research, the approximate translation of the inscription would be
as
follows:
8
Geats/Goths
and
22
Norwegians/Northmen
on
a?
discovery/seeking expedition, from Vinland west of. We had stores with 2
shelters, one day's journey north from this stone. We were at fishing one day,
after we came home found 10 men red of blood and dead. AVM (Ave Maria?)
rescue from evils.
8 Goths and 22 Norwegians on a search expedition from west of Vinland. We
have tents with two shelters, a day's journey north from this stone. We were
fishing one day and after returning home we found 10 men dead and covered in
blood. Ave Maria rescue us from
the
evil ones.
The Ave Maria in Latin abbreviation is entirely feasible, given that by the 14th
century AD all the Scandinavian kingdoms had been Christianised for quite
some time and, as mentioned in the first part of this book, it was common
practice at that time to write words or phrases from the Latin language using
runic symbols. On the side of the stone there is another shorter inscription:
Have 10 men by/at sea to look after our ship, 14 day journey from this island.
Year 1362. We have 10 men at sea to look after our ship, 14 days' journey from
this island. Year 1362rter inscription:
Have 10 men by/at sea to look after our ship, 14 day journey from this island.
Year 1362. We have 10 men at sea to look after our ship, 14 days' journey from
this island. Year 1362

--- PAGE BREAK ---ve 10 men by/at sea to look after our ship, 14 day journey from this island.
Year 1362. We have 10 men at sea to look after our ship, 14 days' journey from
this island. Year 1362

--- PAGE BREAK ---

17
8
In 2005, archaeologist Alice Beck Kehoe alluded to possible legendary contacts
between Native Americans and immigrants from other continents well before the
14th century AD. For example, blond-haired Indians have been found among
the Mandan community in the upper Missouri River. Evidence has also been
found of a tuberculosis epidemic around the year 1000 AD. Finally, there is the
Hochunk legend about the ancestral hero Red Horn who fought red-haired
giants (4).
Another known stone with runic inscriptions is the Heavener Stone, located on
Poteau Mountain on the outskirts of the town of the same name. Local traditions
attribute it to Nordic men who arrived on the continent via the Gulf of Mexico to
navigate the Mississippi River, the Arkansas River and finally the Poteau River.
Other researchers simply consider it an inscription made in the 19th or 20th
century AD by a local person because the eight characters that form the word
Gnomedal (probably 'Valley of the Gnome') combine signs from the Old Futhark
and Gothic Futhark, both of which were almost obsolete in the 10th century AD
when the Vikings arrived in Canada from Greenland. US military cryptographer
Alf Monge theorised that the inscription was a cryptogram meaning '11
November 1012', while an engineer named Richard Nielsen suggested in 1986
that the true meaning of the symbols is 'Glome dal' (valley of glome – the dark
valley)(5) . Ten miles northwest of Mount Poteau in 1967, another seven-
character runic inscription was found, very similar to that on the Heavener
stone. The transliteration would indicate the word "GLOIALLW", although other
possibilities have been suggested depending on the different futharks used for
the translation. Alf Monge also theorised about this inscription and others found
in Norway, relating them to codes indicating the dates of religious festivals.
According to him, the date "12 November 1017"(6) is encrypted in this second
Poteau stone.
Meanwhile, in Shawnee (Oklahoma), a mile from the North Canadian River, in
1969 Jim Step, accompanied by his son, found a 14-inch oval stone slightly
buried in the ground near a stream. When the stone was removed, they saw an
inscription of five letters on the opposite side. The five signs deciphered
according to the ancient futhark correspond to the word "MEDOK", which could
refer to Madoc, a prince from Wales who, according to legend, came to America
in 1170 AD and later returned to his homeland with 10 ships of colonists whom
he taught about the Mississippi River.
4Kehoe, Alice Beck, The Kensington Runestone: Approaching a Research Question Holistically. USA:
Waveland Press, 2005.
5 Monge's concept in: Oklahoma Today magazine, Summer 1970. Article by O.G. Landsverk on Monge,
page 28. Nielsen's concept in Epigraphic Society Occasional Publications, Vol. 15, 1986, page 133.
6Oklahoma Today magazine, Summer 1970. Article by O.G.
Landsverk on Monge, page 28.sverk on Monge,
page 28. Nielsen's concept in Epigraphic Society Occasional Publications, Vol. 15, 1986, page 133.
6Oklahoma Today magazine, Summer 1970. Article by O.G.
Landsverk on Monge, page 28.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e 28. Nielsen's concept in Epigraphic Society Occasional Publications, Vol. 15, 1986, page 133.
6Oklahoma Today magazine, Summer 1970. Article by O.G.
Landsverk on Monge, page 28.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

179
However, the authenticity of this inscription has been questioned because the
Old Futhark runes were not used in Wales. Alf Monge also took this inscription
as a cryptogram and deciphered it as the date "24 November 1024"7.
In 1749, the French-Canadian explorer Pierre Gaultier de Varennes de la
Vérendrye discussed with the Swedish scientist Pehr Kalm a runic inscription he
found on a trip to the west of the Great Lakes in 1730. This inscription, known
as the Vérendrye stone, was sent to Quebec, where Jesuit priests kept it after
claiming that it contained "Tartar" writing. Some time later, the inscription was
sent to the French Secretary of State, from where it is believed to have been
sent to and stored in Rouen Cathedral alongside other strange archaeological
artefacts. Apparently, the building where the runestone was kept was burned
down due to explosions during the Second World War, and nothing more has
been heard about the artefact since. Hjalmar Holland asserts that the Vérendrye
runestone was inscribed by Nordic immigrants also related to the
aforementioned Kensington Stone, and that the description of the language
used as "Tartar" makes sense since it descends from Old Hungarian and
Orkhon, which have linguistic structures similar to those of the Old Norse
languages.
Also in 1971, three runic inscriptions were found at Spirit Pond (Phippsburg),
one of which contains 15 lines of text and another contains a map of the
landscape in addition to other runic signs. These inscriptions include the
number 1011 written with runic "pentadic" numerals similar to those proposed in
1885 by tailor Edward Larsson to replace Arabic numerals, although it has been
speculated that this numbering system existed many centuries earlier and was
kept secret among the members of Larsson's guild.
This has led most scholars to believe that the Spirit Pond inscriptions are a
fraud dating from the late 19th or 20th century AD. However, Richard Nielsen
dates the inscription to 1401 AD, and other researchers who support the idea of
constant Viking migrations to North America before Columbus have suggested
the 14th century AD as the time when the inscriptions were made.
Edward Larsson's pentadic runic numbering:
7Oklahoma Today magazine, Summer 1970. Article by O.G. Landsverk on Monge, page 28.ggested
the 14th century AD as the time when the inscriptions were made.
Edward Larsson's pentadic runic numbering:
7Oklahoma Today magazine, Summer 1970. Article by O.G. Landsverk on Monge, page 28.

--- PAGE BREAK ---18
0
Finally, in the field of runic inscriptions found in the United States, mention
should be made of the island known as "Nomans Land" or "No Man's Land,"
which is located off the coast of Massachusetts in the United States, about five
kilometres from Martha's Vineyard.

Its name derives from the fact that this
island is closed to the public because it has been used by the military to test
bombs since 1943.

In the 1920s, the island was owned by a man named
Joshua Crane, who claimed to have seen a black rock with indecipherable signs
on the coast one evening in 1926.

A year later, a captain named Wood, who
was both a resident and a watchman on the island, also stumbled upon the
strange rock.

Also in 1927, Edward F.

Gray took several photographs of the
rock(8) .

Gray did not know the runic language, but subsequent efforts by other
researchers to decipher the inscriptions suggest that the first two lines on the
rock read "Leif Eriksson, 1001".

The text also contains other lines below that are
difficult to decipher or may have been diluted or erased by erosion over several
centuries.

However, it has been suggested that one of these lower lines may
read the word "Vinland".

Despite the fact that this inscription combines runic
characters with Roman numerals (which were only used in Scandinavia from
the 14th century AD onwards), there are many doubts about its authenticity.

However, it is worth mentioning that during the Middle Ages it was common to
write Latin words with runic symbols, so a possible combination of these with
Roman numerals would not be entirely unreasonable.

Returning once again to South America, another interesting reference can be
found in the mysterious book called the "Chronicle of Akakor" written by the
German historian Karl Brugger, who, while working as a journalist in Manaus
(Brazil) in 1972, met the son of an Indian chief named Tatunca Nara.--- PAGE BREAK ---

However, it is worth mentioning that during the Middle Ages it was common to
write Latin words with runic symbols, so a possible combination of these with
Roman numerals would not be entirely unreasonable. Returning once again to South America, another interesting reference can be
found in the mysterious book called the "Chronicle of Akakor" written by the
German historian Karl Brugger, who, while working as a journalist in Manaus
(Brazil) in 1972, met the son of an Indian chief named Tatunca Nara. The
indigenous man told him about and provided evidence of the ancient history of
his race, the Ugha Mongulala, which Brugger later published. This book refers
to the arrival of the Goths on the South American continent after Teja, the last
Gothic king, was defeated by Narses, general of the Eastern Roman Empire, in
the Battle of Mount Vesuvius (552 AD). After sailing for several years, the
surviving Goths arrived on the American continent in 570 and settled in the
regions surrounding the capital of the Ugha Mongulala empire, a city located in
the mountainous valleys on the border between Brazil and Peru. For several
centuries, the Goths lived peacefully with the Mongulala, and the two clans
jointly ruled their civilisation. The Goths even brought several innovations to
their empire, including new seeds and farming methods, animal-drawn ploughs,
and ways to develop better looms. But the most important contribution made by the Goths was the secret of iron
production using stone furnaces. Using this metal, American craftsmen supplied
the Mongol armies with new weapons, and in this way the empire regained
control over its
8  In the midst of his research, which would result in a book about the voyages of the Norse to North
America, published in 1930 by Oxford University.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e regained
control over its
8  In the midst of his research, which would result in a book about the voyages of the Norse to North
America, published in 1930 by Oxford University.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

181
extensive area and reconquered the territories usurped by hostile or rebellious
tribes.
In 645 AD, most of the Goths, together with a large group of Mongulala warriors,
set out on a gigantic campaign against a nation in what is now North America,
which, according to the priests of Akakor, could pose a threat and danger to
their empire. But apparently the war turned into a catastrophe and most of the
contingents sent did not return, and the survivors mixed with this other strange
people.
More than 1,000 Gothic warriors had arrived in Akakor on dragon-headed ships
they had built themselves. When the indigenous people saw them, they took
them to be relatives sent by the ancient gods who, according to their chronicles,
were white-skinned and had thick beards. Those gods had also instructed a n d
lived with their distant ancestors, but due to a planetary catastrophe (consistent
with the sinking of Atlantis) in the year 10,481 BC
BC, they abandoned the surface of the planet to go to their 13 underground
cities hidden beneath the Andes mountains.
A similar situation occurred throughout the American continent when the various
surviving empires received news of the arrival by sea of "other white bearded
men" between the end of the 15th century AD and the beginning of the 16th
century AD. It is easy to understand why the Aztec emperor Moctezuma II took
the arrival of Hernán Cortés in Tenochtitlán in 1519 AD as the return of the
relatives of the White Gods, considering the Spanish conquerors to be
descendants of the legendary Quetzacoátl-kukulkán. Unfortunately, under the
Judeo-Christian symbol, the intentions of these new immigrants would be very
different from those of their predecessors, as the Aztecs and Incas themselves
would painfully discover in the following decades.
There has also been speculation about various expeditions to America by Irish
druids and Christian missionaries in the 8th and 9th centuries AD. Rudolf John
Gorsleben, in his book Die Hoch-zeit der Menschheit (The Zenith of Humanity),
discusses the possibility that they founded a colony in what is now the state of
Florida in the United States. According to him, this colony was called
Huitrammannaland(9) .
Apart from De Mahieu, who has pointed out the supply of silver that the Knights
Templar brought from America to Europe in the 12th and 13th centuries AD,
thanks to which 150 Gothic churches were built, various researchers have also
suggested the arrival of individuals from this order of knights centuries before
the arrival of Columbus. A group of Argentine researchers found a totem and a
block of stone carved with crosses and various Templar symbols, such as the
tree of life, in the city of San Antonio Oeste (province of Río Negro), which are
said to be 700 years old. According to engineer Fernando Fluguerto Martí,
9  Aterm meaning "land of white people".e
tree of life, in the city of San Antonio Oeste (province of Río Negro), which are
said to be 700 years old. According to engineer Fernando Fluguerto Martí,
9  Aterm meaning "land of white people".

--- PAGE BREAK ---18
2
According to the director of this investigation, the objects were found near a
plateau known as "El Fuerte" (The Fort) close to the Gulf of San Matías, where
it is likely that Knights Templar had been entrenched for several centuries.

Several English and French maps made up until the 19th century AD included
this location, but Spanish maps did not, most likely due to the Catholic Church's
veto on anything related to the Knights Templar(10) .Martí also indicates that
after the order to extinguish the order promoted by King Philip IV of France and
Pope Clement V at the beginning of the 14th century AD, the surviving
Templars used a large part of their abundant fleet to depart from the port of La
Rochelle in France to the lands of the West, reaching the Patagonian region
where they would found three fortified villages: the one already mentioned in the
Gulf of San Matías, another on the coast of the province of Chubut, and the last
one near the coast of the Osorno region in Chile.

These three locations were
also linked to the mythical "City of the Caesars" described in local indigenous
legends and eagerly sought by the Spanish, although they appear to have been
abandoned or hidden at the time of their arrival.

On the other hand, the legends of the Egyptian voyages to the land of Punt and
those of King Solomon's fleets to the country of Ophir seem to have a real and
historical inspiration in the fleets built and the expeditions commissioned by
different Middle Eastern kings to Phoenician navigators, who, settled in present-
day Lebanon and departing from the Persian Gulf or the Red Sea, would make
long overseas voyages across the Indian Ocean, the Mediterranean and the
Atlantic Ocean.

Writers such as Dick Edgar Ibarra Grasso have identified two
Phoenician ships in the inscriptions on the steles of the temple of Sechim on the
Peruvian coast, whose ruins have been estimated to be 3,000 years old.On the other hand, the legends of the Egyptian voyages to the land of Punt and
those of King Solomon's fleets to the country of Ophir seem to have a real and
historical inspiration in the fleets built and the expeditions commissioned by
different Middle Eastern kings to Phoenician navigators, who, settled in present-
day Lebanon and departing from the Persian Gulf or the Red Sea, would make
long overseas voyages across the Indian Ocean, the Mediterranean and the
Atlantic Ocean.

Writers such as Dick Edgar Ibarra Grasso have identified two
Phoenician ships in the inscriptions on the steles of the temple of Sechim on the
Peruvian coast, whose ruins have been estimated to be 3,000 years old.

He has
also compared the ships depicted on Mochica pottery from northern Peru with
Phoenician merchant ships from the eastern Mediterranean trade in the 3rd
century BC(11) .Bernardo Silva Ramos has travelled through the Brazilian
Amazon rainforest, finding approximately 2,800 rock inscriptions, many of which
he himself has described as reminiscent of Phoenician writing and
pictography(12) .

In 1969, Lienhardt Delekat studied copies made of the inscriptions on the
famous "Paraíba Stone" in the state of Pará in Brazil, which was found on a
plantation in September 1872.

According to Delekat and other researchers such
as Paul Gallez, the inscriptions on this stone are clearly Canaanite-Phoenician
in nature, concluding that they are written in the ancient Sidonian language
used at the end of the 6th century BC(13) .

10Martí is the coordinator of the Delphos Foundation, which is based in Argentina and uses a multidisciplinary
approach.

During 2001 and 2002, they carried out several expeditions to "El Fuerte" in Río Negro.

11  IBARRA GRASSO, DICK EDGAR "The representation of America in Roman maps from the time of
Christ".

Buenos Aires: 1970.

12  DA SILVA RAMOS, BERNARDO DE AZEVEDO "Inscriptions and traditions of prehistoric America, especially
Brazil".--- PAGE BREAK ---

Buenos Aires: 1970. 12  DA SILVA RAMOS, BERNARDO DE AZEVEDO "Inscriptions and traditions of prehistoric America, especially
Brazil". Rio de Janeiro: National Printing Office, 1930. 13DELEKAT, LIENHARDT, Phönicier in Amerika. Bonn: 1969. GALLEZ, PAUL, Predescubrimientos de América. Bahía Blanca: Instituto Patagónico, 2001.

--- PAGE BREAK ---eiro: National Printing Office, 1930. 13DELEKAT, LIENHARDT, Phönicier in Amerika. Bonn: 1969. GALLEZ, PAUL, Predescubrimientos de América. Bahía Blanca: Instituto Patagónico, 2001.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

183
Finally, reference should also be made to what has been said and written in
recent decades regarding the possibility that the Chinese were in America
before Columbus. Special mention has been made of Admiral Zheng He and his
expeditions around the world between 1405 and 1432. The writer and former
British naval commander Gavin Menzien reports on this, suggesting the year
1421 as the date of He's crew's arrival on the American continent and also
deducing that the world maps made by the Chinese were the reference points
for subsequent European expeditions such as those of Christopher Columbus,
Ferdinand Magellan, Vasco da Gama and James Cook(14) .Chinese collector Liu
Gang vindicated this possibility by publicly presenting a world map from 1763,
which was itself a copy of one made in 1418 and which he purchased from
another collector in Shanghai in 2001. The famous 1513 map owned by Turkish
explorer Paris Reís has also raised a lot of questions among the scientific
community today because it shows the Antarctic region perfectly delineated,
which was presumed to have only been fully mapped by Europeans until the
19th century AD. The different groups that arrived on the American continent
before Columbus can be listed and summarised in broad terms:
-Hyperborean myths refer to the passage of a group of Cro-Magnon men after
the destruction of Atlantis. They were responsible for building and directing the
gigantic stone constructions on the continent. After fulfilling their mission, they
mysteriously disappeared.
- In the 11th century BC, remnants of the Trojans escaped their destruction.
According to Jacques de Mahieu, traces have been found that they settled in
the central region of South America. He even suggests that the Guayaki Indians
of Paraguay are their current mestizo and very distant descendants.
- During the first millennium BC, the Phoenicians made various expeditions to
the American continent, sometimes under their own direction and initiative, and
at other times under the commission and direction of Egyptian pharaohs,
Hebrew kings and Persian kings. (From the 6th century BC, Phoenicia was
incorporated into the growing Persian Empire by King Cyrus).
-According to the Akakor chronicle, in the 5th century AD, a group belonging to
the Goths entered South America and lived for two centuries with the Indians of
this city settled in the depths of the Amazon jungle.
-From the 8th and 9th centuries AD, groups of Druids and Irish Celts possibly
founded small communities in Central America, Florida, and parts of Brazil and
South America.
-In the 10th century AD, groups of Vikings crossed the entire continent from
north-western Canada through Central America, finally settling in the 11th
century AD as a co-ruling caste of the Tiahuanaco civilisation, surely
remembering or rethinking that connection between the
14MENZIEN, GAVIN, “1421, The year China discovered the world”. London: Bantam Book, 2002-2003.uling caste of the Tiahuanaco civilisation, surely
remembering or rethinking that connection between the
14MENZIEN, GAVIN, “1421, The year China discovered the world”. London: Bantam Book, 2002-2003.

--- PAGE BREAK ---18
4
ancient Tiahuanaco with the legendary Atlantis.

After the decline of that
civilisation, some descendants of its royal caste headed north, where they
founded the Inca Empire in the 13th century AD.

-In the 12th and 13th centuries AD contingents of Knights Templar arrived from
the port of La Rochelle in France.

Initially, they maintained a supply of silver
from America, which would be introduced and traded in Europe.

Subsequently,
they developed an escape route to America due to the persecution they
suffered at the hands of the Catholic Church at the beginning of the 14th
century AD.

Likewise, a knightly order in Portugal, repository of Templar
descendants and secrets, served as a point of support for Christopher
Columbus in his maritime ventures to 'discover' America, as this order provided
him with maps already made by Templar navigators who had circumnavigated
the American continent in previous centuries.

In reality, that war of Atlantis would not have ended completely, so when
reviewing history, or at least the proposed historical "revisionism," one must
intuit which faction of the gods the different groups or peoples who arrived on
the American continent might belong to or follow, whether they developed a
priestly evangelising and/or commercial strategy or, on the contrary, a strategy
governed by values such as honour and warrior courage, which also involved
instruction a n d the exchange of wisdom.

In this way, it can be deduced that the first strategy would include the
Phoenicians, Druids and Templars who arrived on the continent, without
forgetting, of course, the "discovery" made by Columbus and the arrival of the
Catholic conquerors.

The second strategy would include the Cro-Magnons,
Trojans, Goths a n d Vikings, whose small endogamous elites not only co-led
the American civilisations but also handed down to them the secrets of warfare
tactics, agricultural techniques and stone construction.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In this way, it can be deduced that the first strategy would include the
Phoenicians, Druids and Templars who arrived on the continent, without
forgetting, of course, the "discovery" made by Columbus and the arrival of the
Catholic conquerors. The second strategy would include the Cro-Magnons,
Trojans, Goths a n d Vikings, whose small endogamous elites not only co-led
the American civilisations but also handed down to them the secrets of warfare
tactics, agricultural techniques and stone construction. It would seem that these different groups pursued each other's traces at
different times and instances when they arrived on the American continent,
perhaps appropriating or distorting the evidence, vestiges and legends left
behind by the native indigenous groups. However, it is quite clear that runic
wisdom belonged to and was spread mainly by the groups participating in the
warrior and agricultural strategy. The primordial runic wisdom comes from Atlantis in terms of being true
transcendent knowledge, beyond being seen as a form or disguise represented
in some simple and profane "alphabet". Since the Bronze Age, the purity and
splendour of that wisdom has been maintained to a certain degree by the elites
of initiates in different cultures such as the Iberians, Tartessians, Celts,
Mycenaeans, Achaeans, Trojans, Pelasgians, Etruscans, Dorians, Ionians and
Romans. But despite the subsequent dissolution and decline of those cultures,
the runes were preserved and completely revitalised by the Germanic, Gothic,
Saxon and Viking races, and some of the runic symbols were also preserved by
the upper castes of various Mesoamerican and Asian civilisations.

--- PAGE BREAK ---evitalised by the Germanic, Gothic,
Saxon and Viking races, and some of the runic symbols were also preserved by
the upper castes of various Mesoamerican and Asian civilisations.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

185
BOCHICA, VIRACOCHA AND QUETZALCOÁTL
Apart from the nebulous terrain of history and archaeology, we have another
source that attests to the arrival of the White Gods on the continent in the
different myths and cosmogonies of the peoples called "indigenous" throughout
the continent. The stories about Quetzacoátl among the Aztecs, Kukulkán
among the Mayans, and Viracocha in Tiahuanaco and among the Incas are
already well known.
Viracocha is said to have been the founder of the Inca civilisation and to have
risen from the depths of Lake Titicaca to bring light in times of darkness. He was
a god of storms and lightning and was represented with a crown symbolising the
sun. His eyes could also be shown with tears representing rain. It is also said
that Viracocha disappeared into the Pacific Ocean to return in times of great
crisis.
It is important to note an aspect that is sometimes attributed to Viracocha, which
is that he created the world several times and, due to its imperfections, decided
to destroy it with water in order to rebuild it. Therefore, we would see here a
transposition of the demiurge, creator of the material world, as described by the
Gnostics.
It is also feasible that in pre-Columbian civilisations, the struggle between the
gods was accentuated, or rather, the division of the "white gods" into two
camps. In fact, the Akakor chronicle indicates that Viracocha was actually a
traitorous guide of the Ugha Mongulala civilisation (the only originally white
Indians on the continent) and that he rebelled and separated from them to found
the Inca civilisation.
In a lecture based on the early chronicles of the Indies, Italian historian Luigi
Guarnieri Caló refers to the fact that the Spanish conquistadors found native
elements and cults with many similarities to those of Christian preachers. Caló
also recalled the god Viracocha as the creator who emerged from the waters of
Lake Titicaca, dictated rules for men, and preached charity and love (1).
At the Second Council of Lima, which ended in 1568, it was decided not to
eliminate the theory of pre-Hispanic evangelisation of the Indians because they
showed a very good disposition towards the Catholic Church, a situation that
was confirmed in 1638 by the comments of the Augustinian Antonio de la
Calancha, who was living in Peru at the time.
1  Referred to in the article "Chronicles of Peru in Italy and the dissemination of American themes at the
end of the 16th century", which is part of the book "Building Histories, Contributions to Hispanic American
history from the chronicles" pp. 227 to 241. Editors: Liliana Regalado de Hurtado and Hidefuji Someda.
Pontifical Catholic University of Peru and Osaka State University. 2005ns to Hispanic American
history from the chronicles" pp. 227 to 241. Editors: Liliana Regalado de Hurtado and Hidefuji Someda.
Pontifical Catholic University of Peru and Osaka State University. 2005

--- PAGE BREAK ---18
6
This god or evangelising guide was also called Pachayachachi Viracocha, a
term that means creator of all things.

It is said that after creating a world of
darkness, he also formed a race of giants who did not obey or respect him.

After
sinking them with a flood (the universal flood?

The sinking of Atlantis?),
Viracocha created men in his own image and likeness and illuminated the world
with the sun, moon and stars.

He also created plants and animals and finally
o r d e r e d men to serve him with offerings.

If this was not respected, men
would suffer the consequences.

When the precept was broken, Viracocha became enraged and cursed men,
turning some of them into stone and also causing a flood called Pachacuti, a
term that means 'water that pours over the earth' (another reference to a
universal flood?).

It rained for 60 days and nights, and only the remains of some
men turned to stone were left, represented by the ruins of Pucará, 60 leagues
from Cuzco.

Viracochan was sent as God's representative and tried to instruct men, but
when they mocked his tattered robe, he decided to show his fury and punish
them by sending volcanic fire or turning them to stone.

Viracochan created the
city of Cuzco to be occupied by the long-eared Incas led by Manco Capac and
Mama Ocllo.

In another context, the city of Teotihuacan developed between the 3rd and 8th
centuries AD, where symbolism surrounding Quetzalcoatl as the god of
vegetation, possibly also related to Tlaloc, the god of rain, developed.

However,
it was with the Toltecs (9th to 12th centuries AD) that a clear Hyperborean trace
can be found in the myth of the god Quetzalcoatl, as he was associated with
Venus, the so-called Morning and Evening Star.

to 12th century AD) that a clear
Hyperborean trace is found in the myth of the god Quetzalcoatl, as he was
related to Venus, the so-called Morning and Evening Star.--- PAGE BREAK ---

However,
it was with the Toltecs (9th to 12th centuries AD) that a clear Hyperborean trace
can be found in the myth of the god Quetzalcoatl, as he was associated with
Venus, the so-called Morning and Evening Star. to 12th century AD) that a clear
Hyperborean trace is found in the myth of the god Quetzalcoatl, as he was
related to Venus, the so-called Morning and Evening Star. Furthermore,
Quetzalcoatl and Venus were invoked mainly in the city of Tula (a clear
reference to Hyperborean Thule, the primordial polar island-continent inhabited
by gods). However, in a later period, the Aztecs modified the symbolism of the
god by relating him to the patron saint of priests and protector of artisans. Another Toltec myth concerning the birth of the god Quetzalcoatl is also
interesting: it is said that at birth he was given the name Topiltzin (our prince)
and that his mother Chimalman (reclining shield) conceived him because she
swallowed a "green stone", a clear reference to the grail or stone of Venus of
the Hyperboreans. In another version of the myth, it is said that Quetzalcoatl's mother died in
childbirth and that he was raised by his grandparents. After a while, he decided
to go to his father Camaxtli, but he suffered the envy of his brothers, who tried
to kill him by burning him tied to a rock, but he escaped through a hole in the
stone. Even after killing their father, the brothers tried again to murder
Quetzalcoatl by making him believe that his father had been transformed into a
rock and that he had to make offerings of wild animals such as eagles or lions,
which he had to hunt, risking his life.

--- PAGE BREAK ---187
Finally, Quetzalcoatl climbed a tree (it is also said that he climbed the rock) and
killed all his brothers with arrows.

He then stayed for a few days in a village
called Tollantzinco before leaving for Tollan (another reference to Hyperborean
Thule).Another version also says that Quetzalcoatl's parents were the great
warrior Mixcoatl and the woman Chimalman.

After giving birth, the woman
suffered great distress for four days until she finally died.

Quetzalcoatl was
raised by the goddess Cihuacoatl-Quilazti until he became a great warrior.

From the 10th century AD onwards, the Toltecs included the myth of
Tezcatlipoca (lord of the smoking mirror, judge of sinners and humbler of the
proud), who is said to have corrupted Quetzalcoatl by introducing him to the
vices of drunkenness and hedonism.

Tezcatlipoca was also associated with
war, death, night winds and darkness, as well as being seen as Quetzalcoatl's
adversary.

His symbolism was also strongly connected to the jaguar and to
Tepeyollotli (heart of the mountain).

Tezcatlipoca made Quetzalcoatl drunk with pulque (a sacred drink) so that he
would sleep with his sister.

When he awoke and realised his mistake, he was
ashamed and decided to leave the city.

However, another version of the myth
states that while Quetzalcoatl demanded peaceful tributes and sacrifices from
men, Tezcatlipoca demanded bloody tributes, which led to a confrontation
between the two that resulted in the departure of the former in 987(2)
.Quetzalcoatl descended into the divine waters, fasted for four days and
dressed in his finest clothes to immolate himself on a funeral pyre.

As this was
happening, birds emerged from the flames and his heart ascended to the
heavens to become the planet Venus(3) .In another version of the myth,
Quetzalcoatl embarks on a raft of snakes and heads east, promising to return to
bring back a golden age.--- PAGE BREAK ---

However, another version of the myth
states that while Quetzalcoatl demanded peaceful tributes and sacrifices from
men, Tezcatlipoca demanded bloody tributes, which led to a confrontation
between the two that resulted in the departure of the former in 987(2)
.Quetzalcoatl descended into the divine waters, fasted for four days and
dressed in his finest clothes to immolate himself on a funeral pyre. As this was
happening, birds emerged from the flames and his heart ascended to the
heavens to become the planet Venus(3) .In another version of the myth,
Quetzalcoatl embarks on a raft of snakes and heads east, promising to return to
bring back a golden age. This belief persisted until Emperor Moctezuma II, who
mistook the arrival of Hernán Cortés for the return of the white, bearded
Quetzalcoatl or the arrival of one of his relatives. In the Aztec culture, which reached its peak in the 15th century AD,
Tetzcatlipoca was considered one of the main gods and was offered bloody
sacrifices of the most handsome young men, who were taught to sing and play
the flute and were each given four beautiful young women representing four
goddesses during their last twenty days. Finally, on the last platform of the
temple, the officiating priest would open the young man's chest with a single
stroke of an obsidian knife to remove his heart. What is curious here is the
coincidence with the rituals of the Muisca culture, as a similar sacrifice was also
offered to the sun. 2  Here there is a curious similarity with the myth of Cain and Abel, due to the peaceful and bloody sacrifices of
both, as well as the forced retreat of the former. 3  It should also be remembered that in ancient Rome it was believed that when an emperor died, his Ka or
astral body turned into an eagle to fly to the world of the gods.

--- PAGE BREAK ---former. 3  It should also be remembered that in ancient Rome it was believed that when an emperor died, his Ka or
astral body turned into an eagle to fly to the world of the gods.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

18
8
Tezcatlipoca was the bringer of discord and war, but also of riches. In this we
see a complete reversal of values in Aztec civilisation compared to that of the
Toltecs, who did have Quetzalcoatl as their main god. The two divinities have
even been compared as protectors of two different ethnic groups, and their
struggle has been represented as a contrast between the two cultures.
Tezcatlipoca was obsessed with the destruction of the Toltecs and their centre,
Tula, the city named after Thule, the mythical home of the Hyperboreans at the
North Pole.
Quetzalcoatl was also the god of wind and war, who gave his name to many
kings but was supplanted by the priesthood of Tezcatlipoca until he was finally
defeated and expelled from Tula. Later, a group of Toltecs migrated to the
southeast, where they joined the Mayan civilisation of the 'New Empire' (7th to
16th centuries AD), influencing it in a remarkable way. There, Quetzalcoatl was
known by various names such as Kukulkán, god of the wind, god of life, Ce
acátl, the planet Venus, the twin gods (reminiscent of the Alcis twins in the
Germanic tribes?) and Tlahuizcalpantecuhtli. It is said that in 987 AD, the
"feathered serpent" Kukulcán arrived on the Yucatán Peninsula to establish a
new kingdom.
Quetzalcoatl has been compared to King Arthur, who also set sail on a raft to an
enchanted kingdom. Quetzalcoatl died while crossing the ocean on a serpent to
reach Mictlan. It is also said that he descended into the underworld to deceive
Mictlantecuhtli, the god of death, and then mixed the bones of the dead with his
blood and semen to create a new humanity.
The latter is reminiscent of what has already been mentioned in previous
chapters: the descent into the underworld and initiatory death to acquire
wisdom, as well as the mixing of alchemical-tantric elixirs (blood and semen) to
generate a transmutation, a new man. With the help of the dead (the deep
collective unconscious of one's own lineage), blood (the inner fire and the
memory of divine ancestors) and semen (the seed of fertility and generation
itself) are transmuted within man, overcoming or "deceiving" death to be reborn
as a Siddha with an incorruptible body of red diamond Vajra. The winged
serpent, the chrysalis that becomes a butterfly, the Dagaz rune that refers to
enlightenment and rebirth.
Ehecatl, the god of the wind that blows in all directions, is also related to
Quetzalcoatl and was represented with two masks through which the wind
blows, a shell, the mask of the wind trumpet, and the quetzal with green tail
feathers.
The Maya called Venus Chkak 'ek and related the movements of its phases to
the sacred Tzolkin calendar and the cycles they called Hab-tum, which
represented different phases of death and rebirth.s.
The Maya called Venus Chkak 'ek and related the movements of its phases to
the sacred Tzolkin calendar and the cycles they called Hab-tum, which
represented different phases of death and rebirth.

--- PAGE BREAK ---189
On the other hand, no references to eternity were found in Aztec beliefs.

They
only spoke of the five ages in which the world is created and destroyed.

In the
first age, which was preceded by Tezcatlipoca, the giants were devoured by
jaguars (a reference similar to the giants sunk by the Inca creator Viracocha).

The second age ended with destruction caused by hurricanes, and men were
turned into monkeys.

The third age ended with volcanic rains, and humans were
turned into turkeys, dogs, and birds.

The fourth age ended with floods, and men
were transformed into fish.

The fifth age is about to end.

As can be seen in
Aztec cosmogony, man is equated with animal evolution without reference to his
eternal spiritual part.

The Mexicas (Aztecs) came from Aztlán (also referred to as an enchanted
island) and crossed the regions of Jalisco and Guanajuato during the 10th to
11th centuries AD.

They were hunters and fishermen, and according to myth,
the god Huitzilopochtli, son of Coatlicue, was born in Coatepec (northeastern
valley of Mexico).

Coatlicue was a sorcerer who worshipped Tezcatlipoca, who
was their leader and most revered god.

Here we see how, from the very
beginning, the Aztecs associated their lineage with Tezcatlipoca, the enemy god
of Quetzalcoatl.

Another priest-leader they had was Tenoch, who gave
Tenochtitlán its name.

In 1163 AD, the Aztecs arrived in Tula, city of the Toltecs, and we can see the
precise moment that various myths refer to as the infiltration of Tezcatlipoca
among the ethnic group that was loyal to Quetzalcoatl.

From that moment on,
the Aztecs travelled through various regions until, in 1276 AD, they settled
temporarily in Chapultepec and finally, near Mexicatzingo, founded Tenochtitlán
in 1345 AD.

They had to wander through so many regions due to the hostility of
all the neighbouring inhabitants, who considered them dangerous because they
performed cruel human sacrifices and stole married women.--- PAGE BREAK ---

From that moment on,
the Aztecs travelled through various regions until, in 1276 AD, they settled
temporarily in Chapultepec and finally, near Mexicatzingo, founded Tenochtitlán
in 1345 AD. They had to wander through so many regions due to the hostility of
all the neighbouring inhabitants, who considered them dangerous because they
performed cruel human sacrifices and stole married women. In any case, the
Aztecs also took the memory of Quetzalcoatl with them, and he appears
frequently in the augural codes of the 260-day calendar known as Tonalpoualli. Changing now to a different region and socio-cultural context, among the
Muisca peoples who inhabited the country now known as Colombia, the
equivalent of this wise white hero is found in the legend of Bochica, who is said
to have been an adult man with white skin, a white beard, blue eyes, dressed in
a blanket that covered him to his feet, and who arrived from the east
accompanied by a woman who was also white. It is said that Bochica taught the
Indians the main virtues, how to build houses, sow the land, make crafts and
weave blankets. But apparently his wife did not get along with the Indians and
flooded the region known as the Sabana de Bogotá. The Indians went to ask
Bochica for help, who with a golden rod turned his wife into an owl and from the
hills touched the rocks from which birds flew and waters came out that would
form the small waterfall currently known as the Tequendama Falls in the
department of Cundinamarca.

--- PAGE BREAK ---19
0
However, over time, many Indians showed themselves to be ungrateful to
Bochica, so he decided to retreat through the rainbow 4, where Bochica can be
seen when viewed from the Tequendama Falls.

A variation of the myth indicates that Bochica came from the plains to the towns
of Bosa and Soacha, where he was called Chimizagua (messenger of
Chiminigagua, supreme god of light and all other things).

He then passed
through the towns of Fontibón, Serrezuela, and Cota, finally disappearing into
the Sugamoxi River (Sogamoso)5.

After Bochica's departure, a woman named
Chie began to preach a contrary doctrine among the Indians, inciting them to
hedonism and gambling, so Bochica returned to turn her into an owl and made
her able to walk only at night.

Some time later, the Muiscas worshipped the god Chibchacum, but when they
began to offend him, the god decided to punish them by flooding their lands with
the Sopo and Tibitó rivers.

The desperate Indians called on Bochica to help
them, which he did, using his golden rod to open a mountain range through
which the waters could flow and the land could be freed.

At the Tequendama Falls, he opened two rocks through which the river began
to flow, but as the rod was thin, the opening was not very large, so the winter
waters still overflow the river, forcing the Indians to make offerings and
sacrifices when the rainbow appears.

Bochica, angry with Chibchacum, forced
him to carry on his shoulders all the earth now held by two guacayanes, which
is why the earth trembles as he shifts the weight from one shoulder to the other
to ease the burden on Chibchacum.

Another legend also indicates that when the lands began to flood, Bochica,
whom the Indians referred to as an incorporeal being, was in Sogamoso, where
there was a temple dedicated to the sun.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bochica, angry with Chibchacum, forced
him to carry on his shoulders all the earth now held by two guacayanes, which
is why the earth trembles as he shifts the weight from one shoulder to the other
to ease the burden on Chibchacum. Another legend also indicates that when the lands began to flood, Bochica,
whom the Indians referred to as an incorporeal being, was in Sogamoso, where
there was a temple dedicated to the sun. The zipa (chieftain-ruler of the
Muiscas) decided to look for him and, upon finding him, convinced him to help
him, even though the old white man spoke a different language from that of the
natives. Bochica retired to his room and began to pray to his God, whom he
said was the only God. Then they headed southwest to the end of the Bogotá
Savannah, but among the waters that gathered in a circle of rocks, Bochica took
out a stick with which he broke the stones from which the water would spill over
the walls. Amidst enormous noises, a 150-metre-high waterfall of foam was
formed, now known as "El salto del Tequendama" (the Tequendama Falls),
which connects the upper and lower lands. Some time later, Bochica
disappeared silently. In the myth of Bochica, we see a god-teacher-civiliser similar to Quetzalcoatl
and Viracocha, but his figure lacks the Hyperborean symbolism that the teacher
of the Toltec/Mayan culture had. Instead, he coincides with the element of
alicaida external solar worship present in the
4  Symbol similar to that of the Norse Bïfrost bridge connecting the world of humans with the world of gods
5  The symbol of the river (and also the lake) is seen as the waters of dissolution that give way to the world
of the dead and the end of a stage or life in the material world. The town of Sogamoso was also home to
the Muisca temple dedicated to the worship of the Sun.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ve way to the world
of the dead and the end of a stage or life in the material world. The town of Sogamoso was also home to
the Muisca temple dedicated to the worship of the Sun.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

191
latest versions of the myth referring to the Inca Viracocha as well as
Viracochan's role as the "envoy" of the creator god (the original myth of
Viracocha had different nuances). It is curious that another version of the myth
indicates that Bochica claimed to pray to a single God who was "the only one,"
so he could be taken as the representative of a God analogous to that of Judeo-
Christianity.
Equally noteworthy is the repulsion of the woman Chie and her teachings, as we
know that the monotheistic God likes to present himself as a solitary male to the
detriment of the company of a woman. Even Bochica initially had a companion,
but she ended up being turned into a nocturnal owl, a bird of prey similar to the
eagle owl, which represents hidden wisdom and which in other contexts has
been shown to be a pet of the goddess Athena.
In other myths, the Muiscas also spoke of how thousands of years ago humans
had two heads, four arms and four legs6. One day, the gods decided to
separate them into two beings, but unexpectedly, men and women began to
search for each other because they felt incomplete, and their entire lives began
to revolve around the incessant search for that other half that they lacked and
that complemented both parts.
We thus have another reference to the myth of the primordial androgyne, which
is found in many cultures and which was divided into two parts by a strategy of
the gods of creation who apparently did not measure the consequences of their
actions, since from that moment on, unexpectedly, both men and women would
not adapt to their new incomplete state and would unconsciously decide to seek
to return to their primordial state. It seems as if the creation gods-devas (or, in
short, the different masks of the God referred to as "the one" as well as being
the creator of the material world) were either somewhat incompetent and unable
to deduce the scope of their ideas, or enjoyed experimenting with humans as if
they were mere puppets or beings that are cultivated according to how the
harvest works in an era or on a dimensional plane.
In any case, in the final chapter of this writing, we will see that, by one means or
another, the Muiscas did come into contact or were close at some point to a
group of men or Siddhas who had superior runic knowledge that reflected the
forces of the eternal and infinite.
6  This is also reminiscent of some representations of gods and goddesses from the Hindu pantheon with eight
limbs.ad superior runic knowledge that reflected the
forces of the eternal and infinite.
6  This is also reminiscent of some representations of gods and goddesses from the Hindu pantheon with eight
limbs.

--- PAGE BREAK ---19
2
EL DORADO AND THE CITY OF THE CAESARS
The legend of El Dorado, spread throughout the Colombian Andes during the
Spanish conquest, refers to the symbol of a marvellous city where the streets
were paved with gold, as this metal was unlimited in that place and had no
commercial or utilitarian value, but rather a sacred and spiritual one.

The
Spanish conquistadors searched desperately for this legendary city, attracted
only by the economic benefits that its discovery could bring them.

Many died in
this fruitless attempt, as they had to venture into the middle of the jungle in
inhospitable conditions that were unknown to them.

The legend began in 1530
when the Spaniard Gonzalo Jiménez de Quesada conquered the territory of the
Colombian Andes and its inhabitants, the Muiscas, whose stories and rituals
were recounted to the men of the conquistador Sebastián de Belalcázar, who
brought the legend of the "golden man" and "the empire of the golden king" to
Quito.

It was Belalcázar who led a search for the city in southwestern Colombia
in 1535.

In the same year, the German chronicler and conquistador Nicolás de
Federmann also led an expedition.

In 1536, after completely defeating the
Muiscas, Jiménez de Quesada established Bogotá (Bacatá for the indigenous
people) as the capital of the new kingdom of Granada.

However, both
Belalcázar and Federmann had claimed the same lands as their own, so the
three decided to reconcile with an agreement in 1539, and Quesada convinced
the other two to return to Spain that same year, even though the legal battles
between them were just beginning.

In 1541, other conquistadors such as Francisco de Orellana and Gonzalo
Pizarro also undertook unsuccessful ventures to find this city in the region now
known as the Amazon.

The former would return to Quito some time later, and
the latter would find and name the Amazon River after the indigenous warrior
women he encountered along the way.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In 1541, other conquistadors such as Francisco de Orellana and Gonzalo
Pizarro also undertook unsuccessful ventures to find this city in the region now
known as the Amazon. The former would return to Quito some time later, and
the latter would find and name the Amazon River after the indigenous warrior
women he encountered along the way. In the territory of Omagua, which is also
part of the Amazon, Felipe de Utre searched for the legendary kingdom that
same year. The last famous search for El Dorado was carried out by the English
explorer Walter Raleigh in 1595. From the region he himself named Guyana, he
set off inland along the Orinoco River, but his results were the same as those of
his predecessors: he found a few scattered gold objects and tools, but no clues
about the king or the golden city. In the 20th century, Ronald Stevenson, a Chilean living in the city of Manaus in
Brazil, reported a discovery to a local newspaper. The researcher claimed to
have found an Inca trail from Ecuador to the Guianas, with traces of Inca
clothing and stones with Andean-style inscriptions, and also claimed that the
indigenous inhabitants of the region spoke a language similar to Quechua and
were similar in appearance to the Andean natives. All of this could indicate the
location of a possible site that once served as a "gateway" to the city of El
Dorado and could also suggest the strategic displacement of certain groups
among the peoples of the Colombian Andes during the conquest.

--- PAGE BREAK ---193
It is no coincidence that this discovery came about in that part of Brazil, as it is
well known that the English explorer Percy Harrison Fawcett allegedly
disappeared without a trace in the early 20th century while searching for the
legendary lost city of Z, a kingdom that was recreated in the legends of the
indigenous people of that region.

Likewise, the plot of the mysterious book "The
Chronicle of Akakor" takes place in that region, and its content also addresses
the eternal drama of the war between two sides or factions of gods (also called
siddhas or angels) and the ancient and in many cases forgotten civilisations that
have been under their tutelage.

Similarly, the book refers to underground cities
hidden in the interior of the earth or in dimensional folds, to which the ruling
elites of those ancient cultures have fled after various planetary catastrophes
caused by conflict.

These cities have also served as an impregnable refuge that
cannot be reached or glimpsed by modern men with their materialistic and
rationalistic science.

The Muisca culture was established in the vicinity of the eastern Colombian
mountain range and in the departments now known as Cundinamarca, Boyacá
and part of Santander.

Their structure always involved a dispute between two
rulers from different centres: the Zipa of Bacatá and the Zaque of Hunsa (now
called Tunja).

Although they worshipped both the sun and the moon, the
ceremonial centre of the Zipa was located in the town of Chía, where there was
a temple dedicated to the Moon Goddess, while the ceremonial centre of the
Zaque was located in the town of Sogamoso, where there was a temple
dedicated to the Sun God.

This culture was mainly dedicated to agriculture,
goldsmithing, salt mining, worship and the study of the stars, and historically
they have been considered very similar to the Incas.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Although they worshipped both the sun and the moon, the
ceremonial centre of the Zipa was located in the town of Chía, where there was
a temple dedicated to the Moon Goddess, while the ceremonial centre of the
Zaque was located in the town of Sogamoso, where there was a temple
dedicated to the Sun God. This culture was mainly dedicated to agriculture,
goldsmithing, salt mining, worship and the study of the stars, and historically
they have been considered very similar to the Incas. As for the legend of the city of El Dorado in the Colombian Andes, Juan
Rodríguez Freyle referred in his chronicle of the Spanish conquest to the fact
that around the Guatavita lagoon (located 50 km north of the city of Bogotá), a
priest-sheikh presided over a ceremony in which the members of the Muisca
people, crowned with gold and feathers, watched as the chieftain heir to the
throne was stripped naked and completely sprinkled with gold dust, which stuck
to his body by means of a sticky substance similar to turpentine. The future
sovereign stood in the middle of a raft made of reeds, and at his feet were
placed enormous quantities of gold and emeralds. The same procedure was
followed with four other chiefs who, adorned with feathers, bracelets, and gold
earrings, surrounded the heir. In the middle of the lagoon, they followed him in
the act of throwing the offerings at their feet into the water, which were directed
towards Bachué, the goddess of the waters, and the various protective gods. The sovereign also dived into the lagoon and bathed in it, fulfilling an important
part of the ritual. Once the ceremony was over, the indigenous people from the
outskirts of the lagoon began dances and songs that lasted for three days,
during which they celebrated and recognised the new Zipa, heir to the tradition
of Nemequene, the legendary first legislator of the people.

--- PAGE BREAK ---19
4
These rituals were also performed by other Muisca groups in different lagoons
in the department, such as Siecha, Ubaque and Fúneque, as evidenced by the
discovery of the famous piece of goldwork known as the Pasca raft, found near
the village of the same name and currently on display at the Gold Museum in
Bogotá.

Based on these observations by chroniclers, the Spanish conquistadors
decided to search the bottom of the region's lakes for all the gold deposited by
the indigenous people in their rituals.

In 1580, Antonio de Sepúlveda and 6,000
Indians under his command unsuccessfully attempted to drain the Guatavita
lagoon in its entirety, managing only to lower its level by 20 metres and causing
the death of numerous diggers when the canal used to carry out the operation
collapsed.

To this day, this can be seen in the large trench on one side of the
lagoon.

However, it is important to note that in the 16th century AD there was
confusion and mixing between two mythical-literary elements: on the one hand,
the attested indigenous rituals of coronation of their sovereigns and, on the
other hand, the legend of the majestic city of gold "El Dorado", which is actually
one of the many names given to the "hidden cities" of primordial traditions from
where the gods influence the destiny of earthly man.

Among the Spanish conquistadors, the objective and meaning of their quest
was not clear or uniform.

The vast majority were hungry only for the gold
possessed by the indigenous Americans, while others did not disdain the
possibility of finding the legendary city in addition to the precious metal.

and
finally, a very small group of initiates and sages knew that it was very possible
to find a portal, tunnel or passageway that would lead to the city of the gods.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The vast majority were hungry only for the gold
possessed by the indigenous Americans, while others did not disdain the
possibility of finding the legendary city in addition to the precious metal. and
finally, a very small group of initiates and sages knew that it was very possible
to find a portal, tunnel or passageway that would lead to the city of the gods. Although the motives and intentions of the conquerors differed, the legendary
city is "untraceable" to anyone who is not an initiate or who does not know a
code of runic and lithic signs (stone constructions such as walls, menhirs,
cromlechs and dolmens1 ) that suggest the location of a portal to that city, since
by means of a bridge, path, or underground tunnel reflected both outside and
inside the initiate from the space-time of material creation, one can access an
interdimensional crossing to a place that has a different time and space from
our plane but from which one can have some contact or influence on the world
we currently inhabit. Likewise, crossings between planes to other dimensions
that are very parallel and analogous to ours can be found in lagoons, waterfalls,
caves, mountain slopes, and in the space between a pair of trees or stones
arranged within a forest. 1Menhir: an elongated stone set vertically in the ground, sometimes anthropomorphic in shape. It was
used as a kind of "acupuncture needle" for the currents and channels (nadis) of telluric energy. Cromlech:
A group of menhirs placed in a circular or elliptical shape in a double or triple arrangement. Dolmen: A
megalithic construction consisting of a mound formed by two vertical slabs driven into the ground and a
vertical slab above them.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ape in a double or triple arrangement. Dolmen: A
megalithic construction consisting of a mound formed by two vertical slabs driven into the ground and a
vertical slab above them.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

195
For all the above reasons, access to a hidden city, apart from being heavily
guarded and monitored, is also forbidden to anyone who cannot observe from
their spirit the runic signs that frame the entrances or portals and likewise
whose inner vibration is not in accordance and "attuned" to the forces and
energies of that city.
From all this, it is ridiculous to think that the vast majority of Spanish
conquerors, influenced and guided by a nascent materialistic ideology, could
even approach or glimpse any sign relating to any of the portals or paths, both
material and spiritual, created and uncreated, that lead to the city of the gods.
In this sense, the city of El Dorado is analogous to the other legendary cities
referred to in the legends of the different indigenous peoples of South America,
such as the city of the Caesars, also known as Trapananda or Elelín, which is
supposed to be located somewhere in the mountain range between Argentina
and Chile in Patagonia.
This legend had different origins. On the one hand, there was talk of a rich city
founded in Patagonia by survivors and mutineers from the unsuccessful
expeditions to claim the Strait of Magellan carried out by Simón de Alcazaba
and the Bishop of Plasencia in 1540. Reference was also made to an expedition
by the Spaniard Francisco César to the mountains of Córdoba in the vicinity of
the Diaguitas and Comechingones cultures, where the captain and his men
claimed to have seen a very rich land abundant in jewels and metals.
Likewise, the chronicler Miguel de Olaverría said that a group of Inca subjects
who lived near the Maule River, upon being besieged by the Mapuches and
learning that their king was imprisoned by the Spanish, decided to cross the
mountain range and, according to them, head towards the city of the Caesars.
Spanish captain Diego de Rojas organised an expedition in 1543 to find the city
of the Caesars. From southern Peru, he entered what is now the province of
Santiago del Estero in Argentina. His final objective was a rich region located
between Chile and the Río de la Plata, but his mission was unsuccessful and in
1544 he died in combat against a tribe of the Juríes.
In 1551, Francisco de Villagra also sent a detachment from the Cuyo Valley to
Patagonia to find the city, but all he found were reports of Spanish refugees in
the pampas living peacefully with the Indians. In 1670, the priest Nicolás
Mascardi settled in Chile to evangelise the Poyas, and his goal upon completing
this task was to go to the city of the Caesars, but ironically, this was impossible
because he was killed by the same indigenous people three years later.ise the Poyas, and his goal upon completing
this task was to go to the city of the Caesars, but ironically, this was impossible
because he was killed by the same indigenous people three years later.

--- PAGE BREAK ---is goal upon completing
this task was to go to the city of the Caesars, but ironically, this was impossible
because he was killed by the same indigenous people three years later.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

19
6
The most striking legend is that of a city of the Caesars founded by survivors of
the Mapuche attacks on the cities of Valdivia, Villarrica and Osorno at the end of
the 16th century AD in what is now the Lake District of Chile. Because of this,
the belief spread that a first city of the Caesars (like El Dorado) also existed on
a lagoon called Puyequé (now Lake Puyehue) and that its destruction caused
its survivors to migrate to the eastern pampas, where they would re-found the
city.
El Dorado is also analogous to Paititi, a city with similar characteristics that is
believed to be lost somewhere east of the Andes, between the jungle of south-
eastern Peru and northern Bolivia and the Acre region in south-western Brazil. It
is said that Paititi served as a refuge for the Incas after the Spanish conquest,
and even the aforementioned Fawcett referred to it as the same lost city of Z,
only he searched for it further east, in the region near the Xingu River.
In the legend, after founding the city of Cuzco, the hero Inkarri headed for the
Pantiacolla jungle to take refuge in the city of Paititi. Other researchers suggest
that the city is located between the jungles and mountains of southeastern Peru
and in the current department of Madre de Dios. Curiously, the city has also
been associated with some of the valleys included in the so-called "Manú
National Park" and also with the vicinity of Cerro Atayala and the places called
"Pyramids of Paratoari," which are actually natural geological formations.
Strangely, at the beginning of the 21st century AD, an Italian archaeologist
named Mario Polia claimed to have found in the Jesuit archives an expedition
made around 1600 AD in which a missionary named Andrea López found in the
middle of the deep jungle a city rich in gold and silver near a waterfall that the
natives called Paititi2. From this, it has been deduced that the Catholic Church,
based in the Vatican, has kept this secret hidden for all these years. However, if
this were true, it must be considered that this city must have been formed as a
"reflection" or place of irradiation of the immaterial Paititi, and the same would
apply to the different versions about possible settlements of the city of the
Caesars.
It is most likely that all the legends about legendary cities actually refer to a
single city and that the different places in the Americas where they have been
sought are access points or portals leading both to temporary shelters and to a
direct route to the same mythical place, known by different names depending on
each culture or people.
2Referred to in "The Andean religious worldview in the unpublished documents of the Roman archive of
the Society of Jesus 1581-1752". Pontifical Catholic University of Peru. Published by Fondo Editorial Lima,
Peru, 1999Andean religious worldview in the unpublished documents of the Roman archive of
the Society of Jesus 1581-1752". Pontifical Catholic University of Peru. Published by Fondo Editorial Lima,
Peru, 1999

--- PAGE BREAK ---197
However, it is very important to note that if we are guided by various esoteric
books that have been published in the last century, we should actually refer not
to one but to two cities that in Central Asian cultures have been called Agartha
and Shamballah.

Although some authors refer to them as the same city, others
refer to them as centres of influence of two groups of gods who are engaged in
eternal war and opposition.3.

While Agartha is governed by a chivalrous ethic
similar to that of the Kshatriya caste in India, Shamballah is governed by a
devotional priestly code of conduct similar to that of the Brahmin caste.

Agartha
strives for the liberation and spiritual self-deification of man in relation to the
conditioning of the natural order and the infinite cycles of eternal return in which
the evolution of humanity takes place.

Shamballah, on the other hand, seeks to
maintain and control this materialistic evolution, as well as seeking to unite
humanity passively and pantheistically with the cosmos.

It is not surprising to
find that the emissaries or adherents of one or the other group refer to their
opponents as demons and blame them for the current decline and degeneration
of humanity.

It is evident that cultures influenced by the Hyperborean myth, many of which in
different forms or 'garments' had access to eternal runic wisdom, have
responded mainly to the objectives and strategies of the city of Agartha.

Cro-
Magnon men, Tartessians, Achaeans, Trojans, Spartans, Romans, Goths,
Saxons, Vikings, as well as the Hittites, Kassites, Japanese Ainu, Hindu
Shivaists, and in some periods the Indo-Iranian, Mongolian, and Chinese elites,
among others, developed cultures based on honour and warrior and heroic
values, in addition to basing their social life on an agricultural organisation.It is evident that cultures influenced by the Hyperborean myth, many of which in
different forms or 'garments' had access to eternal runic wisdom, have
responded mainly to the objectives and strategies of the city of Agartha.

Cro-
Magnon men, Tartessians, Achaeans, Trojans, Spartans, Romans, Goths,
Saxons, Vikings, as well as the Hittites, Kassites, Japanese Ainu, Hindu
Shivaists, and in some periods the Indo-Iranian, Mongolian, and Chinese elites,
among others, developed cultures based on honour and warrior and heroic
values, in addition to basing their social life on an agricultural organisation.

Many of the early American cultures were guided by an elite that upheld these
principles, although they gradually allowed themselves to be infiltrated by
harmful external influences and slowly declined until, as already mentioned in
the previous chapter, they were finally abandoned by those leaders who
withdrew to the city of El Dorado or City of the Caesars, waiting for the
opportune moment to re-emerge in the sight of earthly men when the inevitable
critical moment of the end of the current historical cycle materialises.

In this
way, those civilisations, in their cycle of culmination, would end up succumbing
to the vicious circle of continuous and innumerable ritual sacrifices and the
degeneration of their structures and customs, so that what the Spanish
conquerors found was surely, above all, the remains of civilisations that had
known their period of glory several centuries earlier.

3Around 1870, French writers Ernst Renan and Louis Jacolliot referred to Agartha as Asgaard and
Asgartha.

Polish writer Ferdinand Ossendowski also refers to Agartha in his 1923 book Beasts, Men and
Gods.

At the end of the 19th century, Christian hermeticist Saint-Yves d'Alveydre claimed to have visited
Agartha during astral journeys, experiences that were recounted in his books Mission des souverains,
Mission des ouvriers and Mission des juifs.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Polish writer Ferdinand Ossendowski also refers to Agartha in his 1923 book Beasts, Men and
Gods. At the end of the 19th century, Christian hermeticist Saint-Yves d'Alveydre claimed to have visited
Agartha during astral journeys, experiences that were recounted in his books Mission des souverains,
Mission des ouvriers and Mission des juifs. Rene Güenon, in his book Le roi du monde, describes the
schism between the gods who formed Shamballah and Agartha after a catastrophe destroyed the
legendary civilisation of the Gobi Desert on the Chinese-Mongolian border.

--- PAGE BREAK ---scribes the
schism between the gods who formed Shamballah and Agartha after a catastrophe destroyed the
legendary civilisation of the Gobi Desert on the Chinese-Mongolian border.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

19
8
Of course, everything described above contradicts the linear view of history
according to which the progress of these pre-Columbian cultures was delayed,
although parallel to that of the civilisations of the Middle East and Europe, but it
is not in the interest of this writer to adhere to such an ideology or way of seeing
the unfolding of events.
The importance given in the last period of the Muisca culture to priest-sheiks as
sacrificers and mediators between humans and the gods shows the total
degradation and decline of the spirit that may have existed in earlier stages of
that people. Likewise, in these terminal stages, as in Aztec culture, ritual
sacrifices were common. Specifically, the Muisca sheiks slaughtered and
sacrificed their own children or those of enemy tribes defeated in battle as
offerings to please and appease the wrath of the sun god.
The ritual took place on a summit facing east, and the victim's blood was
collected in gourds, which were used to smear the first stones to receive the
sun's rays at dawn. The body was left exposed to the sun to be completely
burned.
In these rituals, we can clearly see the reasons why the heroic teachers or
'white gods' such as Quetzalcoatl-Kukulkán abandoned these American peoples
indefinitely, heading for the mythical hidden cities, although they promised to
return to appear before men when the time was right and perhaps when earthly
men would be worthy of this privilege.
Runic wisdom can generate this internal synchronisation with the Gods of the
hidden cities, and it is even possible for an initiate to achieve total transmutation
into a superman and a Siddha, overcoming all the obstacles and limitations
inherent in earthly man and the finite and conditioned material world. After this,
there will be no impediments for Lord Hades to open the gates of the Elysian
Fields to that warrior who has embarked on his journey and his struggle
following the voice of his blood and his Hyperborean ancestors.no impediments for Lord Hades to open the gates of the Elysian
Fields to that warrior who has embarked on his journey and his struggle
following the voice of his blood and his Hyperborean ancestors.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ord Hades to open the gates of the Elysian
Fields to that warrior who has embarked on his journey and his struggle
following the voice of his blood and his Hyperborean ancestors.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

199
THE STONES OF TUNJO IN FACATATIVÁ
At a distance of 1550 metres from the central square of the town of Facatativá
and 40 kilometres west of the city of Bogotá in Colombia are the so-called
"stones of Tunjo", rock shelters whose walls preserve pictographs (ideograms)
or pre-Columbian cave paintings made with indelible natural ink by the Muiscas
people, who occupied the central region of the country for millennia before the
arrival of the Spanish colonisers.
In the more than 60 murals that make up the archaeological park, some of the
paintings can be seen with a certain degree of clarity and preservation despite
the dissolution of the colours and cloudiness caused by the salts in the rocks
over the centuries, and they are also preserved despite the graffiti written on
most of them by unscrupulous tourists.
It is still unclear how this complex of gigantic metamorphic rocks was formed,
but it is presumed that due to internal pressure from the earth and the evolution
of the lithosphere, these rocks formed the floor of a lake that must have covered
what is now known as the Bogotá Savannah. However, it has been possible to
calculate that the different paintings are between 3,000 and 10,000 years old.
Another version indicates that the stones were actually the shores of the lake
and that various religious ceremonies of the Zipas (chiefs who were part of the
Muisca cultural complex) were performed on them. The rocks also served as a
fence or last refuge for the indigenous people during the conquest. Tisquesusa,
the last of the Zipas, was wounded by the soldiers of the conquistador Gonzalo
Jiménez de Quesada and was taken to the stones of Tunjo by his subjects,
where he finally died in 1538 AD.
A great similarity has also been found between the ideograms on the Tunjo
stones and others found in the Australian desert, which are estimated to have
been made 40,000 years ago by indigenous tribes in that country. This clearly
tells us about eternal symbols deciphered or taught in different ancient times
and in different regions of the planet by an elite of "white gods" who took on the
role of initiates, instructors and civilisers. All of this contradicts the idea that
these paintings are simply pseudo-artistic creations born of the imagination of a
specific culture, or a mere step in the evolution of writing from abstract
ideograms to geometric, phonetic and linguistic signs.gs are simply pseudo-artistic creations born of the imagination of a
specific culture, or a mere step in the evolution of writing from abstract
ideograms to geometric, phonetic and linguistic signs.

--- PAGE BREAK ---20
0
In many of the paintings, we find signs that clearly suggest or simulate the
shape of different runes.

Furthermore, the ideograms are not written in such a
way that they can be considered as part of the structure of a written or spoken
language, but rather each one represents a different initiatory and spiritual
symbol.

In this way, we also confirm here that the eternal runic language is
much more than a simple "dialect" or "alphabet", since in reality each of its signs
individually constitutes magical knowledge.

The Muisca culture, whose common
language was "Chibcha", created this type of pictography throughout the region
now known as the Cundiboyacense highlands.

The Spanish conquistadors
defined the Muiscas as a peaceful, agricultural and trading people of
approximately 600,000 inhabitants who lived among lagoons and had a special
reverence for water.

When the Spanish saw so many "cross" shapes among the
ideograms, they asked the indigenous people about their meaning, and they
replied that they had no idea what they were, much less who had written the
symbols in the past1 This clearly indicates two possibilities: the first is that these
symbols were painted by a people prior to the Muiscas, possibly before the
Atlantean catastrophe or immediately after it, arriving in the region after a forced
migration.

The second option is that these symbols were written in more recent
times by an elite group of white gods who were the only ones to know their true
magical and profound meaning.

Interestingly, writers such as Miguel Triana and
Louis Guisletti(2)have found similarities between the ideograms and some letters
of the Greek alphabet, which is no mere coincidence, since, as has been well
said, that Indo-European alphabet also had a common runic and eternal source
in its origins.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The second option is that these symbols were written in more recent
times by an elite group of white gods who were the only ones to know their true
magical and profound meaning. Interestingly, writers such as Miguel Triana and
Louis Guisletti(2)have found similarities between the ideograms and some letters
of the Greek alphabet, which is no mere coincidence, since, as has been well
said, that Indo-European alphabet also had a common runic and eternal source
in its origins. It does not matter that many current materialist "academics"
consider the theses of these two researchers to be ridiculous and subjective;
after all, we are in the midst of Kali-yuga, the dark age in which man has lost
contact with the gods and with the eternal. On the other hand, Colombian anthropologist Álvaro Botiva has established that
the substance used to make the pigments was ochre. The colour most
commonly used to make the paintings was red, which is not a mere
coincidence, as many European burial excavations have found skeletal remains
impregnated with red ochre, a colour that symbolises blood and vital force,
although symbolically it should rather be said to represent the fire of the blood of
the subtle body and spirit. In this way, ancient peoples gave their dead an
auxiliary force that would serve them on their postmortem journey, similar to
how the ancient Greeks left a coin on the forehead of the deceased so that they
could pay the ferryman Charon for the journey across the Styx to the island of
the dead. 1  Fact reported by Nancy Vera Martínez and Stella Bernal García in an article in Diners magazine, No. 210, September 1987, Bogotá, Colombia. 2  Theses referred to in Miguel Triana's books "La civilización Chibcha" (1921) and "El Jeroglífico Chibcha"
(1924). Also in Louis Guisletti's book "Los Mwiskas, Una gran civilización precolombina" Biblioteca de
autores colombianos, Bogota, 1954.

--- PAGE BREAK ---cha" (1921) and "El Jeroglífico Chibcha"
(1924). Also in Louis Guisletti's book "Los Mwiskas, Una gran civilización precolombina" Biblioteca de
autores colombianos, Bogota, 1954.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

201
Red is also the colour most commonly used in runic magic and Nordic magic,
and it also has a high Gnostic symbolism as it refers to the diamond body of the
immortal Red Vajra of a siddha. In Shivaist tantrism, it symbolises the menstrual
fluids in which women expel all the essence of the goddess Kali and which are
considered an elixir that promotes great magical power and immortality to the
astral body of men.
What has not been clearly deduced from the ideograms is what tools were used
to apply the paintings, as their fineness and precision make it unlikely that they
were simply done with the fingers.
This complex of stones is also known as the "Tunja stones", which has led to
the mistaken belief that they are located in the city of the same name, which is
the capital of the department of Boyacá, 120 km north-east of Bogotá.
Among the popular myths surrounding the stones is that of a priest belonging to
the Franciscan community of Quito who planned to build and erect a church in
that city. When the work was paralysed due to the depletion of stones in the
nearby quarries, one of the priests decided to sell his soul to the Devil in
exchange for him bringing him large stones to complete the construction. The
Devil found the largest stones in a quarry near the city of Tunja and decided to
assemble a group of strong demons and another group of agile demons to carry
the stones through the air during moonlit nights so that they would not be seen
during the day.
After making a great effort, the demons decided to rest near the town of
Facatativá, where one of the Devil's messengers informed him that the priest
had repented and decided to dissolve the pact because he had had a
premonitory dream about the construction of the church and had also left the
Franciscan community to join the Carthusians.
The enraged devil ordered his demons to leave the stones abandoned there in
the vicinity of the town of Facatativá. It is said that the devil's screams and
curses were so loud that their echoes can still be heard today in the region
surrounding the stones during stormy nights.
It is curious to note that several of the cyclopean stone complexes that exist in
the world have been attached to Judeo-Christianised legends in which it is said
that the stone blocks were placed or built in that place by a group of "demons".
This is also the case with the aqueducts of Segovia in Spain, attributed to the
Romans and referred to in popular Christian legends of the surrounding towns
as constructions made with the collaboration of infernal beings.ith the aqueducts of Segovia in Spain, attributed to the
Romans and referred to in popular Christian legends of the surrounding towns
as constructions made with the collaboration of infernal beings.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Segovia in Spain, attributed to the
Romans and referred to in popular Christian legends of the surrounding towns
as constructions made with the collaboration of infernal beings.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20
2
On the other hand, in the stones of Tunjo (also called "cercado de los Zipas")
we have an example consistent with the legend of El Dorado, the wonderful
hidden city where the indigenous people had unlimited amounts of gold and
other precious metals and stones. There has been popular speculation that
hidden treasures left behind by the indigenous people before the Spanish
conquest are located in the lower or underground part of the stones. In fact,
various historians claim that after defeating Tisquesusa, Gonzalo Jiménez de
Quesada hurried to the tomb among the stones of Tunjo where the Muisca
subjects had buried the last zipa, as it was believed that a great treasure was
also hidden in his tomb. However, when the body was exhumed, only a gold
cup was found.
It is obvious to mention once again the city of El Dorado and the treasure
hidden under the stones of Tunjo as a symbol of divine wisdom hidden and
safeguarded in the impregnable cities and refuges reached by the elites of pre-
Columbian American cultures through underground passages and portals of
space-time dislocationsand from which they plan to return to the surface when
the time is right and the current modern materialistic age comes to an abrupt
end. But it is well known that it is very difficult for the short-sighted, rationalist
modern man of today to understand or even intuit all this.
Below are photographs of different rocks that form part of the Tunjo stones, as
well as some pictograms resembling runic forms, found mainly on the front and
lower parts of the murals.
Curiously, the stones have been attributed with similarities to animal and
reptilian forms, frogs, snakes and crocodiles. The site perhaps recalls the
cyclopean atmosphere of the very primitive amphibious and dinosaurian eras of
planet Earth. It seems that the runic inscriptions were intended to control and
reinterpret the serpentine currents and lines that make up the primordial force
that sustains the material manifestation of the planet and the universe(3) .
All the photographs were taken together with two comrades on the path of runic
and eternal wisdom:
3  Geomancy is precisely the study of the telluric and subterranean magnetic lines that make up the subtle energy
fabric of planet Earth.r with two comrades on the path of runic
and eternal wisdom:
3  Geomancy is precisely the study of the telluric and subterranean magnetic lines that make up the subtle energy
fabric of planet Earth.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

203
Two different views of the Tunjo stones, rock formations that give the observer
the impression of not fitting in with the surrounding topography of their natural
environment in the province. It seems as if they were accidentally placed there
by a fortuitous or provoked supernatural event.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20
4
Two different shots of giant rocks within the Tunjo Stones complex. Their
shapes resemble a reptilian or serpentine head.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

205
Two different shots of giant rocks within the Tunjo Stones complex. In both, the
surface of a stone that resembles amphibious "skin" can be seen from above.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20
6
Above: a photo of a flat, smooth front wall on the lower level of one of the Tunjo
stones. Below, we see a detailed pictograph of the central part of the photo,
which shows a graphic shape similar to the Odal rune.
Curiously, the rectangular shape is demarcated by three lines, as if also
referring to the magical number of the trinity and the enclosure of the realms of
the body, soul and spirit, with the innermost rectangular figure corresponding to
the latter.

--- PAGE BREAK ---o
referring to the magical number of the trinity and the enclosure of the realms of
the body, soul and spirit, with the innermost rectangular figure corresponding to
the latter.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

207
Detail of a flat, smooth front wall on the lower level of one of the Tunjo stones.
In the pictograph, we first see an X-shaped body position similar to that of the
GEBO rune, which represents the contact between the divine world and the
earthly world.
You can also see the triple division of his limbs, simulating the ideogram of the
quadruple rune ELHAZ of magical protection. ELHAZ, in an ascending and
descending sense, symbolises the creative tension of polarity and the contrast
between the positive and negative currents that influence the transformation of
the three realms of being (spirit, soul and body).
Likewise, the lower part of the body shows the extension of the line of the
genitals to simulate the shape of the rune YR. Curiously, this rune is sometimes
also associated with a man urinating to fertilise the earth. If we count this line
together with another that would correspond to the man's head in the ideogram,
then the figure would derive from the rune HAGALL, which represents the whole
man.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20
8
On the left, we can see in detail an inscription in which a graphic form similar to
the rune HAGALL, the matrix of all runes, is denoted. On the right, we can see
the graphic form of the rune EHE (also called AR in the Scandinavian futhark),
which symbolises magical alchemical marriage.
This photograph shows a detail of an X-shaped pictograph, identical to the rune
GEBO and also known as St. Andrew's Cross. Surprised by these cross-shaped
symbols, the Spanish conquerors decided to ask the Muiscas about the author
of the ideograms, to which the natives replied that they had no idea.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Surprised by these cross-shaped
symbols, the Spanish conquerors decided to ask the Muiscas about the author
of the ideograms, to which the natives replied that they had no idea.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

209
BIBLIOGRAPHY
-
BLUM, RALPH, "The Book of Runes: A Handbook for the Use of an Ancient
Oracle: The Viking Runes". London: Michael Joseph, 1984.
-
BRONDINO, GUSTAVO "Hyperborean Vision of History". Córdoba: The
author, 2008.
-
BRUGGER,
KARL, The Chronicle of Akakor. Barcelona: Editorial Pomaire,
1978.
-
DE MAHIEU, JACQUES "The Great Journey of the Sun God, the Vikings in
Mexico and Peru". Buenos Aires: Hachette, 1976.
-
DE ROSARIO, NIMROD, El misterio de Belicena Villca (The Mystery of
Belicena Villca). Córdoba: Quinta Dominica, 2003.
-
EVOLA, JULIUS "The Mystery of the Grail (1937)". Palma de Mallorca: Sophia
Perennis Series. José J. de Alañeta, 1997
-
EVOLA, JULIUS "Metaphysics of Sex (1958)". Palma de Mallorca: José J.
de Alañeta, 2005
-
FRIES, JAN, Helrunar: A Manual of Rune Magic. Oxford: Mandrake, 1993.
-
GORSLEBEN, RUDOLF JOHN, “Die Hoch-zeit der Menscheit”. Leipzig: Koeler
& Amelang, 1930. (English Translation by Karl Hanz Welz. USA: HSCTI. 2002)
-
HERROU ARAGON, JOSE M. “La religión prohibida” (The Forbidden Religion).
Rosario: The author, 2005
-
HERROU ARAGON, JOSE M. “Infallible Parapsychological Works”. Rosario:
The author, 2007.
-
JUNG, CARL.
Psychologie und Alchemie (1944). Spain: Plaza & Janes
(translated by Ángel Sabrido), 1989.
-
KARLSSON, THOMAS, “Uthark, Nightside of the runes”. Sunbyberg-Sweden:
Ouroboros Produktion, 2002.
-
KUMMER, S. A., Heilige Runenmacht. Hamburg: Uranus, 1932.
-
KUMMER, S. A., “Rune magic (Edred Thorsson Translation)”. Texas: Yrmin-
Drighten The rune gild, 1993.
-
LIST, GUIDO VON, "Das geheimnis der runen (1908)". Santiago: Ediciones
Armanen (first edition in Spanish, translated by Roberto Jaras), 2000.
-
MEES, BERNARD. “The North Etruscan Thesis of the Origin of the Runes”
Arkiv For Nordisk Fililogi # 115, 2000.iago: Ediciones
Armanen (first edition in Spanish, translated by Roberto Jaras), 2000.
-
MEES, BERNARD. “The North Etruscan Thesis of the Origin of the Runes”
Arkiv For Nordisk Fililogi # 115, 2000.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

21
0
-
ODENSTEDT, B “On the origin and early history of the runic script”.
Uppsala:1990.
-
OUSPENSKY, P.D.
"In search of the miraculous: Fragments of unknown
teachings". New York: Hacourt Brace, 1949.
-
RAHN, OTTO, The Court of Lucifer (1937). Barcelona: Círculo Latino
(Translation by Marcelo Pelayo), 2004.
-
SCHRECK, NICOLAS AND ZEENA “Demons of the flesh”. Berlin: Creation
Books, 2002.
-
SERRANO, MIGUEL “ELELLA, The Book of Magical Love”. Santiago:
Ediciones Nueva Universidad, 1974.
-
SERRANO, MIGUEL “Nietzsche and the Dance of Shiva”. Santiago:
Edicioneself, 1980.
-
SPIESBERGER, KARL, Runenmagie. Berlin: R. Schilowski, 1955.
-
SPURKLAND, T. Norwegian Runes and Runic Inscriptions. Boydell Press. 2005
-
THORSSON, EDRED, Futhark: A Handbook of Rune Magic. York Beach, 1984
-
WELZ, KARL HANZ, Rune Magick. USA: HSCTI, 1984, 1988.